Security Extensions for Mobile Commerce Objects 
 
Nazri Abdullah 
Faculty of Computer Science and  
Information Technology 
Universiti Tun Hussien Onn Malaysia 
Johor, Malaysia 
anazri@uthm.edu.my 
Ioannis Kounelis, Sead Muftic 
School of Information and 
Communication Technology 
Royal Institute of Technology (KTH) 
Stockholm, Sweden 
{kounelis, sead}@kth.se
 
 
Abstract - Electronic commerce and its variance mobile 
commerce have tremendously increased their popularity in the 
last several years. As mobile devices have become the most 
popular mean to access and use the Internet, mobile commerce 
and its security are timely and very hot topics. Yet, today there 
is still no consistent model of various m–commerce applications 
and transactions, even less clear specification of their security. 
In order to address and solve those issues, in this paper, we 
first establish the concept of mobile commerce objects, an 
equivalent of virtual currencies, used for m–commerce 
transactions. 
We 
describe 
functionalities 
and 
unique 
characteristics of these objects; we follow with security 
requirements, and then offer some solutions – security 
extensions of these objects. All solutions are treated within the 
complete lifecycle of creation and use of the m–commerce 
objects.  
Keywords - mobile commerce; m–commerce; m-objects; 
security;  privacy 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As mobile commerce (m-commerce) continues to evolve, 
it is a matter of time that it becomes the main source of 
online commerce [1]. In this paper, we describe our vision of 
m-commerce, by differentiating the goods that can be 
purchased in seven categories - we call them m-commerce 
objects. The m-objects have different requirements and are 
therefore treated in a separate way from the actors involved 
in a mobile commerce transaction. 
We first provide the results of our analysis of the current 
concept of m-commerce objects. However, we also take two 
further steps: we consider the security features and the 
extensions that they need and moreover, what mechanisms 
and technology can be used to ensure and enforce such 
extensions.  
Our research is focused on user aspects of various m–
commerce systems, ensuring that the mechanisms we 
introduce allow users to protect their privacy and at the same 
time to verify authenticity, integrity and availability of 
digital goods that they are purchasing. 
The next section of the paper describes various examples 
of m-commerce objects, based on our concept of a so-called 
generic m–commerce object. Section 3 introduces the main 
actors in an m-commerce scenario. Section 4 analyses 
security features and requirements targeted as goals of our 
design and also describes methodologies and technologies 
that can be used for implementation of those features. 
Section 5 demonstrates the dynamic use of the m-objects 
security features. Section 6 briefly introduces one of the 
popular m–commerce payment systems – Bitcoin and 
justifies our use of some of the innovative ideas that Bitcoin 
has introduced. Section 7 contains relevant work and 
compares the results with ours, while in section 8 we discuss 
our findings and approach. Finally, section 9 contains 
conclusions and suggestions for future work  
II. 
SPECIFICATION OF MOBILE COMMERCE OBJECTS 
It is important to understand the similarities and 
differences between various types of m-commerce objects. 
The definitions given below have been also documented in 
our previously published research paper [2]. The criterion for 
some well-known transactions to be classified as m–
commerce objects is whether they have direct – explicit or 
indirect – implicit value. An example of an m–commerce 
object with explicit value is a pre–paid card – its value is 
money paid for the card. An example of an object with 
implicit value may be various discounts or benefits based on 
different types of memberships.  
In this section, we list typical m–commerce objects 
described in some form of an order, starting from those that 
do not have explicit value all the way up to those that have 
strictly determined value. The objects are also “sorted” in the 
increasing complexity of their use. 
The first type of m–commerce object is promotions. They 
publicize a product or a service with discount, so that the 
offered discount represents an implicit value of this type of 
m–commerce object [3]. In a mobile digital environment, 
these objects can be managed through personalized 
advertisements received through the Internet or even through 
a personal area network. A citizen with a Bluetooth enabled 
phone, for example, may receive personalized promotions or 
discounts to his/her phone via Bluetooth when shopping in a 
mall. The project PROMO demonstrates how this can be 
achieved [4]. Promotions do not require payments by users, 
which means that this type of m–commerce objects can be 
obtained without associated financial transaction.  
The next type of m–commerce object is a mobile coupon. 
Those are text or picture vouchers solicited or purchased and 
delivered to a consumer’s mobile phone. This object can be 
stored and exchanged for a financial discount, when 
purchasing a product or service [5]. The most important 
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

difference between promotions and coupons is that coupons 
have a value (expressed either as discount or monetary 
value), while promotions are mostly used for advertising of 
discounts. 
The third type of m–commerce objects that we consider 
is a standard voucher used mainly today in paper form. It is 
a small printed piece of paper that represents the right to 
claim goods or services [6]. In the case of an m-voucher, 
there is no printed copy, but a digital equivalent with the 
unique identifier, such as a barcode or a Quick Respone 
(QR) code, stored locally on the phone or remotely at the 
m–commerce server. One example of such vouchers are 
coupons distributed by Groupon [7] or some  other similar 
companies. In order to acquire a voucher, a payment 
transaction is usually involved. The difference between a 
voucher and a coupon is that the voucher is a complete 
representation of a product or a service, while the coupon is 
an offer/discount for the product or service. In other words, 
having a voucher means that the specific product has 
already been bought in advance while with a coupon 
consumers may claim it at alternative places or not at all, if 
the coupon was not purchased. 
Another type m–commerce object is a gift card. In real 
life it is usually a tangible device (plastic card), embedded 
or encoded in a plastic, electronic or other form with a value 
based on a payment, which promises to provide to the bearer 
merchandise of value equal to the remaining balance of the 
card [8]. In a digital environment, a gift card can be seen as 
an equivalent to a very specific and limited pre–paid amount 
in an e-wallet, which can be used only with the specific 
merchant, in a particular shop or for a particular series of 
products. The difference with the voucher is that a gift card 
can be used as many times as possible, as long as there is 
credit left in the card. The voucher however is usually 
limited to one or to a predefined number of claims. 
Mobile ticketing is an electronic realization with the 
help of a mobile device of the proof of access/usage of 
rights to a particular service [9]. There are many forms and 
ways to purchase a mobile ticket. Usually, a Short Message 
Service (SMS) message is the outcome of the purchase (the 
receipt). 
A pre-paid card has many similarities with the gift card. 
It is a value stored in an e-wallet or in some account that can 
be loaded with money in order to be used mostly for 
micropayments [10]. The main difference with a gift card is 
that a pre-paid card is intended to be used by the owner and 
not to be gifted to another party and is usually not limited to 
specific merchants. More importantly, a pre-paid card can 
be recharged when the pre–paid amount is exhausted. By 
their purpose and type of transactions supported, the very 
popular pre–paid airtime may also be considered as one type 
of pre–paid card. In case of airtime, such m–commerce 
object is usually called telecom account. 
Our final example and type of m–commerce object is a 
bonus card (also called loyalty card). This type of object 
usually refers to accumulation of points that a user gains 
from various purchases [11]. They are usually represented 
as supermarket cards, airline bonus cards, membership 
cards, etc., issued by merchants/businesses that give points 
to the customers depending on the value of goods or 
services that they previously purchased. Their owners can 
later use these points, in exchange for products or services. 
Such cards are usually free to acquire, but are bound to a 
user (or to a small closed and related group of users, such as 
members of a family). 
III. 
THE CONCEPT OF M-COMMERCE TRANSACTIONS 
In this section, we introduce the main actors and define 
their roles in a typical m–commerce transaction together with 
the terms used and their interpretation. The purpose for the 
reader is to better understand the text in the remaining 
sections of the paper. 
There are four actors in an m–commerce transaction: 
1) Merchant: This is a business entity that offers some 
services or products for purchase. Merchants define 
availability, price, and all specific attributes of the m-
commerce objects they issue and accept. 
2) Customer/User/Client: The customer is the entity that 
obtains or purchases an m-commerce object in order to 
later redeem it. 
3) Redemption Point/Redeemer: The place where m-
commerce objects can be redeemed. In some cases this 
entity can be the same as the entity that issued the 
object, but most likely they will differ. For example, 
when buying a ticket for a concert, the merchant is the 
company selling tickets, while the redemption point is 
the venue where the concert takes place. 
4) m–Commerce Services Provider: This is a trusted–third 
party in our system. It is the central entity that all other 
actors communicate with in order to handle their 
requests. Depending on the actor, different roles and 
services may be offered by the services provider. 
Merchants use the provider to make available their m-
commerce objects, customers use it to acquire such 
objects and later use them, and redemption points use it 
for verification of validity of m-commerce objects in 
the redemption phase. 
IV. 
SECURITY FEATURES AND ATTRIBUTES OF M-
COMMERCE OBJECTS 
Each m-commerce object has a number of attributes that 
define it, both in terms of security and usability. Such 
attributes are required by both participating parties, object’s 
issuers (merchants, m–commerce providers) and also by 
users, as their enforcement is an advantage for all parties. 
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

A. Authenticity of m–Commerce Objects 
This security property refers to the capability of the 
recipient to verify the originality of the m-commerce object, 
which includes verification of the identity of its issuer as 
well as correct and original contents of an objet. Verification 
can be performed by both the customer and the redeemer. 
The customer should perform this check in the process of 
acquisition of an m-commerce object, i.e., before paying for 
it. This should be done in a timely manner, without 
interfering with the customer’s purchasing experience in any 
way. In the best case, it should be an automated procedure, 
embedded in the acquisition phase and fully transparent to 
the user. The user should only be informed of the outcome of 
the procedure before giving the consent to proceed with the 
payment. 
The redeemer should also perform verification of the 
object’s authenticity before redeeming the m-commerce 
object. Such action should be performed with the assistance 
of the m–commerce Provider. This control will protect the 
redeemer against fraudulent attempts to acquire fake m-
commerce objects. 
Authenticity of m–commerce objects can be supported 
by the issuer (merchant or m–commerce provider) by 
digitally signing the object. Then the client will be able to 
verify the signature, as the certificates of either the provider 
or the merchant will be known to him/her. 
B. Security of m–Commerce Objects 
When referring to the security of an m-commerce object, 
we are actually referring to two different aspects: the 
integrity and the confidentiality of its content. These two 
issues together can be also interpreted as the user’s privacy. 
1) Integrity: Integrity refers to protection of the m-
commerce object’s values, against illegal intentional or 
accidental modifications, after its creation. This security 
feature is actually equivalent to the authenticity, described 
in the previous section. Therefore, all the mechanisms 
described above are also applied when referring to the 
integrity.  
2) Confidentiality of Content/Privacy for the User: 
Confidentiality of the content refers to the user’s privacy 
when proving that he/she is the owner of an m-commerce 
object. This property is not applicable to all m-commerce 
objects, but rather depends on the type and also sensitive 
nature of the object. 
Namely, the user should be able to prove that he/she is 
the owner of an object without revealing any information of 
what he/she has purchased with that object. The content of 
the object should be encrypted by the user upon purchase 
and will only be decrypted when redeemed. In the 
intermediate states, a header/part of the m-commerce object, 
indicating the owner, will be unencrypted, but signed by the 
issuer. If the m–commerce provider is involved, it is already 
in possession of user’s identifying information and therefore 
there is no need to exchange any extra data with every 
purchase. The user should be able to define sensitivity level 
of the content in accordance to his/her preferences and then 
the system will enforce those preferences during the 
acquisition phase. 
The security mechanisms for confidentiality of m–
commerce objects are standard symmetric key crypto 
algorithms. What makes this feature very complicated to 
design and implement is use of partial values of some 
objects. For instance, gift cards or pre–paid cards may be 
partially redeemed. In such situations, encrypted objects 
must be decrypted, partially claimed, and then the new 
contents must be encrypted again. 
C. Duplication 
This is the property of m–commerce objects that 
specifies whether an object can be duplicated, i.e., whether a 
valid and legitimate copy of an m-commerce object can be 
created by its owner. Obviously, if objects have explicit 
value, this possibility should be prevented. In some virtual 
currency systems this feature is called prevention of “double 
spending”. 
In order to guarantee non–duplication, if required, a 
signature created over a random, unique, non–replicated 
value is needed. Therefore, the issuer will have to create a 
new value and sign a counter, possibly along with a 
timestamp, which when duplicated will not be possible to be 
changed, since in that case the signature will not be valid. 
This security property is useful when an instance of an 
m-commerce object must be unique. For example, a voucher 
for a specific service or a ticket for a concert are examples of 
non–duplicated objects. On the other hand, if an m-
commerce object is a free of charge promotion, it is actually 
in the merchant’s interest to have the object duplicated and 
distributed as widely as possible, as this will give it more 
visibility. 
The unique value or counter must be specified by the 
issuer in the process of creation of the object. In cases where 
users create copies of the object, the redemption of the 
second instance of the object will not be accepted as the 
unique value of the counter will be checked by the 
redemption point. This verification is very tricky in open, 
distributed environments and the Bitcoin concept has 
successfully addressed and eliminated this problem. This is 
one more reason why we have adopted its concept and some 
specific solutions for security of our m–commerce objects.  
There is of course a risk that an m-commerce object is 
illegally duplicated after its first redemption and the illegal 
copy is distributed to some other entity. Then, when the 
legitimate owner tries to redeem the original object, he/she 
will be denied redemption. This problem may be eliminated 
by having the owner to sign the object as well. Therefore, if 
there is an attempt to redeem another copy of the same 
object, the owner will be consulted for approval as well. In 
addition, if the same person is trying to cheat the system, the 
unique identifier of the object will be sufficient to prohibit 
such action. 
D. Transferability 
This feature represents the property of an object to 
legitimately change ownership of an m-commerce object. 
If objects are transferable, this action must be performed 
with the assistance of the m–commerce provider, since it is 
the actor responsible of signing the object and assigning its 
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

ownership. Moreover, even if a transfer is initiated or 
performed by one person to another person, the two entities 
will protect their privacy between them, as they will not have 
to exchange any details apart from their system identifiers 
(usually randomly assigned identifiers (IDs)). 
The provider will receive a «transfer request» command 
from the current owner along with the ID of the recipient and 
then, if and only if the new owner meets all security 
requirements associated with the specific object, for instance 
age limit, the transfer will be performed. The owner of the 
object will be changed and the object will be re–signed by 
the m–commerce provider. 
A drawback of this approach is the necessity to have 
provider’s server connectivity at the time of the exchange. If 
the server is not accessible at the time of the transaction, the 
request may be temporarily saved on the current owner’s 
station and when the connection is established, the request 
will be forwarded to the server and the transfer of the object 
will be performed. 
Finally, in this stage of our research, the option to have a 
fee charged for this exchange is not considered. All transfers 
are free of charge. The payment in order to acquire the m-
commerce object from the provider has already taken place 
from the first owner. 
E. Monetary Value 
Monetary value is the attribute representing the financial 
value of the m-commerce object, i.e., if it can be 
“exchanged” for something that has a cost. 
This property does not provide any extra feature or 
option, as all the previous ones, but rather is a key factor 
affecting which of the previous mechanisms must be 
enforced to the specific m-commerce object itself. It can be 
better viewed as a property rather than an extra attribute. 
If an m-commerce object has a monetary value, then, it is 
both in the merchant’s as well as in the consumer’s interest 
to have the object secured in all the above mentioned ways. 
As a conclusion, authenticity, non–duplication, integrity, and 
confidentiality for each object are needed. 
The contents of each object are cryptographically 
encapsulated by the m–commerce provider and therefore the 
m–commerce objects cannot be tampered with. It is up to the 
object’s owner to disclosure such information to any third 
parties or to reveal it only when absolutely needed (during 
the redemption process). 
F. Purchased 
M-commerce objects have this property if money is 
needed in order to acquire the object. 
This property is strongly linked to the monetary value 
property. What applies there is also applicable to this 
property as well. The main difference whether an object has 
been purchased or not indicates solely the way in which the 
owner has acquired such object. Monetary value indicates 
also the actual value of the object. 
G. Multiple/Partial Use 
This property indicates whether an m-commerce object 
can be used more than once, i.e., if its total value may be 
partially redeemed. If yes, then such functionality can be 
enforced in two different ways: 
1) There is a predefined number of uses that is decreased 
after each use (or increased when the user buys some 
more quantities of the object). An example may be 
tickets for public transportation. 
2) It can be an amount (in Euros for example) that is 
decreased (or increased if the user charges the object). 
This is mostly valid for a gift card. 
In both cases, the m–commerce provider must be 
involved in order to approve/confirm the remaining number 
of uses or the amount/value of the object. The new value of 
the object, after its adjustment, is signed and therefore can be 
verified by the provider at any time. 
H. Tracking 
This is the ability of the system to track past transactions 
and determine the current status of the object, i.e., the ability 
to track its full life cycle. 
The attributes of the m–commerce objects that may be 
interesting when tracking are the date of creation, previous 
uses in terms of volume and content, and information about 
all previous owners. All these aspects depend on the type of 
the specific m-commerce object and the specific values of its 
attributes. 
Tracking an object’s history may be performed by the 
user without the need to engage the m–commerce provider in 
that process. For example, all previous uses can be recorded 
in the header of the object and in that way they may be 
retrieved in a read-only mode. They are always signed by the 
m–commerce 
provider. 
As 
such, 
it 
is 
generally 
recommended to reveal the values of all non–sensitive 
attributes (in terms of user privacy) in a read-only mode, so 
users can retrieve them at any given time and without 
requirement to be on-line, connected to Internet, in that 
process. 
V. 
DYNAMIC USE OF SECURITY FEATURES 
The security features described above are based on the 
basic set of security services: confidentiality, integrity and 
authenticity and may be applied during any phase of an m-
commerce object’s lifecycle. However, what makes these 
features different from the classical application of security 
services in some other network application is that they are 
applied in a very dynamic way. 
The reason for the dynamic applicability is the complex 
reuse of the majority of the m-commerce objects. For 
example, a voucher that has a specific number of admissions 
to a service needs to have this number updated accordingly 
after each use. This implies that various features established 
in the initial phase when creating an object, are re-applied 
after every use of the object. Therefore, in case of m–
commerce objects, special security protocols are needed, 
supporting repetitive application of security services. These 
protocols, therefore, effectively ensure that in all phases of 
its lifetime, each m-commerce object meets all the security 
requirements according to their special needs and properties. 
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

As explained earlier, these needs and requirements are 
determined by the attributes of the specific m-commerce 
object, each depending on their contents and the nature of 
use. A full list of significant attributes for our m–commerce 
objects is given in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
M–COMMERCE OBJECTS AND THEIR ATTRIBUTES 
 
The enforcement of security services that support those 
requirements takes place at both, the client side and the 
server side. Clients control object’s authenticity and 
conformity to a predefined set of standard attribute values. 
The server creates these attributes and cryptographically 
encapsulates them, thus binding security credentials to the 
values of the m–commerce attributes. When a value of some 
attribute of an m-commerce object needs to be changed, the 
client sends a corresponding request to the server which 
performs the same procedure all over again, updating the 
values of m-commerce objects’ attributes. By “client” in this 
case we do not necessarily mean the end–user but also any 
other entity in the m–commerce transactions chain, such as a 
merchant or a retailer. For a more comprehensive description 
of the actors and their interactions, the reader should refer to 
[2]. 
A. Comparison with a traditional secure-by-design system. 
To illustrate how the dynamic nature of security services 
is different from some other traditional network applications, 
in this section, we compare our previous work of a secure e-
mail system based on Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail 
Extensions (S/MIME) and security proxies [12] and the 
dynamic use of security services described above. 
Secure Email
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(a)
 
Figure 1. Secure Email Use. The security functionalities stay within the 
Secure Email proxy. 
In the secure e-mail system, the use of security is 
straightforward. When a security method is applied, for 
example encryption or signing of an e-mail letter, a security 
action takes place at the e-mail client or at the security proxy 
and it is directly applied to the complete and final form of the 
specific e-mail letter. Then, in order to read such letter, i.e., 
decrypt or verify it, the e-mail client of the proxy server is 
again used. In the intermediate states of the protected e-mail 
letter, a third party cannot manipulate the message. For the 
client, the security is completely transparent; he/she only 
sees the “clear” output regardless of the way he/she accesses 
the proxy server. When accessing the secure e-mail from any 
end device (see Figure 1, i-iv), the result for the client is the 
same as for all the security functionalities that are performed 
internally. 
m-object
Attributes
Attributes
m-object
m-object
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
M-Commerce Server
m-object
m-object
 
Figure 2. The dynamic reuse of security attributes for an m-commerce 
object. 
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

In the m-commerce case, security services and 
mechanisms are re-applied after every use of the m-
commerce object. Although there is a similarity in the two 
cases, in the sense that the server is the one that takes care of 
the enforcement of the security, the use for the client is 
different. When the client is using the m-object, the values of 
the m-object change. This directly implies that the signature 
and the authenticity of the m-object is not the same anymore 
and as a result the security attributes need to be readjusted to 
the new data. The server is the one that takes the 
responsibility of fulfilling this task and then resends the 
newly adjusted m-object to the client. The client, however, in 
this case has the ability to verify and recognize the security 
enhancements. This can be seen in Figure 2; as the m-
commerce object is used in the real world (i-iii), its values 
change. These changes are taken into account each time at 
the server and as a result all the security attributes are re-
applied. The attributes can be read not only by the server but 
also from the client side. 
VI. 
BITCOIN SYSTEM 
Bitcoin [13] is a virtual currency that has become very 
popular in the last few years. It uses a peer-to-peer network 
to authorize and verify transactions and has no central 
authority like all other traditional payment systems. One of 
its main advantages is that the transactions are anonymous 
(actually pseudonymous) and third parties are not involved 
when performing payments or transfer of money, even for 
verification of participants. 
Although the details of the protocol are not in the scope 
of this paper, we briefly review some of the innovative 
features that Bitcoin has introduced in the payment 
environment and we also indicate how these features can be 
applied and improved for security of our own system, that is 
for security of other virtual currencies. 
The most interesting feature of the Bitcoin system is the 
concept and use of the blockchain. Transactions are grouped 
in specific blocks of data and these blocks are linked in the 
chain, called blockchain. Therefore, the blockchain contains 
and reveals the history of all transactions that have taken 
place in the Bitcoin system, since its creation. In order for a 
new transaction to be considered valid and accepted in the 
system, it must be included in the blockchain and then, 
applying mathematically and computationally complex 
procedures, be verified. Moreover, all accounts (Bitcoin 
addresses) in the Bitcoin system are publicly available, 
which means that anyone can check the balance of each 
account and how it has accumulated its current balance. 
As Bitcoin addresses are long random strings of 
characters without any meaning and interpretation, there is 
no direct link between the owner of an address and the 
address itself. Nonetheless, it is still feasible for someone to 
try to find information that may be leaked about identities 
and the addresses that belong to them. This feature is also 
very useful in order to protect one’s privacy. We would like 
to extend this feature by offering both anonymous 
transactions and by providing the possibility to have verified 
and authorized transactions for authorities and users who 
need verification of authenticity and reliability of selected 
transactions. 
Our intention is to create a side-chain to Bitcoin, starting 
with one of the m-commerce objects. Side-chain is a separate 
blockchain, which is backed by Bitcoins, in the same way 
that currencies are backed by gold [14]. Doing so, we will be 
able to take advantage of the above-mentioned Bitcoin 
characteristics, while in the meantime manipulate the side-
chain according to the m-object’s needs. 
VII. RELATED WORK 
The concept of m-commerce is not new to the research 
community. From the early years of mobile device adoption, 
both with the use of the first mobile smart phones or with the 
use of Personal Digital Assistants (PDA), the importance and 
potential growth of m-commerce was foreseen and a number 
of research solutions with a focus on security were proposed. 
Nambiar et al [15] performed an analysis on payment 
transactions security in mobile commerce. As their research 
is 10 years old, technologies such as Wireless Application 
Protocol (WAP) and Java Micro Edition (J2ME) are not 
considered relative for modern development. Nonetheless, 
we consider the use of the SIM Application Toolkit still 
relevant, although still not used by major vendors, as 
demonstrated by our previous work [16]. Hughes [17] 
provides a comparison between Business-to-Business (B2B) 
and Business-to-Consumer (B2C), pointing out which Public 
Key Infrastructure (PKI) components are not necessary for a 
B2C marketplace. Lam et al [18] propose a lightweight 
security for mobile commerce transactions. Their proposal is 
based on public key cryptography and is end-to-end, thus 
avoiding any intermediate insecure actors. Chang et al [19] 
have proposed a secure e-coupon system for mobile users. 
The requirements Chang proposes are similar to ours with 
the difference that we extend them by including duplication, 
monetary value, multiple use and tracing. 
We consider the above research results valuable input for 
our further research. However, it has to be pointed out, that 
as the works are relatively old, most of the restrictions 
mentioned are not applicable any more. For example, the 
computational power of the mobile devices, the wireless 
connectivity, the ease of use of modern smart phones and the 
powerful in terms of capabilities mobile operating systems, 
make it possible to overcome many of the restrictions that 
were mentioned a few years ago. 
The most significant difference with our solution is that 
we propose a system that differentiates approach and security 
mechanisms depending on the nature of the m-object. The 
approach is not universal and applied blindly to all objects. 
That is the reason why we have distinguished and created the 
different m-object categories. 
VIII. DISCUSSION 
In this work, we have presented and described our notion 
of mobile commerce objects, their use and special 
characteristics. We believe that the differentiation that we 
propose between these digital representations of goods is a 
useful distinction that could be a key enabler for future 
mobile commerce systems.  
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

The most significant challenge we had to face was to 
clearly distinguish between the proposed categories of m-
commerce objects. In fact, by searching the literature, the 
notions and terms used are some times mixed or may have a 
double meaning. For example, the difference between 
promotions and coupons is very delegate and may create 
confusion. 
When dealing with a client-to-server connection, even 
more when the client is a mobile device, it is reasonable to 
face 
well-known 
vulnerabilities, 
specific 
to 
such 
environment. For example, threats like eavesdropping, 
spoofing, Denial of Service (DOS), data manipulation have 
to be dealt with when deploying such a system. We consider 
the description and further analysis of such threats not in the 
scope of this paper; we take however into account the results 
from [20] and [21] in order to deal with them in our future 
work. 
Moreover, in order to avoid some of the human related 
vulnerabilities, e.g. having a mobile device stolen, we use 
secure storage of the m-objects on the user’s device, as 
described in [16] and [22]. In such case, the m-object cannot 
be retrieved even in the case where the legitimate owner 
loses his/her device. 
Finally, with the use of a mobile device as the main 
enabler of m-objects, it is evident that connectivity issues 
may appear. However, with the wide pervasiveness of 
wireless technologies, both mobile communications and Wi-
Fi connections, we consider connectivity and speed 
connection to be less of a problem and not to influence the 
client experience. 
Our goal with this article is to provide a reference for 
future use of m-commerce objects but to also propose what 
security and privacy characteristics are needed for them. 
With our distinction, we have made it easier to implement 
security enhancements for the m-objects as we provide 
guidelines on which requirements are needed. We also point 
out how this approach differs from a classical security 
solution from both the server and the client side. Our 
intention is to use the current paper as a reference for our 
further developments as described in the section below. 
IX. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, we have described our concept of m-
commerce objects and analyzed security mechanisms that are 
required in order to ensure protection and consistency of 
their attributes. We have also emphasized security services 
that ensure the integrity and authenticity of m-commerce 
objects. Those services are provided to all actors in the 
system, each having a different motivation and reason for 
ensuring the correctness of the objects and transactions. 
Moreover, we ensure customers’ privacy by concealing 
sensitive information from intermediate parties. Finally, we 
refer to the Bitcoin system as a basis of the new paradigm for 
use of virtual currencies. 
For future work, we plan to use some of the innovative 
mechanisms that Bitcoin has introduced for our design and 
implementation of the complex security system for the 
protection of virtual currencies. Anonymity and traceability 
of accounts and transactions are desired features in our 
design and implementation. However, they will be combined 
with the corresponding security enhancements that will allow 
legal entities to intervene in case of illegal transactions and 
activities. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  
B. Siwicki, “E-commerce and m-commerce: The next five years,” 
internetretailer.com, 
28-Apr-2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.internetretailer.com/commentary/2014/04/28/e-
commerce-and-m-commerce-next-five-years. [Retrieved: Oct-2014]. 
[2] 
I. Kounelis, G. Baldini, S. Muftic, and J. Loschner, “An Architecture 
for Secure m-Commerce Applications,” in 2013 19th International 
Conference on Control Systems and Computer Science (CSCS), 
2013, pp. 519–525. 
[3] 
WordReference, 
“Promotion.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
www.wordreference.com/definition/promotion. 
[Retrieved: 
Jan-
2012]. 
[4] 
PROMO, “Proximity Marketing Solution.” [Online]. Available: 
http://isin.dti.supsi.ch/NetLab/index.php/promo. 
[Retrieved: 
Jan-
2012]. 
[5] 
Mobile Marketing Association, “Introduction to Mobile Coupons,” 
MMA, 2007. 
[6] 
K. Fujimura and D. Eastlake, “RFC 3506 - Requirements and Design 
for Voucher Trading System (VTS),” 2003. 
[7] 
“Groupon.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.groupon.com/. 
[Retrieved: Feb-2013]. 
[8] 
Kansas Statutes Annotated, “Unfair Trade And Consumer 
Protection: Consumer Protection,” 2006. 
[9] 
G. Me, “Security overview for m-payed virtual ticketing,” in 
Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, 2003, pp. 844–
848. 
[10] US General Services Administration, “Pre-paid Card,” SmartPay. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://smartpay.gsa.gov/about-gsa-
smartpay/glossary#p. [Retrieved: Feb-2012]. 
[11] Electronic Merchant Systems, “Loyalty Card.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.elect-mer.com/glossary-l.html. [Retrieved: Feb-2013]. 
[12] I. Kounelis, S. Muftic, and J. Loeschner, “Secure and Privacy-
Enhanced E-Mail System Based on the Concept of Proxies,” 
presented at the 37th International Convention on Information and 
Communication Technology, Electronics and Microelectronics - 
MIPRO, 2014, pp 1405-1410. 
[13] “Bitcoin - Open source P2P money.” [Online]. Available: 
https://bitcoin.org/en/. [Retrieved: May-2014]. 
[14] Z. Muadh, “Introduction To Sidechains and Blockchain 2.0,” Deep 
Dot 
Web. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.deepdotweb.com/2014/06/26/sidechains-blockchain-2-
0/. [Retrieved: Oct-2014]. 
[15] S. Nambiar, C.-T. Lu, and L. R. Liang, “Analysis of payment 
transaction security in mobile commerce,” in Proceedings of the 
2004 IEEE International Conference on Information Reuse and 
Integration, 2004. IRI 2004, 2004, pp. 475–480. 
[16] I. Kounelis, H. Zhao, and S. Muftic, “Secure Middleware for Mobile 
Phones and UICC Applications,” in Mobile Wireless Middleware, 
Operating Systems, and Applications, vol. 93, Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 143–152. 
[17] J. Hughes, “Enabling E-Commerce Through PKI,” Netw. Secur., 
vol. 2000, no. 3, Mar. 2000, pp. 14–16. 
[18] K.-Y. Lam, S.-L. Chung, M. Gu, and J.-G. Sun, “Lightweight 
security for mobile commerce transactions,” Comput. Commun., 
vol. 26, no. 18, Dec. 2003, pp. 2052–2060. 
[19] C. C. Chang, C. C. Wu, and I. C. Lin, “A Secure E-coupon System 
for Mobile Users,” Jan. 2006. 
[20] D. Geneiatakis, I. Kounelis, J. Loeschner, I. N. Fovino, and P. 
Stirparo, “Security and Privacy in Mobile Cloud Under a Citizen’s 
Perspective,” in Cyber Security and Privacy, M. Felici, Ed. Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 16–27. 
[21] I. Kounelis, J. Loschner, D. Shaw, and S. Scheer, “Security of 
service requests for cloud based m-commerce,” in 2012 Proceedings 
of the 35th International Convention MIPRO, 2012, pp. 1479 –1483. 
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[22] F. Zhang, I. Kounelis, and S. Muftic, “Generic, Secure and Modular 
(GSM) Methodology for Design and Implementation of Secure 
Mobile Applications,” presented at the SECURWARE 2012 , The 
Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, 
Systems and Technologies, 2012, pp. 1–6. 
 
 
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

