IT-Security Compliance for Home Ofﬁces
Christoph Haar
Hochschule f¨ur Telekommunikation Leipzig
Leipzig, Germany
email: haar@hft-leipzig.de
Erik Buchmann
Hochschule f¨ur Telekommunikation Leipzig
Leipzig, Germany
email: buchmann@hft-leipzig.de
Abstract—The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic increases the need
to transfer employees into home ofﬁces. Securing a home ofﬁce is
challenging. Approaches, such as BSI Grundschutz, ISO 2700x,
NIST 800-53 or ISIS12 focus on company premises, and the
data carried outside must be strongly restricted. The focus of
such approaches is to secure the IT-infrastructure on company
premises but not on the employee’s private network. In this
paper, we explore how the IT-Grundschutz Compendium, a
standardized IT-security framework from the German Federal
Ofﬁce for Information Security, can be carried into a home ofﬁce.
Our objective is to extend the scope of protection of the BSI
Grundschutz from company premises into the private areas of
an employee in a home ofﬁce. To this end, we apply the BSI
Basic Protection to a basic home-ofﬁce scenario. For each security
requirement, we investigate whether it can be implemented by
the employee, or by the employer.
Keywords – IT-Grundschutz; Home Ofﬁce Security; Compli-
ance; Basic Protection
I. INTRODUCTION
The IT-Grundschutz Compendium [1] maintained by the
German Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security (BSI) allows
companies to approach pre-deﬁned levels of IT-security in a
standardized way. The security level can be audited and certi-
ﬁed, and it is compatible with the International Organization
for Standardization (ISO) 2700x series of standards [2] or the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Cyber-
security Framework [3]. Such approaches ease the deﬁnition of
a security strategy, the execution of risk analyses on company
assets and the implementation of a security management that
considers organization, personnel, business processes, the IT-
architecture, IT-operations, IT-systems and devices, networks,
applications and data. Approaches for speciﬁc domains ex-
ist, e.g., the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard
(PCI DSS), the International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC) standard 62443, or the Federal Information Processing
Standards (FIPS) 199 and 200. In many sectors, a certiﬁed
level of IT-security is mandatory for any major enterprise.
The certiﬁcation conﬁrms, that the company has achieved a
reasonable level of IT-security, i.e., it is not only protected
against certain attack vectors.
However, such security approaches focus on company
premises. Only two of approx. 100 modules in the IT-
Grundschutz Compendium directly address home ofﬁces
(”INF.8 Working from Home” and ”OPS.1.2.4 Teleworking”).
Other modules explain how, say, IT-operations on company
grounds can be organized without security risks. In con-
sequence, home ofﬁces are either considered insecure, or
securing them requires elaborate, individual risk analyses and
protection mechanisms, as required by INF.8 and OPS.1.2.4.
This is problematic. The Coronavirus-2019 pandemic in-
creases the urge for enterprises allow working from home [4].
Work-life-balance concepts, issues, such as the reconcilability
of family and working life, and ﬂexible working-time models
also foster this development. However, having obtained a certi-
ﬁed level of IT-security means that sensible data must not leave
secure areas. But today’s homes are ﬁlled with networked
smart-home devices that do not have security clearance from
an enterprise expert, Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN)
network connections can be eavesdropped from public spaces,
and family members can be expected to enter the work place
at home at any time. A recent (meta-)study [5] illustrates the
scope of this issue.
Many existing guidelines promise to secure private net-
works [6]–[8]. Even the BSI has published a checklist for
employees in the home ofﬁce due to the ongoing Coronavirus-
2019 pandemic [9]. This checklist covers some basic rules of
conduct in a home ofﬁce. However, none of the guidelines
we are aware of reach the completeness and soundness of
standardized approaches, such as the BSI Grundschutz or the
NIST Cybersecurity Framework. Frequently, it also remains
unclear which level of technical understanding is required from
an employee to follow such guidelines at home successfully.
From a company perspective, the main disadvantage of such
guidelines is their incompatibility with certiﬁcates. Compa-
nies, that do not want to put their certiﬁed security strategies
at risk, but send employees into home ofﬁce, are forced to
implement harsh measures that limit the usability of a home-
ofﬁce workplace.
One example for such a measure is to strictly disallow any
company data on a private device, and to use screen forwarding
from a remote machine at the company to the user’s device
via Virtual Private Networks (VPN). While this approach
protects the integrity and conﬁdentiality of the transmission
and ensures the availability of the data at the company’s side,
it might be inadequate for many business tasks. One issue is
that a malware at the user’s device could interfere with the
login process of the VPN or the remote machine. Another
issue is that it is restricted to business processes that can be
executed entirely on the remote machine. Furthermore, screen
forwarding via VPN is too slow for many graphical tasks,
including computer-aided design or multimedia content cre-
ation. A superior approach would be to extend the company’s
certiﬁed security concept to the user’s home ofﬁce.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

In this paper, we analyze how the certiﬁable security level
”Basic Protection” of the IT-Grundschutz Compendium can be
executed in a home ofﬁce. Furthermore, we ﬁnd out whether
the identiﬁed security requirements can be implemented by
an employee without in-depth technical background knowl-
edge, or need an expert from the employer. To this end,
we restrict the focus of this paper on the technical parts of
the IT-Grundschutz Compendium that are relevant for home
ofﬁces, i.e., we only consider the module layers ”Applications”
(APP), ”Concepts” (CON), ”Detection and Reaction” (DER),
”Operations” (OPS), ”Networks” (NET) and ”Systems” (SYS).
In particular, we make the following contributions:
• We model a minimal home-ofﬁce scenario that contains
customer data, together with respective roles for the
employee in the home ofﬁce and the company’s IT-
security expert.
• We execute a Basic Protection approach according to BSI
Grundschutz on this scenario, and we say what must be
modiﬁed if the scenario changes.
• For each security requirement identiﬁed, we examine
whether it can be implemented by the employee.
We found out that, from a technical point of view, it is
indeed possible to apply the Basic Protection of the BSI to a
home ofﬁce. This means that it is technically feasible to extend
the scope of a certiﬁed security policy to workplaces at home.
However, only 11 of the 103 security requirements needed
to implement Basic Protection in our minimal scenario can
be implemented by an employee without IT-security expertise
that is beyond his or her working skills. All other requirements
must be implemented by the employers IT-security experts,
either by bringing-in the device, by call-center support or by
a security expert visiting the workplace.
Section II describes the IT-Grundschutz basic protection
and the basic terms of this work. We deﬁne a minimal
home-ofﬁce scenario and implement the basic protection in
Section III. In Section IV, we check which of the identiﬁed
basic requirements the user can implement independently. We
discuss our ﬁndings in Section V. Section VI concludes.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we introduce the IT-Grundschutz Com-
pendium, related standards and fundamental concepts.
A. BSI IT-Grundschutz
Since 1991, the German Federal Ofﬁce for Information
Security (BSI) maintains a structured collection of guidelines
to implement IT-security in large enterprises in a standard-
ized way. The most recent collection is the IT-Grundschutz
Compendium, version 2021 [1], together with supporting stan-
dards, such as BSI-Standard 200-2 ”IT-Grundschutz Method-
ology” [10]. The BSI distinguishes security levels, such as
”Basic”, ”Standard” and ”Increased”. The security levels can
be audited and certiﬁed, and are compatible with the ISO
2700x series of standards [2] or the NIST cyber security
framework [3]. In 2017, the BSI published the ”Guide to Basic
Protection based on IT-Grundschutz” [11]. It deﬁnes the steps
shown in Figure 1 to secure a typical IT-infrastructure. We
have aligned our research approach according to these steps.
For this reason, we brieﬂy describe them in the following.
B. Basic Protection
The security level ”Basic” requires to specify the scope of
the protection, to map the information doman to BSI modules,
and to implement adequate safeguards.
a) Speciﬁcation of the Scope: The information domain
is deﬁned by means of a structural analysis. Either the entire
IT-infrastructure of the company can be considered, or certain
departments only. That essentially depends on the size of the
individual departments or the company [10]. The information
domain includes business processes (e.g., production), IT-
systems (e.g., PC’s, server), applications (e.g., Word, Drop-
box), data (e.g., customer data), communication links (e.g.,
ethernet), rooms (e.g., ofﬁces), and organizational structures.
The individual components of the information domain are
described as a network plan.
After the information domain has been deﬁned, it must be
modeled by using the IT-Grundschutz Compendium. The IT-
Grundschutz Compendium contains modules that map the ele-
ments of the information domain [1] to security requirements.
The modules contain a clear introduction, a threat landscape
and requirements on different protection levels. Furthermore
the scope within each module is described. In the scope it is
also pointed out in more detail which other modules should
be considered when using this module.
The current version of the IT-Grundschutz Compendium [1]
was released in 2021. However, this version is only available in
German at the moment. We use the 2021 version as a basis for
this paper, but we brieﬂy describe the differences to the preced-
ing version from 2019 [12], which is available in English: The
module ”APP.5.1 General Groupware” is no longer included in
the 2021 version. The requirements contained in this module
are now contained in other modules, such as ”APP.5.3 General
E-Mail Client and Server” The modules ”SYS.4.5: Removable
Media” and ”APP.6 General Software” are not yet included
in the 2019 version. We need to consider them in our work.
The module ”CON.2” only contains one basic requirement
”Implementation of the Standard Data Protection Model”. This
requirement includes all basic requirements from the 2019
version. The Standard Data Protection Model complements the
IT-Grundschutz Compendium regarding data protection and is
also available in english [13]. In the 2021 version, some basic
requirements have been omitted. That means, we do not have
to consider them in our work. In the 2021 version the fol-
lowing basic requirements have been added: OPS.1.1.3.A15,
OPS.1.1.3.A16, SYS.2.1.A42, SYS.3.1.A9 and APP.1.1.A17.
We will consider them in our work.
b) Selection and Prioritization (a.k.a. Modelling): After
the information domain has been deﬁned, the modelling must
be applied in the next step. For this purpose, all elements of
the information domain are mapped to the respective modules
in the IT-Grundschutz Compendium [1]. The modules contain
deﬁnitions of possible risks that have to be considered when
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Specification 
of the Scope
Selection and 
Prioritisation
IT-Grundschutz
Check
Implementation
of Safeguards
Figure 1. ”Basic Protection” according to BSI Standard 200-2
securing an element. Furthermore, requirements are described
in each module that must be implemented to avert potential
risks. For a more detailed description of the modules, we refer
to one of our previous works [14]. This step is challenging,
because elements can be linked with multiple modules, and
modules frequently contain cross-references to other ones.
The result of the modelling is an IT-Grundschutz model of
the information domain, which consists of various modules.
The requirements for averting potential risks that are described
in the modules represent a checklist that must be worked
through. The IT-Grundschutz Check can now be started with
this checklist.
c) IT-Grundschutz-Check: In the preceding step, relevant
modules have been identiﬁed. Each of these modules contains
basic requirements that must be implemented. However, some
requirements might have been already implemented in the
past, or the products used allow better options to fulﬁll a
requirement than those named in a module. For this reason,
the IT-Grundschutz Check provides as a gap analysis. For
each basic requirement, it is checked whether and to what
extent it has already been implemented. The following answers
to the implementation status of the basic requirement are
possible [11]:
• Unnecessary: The requirement can be omitted, because it
is not relevant in the information system under considera-
tion or has already been met due to alternative safeguards.
• Yes: Appropriate safeguards have been implemented
completely for the requirement.
• Partially: The safeguards implemented so far do not
entirely fulﬁll the requirement.
• No: The requirement has not been met yet, i.e., appro-
priate safeguards have not been implemented yet.
The result of the IT-Grundschutz Check is a list of re-
quirements with implementation status ”partially” or ”no”. The
implementation of these requirements is the starting point for
the next step in the Basic Protection. When implementing
Basic Protection, the BSI stipulates that all requirements
MUST be implemented. For this reason, we will not check
which of the basic requirements can be waived, but consider
all of them to be necessary.
d) Implementation of the Safeguards: Regarding the re-
alisation of the requirements, it must be decided how and in
what order the identiﬁed requirements have to be implemented.
The BSI describes implementation recommendations for
the requirements. These implementation recommendations are
best practice approaches with many years of experience from
experts in the ﬁeld of information security.
III. BASIC PROTECTION FOR HOME OFFICES
In this section, we analyze to which extent an employee is
able to implement the BSI protection level ”Basic” to secure
a typical home-ofﬁce scenario. We start with our research
method: First, we deﬁne the role ”Home-Ofﬁce User” as a
person without in-depth background knowledge on IT-security.
Second, We specify a home-ofﬁce scenario, and we model
its information domain according to BSI standard 200-2 [10].
Third, we apply the BSI protection level ”Basic” on this
scenario, i.e., we derive appropriate security requirements for
this scenario from the BSI Grundschutz Compendium [1].
Fourth, we use our role deﬁnition from the ﬁrst step as a
reference to test if an employee can execute the respective
IT-security requirements, or needs help from an expert from
the employer. Finally, we discuss what changes if the minimal
home-ofﬁce scenario is extended due to further needs of the
employee’s business task.
A. A Minimal Home-Ofﬁce Scenario with Customer Data
With ”home ofﬁce”, we refer to a situation where a home-
ofﬁce user fulﬁlls (a subset of) his business tasks at home, in a
domestic environment that is not strictly tailored for business,
but also for daily (family) life, leisure, recreation, sports, etc.
A room used for home ofﬁce might also contain a TV or a
smart speaker which could be banned on company premises.
The room might be shared with other family members when
it is not used for work. The PC used for work might be shared
with others, with a different user account. We implement the
BSI protection level ”Basic” for the following scenario:
Scenario: A health insurance company sends an employee
from the customer service department into home ofﬁce. Since
the employee manages sensible data, the company requires
that the room used for home ofﬁce is locked when the em-
ployee is off. Furthermore, the company provides a work laptop
with an operating system, applications for opening and editing
documents, an e-mail client, a web browser and anti-virus
software. Furthermore, the work laptop has an USB interface.
The employee’s private network has a router that acts as an
Internet gateway and a personal ﬁrewall, and spans a WLAN
network (WLAN0). To establish a network connection to the
company, the employee connects his laptop via WLAN to the
router, as shown in Figure 2.
B. The Role ”Home-Ofﬁce User”
In the context of this paper, we assume that an employee
is an adequately-trained domain expert for the business task
he executes, and we also assume that the employee has been
trained to use computer equipment securely. However, we do
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Private Network
(Home Office)
Internet
Router with
Firewall
eth0
WLAN0
Work Laptop
Company
Data Center
Figure 2. Network plan of a basic home-ofﬁce scenario
not expect the employee to possess in-depth technical knowl-
edge regarding IT-operations, IT-administration or IT-security.
To approach a role speciﬁcation for our home-ofﬁce user that
considers this, but is also in line with well-established best
practices in industry and business, we adapt role deﬁnitions
from the BSI. In standard 200-2 [10], the BSI describes a set
of roles, such as ”Information Security Ofﬁcer”, ”Data User”,
”Data Owner” or ”Data Creator”. For our paper, we borrow
the role ”Home-Ofﬁce User” from the BSI role ”Data User”.
While the BSI assumes that every employee can take
the role ”Data User” [10], our role ”Home-Ofﬁce User” is
restricted to employees that are eligible for home ofﬁce and
have been trained for home ofﬁce speciﬁc IT-components, e.g.,
how to establish a VPN connection to a company server, how
to set up a video conference or how to lock the screen so
that no family member gets insight into work data. Table I
summarizes the properties and characteristics of this role
deﬁnition. Note that the BSI deﬁnes the term ”operations”
according to ISO Standard 12207 [15]. This standard describes
a software lifecycle that includes the primary processes of
development, operation and maintenance. The ISO standard
15288 [16] describes the same for systems. In our work, we
will also use this deﬁnition. Thus, our role deﬁnition is both
compatible with BSI Grundschutz and the ISO standards.
TABLE I
ROLE ”HOME-OFFICE USER”
Property
Role Characteristics
Tasks
Execute business tasks on business data at
home
Operations
Use work equipment and software applications
at home
Qualiﬁcation
Knowledge of the application domain and the
IT systems used
Eligibility
Every employee whose function can be per-
formed in home ofﬁce
With our minimal home-ofﬁce scenario, the role home-
ofﬁce user is instantiated as follows:
Scenario User: The employee works in customer service,
has been qualiﬁed accordingly, and has years of working ex-
perience in that domain. His daily activities include answering
customer requests, assessing and settling medical invoices or
providing insurance contracts. For this purposes, he uses tele-
phone and email. To do this, he uses the work laptop provided
by the employer. Furthermore, the employee has been trained
to use the laptop securely at home, i.e., he is able to change
passwords, to allow automatic security updates for applications
and operating system, and knows how to handle the anti-virus
software.
C. The Information Domain
To implement the BSI Basic Protection on our scenario,
we need its information domain. In the context of this paper,
the scope of the information domain is limited to the technical
home ofﬁce setup of the employee, i.e., it ends with the router
that provides Internet access.
In line with the BSI Grundschutz methodology, we model
the the information domain for each of the levels ”Data”,
”Communication”, ”Applications” and ”IT-Systems” from the
network plan (cf. Figure 2) and our scenario description (cf.
Subsection III-A). The information domain for our scenario is
shown in Table II. Observe that we do not make assumptions
yet on the applications or operating systems installed.
TABLE II
INFORMATION DOMAIN OF THE PRIVATE NETWORK
ID
Object
Description
Data
D1
Customer Data
Personal data from customers
D2
Content Data
Data of applications and services
D3
Account Data
Login and authorization data of the user
Communication
N1
Router/Firewall
Security gateway
Applications
A1
System Software
Operating system, drivers and utilities
A2
Applications
Applications to display and edit documents
A3
E-Mail Client
Application for sending/receiving emails
A4
Web Browser
Application to display web content
IT-Systems
S1
Work Laptop
Laptop provided by the employer
Data D1 to D3 represent different kinds of information from
the daily work. For example, the work laptop is secured with
a username and password (D3). The same applies to the login
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

of the work e-mail account. Customer data, such as the names,
addresses and customer IDs (D1), are processed together with
other information (D2) on the work laptop (S1) due to the
activity as a customer service employee. The employee’s
private Internet router (N1) serves also as a security gateway,
because it contains a ﬁrewall. The applications A1 to A4
represent the various software needed for daily business.
D. Implementing Basic Protection
To implement Basic Protection, we have to identify all
modules from the IT-Grundschutz Compendium that address
the elements of our information domain (Table II). Observe
that the modules in the IT-Grundschutz Compendium are
organized in a hierarchy. To secure the web browser, not
only ”APP.1.2 Web-Browser” needs to be considered, but also
”APP.6 General Software”. Furthermore, the scope deﬁnition
of some modules contain cross references to others. For ex-
ample, ”SYS.3.1 Laptops” refers amongst others to ”NET.2.2
WLAN usage” and ”SYS.2.1 General Client”. It is also pos-
sible that a requirement forces to implement another module.
For example, basic requirement ”NET.2.1.A8 Procedures in
the Event of WLAN Security Incidents” makes it mandatory
to consider ”DER.2.1 Security Incident Handling”. Finally,
some requirements implicitly call for other modules. For
example, Basic Requirement ”SYS.2.1.A4 Regular Backups”
is implicitly linked with ”CON.3 Backup Concept”. Table III
shows all modules needed to model our scenario, and Table IV
contains the list of all Basic requirements, we have identiﬁed.
For a detailed description of the modules and its security
requirements, see the IT-Grundschutz Compendium [1].
TABLE III
MODULES RELATED TO OUR INFORMATION DOMAIN
ID
Description
APP.1.1
Ofﬁce Products
APP.1.2
Web-Browser
APP.5.3
General E-Mail Client and Server
APP.6
General Software
CON.2
Data Protection
CON.3
Backup Concept
CON.6
Deleting and Destroying Data and Devices
DER.2.1
Security Incident Handling
DER.2.3
Clean-Up of Extensive Security Incident
NET.1.1
Network Architecture and Design
NET.1.2
Network Management
NET.2.1
WLAN Operation
NET.2.2
WLAN Usage
NET.3.1
Router and Switches
OPS.1.1.3
Patch and Change Management
OPS.1.1.4
Protection Against Malware
SYS.2.1
General Client
SYS.3.1
Laptops
SYS.4.5
Removable Media
Our starting point was a minimal home-ofﬁce scenario with
customer data. For this reason, this exhaustive list of Basic
requirements must be fully implemented, in order to extend
the certiﬁed security level ”Basic Protection” from company
premises to the workplace of a home-ofﬁce user that handles
any kind of customer data, personal data or other sensitive
information.
Note that tasks like telemedicine or power plant control
need a higher security level than ”Basic Protection”, because
any security issue might endanger the life of a person or
produce very high damages. In such scenarios, the list of
requirements would be much larger. However, such scenarios
are less suitable for home ofﬁces anyway.
IV. RESPONSIBILITIES FOR REQUIREMENTS
To systematically approach at a distinction between re-
quirements that can be implemented by the employee and
requirements that need an expert from the employer, we deﬁne
two prerequisites.
Prerequisite 1: The implementation of the requirement
must be within the abilities deﬁned in the role speciﬁcation
from Table I. In particular, for each requirement, we need the
following questions answered with ”yes”:
• Has the requirement an impact on the user’s professional
tasks or business processes?
• Is the requirement within the user’s typical activities with
work equipment or software applications?
• Are the user’s qualiﬁcations sufﬁcient to appropriately
meet the requirement?
Prerequisite 2: The requirement cannot be implemented at
the employer’s site.
If Prerequisites 1 and 2 are met, the user has the abilities
and the responsibility to implement a requirement. If this is not
the case, the requirement must be implemented by an expert.
Observe that some requirements for home-ofﬁce users are
among the typical tasks for an expert in the employer’s IT
department. It is the IT department which conﬁgures laptops,
installs software or manages VPN tunnels. Thus, such tasks
are addressed before the employee is sent into home ofﬁce.
Example: With our home-ofﬁce scenario, an anti-virus ap-
plication has been installed on the employee’s laptop. This
application is associated with Basic requirement SYS.3.1.A4
”Use of Anti-Virus Programs”. Because the employee has been
ordered to use it, it is part of his professional tasks. The
employee needs to handle virus warnings or requests to accept
fresh virus signatures, i.e., it is within his typical activities with
the laptop. The employer has provided a training on how to
use the anti-virus software. Finally, the daily use of the anti-
virus application cannot take place at the employers site. Thus,
Prerequisites 1 and 2 are met, and requirement SYS.3.1.A4 is
within the responsibilities of the employee.
Reconsider Table IV. All bold requirements fulﬁll both
prerequisites and must be implemented by the home-ofﬁce
user in order to extend the company’s security concept, level
”Basic”, to the user’s home ofﬁce.
To our surprise, this number of requirements is rather small.
All other basic requirements must be implemented with the
help of experts of the IT department, either via bringing-in
the laptop, via hotline support, or by visiting the user.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

TABLE IV
BASIC REQUIREMENTS FOR A MINIMAL HOME OFFICE
ID
Description
APP.1.1.A2
Limiting Active Content
APP.1.1.A3
Opening Documents from External Sources
APP.1.1.A7
Awareness of Speciﬁc Ofﬁce Properties
APP.1.2.A1
Using Sandboxing
APP.1.2.A2
Encryption of Communications
APP.1.2.A3
Using Certiﬁcates
APP.1.2.A4
Version Checking and Updates for (...)
APP.5.3.A1
Secure conﬁguration of e-mail clients
APP.5.3.A2
Secure operation of e-mail servers
APP.5.3.A3
Data backup and archiving of emails
APP.5.3.A4
Spam and virus protection on e-mail servers
APP.6.A1
Planning the software useage
APP.6.A2
A requirements catalog for software
APP.6.A3
Secure procurement of software
APP.6.A4
Installation and conﬁguration of software
APP.6.A5
Secure installation of software
DER.2.1.A1
Deﬁnition of a Security Incident
DER.2.1.A2
Policy for Handling Security Incidents
DER.2.1.A3
Responsibilities for Security Incidents
DER.2.1.A4
Notiﬁcation for Security Incidents
DER.2.1.A5
Remedial Action for Security Incidents
DER.2.1.A6
Recovering after Security Incidents
DER.2.3.A1
Creation of a Management Committee
DER.2.3.A2
Deciding on a Clean-Up Approach
DER.2.3.A3
Isolation of Affected Network Segments
DER.2.3.A4
Blocking and Changing Access Data (...)
DER.2.3.A5
Closing the Initial Entry Route
DER.2.3.A6
Returning to Production Operations
CON.2.A1
Implementing the Standard Data Protection Model
CON.3.A1
Determining the Factors for Backups
CON.3.A2
Stipulating Backup Procedures
CON.3.A4
Drawing Up a Minimum Backup Concept
CON.3.A5
Regular Backups
CON.6.A1
Regulations for Deleting/Destroying Information
CON.6.A2
Disposal of Sensitive Resources and Information
CON.6.A11
Deletion of Data by External Service Providers
CON.6.A12
Minimum Requirements for Deletion
NET.1.1.A1
Network Security Policy
NET.1.1.A2
Documentation of the Network
NET.1.1.A3
Speciﬁcation of Network Requirements
NET.1.1.A4
Network Separation in Security Zones
NET.1.1.A5
Client-Server Segmentation
NET.1.1.A6
End Device Segmentation for Networks
NET.1.1.A7
Protection of Sensitive Information
NET.1.1.A8
Basic Protection of Internet Access
NET.1.1.A9
Communication with Untrusted Networks
NET.1.1.A10
DMZ Segmentation for Internet Access
NET.1.1.A11
Communication with the Internet
NET.1.1.A12
Protection of Outgoing Communication
NET.1.1.A13
Network Planning
NET.1.1.A14
Implementation of Network Planning
NET.1.1.A15
Regular Gap Analysis
ID
Description
NET.1.2.A1
Network Management Planning
NET.1.2.A2
Network Management Requirements
NET.1.2.A6
Regular Backups
NET.1.2.A7
Basic Logging of Events
NET.1.2.A8
Time Synchronisation
NET.1.2.A9
Network Management Communication
NET.1.2.A10
Limitation of SNMP Communication
NET.2.1.A1
Deﬁnition of a Strategy for WLAN Usage
NET.2.1.A2
Selection of a Suitable WLAN Standard
NET.2.1.A3
Selecting Crypto Methods for WLAN
NET.2.1.A4
Suitable Location of Access Points
NET.2.1.A5
Secure Basic Conﬁguration of Access Points
NET.2.1.A6
Secure Conﬁguration of WLAN Clients
NET.2.1.A7
Setting Up a Distribution System
NET.2.1.A8
Procedures for WLAN Security Incidents
NET.2.2.A1
Creating a User Policy for WLAN
NET.2.2.A2
Awareness and Training of WLAN Users
NET.2.2.A3
WLAN Usage in Insecure Environments
NET.3.1.A1
Basic Conﬁguration of a Router or Switch
NET.3.1.A2
Installing Updates and Patches
NET.3.1.A3
Restrictive Granting of Access Rights
NET.3.1.A4
Protection of Administration Interfaces
NET.3.1.A5
Protection Against Fragmentation Attacks
NET.3.1.A6
Emergency Access to Routers and Switches
NET.3.1.A7
Logging on Routers and Switches
NET.3.1.A8
Regular Backups
NET.3.1.A9
Operational Documentation
OPS.1.1.3.A1
Concept for Patch and Change Management
OPS.1.1.3.A2
Speciﬁcation of Responsibilities
OPS.1.1.3.A3
Conﬁguration of Auto-Update Mechanisms
OPS.1.1.3.A15
Regular updating of IT systems and software
OPS.1.1.3.A16
Searching for patches and vulnerabilities
OPS.1.1.4.A1
A Concept for Protection Against Malware
OPS.1.1.4.A2
System-Speciﬁc Protection Mechanisms
OPS.1.1.4.A3
Virus Protection for End Devices
OPS.1.1.4.A5
Operating Virus Protection Programs
OPS.1.1.4.A6
Updating Virus Protection and Signatures
OPS.1.1.4.A7
User Awareness and Obligations
SYS.2.1.A1
User Authentication
SYS.2.1.A3
Activation of Automatic Update Mechanisms
SYS.2.1.A6
Use of Anti-Virus Programs
SYS.2.1.A8
Protection of the Boot Process
SYS.2.1.A42
Use of cloud and online functions
SYS.3.1.A1
Rules for Mobile Laptop Use
SYS.3.1.A2
Laptop Access Protection
SYS.3.1.A3
Use of Personal Firewalls
SYS.3.1.A9
Secure remote access with laptops
SYS.4.5.A1
Awareness for handling removable media
SYS.4.5.A2
Loss or manipulation report
SYS.4.5.A10
Volume encryption
SYS.4.5.A12
Protection against malware
V. DISCUSSION
The focus of our work was to extend the company’s security
concept to the user’s home ofﬁce in a standardized way that
is compatible with a certiﬁcation from BSI. To approach at
a minimal but comprehensive set of requirements, we have
started with a minimal home ofﬁce scenario that includes
customer data. In consequence, the Basic requirements from
Table IV must be fully implemented for any home-ofﬁce
scenario using customer data. We have found out that this
includes much help from an security expert of the employer.
In some home-ofﬁce scenarios, employers would equip
their employees with additional devices, such as tablets or
smartphones, or maybe with other categories of applications,
such as database systems. The requirements for operating the
company’s own hardware and software in the home ofﬁce can
also vary greatly. In such cases, the list of requirements in
Table IV must be extended. Recall that our minimal scenario
did not make any assumptions on the operating systems
and business applications used. Therefore, ﬁrst candidates
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

for further BSI modules are SYS.3.2.4 ”Android”, SYS.2.4
”macOS Clients” or SYS.2.2.3 ”Windows 10 Clients”.
The procedure to extend this list of requirements is identical
to the research method we have used in this paper: It starts by
widening the scope of the information domain. The next step is
to research further BSI modules, followed by an assessment of
the implementation status of the additional requirements with
the IT-Grundschutz Check. The core protection of the BSI-
standard 200-3 [17] uses the same approach. Core protection
means to secure the most vulnerable subset of the information
domain ﬁrst, and to extend this protection at a later time.
Our approach is adaptable to other certiﬁcations, e.g.,
based on the NIST Cybersecurity Framework [3]. The IT-
Grundschutz Compendium is organized in various process
layers and system layers, while the Cybersecurity Framework
is organized in the categories ”Identify”, ”Protect”, ”Detect”,
”Respond” and ”Recover”. However, both approaches use a
comparable methodology. The BSI role ”Data User” [10]”
corresponds to the NIST role ”Information System User” [18].
Furthermore, the requirements in the modules of the IT-
Grundschutz Compendium have their counterparts in the
controls of the Cybersecurity Framework. For example, BSI
module ”CON.3 Backup Concept” names requirements that
are a subset of the imperatives in the NIST control family
”CP: Contingency Planning”. Finally, both IT-Grundschutz
Compendium and NIST Cybersecurity framework can be
mapped to the ISO 2700x series of standards [2].
VI. CONCLUSION
With the Basic Protection from the 200-2 standard, the BSI
provides companies with a comprehensive guide to imple-
ment a deﬁned level of IT-security in a company-wide IT-
infrastructure. This security level can be audited and certiﬁed,
which is mandatory in many sectors of industry and business.
However, the BSI considers home-ofﬁce users as a risk that
is external to the company’s infrastructure. In consequence,
home-ofﬁce users must have restricted access to company
assets, which restricts the business tasks that can be carried
out at home.
In this paper, we have investigated which requirements
must be implemented in a minimal home-ofﬁce scenario with
customer data in order to obtain the BSI protection level
”Basic”. Furthermore, we have used a deﬁnition for a home-
ofﬁce user, to ﬁnd out which of those requirements can be
implemented by the user.
We have observed that the number of requirements that need
a security expert from the company is manageable for a small
home-ofﬁce scenario, and we have discussed how to extend
this scenario for more complex settings. Our ﬁndings are a ﬁrst
step towards creating an IT-Grundschutz proﬁle for a home
ofﬁce, to simplify security management for employees in a
home ofﬁce, while ensuring a certiﬁed security policy at the
same time.
REFERENCES
[1] Federal
Ofﬁce
for
Information
Security,
“BSI
IT-Grundschutz
Kompendium
Edition
2021,”
https://www.bsi.bund.de/DE/Themen/
Unternehmen-und-Organisationen/Standards-und-Zertiﬁzierung/
IT-Grundschutz/IT-Grundschutz-Kompendium/
it-grundschutz-kompendium node.html [accessed: July 2021], 2021.
[2] ISO/IEC/IEEE, “The ISO/IEC 27000 Family of Information Security
Standards,” https://www.itgovernance.co.uk/iso27000-family [accessed:
July 2021], 2015.
[3] National Institute of Standards and Technology, “SP 800 series on
Information Security and Cybersecurity Practice Guides,” https://csrc.
nist.gov/publications/sp800 [accessed: July 2021], 2020.
[4] FAZIT
Communication
GmbH
in
cooperation
with
the
Federal
Foreign
Ofﬁce
Berlin,
“The
Federal
Government
informs
about
the
Corona
crisis,”
https://www.deutschland.de/en/news/
german-federal-government-informs-about-the-corona-crisis [accessed:
July 2021], 2021.
[5] M. Bispham, S. Creese, W. H. Dutton, P. Esteve-Gonzalez, and M. Gold-
smith, “Cybersecurity in working from home: An exploratory study,”
Available at SSRN 3897380, 2021.
[6] S.
Cooper,
“How
to
secure
your
home
wireless
network,”
https://www.comparitech.com/blog/information-security/
secure-home-wireless-network/ [accessed: July 2021], 2020.
[7] NortonLifeLock Inc., “Keep your home Wi-Fi safe in 7 simple steps,”
https://us.norton.com/internetsecurity-iot-keep-your-home-wiﬁ-safe.
html [accessed: July 2021], 2020.
[8] D. Nield, “How to Secure Your Wi-Fi Router and Protect Your
Home Network,” https://www.wired.com/story/secure-your-wi-ﬁ-router/
[accessed: July 2021], 2020.
[9] Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security, “IT-Sicherheit im Home
Ofﬁce,”
https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/BSI/
Cyber-Sicherheit/Themen/checkliste-home-ofﬁce mitarbeiter.html
[accessed: July 2021], 2020.
[10] Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security, “BSI-Standard 200-2: IT-
Grundschutz-Methodology,”
https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/
Downloads/EN/BSI/Grundschutz/International/bsi-standard-2002 en
pdf.html [accessed: July 2021], 2017.
[11] Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security, “Guide to Basic Protec-
tion based on IT-Grundschutz,” https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/
Downloads/EN/BSI/Grundschutz/International/Basic Security.html [ac-
cessed: July 2021], 2017.
[12] Federal
Ofﬁce
for
Information
Security,
“BSI
IT-Grundschutz
Compendium
Edition
2019,”
https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/
Downloads/EN/BSI/Grundschutz/International/bsi-it-gs-comp-2019.
html [accessed: July 2021], 2019.
[13] Conference of Independent German Federal and State Data Protection
Supervisory
Authorities,
“The
Standard
Data
Protection
Model,”
https://www.datenschutzzentrum.de/uploads/sdm/SDM-Methodology
V2.0b.pdf [accessed: July 2021], 2020.
[14] C. Haar and E. Buchmann, “Securing Orchestrated Containers with BSI
Module SYS.1.6,” in Proceedings of the 7th International Conference
on Information Systems Security and Privacy, 2021.
[15] ISO/IEC/IEEE, “ISO/IEC12207:2017 Systems and software engineering
Software life cycle processes,” https://www.iso.org/standard/63712.html
[accessed: July 2021], 2008.
[16] ISO/IEC/IEEE, “ISO/IEC/IEEE 15288:2015 Systems and software en-
gineering
System life cycle processes,” https://www.iso.org/standard/
63711.html [accessed: July 2021], 2015.
[17] Federal
Ofﬁce
for
Information
Security,
“BSI-Standard
200-
3:
Risk
Analysis
based
on
IT-Grundschutz,”
https://www.bsi.
bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/EN/BSI/Grundschutz/International/
bsi-standard-2003 en pdf.html [accessed: July 2021], 2017.
[18] National Institute of Standards and Technology, “NIST Special Publica-
tion 800-100: Information Security Handbook – A Guide for Managers,”
https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-100/ﬁnal [accessed: Au-
gust 2021], 2020.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

