Reliablity and Survivability of Wireless Sensor Network Using  
Security Adaptation Reference Monitor (SARM) 
 
Tewfiq El Maliki 
Information Technology department-hepia 
University of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland 
1202 Geneva - Switzerland 
tewfiq.elmaliki@hesge.ch 
Jean-Marc Seigneur 
Advanced Systems Group 
University of Geneva 
1211 Geneva 4 – SWITZERLAND 
Jean-Marc.Seigneur@trustcomp.org 
 
 
Abstract —Security has become a key issue for any huge 
deployment of Wireless Sensor Network (WSN). Moreover, data 
reliability combined with energy loss minimization is really a 
challenging task, particularly to maintain survivability of the 
WSN under attacks such as sinkhole. Therefore, new security 
mechnisms must be in accordance with energy consumption 
constraint. This paper proposes to address this task using our 
Security Adaptation Reference Monitor (SARM) which is an 
efficient Framework capable of trading-off between security and 
energy optimization. SARM is based on an autonomic computing 
security looped system, which fine-tunes security means based on 
the monitoring of the context including energy consumption 
aspects. We evaluate SARM in the context of WSN through a 
simulation tool to verify the performance of overall reliability 
and energy loss in the presence of sinkhole attackers. The results 
clearly show that SARM is efficient in terms of reliability, overall 
network utilization and power consumption.  
Keywords – Framework, Autonomic, Security adaptation, 
Sinkhole, Sensor Network 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Wireless sensor network (WSN) is a versatile network 
for supporting variety of important applications, consisting 
of a large number of low-power and multifunction sensor 
nodes that communicate as one hop, multi-hop or cluster-
based models to send data to one or many base stations (BS)s 
through wireless links [1]. The BS is highly enriched system 
with a large amount of energy. This network is built by 
deploying the sensing nodes in the area of interest to form a 
self configured network and start acquiring the necessary 
information. The nodes in this network are battery operated 
and have limited lifetime to operate. Therefore, there is a 
need of energy aware security algorithm which should not 
perform heavy computation on the nodes since it shortens the 
network lifetime. 
In general, many applications could not operate under 
significant packet loss. Thus, reliability is one of the most 
important criteria to evaluate the quality of wireless sensor 
networks. Unfortunately, packet loss is increased by two 
major factors: less coverage of sensors due to less power and 
high error rate of wireless links. Moreover, dynamic power 
attacks such as sinkhole are fatal to the survivability of the 
network. Therefore, the concept that must cope with this new 
security challenge has to be based on dynamic adaptation 
security system to satisfy an overall performance such as 
network reliability, being a key issue especially in sensor 
networks. We have already proposed a generic security 
adaptation reference monitor (SARM) as a compelling 
solution for such problems [2]. In this article, we will apply 
it for WSN in case of sinkhole attacks.  
Please note: we use security in general term including 
availability, reliability and survivability.  
In Section 2, we survey other related works. Section 3 
gives the problem statement, highlighting the motivation of 
our work. Section 4 introduces SARM for WSN and explains 
its components and functionalities. Section 5 explains our 
experiments and simulation implementation to validate 
SARM in the case of sensor network. Our simulation results 
and performance analysis are presented in Section 6 and 
Section 7 concludes our paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Many systems rated at the higher levels of security for 
data are implemented according to the reference monitor 
concept. First introduced by James Anderson [3], a reference 
monitor is a concept that has proven to be a useful tool for 
computer security experts. It is the only effective tool known 
for describing the abstract requirements of secure system 
design and implementation.  
A suitable security service is provisioned in a progressive 
way to achieve the maximum overall security services 
against network performance services throughout the course 
of sensor networks operation. Security in sensor networks is 
complicated by the constrained capabilities of sensor node 
hardware and the properties of the deployment [4], [5] and 
[6]. 
We argue that the spare processing and transmission 
resources are wasted in sensor environments if security is 
over-provisioned. Hence the trade-off between security and 
performance is essential in the choice of security services. 
Adaptive security mechanisms are also found in flexible 
protocol stacks for wireless networks [7], context-aware 
access control systems [8] and security architectures [9]. 
This prompted us for the implementation of a completely 
reconfigurable architecture [10], which is fundamental to 
adapt the architecture to the terminal and network variability 
of the context and particularly in the security field [11]. J-M 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Seigneur [12] has introduced autonomic security pattern in 
his security design but only at the authentication level. 
III. 
MOTIVATION FOR OUR FRAMEWORK 
Flexible security mechanisms are needed to respond to 
new types of attacks and to meet different network setting-
specific protection requirements. The required flexible 
security assessment can be achieved by introducing a generic 
autonomic computing security framework. 
In the case of sensor networks, the sensors usually 
forward their messages to a Base Station (BS) [13] in a hop-
by-hop fashion because they are resource-constrained in 
terms of energy and the spending of energy dramatically 
increases with the range of transmission. It is quite easy for 
an attacker as a Sinkhole [14] to defeat the WSN purpose by 
dropping messages when received rather than forwarding 
them to consume energy of other sensors by requesting them 
to continuously send information.  
It is highly critical to keep the overall security at the 
highest level due to the configuration complexity and the 
runtime changing context. In general, data transfer in WSNs 
is more susceptible to loss due to the nature of sensors 
(power, processing, etc) in addition to the high error rate of 
wireless links. Moreover, sinkhole attacks by means of 
dynamic changing behavior skyrocket the packet loss. 
Therefore, the most crucial constraint in WSN which is 
reliability is not at all guaranteed  
Assuring reliable data delivery between the sensor nodes 
and the BS in Wireless Sensor Networks is a challenging 
task as it affects the ability to sense event. A reliable protocol 
in WSN is a protocol that allows reliably data transfer from 
source to BS with reasonable packet loss. The problem of 
achieving reliable communication between nodes is further 
aggravated by the presence of sinkhole attackers whenever 
they are changing dynamically their behavior. 
In addition, most applications cannot operate in case of 
high packet loss. Thus, reliability, being a key issue 
especially in sensor networks, is definitely one of the 
important criteria to evaluate the quality of wireless sensor 
networks. Accordingly, the concept that must cope with this 
new security challenge in term of availability has to be based 
on dynamic adaptation security system to satisfy an overall 
performance such as network reliability and energy loss. 
Briefly, to lengthen the lifetime of wireless sensor 
network, an efficient protocol needs to support reliable 
network combined with energy efficiency under sinkhole 
attacks. 
 
We propose a generic Framework called Security 
Adaptation reference monitor (SARM) as a compelling 
solution for this problem, because it is looped system 
developed especially for highly dynamic wireless network. It 
is aimed to offer a global adaptation security scheme for any 
application instead of a classical layered security mechanism.  
Implementing this security scheme at each application 
level is not feasible because the change will interfere in each 
communication program in each sensor. The best way to 
overcome this constraint is to implement it in the kernel that 
leads to an overall security control. 
IV. 
SARM DESCRIPTION 
We would like with SARM to fine-tune security means 
as best as possible taking into account the risk of the current 
application environment and the performance of the system 
especially regarding the optimization of its energy 
consumption. Thereby, our system differs from others by its 
[2]: 
a) 
Autonomic computing security looped system 
b) 
Dynamic and evolving security mechanisms related 
to context-monitoring 
c) 
Explicit energy consumption management 
The concept of isolating various functions and restricting 
their access to specific system can also be applied to security 
in wireless environment integrated in the operating system 
itself. The best way to overcome the non realistic constraint 
of implementing the framework in each communication 
program is to integrate it in the kernel and consequently 
having an overall security control. Thus, all communication 
programs go through SARM at some stage in order to gain 
access to communication resources. 
The key challenge of SARM is the adaptation of 
Reference Monitor (RM) [3] concept for wireless 
communication and beyond data access control. The goal of 
a RM is to enforce security by forcing all processes and also 
to prevent applications from accessing any data but only 
through the reference itself. The security kernel is managed 
by security policies. We have also chosen to apply the 
autonomic computing security pattern [15] to design SARM 
by dividing it into a functional unit and a monitoring unit. In 
addition, localized trust [17] or distributed trust [18], [19] 
and [20] are good paths to explore because in some cases 
they 
generate 
low 
computing 
charge 
(less 
energy 
consumption) and give better results. Thereof, we are fitting 
perfectly the context of WSN. 
In [2], we could find all information about SARM high-
level components view. 
A. WSN- SARM 
To validate SARM, we have applied an adapted version 
of SARM, called WSN-SARM, to the application domain of 
wireless sensor network. 
1) Application Domain Main Problem 
In Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN), one of the main 
constraints is to minimize energy consumption in order to 
maximize the lifespan of the network.  
We send messages to the BS in a hop-by-hop routing 
method. While this method searches to minimize the overall 
network utilization of energy, since the power cost is in 
function of distance to the power of a parameter ranged from 
2 to 5.  
This heavy load of traffic on nodes near the BS brings 
them to deplete their energy rapidly. Thereby, it is a 
bottleneck region for the network. Unfortunately, when too 
many of those nodes run out of energy, the BS becomes 
disconnected from the network, and putting the network 
down while there may be plenty of energy remaining in 
nodes away from the BS. Therefore, it seems that energy 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

load balancing is a particularly promising way of 
maximizing the survivability of the network.  
Another problem that challenges all proposed solution is 
sinkhole attack which is a node that does not retransmit any 
received packet. 
The goal of this validation is to show that SARM adapts 
security as efficiently as possible by: 
a) keeping an appropriate level of security depending 
on the context ; 
b) whilst maximizing the overall reliability; 
c) and minimizing the power consumption. 
 
2) Metrics 
Energy metrics are Packet loss ratio that affects energy 
loss per node and the whole network energy loss which is 
important to evaluate energy efficiency at transport protocol 
for any application. 
Assuming dropped packets have a direct relation with 
energy depletion, the energy loss per node can be measured 
by [16]: 
 
Whereas the energy loss for the whole network can be 
calculated by total number of packet received by: 
 
 
Reliability of the entire network is defined as: 
 
 
We can show easily that R network = 1/(E network + 1) 
 
3) WSN-SARM Description 
In Fig. 1, we describe module by module, how SARM is 
applied to the application domain of our validation, 
becoming 
the 
WSN-SARM 
version. 
Context : 
Sensing
R
i
s
k
Performance: 
Network 
Reliability
Vulnerability : 
packet lost
sinkholes
Send an action 
to security
FunctionalUnit
Preferences
Maximum 
energy saving 
Reliability
Analysis
Monitoring
Tune
Policies
Logs : 
Sinkhole
Applications
Not 
Used
Security Means
Trust 
fonction
Balanced or 
unbalanced
distribution
of packets
&
Min distance 
Received 
info from 
BS
Management Unit
 
Figure 1.  WSN-SARM Modules 
First of all, the security means, which can be tuned by 
SARM, are uniform packet repartition or unbalanced 
neighbors packet repartition or a set of suboptimal routing 
paths. The application preference is to maximize the usage 
time whilst keeping enough security. The gathering context 
module is used to collect and distribute trust values between 
the Base Station and Nodes (sensors). These values represent 
the trust of a sensor about its neighbors. They are 
summarized in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
BEHAVIOR AND RECOMMENDED VALUE SENT BY BASE 
STATION TO SENSOR UNDER SINKHOLE ATTACK  
Sensor Behavior over neighbors 
Recommended value to Sensor  
Normal 
The packet is received (1) 
Sinkhole to neighbors’ by not 
sending packet  
The packet is lost (-1) 
 
The values are sent to the management unit for analysis 
using a Trust Function (TF) that will assert the fact which 
algorithm has to be used. In addition, the performance is 
fixed as energy saving in accordance with Application 
Preference, which is lifespan maximizing. 
Each Sensor sends packets uniformly to a number of 
Sensors within a define range according to thresholds used as 
policy. Thanks to its context gathering module the TF has all 
information to evaluate the trust. 
The management unit will integrate the Trust Function 
TF that predicts whether or not to use uniform or unbalanced 
connections depending on the output of the TF depending 
on historical values vi,j  (i packets) sent by the BS to sensor z 
about his neighbor sensor j within defined range. 
• 
 [
: trust of sensor z 
in sensor j and vi are sent by BS as ACK, N : number 
of all packets sent by sensor z and received by BS]  
• 
Threshold = rand() 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

For all j sensors 
 
if (
 
TF is the summation of all positive Trust over j 
neighbors 
if (TF ==0) 
 
then {we send uniformly} 
 
else{TF> threshold}  
 
 
then {we send the packet to sensor j} 
End for 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION AND VALIDATION METHODOLOGY 
We have implemented WSN-SARM and validated it in a 
Sensor wireless network simulation developed with 
AnyLogic, which is a simulation tool that supports all 
different simulation methodologies: System Dynamics, 
Process-centric, and Agent Based modeling. It is based on 
Real-time UML and Java object-oriented language.  
A.  Model Set-up 
Setting up our security model using table 1, one can take 
advantage of state charts to control the behavior of Sensors. 
Using AnyLogic as implementation platform agents and 
especially 
state-charts 
can 
be 
programmed 
very 
conveniently. In particular modifications and/or extensions 
of the final model can be handled in a simple way. 
In Fig. 2, each Agent (Sensor) starts simultaneously in a 
“Transmission” state in the “SensorStateR” and “Trust 
function” state-charts. The Agents are switched to their 
relative state (Sinkhole, Base Station, Sensors). They are 
then added to a list of the sensor whenever they are within 
his range. 
 
 
Figure 2.  State-charts: “Transmission” of agent “SensorStateR” and “TF” 
In Fig. 2, each Agent (Sensor) starts simultaneously in a 
“Transmission” state in the “SensorStateR” and “Trust 
Function” state-charts. The Agents are switched to their 
relative state (Sinkhole, Base Station, Sensors). They are 
then added to a list of the sensor whenever they are within 
his range. 
We used Agents having one of the following behaviors: 
a) Normal state and 
b) Sinkhole  
Each Agent is then processed depending on the decision 
of the monitor unit to choose a security mean or not. 
Therefore, the Agent transits to another state depending on 
the transition conditions or stand in the same state. When 
completing the transfer, the Agent returns to its initial state 
and so on. The state-chart Trust update the trust each time 
the Base Station sends an Ack. Of course, the BS is not 
limited in energy and thus is not subject to any sinkhole 
attack. 
B. Validation Methodology 
In our experiments, we have validated our proposed 
solution and analyzed the extended performance under a 
range of various scenarios. 
We have carried out simulations under 0%, 20% and 
50% sinkhole attackers. Furthermore, the network topology 
was set to random spreading or arranged uniform spreading 
of sensors. We have taken as a reference uniform packet 
distribution over the neighbors. In addition, a Time-To-Live 
TTL counter is used to avoid that a packet stay forever in the 
network and to guarantee that the consumed energy is 
limited to a maximum value when a packet is sent from the 
farthest sensor to the BS. 
To minimize the transit delay and the energy 
consumption, we have also introduced suboptimal routing 
paths as paths that have the shortest Euclidian distance to the 
BS. Indeed, if the topology of sensors is uniformly 
distributed and the sensors aren’t in the border of the square, 
there are 3 possible sensors that have the shortest distance to 
the BS.  
Normally, the BS is in the middle of the network to 
minimize the distance to the farthest sensor. Additionally, 90 
degree sector antennas are used to cover each of four squares 
to lengthen the BS range and minimizing the energy 
consumption. Sector directional antennas can be also added 
to sensors to take advantage of this technique in term of 
energy consumption [21] Therefore, we do not lose any 
generality if we put the BS in the upper left side of the 
square; rather we gain in survivability of WSN. 
 
Figure 3.  Animation interface of Arranged WSN-SARM 
Fig. 3 shows a very powerful animation interface using 
AnyLogic. The BS is placed in the upper left side of the 
square. 
Arranged sensors means that they are placed in an 
equidistant manner as depicted in Fig. 3. Random sensors 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

repartition means that the sensors are physically placed in a 
random manner. 
 
All sensors are over spread over a square topology of 
520m side length, and operating over one day of simulation 
time. In our simulations, we considered that the Base station 
was taken at the origin. The coverage of the Base Station is 
over the entire network. We fix the connection number of 
neighbors from 1 to 7. Indeed, depending on the topology of 
the network (arranged or random distributed sensors 
positions), each sensor was configured to have a maximum 
communication range equal to 50 meters. We deployed the 
Sensors in an incremental mode, from S1 to Sn. The number 
of sensors can be selected from 10 to 1000 and their 
arrangement can be selected between arranged uniformly or 
randomly. 
VI. 
RESULTS ANALYSIS 
During our analysis, we firstly studied the performance 
of WSN-SARM in the defined scenarii where sensors were 
arranged uniformly or at random. The performance metrics 
are network Reliability Ratio and overall network Energy 
loss within the constraints: 
a. 
Thanks to TTL almost the same average energy 
consumption for any packet and  
b. Balancing overall traffic over all the neighbors to 
guaranteed the network survivability.  
Secondly, we studied long-run convergence of TF used in 
WSN-SARM. 
 
We have depicted in Fig.4 and Fig. 5 the results of the 
simulation of WSN-SARM and uniform traffic balancing 
under respectively 0%, 20% and 50% of sinkhole attackers. 
We can easily conclude that SARM is largely better than 
uniform balancing. A ratio of 10 is reached within short time. 
Indeed, we have the obtained the desired effect of the 
feedback mechanism and Trust Function implemented in 
WSN-SARM. 
 
Figure 4.  Reliability of WSN-SARM under different sinkhole attacks. 
 
Figure 5.  Reliability of WSN-SARM under different sinkhole attacks. 
For comparison purpose, we plotted the WSN-SARM 
under 20% of sinkhole attackers using our Trust Function 
and without trust (No Trust) in Fig. 6. We have used all 
suboptimal routing paths to the Base Station. The results 
clearly demonstrate that the convergence is boosted to reach 
100% of Network Reliability.  
Remark: WSN-SARM constitutes a good algorithm to 
detect any sinkhole with the help of the Base Station and 
eliminates it from its connections. We can see that when the 
Sinkhole attackers are detected and inhibited by the message 
sent by BS to all sensors, the reliability of the network is 
raised and especially in case of 50% sinkhole attackers 
(many attackers) get a significant step for its convergence. 
Therefore, simulation shows that our Framework is efficient 
in this context and is tuning to achieve the best trade-off 
between security in one side and, energy loss and reliability 
in other side. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Reliability of WSN-SARM and reference. 
We have noticed that there are significant differences 
between Trust Function used by WSN-SARM and uniform 
packet distribution reference in the case of arranged Sensors. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

We have an average ratio of 2.4 between the two cases. The 
convergence is also boosted for WSN-SARM. 
 
Figure 7.  Network Energy Loss for WSN-SARM and uniform balancing 
We have depicted in Fig. 7 energy loss of WSN-SARM 
using Trust Function and a reference case without trust under 
20% of sinkhole attackers. The convergence is rapid and the 
overall Energy loss is very rapidly minimized within WSN-
SARM.  
Since long-run simulation has a Network reliability of 1 
(estimated with an error of less than 0.1%), the system 
convergence is guaranteed. 
All the results show clear advantages of WSN-SARM 
under sinkhole attackers thanks to the looped system and the 
Trust Function efficiently.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We have proposed a Security Adaptation Reference 
Monitor (SARM) based on the Reference Monitor concept 
and the Autonomic Computing Security pattern to support 
both context monitor and behavior control. The results show 
that WSN-SARM copes with reliability and network Energy 
loss under sinkhole attack even at 50% of attackers. Indeed, 
WSN-SARM constitutes a good Platform to detect within the 
Base Station any sinkhole and eliminates it from its 
connections. The results clearly show that our platform copes 
with reliability and security of the network under sinkhole 
attack, by efficiently tuning the adequate means whilst 
minimizing energy loss. 
These results encourage us to further research on other 
strategies that could automatically optimize the trade-off 
between security and energy consumption in other important 
application domains, such as mobile wireless sensor 
networks under other attacks. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Ibriq and I. Mahgoub, “Cluster-based routing in wireless sensor 
networks: Issues and challenges” Proceedings of the International 
Symposium 
on 
Performance 
Evaluation 
of 
Computer 
and 
Telecommunication Systems, July 25-29, 2004, San Jose, California, 
USA 
[2] 
T. El Maliki and J.-M. Seigneur “A Security Adaptation Reference 
Monitor (SARM) for Highly Dynamic Wireless Environments” The 
International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems, 
and Technologies SECURWARE July 2010 
[3] 
J. 
Anderson, 
“Computer 
Security 
Technology 
Planning,” 
http://seclab.cs.ucdavis.edu/projects/history/papers/ande72.pdf, 1972.  
[4] 
Hiren Kumar Deva Sarma, Avijit Kar, “Security Threats in Wireless 
Sensor Networks”, IEEE 2006 
[5] 
E. Shi and A. Perrig, “Designing Secure Sensor Networks,” Wireless 
Commun. Mag., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 38–43, Dec. 2004 
[6] 
Yun Zhou; Yuguang Fang; Yanchao Zhang, “Securing Wireless 
Sensor Networks: A Survey”, IEEE Communications Surveys & 
Tutorials, Vol:10, Issue 3, PP: 6 –28, Third Quarter 2008. 
[7] 
C. Hager, “Context Aware and Adaptive Security for Wireless 
Networks,” PhD thesis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University, 2004. 
[8] 
M. Lacoste, G. Privat, and F. Ramparany. “Evaluating Confidence in 
Context for Context-Aware Security,”. European Conference on 
Ambient Intelligence (AmI'07), 2007. 
[9] 
J. Al-Muhtadi, D. Mickunas, and R. Campbell, “A Lightweight 
Reconfigurable Security Mechanism for 3G/4G Mobile Devices,” 
IEEE Wireless Communications, 9(2):60–65, 2002. 
[10] E2R Deliverable D2.2., “Equipment Management Framework for 
Reconfiguration: Architecture, Interfaces, and Functions,” Dec. 2005. 
[11] T. Jarboui, M. Lacoste, and P. Wadier, “A Component-Based Policy-
Neutral 
Authorization 
Architecture,” 
French 
Conference 
on 
Operating Systems (CFSE), 2006. 
[12] J.-M. Seigneur, “Trust, Security and Privacy in Global Computing,” 
PhD Thesis, 2005. 
[13] Olivier 
Powell, 
Jean-Marc 
Seigneur 
and 
Luminita 
Moraru,“Trustworthy Forwarding Sensor Networks Information to 
the Internet” The International Conference on Emerging Security 
Information, Systems, and Technologies (SECURWARE 2007). 
[14] Asad Amir Pirzada and Chris McDonald “Circumventing Sinholes 
and Wormholes in Wireless Sensor Networks” the Int. Workshop on 
Wireless Ad-hoc Networks, 2005. 
[15] D.M. Chess, C.C. Palmer, and S.R. White, “Security in an autonomic 
computing Environment,” IBM Systems Journal, VOL 42, N1, 2003. 
[16] Anylogic 38M. A. Rahman, A. E. Saddik and W. Gueaieb, “Wireless 
Sensor Network Transport Layer: State of the Art”, Sensors, 
Springer-Verlang Berlin Heidelberg, 2008. 
[17] C. Davis, “A localized trust management scheme for ad-hoc 
networks,” Proc. 3rd International Conference on Networking 
(ICN'04), Mar. 2004. 
[18] L. Eschenauer, V. Gligor, and J. Baras, “On Trust Establishment in 
Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks,” Proc. 10th International Workshop of 
Security Protocols, Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
(LNCS), Apr. 2002.  
[19] A. Rahman and A. Hailes, “A Distributed Trust Model,” New 
Security Paradigms Workshop 1997, ACM, 1997. 
[20] X. Titi, Tewfiq EL MALIKI, Jean-Marc Seigneur, “Trust-Based 
Hotspot Selection” IADIS International Jounal onComputer Science 
and Information System. V V,2 , 2010 
[21] E. Felemban, S. Vural, R. Murawski, E. Ekici, K Lee, Y. Moon, and 
S. Park, ”SAMAC: A Cross-Layer Communication Protocol for 
Sensor Networks with Sectored Antennas” Mobile Computing, IEEE 
Transactions on, August 2010  
 
 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

