Resistance of Passive Security Elements as A Quantitative Parameter Influencing
The Overall Resistance and Resilience of A Critical Infrastructure Element
Tomáš Loveček 
Faculty of Security Engineering/Department of Security
Research
University of Zilina
Zilina, Slovakia
e-mail: Tomas.Lovecek@fbi.uniza.sk
Anton Šiser
Faculty of Security Engineering/Department of Security
Management
University of Zilina
Zilina, Slovakia
e-mail: Anton.Siser@fbi.uniza.sk
David Řehák 
Faculty of Safety Engineering/Department of Public
Safety
VŠB – Technical University of Ostrava
Ostrava, Czech Republic
e-mail: david.rehak@vsb.cz
Martin Hromada
Faculty of Applied Informatics/Department of Security
Engineering
Tomas Bata University in Zlín
Zlín, Czech Republic
e-mail: hromada@fai.utb.cz
Abstract— The character of protection and resilience of
critical infrastructure is an important parameter, which
directly affects the functioning and operational status of
modern states. This article specifies the meaning of resistance
indicator within the overall resilience of critical infrastructure
element. In this paper, resistance indicator expresses the
resistance of mechanical barriers and building construction
and it is useful in creating a model of quantitative assessment
of the level of protection of critical infrastructure elements.
Keywords-
resistance;
resiliance;
delay
time;
barriers;
indicator.
I.
INTRODUCTION
According to the 2007 decree of the European Council,
critical infrastructure has to include primarily such physical
resources,
services,
IT
equipment
and
communication
networks damage to or destruction of which would severely
influence the critical social functions including the supply
chain, healthcare, security, safety, economic and social well-
being of the population or functioning of the European
Union (EU) or its member states [1]. Protection of these
elements or objects, deemed strategic for the state, is dealt
with through individual solutions in various legal regulations
but with different approaches to their protection. Such
objects include nuclear plants, objects and areas for storage
and manipulation with state secrets or objects housing
financial institutions [2].
However, the critical infrastructure can include other
elements/objects, the specific protection of which has not yet
been covered by laws (such as line and node objects and
elements of road, air, water or rail transport, chemical plants,
suppliers of various forms of energy, hydraulic engineering
objects, food and grocery businesses, industrial companies,
mobile network providers, hospitals and other providers of
care, etc.); the responsibility for their protection should be on
the shoulders of the public sector, as well as the owners and
managers of the individual elements of critical infrastructure
[3] [5].
The paper structure includes 8 important sections. After
the introduction, Section II focuses on assessing the current
state, reviewing laws and European standards. Section III
defines the relation between the terms "resistance" and
"resilience". Section IV defines the options for evaluation of
security systems and Section V then expands on the
properties of passive barriers. Sections VI and VII are
focused on collecting delay time data using a matrix,
statistics
and
operation
analysis.
The
final
section
summarizes the possible future developments in this area.
II.
PROTECTION OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE –
LEGISLATION AND STANDARDS
The existing EU standards approach the physical and
object
protection
of
the
elements
of
the
critical
infrastructure through proclamations and do not specify
specific proposals for its solutions. The Green Book
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

document [2] states several possible means (tools) of
improving preventive measures, security, preparedness and
response
in
terms
of
the
protection
of
the
critical
infrastructure within the EU conditions, but does not specify
them further. This approach is similar on the national level,
where according to [3] [4] [5], tools which can be used to
lower the endangerment of the critical infrastructure can be
technical
elements
for
discouragement,
detection,
verification, signalization and elimination of the violator
(mechanical and electronic) as well as the activity of
security services (such as an intervention by a security force
or the military); there is no further specification however
what the resulting level of protection should be.
The analysis of the legal regulations of both the
European and national levels of individual member states of
the EU shows that the main focus is placed on implementing
safety
measures
against
anthropogenic
threats (threats
sources caused by person acting to damage or destroy an
element of critical infrastructure), which are classified as
tools increasing the resistance of the elements of critical
infrastructure.
III.
RESISTANCE AND RESILIANCE
The Resistance of a system can be understood as the
ability of the system to resist the effect of negative factors,
which do not lead to the change in the ability of the system
to function. It is an ability of the system to resist changes
that would lead to the system itself visibly changing. The
resistance of a system is one of the many factors influencing
the system’s overall resilience. System resilience can be
understood as the ability of a system to secure and maintain
its functionality under the effects of negative factors as well
as retain the functions of the system if changes to the system
do occur.
The resistance of a system can be divided into structural
and safety resistance. Structural resistance is the ability of a
system to withstand the effects of negative factors based on
the construction of its various elements, their placement in
the system and the technologies utilized. Security resistance
is the ability of a system to withstand the effects of negative
factors using a system of security measures (Security
Resistance) with minimal impact on the public safety
(Safety Resistance).
IV.
EVALUATION OF SECURITY RESISTANCE LEVEL
The existing tools, which evaluate the necessary or
existing security resistance level use one of the two main
approaches [6]:
•
qualitative approach,
•
quantitative approach.
There are several tools around the world using one of the
aforementioned approaches [6] [11]:
•
tools using the qualitative approach: RiskWatch
(USA),
CRAMM:
CCTA
Risk
Analysis
and
Management Method (Great Britain),
•
tools
using
the
quantitative
approach:
SAVI:
Systematic Analysis of Vulnerability to Intrusion,
ASSESS:
Analytic
System
and
Software
for
Evaluation of Safeguards and Security (Sandia
National Laboratories, USA), Sprut (Scientific and
Production Enterprise ISTA SYSTEMS JS Co.,
Russia), SAPE (Korea Institute of Nuclear Non-
proliferation and Control, South Korea), SATANO:
Security
Assessment
of
Terrorist
Attack
in
a Network
of
Objects,
(University
of
Žilina,
Faculty of Security Engineering Slovakia, TLP
spol. s r.o., Czech Republic).
Tools utilizing the qualitative approach are based on the
evaluators’ expert estimates when it is not possible to
confirm the exact security resistance level and it is
necessary to rely on the expert skills of the authors of these
approaches. In such case it is impossible to verify whether
the protection system is understated or overstated from in
terms of the proposed protective measures.
Tools based on the quantitative approach allow the exact
evaluation of the proposed protective measures based on
measurable input and output parameters. In such cases, in
contrast to the qualitative approach, the adequacy of a
proposed solution can be confirmed. The basic parameter of
the quantitative approach to resistance evaluation is the
object protection level, which is judged based on structural
and security resistance.
Structural resistance is evaluated separately by means of
evaluation the individual elements of the object protection
system such as the breakthrough resistance of a given
object, i.e., the resistance of such object to various ways and
methods of unwanted breakage [7]. The safety resistance is
evaluated by evaluating the overall object protection level
[8]. Figure 1 shows the visual classification of the basic
evaluation
parameters
of
critical
infrastructure
object
resistance.
Figure 1. Basic evaluation parameters of a critical infrastructure resistance
The advantage of the quantitative approach is that
subjectivity and influence of the evaluator is minimized and
such amount and structure of protective measures is used so
201
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

that the violator is detected and apprehended by a response
unit before reaching his goal. Ironically, this approach is
least used in practice.
The main reason for not using the quantitative approach
is the fact that the evaluation tools do not have access to a
basis of probability and temporal parameters of two main
factors, which are the vector of approach and the protection
system, both of which influence the overall required level of
protection.
Other missing bases on parameters of factors influencing
the overall protection level include:
•
times
of
breakthrough
resistance
of
passive
protection elements, which change based on the
type of tools used to break through them,
•
the
likelihood
of
being
detected
by
active
protection elements, which changes based on the
violator’s knowledge of the technology utilized
(such as the way physical changes are evaluated as
a result of a protected area being broken into) [10],
•
reaction times of response units, changing based on
the strategy of the response,
•
reliability of the technical protection elements,
•
reliability of the human factor.
The reason for the absence of these bases of input
probability and temporal parameters is the fact that there are
no methodical approaches specifying a simple way of
acquiring them and up until recently, there was no research
infrastructure, which would allow the creation of polygons
and their subsequent filling with relevant data.
V.
DELAY TIME OF PASSIVE BARRIERS
Upon closer examination of the selected indicators
influencing the resilience and general level of protection of
an object, there are several links emerging that lead to the
used mechanical security measures and structural barriers.
The main task of these systems is to discourage, set back or
completely
prevent
a
potential
violator
reaching
the
protected object. The common element of all mechanical
security systems and structural barriers is their attribute
known in professional literature as delay time. This variable
expresses the time in which a passive protective elements
(such as doors, vaults, locks, etc.) has the ability to resist
any tool or applied physical strength and depends on the
mechanical properties of the materials used, abilities, skills
and knowledge of the violator, effects of weather and other
factors. The delay time value is expressed mathematically
as:
 
DT= T2 – T1
(1)
i.e., the subtraction of T1 – which is the time at which
the violator began penetrating the passive protective element
from, T2 – which is the time at which the passive protective
element has been penetrated.
The emphasis placed on studying the delay time of
passive elements is rendered necessary by the fact that it is
the only measurable attribute, which can also be used in the
process of qualitative evaluation of the level of protection of
an object. With the knowledge of exact values of delay time
of each individual obstacle placed on the critical path we
can - with a high degree of precision – determine whether a
task force or a response team is able to act against a
potential threat in time, whether it is caused by natural
processes or is anthropogenic in its nature before this threat
reaches its ultimate goal, i.e., the object under protection;
this can be represented by tangible assets, intangible assets
or human resources. In case of a standard violator interested
in stealing valuables or some other form of property with
high liquidity, the time of this theft path will consist of the
studied delay time values of all existing passive security
elements, the time of transitioning between them, but also
the time necessary for retreat.
If the overall theft path is TA – the time of action – then
this value represents the maximum time within which the
response team must perform a successful intervention
against the violator. This time for intervention can be
expressed as TR – the reaction time – and will include the
time from the first detection, evaluation, verification of the
alert message and also the time necessary for transit and
apprehension of the suspect through the means of the
response unit. By comparing the times TA and TR we can
then evaluate the level and effectiveness of the physical
protection system. It can be concluded that for an effective
case of property protection, the following must be true [9]:
  
TA > TR
(2)
i.e., the action time - TA, which the violator needs to
reach the protected object must always be longer than TR
necessary to apprehend the violator. For more precise
quantitative evaluation of the level of protection, it is
necessary to return to the delay time value of passive
protection elements and structural barriers in relation to the
tools or means utilized.
VI.
DELAY TIME DATA MATRIX
As part of the professional and publishing activities of
the Faculty of Security Engineering, University of Zilina, a
new method of evaluation for the effectiveness and level of
physical protection of systems is being developed; this
method would be based on exact time values expressed as
delay time presented in a matrix using the ‘tool versus the
passive security element’ relation. Part of the matrix
proposal is represented in Figure 2.
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Figure 2. Proposal of delay time data matrix
In compiling and completing this matrix, several issues
arise. Before we get to the most important one, which is the
great amount of missing data, let us begin with the
complications
related
to
the
selection
of
suitable
representatives, both on the side of passive security
elements and structural barriers, as well as on the side of
tools used to breach them.
Since it is impossible to take into account the existence
of all available security systems and the tools to break them,
it proved necessary to divide them into categories from
which the following elements best represent the overall
character of their respective categories. This step simplified
the entire process significantly and did not, in fact, decrease
the quality of the end result. The current state of categories
is not final and requires further modifications alongside
continuous
updates
concurrent
with
the
market
development.
The first axis of the matrix consists of passive security
elements divided into groups based on its location:
•
perimeter protection (different types of fences,
gates, turnstiles, ramps, etc.),
•
outer
protection
(security
doors,
locks,
windows,
grilles,
shutters,
gates,
security
window films, etc.),
•
object protection (safes, cabinets, boxes, etc.).
This axis also contains a separate group consisting of the
most popular structural barriers.
The second axis focuses on tools, means and resources
used to overcome passive security elements. They are
divided into the following groups:
•
physical load (breakage, kicking, etc.),
•
improvised tools (ladder, rock, pole, etc.)
•
mechanical
hand-operated
tools
(axes,
hammers, crowbar, screwdriver, etc. ),
•
motor tools (electric saw, drills, grinders, petrol
saws, special hydraulic tool, etc.),
•
thermal tools (liquid nitrogen, hot-air pistols,
oxy-acetylene tools, etc.),
•
firearms (.22LR, 9x19 Luger pistols, 5.56x45
rifles, etc.),
•
explosives,
•
means of transport (cars, trucks and special
vehicles),
•
specialized
tools
developed
specifically
to
negotiate locks, doors, etc.
After the axes have been finalized, the matrix needs to be
completed with specific values using all the currently known
data accumulated in technical standards as well as resulting
from
tests
performed.
Where
technical
standards
are
concerned, it is necessary to point out their norms are not
synchronized due to various reasons. There are several
technical commissions and approval boards working in the
field of development of technical standards focused on
passive security elements. Some of these organizations have
members who are also producers of such elements, which
open up the potential for lobbying as well as directly
influencing the normalization process for personal gains. As
such, the delay time value may be skewed by testing
parameters being set up in a way that is more suitable for
certain products or in favour of their manufacturers.
Another problem found in detailed study of European
standards is performing the tests in ideal conditions, which
do not take into account real effects of the environment as
well as the use of a limited amount of tools, as it is with the
EN 1627 standard. This standard for penetration tests only
involves some types of widely available tools. The use of
specialized tools or high-performance thermal tools is not
included in this case.
There is a specific issue in cases where the standard does
not show resistance of passive security elements, as is the
case in glass panes, against the effects of explosives or
firearms using a measure of time but rather the maximum
pressure or number of repeated impacts that the element is
able to successfully resist. In case of explosives, the effects
are shown immediately, therefore the only temporal value
that can be measured is the time necessary to prepare and set
the charge. The effects themselves on the passive security
elements can only be assumed in realistic conditions,
because all values listed in the standards have been measured
in open areas or using pressure tubes and only using TNT-
based explosives. The effects of other explosives will likely
have to be calculated using the actually known coefficients
[12]. Additionally, influence of the environment on the
propagation of a pressure wave in real conditions will have
to be taken into account. The largest task in the process of
filling in the values of delay time is acquiring the missing
data, which cannot be found in the norms or were not
processed in any other way.
VII.
COLLECTING DATA METHODS
A big contributing factor in collecting the data is
selecting a method, which will lead to this data in the most
effective way possible.
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

A.
Expert opinions and valuation
Currently, the Faculty of Security Engineering of the
Zilina University is focused on studying various approaches.
One of them is using expert opinions. For this approach to
be feasible, a larger number of professionals have to be
selected,
specialists
in
specific
fields
with
extensive
practical experience; they would then be answering prepared
and unambiguous questions. Based on the responses and
after their subsequent evaluation, relevant values could be
achieved.
The
disadvantage
of
this
approach
is
its
organizational and managerial complexity as well as a large
number of persons involved.
B.
Fuzzy logic application
A second approach of gathering usable data for the delay
time value is the use of fuzzy logic. Fuzzy logic is a system
in mathematical theory, which uses the many-valued logic
containing real values from the <0 ; 1> interval and
elements of approximate deduction based on the rules of
human logic. The term fuzzy logic came to be in 1965 based
on scientific activities of a mathematician and scientist of
Azerbaijani descent, L.A. Zadeh at the University of
California, Berkeley. The first indications of this theory can
be found in the early 20th century and it found its use in the
subsequent years in various fields such as engineering,
logistics, economics and computer sciences. Similarly, it
can be used in risk analysis and evaluating the physical
protection systems and their level of effectiveness. The
advantage of fuzzy logic je its simple application to any
values with no regard as to whether they are expressed as
time, pressure or otherwise. The entire process takes place
in mutually related steps, which are shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Fuzzy logic application steps
Entry data of random nature are assigned a level of
adjacency through the use of evaluation language operators
based on the regulation strategy defined by the rule base.
Through
the
process
of
defuzzification,
we
create
quantifiable results and obtain output values. This entire
process seems simple, but each step allows for use of
several methods. This puts high demands on the knowledge
of the field of general logic, mathematics and statistics.
For a higher evaluation of accuracy of results obtained
with the use of fuzzy logic, verification is needed, e.g., in
the form of case studies, which would simulate realistic
conditions and their influence on a real object. Penetration
tests of selected passive security elements with the use of
specific tools may serve as another kind of verification tool.
The Faculty of Security Engineering at the Zilina University
has performed similar tests as part of the PACITA and
VEGA projects focused on acquiring delay time values of
the most often used fences, safety walls, and other security
elements. All missing delay time data could be acquired this
way though this seems unrealistic due to high financial cost
of the process. Therefore, the verification through selected
tests is the biggest asset of the process.
VIII.
CONCLUSION
Creating a database that would exactly present the
quality of security elements based on their delay time values
when being negotiated by a specific set of tools means a
huge advancement in the abilities of quantitative evaluation
of the quality of physical protection systems. In terms of
evaluating resilience, i.e., the ability of an object or system
to maintain its functionality against the influence of
negative factors, the process of determining delay time
values offers possibilities to highlight links to other
indicators of resilience, specifically in case of structural
resistance. Relations are, however, also clear in case of
other indicators such as readiness, security or safety; and as
was previously mentioned, it has a considerable importance
when determining the reaction time. All acquired data will
serve as an important step forward in the field of object
security,
especially
in
the
application
of
quantitative
evaluation of the physical protection systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the research project
VI20152019049 "RESILIENCE 2015: Dynamic Resilience
Evaluation
of
Interrelated
Critical
Infrastructure
Subsystems", supported by the Ministry of the Interior of the
Czech Republic in the years 2015-2019.
REFERENCES
[1]
Council Decision 2007/124/EC, Euratom, Council decision of
12 February 2007, establishing for the period 2007 to 2013, as
part of General Programme on Security and Safeguarding
Liberties, the Specific Programme Prevention, Preparedness
and Consequence Management
of Terrorism and other
Security related risks,
Accessed on 15 Feb. 2016, Available at: http://eur-lex.
europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2007:058:00
01:0006:EN:PDF.
[2]
Green
paper
on
a
european
programme
for
critical
infrastructure protection.
Accessed on 30 March 2016, Available at: http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52005DC0576&rid=8
[3]
National concept of protection and defense methods of critical
infrastructure in the Slovak Republic, Accessed on 18 April
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

2016, Available at: http://www.economy.gov.sk/narodny-
program-pre-ochranu-a-obranu-kritickej-infrastruktury-v-
slovenskej-republike--pdf-/136156s
[4]
National program of protection and defense of critical
infrastructure in the Slovak Republic
Accessed
on
18
March
2016,
Available
at:
http://www.rokovania.sk/File.aspx/ViewDocumentHtml/Mate
r-Dokum-186499?prefixFile=m_
[5]
L. Simak, J. Ristvej, (2009). The Present Status of Creating
the Security System of the Slovak Republic after Entering the
European
Union,
Journal
of
Homeland
Security
and
Emergency Management: Vol. 6 : Iss. 1, Article 20, ISSN:
1547-7355. DOI: 10.2202/1547-7355.1443
[6]
T. Lovecek, at al. Qualitative approach to evaluation of
critical infrastructure security systems. In: European journal
of security and safety. ISSN 1338-6131. - Vol. 1, no. 1
[7]
M. Hromada et al. The system and method of resilience
evaluation of critical infrastructure / Systém a způsob 
hodnocení odolnosti kritické infrastruktury. Ostrava, 2014.
177 p. ISBN 978-80-7385-140-8.
[8]
D. Řehak, L. Hadacek. Uniform methodology for determining 
the
equipment
for
the
production,
transmission
and
distribution of national and european critical infrastructure
and
physical
protection
of
these
devices
/
Metodika
jednotného určování zařízení pro výrobu, přenos a distribuci 
elektřiny národní a evropskou kritickou infrastrukturou a 
zajišťování fyzické ochrany těchto zařízení. [certified 
methodology]. Prague, 2013. 51 p. Č.j.: MV-104188-1/PO-
OKR-2013
[9]
M. L. Garcia, The design and evaluation of physical
protection systems. USA: Elsevier. (2001). ISBN 0-7506 –
7367 – 2.
[10] G. Honey, Intruder alarms. 3rd edition. USA: Elsevier.
(2007). ISBN – 13: 978-0-7506-8167-4
[11] T. Lovecek, J. Reitspis, Design and evaluation of physical
protection systems / Projektovanie a hodnotenie systémov
ochrany objektov. Žilina: EDIS- University of Žilina. (2011).
ISBN 978-80-554-0457-8
[12] V. Kavicky, L. Figuli, S. Jangl, Z. Zvakova, Analysis of the
field test results of ammonium nitrate: fuel oil explosives as
improvised explosive device charges. In: Structures under
shock and impact XIII: (13th international conference, SUSI
2014: New Forest, United Kingdom, 3 June 2014 through 5
June 2014). – Southampton, Boston: WITpress, 2014. – ISBN
978-1-84564-796-4. – P. 297-309. – (WIT Transactions on
the Built Environment, Vol. 141. – ISSN 1746-4498).
Available online with ISBN 978-1-84564-797-1.
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

