Security of Vehicular Networks:
Static and Dynamic Control of Cyber-Physical Objects
Vladimir Muliukha, Vladimir Zaborovsky, Sergey Popov
Telematics department St.Petersburg Polytechnic University
Saint-Petersburg, Russia
Email: vladimir@mail.neva.ru, vlad@neva.ru, popovserge@spbstu.ru
Abstract—The modern vehicle has long ceased to be a pure
mechanical device. Each year data-processing component of the
car is becoming more important. Considering the vehicle as the
dynamic cyber-physical object in non-deterministic environment,
we propose to use the methods of cloud services information
security to solve the problem of access control to the cars
telematics network. We propose to use a real-time control for
each of these aspects, which is a complex technical challenge
with static and dynamic interactions. The paper proposes a
solution for implementing access control for vehicular networks.
It is done by ﬁrewalls using dynamic access approach, based
on virtual connections management, and algebra of ﬁltering
rules with mechanism of trafﬁc ﬁltering in ”stealth” mode.
The proposed security monitor architecture allows to enforce
dynamic access policy depending on static set of ﬁrewall ﬁltering
rules and current condition of virtual connections and network
environment.
Keywords–Security; Vehicular network; Cyber-physics objects;
Dynamic access control; Virtual connections.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Information systems are deeper entering our lives, inte-
grating with various purely physical systems. For example, a
modern car is no longer a mechanical device. After enabling
cyber component to all internal circuits and vehicular commu-
nications, it can be assigned to the new class – Cyberphysical
objects. And each year this ”cyber” component of the car is
becoming more and more important.
In order to simplify the driving, more and more systems in
the car become automated. Lots of the remaining mechanical
systems in a modern car are controlled by computer via the
Controller Area Network (CAN), but not directly by the driver.
According to the researches, modern vehicles comprise up
to 60-70 Electrical Control Units (ECUs). The ECUs serve
a multitude of purposes like monitoring and controlling the
different subsystems of a car [1][2].
Many of ECUs are connected together by the controller
area network bus. Now, CAN is the most frequently used
protocol in automotive networks, other protocols, designed to
ﬁt speciﬁc uses may also be used, such as Local Interconnect
Network (LIN), Media Oriented Systems Transport (MOST) or
FlexRay [1]. Such bus and ECUs form telematics network and
serve as information and communication system of the modern
vehicle. In modern vehicles, most of important functions are
realized by telematics network. It measures vehicle’s speed and
revolutions per minute or informs the driver and other systems
when an accident is about to occur and so on.
The world’s largest automobile manufacturers are devel-
oping further, integrating in modern vehicles, more and more
software and hardware to provide the owner and the driver
of the car a maximum number of different digital services,
including the remote ones.
According to the joint project of the Ford Motors Company
and Saint-Petersburg State Polytechnical University, we sug-
gest that in the near future, all new cars should be integrated
into a single information service network and should be able
to communicate with other cars and external sources, via
USB, Bluetooth, WiFi, 3Gm and Long-Term Evolution (LTE)
networks.
Digital revolution allows vehicles to signiﬁcantly extend
their functionality. Security means have to evolve together
with cars. From 1960s to 2010s, vehicular security devices
developed from mechanical through electromechanical and
electronical to software based systems [3]. In the next few
years, the car will be part of a single information and service
space – cyber-physical object operating in the information
space, which will result in a new class of security threats.
For several years, experts concerned with vehicular infor-
mation security by hacking CAN network and replacing data
from controllers. But, while maintaining speed and trends for
Automotive Research in the near future, the hacking would be
done remotely. This can lead to very bad consequences from
data theft to a carjacking or damage the vehicle itself.
Thus, the issue of cars information security as the new
class of cyber-physical systems that combine mechanical and
electronic components is one of the most important issues of
the vehicular networks.
The article describes cars as the new class of systems that
combine the mechanical part and logical information, so-called
cyber-physical objects. The security of information services
for networks of cyber-physical objects is based on the access
control technology.
The paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we
consider the vehicle as the cyber-physical object. In Section III,
we discuss security aspects of mobile cyber-physical networks
using cloud computing security approaches. Section IV con-
tains main aspects of the dynamic access control enforcement
in computer networks. And in Section V, we suggest an
architecture of a secure cloud computing environment. Section
VI concludes the paper.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

II.
VEHICLES AS THE CYBER-PHYSICAL OBJECTS
In the near future, new generation of vehicles will be
created. Such cars would be able to receive, store, and transmit
information about their surrounding environment, which will
be used during their operations. Information will be transmitted
between such objects, between car and information center and
also between the vehicle and the driver.
In our work, for the formalization of vehicular networks we
use Cyber-Physical (CPh) approach, which extends the range
of engineering and physical methods for a design of complex
technical objects by researching the informational aspects of
communication and interaction between objects and with an
external environment.
The selection of CPh systems as a special class of de-
signed objects is due to the necessity of integrating various
components responsible for Computing, Communications, and
Control (3C) processes. Although in modern science there
are different approaches to the use of information aspects
of the physical objects, but only within cybernetics, such
approaches have had structural engineering applications. The
conceptual distinction between closed and open systems in
terms of information and computational aspects requires the
use of new models, which take into account the characteristics
of information processes that are generated during the driving
of the vehicle and are available for monitoring, processing, and
transmission via computer network.
According to Figure 1, a CPh model of a vehicular
control system can be represented as a set of components,
including following units: information about the characteristics
of the environment (Observation), analysis of the parameters
of the current state for the controlled object via CAN or
telematics network (Orientation), decision-making according
to the formal purpose of functioning (Decision), organiza-
tion and implementation of the actions that are required to
achieve the goal (Action). The interaction of these blocks
using information exchange channels allows us to consider
this network structure as a universal platform. Such platform
allows us to use various approaches, including new algorithms
and feedback mechanisms for the goals restrictions entropy
reduction or the reduction of the internal processes dissipation.
Figure 1. Cyber-physical model of vehicular control system.
Centric solutions allow using universal means for the
organization of information exchange to integrate different
technologies for the both observed and observable components
of the control system. The main differences between these
observed and observable components are the property ”part
whole” (for observed components) and the ratio ”system
environment” (for the observable ones). The parameters and
the structure of such control system can quickly be adjusted
according to the current information about the internal state
of the object and the characteristics of the environment, which
are in a form of digital data. Reported features open up the
new prospects for the development of intelligent vehicular
cyber-physical systems that will become in the near future
an integral part of the human environment in the information
space ”Internet of Things.” According to the estimates [4],
network-centric cyber-objects in the global information space
of the Internet will fundamentally change the social and
productive components of people’s lives. That will accelerate
of the knowledge accumulation and the intellectualization
for all aspects of the human activity. However, this process
requires not only innovative engineering ideas, but also the
development of scientiﬁc concepts uniting universal scientiﬁc
paradigm. Within this paradigm, for every CPh object like car,
the information should be considered as a fundamental concept
of objective reality, in which physical reality has ”digital”
basis and therefore is computable. The idea of integrating the
physical concepts with the theory of computation has led to
the new conceptual schema for nature descriptions, known
as ”it from bit” [5]. In this scheme, all physical objects,
processes, and phenomena of nature, which are available to be
read and understood by a person, are inherently informational
and therefore they are isomorphic to some digital computing
devices. Within this paradigm information acts as an ob-
jective attribute of matter that characterizes the fundamental
distinctiveness of the potential states of the real object. The
distinctiveness, according to the Landauers principle [6], is an
energy factor of the objects states and that is why it gives an
explanation of what are the states and how they are perceived
by other objects. This distinctiveness appears while creating
the systems that are capable to ensure the autonomy of the
existence during the interaction with the external environment
by the self-reproduction of its characteristics. It should be
noted that on the way to the wide-spread use of ”digital
reality” for the control problems, there are some limitations
that reﬂect the requirements for the existence of the special
state of physical objects reﬂecting its changes as a result
of the information exchange processes. So, cyber-physical
approach now often used to describe the properties of the so-
called non-Hamiltonian systems in which the processes of self-
organization are described by dissipative evolution of the den-
sity states matrix. However, the cyber-physical methodology
may be successfully used to create complex robotic systems,
the components which are capable for reconﬁguration as the
result of transmitting and processing digital data or metadata.
The control and security tasks that are considered in this paper
cover the actual scope of the cyber-physical approach, which
is the basis of cloud computing technology and develop the
methodology of cybernetics in the direction of the metadata
control.
III.
SECURITY ASPECTS OF CYBER-PHYSICS SYSTEMS
Modern technical systems have clear boundaries separating
them from the environment or other objects and systems.
Therefore, the description of the processes in such systems
is local and the change of its state can be described by the
laws of physics, which are, in its most general form, the
deterministic form of the laws of conservation, for example,
energy, mass, momentum, etc. The mathematical formalization
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

of these laws allows to computationally determine the motion
parameters of the physical systems, using position data on the
initial condition, the forces in the system and the properties
of the external environment. Although the classical method-
ology of modern physics, based on abstraction of ”closed
system” is signiﬁcantly modiﬁed by studying the mechanisms
of dissipation in the so-called ”open systems”, but such an
aspect of reality as the information is still not used to build
the control models and to describe the properties of complex
physical objects. In the modern world, where the inﬂuence of
the Internet, supercomputers, and global information systems
on all aspects of the human activity becomes dominant, ac-
counting an impact of information on physical objects cannot
be ignored, for example, while realizing sustainability due to
the information exchange processes. The use of cyber-physical
methods becomes especially important while studying the
properties of systems, known as the ”Internet of Things” [6][7],
in which robots, network cyber-objects, and people interact
with each other by sharing data in the single information
space for the characterization of which are used such concepts
as ”integrity”, ”structure”, ”purposeful behavior”, ”feedback”,
”balance”, ”adaptability”, etc.
The scientiﬁc bases for the control of such systems were
called Data Science. The term ”Big Data” describes the process
of integration technologies for digital data processing from the
external physical or virtual environment, which are used to
extract useful information for control purposes. However, the
realization of the Data Science potential in robotics requires
the creation of new methods for use the information in control
processes, based on sending data in real time at the localization
point of moving objects (the concept of ”Data in motion”).
In general, the ”Big Data” are characterized by a combi-
nation of four main components (four ”V”): volume, variety,
velocity, and value. The general ”V” is visibility of data and
it is also a key deﬁning characteristic of Big Data.
As a result, ”Big Data” in modern science has become a
synonymous for the complexity of the system control tasks,
combining such factors of the physical processes that charac-
terize the volume, velocity, variety, and value of data generated
by them.
The security of CPh systems like vehicles is more complex
task than access control in stationary local network. The cars
move constantly changing the network conﬁguration. Security
policy enforcement requires data about permissions and pro-
hibitions, as well as the current localization of the car and the
route to it. Thus, while ensuring the information security of the
vehicular network, we have to consider the static and dynamic
aspects. This task is very similar to the information security of
cloud services, where is regular migration of virtual machines
from one physical platform to another to optimize the structure
of the cloud and a hardware load balance.
The virtual computing environment allows us to create
applications’ service-oriented network of virtual devices. Any
vehicle involved in the information exchange has its own
virtual ”avatar” in a high cloud environment. This virtual
”avatar” of the car has all the information from the real
object and the data obtained from other ”avatars” in a virtual
environment. Information exchange and required calculations
are done in the secure virtual environment.
Localization of computing and data collected can accelerate
the process of information processing and decision making.
After that, the data is transmitted to the driver on the car for
a ﬁnal decision.
IV.
DYNAMIC ACCESS POLICY USING FIREWALL
FILTERING RULES
The implementations of vehicular network security are far
from simple due to the dynamic nature of network environment
and users activity [7][8][9].
Figure 2. Security conveyor architecture.
Speciﬁc threats for the vehicular network are attacks af-
fecting data integrity and availability of the car systems. An
attacker often prefers not to steal any information out of the
car but to modify it, thus tricking the various systems of the
auto. Attack on availability can signiﬁcantly hamper the work
of the car, cutting off some of its devices from the information
exchange process.
This speciﬁcity requires the use of specialized protective
equipment. The main thread is while attacking the integrity of
the information, the attacker can spoof the signals from the
remote control signal, for example, acting as the owner and
steal the vehicle.
In vehicular network, every second, hundreds of users and
telematics devices establish new virtual connections [10] with
distant resources and services. According to the mandatory
security policy, if we have N users, M resources and these
numbers are big, than we have to create a huge access N*M
matrix. And each element of this matrix will be a vector of
parameters and attributes, describing one virtual connection.
Vehicles and resources of course can be grouped according to
their rights and context, but in either case such matrix is too
big to be processed efﬁciently in real-time.
We propose the architecture of security conveyor (see
Figure 2), which consists of several ﬁltering stages. At the ﬁrst
stage when a connection is established there is a classical static
packet ﬁlter, which reject prior harmful trafﬁc that corresponds
local telematics devices of the car. The second stage enforces
more accurate dynamic aspect of the access policy. Doing it
the dynamic ﬁrewall have to take into account that the net-
work resources can change their context any moment without
informing our security conveyor. That is why we propose to
use some prior information about remote users and resources
in ﬁrewall to enforce security policy. Such information should
be received from databases and services outside of our security
monitor.
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Figure 3. Dynamic access control approach.
In computer networks, information is transmitted in the
form of packets. Each of these packets has some part of mes-
sage in it. All network devices such as vehicular transmitters
and ﬁrewalls have to operate with these packets. According
to Figure 3, every access rule can be considered as one or
more informational virtual connections (1) specifying action
as ”access”, ”read”, ”write”, and so on. Then, we have to
determine what does this record mean to telematics devices,
how can the vehicle and requested information resource be
described. To answer these questions, our security monitor
has to use some prior outside information from specialized
databases and services (2). Using such information we receive
one or more Technological Virtual Connections (TVCs) from
initial informational virtual connections [10]. Then, all these
TVCs rules should be transformed into the requirement to the
packet ﬁlter. At this stage, we use different transport protocols
state machines to receive information about packet sequences
(3). If all these procedures will be applied to each established
virtual connection well receive huge amount of ﬁltering rules.
That is why at the next stage, we propose to optimize the set
of ﬁltering rules using specialized algebra of ﬁltering rules (4)
[11]. Only optimized set of ﬁltering rules can be processed in
real-time by ﬁrewall to enforce access policy (5).
V.
ARCHITECTURE OF A SECURE CLOUD COMPUTING
ENVIRONMENT
During the researches at the Telematics department of SPb-
SPU, we proposed architecture of a secure cloud computing
environment. This architecture considers dynamic nature of
cloud environment and is suitable for description of vehicular
networks.
A distributed computing environment (cloud system) con-
sists of the following software and hardware components:
1)
Virtualization nodes;
2)
Storage of virtual machines and user data;
3)
Cluster controller;
4)
Cloud controller.
The distributed computing environment intended for solv-
ing scientiﬁc and engineering problems is a set of various
computing resources, such as virtual machines, and has the
following features [12]:
1)
The environment is used by a wide range of users,
who are solving problems of different classes;
2)
Virtual machines of different user groups can operate
within one hypervisor;
3)
Wide range of software components (Computer-
Aided Design (CAD)/Computer-Aided Engineering
(CAE) applications, development tools) and operating
systems is used;
4)
Different hardware conﬁgurations are used, including
virtual multicore computing machines and virtual ma-
chines, which allow performing computations using
the streaming technology Compute Uniﬁed Device
Architecture (CUDA).
Virtualization node is the hypervisor software which runs
on powerful multicore computing node. In virtualization, the
domain level 0 (dom0 in terms of hypervisor XEN or service
console in terms of other hypervisors) and virtual computing
machines (domain level U, domU) operate.
For information security and Access Control (AC) between
the virtual machines that operate under a single hypervisor, the
internal (”virtual”) trafﬁc and the external trafﬁc (incoming
from other hypervisors and from public networks) must be
controlled. The solution of the access control problem could
be achieved through the integration of a virtual ﬁrewall into the
hypervisor; this ﬁrewall would functions under the hypervisor,
but separately from the user virtual machines. The virtual
ﬁrewall domain can be deﬁned as ”security domain” (domS).
Invisible trafﬁc ﬁltering is an important aspect of the network
monitoring; the ﬁrewall must not change the topology of the
hypervisor network subsystem. This can be achieved by using
”Stealth” [12] technology, which is a packet trafﬁc control
invisible to other network components.
Figure 4. Secure cloud architectrure.
Figure 4 shows the common architecture of a distributed
cloud system with integrated AC components. The following
abbreviations are used: hardware FireWall (FW); Virtual Fire-
Wall (VFW); the Central Control System of all Firewalls in
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

the cloud (FSCS); Virtual Machine (VM); CLoud Controller
(ClC); Cluster Controller (CC); Storage Controller (SC).
The FSCS distributes the access control policies to all
ﬁrewalls in the system. When the information security policy
changes, new access rules are replicated to all components. The
security domain isolates virtual machines from the hypervisor,
which prevents the possibility of attack against the hypervisor
inside the cloud. The hardware ﬁrewall isolates the private
cloud components from the external threats.
The joint use of hardware and software ﬁrewall and intru-
sion detection system, based on the prediction of the driver’s
and vehicular’s behavior and the vehicular network state will
reduce the risks of invasion in a car network. Using a virtual
machine ”avatar” in a cloud computing environment, allows
a better control of the processes of information exchange and
the current status of all road users.
The task of ﬁnding an optimal allocation of virtual ma-
chines to minimize the number of nodes used by the cloud
system is similar to the N–dimensional problem of packing
containers (Bin Packing Problem), where N corresponds to
the number of virtual machine’s selected characteristics taken
into account in the allocation. In [13], specialists of our
department proposed a new approach for virtual machines
distribution. A new virtual machines scheduler is able to place
a virtual machine on the optimal compute node and migrate
it to another node if resource consumption state has been
changed. In [13], the proposed algorithm allows to optimize
the structure of high-performance computing cloud system,
facilitates localization of data and computing resources, and
reduces the time required to provide a user requested services.
Cloud can improve system performance through the use
of parallelization technology. When a large multi–node cluster
needs to access large amounts of data, task scheduling becomes
a challenge. Apache Hadoop is a cluster computing framework
for distributed data analytics. However, the performance of
each job depends on the characteristics of the underlying
cluster and mapping tasks onto Central Processing Unit (CPU)
cores and Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) devices provides
signiﬁcant challenges. Spark provide interesting advantages to
the typical Hadoop platform [14]. Spark is an open source
cluster computing system provides primitives for in–memory
cluster computing. Job can load data into memory and query
it repeatedly much quicker than with disk–based systems.To
make programming faster, Spark integrates into the Scala
language. Scala is statically typed high–level programming
language designed to express common programming patterns
in a concise, elegant, and type–safe way. Scala runs on
the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) so it integrates features of
object–oriented and functional languages. Spark is built around
distributed datasets that support types of parallel operations:
transformations, which are lazy and yield another distributed
dataset (e.g., map, ﬁlter, and join), and actions, which force
the computation of a dataset and return a result (e.g., count)
[15]. In our work, we propose to use Deep Content Inspection
(DCI) that reconstructs, decompresses, and decodes network
trafﬁc packets into their constituting application level objects.
DCI examines the entire object and detects any malicious or
non-compliant intent.
While solving information security problems for vehicular
networks, we rely on our expertise in the ﬁeld of robots
control, for example during the space experiment ”Kontur-2”
[16]. Using DCI for network trafﬁc monitoring enables us to
provide the required level of security for on-surface robots,
and trafﬁc prioritization methods in packets processing allow
us to provide the required level of Quality Of Service (QoS)
[17] [18].
VI.
CONCLUSION
Considering the vehicle as the dynamic cyber-physical
object in non-deterministic environment, we propose to use
the methods of cloud services information security to solve
the problem of access control to the cars telematics network.
Vehicular security devices developed from mechanical
through electromechanical and electronical to software based
systems.
From the viewpoint of information security, the vehicle
can be regarded as the dynamic virtual machine in the cloud
environment.
In this paper, we propose an architecture of a secure cloud
computing environment, which involves the use of static and
dynamic access control methods.
It is necessary to mention that proposed solution doesnt
solve all security problems of vehicular networks. The model
described above can be merged easily with other methods of
security control, for example with encryption or obfuscation.
The prototype of the proposed system is currently developing
for the Ford Motors Company at the Telematics department of
the Saint-Petersburg State Polytechnical University.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper funded by RFBR grant 13-07-12106 and is done
in the framework of the project with the Ford Motor Company.
REFERENCES
[1]
I. Studnia, V. Nicomette, E. Alata, Y. Deswarte, M. Kaˆaniche, and
Y. Laarouchi, “Security of embedded automotive networks: state of the
art and a research proposal,” in SAFECOMP 2013 - Workshop CARS
(2nd Workshop on Critical Automotive applications : Robustness
&
Safety)
of
the
32nd
International
Conference
on
Computer
Safety, Reliability and Security, Toulouse, France, 2013, J. Fabre,
P. Qu´er´e, and M. Trapp, Eds.
HAL, 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/SAFECOMP2013-CARS/hal-00848234
[2]
B.
Donohue,
“Hacking
the
Modern
Automobile,”
2013,
URL:
http://blog.kaspersky.com/car-hacking/ [accessed: 2014-10-01].
[3]
A.
Weimerskirch,
“Automotive
Data
Security,”
2012,
URL:
http://www.sae.org/events/gim/presentations/2012/
weimer-
skirch escrypt.pdf [accessed: 2014-10-01].
[4]
A. L. Fradkov, Cybernetical Physics: Principles and Examples. Nauka,
Saint-Petersburg, Russia, 2003, ISBN: 5-02-025028-7.
[5]
J. A. Wheeler, “Information, physics, quantum: the search for links,”
in Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium Foundations of
Quantum Mechanics in the Light of New Technology, Kokubunji,
Tokyo, Japan, August 28-31, 1989, N. B. Gakkai, Ed.
Hitachi, Ltd.,
1989, pp. 354–368.
[6]
G.
Niemeyer
and
J.-J.
E.
Slotine,
“Telemanipulation
with
time
delays,”
The
International
Journal
of
Robotics
Research,
vol.
23,
no.
9,
2004,
pp.
873–890.
[Online].
Available:
http://ijr.sagepub.com/content/23/9/873.abstract
[7]
V. Zaborovsky, O. Zayats, and V. Mulukha, “Priority queueing with
ﬁnite buffer size and randomized push-out mechanism,” in Networks
(ICN), 2010 Ninth International Conference on, April 2010, pp. 316–
320.
[8]
V. Zaborovsky and V. Mulukha, “Access control in a form of active
queuing management in congested network environment,” in Networks
(ICN), 2011 Tenth International Conference on, 2011, pp. 12–17.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[9]
V. Zaborovsky, A. Gorodetsky, and V. Muljukha, “Internet performance:
Tcp in stochastic network environment,” in Evolving Internet, 2009.
INTERNET ’09. First International Conference on, Aug 2009, pp. 21–
26.
[10]
V. Zaborovsky, V. Mulukha, A. Silinenko, and S. Kupreenko, “Dynamic
ﬁrewall conﬁguration: Security system architecture and algebra of the
ﬁltering rules,” in Evolving Internet, 2011. INTERNET ’11. Third
International Conference on, Jun 2011, pp. 40–45.
[11]
V. Zaborovsky, V. Mulukha, and A. Silinenko, “Access control model
and algebra of ﬁrewall rules,” in WORLDCOMP11: Proceedings
of the 2011 International Conference on Security and Management
(SAM2011).
CSREA Press, Jul 2011, pp. 115–120.
[12]
V. Zaborovsky, A. Lukashin, S. Kupreenko, and V. Mulukha, “Dynamic
access control in cloud services,” in Systems, Man, and Cybernetics
(SMC), 2011 IEEE International Conference on, Oct 2011, pp. 1400–
1404.
[13]
A. Lukashin and A. Lukashin, “Resource scheduler based on multi-
agent model and intelligent control system for openstack,” in Internet
of Things, Smart Spaces, and Next Generation Networks and Systems,
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, S. Balandin, S. Andreev, and
Y. Koucheryavy, Eds.
Springer International Publishing, 2014, vol.
8638, pp. 556–566.
[14]
T. Kumawat, P. K. Sharma, D. Verma, K. Joshi, and K. Vijeta,
“Implementation
of
spark
cluster
technique
with
scala,”
in
International Journal of Scientiﬁc and Research Publications (IJSRP),
vol. 2, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.ijsrp.org/research-paper-
1112/ijsrp-p1181.pdf [accessed: 2014-10-01]
[15]
A. Lukashin, L. Laboshin, V. Zaborovsky, and V. Mulukha, “Distributed
packet trace processing method for information security analysis,” in
Internet of Things, Smart Spaces, and Next Generation Networks and
Systems, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, S. Balandin, S. An-
dreev, and Y. Koucheryavy, Eds.
Springer International Publishing,
2014, vol. 8638, pp. 535–543.
[16]
V. Zaborovsky, M. Guk, V. Muliukha, and A. Ilyashenko, “Cyber-
physical approach to the network-centric robot control problems,” in
Internet of Things, Smart Spaces, and Next Generation Networks and
Systems, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, S. Balandin, S. An-
dreev, and Y. Koucheryavy, Eds.
Springer International Publishing,
2014, vol. 8638, pp. 619–629.
[17]
A. Ilyashenko, O. Zayats, V. Muliukha, and L. Laboshin, “Further
investigations of the priority queuing system with preemptive priority
and randomized push-out mechanism,” in Internet of Things, Smart
Spaces, and Next Generation Networks and Systems, ser. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, S. Balandin, S. Andreev, and Y. Koucheryavy,
Eds.
Springer International Publishing, 2014, vol. 8638, pp. 433–443.
[18]
V.
Muliukha,
A.
Ilyashenko,
O.
Zayats,
and
V.
Zaborovsky,
“Preemptive
queueing
system
with
randomized
push-out
mechanism,”
Communications
in
Nonlinear
Science
and
Numerical
Simulation,
2014,
p.
in
print.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1007570414004031
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

