The Mathematical Modeling of Road Transport in Context of Critical
Infrastructure Protection
Jan Mrazek, Lucia Duricova, Martin Hromada
Faculty of applied informatics
Tomas Bata University in Zlin
Zlin, Czech Republic
e-mail: {mrazek, duricova, hromada}@fai.utb.cz
Abstract—The failure of critical infrastructure is becoming a
more and more debated topic in the society. There is a need to
plan
and
implement
a
functional
and
secure
critical
infrastructure. Road transportation has significant influence
over the correct functioning of critical infrastructure. A case of
disruption of security and functionality leads to distortion
between other elements. This process causes a disturbance or
paralysis of critical infrastructure. The first part of the article
focuses on transport critical infrastructure and its importance
for maintaining vital societal function. Road transportation
has also significant influence over the correct functioning of
critical infrastructure. Next, we present different approaches
to dynamic modeling of the impacts of road transportation.
The presented approaches provide some basic knowledge to
implement dynamic modeling into practice. The conclusion of
the article focuses on the design of dynamic modeling in road
transportation, based on a deterministic approach. Conclusion
outputs are seen as a fundamental baseline for selected
processes of security project Resilience 2015.
Keywords-critical
infrastructure;
crisis
situation;
extraordinary event; mathematical models of road transport;
road critical infrastructure.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The paper describes the use of mathematical models for
modeling impacts on critical road infrastructure [2]. Critical
road infrastructure has an effect on our lives. Even a simple
accident can significantly disturb or even paralyze the
continuity of road transportation [3]. For this reason, it is
necessary to pay attention to the critical infrastructure. This
article is primarily focused on the identification and
designation of critical infrastructure [1]. Another aspect
addressed in the paper is the mathematical modeling in road
transport. When applying mathematical models to road
transportation, one needs to timely minimize the negative
impacts on society and on other critical infrastructure sectors
[5].
II.
CRITICALINFRASTRUCTURE
Critical infrastructure is mostly known as an element or a
system whose functional degradation leads to a significant
impact on national security. National security considers the
basic needs of the population of a country, its health and
economy.
Individual
elements
of
critical
infrastructure
have
linkages
to
each
other
which
guarantee
the
correct
functioning of individual elements. These linkages ensure the
interdependence of its various sectors and elements.
The elements we call critical infrastructure in particular.
These elements are determined by the cross-cutting and
sector specific criteria if the element of critical infrastructure
is part of the European Critical Infrastructure. In this case, it
is
considered
as
an
element
of
European
critical
infrastructure [14].
A.
The Cross-cutting Criteria
In order to assess the severity of the impact of
disruption to a critical infrastructure element, we consider
the elements from the following perspectives:
(a) casualties criterion (assessed in terms of the
potential number
of
fatalities
or
injuries);
(b) economic effects criterion (assessed in terms of the
significance of economic loss and/or degradation of
products
or
services;
including
potential
environmental effects);
(c)
public effects criterion (assessed in
terms
of
the impact on public confidence, physical suffering
and disruption of daily life; including the loss of
essential services).
B.
The Sectoral Criteria
The sectoral criteria to identify critical infrastructure
elements are set by Government Decree no. 432/2010
Coll.[14], on criteria for determining the elements of
critical infrastructure.
The basic classification of sector specific criteria to
identify critical infrastructure elements are: [14]
•
Energy.
•
Water management.
•
Food and agriculture.
•
Health.
•
Transport.
•
Communication and information systems.
•
Financial market and currency.
•
Emergency services.
•
Public administration.
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

III.
CRITICALROAD INFRASTRUCTURE
The individual elements of the critical road infrastructure
are important for the state not only for passengers, but also
for materials. These elements include rail, water, air or road
transport. The individual elements are also at risks that can
affect them through any linkage to crisis or emergency
situations.
These
situations
can
impair
or
limit
the
functionality of this state. In case of limited functionality,
there is a disruption of its security. In our case, we focus on
the road critical infrastructure which could be described as
the most important element in the transport [6].
The current state of road infrastructure can be analyzed
from two perspectives. The first view is regarding road
safety. The second view shows us linkages with other
elements of critical infrastructure.
Traffic safety is influenced by two inputs. The first entry
is homeland security, which is aimed at reducing accidents
and creating traffic rules. External security includes anti-
terrorism, vandalism, the elements etc.
We can conclude that road transport is the most
vulnerable and the most significant element of the critical
infrastructure.
Figure 2. Intensity of Transport in Czech Republic 2015. [13]
When looking at Figure 2, we can see that the riskiest
places in the Czech Republic are the main arteries of
motorways and Class I roads. The biggest risk for the Czech
Republic is without any doubt the D1 motorway. Looking at
Figure 2, it is possible to draw attention to the utilization of
major roads. They are overloaded by a large number of
vehicles.
IV.
MATHEMATICAL MODELS OF ROAD TRANSPORT
The goal of mathematical modeling in road transport is
what the most trusted model vehicle movements and their
interaction in traffic. One of the criteria is the failure of
random factors and variables. These models can then be
divided into stochastic and deterministic. The difference
between these two models is substantial. Stochastic models
operate with the probability of certain events and take into
account the random effects, while deterministic models with
random effects are not counted. Deterministic model is act
upon strict mathematical, statistical and logical relationships.
These relations predetermine the behavior [9] [10].
A very important role in modeling road transport is the
request for range of investigated network. This fact is closely
related to the requirement for input data. When modeling
large transport networks, we can generalize some detail or
possibly neglected. For small transport networks, it cannot be
afforded such a procedure, it is necessary to give weight to
each transport movement. In this model we divide the
macroscopic and microscopic or their combination. When
you merge macroscopic and microscopic models, there is a
new model that we call mesoscopic. With this model it is
possible to meet only rarely. [9], [10]
A.
Makroscopic Model
The most commonly are used to simulate large-scale
communication networks. These models are mainly used for
prognostic purposes.
(1)
Where q = intensity of transmission services [ks∙h-1];v = 
the current speed of vehicle [km∙h-1];k = density of vehicles 
in the stream [ks∙km-1]. 
Greenshields model is among the simplest and oldest
linear model. It is based on measuring the speed and
intensity when the help of these data we can calculate the
density. Fundamental assumption is the linear dependency of
velocity on the density. The following formula expresses this
dependency: [5]
(2)
where vmax = maximum speed [km∙h-1]; kmax = density
congestion [ks∙km-1].
In areas with
a low
density, this model acts
as
unrealistic. This behavior is caused
by
insufficient speed
and density is then symmetric parabolic dependence on the
density of intensity. At lower densities it leads to maximum
intensity.
B.
Microscopic model
They are based on modeling of individual vehicles
driving along the road when there is a consideration as the
communication parameters and the vehicle and the driver
behavior. During a traffic simulation we meet mostly these
models.
Input parameters are achieved vehicles vehicle speed,
engine power, size, acceleration and deceleration. Other
essential parameters for input features are network users and
their interaction. The input data are never accurate, mainly
due to the uniqueness of each participant and the vehicle.
The
determination
of
acceleration
depending
on
the
environmental conditions is essential. Generally, we can
express the acceleration in microscopic models as follows:
(3)
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

where a = acceleration [m∙s-2]; v = speed [m∙s-1]; ∆v =
relative speed relative to the preceding vehicle [m∙s-1];
∆x = distance from the preceding vehicle [m].
Consequently, the examination of the traffic flow, we
filter out two basic ways of influencing the vehicle between
them. The first approach is developed based on observance
of a safe distance between vehicles, and when changing the
speed of the vehicle prior. The second approach is based on
the distance between vehicles. [12], [4]
Weidman’s model – The model is a reaction of the
driver, which is carried out at a certain distance and
the difference in speed between the vehicles. This
difference estimated driver only relatively. Using the
model, we are looking threshold level drivers that are
running in its decisions. These limits are divided into
four categories:
•
Free movement.
•
Approximation.
•
Monitor.
•
Emergency braking.
These four categories are shown in Figure 3, which you
can see below:
Figure 3. Wiedemann Model. [11]
In the free movement the drivers try to or do reach
maximum speed. In cases where an increase of density on
the road is, there occurs a state where the vehicle is
traveling at a higher speed than the preceding vehicle for
this vehicle approaching. Once there is the approaching to
the vehicle prior to the vehicle driver tries to adjust not only
the speed of the preceding vehicle but also its driving style.
This leads to copying of previous vehicle, not only in terms
of speed but also in view of maintaining a constant distance
between vehicles. At this point, the most important element
is the reaction time of the driver, which can lead to two
different states. The first condition can be described as the
best possible, and that is the driver can react quickly and
reduce the existing distance between vehicles. The second
condition leads to a bad reaction that could cause a collision.
Gipps model – This model can be also known as non-
crash. It is based on the speed limit, when as the result of
this action is no crash. This model was the first realistic
model. The positive aspect is its ability to reproduce the
characteristics
of
real
traffic
flow
without
necessity
introducing parameters. These properties are not related to
the driver. The driver is limited to maximum accelerations
and decelerations that are in full speed distance between
vehicles and the relative speed. Therefore, the vehicle will
never exceed the maximum speed and acceleration should in
the free flow of traffic drop to zero. On the basis of the
vehicle speed in the traffic flow calibration has been
experimental data expressed by the following formula:
(4)
Where an = maximum vehicle acceleration [m∙s-2]; τ =
the reaction time of the driver [s]; Vn = target vehicle speed
corresponding free traffic without restrictions [m∙s-1]; vn(t)=
vehicle speed at time t[m∙s-1] [11]
IDM model – The biggest advantage of the above
mentioned model is the number of input parameters. These
source
parameters
are
intuitive
character.
From
this
perspective, it saves a great deal of time because they do not
have to work on long analysis to obtain the input data. The
basic equation of this model is expressed dependence
acceleration:
(5)
Where ai = acceleration of the vehicle [m∙s-2]; aiO =
comfortable acceleration [m∙s-2]; viO= target vehicle speed
[m∙s-1]; v= vehicle speed [m∙s-1]; sopt = optimum distance
vehicles [m]; si = immediate distance from the preceding
vehicle [m]; δ = acceleration factor of realism of the
reference vehicle.[11]
Usefulness of the models has in every sector its pros
and cons. In the community of mathematicians and
physicists dealing with this issue it has become the most
recognized IDM model also termed as "Intelligent Driver
Model". Gipps and Wiedemann models and are most
prevalent in simulation software. [7], [8]
V.
THE USE OF DYNAMIC MODELING OF THE IMPACTS
OF ROAD TRANSPORT
Macroscopic and microscopic models have their uses for
modeling in road transport. The output element of these
models is the evaluation of vehicle movement and their
interaction in the road. We can say that it is modern
approaches. On this basis, we developed a group of authors
on the subject of dynamic system modeling in road transport.
This system is based on a deterministic approach. The basis
of this system is the analysis section where it disposes
critical element and detour routes on the basis of the
macroscopic model. The brain of the system is the algorithm
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

that evaluates the performance parameters of the sections,
the degree of intensity transmittance pass routes in the
transport and effects of operating parameters on alternate
roads.
In Figure 4. below we can see the progress of the
algorithm for dynamic system modeling the impact of road
transport:
Figure 4. Algorithm of Dynamic Modeling of the Impacts of
Road Transport. [1]
Step 1. Identifying critical element in road infrastructure
- In case of rejection of a critical element of road transport
is
the
first
step
no
doubt
his
identification.
The
identification is based on a directive of the European
Union, which leads to their identification and subsequent
designation by sectoral and cross-cutting criteria. To be
able to fulfill the cross- cutting criteria, you need to model
the results of the impact that these values be able to
compare the values of crosscutting. This hypothesis is the
initial step due to confirm or refute criticism.
Step 2. Determination of critical element functional
parameters in a normal state - After identifying follows
assessment of functional parameters critical element in a
normal state. This means that a certain intensity and traffic
throughput as the latest phase in this step set these
parameters along the entire route, where this is a critical
element.
Step 3. Finding detour routes and critical sections of
these routes - At a time when there is lose of a critical
element we need to be prepared for alternative roundabout
routes. Certainly we should not forget the possible risk
sections also on alternative routes so that we are ready
for the emergence of other events.
Step 4. Determine the degree of intensity throughput
traffic on the detour routs. Determination of functional
parameters should be done not only on the main road
but also on alternative routes. Functional parameters
means to determine the intensity of transmission traffic
across alternative route.
Step 5. Determination of the impact on functional
parameters on alternate roads. Finally, to represent a
number
of
casualties
and
economic
loss.
The
final
statement gives us lost gross domestic product (GDP) and
additional operating costs.
VI.
CONCLUSION
Road transport is for every state a significant element of
the critical infrastructure. In the case of disruption or failure
of this element can lead to other serious threats to some
typical elements of critical infrastructure. This fact can
achieve a negative impact not only on society. From this
perspective, we must not neglect prevention and quality
response to this potential threat. Above presented tool is built
on the foundations of existing instruments. This tool is not
only suitable for real-time analysis but also a far better
overview in the art. The aim of dynamic modeling is
effective to minimize the expected impact. Road transport is
important for any company in many ways and therefore it is
necessary to pursue this issue more intensive than before.
Increasing the security of critical infrastructure element
significantly will affect the security and other elements that
are connected with a linkage.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Internal Grant Agency of
Tomas
Bata
University
under
the
project
No.
IGA/FAI/2016/015.
This work was supported by the research project
VI20152019049 "RESILIENCE 2015: Dynamic Resilience
Evaluation
of
Interrelated
Critical
Infrastructure
Subsystems", supported by the Ministry of the Interior of
the Czech Republic in the years 2015-2019.
REFERENCES
[1] M., Hromada and L., Lukas: Methodology for selected critical
infrastructure
elements
and
elements
system
resilience
evaluation.
In:
The
2015
IEEE
Symposium
on
Technologies
for
Homeland
Security,
Waltham,
USA
(2015), ISBN 978-1-
4799-1737-2
[2]
L., Lukáš and M., Hromada: Simulation and Modelling in
Critical Infrastructure Protection, In: International journal of
mathematics and computers in simulation, pp. 386-394
(2011), ISSN: 1998-0159
[3]
S., Attal (2008) Markov chains and dynamical systems:
The open system point of view, 2008. Available from:
http://math.univ-lyon1.fr/~attal/Mesarticles/cosa_attal.pdf
[4]
Ni, D. Equilibrium traffic flow models [online]. 2012[cit.
2015-03-24].
Available:
http://people.umass.edu/ndh/TFT/Ch05%20Equilibrium.pd
f
[5]
R., Bogo, L., Gramani and E., Kaviski. (2015) Modelling the
flow of
vehicles
by
the
macroscopic
theory.
Revista
Brasileira de Ensino de Física, volume 37, Issue 1, 2015, pp.
1-8.
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[6]
G., Oliva, S., Panzieri and R., Setola. (2010) Agent-based
input– output
interdependency
model,
International
Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection, 3(2010), 79-82.
[7] G., Upreti, P.V., Rao, R.S., Sawhney and I., Atuahene and
R., Dhingra. (2014) Increasing transport efficiency using
simulation modeling
in
a
dynamic
modeling
approach,
Journal
of Cleaner Production (Special Volume: Making
Progress Towards More Sustainable Societies through Lean
and Green Initiatives), 85(2014),433-441.
doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.09.002
[8] W . , Young, A., Sobhani, M.G., Lenné and M., Sarvi. (2014)
Simulation of safety: A review of the state of the art in road
safety
simulation
modelling,
Accident
Analysis
&
Prevention,
66(2014), 89-103. doi:10.1016/j.aap.2014.01.00
[9]
T., Apeltauer. (2013) Microscopic traffic models in work
zones. [Habilitační práce]. Brno: University of Technology, 
2013. (in Czech)
[10] T., Apeltauer, P.,
Holcner and J., Macur.
(2009)
Verification of some models of traffic flow, článek v Silnice 
a železnice,
ISSN
1801-822X,
KONSTRUKCE
Media,
Ostrava, 2009. (in Czech)
[11] Apeltauer, T., Holcner, P., Macur, J. (2013) Validation of
microscopic
traffic
models
based
on
GPS
precise
measurement
of
the
vehicle
dynamics.
Promet
-
Traffic&Transportation, 2013, Vol. 25, pp. 157-167.
[12]
Apeltauer,
T.
(2011)
Romodis
–
rozvoj
moderních
dopravních inteligentních   systémů   (modul   8   –  Využití   
simulačních modelů v dopravě) [online]. 2011 [cit. 2015-03-
24]. Dostupné z: http://www.romodis.cz/files/169118867.pdf
(in Czech)
[13] Nationt traffic census. RMD [online].
Praha:  Ředitelství  silnic  a  dálnic,  2010  [cit.  2016-03-31]. 
Available
from:
http://scitani2010.rsd.cz/pages/map/default.aspx
[14] Act n. 432/2010 Coll. Government Regulation on criteria for
determining critical infrastructure element, 2010 [cit. 2016-
03-30]. Dostupné z: https://www.zakonyprolidi.cz/cs/2010-
432
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

