Theoretical Sources for a Theory of Safety and Security 
 
Ludek Lukas 
Department of Security Engineering 
Tomas Bata University in Zlín 
Zlín, Czech Republic 
email: lukas@fai.utb.cz 
 
 
Abstract—Safety and security are top priorities in our society 
and addressing problems in these areas is crucial. Several 
different kinds of safety or security exist today, such as 
international security, cyber security, physical security, fire 
safety, and so on. The scientific community is starting to 
address the creation of a theory of safety and security. The 
theory of safety and security will be followed by a series of 
default theories. This paper discusses the concepts and 
theoretical sources we can draw from for the theory of safety 
and security, as well as subsequent knowledge. 
Keywords-theory of safety and security; risk theory; crisis 
theory; causality. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, a mostly pragmatic approach prevails in the 
safety and security research [1]. Currently, safety and 
security research is realized independently, with each sector 
addressing its own kind of safety or security. Each kind of 
safety or security mostly creates its own professional 
conceptual apparatus. 
Many specialists think that it is not possible to connect 
problems of international security, fire safety, information 
security or work health safety in one unit because they do not 
have a collective content. There are obvious reasons for that. 
Until now, no comparison was done between the different 
kinds of safety and security; in addition, no generalization 
was attempted.  
Specialists in each field work on and develop their own 
kind of safety or security measures independently. Each kind 
of safety or security is solving its own specific problems of 
that field, which are meant to prevent danger or negative 
consequences. Because of this reason, each kind of safety or 
security was created by taking into account measures that 
make a reference object safe or secure. The different kinds of 
safety and security were researched and evolved separately. 
Until now, there is no common theoretical basis for safety or 
security. 
Many scientific disciplines like informatics or electronics 
have their own theory. There also should be the theory of 
safety and security. The theory of safety and security should 
evolve from each kind of safety or security. This theory 
should reflect the existing theoretical knowledge in the area 
of safety and security research and other disciplines which 
have relations to safety and security.  
 
 
 
The theory of safety and security can draw mainly from 
the following sources: 
  
• 
Copenhagen school of security studies, 
• 
risk theory, 
• 
crisis theory, 
• 
causality. 
 
The following section analyzes the above mentioned 
sources and their impact on the theory of safety and security.  
The last part of the article discusses the starting points which 
should be respected in the theory of safety and security.  
II. 
COPENHAGEN SCHOOL OF SECURITY STUDIES 
Theoretical security research exists for a long time. The 
main research was done in the field of international security 
and military. The specialists who researched this field had 
mostly political science education. They researched the 
security from the political science and governance point of 
view. The aim of their research was to solve mainly military 
problems between states. The Copenhagen School of 
Security Studies (CSSS) had a significant position in this 
field. During the 90s of 20th century, the CSSS focused on 
the research into other sectors of security. In their work [1], 
they emphasized security research not only in area of 
military security, but in human security, environment and 
other sectors. The specification of security sectors and 
securitization process are the main benefits of CSSS for 
security research. There are three main questions about 
security: 
 
1. Whose security? 
2. Security of which values? 
3. Security against what? 
 
Answers to these questions should help analyze the 
security reality. They define what the reference object is, 
what protects it, and what the threats are. Answers to these 
questions allow specifying the basic elements and 
interactions in the analyzed kind of security. The situational 
analysis is the result of this process. This analysis is the basis 
for solving security problems and choosing of the 
appropriate security methods, measures and resources. 
The representatives of the CSSS emphasize that security 
is ensured primarily in the military area. They also 
recommended to make the research and to solve the security 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

problems 
in 
the 
political, 
social, 
economic 
and 
environmental sectors. Through this, they developed from 
the security discipline the transdisciplinary scientific field. 
The creation of the security sectors meant a top-down 
approach for solving the security problems in society. 
The identification of the securitization process was the 
last contribution of the CSSS. The securitization is speech 
act. Its aim is to transform the political problem into security 
problem.  The securitization actor identifies some political 
problem, and after that he emphasizes the needs of solution 
as the security problem. This problem gets into the security 
agenda and has high priority of solution. 
The specifications of a formal frame for security and 
securitization process are basic benefits of the CSSS for the 
theory of safety and security. The main drawback of this 
school is a lack of a solution for a security situation. 
  
III. 
THE RISK THEORY AS A BASE FOR THE THEORY OF 
SAFETY AND SECURITY 
Risk theory is a widely used scientific discipline, based 
on the identification of a threat, the specification of risk and 
the specification of how to overcome the risk. The essence of 
risk lies in the objective existence of threats. The risk comes 
from consciously controlled acting, or chaotic and 
uncontrolled acting of each part of a complex. In the 
behavior of elements, moments may arise when the 
elements, whether intentionally or randomly, are getting into 
direct interaction (collision, impact).  
Many interactions are negative, with devastating impact. 
This impact is proportional to the magnitude and direction of 
the action (measure), where the individual reference objects 
are involved in negative interactions. This negative 
interaction is named “security incident”. The application of 
the risk theory evaluates which threats (or negative acts) 
affect the reference object, and which ones have more or less 
significant impact. The purpose of risk identification is to 
identify the worst possible impact of threats and prepare 
measures to counteract these threats. The proposed measures 
should prevent the effects of threats or prevent negative 
impacts on the reference object. 
The aim of risk is to express how probable and how large 
the negative impact will be on the reference object. The risk 
can be determined quantitatively as well as qualitatively. Its 
size has more variables. There is currently no definition of 
risk that is clearly defined and accepted. Usually, the risk is 
characterized by the size of the negative impact or the harm 
and by the probability of threat exposure. Some authors have 
added the vulnerability of the reference object into the risk 
definition [5]. The question of vulnerability is purposeful. 
The vulnerability emphasizes the threats to which the 
reference object is prone. This parameter is involved in 
specification of probability of exposition. If it is not prone to 
threat exposition, the exposure probability, and also 
vulnerability, will be lower. 
 The method of risk management is used in many fields. 
These include project management, investment, economics, 
and so on. It is also always part of the management. The goal 
of the risk management is not to find a way to efficiently 
fulfill the objective function of the reference object. Its aim is 
to determine the negative impact, which can affect the 
reference object, how the reference will be affected, how it 
acts or how to minimize the impacts.  
Risk management has an important position in the field 
of safety and security. It is focusing on minimization of 
damage or impact. The risk theory could be used as 
methodology for specification of possible negative impacts, 
which could harm the reference object. Due to this fact, risk 
management is used in many fields, in which significant 
theoretical development and practical applications were 
developed.  Methods of risk analysis have been elaborated. 
Nowadays, we have many methods of risk analysis. These 
methods allow quantifying the level of risk. Depending on 
the approach and nature of the application, different risk 
analysis methods could cause different results, which were 
obtained during the analysis of one specific security 
problem.  
Risk management prefers the repressive manner for 
ensuring the safety or security. It defines for what risk and 
how the reference object should be prepared. The 
disadvantage of the risk management is that it does not find 
out the causes of threats. Threats are taken as a fact and it 
only focuses on what they can cause. Unacceptable risk is 
solved by appropriate measures. The solution comes as 
acceptance of risk, risk retention, risk transfer and risk 
avoidance. 
Despite this disadvantage, risk theory creates the basis of 
the theory of safety and security. The main contribution is its 
well developed methods of risk analysis. The risk theory is 
well applied in kinds of safety or security that protect the 
conditions of reference object (physical security, information 
security, administrative security and so on). Risk theory is 
less suitable for the kinds of safety or security that govern 
the reference object (international security, homeland 
security and so on). In these cases, it is about creating the 
secure of safe environment as the result of synthesis. 
IV. 
THE CRISIS THEORY AND ITS RELATION TO THE 
THEORY OF SAFETY AND SECURITY 
A crisis is an important phenomenon, which has negative 
influence on human society. The negative effect is a 
common sign of security breach and crisis. For the safety and 
security research, it is important to determine what is the 
reason and nature of safety and security problems. Moreover, 
we need to examine what is the relation between the theory 
of safety and security and the crisis theory.  
Crisis theory is a scientific discipline focused on the 
theoretic aspects of crisis research, mainly on nature and 
causes of crisis. The basics of crisis prevention and its 
handling are based on the crisis theory.  
The crisis theory has systems and a dynamic character. 
The crisis theory is independent from a concrete reference 
object; it also researches the basic aspects of the creation and 
development of crisis. The crisis theory is the basis for 
successful management of a crisis. Nowadays, the crisis is 
understood as: 
 
 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

• 
time when contradictions culminate,  
• 
or as a complicated situation. 
 
These terms are similar. They are appropriate for 
designation of a time period when existential complications 
arise. The crisis is considered as a state or period when 
danger is coming out and simultaneously the aim function of 
the reference object is threatened.  The crisis arises when 
there is a significant change in conditions for the reference 
object. Changing conditions occurs due to the chaotic or 
uncoordinated behavior of each part of the system. During 
this time period, the configuration of conditions and 
environment are changing. It could be caused by a lack of 
inputs, a fault in the power supply or production elements, or 
escalation of electric voltage, and so on. Each change 
requires an adequate system reaction to provide adaptation. 
If the changes are expected, the system can be prepared for 
them and after that; it also can have a suitable reaction. The 
situation is different when a rapid change has a higher than 
expected value. During this situation, the system can have an 
inappropriate reaction and, following that complications or 
crisis may arise. Basically, the crisis is created due to: 
 
• 
unexpected and large negative situation, 
• 
unmanaged control. 
A. Unexpected and Large Negative Situation 
An unexpected situation is  a situation which cannot be 
predicted. The complications are created by a negative event 
of large scale (for example, natural disasters, the sharp fall in 
the price of the shares on the stock exchange, large-scale 
attack of an unknown computer virus, and so on). The 
system is not prepared for these changes, because they are 
not frequent and the prevention is economically unbearable.  
The system should be prepared for these negative situations. 
Managing the crisis is based on minimization of the 
influence of the negative situation and also on system 
recovery. Crisis management is a special kind of 
management created for managing and overcoming the 
crisis. The activation of new forces and equipment is a basic 
crisis measure. 
B. Unmanaged Control 
The nature of the crisis arising is based on the 
unmanaged control. The crisis usually includes periods 
(stages) 
of 
latent 
symptoms, 
acute, 
chronic 
and 
resolved/unresolved crisis. In the stage of latent symptoms, 
the accumulation of unresolved problems happens. If the 
managing system is not catching up or is not solving the 
crisis symptoms, the crisis comes out. In the acute stage, 
problems culminate. The unsolved problems accumulate, 
too. The control system should start solving these problems 
slowly. A breakpoint of the situation is then reached. This 
breakpoint is based on the capacity of the system, especially 
on the control system. The crisis is eliminated if the system 
is capable of activating and ensuring plenty of resources for 
appropriate measures. The crisis management has been 
activated, too. The crisis management has to act fast and has 
to be effective enough to solve the crisis without harming the 
elements of the complex. In crisis, we usually do not have 
enough relevant information. So, crisis solving must be done 
during an unclear situation. Knowledge and experience, 
obtained from previous crisis, plays a key role in managing 
complicated situations. Decisions usually have irreversible 
implications. The systems have to be prepared for crisis and 
also have to make the plans for eliminating the crisis 
situation. At the same time, they should solve the crisis 
immediately in the stage of latent symptoms. This ensures 
avoidance of crises. 
C. Relations between Crisis and Safety and Security 
The crisis theory and the theory of safety and security 
represent the common form of scientific knowledge, which 
gives the systematic view about laws and main substantial 
relations, reasons and conclusions of special types of 
negative effect affecting reference objects. These negative 
effects are crisis and security incidents. Both of them have 
negative effects for the reference object. The reason why 
negative effects happen is different in each case. The key 
reason of crisis is the unmanaged control and the key reason 
of security incident is the objective existence of danger and 
intentional, unintentional or accidental emergence of safety 
and security incidents. The common signs of crisis and 
safety and security incidents include: 
 
• 
a negative effect for the reference object, 
• 
arising due to changes in the reference object and its 
inputs, 
• 
the fact that overcoming of complications requires a 
specific type of management, 
• 
the fact that the size of the impact can be minimized 
by prevention and repression, 
• 
the usage of the risk theory as the basic theory for its 
managing and overcoming. 
 
The different signs are: 
 
• 
difference in the nature of arising, 
• 
security incidents happens suddenly, but a crisis 
usually comes gradually. 
 
Disclosure of security breaches lies in the objective 
existence of threats and intentional, negligence or accidental 
exposure. The security incident emerges due to the chaotic 
evolution. It can be a cause of negative interaction and also 
as creation of damage. The crisis is based on an unmanaged 
control of changed conditions. Both theories have many 
common points, but their basics are different. Crisis can 
cause security incidents and also security incidents can cause 
crisis. On one side, the economic crisis leads to increasing 
criminality and also, on the other side, a security incident 
such as an attack on oil pipeline can cause an energy crisis, 
for example. There are relations between them. In practice, 
the safety or security is ensured continuously. On the other 
hand, the crisis is solved only at the time it arises.  
Also, there are applied relations between superiority and 
subordination. The security manager provides measures in 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

each kind of safety or security. The physical security, 
personal security or information security are basic kinds of 
safety or security in a manufacturing company, for example. 
If the crisis begins, the crisis manager takes care of 
management. His task is to lead the organization out of the 
crisis. The crisis manager must understand the fulfillment of 
objective function of the organization. By his actions, he 
tries to make the organization become fully operational. The 
security manager helps the crisis manager especially with 
prevention of crisis by minimizing security incidents in the 
field of property, staff or information. During the crisis, the 
crisis manager is superior to security manager. 
V. 
CAUSALITY AND ITS RELATION TO THE THEORY OF 
SAFETY AND SECURITY 
The causality is a scientific discipline which researches 
relations between cause and effect. The term causality has 
evolved from the Latin word „causa“. The cause is relation, 
where cause and effect are mutually connected. The law of 
causality determines that anything that happens has at least 
one cause, and also any cause has future consequences. The 
same causes create the same effects. It is structured by a 
causal relationship (causal nexus). Causality is an expression 
of the relationship between two events, where one of them 
raises and the second is called the "cause". Basically the 
reason is the term, which causes effect. 
Causality is key for the theory of safety and security. It 
allows establishing a logic chain of causes of security or 
safety violation. From this point of view of safety or security, 
there is inadequate position of causality. A role of causality 
is neglected. It is important to focus on this problem. 
VI. 
BACKGROUND FOR THE THEORY OF SAFETY AND 
SECURITY 
The theory of safety and security should specify the basic 
concepts and knowledge in the field of safety and security in 
the most general context. The Czech concept of the theory of 
safety and security will be different from the English 
concept. The security identifies security incidents caused 
intentionally. The safety identifies safety incidents caused by 
negligence or accidentally. 
 The Czech language, contrary to the English language, 
uses the terms “safety and security” as one term 
"bezpecnost". The Czech language does not distinguish 
between intentional and accidental incidents. Therefore, the 
Czech concept of the theory of safety and security will be in 
certain aspects different from the English concept of the 
theory of safety and security. 
The theory of safety and security should follow up to the 
crisis theory, the risk theory, the causality and the CSSS. 
Based on the analysis of the above mentioned theories, the 
theory of safety and security exploits the following findings 
and conclusions: 
A. The Copenhagen School of Security Studies  
The CSSS’ benefit is a conceptual security framework 
which gives the answers to basic questions: "Whose 
security?“, „Security of which values?“,  „Security against 
what? " The response is the notion of a" reference object ", 
which refers to an object whose security is assessed. Another 
benefit is the list of threats affecting the reference object. 
 A sector approach to decomposition of the security 
environment is another benefit. Sectors refer to areas where 
security issues should be identified and addressed. If there is 
an accumulation and a repetition of security problems, a new 
kind of security is created for its solution. 
The last benefit is specifications of the securitization 
process. This concept shows how the problem becomes a 
security issue. The problem then comes to the security 
agenda. Security issues are those that have to reference the 
object’s existential influence and impact. 
B. Risk Theory 
The risk theory offers to the theory of safety and security 
a basic methodological approach to the identification and 
assessment of safety and security problems by identifying 
threats, risk analysis and the choice of method of risk 
management. Risk theory gives to theory of safety and 
security the basic terms. Basic terms are a threat, risk, 
damage and impact. 
C. Crisis Theory 
The crisis theory is closely linked to the theory of safety 
and security by managing the breach consequences. Most 
security breaches get a reference object into a crisis and it is 
important to overcome it.  
D. Causality 
The causality deals with the causes of safety and security 
breaches. The theory of safety and security can utilize the 
types of causes of safety and security breaches. It is the 
intent, negligence and chance. 
The above described theories offer to the theory of safety 
and security new knowledge and themes. The newly created 
theory of safety and security can draw from this knowledge.  
The theory of safety and security can be created in several 
ways. Based on the conclusions, the theory of safety and 
security will be established by generalization and induction.  
Such a theory should be created in the form of postulates 
creating a systematic, generalized picture of the essential 
patterns and contexts of safety and security, its breaching and 
ensuring.  
 
TABLE 1.     USABLE KNOWLEDGE FROM THE ANALYSED SOURCES 
 
Source 
Usable Knowledge 
 
Copenhagen school of 
security studies  
• answers for situation analyses, 
• sector approach, 
• securitization. 
 
risk theory 
• basic methodological approach: 
• threat – risk – measure. 
 
crisis theory 
• solution of safety or security event. 
 
causality 
• causes of safety or security event. 
 
 
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
 
 
Figure 1.  Induction of the kinds of safety or security 
Then, the theory of safety and security could clarify the 
issue of safety and security in the whole range of the most 
general aspects. Fig. 1 depicts the generalization and 
induction of the selected kinds of safety or security as a way 
for creating the theory of safety and security. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Nowadays, there is an effort to create the theory of safety 
and security. The newly created theory of safety and security 
would provide a common framework for all kinds of safety 
and security. The problem of safety and security has been 
addressed for a long time, and a theory of safety and security 
should utilize already established theories and theoretical 
discipline. Based on long-term research, we identified 
fundamental theories which should establish a background 
for the theory of safety and security. These theories can be 
used as source for creating the theory of safety and security. 
The theories discussed include the Copenhagen school of 
security studies, risk theory, crisis theory and causality. The 
newly created theory of safety and security is based on a 
generalization of the findings from the already established 
kinds of safety and security. This theory will be realized in 
the form of postulates. It can be assumed that the Czech 
version of the theory will be different from the English 
version. Czech language and other Central European 
languages do not distinguish between intentional and 
unintentional threats, like English language does. The 
substance of the theory of safety and security, however, 
remains the same. It will focus on clarification of the issue of 
safety and security in the most general aspects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, 
Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic within the National 
Sustainability Programme project No. LO1303 (MSMT-
7778/2014). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Buzan, O. Weaver, J. de Wilde, Security: New Framework 
for Analysis. London: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1998. 
[2] B. Buzan, L. Hansen, The evolution of international security 
studies. Cambrige: Cambrige University Press, 2009. 
[3] M. McDonald, “Securitization and the Construction of 
Security”. 
In: 
European 
Journal 
of 
International 
Relations December 2008, vol. 14 no. 4563-587. 
[4] L. Lukas, “On theory of security”. In: Kosicka bezpecnostna 
revue, vol. 2015, no. 2, pp. 187 – 192, ISSN 1338 -6956. 
[5] M. Hromada, “Security Models.” In: Kosicka bezpecnostna 
revue, vol. 2015, no. 2, pp. 118 – 127, ISSN 1338 -6956. 
[6] C. Smith, D. Brooks, Security science: the theory and practice 
of security. Walthman, MA: Butterworth-Heimann, 2013. 
 
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

