Secure and Fast PIN-entry Method for 3D Display 
Mun-Kyu Lee, Hyeonjin Nam 
School of Computer and Information Engineering 
Inha University 
Incheon, Korea 
e-mail: mklee@inha.ac.kr, jin0639@hanmail.net 
 
 
Abstract—The personal identification number (PIN) is one of 
the most well-known user authentication methods. However, 
there have been concerns about the security of the regular PIN 
pad against shoulder surfing attacks. Although there are many 
indirect input methods based on random challenges, most of 
them have usability issues because they require very long 
authentication time and their error rates are quite high. In this 
paper, we introduce our ongoing work to develop a solution to 
this problem using a 3D display. The proposed method 
transmits a random challenge to a user more effectively and 
securely by displaying a specific challenge object with different 
3D depth from the other decoy objects. A prototype of the 
proposed method was implemented on a smartphone with a 
parallax barrier-based glasses-free 3D LCD, which guarantees 
the physical security because only a legitimate user who is 
located at the right position in front of the device can recognize 
the 3D effect correctly, while an attacker cannot. According to 
our pilot test, the average authentication time and the average 
error rate of the proposed method are as small as 8.4 seconds 
and 5.0%, respectively. 
Keywords-personal identification number, authentication, 
smart device, 3D display 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
User authentication is a procedure that verifies the 
identity and access permission of a claimed user. It is well 
known that there are three categories for user authentication; 
knowledge-based authentication, hardware token-based 
authentication, and biometric verification. In this paper, we 
are interested in the first category, which is the most 
prevalent one. Especially, we will focus on personal 
identification number (PIN). 
Although PINs are widely used for smart devices, ATMs, 
and digital door locks, there are concerns about the security 
of PINs [1]. That is, anyone who observes the authentication 
procedure over the user’s shoulder can easily impersonate 
the user, because the traditional PIN pad asks a user to 
directly input his/her PIN and this PIN is short enough for an 
ordinary human attacker can memorize to use in the next 
authentication session. This kind of attack is known as a 
shoulder surfing attack [2]. 
We can find many proposals to solve this issue in the 
security literature [2-6]. They were designed so that a user 
may enter a response to a random challenge given by the 
system instead of entering the PIN digits directly. The 
response is computed by combining properly the challenge 
and the secret PIN. However, the previous methods have 
usability issues. That is, they require too long time to enter a 
PIN or their error rates are too high. The major reason for 
this is that the procedure where the user computes an 
appropriate response from the given challenge is very 
complex due to security requirement. 
In this work, we propose a solution to this problem, 
which is applicable to devices with a 3D display. The 
proposed method effectively transmits a challenge to a user 
by showing a challenge object with distinct 3D aspects from 
the other decoy elements. The challenge object defines a 
simple mapping between PIN digits and some alphabet 
characters. Then, the user only has to remember this 
mapping, and inputs the mapped characters though a keypad. 
On the other hand, the attackers without access to the 3D 
information cannot obtain any information about the 
challenge object. According to the pilot test, the PIN-entry 
time and error rate of the proposed method are significantly 
smaller than those of the existing methods. We name our 
method Map-3D after the design principle. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 gives a brief introduction to the 3D display 
technology that we used to implement our proposal. The 
proposed method is explained in Section 3. Section 4 and 
Section 5 analyze the security and practical performance of 
the proposed method, respectively. Section 6 compares the 
proposed method with previously known methods. Section 7 
enumerates the issues that we still have to resolve and 
propose future work. 
II. 
3D DISPLAY 
Nowadays, we see many devices with 3D display, such 
as a 3D TV, a 3D monitor, a 3D game console, a 3D 
smartphone, and a 3D smart pad. Although the proposed 
method may be applicable to any of these devices, we 
consider a 3D smartphone as the implementation platform 
for this paper. We used an LG Optimus 3D smartphone with 
a parallax barrier 3D LCD whose resolution is 800 by 480 
pixels. The parallax barrier [7] is a well-known method to 
realize glasses-free 3D display, where many thin vertical slits 
are regularly placed in front of an LCD so that the left and 
right eyes may see different sets of pixels. The difference 
between the images for left and right eyes produces a 
stereoscopic effect. However, this effect is only realized at a 
specific point in front of the screen, where the eyes of the 
legitimate user should be located. If the eyes are not at this 
position, the user will not recognize the 3D effect correctly. 
Naturally, the attacker will not be able to feel the 3D effect 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

because s/he cannot be at this sweet spot. In this way, the 
security of our method is physically guaranteed.  
III. 
MAP-3D: PROPOSED METHOD 
Figure 1 shows the layout of Map-3D, the new method. 
Map-3D is composed of two stages; the challenge display 
stage and the response input stage. Figure 1 is the first stage, 
where a 10 by 10 matrix of alphabets is given to the user as 
well as the row index from 1 to 0 and two touch buttons 
labeled ‘3D’ and ‘Next.’ Each column is a random 
permutation of 10 alphabet characters from A through K. 
(We do not use letter I because it may be confused with 
integer 1.) As a result, each character appears exactly 10 
times in the matrix. Initially, all 100 letters are displayed 
with the same 3D depth. When the user touches the ‘3D’ 
button, the device changes the depths of letters. To be precise, 
a random one among 100 letters is chosen by the device, and 
it is displayed with depth +1, and all the other letters with 
depth -1, where positive and negative depths mean that an 
object is displayed as a prominent and depressed letter, 
respectively. In the example of Fig.1, the ‘F’ at the 
intersection of row 9 and column 2 is at depth +1, and it is 
shown to the user as a prominent letter. (Unfortunately, we 
cannot express the 3D effect properly on this printed paper. 
In fact, the picture in Fig. 1 that was taken using an ordinary 
2D camera is roughly what the attacker sees.) The other 99 
letters are displayed on the plane with depth -1, and the user 
will feel as if these letters are depressed. While the user 
keeps touching the ‘3D’ button, this 3D effect is maintained.  
Figure 1.  Challenge display stage of Map-3D. 
After recognizing the prominent letter F, the user releases 
the button, which eliminates the 3D effect. But, the 
arrangement of letters remains the same. Then, the user’s 
task is to remember 4 specific letters in his/her short-term 
memory. For example, let’s assume that the PIN is ‘6421.’ 
The user focuses on the second column where the prominent 
F was located, and remembers the 4 letters at rows 6, 4, 2, 
and 1, which are H, K, E, and D, respectively. In the case 
that the user forgets the prominent letter, s/he may touch 
again the ‘3D’ button to reshow the 3D effect. But, at this 
time, the device chooses again a new random letter to be 
displayed with depth +1. The user finishes the challenge 
display stage by touching the ‘Next’ button. This 
immediately starts the response input stage. 
Figure 2.  Response input stage of Map-3D using QWERTY keypad. 
Figure 3.  Response input stage of Map-3D using linear keypad. 
In the response input stage, the device displays an 
ordinary keypad as in Fig. 2. However, the input of letters 
that do not belong to the challenge alphabet set is disabled. 
The user only has to input the four letters that s/he 
memorized in the first stage. An alternative input method 
shown in Fig. 3 is also possible. In this case, the 10 possible 
letters are displayed in a row. 
IV. 
SECURITY 
For security analysis, we may consider two criteria, 
because an attacker may have two different attack strategies; 
random guessing and shoulder surfing [8]. With the random 
guessing strategy, the attacker tries to pass the authentication 
test by randomly selecting the possible responses. We easily 
see that the success probability of this strategy is 1/10,000, 
which is the same as that of a regular PIN pad.  
On the other hand, in a shoulder surfing attack scenario, 
the attacker tries to obtain useful information on the PIN by 
observing the authentication session of a legitimate user. 
Because the depths of all letters in the challenge display 
stage will look the same to the attacker who is not at a right 
position, the only thing the attacker can do is to carefully 
remember the arrangements of 100 letters and the 4 letters 
that the user enters in the response input stage. However, it is 
well known that a human user can remember only 7±2 items 
in the short-term memory [9], and recent research results 
show that the number of items is actually even less than this 
value [10]. However, at this point, let’s assume very 
pessimistically, that an attacker may memorize 10 items at 
the same time. Then, the best strategy will be to randomly 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

choose one column and to memorize the 10 elements in that 
column. Combining this information and the user’s response, 
the attacker can recover the PIN digits with a probability, 
1/10. This is 10 times less than that of the regular PIN pad. 
Therefore, we conclude that the proposed method is 
significantly safer than the regular PIN pad against a 
shoulder surfing attack. However, we remark that even this 
estimation is a very pessimistic one, and we conjecture that 
the real probability will be far less than 1/10. 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
For our pilot test, we used LG Optimus 3D smartphone. 
The software for the proposed method was programmed 
using Java over Android 2.3.3. We start this section by 
explaining the implementation details for 3D effects. As 
explained in the Section 3, a prominent object is given a 
positive depth, while a negative depth implies that an object 
is located at a deeper plane. This difference in depth is 
realized by showing different images to left and right eyes. If 
the depth is 0, two eyes see the same images. However, for 
positive and negative depths, the object is horizontally 
shifted by proper amount. For example, if the depth of an 
object is +1, the object should go to right by one position in 
the image for the left eye. Similarly, it should go left by the 
same amount in the image for the right eye. 
We designed a pilot test to verify the validity of our idea. 
We recruited four subjects from our local university. Their 
ages were between 21 and 40. Two of them were male. 
Before the test, we explained the rationale for our proposal 
and the authentication procedure. The participants easily 
understood the working principle of the proposed method, 
and we did not give them any opportunity for practice. But 
we measured the timing and error rate from their first trials. 
Each participant performed ten authentication sessions with 
the QWERTY keypad shown in Fig. 2. Then, ten additional 
sessions were performed with the linear keypad in Fig. 3.  
According to the experimental results, the average 
authentication time among the 40 sessions with the 
QWERTY keypad was 8.4 seconds, and the best one was as 
fast as 5.2 seconds. There was no significant difference in the 
case with the linear keypad. The average was 8.5 seconds, 
and the minimum was 5.4 seconds. The error rates in two 
experiments were 5.0% and 7.5%, respectively, where an 
error is defined as the case that the user completes the 
session but the entered PIN is different from the correct one. 
We remark that there were only 10 among 80 sessions where 
a participant touched the ‘3D’ button more than once. 
VI. 
COMPARISON WITH RELATED WORKS 
In Table 1, we compare the performance of the proposed 
method with those of the previous methods including the 
legacy PIN pad. Table 1 lists the authentication times and 
error rates of various methods including the proposed one. 
We remark that the data for the previous methods are not 
from our own experiments, but they are from the papers that 
presented each method. But we recalculated error rates of 
some methods because their definition of error rate is 
different from ours. That is, they defined an error as the case 
that the user enters incorrect PINs in three consecutive trials, 
which is a common practice in ATMs. If we adopt this 
definition, the error rate of the proposed method is 0. 
However, we define an error as the case that the user enters 
an incorrect PIN in one trial. 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF SPEED AND ERROR RATE 
Method 
Authentication time 
Error rate 
Regular PIN pad 
< 3 
≈ 0 
Binary [2] 
23.2 
9.0 
Undercover [3] 
32-45 
> 31.5 
VibraPass [4] 
8.2 
> 14.8 
Haptic Wheel [5] a
23.0 
16.4 
ColorPIN [6] a 
13.3-13.9 
N.A. 
Proposed: Qwerty 
8.4 
5.0 
Proposed: linear keypad 
8.5 
7.5 
a. Audio-based version 
According to Table 1, the speed of the proposed method 
is much faster than those of the existing methods, except the 
regular PIN pad, which does not have shoulder-surfing 
resistance and VibraPass whose error rate is too high. The 
error rate of the proposed method is also very low compared 
to the other challenge-response-based methods. 
VII. FUTURE WORK 
This paper is a description of work in progress that still 
has several factors to be addressed as follows: 
• 
In the first stage of the current version, the digits 
from 1 to 0 are arranged vertically. The horizontal 
arrangement could be considered. In addition, the 
number of letters assigned to a digit should not be 
always 10, but it may be customized. 
• 
The depth difference between the prominent letter 
and the remaining letters are 2 in the current version. 
We may try other values for better 3D effect. 
• 
In the first stage, only the letters from A to K are 
given to the user. We may consider a complete set of 
capical letters, i.e., A to Z. In this case, the impact on 
the security and performance should be analyzed. 
• 
The pilot test in this paper only involves 4 subjects. 
We need to perform a complete test with more 
participants with diverse demographic backgrounds. 
Especially, applicability to the subjects with vision 
problems would be an interesting issue. 
• 
It would be meaningful to verify if there is any 
significant learning effect. Therefore, we may 
analyze the transition of authentication times and 
error rates according to the accumulated number of 
trials through a long-term study. 
• 
We may also redesign the experiment so that the 
device may present instructions that participants 
should follow. In the current experiments, we 
directly explained the new system to the participants. 
• 
We may also try to apply the new method to non-
hand-held devices such as an ATM. There are 
several devices available on the market to simulate 
this situation, e.g., 3D smart pads, although most of 
them require 3D glasses. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

In our future work, we will continue our research to present a 
complete version of the proposed method as well as more 
extensive analysis results. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the MSIP (Ministry of 
Science, ICT & Future Planning), Korea, under the ITRC 
(Information Technology Research Center)) support program 
(NIPA-2013-H0301-13-1003) supervised by the NIPA 
(National IT Industry Promotion Agency) and the IT R&D 
program of MOTIE/KEIT. [10039180, Intuitive, convenient, 
and secure HCI-based usable security technologies for 
mobile authentication and security enhancement in mobile 
computing environments]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Bonneau, S. Preibusch, and R. Anderson, “A birthday present every 
eleven wallets? The security of customerchosen banking PINs,” 
Financial Cryptography and Data Security 2012, Feb. 2012, pp. 25-40. 
[2] 
V. Roth, K. Richter, and R. Freidinger, “A PIN-entry method resilient 
against shoulder surfing,” Proceedings of the 11th ACM Conference 
on Computer and Communications Security, Oct. 2004, pp. 236-245. 
[3] 
H. 
Sasamoto, 
N. 
Christin, 
and 
E. 
Hayshi, 
“Undercover: 
Authentication Usable in Front of Prying Eyes,” CHI 2008, April 
2008, pp. 183-192. 
[4] 
A. D. Luca, E. V. Zezschwitz, and H. Hußmann, “VibraPass-Secure 
Authentication Based on Shared Lies,” CHI 2009, April 2009, pp. 
913-916. 
[5] 
A. Bianchi, I. Oakley, J. K. Lee, and D. S. Kwon, “The Haptic 
Wheel: Design & Evaluation of a Tactile Password System,” CHI 
2010, April 2010, pp. 3625-3630. 
[6] 
A. D. Luca, K. Hertzschuch, and H. Hussmann, “ColorPIN – securing 
PIN entry through indirect input,” CHI 2010, April 2010, pp.1103-
1106. 
[7] 
Parallax 
barrier, 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallax_barrier. 
[retrieved: May, 2013] 
[8] 
Q. Yang, J. Han, Y. Li, and R. Deng, “On limitations of designing 
leakage-resilient password systems: attacks, principles and usability,” 
The 19th Annual Network & Distributed System Security Symposium 
(NDSS 2012), Feb. 2012. 
[9] 
G. A. Miller, “The magical number seven, plus or minus two: some 
limits on our capacity for processing information,” Psychological 
Review, vol. 63, 1956, pp. 81–97. 
[10] G. A. Alvarez and P. Cavanagh, “The capacity of visual short-term 
memory is set both by visual information load and by number of 
objects,” Psychological Science, vol. 15, no. 2, 2004, pp. 106–111. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

