GAIA-MLIS: A Maturity Model for Information Security
 
 
Roger W. Coelho 
Computer Science Department 
State University of Londrina, UEL 
Londrina, Brazil 
rogercoelho04@uol.com.br 
 
Gilberto Fernandes Jr. 
Computer Science Department 
State University of Londrina, UEL 
Londrina, Brazil 
gil.fernandes6@gmail.com 
 
Mario Lemes Proença Jr. 
Computer Science Department 
State University of Londrina, UEL 
Londrina, Brazil 
proenca@uel.br 
 
Abstract— Information security management has become one 
of the most important areas for organizations in recent times. 
This is due to the increased need to protect data which is, in 
turn, one of the most important assets for any organization 
nowadays. Managing security risks is an ardous task which 
requires investments in support and technology management 
in order to succeed. Thus, there is great demand for a tool 
which is able to demonstrate the maturity level of an 
information security system, with the main objective of 
identifying key strengths and weaknesses in IT processes 
utilized by an organization. The GAIA-MILS model presented 
in this article has, as its main goal, to analyze the maturity level 
of an organization’s information security system and supply 
them with key data on how they can improve. This proposed 
model presents descriptions of each different level in the areas 
of hardware, software, people and facilities. Its main objective 
is to diagnose and aid in the improvement of any identified 
weaknesses in the management of each specific area. 
 
Keywords - Maturity Level; Information Security; IT 
Governance. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the business world, asset information is seen as one of 
the most important within organizations. There are three 
distinct types which are considered most valuable: people, 
facilities 
and 
information 
[1]. 
Thus, 
security 
risk 
management is usually based on technology support and 
investment management [2]. 
The risks posed by information systems are not only 
complex but also difficult to quantify, since the damage can 
directly impact on the goal of the organization [5].   
Organizations and service providers must develop 
protection tools in order to avoid misappropriation of user 
data. Thus, security threats such as viruses, worms, denial of 
service, submission of data by third parties, among others, 
cause concern for both users and service providers [3]. 
The Governance of Information Technology, aligned 
with good information security, is vital to the organization 
and service providers, since its credibility and reliability are 
tested every day. In addition, assessment methods can 
provide prescriptive data on how to improve the company 
management, as well as define who is responsible for the 
information and how it will be transmitted or maintained 
[15].  
In conjunction with IT (Information Technology) 
governance, information security means keeping three main 
pillars: confidentiality, as information must be accessible 
only to authorized persons; integrity, to ensure that 
information is entirely transmitted; and usability, to 
guarantee authorized personnel access to the information 
and related resources when needed [4]. 
Organizations should assess their level of safety maturity 
through a formal model and utilize it as a parameter to 
measure the security risk. The model GAIA Maturity Level 
Information Security (GAIA-MLIS) aims to assess the 
maturity level of information security used in the evaluated 
network. For the purpose of implementing improvements in 
these processes, GAIA-MLIS enables companies to identify 
weaknesses in security processes, like hardware, software, 
human resources, facilities and information.  
This article is organized as follows: Secion II deals with 
IT Governance and Information Security; Section III 
presents GAIA-MLIS Maturity Model Information Security; 
Section IV shows tests and results; and finally, Section V 
concludes the article. 
II. 
IT GOVERNANCE AND SECURITY OF 
INFORMATION 
Technological 
infrastructure 
is 
critical 
to 
daily 
operations within an organization and should be managed 
with defined processes. Accordingly, IT governance should 
focus on risk and resource management and strategic 
alignment to ensure that the technology and the active 
information adopt corporate objectives, maximizing benefits 
and opportunities as a means of acquiring competitive 
advantage [1].  
IT governance has emerged as an auxiliary tool for 
managers, both in IT and other sectors of an organization, to 
help them comprehend the importance of all sectors working 
in alignment and, therefore more efficiently, in order to 
achieve their common goal [6]. IT is a strategic sector for an 
organization and it aids in revenue generation, contributing 
to the development of new technologies and technical 
support for other sectors. The Chief Information Officer 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

(CIO) must establish an effective governance, to improve 
the performance and success of the organization, supporting 
business strategies and plan of action [5].  
Effective governance requires that the managers set 
standards 
and 
regulations 
for 
information 
assets. 
Information security is not only restricted to minimizing 
risks and failures, but it also affects the reputation of the 
organization, depending on how it acts on disaster recovery. 
The recovery organization defines the values and access 
permission information, thus everyone involved, customers, 
employees, among others, come to rely on the credibility of 
the organization [7]. Almost all organizations have their 
automated processes in their information systems, in order 
to ensure the efficient delivery of their services [17].  
It is know that security is a method to protect the 
information against various types of threats ensuring 
continuity of business, higher return on investment and 
minimized risk. It is also the practice of ensuring the 
information can only be read, heard, altered or transmitted 
by people or organizations that have the right to do so. The 
main goals are confidentiality, integrity and availability. 
Confidentiality is the protection against theft and espionage. 
Integrity is the protection against non-authorized changes. 
Availability is the automated and secure access to the 
information users [12] [18].  
Information security is achieved by means of an 
appropriate set of controls, which might include, policies, 
procedures, software, hardware, among others. All these 
controls need to be established, implemented, monitored, 
reviewed and improved in order to achieve the company’s 
business targets. Likewise, security metrics have attracted 
the attention of the community for many years. However, 
the field is still lacking a formal model [16].  
It is necessary that these controls are carried out in 
conjunction with security metrics to measure and compare 
the value of the security provided by different systems and 
settings [8].  
The organization should always conduct audits at 
intervals of predetermined time in order to ascertain whether 
the control objectives, processes and procedures are meeting 
the security requirements of information identified, and if all 
objectives are maintained and implemented by executing 
them as expected. Control Objectives for Information and 
Related Technology (COBIT) aims to help businesses create 
an ideal value, referring to the IT sector, balancing and 
maintaining the resources from this area. Thus, COBIT 
version 5 allows organizations to manage their resources in 
a holistic way, with the goal of an end-to-end IT and 
functional areas considering both internal and external 
interest business [9].  
For the development of a model of maturity level in 
information security, COBIT serves as a helper tool. Thus, 
the asset information gains importance in verifying the 
actual efficiency of the resources used for protection and 
obtaining a level of acceptance that is risky or not for the 
organization, since the information and its security must be 
established during the process of governance. The COBIT 
maturity model is used as basis for the GAIA-MLIS 
maturity model. 
Information, systems, processes that support the 
organization, and even computer networks, are important 
assets to the organization's business. With the view to ensure 
greater 
competitiveness 
and 
visibility, 
the 
security 
information assets should be reviewed each time period and 
verified whether the initial planning is under execution or, 
the initial idea does or does not comply with the reality of 
the organization [7].  
It is a fact that organizations often undergo various types 
of threats to their systems and computer networks, which 
may include, espionage, malicious persons within the 
enterprise and electronic fraud [11]. It is well known that 
organizations should understand the need for improvements 
in regards to risks they face and what targets and plans are 
in place [10].  
Information security is important for any organization, 
whether a public agency with a model of electronic 
government (e-gov), or for a private enterprise [11].  
Many systems are not designed for security. Some 
organizations do not have appropriate processes and 
procedures. It is essential that the requirements of 
information security are identified, analyzed and monitored, 
so that through continuous improvement, targets relating to 
information and its security are being met.  
It is important to evaluate and establish a standard on an 
enterprise maturity level, so that both can be used to 
research through questionnaire or the construction of 
baselines about characteristics related to the use of 
technology. The use of baseline, or digital signature, has 
been used, for example, for establishment of standard and 
profile to network usage, as may be viewed in [21] and [22]. 
The standards ISO / IEC 27001:2005 and 27002:2005 
aim to help IT managers and others, to establish what the 
security requirements are for the information which should 
be adopted. The standards serve as a guideline to develop 
practices and procedures for information security and assist 
in confidence building activities focusing on inter-
organizational guidelines [19] [20]. 
III. 
MODEL OF GAIA-MLIS 
Information is considered by many organizations as the 
asset which causes the most concern [13]. Defined processes 
help managers and employees to identify the requirements 
for decision making in order to protect all assets related to 
information [14].  
The GAIA-MLIS maturity model aims to evaluate the 
level of maturity in information security and examines five 
areas, which are: Hardware, Software, Staff, Facilities and 
Information. All these areas are related to information. 
Through this model, organizations can verify the level of 
maturity in information security, identify if there is any 
deficiency and correct it in order to implement the 
improvement.  
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Figure 1 shows that the information has a centralizing 
role among all assets. Keeping information secure is one of 
the most difficult challenges that organizations have. Given 
that, many resources and processes should be measured by 
GAIA-MLIS model.  
 
A. Maturity Level GAIA-MLIS 
Organizations are concerned with constant intrusions 
into computer systems. Processes in information security 
should be stored in environments that require more efficient 
security not only in computational media, but also in the 
physical environment with committed employees and a 
series of rules and procedures laid down in order to protect 
their information assets.  
Since this procedure is not always carried out by the 
companies, along with the lack of knowledge of the 
importance of information, or non-commitment from the 
directors to the other employees, the creation of tools able to 
verify the security level of information is necessary for 
organizations. Thus, the GAIA-MLIS, model aims to 
analyze the level of maturity in information security in a 
particular company.  
Through GAIA-MLIS, companies can verify what their 
weaknesses are in relation to information security and what 
targets they need to meet to achieve a certain level of 
information 
security. 
Through 
continuous 
planning, 
corporations can use the model in order to check whether 
goals are being met. The proposed model has five levels of 
maturity, which are goals and objectives describing what 
should be achieved by companies regarding the information 
security with a fully managed process.  
The 
maturity 
model 
GAIA-MLIS 
is 
based 
on 
recommendations of COBIT 5 [9] and ISO / IEC 27001 [10] 
and 27002 [11] standards. The GAIA-MLIS maturity levels 
are described below. 
Level 0, no insurance: Processes are not defined in 
information security. There are no defined responsabilities 
for information security policies. Employees and partners 
are unaware or are not trained with awareness programs on 
the importance of information security. Employees, partners 
and third parties do not suffer disciplinary proceedings upon 
the discovery of an information security incident. Shutdown 
policy of employees, partners and third parties policies are 
not 
applied 
upon 
termination 
and 
the 
return 
of 
organization’s information assets. There is no security or 
access control defined process. Physical facilities are 
unsecured. There is no protection of equipment against 
external threats, whether human or environmental. There is 
no an efficient management for the network, avoiding or 
minimizing loss, damage or theft to information assets. 
Asset information is not encrypted. There is no backup 
policy with copies stored in monitored environments with 
access control in an environment protected against external 
threats. Inventories of assets are not identified and there are 
not established or documented. There are no classificaions 
of the importance and values of information. 
Level 1, entry level insurance: Some processes are 
defined in information security. There are no defined sets 
for information security. Staff and partners are unaware or 
are not trained with awareness programs on the importance 
of information security. Employees, partners and third 
parties do not face disciplinary proceedings upon the 
discovery of a security incident information. Shutdown of 
employees, partners and third parties policies are applied 
haphazardly when closing the active. There is no security 
and access control process defined. Physical facilities are 
unsecured. There is some equipment protection against 
external threats, whether they are human or environmental. 
There is a basic management for the network without 
defined processes to avoid or minimize loss, theft or damage 
to information assets. Asset information is not encrypted. 
There are backup policy, but there are no copies stored in 
environments with access control, monitored and protected 
from outside threats. Assets inventory are not identified and 
are no established or documented. There are no 
classifications of the importance and values of information 
assets. 
Level 2, regular insurance: Processes are defined in 
information security. There are few sets of defined 
responsibilities for information security. Staff and partners 
know, but they are not trained in awareness programs on the 
importance of information security. Employees, partners and 
third parties do not suffer disciplinary proceedings when 
some information security incidents are discovered. 
Shutdown of employees, partners and third parties policies 
are applied haphazardly when closing the active. There are 
some control access security set. Physical facilities are 
unsecured. There is some equipment protection against 
external threats, whether they are human or environmental. 
There is a basic management for the network without 
defined processes to avoid or minimize loss, theft or damage 
to information assets. Asset information is not encrypted. 
There are backup policy, but there are copies stored on 
environments without monitoring, access control and 
external threat. Inventories of assets are identified and 
established, but are not documented. There are no 
 
Figure 1. Relationship Areas. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

classifications of the importance and values of information 
assets.  
Level 3, partially safe: Processes are defined in 
information security and there are sets of defined 
responsibilities for information security. Staff and partners 
are trained in awareness programs on the importance of 
information security. Employees, partners and third parties 
sufferers disciplinary proceedings when an information 
security incident is discovered. Shutdown of employees, 
partners and third parties are partially documented. There is 
security and access control procedures defined. Physical 
facilities are protected. There is some equipment protection 
against external threats, whether they are human or 
environmental. There is an efficiently network managed, 
with some defined processes to avoid or minimize loss, theft 
or damage to information assets. Asset information is 
encrypted. There are backup policies and the copies are 
stored in monitored environments with access control and 
with protected against external threats to the environment. 
Inventories of assets are identified and established, but they 
are partially documented. There are classifications of the 
importance and values of information assets are partially 
documented.  
Level 4, fully insured: Processes are defined in 
information security. Sets of responsibilities defined by 
security policy information. Staff and partners are trained in 
awareness programs on the importance of information 
security. Employees, partners and third parties sufferers 
disciplinary proceedings when an information security 
incident is discovered. Shutdown policies of employees, 
partners and third parties are totally documented. Access 
control are defined. Physical facilities are protected. The 
facilities are protected against external threats, both human 
and 
environmental. 
There 
is 
an 
efficient 
network 
management, avoiding or minimizing loss, damage or theft 
to information assets. Asset information is encrypted. There 
are backup policies and the copies are stored in monitored 
environments with access control and with protected against 
external threats to the environment. Inventories of assets are 
identified, 
established 
and 
registered. 
There 
are 
classifications established and the importance and values of 
information assets fully documented. 
The maturity levels possess the following percentages: 
Level 0 has a percentage from 0% to 35%; Level 1 from 
36% to 55%; Level 2 from 56% to 75%; Level 3 from 76% 
to 85%; and Level 4 above 85%. The percentages were 
assigned as described metrics of security levels. The 
empirical study was carried out to create an evaluation 
model for information security by analyzing the areas 
(hardware, software, staff, facilities and information), and 
these weights are an adaptation to what is suggested in the 
groups of ISO/IEC 27002. As observed, the levels are 
described as the overall organizational structure an 
organization might have, due to their maturity in 
information security. It is noteworthy that, through 
measurements of the formal model to assess GAIA-MLIS, 
organizations can plan and check the weaknesses in security 
processes.  
  The five ares (Hardware, software, facilities, staff and 
information) on GAIA-MLIS is addressed as in ISO/IEC 
27002 standard. We may relate the areas of ISO/IEC 27002 
(security policy, organizing information security, asset 
management, human resources security, physical and 
environmental security, communications and operations 
management, 
access 
control, 
information 
system 
acquisitions, development and maintenance, information 
security 
incident 
management, 
business 
continuity 
management and compliance) with five areas of GAIA-
MLIS. 
The evaluation will provide all companies, whether 
public or private, the ability to measure, manage and verify 
the asset information and use metrics to target higher levels 
by structuring its processes according to their needs and 
realities. Thus, the results obtained by supplementation of 
data areas provide greater control of the process used in 
information security, as well as manage the risks that 
organizations are subjected to every day.    
IV. 
TESTS AND RESULTS 
As means to verify and validate the maturity model 
GAIA-MLIS, three organizational structures were analyzed. 
The companies were not divided into sectors groups (service 
provider, bussiness company, etc), because we wanted to 
have a general sampling.  
A questionnaire with thirty questions was administered in 
order to identify strengths and weaknesses in the processes 
of the five areas. The objective of the questions is to 
perform a diagnostic analysis of each area (hardware, 
software, people and facilities). The questions were 
developed based on the suggested groups of ISO/IEC 27002. 
There are five questions for the groups hardware, software, 
people and facilities, and ten questions related to the 
information area.  The diagnose performed involves the 
application evaluation of security requirements related to 
policies and rules on the five suggested areas, assessing the 
investment degree and the use of technologies to guarantee 
each one of these areas. The weights of the questions were 
defined in an empirical way, and the information area has a 
higher number of questions than the other areas due to the 
fact that it is the analysis focus of the model. The mentioned 
areas have an assigned weight of: 30% for information, 25% 
for hardware, 25% for software, 15% for employees and 5% 
for facilities. These weights are an adaptation to what is 
suggested in the groups of ISO/IEC 27002. 
Figure 2 below is a comparison of results from the 
analysis of different companies.  
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
 
Figure 2. Results. 
 
According to figure 2, Company 1 and 2 are at Level 1 
maturity in information security. Meanwhile, Company 3 is 
at Level 2. Results show that the software area has more 
investment than others and facilities area has the lowest 
investment. A monitored environment may be able to inhibit 
harmful actions caused by employees or people who do not 
work in the organization. However, if the company does not 
provide training in accordance with the rules and 
punishments applied to employees, they face the risk of 
information security threats caused by internal factors. 
These results indicate that there are more weaknesses 
than strengths in processes of the assessed networks, leaving 
companies with a level of information security level which 
is fragile and more susceptible to certain information 
security situations. Thus, companies should check and 
improve their processes, and directors may have GAIA-
MLIS system as an analysis tool.  
The system has proved to be efficient in indicating what 
level of maturity in information security the companies fall 
under. Figure 3 shows the trend lines for the three 
companies analyzed. These lines show their current status. 
Thereby, the results obtained in the tests enable defined 
strategies for improving processes and also indicate what 
their weaknesses are.  
 
 
Figure 3: Tendency.  
 
The GAIA-MLIS model contributes to a better 
management of information assets, analyzing five areas 
(hardware, software, staff, facilities and information), 
aiming to formalize metrics and levels of security. It creates 
value, in the sense that it allows for planned investments and 
formal documentation, defining standards and procedures 
for IT processes. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
We presented the GAIA-MLIS model that aim to analyze 
maturity level for information security in enterprise, 
observing five areas (hardware, software, staff, facilities and 
information) through a diagnostic evaluation. We used three 
enterprise as object of analysis and we may see strengths and 
weaknesses in their areas of safety. With the results, we may 
evaluate what are the strengths and weaknesses of enterprise 
in each area, and what needs investments to improve the 
information security level. 
The model helps organizations focus their efforts to solve 
specific problems in each one of the areas where the 
diagnostic evaluation identified a problem. The questionnaire 
application allows the exact identification of the area that 
needs investments in order to strengthen the security and, 
thus, improve the maturity level of the organization.  
The flexibility of the analysis demonstrates that GAIA-
MLIS system is able to state clearly the needs of each 
evaluated area. With the obtained results, the CIOs discuss 
the investment needs for all evaluated areas. Therefore, the 
CEO knows that the organization must change or create new 
policies and targets in order to aim at a better standard for the 
level of information security, demonstrating to partners and 
customers their concern with the integrity of all company 
assets, mainly with information.  
Companies should establish policies and goals to aim for 
a higher level of security. GAIA-MLIS system provides 
companies metrics to identify the strengths and weaknesses 
of the processes. Investment in equipment and software 
techniques are important. However, if employees are not 
committed and if there is no a physical infrastructure able to 
protect the information assets, the organization will not be 
able to provide security for its network.  
The proposed model achieved its objective of performing 
a security diagnosis evaluation, more specifically in 
hardware, software, people, facilities and information. It also 
helps the organizations on focus efforts to solve specific 
problems in each one of the areas in which the diagnostic 
evaluation found a problem. 
An advantage of the model is the simplicity and the fast 
way with which it evaluates and diagnoses security maturity 
levels on the proposed subareas. 
The corrective actions are directed according to the result 
of the diagnostic evaluation, and they aim to define policies 
of investment and adjustment on the analyzed areas in order 
to improve the information security. 
In future works, we intend to analyze other companies 
separated by sector (service provider, public agencies, etc), 
aiming to adjust and improve the results according to 
characteristics common to organizations.  
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was supported by: SETI/Fundação Araucária 
and MCT/CNPq for Betelgeuse Projects’ financial support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. V. Solms, K. L. Thomson and P. M. Maninjwa, “Information 
security 
governance 
control 
through 
comprehensive 
policy 
architectures”, Proc. IEEE ISSA, IEEE Press, Aug 2011, pp 1-6. 
[2] X. Yuan, Y. Zhou and Z. Qian, “Information Security of Power 
Corporations and its Reinforcement Measures”, Proc. IEEE CICED, 
IEEE Press, Sep 2012, pp 1-7.  
[3] P. I. Wang, “Information Security Knowledge and Behavior: An 
Adapted Model of Tecnology Acceptance”, Proc. IEEE ICETC, IEEE 
Press, June 2010, pp v2-364 – v2-367. 
[4] L. Qingguo and Z. Wei, “Strengthen Militaru Academy’s Information 
Security Management”, Proc. IEEE MINES, IEEE Press, Nov 2009, 
pp 182 – 186. 
[5] J. Zhang, W. Yuan and W. Qi, “Research on Security Management 
and Control System of Information System In IT Governance”, Proc. 
IEEE CSSS, IEEE Press, Jun 2011, pp 668-673. 
[6] P. Weill and J.W. Ross, IT Governance: How top performers manage 
IT decision rights for superior results, Boston: Harvard Business 
Press, 2004.  
[7] M. Sajko and N. Hadjina, “Information Security Governance and 
How to Accomplish it”, Proc. IEEE MIPRO, IEEE Press, May 2011, 
pp 1516 – 1521. 
[8] K. Sun, S. Jajodia, J. Li, Y. Cheng, W. Tang and A. Singhal, 
“Automatic Security Analysis Using Security Metrics”, Proc. IEEE 
MILCOM, IEEE Press, Nov 2011, pp 1207-1212.  
[9] ISACA, COBIT 5, A Business Framework for the Governance and 
Management of Enterprise IT. ISACA. 2012. 
[10] ISO/IEC, Information technology – Security techniques – Information 
security management system - Requirements. ISO/IEC. 1ed. 2005. 
[11] ISSO/IEC, Information technology – Security techiniques – Code of 
practice for information security management. ISO/IEC. 1ed. 2005. 
[12] M. Moyo, H. Abdullah and R. C. Nienaber, “Information Security 
Risk Management in Small-Scale Organisations: A Case Study of 
Secondary Schools Computerised Information Systems”, Proc. IEEE 
ISSA, IEEE Press, Aug, 2013, pp 14 – 16. 
[13] L. Hong-li and Z. Ying-ju, “Measuring effectiveness of information 
security management”, Proc. IEEE CNMT, IEEE Press, Jan, 2009, pp 
1 -4. 
[14] M. Ratchakom and N. Prompoon, “A Process Model Design and Tool 
Support for Information Assets Access Control using Security 
Patterns”, Proc. IEEE JCSSE, IEEE Press, May, 2011, pp 307 – 312. 
[15] M. Simonsson and P. Johnson, “The IT organization modeling and 
assessment tool: Correlating IT governace maturity with the effect of 
IT”, Proc. IEEE HICSS, IEEE Press, Jan, 2008, pp 1 – 10. 
[16] L. Krautsevich, F. Martinelli and A. Yautsiukhin, “Formal Analysis 
of Security Metrics with Defensive Actions”, Proc. IEEE UIC/ATC, 
IEEE Press, Dec, 2013, pp 458 – 465. 
[17] A. Chakraborty, A. Sengupta and C. Mazumdar, “A Formal Approach 
to Information Security Metrics”, Proc. IEEE EAIT, IEEE Press, Dec, 
2012, pp 439 – 442. 
[18] B. Karabey and N. Baykal, “Information Security Metric Integrating 
Enterprise Objectives”, Proc. IEEE ICCST, IEEE Press, Oct, 2009, pp 
144 – 148. 
[19] J. Anttila, K. Jussila, J. Kajava and I. Kamaja, “Integrating ISO/IEC 
27001 and other managerial discipline standards with processes of 
management in organizations”, Proc. IEEE ARES, IEEE Press, Aug, 
2012, pp 425 – 436. 
[20] A. Iqbal, D. Horie, Y. Goto and J. Cheng, “A Database for Effective 
Utilization of ISO/IEC 27002”, Proc. IEEE FCST, IEEE Press, Oct, 
2009, pp 607 – 612. 
[21] E. Gomede, M. L. Proença JR and R. M. Barros, “Networks Baseline 
and Analytic Hierarchy Process: An Approach to Strategic 
Decisions”, IADIS International Conference Applied Computing 
2012, 2012, Madrid. Processing of IADIS International Conference 
Applied Computing 2012. Madrid, 2012. p. 34-41. 
[22] M. L. Proença JR, C. Coppelmans, M. Bottoli and L. S. Mendes, 
“Baseline to help with network management”, ICETE 2004 – 
Springer. (Org.). e-Business and Telecommunication Networks. 
Dordrecht: Springer, 2006, v. 1, p. 158-166. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

