Security and Safety Processes in Czech Republic Universities 
 
Lucia Duricova, Martin Hromada, Jan Mrázek 
Faculty of Applied Informatics 
Tomas Bata University in Zlin 
Zlin, Czech Republic 
E-mail: {duricova, hromada, jmrazek}@fai.utb.cz 
 
 
Abstract— This paper focuses on security and safety 
requirements and processes to help universities in developing 
more effective security and safety risks management system.  
The proposal is based on management techniques and on 
understanding primary processes in university buildings. The 
solution proposes a system which is integrated as a 
management system in the commercial sector. However, this 
proposal only takes in account special conditions, such as 
requirements for students, which are present in the university 
buildings. The proposed system helps enforce more effective 
security and safety measures in school facilities and in 
universities.  
Keywords- Law Requirements; Risk Management; Safety; 
Security; Soft Targets. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The aim of this paper is the proposal of a security and 
safety management system in universities with software 
support. Safety and security in academic institutions is a 
common topic, especially with school buildings being the 
target of different attacks [10] [11] [12]. The objects, that 
need to be under the security and safety management system, 
include structures or facilities that are visited daily by 
hundreds or thousands of students. The paper is focused on 
understanding the processes and also on the specification of 
security and safety risks. 
This research concentrates on the system integration 
which has been applied into school facilities and universities. 
The current situation could be different in other countries.  In 
the Czech Republic, the current state could be presented as a 
system without any special security requirements. The 
school facilities have problems with financial resources that 
could be used towards security techniques and with 
knowledges about efficient measures. These statements are 
based on studies which have been done in school facilities 
such as kindergartens, primary schools and secondary 
schools [1] [2] [3]. 
University management faces to a different problem. 
Universities want to be more open towards their 
surroundings for students and potential students. This is the 
reason why security attacks have happened at Czech 
Republic Universities [10] [12]. This statement resulted from 
interviews with management at Czech Universities. 
 Universities could apply basic principles of management 
to manage processes because the structure is similar as a 
commercial organization aiming to gain/earn a profit. Risk is 
a subjective concept that needs to be viewed and quantified 
on an individual basis [4]. 
This research defines processes which could be 
implemented into software. The level of security and safety 
situation at universities depends on the correct setting of 
measures. The software has to know the processes that occur 
at the university on daily basis and also the ideal situation. 
The ideal situation is represented by the values that are used 
for the fuzzy statements. The fuzzy statements are used for 
the decision making process [3]. 
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. In 
Section 2, we defined the elementary law requirements 
which have to be integrated into the software. This had been 
done in order to simplify requirements for the management 
of school facilities and universities. In Section 3, we defined 
the categorization of the physical structure of a university 
building. The categorization could have an impact on 
security and safety incidents. In Section 4, we described the 
classification of each building or part of the building by the 
impact to emergency incidents. The aims of access are 
classified in section 5. According to the aim of access, the 
system should define the typical behavior and then identify 
NOK (Non-conformity) of process. In section 6, the impact 
of risk sources is defined. In section 7, special events are 
identified. Software solution must identify special events by 
values that represents it; for example, planning in calendar 
(user define special event in application). After that, the 
software will propose special conditions that have to be 
fulfilled before action. In the section 8, the proposal of 
security and safety solution is explained. This part describes 
system realization (the processes have been already specified 
in the previous section 2-8). The real life case study is 
expressed in section 9. The last section concludes this 
research paper.  
The paper proposes one system solution that could 
effectively manage security and safety situation in the school 
facilities and the universities. The software could supply 
missing knowledges to management of the school facilities 
and universities. The research relates to the smart home 
security and intelligent management system that could 
support school facilities. The fuzzy logic is the modern 
theory which belongs to artificial intelligence field [5]. 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

II. 
LAWS REQUIREMENTS WAS INTEGRATED TO SCHOOL 
FACILITIES IN CZECH REPUBLIC  
Law requirements are aimed to security and safety 
requirement that are integrated into school facilities and also 
universities, but it is not limited to this kind of facilities. In 
Czech Republic, two groups of universities are defined. 
Institution, which belongs to the first level of university, can 
perform role of a researcher (development and innovation). 
Each student must respect internal directives at university 
and at other buildings that are part of the campus. It is the 
first requirement that should be followed. In the proposal, it 
could be utilized as implementation support [3]. 
The internal directives are defined for appropriate 
behavior in object and also there is applied in educational 
system. If these directives have special security and safety 
option, it could be called as security and safety directives; 
however, it must be applied into other processes and also 
into related directives. 
In safety solution, Czech Republic has two groups of 
requirements. The first is an Occupational Health and Safety 
(OHS). These requirements do not affect only employees and 
also students [8]. On the other hand, Czech Republic has 
specified requirements for Fire Protection (FP). This second 
group is based on primary firefighting building technical 
solution which is designed in project plan by authorized 
engineer. This solution is implemented to project in the 
preparatory development phase. Other fire requirements are 
derived from this solution which is implemented in operation 
of facilities. The special safety conditions for primary, 
secondary, and high school are specified in Czech law; 
however, 
these 
conditions 
are 
not 
established 
for 
universities. It could be utilized for definition of primary 
requirements for this type of objects. That means, it could be 
specified for schools, universities, theatres, shopping centers 
and other objects which fall into soft targets category. 
III. 
PHYSICAL STRUCTURE OF UNIVERSITY BUILDINGS 
This section considers the division of parts of university. 
University buildings are used to educational process or to 
other supported processes. This categorization is important 
for the proposal of software solving. The proposal of 
software has implemented this structure into the main 
program.  
A. Size and Separation University Building 
The university consists of educational buildings, 
individual faculties, and other buildings. The number of 
visitors is closely related to the location and territorial 
jurisdiction. There is a relevant assessment of objects whose 
activities are closely related to the processes in the 
university. The building or premises separation should be 
evaluated mainly from two perspectives, namely the 
distribution of individual objects and their connectivity with 
a university. 
B. Distribution of Relevant Faculties and Buildings 
The dislocation of individual objects should be addressed 
by linking effectiveness ties and with location of the object. 
This aspect should be examined in the relation to the 
transport or access of individuals into the object, and also 
due to the timetable of the teaching process and other 
aspects. A parts of the university are defined as the basic 
building block. 
The map of dislocation helps visitors to familiarize with 
the localization of individual rooms or increase the degree of 
orientation of the building. The software support will define 
requirements for the parts of university, and it could help to 
solve incidents quickly and effectively. An expert who will 
make decisions could see the structure of building and the 
number of persons in object. It could be useful for 
emergency. The main reason is to use the plans for solving 
incidents and security and safety situations. The proposal of 
the system security and safety integration implements plans 
for support into decision making process. Experts can offer 
effective and smart solutions if they are informed about the 
dislocations and security devices layout [2]. 
In individual building complex, where the systematic 
solution is implemented, the efficiency of safety and security 
is lower than in the whole area. In the second case, the 
distance between university buildings is different in each 
educational institution. Therefore, this is the one of many 
inputs that is supplied to the decision making process.  
While the student is moving between buildings, there is 
higher probability of safety and security emergency 
incidents. In the software solution, this could be represented 
by numerical value. Due to this value, the expert is aware 
about the current situation. 
This is important fact, especially, if we are talking about 
the possibility of the injury risks and also repeated controls 
on re-entry to another parts of the university [4].  
IV. 
 DEFINITION OF UNIVERSITY BUILDINGS  
This section deals with specifications for each kind of 
university building (see Figure 1). This definition considers 
three parts: 
 
Complex structure, 
 
the main and supported aim of the object, 
 
the primary visitors aim. 
In this section, primary options are presented. These 
options can improve security and safety situations at 
universities. 
 
 
Figure 1. Definition of university buildings. 
The definition of university buildings is the first part of 
object 
categorization. 
According 
to 
the 
building 
categorization, the software can identify input requirements. 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

If several objects are located in one central place, there is 
a need to consider their purposes. Individual components 
should be analysed as an individual unit. 
This part of paper has been reflected physical structure of 
university buildings. After this analytical process, the 
analyses of visitors are followed. The next process examines 
the ties between visitor aim and operation requirements. This 
process will be applied in software. When the evaluation is 
negative, then the visitor aim is different than university aim. 
The management should implement security and safety rules 
into this process. These rules have to be implemented into 
process, have to be documented and also controlled. The 
main aim of the University building is education. Another 
object aims are supporting and the object have to be adapted 
to these requirements. In this situation, there are reciprocity 
ties. It could be utilized to achieve greater safety and security 
situation.  
V. 
EVALUATION OF USER ACCESS 
Each category of the school facility is specified by the 
aim and function rules which are closely related to the person 
who sets the access to the facilities. For the effective security 
and safety options, the study and evaluation of these ties and 
its attributes is important. The intersection of the attributes 
should be used for effective decision-making in the crisis 
situations; for example: public course and common classes.  
 
 
Figure 2. The definition of users. 
According to the specification (primary building, second 
visitors), the management should define the security and 
safety requirements and furthermore system options. The 
effective measures should set up rules for visitors in building 
and manage their movement. The measures have an impact 
on incident probability. The software will monitor visitors by 
the effective measures. The visitor has to apply for access by 
an assigned card.  The assigned card has given rules that 
correspond with the visitor aim. The categorization of visitor 
with assigned card is depicted in Figure 2. This solution 
could be implemented into a program and transferred into the 
soft targets net. The management of solution could be faster 
and more effective. The software will replace expert 
knowledges and then the manager of the object can specify 
the internal object knowledges. 
VI. 
IMPACT OF RISK SOURCES 
This part of the paper will describe causes of the 
incidents that could happen in university buildings. In case, 
that the management of university will know root cause of 
incident, then the setting of permanent measures will be 
more effective, because the measures will be implemented 
for specific event. In the paper, two primary groups of risk 
sources are defined (human factors, technical factors). These 
two factors are represented in software by numerical value. 
In each category, whole range of the values that represents 
status of these factors is defined. 
A. Impact and context with measures -  Human factors 
The factors, which are described in this section, are 
resulted of survey in educational buildings. This factor also 
occurs in commercial building; however, the management 
coordinates it with ISO standard. The human factors are 
important for definition of typical human behavior and it 
could be implemented to software solving. In the next part, 
the main points of human factors are defined. 
 
Cause of security incident by inappropriate 
behaviour (unwanted conduct). 
 
Occurrence of human error negligence, ignorance - 
without the presence of variations in operational 
practices. 
 
Lack of definition and application of security 
measures in operation. 
 
Establishment of internal procedures and rules with 
the help of guidelines that define the desired 
conditions and the required visitor behaviour. 
 
The implementation of measures and procedures of 
the directives in the actual operation of the 
facilities. 
 
Monitoring compliance with the security measures 
binding to the desired level. 
It is only the first part of risks. The second part is 
connected to the technical factors.  
B. Impact and context with measures -  Technical factors 
The technical components are used to security measures 
and also for other use. The technical components, which are 
used to other use, could have impact to security and safety 
situation in object. Security technical components are used 
to achieve more effective monitoring and permanent 
controlling in object [4]. The security components are 
designed to support managers and experts. The causes of 
technical difficulties are defined: 
 
Improper installation of equipment - technical 
failure of the device or other parts. 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
The failure of the technical component caused by 
its use. 
 
Short circuit was caused by other activities. 
 
Closely related to the definition of procedures for 
the installation of technical equipment and 
functional tests and more. 
 
Closely related to the defined intervals to check the 
technical component devices. 
 
Specification of the possible effects of the above 
mentioned equipment. 
The risk sources are implemented to the proposal as inputs 
for the analytical processes. The proposal of software 
solving is based on the object characteristics and the sources 
of risks.  
VII. SPECIAL EVENTS IN UNIVERSITIES 
In the research, each process is implemented into a 
flowchart. It should be integrated to security and safety 
solution. For integration, primary Deming’s cycle (PDCA 
model) is chosen. Table I. defines events that can occur at 
the University and educational objects. The next part of the 
proposal will define the preventive actions in event planning. 
TABLE I.  
  THE CHARACTERISTIC OF SEPARATION IN PROCESSES [2] 
Num. 
The separation in university processes 
The Process 
The Separation 
Groups of person 
1. 
 Educational 
Admission process 
Prospective students 
Enrolment to studies 
Acceptance 
of 
candidates 
The beginning of 
the semester – full-
time study 
Enrolled students 
The beginning of 
the 
semester 
– 
correspondence 
course 
Enrolled students 
Exam period 
Students 
who 
have 
been granted credits 
(full-time 
and 
correspondent). 
Final exam 
Students 
who 
graduated and fulfil 
student’s 
requirements. 
2. 
 
Public events 
Conference, 
workshops 
and 
other 
regulate 
actions. 
Invited 
guests, 
acceptable 
reservations, 
payments. 
Open door day and 
other actions. 
Public actions. 
3. 
 
Commercial 
sector 
Operation 
of 
commercial sector. 
Clients and business 
partners. 
Meetings 
and 
workshops 
organized 
by 
the 
commercial sector. 
Clients and business 
partners (it could be 
public action). 
This part of paper defines primary events in educational 
processes; however, behavior and interest of students in free 
time period is not presented in these analyses. Free time 
period is period between two teaching units or two groups 
of activities.  
VIII. THE PROPOSAL OF SECURITY AND SAFETY SOLUTION 
The proposal has been implemented to two groups of 
university buildings. In the new buildings or facilities, the 
proposal should be included in plan documentation for 
construction. In existing buildings, the application of this 
proposal is more demanding because of the processes must 
not be suspended. Both categories are based on similar 
principle. For the proposed application, fuzzy logic was 
chosen. The processes definitions are demonstrated in 
Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. Analytical process and software integration. 
Fuzzy logic is based on analysis of real numbers 
between 0 and 1. Fuzzy logic works with fuzzy statements 
that 
are 
constructed 
from 
expert 
experiences 
and 
knowledges. 
The first analytical part is based on the object 
categorization. The software inputs are objects that have 
defined characteristic properties and measures. The software 
analyzes the current state in the object and also the control 
statements. If the current state does not correspond with the 
required state, the software defines immediate actions or 
decision making actions [3]. 
A. The proposal for educational object integration 
 
Analysis the current state (definition of buildings 
aim, visitors aim, events, categorization of teaching 
units and processes and definition of acceptable 
and unacceptable risks). 
 
The definition of root causes (safety and security 
solution and suggestibility of other processes in the 
objects). 
 
The definition of permanent corrective actions 
(PDCA model). 
 
The repeated security and safety analysis (law 
requirements and management requirements). 
Figure 4. shows designed ties between measures in 
educational objects. The measures are defined in planning 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

process and also in operator process. Users should define 
input attributes and this attributes could be set by experts or 
by building documentations. 
 
Figure 4. Integration into educational objects. 
The next part defines proposal for the division of 
educational rooms. 
 
Specific places in object – define the requirements 
to the access, the requirements for the manipulation 
with the materials and the machines, definition of 
the safety procedures for working process, the 
definition of room aim and definition of risk 
attributes. 
 
Non-public space object - these spaces belong to 
group premises accessible to the public; however, 
the access control does not require a high level of 
management. The management defines the same 
attributes as previous. In these places, specific 
objects (machine and materials) should not be 
placed. 
 
The public space at university – it is not public for 
everyone (only on Open day door or other specific 
events); however, the management defines public 
space as a space, where every person who has aim 
to be in university can move. 
Access to university facilities should be managed and 
monitored. In case, that the part of the building is used for 
commercial purposes, the rules for the minimization of 
possible creation of security incidents should be defined. 
These rules cannot influence the main activities of the 
university and supported processes. 
B. The categorization of system layout 
 
University areal - defined territory forms a single 
unit. The university areal consists of several 
buildings with undeveloped land between them. 
The complex should be bordered. 
 
The simple structure of the university buildings – 
the university is formed by one or more connected 
buildings (mostly faculties). 
 
The complex structure of the university buildings - 
multiple buildings with different distance between 
them that are in competence of university (located 
at the site of one city or the structure also affects 
flights to another city) [2]. 
 
Those types of structures guaranties safety and security 
procedures which are specified especially in their 
dislocation. In the case of the complex there is a possibility 
of managing the entry and exit of the building. The 
categorization will be set in software. It means, we must use 
description that is written above for the implementation in a 
school facilities and a university.  
Other approaches are defined separately and it causes 
that measures are not as effective as can be. The software 
support will economize financial support and reduces 
requirements for security operators. These are the main two 
reasons why the managers and directors do not want to 
invest money to security solutions. 
IX. 
REAL-LIFE CASE STUDY 
The software could help the academic objects. If a 
university campus is included into the software, an expert 
can see where people are and what they are doing. If some 
incident threatens, the expert could have a number of people 
in the building immediately.  
A. The fire in the building 
In the software we can see, where the fire is, what cause it, 
who is threaten and what decision expert should do. 
Without the software, we could lose time. We could see 
where the fire is; for example, fire control panel, but we 
cannot see other information as access, number of visitors, 
the position of the resources for extinguishing. Other 
information could be integrated to one system that could 
provide the expert decision making. Nowadays, the 
universities integrate more systems in an object; however, 
the management is different for each other. This proposal 
could integrate it together. The aim is to unite each output 
from central unit that manage these components. If the 
software knows the visitor aim, the expert also knows that 
visitors are not able to orient in the building. 
The reasoning is based on fuzzy rule in the software. The 
fuzzy rules use the linguistic variables. The form of fuzzy 
rule is: 
If x ϵ A and y ϵ B then z ϵ C, where A, B, and C are fuzzy 
sets. 
B. Example for fuzzy reasoning 
If (security coefficient of events 1 is medium) and 
(number of visitors is high) then (security measures are 
medium). 
The degree of support for the variable “security measures” 
is defined by fuzzy set “medium”. The degree of support for 
the variable “security coefficient” is defined by fuzzy set 
“medium” and the degree of support for the variable 
“number of visitors” is defined by fuzzy set “high”. The 
underlying idea is with increasing number of checks of 
propositions in premise; the more suggestions could be 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

derivate. For the degree of support for the truth of the fuzzy 
proposition “security measures are medium”, the fuzzy 
implication must be defined. The fuzzy statement defines 
the degree of support for the fuzzy rule. The defuzzification 
is process in which the one shape value is determined from 
the interval [5]. 
C. The software solution 
The access for visitors is monitored by a card. They will 
obtain cards in registration process. Management rules are 
defined with an event plan. After the software is 
familiarized with the plans, the measures will be done. 
This part of paper applies the application into processes in 
the universities and the school facilities. The measures will 
be supported by the expert groups. The expert groups are 
represented by fuzzy statements in software. That is the 
main reason why this solution could be effective and the 
management does not need to know any special knowledges 
about security and safety decision making. The research is 
aimed to software support; however, we still need the 
support of training for effective decision making; for 
example: employee training. The employee training is 
aimed on a crises situation. They will manage crises 
situations; for example: attack in a school. 
X. 
CONCLUSION 
The main advantage is the system approach which 
should manage security and safety situation at universities. 
The system integration could increase effectivity of all 
processes. In this paper, the security and safety proposal was 
presented as a system solution which is used in World 
Corporation, and also companies and it is called 
management systems with software support. This paper 
describes primary processes and identifies possible 
weaknesses in processes which could be used as an 
opportunity for improve. These methods are certificated by 
authorized subject and the effectiveness is verified every 
day.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Internal Grant Agency of 
Tomas Bata University in Zlin under the project No. 
IGA/FAI/2016/012.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] L. Fennely and M. Perry, “ The Handbook for School Safety 
and Security,” 1st ed., Elsevier, 2014, ISBN: 978-0-12-
800568-2. 
[2] L. Prochazkova and M. Hromada, “ The Proposal System for 
the Safety Assesment of Soft Targets with Focus on School 
Facilities,” Proceeding of 3rd CER Comparative: SCIEMCEE 
Publishing, Vol. II, pp.: 30-34, ISBN: 978-0-9928772-6-2. 
[3] L. Duricova Prochazkova and M. Hromada. “The Proposal of 
the Soft Targets Security”. Advences in Intelligent Systems 
and Computing, Automation Control Theory Perspectives in 
Intelligent Systems. Proceedings of the 5th Computer Science 
On-line Conference 2016 (CSOC2016), Vol3, Springer, pp.: 
337-345. ISSN 2194-5357, ISBN 978-3-319-33387-8, DOI 
10.1007/978-3-319-33389-2. 
[4] Ch. Sennewald, and C. Baillie, “Effective Security 
Management,” 6th ed.,Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2016, ISBN: 978-
0-12-802774-5. 
[5] T. J. Ross, “Fuzzy logic with engineering applications” 3rd 
Edition, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 978-0-470-74376-8. 
[6] ISO 31000:2009, Risk management – Principles and 
guidelines. 
[7] ISO/IEC 27001:2013, Information Technology- Security 
Techniques- Information Security Management Systems – 
Requirements. 
[8] British Standard BS OHSAS 18001/2007, Occupational 
Health and Safety Management Systems- Requirements. 
[9] ISO 9000:2005, Quality Management Systems- Fundamentals 
and Vocabulary. 
[10] http://www.bdlive.co.za/national/education/2016/05/16/arson-
attack-at-university-of-johannesburg-caused-damage-
estimated-at-r100m-university-says 
[11] http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/ap/article-2792116/1-
killed-knife-attack-Czech-school.html 
[12] http://edition.cnn.com/2016/02/29/us/ohio-school-incident/
 
 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

