Interception Methods and GSM
Michal Sustek, Miroslav Marcanik, Milan Oplustil, Pavel Tomasek, Zdenek Urednicek
Faculty of Applied Informatics
Tomas Bata University in Zlin
Zlin, Czech Republic
Email: {sustek, marcanik, moplustil, tomasek, urednicek}@fai.utb.cz
Abstract—
Nowadays,
eavesdropping
is
a
real
problem,
whether it is about the interception of personal or corporate
information. Current technologies enable us to use a wide
variety of listening devices and methods. It may not be just a
recording on a dictaphone, but also the use of vibration. The
issue of eavesdropping is very popular today and many people
and organizations work on solutions to prevent it. The work of
these companies is mostly successful, but a problem still
remains related to GSM (Groupe Special Mobile) interception.
This contribution provides an insight into the principles of
defense against the complex problem of eavesdropping. In any
case, people have to be careful and consider what kind of
information is communicated using cell phones and other
technologies and what are the possibilities of their interception.
Keywords-eavesdropping;
interception;
GSM;
5G;
wire-
tracking.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Today, the boom of information and communication
technologies
contributes
to
an
increasingly
connected
society.
Modern
technology
surrounds
us
and
it
is,
therefore, not surprising that almost every one of us owns a
cellular phone. We all use it to communicate information.
GSM phones are often used to communicate corporate
information of critical importance. With the development of
technology on transmission, we can see the development
options of technologies on sound capturing and interpreting
this information back [1]. It leads to a risk of using
interception devices.
Therefore, it is necessary to know
what
principles
and
technologies
are
used
in
the
implementation of the interception, but also how to prevent
it [2]. Eavesdropping can affect everybody in the world.
Countermeasures exist for most eavesdropping methods.
However, GSM interception presents a specific issue It is
difficult to identify an offender performing the passive form
of eavesdropping. It forms part of the problem which must
be dealt in the future.
Defense-technical inspection is the primary method [4]
used to detect interception devices in a room or on other
devices. This method is nondestructive for the device itself.
Inspection is performed on suspicion of eavesdropping
occurrence. An authorized
person performs an initial
analysis of space aimed at identifying possible risks and the
type
of
interception
device.
In
an
organization,
the
inspection can be made visible, so that the employees of the
company knew, but it can also be done discreetly, outside
office hours, in which case the employees are unaware. This
systematic inspection is supported by technical facilities [4],
both for the detection of interception and subsequent
security premises and equipment.
In some areas, it is mandatory to have devices for
protecting against interception. Nowadays, with compelling
interception
devices,
it
is
possible
to
see
several
technologies used in wiretaps. These technologies include a
contact
or
non-contact
scanning
of information
from
windows, or the use of GSM phones, radio interception,
direct recording on a recording unit, as well as passive and
active GSM interception.
We should pay attention to protect relevant information,
whether by technical means and/or by using common sense.
This
contribution
presents
the
basic
outline
of
eavesdropping. It presents some methods of interception and
countermeasure. That contains technical, regime measures
and identification method including the defense-technical
inspection.
Section 1 presents the GSM technology in general
including mobile stations, the next generation 5G networks,
and their architecture. Section 2 focuses on interception
methods and protection methods against interception. The
primary part of defense against eavesdropping is a defense-
technical inspection. This inspection contains physical
control, radio analysis, detection of nonlinearity and other
measurements. It is used in protection of meeting places.
The main goal is an identification of interception devices
and defense against them. Devices against which one must
protect are contact and contactless devices, unauthorized use
of GSM phones, radio interception and record unit. GSM
interception is divided into active and passive form. The
active form is reliable, but it is easier to identify. On the
other hand, the passive version of GSM interception is
almost invisible, but it is not as reliable and it is useless in
case of a moving device. The resources, which are used for
defense, are GSM jammers, security wallpaper, radio
analyzers and more.
II.
GSM TECHNOLOGY
GSM
technology
is
based
on
ETSI
(European
Telecommunications Standards Institute) standards [8]. The
211
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

primary document is standard "GSM - Phase first". In the
development of this technology, these were several GSM
phases until today's generation was created (Long Term
Evolution,
hereinafter,
the
LTE
[8])
and
for
future
generations 5G. The GSM network consists of mobile
stations,
the
base
station
subsystem,
a
network
and
switching
subsystem
and
operational
subsystems.
Subsequently, we will define several types of GSM services,
such as telematics services, advanced services, additional
services, the Subscriber Identity Module (SIM) card and
phone.
GSM coverage area is divided into bundles. Each bundle
consists of 7 cells. Inside each cell, there is a base station
assigned to a particular group of channels and provides
communication with mobile subscribers. In the event when
the area of all the cells is equal to at least the interference
area, it is possible to use the same channel group in all cells
[6].
To obtain better properties of the system it is possible to
use sectorization. The entire GSM area is divided into a
smaller number of cells. This leads to the need to increase
the number of base stations because the cells are smaller,
but the covered area has the same size.
The number of required channels is not changing but the
number of base stations growths from 7 to 21. Their number
can be reduced again to 7 by placing three separate
directional antennas at the intersection of three neighboring
cells.
A.
Mobile station
The GSM user communicates using mobile stations,
which means not only the receiver/transmitter (cell phone),
but also a SIM module. The SIM card is used as unique
identifier for user within the network.
Source coding performs of the encoder source, which
digitizes the analog signal and the digital side eliminates
redundant data contained in the audio. The main goal of this
step is to reduce the data flow to a minimum since each
channel has its limitations. For removing these frequencies,
a parametric method is used. The signal is divided into 20
msec segments. Then it is used to each segment LPC
(Linear Predictive Coding) filter and LRP (Long-Range
fading Prediction) to encryption.The resulting signal is
composed of 188 bits, which carry information about calling
and 72 bits, which carry information about filters. These two
parts make up the frame of length 260 bits. There are 50 of
these frames in one second, therefore, the bit rate is 13kbps.
To
minimize
unwanted
signals,
such
as
noise,
interference, and scattering, channel coding is used, which
adds additional bits to the colloquial frame which are used
in the decoder to remove and reduce errors. In essence, it is
a block of convolution codes that divide the 260-bit blocks
colloquial framework into 3 classes (50 major, 132 minor
and 78 less important). Based on these codes, it is possible
to nearly double the signal and the speed.
The signal is magnified with redundant bits which are
added to information binary string. It leads to increasing
error detection and correction capabilities. A block, the size
of which is 456 bits, is divided into 8 groups of size 57 bits
each. These groups are interleaved with the last four groups
of the previous block and with the first four groups of the
following block.
B.
5G Architecture
One of the main ideas of designing 5G networks [6] is a
separation of internal and external users into two segments.
This approach aims to avoid losses resulting from signal
passing through the walls, or at least minimize it. It will be
realized with a complex antenna system and massive
Multiple Input/Multiple Output (MIMO) technology, which
will be deploying large antenna arrays with tens or hundreds
of antenna segments. While the most common MIMO
technologies serve 2 to 4 antennas, the goal of massive
MIMO systems is to increase user options by using antenna
arrays. Outdoor base stations will be equipped with an
extensive antenna array of antenna elements around the
cells. These cells will be connected by optical fibers with
base stations. Outdoor users are equipped with a limited
number of antenna elements, but they can work with others
in an extensive virtual network. An antenna array will be
installed outside buildings and will communicate with
external base stations.
One can use a mobile architecture where internal users
need to communicate only with the internal access points
with antenna arrays; then, one can use technologies for
short-range communication (Wi-Fi [6], the ultra-wide band
[6], mm-wave communications [6]).
5G
network
architecture
should
also
contain
heterogeneous macrocells, microcells, small cells, and
transmitters. To ensure adequate coverage for users who
move too quickly, it will also work with mobile femtocells,
which combine the concept of mobile relays and femtocells
[6]. In Figure 1, one can see the planned architecture for 5G
networks.
Figure 1. 5G Network [6].
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

C.
Encryption for data protection
Current encryption is used to protect against unwanted
eavesdropping. The GSM network calculates the secret key,
which length is 64 bits, after verifying the mobile phone in
the mobile station. A key figure of TDMA (Time Division
Multiple Access) frame lengths of 22 bits is input to the
cipher algorithm A5 [6]. The A5 algorithm generates a
pseudo-random sequence which, along with 114-bit bursts
used XOR function. It leads to data encryption. The A5
algorithm is relatively fast and it establishes a 228-bit
sequence during TDMA frame.
After encryption, the modulation signal has a carrier
wave using GMSK (Gaussian Minimum Shift Keying)
modulation. GMSK is two-state modulation which is based
on the frequency keying stroke.
III.
INTERCEPTION
Interception of mobile phones and monitoring the flow
of information are current topics of great interest. With the
available technologies, it is possible to eavesdrop on almost
any form of communication. On the other hand, however, it
remains the issue of cryptography and steganography [1].
Wiretapping is usually conducted by a third party (i.e., not
the operator, but he can know about eavesdropping and
allow it). Wiretapping is divided into active and passive
forms. The operator knows about the active form and sees it
in the system, however, a passive form is not known to the
operator. The passive form is based on the capture of radio
signals and then decoding them.
The passive way has very significant limits in terms of
reach and effectiveness, because, when the phone is in
motion, these interceptions have problems with receiving
the signal. For this type of interception, a computer
equipped with a GSM antenna, receiver, and special
software is used. This software enables the device to
identify all phones within range and can focus on one or
multiple phones. Then, it can record, decode and eavesdrop
the cell phones (in the case of short message service and
multimedia
messaging
service).
The
interception
of
conversation
is
not
possible
to
find
or
identify.
Consequently, it is necessary to focus on defense rather than
detection.
A.
Defense-technical inspection
Defense-technical inspection is the basic form for
detecting interception devices in a room and also it is not
destructive to the device.
The inspection is conducted on
the grounds of suspicion. An authorized person performs an
initial analysis of the room aimed at identifying possible
risks of the type of interception, determination of inspection
techniques and inspection frequency. As with all steps, it is
necessary to select the date, time, method and inspection
techniques themselves. The inspection can be made visible,
so that the employees of the company knew, but also
discreetly outside office hours, by which employees are not
aware [4].
Most companies that provide the inspection to be carried
out require the constant presence of a responsible person
from the part of the applicant, which is to prevent further
irregularities and accusations that might occur. Once an
interception is found in an area, there are basically three
options to deal with it. These options are its liquidation,
inform the police or use it for disinformation the offender.
The inspection consists of four steps:
• Physical control
• Radio Analysis
• Detection of nonlinearity
• Other measurements
1)
Physical control
In the first step of defense-technical inspection, all the
equipment and other resources, which could contain the
interception, will be disassembled. Examples include outlet
detectors, telephones, lights, switches, and other similar
devices.
2)
Radio Analysis
The second step performs spectral analysis [3] in the
room. It scans all frequencies that occur at that place and
subsequently verifies if each frequency has a reason for its
existence. The principle of this method is to detect the
presence of radio equipment which is designed for the
interception. Figure 2 shows the radio analysis output. Each
frequency indicates radio signals of potential interception
hardware.
Figure 2. Radio Analysis [3].
3)
Detection of nonlinearity
After identifying the presence of a radio detector, the
inspection checks nonlinearities. The method is based on the
fact that each intercepted device includes semiconductor
components. It allows the discovery of semiconductors in
the transmitted electromagnetic field. This detection method
is used for walls, construction equipment etc.
4)
Other measurements
The last step is to check the other elements, such as
telephone
lines,
checking
in
infra-specter,
control
of
leadership in the over-voice band.
Due to a large amount of work, it is an approximate
speed of inspection 10 m2 per hour for a couple of
technicians.
After
the
inspection
is
completed,
the
authorized person of the contracting authority receives a
verbal report follows by a written report on the results of the
inspection and the list of used methods. Of course, as in all
sectors of security, the best protection is a combination of
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

technical
means
to
human
disturbance,
because
the
technology is not always reliable and can be a failure [4].
B.
Technique for protection meeting places
With the increasing diversity of eavesdropping devices
also grows a diversity of protection devices against the
interception. These safeguards are mandatory in some areas.
Today, after the expansion of eavesdropping devices it is
possible to see several technologies that are used for
wiretapping (contact or contactless sensing information
from
windows,
the
use
of
GSM
phones,
the
radio
interception, direct recording on the recording unit).
1)
Protection
against
contact
and
contactless
information gain from windows or walls of the building
The interception is performed on the basis of vibration
of the glass panel or the
wall of a building. The
method/devices used to protect these surfaces are white
noise generators [4]. The white noise vibrates on the
window panels and in the walls. Optionally, one can add
speakers, from which the noise is able to superimpose a
recording of the voice recorder. Due to the frequency range
of the white noise, it is clear that it passes all frequencies of
human speech. The white noise is a mechanical wave. It
leads to interference with the signal and then it cannot be
deleted with the available technology. It protects reliably
before
interception
using
stethoscopic
and
laser
microphones. Despite all the advantages it also has one
major disadvantage, especially for the comfort of the people
on negotiations. The frequencies are in the audible spectrum
and can thus interfere with the comfort of each person in the
room [4].
2)
Protection for unauthorized use of GSM phones
Under this type of protection, it is possible to use two
devices
(Identification
GSM
operation
and
the
GSM
jammer). The identification of the GSM operation uses
sensitive devices that detect signals in the GSM band, and
inform both acoustically and visually about the unauthorized
transmissions. The disadvantage is the necessity to set it to a
sensitivity to avoid false alarms announcement [4].
The second option is a GSM jammer, which operates in
the GSM phones. GSM jammers jam the receiver, which
subsequently cannot log into the network. There are many
types of jammers, which vary in reliability. However, the
problem remains that, in fact, it is illegal to interfere with
the operators signal [4].
3)
Protection against radio interception
The
most
common
type
of
interception
is
radio
interception [10]. It has good possibilities for capturing and
sending the signal. However, as in all other cases, these are
ways to prevent it. For protection, they are used in radio
analyzer, jammer, safety foil, and wallpapers.
Radio analyzer saves all radio frequencies, which are
active in the area. After subsequent scanning of the radio
spectrum, the results can be compared with the new scan
and the error detected. This deviation indicates a new radio
receiver/transmitter that can be tapped in space and display
the field strength (relative distance of the transmitter). These
devices have a difference in bandwidth with which they are
able to operate and control the speed. Like with all other
devices, there are also certain disadvantages. In particular,
these disadvantages include the relatively high demands on
the operation and the high coverage area of different radio
signals. Only in London, the scan of a single site can detect
600 active frequencies.
That is the reason why is it
necessary to carefully adjust the sensitivity of these because
not of all the disturbing frequencies comes from listening
devices [4].
The second possibility is a jammer; whose function is
very similar to GSM jammers. The main advantage is the
fact that they produce no false signals. But, as with the
GSM version, there is questionable legality and
yet
unknown effects on human health by prolonged exposure.
Some types of jammers are nowadays used as protection
against remotely charge attacks that have initiated igniter
radio signal.
The third measure, which operates on the principle of
Faraday's cage (inhibits the passage of radio signals from
the protected area) are security stickers, wallpapers, and
foils.
Its
application
is
technically
very
demanding.
Wallpaper itself contains a copper layer. It is necessary to
completely
cover
each
element
of
the
room
(doors,
windows, line filters for 230 V line). The use of a protective
element is rather rare due to the complexity [4].
4)
Protection from obtaining information direct entry to
the recording unit
In the context of digitization, it is no longer possible to
use some methods for protecting before recording the
acoustic signal to a recording device, which was used
earlier. Today's equipment for direct recording does not
radiate. It is necessary to choose methods that have an effect
on the quality of recorded sound. The solution is the noise
generator with speakers. The noise binds to the signal and
degrades it. Nowadays, there are no technical possibilities to
effectively eliminate the noise from the recording [4].
C.
Techniques to protect communications media
The advent and subsequent development of GSM
technology have created a new risk, which involves
interception
of
mobile
phones
and
information
communication in this way. It is important to recognize that
the GSM network protects information with encryption only
on the way to a GSM cell and back to the phone, the rest is
unprotected.
Currently, there is a wide variety of devices that are able
to decrypt the signal in real time and perform it in this way
of the interception. These elements can be active or passive.
1)
Active
Active devices are essentially fake GSM cells. The
device convinces its target that the device is the best cell,
which should be used with the cell phone. The signal is
duplicated. One copy is forwarded to a GSM network and
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

the second copy is decrypted. These systems are active and
they are detectable on the side of the operator. By default,
this method is used in urban residential areas, approximately
500 meters from their target. Generally, these methods are
more reliable than passive methods of eavesdropping [4].
2)
Passive
The capturing signal takes place on the side of the cell
phone. The attacker must be in urban areas about the same
distance.
The
main
advantage
of
this
method
is
“invisibility”. On the other hand, if the target moves, the
interception is essentially impossible because the device is
not able to quickly re-tune the frequency in order to capture
the tapped signal.
The
best
method
of
defense
of
communications
equipment is their encryption. Therefore, many cell phone
manufacturers have started to produce versions of their
phones, which are equipped with encryption devices. The
basis is the principle on which the information is digitized,
encrypted and in such form goes with the device. On the
receiver side, one must also use an encrypted phone for
which it is possible to decrypt the information [4].
3)
GSM interception
As in the case of radio interception, it is a small device
that senses ambient sounds, but, unlike classical radio
interception, it does not intercept the broadcast signal
locally on discrete frequency, but it is transmitted using the
same principle as talking on a cell phone. Actually, the
interception is logged into base transceiver station as well as
cell phone and from a signal transmitted. Nowadays, this
type of interception is widespread for several reasons. First,
it has a virtually unlimited range; the attacker can be
anywhere there is a phone signal coverage. Second, the
main supply is operating almost unlimited. The last point is
called costs. The costs are minimal (advantageous monthly
fee) and it is almost impossible to capture the conventional
methods
for
detecting
interception
(Radio
frequency
detectors, radio spectrum analyzers). The findings of this
type of the interception device are problematic for several
reasons.
First, the signal is not transmitted on a usual
frequency and analog modulation, but it uses GSM network
infrastructure
itself
with
FDMA/TDMA
(Frequency
Division Multiple Access/ Time Division Multiple Access).
The entire eavesdropping is not conducted continuously, but
it is invoked to "request" call on the device. In principle, the
device is logged into the network. The device is hidden, if it
does not launch an active interception, it looks like others
cell phones.
Although finding of these devices is difficult it is not
impossible. One can use a spectrum analyzer and a strict
adherence to procedures. If one wanted to avoid installation
of interception device, one must have 24-hour control over
all daily routines in the room. This approach is costly and
unsustainable.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Nowadays, the interception issue affects all people, even
if they do not realize it. Due to the technical progress of
society,
there
are
many
means
of
communicating
information, but also a lot of resources for their capture.
This technology creates a risk of misuse of critical
information.
Currently,
there
is
a
large
amount
of
communication through people's cell phones. Cell phones
are
often
used
to
communicate
critical
corporate
information. Fortunately, despite the technical capabilities
of
the
attacker,
there
are
countless
ways
to
resist
interception.
Defense-technical inspection is the basic form for
detection of interception devices in a room and that is also
non-destructive to the device. The inspection is conducted
on the grounds of suspicion. An authorized person performs
an initial analysis of the room aimed at identifying possible
risks of the type of interception, determination of inspection
techniques and inspection frequency. As with all steps, it is
necessary to select the date, time, method and inspection
techniques themselves. The inspection can be made visible,
so that the employees of the company knew, but also
discreetly outside office hours, by which employees are not
aware.
For technical resources, in addition to physical control,
spectral analysis is also performed. This is a scan of all
frequencies
and
their
subsequent
comparison
with
a
reference measurement. Based on this comparison, it is
possible to identify suspect signals that could potentially
come from interception devices. Another method that is
used is the control of nonlinearities. The method is based on
the fact that each previously produced interception includes
semiconductor components. The nonlinearities detection
method can detect the presence of semiconductors in a
sensing area because the electromagnetic field in the area is
affected by these semiconductors. The authorized person
must not forget to check the other elements, such as
telephone lines, checking in infra specter, control of the
over-voice band.
Defense against GSM interception is difficult because its
identification is not easy. Its signal is not broadcasted on a
frequency and analog modulation but uses GSM network
infrastructure itself with FDMA/TDMA access. The entire
interception is not carried out continuously, but it is invoked
to "request" call on the device. In principle, the device is
logged into the network. The device is hidden, if it does not
launch an active interception, it looks like others cell
phones.
The next steps of research will lead to a deeper
understanding of wiretaps in terms of features and options
for defense against them. Following this understanding will
be appropriate to conduct a testing and measuring for
available wiretaps. On the other hand, the most interesting
methods of interception, the GSM interception is probably
the best option for a creation of any external encryption
applications.
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Internal Grant Agency of
Tomas
Bata
University
under
the
project
No.
IGA/FAI/2016/25.
REFERENCES
[1] S.
Fisman,
Wiretapping,
and
Eavesdropping.
Clark
Boardman
Callaghan, 1978. ISBN 068559856X.
[2]
J. Losert,
Infosafe - Protection
against eavesdropping, special
technology
[Online].
Olomouc:,
2016.
Available
from:
http://www.infosafe.cz/ 2016.5.17
[3] J. Mudroch, Mudroch Labs s.r.o [Online]. Bánská Bystrica, Available
from: http://www.triangulace.cz/ 2016.5.17
[4] F. Kucera, Mobile interception. Android World [Online]. Praha:
VSHosting,
2012
Available
from:
http://www.svetandroida.cz/
mobilni-odposlechy-jak-funguji-a-lze-se-jim-branit-201201 2016.5.17
[5] N. Kokesova, Principles of operations of contemporary mobile
communication networks . Brno, 2006. Supervisor Doc. Ing. J. Saudek,
CSc.
[6] Ch. Wang and F. Haider, “Cellular Architecture and Key Technologies
for 5G wireless Communication Networks” IEEE Communications
Magazine.
2014,
(2):
9.
Available
from:
http://cms.comsoc.org/SiteGen/Uploads/Public/Docs_TC_5GMWI/Cel
lular_Architecture_and_Key.pdf 2016.5.17
[7] I. Poole, 5G Mobile / Cellular Technology. Radio-Electronics [Online]
Available
from:
http://www.radio-electronics.com/info/
cellulartelecomms/5g-mobile-cellular/technology-basics.php 2016.5.17
[8] J. Kacerovsky,
GSM Networks. Semestral paper, Communication
systems
and
services,
Brno,
2002.
Available
from:
http://www.uai.tode.cz/stud_mat/GSM/it420_gsm.pdf 2016.5.17
[9] M. D. Renzo et al., “Spatial Modulation for Generalized MIMO:
Challenges, Opportunities, and Implementation,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 102,
no. 1, Jan. 2014, pp. 56–103.
[10] C.-X. Wang and S. Wu, “Massive MIMO Channel Measurements and
Modeling:
Advances
and
Challenges”,
IEEE
Wireless
Communication.
[11] WWRF, L. Sorensen and K. E. Skouby, User Scenarios 2020, report,
July 2009; http://www.wireless-world-research.org. 2016.5.29
[12] N. Jamaly., A. Derneryd and Rahmat-Samii, Y. "Spatial Diversity
Performance of Multiport Antennas in the Presence of a Butler
Network", Antennas and Propagation, IEEE Transactions on, On
page(s): 5697 - 5705 Volume: 61, Issue: 11, Nov. 2013.
[13] Kempe D. and F. McSherry, A decentralized algorithm for spectral
analysis, Journal of Computer and System Sciences, v.74 n.1, p.70-83,
February 2008
[14] X. Li, H.-N. Dai, Q. Zhao and Q. Wang. "Eavesdropping Attacks in
Wireless Ad Hoc Networks under a Shadow Fading Environment"
Proceedings of the 2014 International Conference on Internet of
Vehicles (IOV 2014)
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

