Towards Reducing the Impact of Data Breaches 
 
 
George O. M. Yee 
Computer Research Lab, Aptusinnova Inc., Ottawa, Canada 
Dept. of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada 
e-mail: george@aptusinnova.com, gmyee@sce.carleton.ca 
 
 
 
Abstract— Organizations are increasingly being victimized by 
breaches of private data, resulting in heavy losses to both the 
organizations and the owners of the data, i.e., the people 
described by the data. For organizations, these losses include 
large expenses to resume normal operation and damages to its 
reputation. For data owners, the losses may include financial 
loss and identity theft. To defend themselves from such data 
breaches, 
organizations 
install 
security 
controls 
(e.g., 
encryption) to secure their vulnerabilities. While such controls 
help, they are far from being fool proof. This paper examines 
the behaviour of Business-to-Consumer (B2C) e-commerce 
companies, in terms of why they collect and store personal data. 
It then proposes an approach that reduces the impact of a data 
breach by limiting the amount of private data that the company 
stores in its computer system, while preserving the company’s 
ability to accomplish its purposes for collecting the private data. 
The paper illustrates the approach by applying it to different 
types of B2C e-commerce companies. 
Keywords-reducing impact; data breach; private data loss; 
B2C e-commerce. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Data breaches of personal data or personal information 
are appearing more and more often in the news, devastating 
the victim organizations. The losses have serious negative 
consequences both to the consumer (e.g., financial loss, 
identity theft) and to the organization (e.g., loss of reputation, 
loss of trust).  Recently in the news is a report that MGM 
Resorts has suffered a data breach in which the personal 
details of over 10.6 million guests who stayed at its hotels 
have appeared on a hacking forum [1]. MGM Resorts is being 
sued for this breach [2]. In the first half of 2019, there were 
3,800 publicly disclosed breaches worldwide, exposing 4.1 
billion records. This represents an increase of 54% in the 
number of reported breaches compared to the first half of 
2018 [3].  
In response to attacks that result in data breaches, 
organizations attempt to identify the vulnerabilities in their 
computer systems and secure these vulnerabilities using 
security controls. Example security controls are firewalls, 
intrusion 
detection 
systems, 
encryption, 
two-factor 
authentication, and social engineering awareness training for 
employees. Unfortunately, securing vulnerabilities with 
security controls is far from being foolproof. One major 
weakness is that it is impossible to find all the vulnerabilities 
in a computer system. This means that it is highly likely that 
a determined attacker will find an attack path into the 
organization’s system that has been overlooked and cause a 
data breach, even though the organization believes that it has 
done due diligence and secured all its vulnerabilities. 
Nevertheless, security controls do help to prevent breaches, 
and we are not advocating that they be eliminated. Rather, the 
approach in this work can be considered as an addition to the 
existing arsenal of security controls. 
In this work, we propose an approach in which most of 
the private data collected is stored on the user’s device. Thus, 
a smaller quantity of private data remains on the company’s 
computer system, reducing the impact or the loss of private 
data should the company stored data ever be breached. The 
approach also ensures that the needs of the company to carry 
out its purposes for collecting the private data are satisfied. 
The user’s device could be a desktop computer, a laptop, or a 
smart phone. The approach is intended for Business-to-
Consumer (B2C) e-commerce companies, since B2C 
companies appear to collect large quantities of personal data 
and are often victimized by data breaches. Note that in this 
work when we write about data storage on or in the 
“company’s computer system”, we mean that the data is 
stored on company premises or in the cloud.  
This paper is organized as follows. Section II examines 
the behaviour of B2C companies in terms of why they collect 
and store personal information. It also looks at the nature of 
the collected information. Section III presents the approach. 
Section IV contains examples of how the approach can fit 
with different types of e-commerce companies. Section V 
describes related work. Section VI gives conclusions and 
future work.  
II. 
THE COLLECTION AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL 
INFORMATION BY B2C COMPANIES 
In this section we examine why B2C companies collect 
personal information and discuss the nature of this 
information.  
A. Private Data 
Private information consists of data about a person that 
can identify or be linked to that person and is owned by that 
person. Thus, private information is also “personal 
information”, and consists of “personal data”. For example, a 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

person’s height, weight, or credit card number can all be used 
to identify the person and are considered as personal 
information. There are other types of personal information, 
such as buying patterns and navigation habits (e.g., websites 
visited) [4]. In many countries, personal information is 
protected by legislation in which the concept of “purpose” for 
collecting the personal information (how the collected 
information will be used) is important. Companies must 
disclose the purpose for collecting the personal information 
and cannot use the information for any other purpose. 
B. Purposes for Collecting Personal Information 
Companies engaged in B2C e-commerce, collect personal 
information for the following purposes (the first two purposes 
are self-evident): 
• Transaction Requirements: Personal information is needed 
and used in carrying out the transaction. For example, 
making an online purchase requires your name and address 
for goods delivery. 
• Communication: Personal contact information is needed 
to communicate with customers for resolving order issues 
or to answer product questions. 
• To Secure Other Data: A personal biometric is needed for 
further authentication, e.g., a voice print, prior to allowing 
the customer to access more secure areas of his or her 
account [5]. The biometric may also be required for use in 
multi-factor authentication. 
• Establishing Loyalty: A personal history of past 
transactions may be required to establish a customer’s 
loyalty in order to reward the customer with certain 
benefits such as free shipping or product discounts [6]. 
• Targeted Advertising: A personal history of past 
transactions is needed to understand the type of products a 
particular customer has purchased in the past, and thereby 
create more appealing and effective ads directed at the 
customer [7]. 
• Market Research: The personal histories of past 
transactions for all customers are studied in order to 
understand what products appeal to customers in order to 
make decisions for stock purchases, or to provide a better 
customer experience in terms of app or website design [5]. 
• Sharing or Selling: Personal information collected is 
shared or sold to other organizations for a profit [5]. 
C. E-Commerce Data 
In B2C e-commerce, online companies sell items and 
services to consumers. Example types of such companies 
include sellers of goods and services (e.g., Amazon.com), 
hotels (e.g., Mariott.com), travel agencies (e.g., Expedia.ca), 
financial services (e.g., CIBC.com), and the list goes on. All 
these companies share common data types. Each company 
offers products that customers purchase. Table 1 identifies 
the products for the e-commerce company types mentioned 
above.  
Each customer has a set of personal identifying 
information, such as name, postal address, and phone number 
that identify the customer, and depending on the service 
provided by the company, include personal information such 
as credit card details, date of birth, amount of mortgage on 
house, and so on. We group all such personal identifying 
information under the heading Customer Personal Data 
(CPD). Each customer makes one or more product selections 
and effects payment for the product(s) selected. In addition, 
there is ancillary data, such as type of payment, date ordered, 
date shipped, date delivered (from delivery agent, e.g., 
courier), and so on.  Table 2 shows these data types and 
whether they originate from the company or the customer.  
TABLE 1. PRODUCTS ASSOCIATED WITH EACH COMPANY TYPE. 
Company type 
Products 
Sellers of goods and services 
(e.g., Amazon.com) 
Physical items such as pots, 
clothing, and electronics; 
services such as selling your 
items for you 
Hotels (e.g., Mariott.com) 
Rooms 
Travel Agencies (e.g., 
Expedia.ca) 
Travel bookings  
Financial services (e.g., 
CIBC.com) 
Fee-based banking accounts 
 
TABLE 2. DATA TYPES AND WHERE THEY ORIGINATE. 
Data type 
Origin 
Products 
Company 
CPD 
Customer 
Product selection 
Customer 
Amount paid 
Company 
Ancillary data 
Company 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Data collection for a customer order. 
We can see that each online customer order involves the 
data types shown in the left column of Table 2. Depending on 
the company, the instantiation of these data types will be 
different, with the possible exception of Amount paid. For 
example, the “Products” of Amazon.com would be different 
from the “Products” of eBay.com and the CPD for CIBC.com 
may be different from that for TD.com (another Canadian 
bank). Thus, each customer order may be represented by a 
data collection as shown in Figure 1. We wish to emphasize 
that there is no implied ordering of the data types in Figure 1, 
i.e., Figure 1 does not state that the data types should be 
stored in any particular order one after the other. These data 
collections would be stored by the company in its own 
databases, which may be on company premises or on a cloud 
server. If the company were to suffer a data breach, this data 
(including CPD) would be exposed. 
CPD 
Product  
selection 
Amount 
paid 
Ancillary 
data 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

III. 
APPROACH 
This section details our approach for reducing the impact 
of data breaches. 
A. Strategy for Storing a Customer’s Personal Data 
The goal of this strategy is to reduce the storage of 
personal data on the company’s computer system by storing 
the bulk of the personal data on customers’ own devices, 
while allowing for all the purposes described in Section II-B 
to be carried out. The strategy consists of five parts, as 
follows:  
1. Identification of data (Figure 1) to be stored on the 
customer’s device: CPD.  
2. Design for linking the data on the customer’s device to 
the rest of the data stored on the company’s computer 
system: Use a Unique Customer Identifier (UCI) that the 
company assigns to each customer. The UCI is the hash 
(e.g., SHA-3) of the customer’s User ID and password 
for accessing the company. It will form part of the 
records shown in Figure 2 (shown as relational records 
without loss of generality since we could have shown 
them as other types of data structures, e.g., linked lists).  
 
UCI 
CPD 
 
a) 
Record of personal data stored on customer’s device.  
 
UCI 
Product 
selection 
Amount 
paid 
Ancillary 
data 
 
b) 
Record of order data stored on company’s system. 
Figure 2. Data records corresponding to a customer order. 
Encrypted data types are shaded. 
3. Design for enabling the company to carry out its 
communication purpose: Use the “Contact information” 
data record in Figure 3 to contact the customer, where 
“Contact information” consists of email address and 
telephone number. Figure 4 shows how the UCI links the 
three types of data records together. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Data record for a customer’s contact information. 
Encrypted data types are shaded. 
4. Design to keep the CPD record should the customer a) 
use a new device with the company after using other 
devices, or b) loses a device used with the company. For 
a), the customer can register a new device with the 
company on its website after logging in. The company 
would then transfer the CPD record from a previously 
used device (on which the customer is also logged in) to 
the new device. For b), the customer may have used other 
devices with the company and wishes to replace the lost 
device, in which case the resolution for a) applies. If the 
lost device is the only device used with the company, the 
customer would need to re-enter his/her CPD. See also 
the third paragraph of Section III-C. 
5. Enabling 
security: 
Use 
authenticated 
symmetric 
encryption (e.g., AES-GCM [8]) to encrypt the UCI and 
CPD in Figure 2(a), as well as the Contact information 
in Figure 3 (encrypted data types are shaded). The UCI 
in Figure 3 is not encrypted. The UCI and remaining data 
types in Figure 2 (b) are not encrypted, as it would be 
difficult for the attacker to use them alone to identify the 
customer, should the data be breached.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 4. How the UCI links data records together. 
 
B. Customer Walk-Through of the Strategy 
1. The customer accesses the company using its website, 
running either on a desktop computer or on a mobile 
device such as a smart phone or tablet. In the following, 
all data transfers between the user’s device and the 
company’s system is done though a secure channel (e.g., 
TLS). 
2. If it’s the customers first use of the website on this device 
(detected by the absence of the CPD record), he/she will 
be asked if he/she has a different device that was used 
with the website. If not, he/she will be prompted to enter 
his/her CPD. The company then generates the UCI, 
forms the record in Figure 2(a), encrypts it, and stores 
this encrypted record on the customer’s device. The 
company then uses the unencrypted CPD entered by the 
customer for processing the current order. In addition, 
the company checks if the customer’s Contact 
information is already in the system (possible if the 
customer’s device was lost or stolen) and if not, creates 
and stores the record in Figure 3, after encrypting the 
Contact information (obtained from the CPD). If the 
customer has used the website before on a different 
device, he/she will be asked to also login using the other 
device, at which point the company stores the CPD 
UCI 
Contact information 
UCI 
CPD 
 
 
              Customer Device 
UCI 
Contact information 
 
 
UCI 
Product 
selection 
Amount 
paid 
Ancillary 
data 
 
 
         Company’s Computer System 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

record from the old device on the new device, decrypts 
the CPD record, and uses it for the current transaction. 
If the customer has used the website before on this device 
(detected by the presence of the encrypted CPD record), 
the company automatically retrieves the encrypted CPD 
record (Figure 2(a)) from the customer’s device and 
decrypts it for use in the current transaction. 
Note that the only time the company retrieves the CPD 
record from a customer device is when the customer logs 
in to do a new transaction. 
3. The customer proceeds with his/her shopping.  Once the 
customer completes the shopping, the company creates 
and stores the customer’s order data record as shown in 
Figure 2(b). Note that this record may have to be updated 
for some ancillary data (e.g., date delivered) once the 
data is available. This update process as out of scope for 
this work.  
C. Security Analysis 
We first consider outside attacks against the company. 
Such attacks would result in breaching the company’s data 
stores leading to the loss of the Contact information and the 
order data (Figure 4). This loss could be in the form of a copy 
taken of the data, deletion of the data from the company’s 
data stores, modification of the data in the company’s data 
stores, or certain combinations of these, namely copy 
followed by deletion, and copy followed by modification. 
However, the attacker fails to read the Contact information 
since it is encrypted. The attacker would be able to read the 
UCI from both the Contact information and the order data 
records but the UCI would appear as meaningless (hash). The 
attacker could also read the order data but would have a hard 
time identifying the customer using only this data. Further, 
deleting or modifying the data will also fail to damage the 
company provided that the company is aware of the attack 
and is able to re-populate the data stores using data back-ups. 
We assume that the company has implemented other security 
measures, including making data backups and having ways 
to detect attacks (e.g., intrusion detection system). Any 
modification of the encrypted Contact information would 
also be detected by a failure to decrypt the modified version, 
i.e., the modified encrypted data fails authentication. Note 
that for the rest of this paper, whenever we refer to failing to 
decrypt attacker-modified encrypted data, we mean that the 
modified encrypted data has failed authentication. In any 
case, the probability of being attacked after applying the 
approach is low, since the only attraction for attackers is 
encrypted Contact information, consisting only of email 
address and telephone number.  Attacks on the company side 
could also involve malware, that for example, exfiltrates the 
customer’s CPD while in the clear. However, these attacks 
are not peculiar to the approach and can occur for any website 
that collects information from users. We assume that the 
company already has security measures for such attacks.  
As for insider attacks against the company, we admit that 
our security scheme is vulnerable to such attacks. For 
example, an insider could simply access the CPD in its 
unencrypted form. Insider attacks are always among the 
harder ones to defend against and given their seriousness, we 
expect the company to have implemented other security 
measures (e.g., [9]) specifically against insider attacks. An 
exploration of these measures is outside the scope of this 
paper.  
Attacks on the customer side with the device in the 
customer’s possession or not (device lost or stolen) could also 
result in a copy taken of the customer’s CPD record, deleting 
it, modifying it, or combinations thereof. Since the data is 
encrypted, the attacker would not be able to read the data if a 
copy is taken. Deletion or modification of the encrypted CPD 
record would be detected by the company’s system when it 
fails to find it or fails to decrypt it, in which case the 
company’s system would inform the customer that he/she 
needs to re-enter his/her CPD or have it transferred from 
another device (see Section III-A, part 4). 
The secure communication channel between the 
company’s system and the customer device may also be 
attacked, but this is again not peculiar to the approach. Such 
attacks would be handled the same way as is done for the 
many other applications of secure communication channels. 
D. Implementation Notes 
The following are suggestions on how the above strategy 
should be implemented. 
• 
On the company side, the implementation should include 
functionality to warn that its data stores have been 
compromised when it is unable to decrypt attacker-
modified encrypted data, or when it finds its data stores 
empty. The implementation should also warn the 
customer that his/her device has been attacked when the 
encrypted CPD record was expected but is missing, or 
when it is unable to decrypt the attacker-modified record.  
• 
If the customer changes or forgets his/her password for 
accessing the service (if forgotten, a conventional 
password reset procedure would be used), the company’s 
computer system will need to generate a new UCI 
corresponding 
to 
the 
new 
user-ID/password 
combination. The company will have to create a new 
CPD record with the new UCI, and upload this new 
record to all customer devices via the website. The 
company will also have to update the UCI in the records 
of Figure 2(b) and Figure 3.  
• 
The company’s system needs to allow the customer to 
update his/her CPD and/or Contact information, and 
update the relevant records with the new information. 
For CPD, the system would need to upload an updated 
CPD record to all customer devices. 
E. Verification of Purposes 
We verify that the approach allows the company to carry 
out its purposes (Section II-B) for collecting personal data. 
• Transaction Requirements: The customer’s CPD record is 
obtained from the customer’s device for every transaction 
(either pre-existing or currently entered) and is available 
for carrying out the transaction.  
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

• Communication: For contacting the customer, the 
customer’s Contact information (Figure 3) can be obtained 
using the UCI link from the order data records since 
contacting is done for an order issue. The customer can 
contact the company by logging into the company’s 
website. The company can determine the customer’s UCI 
from the customer’s User ID and password, and use it to 
access the contact information for the reply. 
• To Secure Other Data: The personal biometric, once 
captured, can be stored as part of the customer’s CPD 
record on the customer’s device. Once the customer logs 
in for a new transaction, the CPD record is retrieved from 
the customer’s device, at which point the personal 
biometric is available for use.  
• Establishing Loyalty: The company has access to a 
customer’s order history in the form of the order data 
records. These records (Figure 2(b)) are identified as 
belonging to a particular customer through the UCI link to 
the Contact information records. The company can thus 
establish the loyalty of a particular customer.  
• Targeted Advertising: Understanding the type of products 
a customer has purchased in the past may be done by 
accessing the customer’s order data records, as explained 
above for establishing loyalty. 
• Market Research: The histories of past transactions for all 
customers can be studied by accessing the order data 
records, ignoring the UCI in each order record, since there 
is no need to identify the customers. We assume that 
market research is carried out without the CPD records, 
since the company probably does not have the customer’s 
consent for such use of his/her CPD. If the company does 
require the CPD records, the company can always capture 
and store them, but would have to accept the risks of those 
records being breached and being sued for illegally using 
the CPD for market research. 
• Sharing or Selling: There is nothing stopping the company 
from copying each customer’s CPD record and sharing or 
selling the data. The company would have to accept the 
risks of the CPD records being breached and being sued 
for illegally sharing or selling the customer’s CPD.  
F. Strengths and Weaknesses of the Approach 
The approach has the following strengths: a) it is straight-
forward, which may make it easier to “sell” to upper 
management for approval, b) it is efficient in that attackers 
would have to breach the devices of all the company’s 
customers, in order to breach the same quantity of personal 
data that are traditionally all stored in the company’s system, 
c) it makes the company less attractive to attackers who 
intend to cause a data breach due to its efficiency as stated 
above and the fact that the only private data left on the 
company’s system to be breached is the encrypted customer 
Contact information, and d) it should please customers who 
want more control over their private data, since most of it is 
stored only on their own devices. 
The approach seems to have three weaknesses: a) the 
storage/retrieval of the CPD record may attract attacks on the 
secure transmission channel, b) there is additional overhead 
cost due to encryption / decryption operations, and c) it is 
vulnerable to insider attack.  Weakness a) does not represent 
significant extra risk over conventional transactions since 
personal data is transmitted in conventional transactions as 
well. For weakness b), the extra overhead should not be 
significant. Finally, weakness c) is not exclusive to this 
approach, since it can arise wherever there are insiders. 
Potential remedies include the installation of specific security 
measures to defend against insider attacks [9]. 
IV. 
APPLICATION EXAMPLES 
We instantiate the data types in Figure 1 for two types of 
B2C companies, demonstrating that the approach can fit with 
different B2C companies. 
 
Example 1: Seller of goods (e.g., Amazon.com). Table 3 
shows the instantiation of the data types for this example. 
TABLE 3. INSTANTIATION OF DATA TYPES FOR EXAMPLE 1. 
CPD 
Product 
selection 
Amount 
paid 
Ancillary data 
Name 
Camera 
$159.00 
Date ordered 
Billing address 
Hair clipper 
$49.00 
Date shipped 
Default shipping 
address 
 
Laser printer 
toner 
$68.00 
Date delivered 
Alternate 
shipping address 
 
 
Payment method 
Email address 
 
 
Product returned 
Phone number 
 
 
Reason for return 
Credit card data 
 
 
Refund status 
 
Example 2: Hotel (e.g., Mariott.com). Table 4 shows the 
instantiation of the data types for this example. 
TABLE 4. INSTANTIATION OF DATA TYPES FOR EXAMPLE 2. 
CPD 
Product 
selection 
Amount 
paid 
Ancillary data 
Name 
Room - 
double 
$200 / 
night 
Date of reservation 
Billing address 
 
 
Arrival date 
Home address 
 
 
Departure date 
Email address 
 
 
Payment method 
Phone number 
 
 
Airport shuttle y/n 
Credit card data 
 
 
Daily laundry y/n 
Loyalty ID number  
 
Daily cleaning y/n 
Country of origin 
 
 
Wake-up call y/n 
Passport country 
 
 
Stay extended y/n 
Passport number 
 
 
 
Room preferences 
 
 
 
Floor preference 
 
 
 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

We could have included other examples here, but the 
above examples suffice for our purposes. 
V. 
RELATED WORK 
Work that is most closely related to this work are as 
follows: Aggarwal et al. [10] propose that an organization 
outsource its data management to two untrusted servers to 
break associations of sensitive information. They show how 
the use of two servers, together with the use of encryption 
where needed, enables efficient data partitioning and 
guarantees that the contents of any one server does not violate 
data privacy. However, it is unclear if attackers can re-
construct the sensitivity associations by breaching both 
servers. Ciriani et al. [11] present what they claim to be a 
solution that improves over Aggarwal et al. [10] by first 
splitting the information to be protected into different 
fragments so that sensitive associations represented by 
confidentiality constraints are broken, and minimizing the 
use of encryption. The resulting fragments may be stored at 
the same server or at different servers. Our work differs from 
Aggarwal et al. [10] and Ciriani et al. [11] as follows: a) the 
above two papers are solutions for securing databases, 
whereas our work is focused on reducing the loss of data in 
the event of a data breach by simply not storing some of the 
data in the company’s computer system, b) we do not use data 
partitioning or fragmentation; rather, our data is distributed 
between the company and its customers from the point of data 
creation, c) we do not need to rely on breaking any sensitivity 
associations, d) our approach has been designed to satisfy the 
business needs of the organization, and e) our approach is 
more straightforward, and is therefore easier to apply. 
Other work in the literature mostly deal with the 
prevention or risks of data breaches, the discovery of a data 
breach, and the aftermath of a data breach. Within these 
categories, the most closely related works have to do with 
preventing or evaluating the risks of data breaches. We 
describe some of these papers below, to give the reader a 
sense of this research. Note that these works all differ from 
this paper in that this paper aims to reduce the impact or data 
lost if a breach were to happen, whereas the works described 
in the following are largely focused on preventing breaches 
from happening. Panou et al. [12] describe a framework for 
monitoring and describing insider behaviour anomalies that 
can potentially impact the risks of a data breach. The 
framework also enhances a company’s understanding of 
cybersecurity and increases awareness of the threats and 
consequences related to breaches, and eventually enable 
faster recovery from a breach. Guha and Kandula [13] 
propose a data breach insurance mechanism together with 
risk assessment methodology to cover the risk from 
accidental data breaches and encourage best practices to 
prevent the breaches. They also present data supporting the 
feasibility of their approach. Zou and Schaub [14] 
interviewed consumers after the Equifax data breach and 
discovered that consumers’ understanding of credit bureaus’ 
data collection practices was incomplete. As such, consumers 
did not take sufficient protective actions to deal with the risks 
to their data. The authors describe the implications of their 
findings for the design of future security tools with the aim 
of empowering consumers to better manage their data and 
protect themselves from future breaches. Nicho and Fakhry 
[15] look at the application of system dynamics to 
cybersecurity, specifically to the Advanced Persistent Threat 
(APT) that can employ technical, as well as organizational 
factors to cause a data breach. They applied system dynamics 
to the APT that led to the Equinox breach and identified key 
independent variables contributing to the breach. Their work 
provides insights into the dynamics of the threat and suggests 
“what if” scenarios to minimize APT risks that could lead to 
a breach. Luh et al. [16] present an ontology for planning a 
defence against APTs that can lead to a data breach. The 
ontology is mapped to abstracted events and anomalies that 
can be detected by monitoring and helps with the 
understanding of how, why, and by whom certain resources 
are targeted. There are other references in this category which 
have not been included here due to lack of space. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
We have presented an approach, applicable to B2C e-
commerce companies, that reduces the impact of a data 
breach by storing most of a customer’s private data in his/her 
own device rather than in the company’s computer system. 
The word “most” is key, since we still allow some necessary 
personal data (customer contact information) to be stored on 
the company’s system. We also verified that the approach 
allows the company to carry out its purposes for collecting 
private data. Some readers may consider the approach overly 
simple, but if a simple solution gets the job done, it should be 
preferred over a complex solution. As well, we do not claim 
that the approach as presented is complete, as there may be 
details that we have overlooked. We look forward to 
receiving feedback and correcting this in a future paper.  
In terms of future work, we would like to explore the 
application of the approach to other types of businesses and 
organizations, and adapt it where necessary. We would also 
like to have implementations of the approach in order to fine 
tune it, measure implementation effort, and check 
performance.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author is grateful to Aptusinnova Inc. for financially 
supporting this work. He expresses his thanks to the 
conference reviewers of this paper for their detailed and 
useful comments. 
REFERENCES 
[1] ZD Net, “Exclusive: Details of 10.6 million MGM hotel guests 
posted on a hacking forum,” [retrieved: October, 2020] 
https://www.zdnet.com/article/exclusive-details-of-10-6-
million-of-mgm-hotel-guests-posted-on-a-hacking-forum/ 
[2] Reuters, “MGM Resorts sued over data breach that possibly 
involved 10.6 million guests,” [retrieved: October, 2020] 
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-mgm-resorts-intl-cyber-
lawsuit/mgm-resorts-sued-over-data-breach-that-possibly-
involved-10-6-million-guests-idUSKCN20G062 
[3] Norton, “2019 Data breaches: 4 billion records breached so 
far,” 
[retrieved: 
October, 
2020] 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

https://us.norton.com/internetsecurity-emerging-threats-2019-
data-breaches.html 
[4] E. Aïmeur and M. Lafond, “The scourge of Internet personal 
data collection,” Proc. 2013 International Conference on 
Availability, Reliability and Security (AReS 2013), Sept. 2013, 
pp. 821-828. 
[5] Business News Daily, “How businesses are collecting data (and 
what they’re doing with it),” [retrieved: October, 2020] 
https://www.businessnewsdaily.com/10625-businesses-
collecting-data.html 
[6] R. Sarcar, “How to set up an ecommerce loyalty program to 
improve retention, build community and drive 5X in sales,”             
[retrieved: 
October, 
2020] 
https://www.bigcommerce.com/blog/online-customer-loyalty-
programs/#how-to-create-and-implement-a-customer-loyalty-
program 
[7] PC, “How companies turn your data into money,” [retrieved: 
October, 
2020] 
https://www.pcmag.com/news/how-
companies-turn-your-data-into-money 
[8] M. Dworkin, “Recommendation for block cipher modes of 
operation: Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) and GMAC,” NIST 
Special Publication 800-38D, November 2007. 
[9] CERT National Insider Threat Center, “Common Sense Guide 
to Mitigating Insider Threats, Sixth Edition,” Technical Report 
CMU/SEI-2018-TR-010, Software Engineering Insititute, 
Carnegie Mellon University, December 2018.  
[10] G. Aggarwal et al., “Two can keep a secret: a distributed 
architecture for secure database services,” Proc. Second 
Biennial Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research 
(CIDR 2005), Jan. 2005, pp. 1-14. 
[11] V. Ciriani et al., “Combining fragmentation and encryption to 
protect privacy in data storage,” ACM Transactions on 
Information and System Security (TISSEC), Vol. 13, Issue 3, 
article 22, pp. 1-33, July 2010. 
[12] A. Panou, C. Ntantogian, and C. Xenakis, “RiSKi: A 
framework for modeling cyber threats to estimate risk for data 
breach insurance,” Proc. 21st Pan-Hellenic Conference on 
Informatics (PCI 2017), article no. 32, Sept. 2017, pp. 1-6. 
[13] S. Guha and S. Kandula, “Act for affordable data care,” Proc. 
11th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks (HotNets-
XI), Oct. 2012, pp. 103-108. 
[14] Y. Zou and F. Schaub, “Concern but no action: consumers’ 
reactions to the Equifax data breach,” Extended Abstracts, 
2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI EA ’18), paper no. LBW506, Apr. 2018, pp. 1-
6. 
[15] M. Nicho and H. Fakhry, “Applying system dynamics to model 
advanced persistent threats,” Proc. 2019 International 
Communication 
Engineering 
and 
Cloud 
Computing 
Conference (CECCC 2019), Oct. 2019, pp 29-33.  
[16] R. Luh, S. Schrittwieser, and S. Marschalek, “TAON: an 
ontology-based approach to mitigating targeted attacks,” Proc. 
18th International Conference on Information Integration and 
Web-based Applications and Services (iiWAS ’16), Nov. 2016, 
pp. 303-312. 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-821-1
SECURWARE 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

