Importance of Human Factors on Cybersecurity within Organizations 
A Study of Attitudes and Behaviors 
 
Elham Rajabian Noghondar 
Data Center 
Tamin ICT& Management Consultancy 
Tehran, Iran 
Elham.rajabian@hotmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—The rise of cybersecurity incidents is a threat to 
most organizations, while the impact of the incidents is unique 
for each of the organizations. There is a requirement to create 
the right conditions which provide rhythm to cybersecurity 
growth and a fully developed cybersecurity resilience. Having 
a mindset of cybersecurity resilience works actively to adapt 
people, processes and technology. Meanwhile, the adequate 
cultural cybersecurity conditions need to be achieved. It seems 
necessary to employ behavioral sciences to concentrate on 
employees’ behavior in order to achieve concrete security 
mitigation preparedness regarding cybersecurity incidents. 
There are noticeable differences among users of a computer 
system in terms of complying with security behavior. The 
people differences can be studied under several headings, such 
as delaying tactics on something that must be done, the 
tendency to act without thinking, future thinking about 
unexpected implications of present-day issues, and risk-taking 
behaviors in security policy compliance. In this article, we 
introduce high profile cyber-attacks and their impacts on 
weakening cyber resilience in organizations. We also give 
attention to human errors and behaviors that weaken general 
security readiness in organizations. The human errors are 
discussed as a part of psychological matters to enhance 
compliance with security policy. 
Keywords-cyber resilience, human factors, cybersecurity 
behavior, attitude, usability, security culture  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In a world of continuous change, addressing cyber risks 
within organizations is already a huge leadership challenge. 
Regardless of organization size, it is critically important that 
each organization develops its own cyber crisis preparation 
response plan. Moreover, having a cyber-resilience approach 
in place prohibits a serious financial and reputational harm to 
organizations and their leaders. 
Digital, dynamic and complex workplaces are great 
targets for cyber-criminals [1]. Cyber-criminal actors are 
people who search for any chance to steal data, blocking 
access with ransomware, or install evasive malware to 
remain undetected for long-term malicious effect. They 
utilize security breaches that emerge from weak links in, for 
instance, 
embedded 
software 
and 
applications 
in 
organization environment. Hence, technology and tools 
alone are not the answer for the cyber risks; after all, we 
have not seen the high- profile breaches in the headlines. In 
addition, the nature of attacks has altered from theft to 
become more harmful than ever since the threats become 
more complicated and harder to recognize. For instance, 
current attack scenarios target backup data repositories and 
administrator functions, which are the last lines of defense in 
organizations [5]. 
The two main high-profile cyber-attacks in 2021 
involved confidential data lost and various forms of 
ransomware attacks. Confidential data was stolen from large 
organizations like Singtel, the University of Colorado, 
Aerospace Company Bombardier and the Australian 
Securities and Investments Commission. Moreover, various 
types of ransomware attacks have occurred in organizations 
such as Acer Company, United States CAN Insurance, 
Scotland’s University of the Highlands, United States 
Colonial Pipeline, California Water and Wastewater System, 
etc. Furthermore, based on the GDATA news in 2021, the 
most recognized type of security attacks include phishing, 
clever ransomware, polyglot files, IoT attacks, social 
engineering, malvertising on Facebook feeds, identity theft, 
password and data breach, zero-day exploits, insider threats 
and deep fake attacks. 
Organizations with integrated information technology 
systems and operational technology systems propose clear 
and unclear points of convergence that directly threaten 
functionality of the technical systems [2] [3], like the attack 
against the Water and Wastewater System in California. The 
attacks usually work against the four main functions of 
information communications technology systems: quality 
and efficiency of services, data confidentiality, improved 
usability and people privacy and safety. 
Organizations need awareness about immaturity in their 
risk mitigation measures. They also should recognize depth 
of threats that result from insiders at the same time [4]. We 
believe that insiders’ threats are becoming more frequent, as 
they are difficult to detect and insiders already have 
legitimate access to the network infrastructure [4]. In 
addition, variety in embedded applications is a source of data 
leakage [5]. The growth in the amount of stored data widens 
the cyber-attack surface. Transition to cloud computing 
technologies poses major difficulties in identifying insider 
attacks as well [6]. Because of all the mentioned 
complexities, such as immature risk mitigation measures, the 
role of insiders, difficulty in recognizing threats from 
insiders to a wide range of embedded software and business 
applications, stored data growth and cloud data repositories, 
more research is needed in order to enhance organizational 
resilience. In this article, we aim to discuss how a people-
centric approach in parallel with a technology-centric 
approach can largely mitigate cybersecurity risks in 
organizations. We also investigate how cyber resilience 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

limits the scope of cybercrime within organizations. The 
research methodology is a qualitative method based on 
systematic literature study along with case studies that prove 
the importance of human factors in cybersecurity. The case 
studies are used to shape discussions, to locate gaps and 
draw conclusions. The organizational challenges are studied 
to shape a sustainable cyber risk management approach in 
the related work section. Insider behaviors are viewed as a 
cybersecurity gap to draw proper cyber resilience in Section 
3. The challenges to perform the best cybersecurity practices 
are mentioned in Section 4. Some guidelines and metrics are 
provided to measure cyber resilience in organizations in 
Section 5. At the end, we indicate some points to build a 
cybersecurity culture based on individual behavior. 
II. 
RELATED WORK  
Sometimes organizations encounter problems to manage 
cyber risks and develop a sustainable security framework. 
They don’t pay enough attention to knowledge, guidance and 
research for the technologies’ innovations. In addition, there 
are no incentives like market forces and no regulation for 
utilizing the emerging technologies in a secure manner [7]. A 
sustainable security framework should mitigate the issues 
such as skills gaps, fragmented security approaches, obscure 
liabilities in cyber resilience, lack of operational security 
capabilities and lack of technical solutions in responding to 
incidents. 
Organizations face a competitive market and they are 
concerned about the sustainability of their operations from 
economic, environmental and social viewpoints. This is 
called the sustainability of business. It means that business 
strategy and competitiveness don’t necessarily interfere with 
sustainability of environment and society [8]. On the other 
hand, digitalization also brings complexity in cyber space 
and organizations are exposed to cyber threats as a result [9]. 
Therefore, organizations need to understand cyber resilience 
as an ability to plan ahead, to respond, to recover from and 
adapt to the cyber threats. 
Cyber resilience can be achieved through a secure 
information infrastructure and a proactive workforce that 
takes both the human factor and the organizational factor 
serious simultaneously. Based on our organizational 
experience, there are many opportunities for purchasing 
technical devices to get ready against cybersecurity attacks. 
Many organizations have cybersecurity risks at their core due 
to untuned embedded devices and other negligent factors. 
Moreover, during the last few years, there is noticeable 
attention to the human side of the cyber risk but there is still 
growth in data breach and other human-related threats [5]. 
One reason to consider just objective activities and pay too 
little attention to people and their behavioral aspect. In 
addition to this, there is a lack of proper policies and of 
procedures to encourage the desired human behavior. These 
are the main reasons why current cybersecurity solutions are 
not effective. 
To specify security problems, besides the above issues, 
organizations should also keep an eye on the numerous 
technological 
transformations 
intended 
to 
enhance 
profitability, and consider them in their security checklists. 
Most such transformations have potential to generate new 
systemic risks [11]. Examples are artificial intelligence and 
advanced machine learning [6], ubiquitous connectivity, 
quantum computing solutions and next-generation digital 
identity systems [11]. Append to these the current 
cybersecurity problems such as distributed cloud-based 
infrastructure, integrating software, web applications that 
reside on premises behind firewalls, etc. [7]. Some 
organizations set policies, standards, apply the best security 
practices and make partnership to avert such cybersecurity 
threats. In addition, organizations need to share and develop 
research, insights and solutions to manage the future-risks as 
a community. At the same time, there is a need for adopting 
a defense-in-depth security strategy with the aim of receiving 
perfect cooperation from the main fundamental cybersecurity 
components including people, processes and technology 
[13]. We contribute with an analysis of different incidents 
and threats reports to show that current cybersecurity 
breaches are the result of too little attention to human factors 
and too much focus on tech-centric solutions. We collect the 
latest cybersecurity reports and study the cause and effect for 
each incident. In addition, the components of cyber resilience 
strategy and corresponding metrics are discussed as a 
limitation for cybercrime impacts. We also introduce a 
cybersecurity training scheme for employees’ preparation to 
recognize the signs of malicious activity in advance. We 
carry out pillars for cybersecurity culture and the desired 
behavioral pattern toward a well-structured cybersecurity 
culture as well. 
III. 
THE CYBERSECURITY AND HUMAN FACTOR 
As we mentioned earlier, organizations usually display 
great progress to employ different technical security 
solutions such as firewalls, virus scanners, web application 
firewalls and intrusion detection systems to control the 
potential cybersecurity threats [14]. This happens because 
CIS normally recommend a technology-centric approach 
with little emphasis on human factors, needs and motivations 
[15]. But there is a demand for a holistic security approach, 
as technical solutions merely cannot handle cybersecurity 
attacks. This is the way to acquire cyber resilience. Thus, we 
have to discuss insiders’ threats besides the threats related to 
the information infrastructure and the processes. Insiders are 
the individuals who have access to resources, detailed 
knowledge about the computer network infrastructure, and 
data storage technical infrastructure. They include staff, 
contractors, partners, vendors and other stakeholders [16]. 
Insiders usually are aware of the location of sensitive data, 
what protective measures are in place, such as firewalls and 
the designed security policies. They often know of 
cybersecurity concerns and bottlenecks. They also have 
capabilities and skills to conceal the crime footprint for a 
long time or sometime forever [17]. Therefore, insiders 
present much more danger with potentially higher damage 
than external cyberattacks. 
According to Data Breach Investigations Report in 2021, 
insiders are in charge of 22% of security incidents. 
Furthermore, based on Stanford University, around 88% of 
data breaches are caused by staff mistakes. Bitglass [49] 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

report in 2022 revealed that top insider actors of security 
incidents are privileged users and administrators (63%), 
privileged business users and C-level executives with access 
to sensitive data (60%), third parties and temporary workers 
such as contractors and consultants (57%) and regular 
employees (51%) as shown in Fig. 1.  
Figure 1. Top Insider Threat Actors in 2022. 
Moreover, 62% of the security incidents result from 
negligent employees or contractors while 14% of the 
incidents were caused by malicious insiders, according to 
Panda security report in 2020 [18]. 
Fortinet [47] described that the most prevalent type of 
insider threats is phishing, about 38% in 2019. For instance, 
exploitation of insecure RDP, and unsupported or outdated 
operating systems and software result in the phishing attack. 
Moreover, according to US Securonix [48] report in 2020, 
the most frequent cyber incidents include data extrusion 
accounting for 62%, privilege misuse about 19%, data 
snooping for 9.5%, infrastructure sabotage around 5% and 
circumvention of IT controls for 3.8%. Fortinet also defines 
fraud as the primary motivation behind insider threats around 
55%, monetary gain for 49% and IP theft for 44% in 2019. 
The most frequent types of attacks related to human factor 
involve online fraud like phishing, DDOS, ransomware and 
social engineering [20]-[23]. Fig.2, displays stop motivations 
for insider attacks. 
Figure 2. Top Motivations for Insider Attacks. 
For several reasons, finding solutions for the insider 
threats is even more difficult than implementing measures to 
protect against foreign and external threats. Most companies 
and organizations rely on security awareness training, 
followed by company policies, procedures and intelligent 
automation to protect themselves against the insider threats. 
Ironically most employees say they understand the company 
policies and the procedures. Comprehension does not help to 
prevent incidents due to malicious behavior or negligence. 
The early indicators of such actions distribute themselves 
across vast data silo repositories that historically defied our 
ability to wrap our cognitively limited minds around [17]. To 
reduce the cyber risk gaps organizations’ top managers need 
to learn about threats by implementing a mature 
cybersecurity risk management. They need to consider one 
key lesson: while technical upgrades are important, 
minimizing human errors by studying employees’ attitudes is 
even more vital. Mistakes by network administrators and 
users’ failures to patch vulnerabilities in legacy systems, 
misconfigured settings, violations of standard procedures-
open the door to the overwhelming majority of successful 
attacks [23]. To flourish, they should move beyond 
protection to resilience. 
IV. 
THE CHALLENGES TO CYBERSECURITY PRACTICES 
Hidden interconnections among organizational factors 
affect the quality of services provided by organizations. They 
may influence in individual’s total performance and their 
actions. For example, poorly written rules, faulty equipment, 
web 
application 
misconfiguration, 
poor 
management 
practices and vague procedures [24] [25]. These refer to 
more breaches and create consequences that are more 
adverse. There are four discussable CIS challenges in path of 
implementing cybersecurity best practices and attack 
mitigation in organizations. They include individual factors, 
organizational factors, technological factors and ethical 
matters [26]. 
When we talk about the individual factor, it is about 
inadequate security actions causing both errors and/or 
violations. Incorrect configurations of work elements will 
cause unintentional errors and conscious actions of non-
malicious attempts [27]. The theory of Reasoned Action [19] 
and the theory of Planned Behavior discuss two solid models 
that link behaviors and attitudes. It is about an indirect 
psychological 
connection 
that 
is 
called 
“behavioral 
intention” [27]. It makes clear that there is a feasibility to 
define human failures and violations via studying staffs’ 
attitudes versus cybersecurity critical behaviors. Reasonably, 
cybersecurity behaviors can directly predict attitudes and the 
exact behavioral purpose of high-risk behaviors. Thus, it is 
important to understand the relation between attitudes and 
deliberate actions in order to avoid the CIS breaches [17]. 
Furthermore, to enhance the cybersecurity situation, there is 
a need to set bases to form attitudes like subjective norms 
and beliefs to perceive consequences of an action, acquire 
actual knowledge about the cybersecurity matter, the 
cognitive strategies utilized in decision-making process, etc. 
Staff attitudes can also encourage the impact of social and 
organizational factors. For instance, social norms, ethical 
dilemmas, and different levels of behavioral control 
understood by staff members such as the degree of freedom 
taken in to display a given behavior and contextual enablers 
in place, are connected to such given behavior [27]. There 
are psychological frameworks that can be applied with the 
aim of reducing the security violations and giving emphasis 
to the role of norms and the ethical values informing staff 
attitudes. The Norm Activation Theory [37], makes clear that 
attitudes are certainly impressed by the moral obligation 
levels, self-responsibility and clear awareness about 
emerging 
consequences 
of 
a given behavior 
[27]. 
Employees’ 
awareness 
and 
training 
downgrade 
the 
probability of sudden and unintentional behaviors which 
cause a violation from cybersecurity rules. In consequence, it 
largely minimizes the information security risks and 
preserves the important organizational assets and the 
intellectual property [28]. Therefore, perceiving the tiny 
 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

differences between human errors and violations specifies 
organizational bottleneck points. In addition, building an 
information security culture based on behavioral issues, and 
incorporate the created culture framework into organizational 
levels contribute towards reducing the risk from employees’ 
behavioral fault and related human errors.  
The second discussable cybersecurity challenge is the 
organizational factor. Many organizations proceed towards 
mitigating the cyber security vulnerabilities by forming 
policies, 
processes 
and 
procedures. 
Although 
the 
organizations require their employees’ compliance with the 
regulations and the procedures, the formal regulations merely 
do not construct the desired human behavior [29] [33]. For 
instance, the complex architecture of computer networks, 
resources and data storage infrastructure provide possibility 
for individuals to use the system in unprotected modes, 
pretending as a usual and useful activity [18]. Deviating from 
security practices can occur because informal procedures and 
intuitional 
cost-benefit 
estimations 
override 
potential 
negative results of one’s activity. For example, passwords 
are written down or shared with colleagues. Therefore, 
employees will not follow the organizational policies and 
rules if they are too costly or it is unclear how to implement 
them [27] [30].  
The third imaginative challenge is the technological 
factor. In this regard, CIS supplies an effective and useable 
security design. Users certainly refuse security mechanisms 
that are hard to utilize or cause faults that weaken security 
[32]. Usability is a degree of effectiveness, efficiency, and 
satisfaction with which users of a system can recognize 
predesignate tasks. Low usability may directly threaten 
safety, quality and efficiency, especially when it leads to 
human errors and slows down organizational processes. 
Inadequate usability might cause indirect cybersecurity risks. 
For example, when aggressive warning notifications 
encourage users to deactivate the security notifications [34]. 
In addition, it is difficult to integrate employees’ differences 
and socio-cultural variables without a usable security design 
[35]. To improve usability, the security principles should be 
user-experience based. This is still a real issue with the CIS 
implementation in organizations. Weak usability in the 
security design leads to improper operation of cybersecurity 
tools and poor functionality. It ultimately creates in-
effectiveness [31]. A unified user interface for various user 
domains may solve some usability and acceptability related 
issues [36]. Therefore, giving priority to the user interface 
design and good user experience leads to positive attitudes 
and facilitates the usage of procedures, software and 
applications [27]. 
The fourth challenge, ethical matter is discussable under 
role of the norms in shaping employee’s attitude based on 
the Norm Activation Theory. In other words, employees’ 
attitude is directly impressed by moral obligation, the ethical 
norms, and their clear knowledge about the consequences of 
a particular behavior [37]. In collective actions, individual 
efforts are negligible when others do not perform their role 
as desired. Thus, having information about others behavior 
supplies clear overview about behavioral norms, which have 
an independent influence on behavior [38]. 
V. 
CYBER RESILIENCE OVER CYBERSECURITY 
Cyber resilience should restrict the impact of cybercrime 
in organizations, business brand reputation, financial 
commitment, legal, and customer trust obligations. These 
areas demand resources and executive support, as they are 
important subjects in case of an actual threat [39]. In other 
words, cyber resilience should bring a certain level of 
confidence for business continuity and ability to respond to 
security attacks with purpose of preserving the obligations 
[40]. Fig. 3 illustrates the relationship between cyber 
resilience, crisis management and reconstruction. 
 
Figure 3. Cyber Resilience Crisis Management and Reconstruction. 
Cyber resilience should present some cybersecurity basis 
such as patching vulnerabilities, detecting and lessening 
threats, and training programs for employees on how to 
defend their organization’s security [41]. It is about a 
continuous functionality not a yearly action as well. In 
addition, the cyber resilience idea must build into each part 
of the organizational departments, from business process 
mapping to service availability engineering to critical 
stakeholder and vendor dependency [42]. Fig. 4 presents 
components of a cyber-resilience strategy: 
Figure 4. Components of Cyber Resilience Strategy. 
Currently, there is a demand for a mature cyber resilience 
framework and specific metrics to measure cyber resilience. 
The mature cyber resilience framework must propose a set of 
features including quick response and recovery procedures in 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

minimal time in case of an incident while supporting 
organizational 
priorities 
[43]. 
The 
cyber 
resilience 
framework helps leaders to understand what cyber resilience 
is and what attitudes can support the intended cyber 
resilience [16]. Organizations need to prioritize human- 
related solutions into their cyber resilience strategy for 
workforces. Cyber resilience is not about comparison, and 
there is no final destination. It is about a measurement 
framework that scales businesses by focusing on people, 
processes and technology to make sure that entire value 
chains are resilient while adopting the desired security 
culture [39]. 
The training program should empower staff to actively 
consider cyber risk. Employees require to be trained about 
different possible security layers. As nowadays the most 
common attacks are again web applications they ought to 
know about the most popular web vulnerabilities and the 
impacts. 
For 
instance, phishing, 
social 
engineering, 
password-based attacks, injection attacks, information 
leakage, email attacks, malware attacks, ransomware, 
DDOS, etc. In addition, the role of insiders should be part of 
the cybersecurity training scheme. To follow up the 
effectiveness of the training package, random testing of 
employees should be performed. For example, a test email 
including malware can be sent to employees and their 
responses are evaluated. Therefore, it is an appropriate 
measure to undertake further education. CEO should have an 
active role in forming an impressive cyber training program. 
CEO not only has authority to create the overall 
cybersecurity strategy but also can supply executive 
guarantee for the strategy. It also helps staff to understand 
the significance of the training programs. The other C-suite 
members like CIO, or CISO bear primary accountability for 
implementing the educating procedures. In this manner, we 
take steps in building a culture of cybersecurity and increase 
cyber resilience in the organization. Furthermore, expanding 
monitoring capabilities and knowledge should be trained 
with the aim of receiving better cyber resilience 
performance. 
A. Measuring Cyber Resilience 
It should be an ultimate mission for organizations to 
concentrate on their cyber resilience capabilities and the 
actual influences emerging from the technical and the 
organizational security measures in order to evaluate the 
cybersecurity posture [44]. In other words, measuring and 
quantifying the state of cyber resilience are essential because 
leaders decide about additional security measures. 
Traditional security metrics restrict vision about the real 
performance of cyber resilience provisions as they merely 
pay attention to existing security controls or completion of 
particular security necessities [45]. For instance, sometimes 
organizations measure the state of security awareness among 
employees through evaluating participation on mandatory 
security training course. However, completing an E-learning 
module will not necessarily assure to behave proper in case 
of a real security threat [46]. To correct such loss in the 
traditional security metrics model, some ability-metrics are 
needed to assess outcome of cyber resilience performance. A 
meaningful cyber resilience metrics model argues a spectrum 
of metrics includes ability to avert social engineering, ability 
to 
engage 
threat 
intelligence, 
ability 
to 
address 
vulnerabilities, ability to handle cyber incidents, ability to 
resist malware, ability to resist system intrusions, ability to 
resist DDoS attacks, ability to protect credentials, ability to 
protect key assets and ability to measure and minimize 
damage [9], and ability to assess insider threats. We believe 
in the predominance of evaluating the metrics model versus 
actually occurred attack scenarios in different industries, to 
check the degree of the avert ability in various stages of the 
attacks. 
Each organization indicates its unique security risks. 
Therefore, there is no unique cyber resilience model which 
fits all imaginable features of risk [10]. Based on the 
described opinion above and in the literature, measuring 
cyber resilience can be accomplished by the following core 
guidelines with the aim of finding the breaches faster, fixing 
them faster and minimize their impact: 
 
Provide a centralized asset management system. 
Specify organizational valuable possession including 
hardware, software and data. Isolate backup data. 
Recognize critical potentialities that may act against 
the asset and the demanded organizational cyber 
resilience. 
 
Define the interlinkage between the organizational 
systems and find out how the interconnectivity 
makes the system vulnerable versus the actual attack 
scenarios. In this regard, ensure proper security 
monitoring for the organizational perimeter. 
 
Recognize the organizational characteristics, current 
organizational cyber resilience attitude; partner with 
peers, competitors and public entities to emphasize 
threat intelligence sharing among the organizational 
networks. 
 
Consider people hiring cycle and how to develop 
people’s skills & behavior. Effective cyber resilience 
needs a strong cultural concentration driven by the 
organization’s board and C-level management which 
reflects in the organization via wide programs to 
educate and increase cyber awareness of staff and 
third parties. 
 
Measure towards a culture of trust, organizational 
agility and continue to stakeholders trust and 
transparency at the same time. 
VI. 
BUILDING CYBERSECUIRTY CULTURE BASED ON 
BEHAVIOR 
Cybersecurity empowers organizational objectives and 
progressively provides competitive benefit [41]. Security 
culture is a set of security-based norms, values, attitudes and 
obligations within an organization. It especially focuses on 
the human related matters. Security culture adds value by 
evaluating shared opinions, customs, social behavior, 
adequate investment and management instruction for 
cybersecurity [15]. Improving security culture increases 
organizations security readiness [39]. It is a fact that the 
security culture is built top down. Building and maintaining a 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

security culture notably leads to a higher security awareness 
among employees. As a result, employees will naturally 
behave as a proactive protective layer. It means, more 
attention to security culture gives greater likelihood that 
employees follow the security practices and consequently 
behave more securely. It finally causes overall reduction in 
the organizational risks. In general security culture is 
influenced by seven main dimensions: attitude, behavior, 
cognition, 
communication, 
compliance, 
norms 
and 
responsibility [41]. 
Attitude describes the feelings and beliefs that 
individuals propose to security protocols and security issues 
[14] [41]. Behavior refers to all activities of employees that 
have direct and indirect impact on security issues within an 
organization [40]. Behavior is defined as the combination of 
actions and habits in a situation, environment or stimulus 
[12]. Cognition discusses awareness, knowledge and 
employees’ understanding of the security issues and related 
activities. 
Communication 
is 
about 
the 
quality 
of 
communication channels to share cybersecurity events, news 
and analysis of the security-related subjects. It encourages a 
real sense of belonging and helps solve security problems 
and 
incident 
reporting 
[41]. 
In 
a 
well-structured 
cybersecurity 
culture, 
leadership 
communicates 
the 
organizational security principles which should not be 
violated. These include procedural compliance, questioning 
attitude, integrity compliance, depth of knowledge, forceful 
backup and formality [23]. Compliance ensures knowledge 
about written security policies and determines security 
policies’ scope which must be followed by employees. 
Norms talk about knowledge and commitment to unwritten 
management rules in organizations. Responsibility makes 
explicit how employees understand the significance of their 
role in supporting or threatening the security of their 
organization [41]. 
In constructing cybersecurity culture based on insiders’ 
behavior, leadership also should train employees to listen to 
the internal alarms, search for causes and take right action. In 
addition, leadership should encourage procedural compliance 
and a questioning attitude among staff [15]. Employees with 
a questioning attitude usually perform double-and triple-
check work, keep notifying for anomalies, and are never 
pleased with a less-than-complete response [23]. Moreover, 
compromising behavior which leads to security breaches, 
usually means breaches in the security principles [15]. For 
instance, imagine a system admin with fewer access 
limitations surfing the web and downloading an infected 
video clip. It clearly violates integrity and the procedural 
compliance. An employee who clicks on a malicious emailed 
link during online shopping is in phishing danger. It indicates 
lack of a questioning attitude, depth of knowledge and lack 
of procedural compliance. A beginner network administrator 
installs an update without consulting the implementation 
guide and with no supervision. Therefore, the former security 
upgrades are unpatched. In this case, depth of knowledge, 
procedural compliance, and forceful backup causes the 
problem. Think about a network help desk that resets a 
connection without exploring the reason for the deactivation. 
It might be an automated shutdown to prohibit an 
unauthorized access. It is again a type of breaking procedural 
compliance and a questioning attitude [23]. 
There is no conclusive method to establish a concrete 
cybersecurity culture but working actively on the behavior 
changing process. To achieve it, top-level management 
should specify the desired behavioral pattern and formulate 
how to reach goals and implement them. Improving security 
culture definitely provides more secure behavior from staffs’ 
side. It consequently mitigates the general risks statistics 
within organizations. Below, we supply some points that can 
be beneficial in the way of improving the security culture 
into organizations: 
 
Set up periodic risk assessment and an ongoing 
monitoring solution for early discovering the 
organizational risks. Define human factor a serious 
matter in the risk assessment procedure. 
 
Define a human-related ability metric in the 
organizational cyber resilience metrics model. 
Measure the individuals’ awareness and behavior 
with it. 
 
Expand a security-awareness culture; make aware 
employees about the desired behavior, unpleasant 
consequences and their responsibility in lack of 
compliance. Shape a strong security culture scheme 
by use of the seven main effective dimensions: 
attitude, 
behavior, 
cognition, 
communication, 
compliance, norms and responsibility. 
 
Create a positive cybersecurity culture by involving 
psychological methods into the security culture 
scheme, 
using 
novel 
“polymorphic” 
security 
warnings, rewarding and penalizing desired and 
undesired cyber behavior. 
 
Deploy automated awareness-training programs for a 
varied 
audience 
including 
all 
organizational 
departments and use unified communication tools 
and attack simulations. Define core organizational 
values 
and 
communicate 
the 
security-related 
leadership instructions clearly in a prescribed 
manner in a proper atmosphere without side 
descriptions which lead to inattention, faulty 
assumption and other errors. 
 
Take advantage of an analytical-driven security 
strategy by mobilizing an active messaging program 
across the organization, and develop a security 
community with peers to share knowledge and learn 
from them. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The contribution of the paper resides in the multi-
factoring CIS challenges to prevent the cybersecurity attacks 
in organizations, with a special focus on the complexity of 
human factors. To manage cybersecurity risks, it is inevitable 
promoting a people- and technology-centric comprehensive 
approach in organizations. We specify the importance of 
differentiating human errors and violations based on the 
individuals’ attitudes and characteristics. In this manner, we 
highlight the significance of the interdependency among 
organizational components which may affect employees’ 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

general performance and actions. Improving cybersecurity 
culture is the main mission in this paper. We discuss how 
cybersecurity 
culture 
can 
increase 
organizations’ 
cybersecurity readiness. We highlight the seven main 
components to improve a security culture model: attitude, 
behavior, cognition, communication, compliance, norms and 
responsibility. Thus, employees naturally behave as a 
proactive protective layer as defined in the cybersecurity 
culture model. The human-centric approach leads to overall 
reduction of cybersecurity risks in parallel with the 
technology-centric approach. As a result, cybersecurity 
resilience seriously restricts the scope of cybercrime in 
organizations. A mature cyber security resilience framework 
should include some ability-metrics for evaluation of the 
cybersecurity resilience performance. Future research could 
continue to explore the desired human behaviors that 
improve cybersecurity culture and accordingly form proper 
cybersecurity resilience. In addition, it should be investigated 
how an organization can achieve the desired behaviors from 
individuals. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Gregory Vial, Understanding digital transformation: A review 
and 
a 
research 
agenda, 
pp.4, 
2019, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2019.01.003. 
[2] Patrick Katuruza, IT-OT Convergence: Managing the 
Cybersecurity 
Risks, 
2021. 
Available 
from:https://gca.isa.org/blog/it-ot-convergence-managing-the-
cybersecurity-risks. 
[3] Richard Paes, David C Mazur, and Bruce K. Venne, A Guide 
to Securing Industrial Control Networks -IT/OT Convergence 
,IEEE, Dec. 2019, pp.49-50. Electronic ISSN:1558-0598, 
https://doi.org/10.1109/MIAS.2019.2943630. 
[4] Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency CISA, 
Insider Threat Mitigation Guide, pp. 20-21,2020. 
[5] EU Data Protection Board, Examples Regarding Personal 
Data Breach Notification, pp. 15-16,2021. 
[6] Pupillo Lorenzo, Fantin Stefano, Afonso Ferreira, and Polito 
Carolina, 
Artificial 
Intelligence 
and 
Cybersecurity 
Technology, Governance and Policy Challenges, pp. 40-
41,2021. 
[7] World Economic Forum with collaboration with Oxford 
University, 
Cybersecurity, 
Emerging 
Technology 
and 
Systemic Risk, pp. 44,2020. 
[8] Alessandro Annarelli and Giulia Palombi, Digitalization 
Capabilities for Sustainable Cyber Resilience: A Conceptual 
Framework, pp.6,2021. https://doi.org/10.3390/su132313065. 
[9] Participants in the Cyber Security Shared Research Program, 
Library of Cyber Resilience Metrics, pp.10,2017. 
[10] Jim Alkove, Cyber security is no longer enough: businesses 
need cyber 
resilience, 
Available  
        From:https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/11/why-move-
cybersecurity-to-cyber-resilience/2021. 
[11] Yuchong Liand Qinghui Liu, A comprehensive review study 
of cyber-attacks and cyber security; Emerging trends and 
recent 
developments, 
pp. 
7-8, 
2021.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2021.08.126 
[12] Keri Pearlson, Sean Sposito, Masha Arbismanand Josh 
A.Schwartz, 
How 
Yahoo 
Built 
a 
Culture 
of 
Cybersecurity,2021. 
[13] Sivaram Chelakkara, CEH, CISSP, and GCISP, People, 
Processand Technology in Cybersecurity, pp. 4-6,2020.  
[14] Check Point Software, Cyber Attack Trends, pp. 21-24,2021. 
[15] Stjepan Groš, A Critical View on CIS Controls, pp. 3-5,2019. 
[16] Nena Giandomenico and Juliana de Groot, Insider vs. 
Outsider Data Security Threats: What is the Greater Risk?, 
Available 
from:https://digitalguardian.com/blog/insider-
outsider-data-security-threats,2020. 
[17] Neetesh Saxena, Emma Hayes, Elisa Bertino, and Patrick Ojo, 
Impact and Key Challenges of Insider Threats on 
Organizations 
and 
Critical 
Businesses, 
pp. 
16-17, 
2020.doi:10.3390/electronics9091460 
[18] Danny Murphy, Insider Threat Statistics, pp.6,2021. 
[19] Martin Fishbein and Icek Ajzen, The Theory of Reasoned 
Actionof Fishbein and Ajzen, pp. 7-8,1975. 
[20] Icek Ajzen, The Theory of Planned Behaviour, 1991. 
[21] Regner Sabillon, Jeimy J. Cano M, Jordi Serra Ruiz, and 
Victor 
Cavaller, 
Cybercriminals, 
cyberattacks 
and 
cybercrime, pp.8,2016. 
[22] Michael Swanagan, CISSO, CISA and CISM, Cyber Security 
Statistics The Ultimate List of Stats Data and Trends, 
pp.9,2022. 
[23] Tashfiq Rahman, Rohani Rohan, Debajyoti Pal, and Prasert 
Kanthamanon, Human Factors in Cybersecurity: A Scoping 
Reviewpp. 8-9, 2021.doi:10.1145/3468784.3468789 
[24] Alessandro 
Pollinietal, 
Leveraging 
human 
factors 
in 
cybersecurity: an integrated methodological approach, pp 
11,2021. 
[25] Edward Staddon, Valeria Loscri and Nathalie Mitton, Attack 
Categorisation for IoT Applications in Critical Infrastructures, 
pp. 14, 2021.https://doi.org/10.3390/app11167228. 
[26] Moti Zwilling, Trends and Challenges Regarding Cyber Risk 
Mitigation by CISOs, A Systematic Literature and Experts’ 
Opinion Review Based on Text Analytics, pp. 7,2022. 
[27] Jongkil Jay Jeong, Joanne Mihelcic, Gillian Christina 
Oliver,andCarsten 
Rudolph, 
Towards 
an 
Improved 
Understanding of Human Factors in Cybersecurity,pp. 5-6, 
2019. doi:10.1109/CIC48465.2019.00047. 
[28] Lee Hadlington, Employees Attitude towards Cyber Security 
and Risky Online Behaviours: An Empirical Assessment in 
the United Kingdom,pp. 9,2018. 
[29] Kristina Gyllensten and Marianne Torner, Therole of 
organizational and   social   factors   for   information   
security   in   a   nuclear    power industry, pp. 10-11,2021. 
[30] Rao Faizan Ali, Dhanapal Durai Dominic Panneer Selvam, 
Emad Azhar, and Mobashar Rehman, Information Security 
Behavior and Information Security Policy Compliance: A 
Systematic 
Literature 
Review 
for 
Identifying 
the 
Transformation 
Process 
from 
Noncompliance 
to 
Compliance,pp. 17, 2021.doi:10.3390/app11083383 
[31] Rick Wash, Prioritizing Security over Usability: Strategies for 
how 
people 
choose 
passwords, 
pp. 
8, 
2021.https://doi.org/10.1093/cybsec/tyab012 
[32] Angela Sasseand Ivan Flechais, Usable Security: Why Do We 
Need It? How Do We Get It? PP. 4-5, 2005. 
[33] Sylwia Agata Beczkowska and Iwona Grabarek, The 
Importance of the Human Factor in Safety for the Transport 
of Dangerous Goods, pp.13, 2021. 
[34] John Soldatos, Security Risk Management for The Internet of 
Things Technologies and Techniques for IOT Security, 
Privacy and Data Protection, pp. 35-37,2020. 
[35] Sebastian Hengstler and Natalya Pryazhnykova, Reviewing 
the Interrelation Between Information Security and Culture, 
pp. 7,2021. 
[36] Jing Wanget al., Research Trend of the Unified Theory of 
Acceptance and Use of Technology Theory: A Bibliometric 
Analysis, pp. 14, 2022. doi:10.3390/su14010010. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[37] Judith de Groot and Linda Steg, Morality and Prosocial 
Behavior: The Role of Awareness, Responsibility, and Norms 
in 
the 
Norm 
Activation 
Model, 
pp. 
4, 
2009.https://doi.org/10.3200/SOCP.149.4.425-449. 
[38] Linda Steg and Judith de Groot, Explaining Prosocial 
        Intentions: Testing causal relationships in the norm activation 
model, pp. 8, 2010. doi:10.1348/014466609X477745.  
[39] Accenture Security, Innovate for Cyber Resilience, pp. 
27,2020. 
[40] DanielA.SepúlvedaEstay,RishikeshSahay,MichaelB.Barfod,a
ndChristian D.Jensen, A systematic review of cyber-resilience 
assessment 
frameworks, 
pp. 
9-10, 
2020.doi:10.1016/j.cose.2020.101996. 
[41] Javvad Malik, How Security Culture Invokes Secure 
Behaviour, 
Available 
from:https://www.infosecurity-
magazine.com/blogs/security-culture-invokes-secure/,2021. 
[42] Thomas H.Llansó, Daniel A.Hedgecock, and J.Aaron 
Pendergrass, The State of Cyber Resilience: Now and in the 
Future, pp. 4,2021. 
[43] lessandro Annarelli and Giulia Palombi, Digitalization 
Capabilities for         Sustainable         CyberResilience,2021. 
        pp.4,https://doi.org/10.3390/su132313065. 
[44] Aviram Zrahia, Threat intelligence sharing between 
cybersecurity vendors: Network, dyadic, and agent views, pp. 
6-7, 2018.https://doi.org/10.1093/cybsec/tyy008. 
[45] Reinder Wolthuis, Shared Research Program Cyber Security, 
pp.11- 12,2021. 
[46] McKinsey, Cybersecurity in a Digital Era, pp. 44, 2020. 
[47] Fortinet, Insider Threat Report, pp. 5,2019. 
[48] Securonix, Insider Threat Report, pp. 8,2020. 
[49] Nestor Gilbert, 31 Crucial Insider Statistics Latest Threat and 
Challenges, pp. 3, 2022. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-007-0
SECURWARE 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

