Using Ethical Hacking to Analyze BYOD Safety in Corporations 
 
Roman Jašek, Jakub Nožička 
Faculty of Applied Informatics 
Tomas Bata University in Zlín 
Zlín, Czech Republic 
e-mail: {jasek, nozicka}@fai.utb.cz 
 
Abstract—Tablets and smart phones using the Android 
platform are still more popular for the general population than 
devices using operating system Microsoft Windows or iOS. 
This fact is useful for hackers. For hackers, it is important to 
always carry with them tools to scan the network traffic in a 
manner that is not obvious to others. It may be difficult, and 
sometimes impossible, to connect to a network that the hacker 
wants to attach using metallic cable. Hackers are less striking 
in scanning network traffic on the wireless network and even 
less striking in scanning when using tablets. For this purpose, 
is perfect to use tablet with Kali Linux (Android platform). 
Such a tablet can be modified to be used for attacks on 
corporate wireless network and potential hacker becomes even 
less striking. Kali Linux distribution does not have high 
hardware department, therefore can be used at tablets with 
basic hardware equipment. 
Keywords- hacking; tablet; android; Kali Linux; wireless 
network. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The aim of the work was to demonstrate that BYOD 
(Bring Your Own Device), which is becoming still more 
popular in organizations and can provide security weakness 
in organization. Percentage of organizations that use BYOD 
is unstoppably growing every year. Potential hacker, who 
wants attacking on wireless networks in organization that 
using BYOD tablets will be conspicuous with using of 
notebook. This problem can be solved with using of tablet 
for this purpose.  Also was proved that tablet is a universal 
tool, which can be used for penetration testing of wireless 
networks, and also that this solution is low cost while 
maintaining all its functions, compared with a laptop.  
 
Some technical papers were published with this aim. 
Security of Tablets in BYOD Programs are published, for 
instance in [4] and [5]. These papers are describing present 
security of tablets, and forecasting how many tablets will be 
using in next years. Aim of this paper were verify, than tablet 
can be suitable tool for hacking of wireless networks in 
corporations. Some technical papers were published with this 
aim. Security of Tablets in BYOD Programs are published, 
for instance in [4] and [5]. These papers are describing 
present security of tablets, and forecasting how many tablets 
will be using in next years. In [7] and [8] the authors are 
describing just possibilities of sending secure data from 
BYOD devices to public cloud or to private server.    
 
Firstly, basic information about hardware which was 
used for this research. In next section software which was 
used for hacking are described. In section IV and are 
presented how to install Kali Linux in to tablet and how can 
be executed attack to wireless network via tablet. There were 
created two testing tablets, which can be using for 
penetration of wireless network in corporations. 
II. 
HARDWARE DESCRIPTION 
A partial goal of research was to prove that the tablet is a 
suitable and low cost solution for penetration testing of 
wireless networks. For verification of the solution, Kali 
Linux was installed on 2 tablets. As a representative of 
tablets with the lowest price, was used tablet Prestigio 
multipad 7.0 ultra duo. And as a tablet, which have better 
HW (hardware) equipment was chosen Lenovo Yoga 2. 
A. Tablet Prestigio multipad 7.0 ultra duo  
As already mentioned above, the tablet Prestigio 
multipad 7.0 ultra duo was chosen as a representative of 
tablets with the lowest price. The goal was to verify that the 
hacking can be done on this type of device. The device has a 
processor DualCore ARM A9 (RK3066) with 1.6GHz, 1GB 
RAM (Random-access memory) memory and 8 gigabytes of 
storage. This configuration is the minimum required to 
ensure all functions of Kali Linux. 
B. Tablet Lenovo Yoga 2 
Tablet Lenovo Yoga 2 was chosen as the representative 
of popular tablets. Compared with the tablet Prestigio 
multipad 7.0 ultra duo, it has better technical parameters and 
is therefore more suitable for hacking. The device has a 
processor Intel Atom Z3745, 4 x 1.86 GHz, 2GB of RAM 
and 32 GB storage. This HW configuration gives Kali Linux 
better support and faster response of system. 
C. Antenna 
For better reaction radius of hacking of wireless networks 
is needed to enhance the reach of the antenna. This can be 
ensured by using the external antenna. Android does not 
support all standard architectures chipsets used in antennas. 
Android supports just antennas with architecture realtek, as 
an example can be used popular antenna Alfa AWUS036H. 
 
III. 
SOFTWARE DESCRIPTION 
Kali Linux is a Linux distribution derived from Debian. 
Kali Linux is designed for digital forensics and penetration 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

testing. Before Kali Linux was widely used Linux 
distribution BackTrack. However, that did not fully support 
tablets architecture, despite modifications to the tablet were 
not fully stable. Kali Linux can be installed on a computer 
hard drive or it can run without installation from Live CD 
(Compact Disc). Kali Linux is distributed in 32 and 64 bit 
version. Kali Linux is even available for ARM processors 
used in Raspberry Pi computers. Kali Linux is available in 
versions for i386 and amd64 architectures, where is minimal 
configuration needed: 1GHz CPU (Central processing unit), 
8GB HDD (hard disk drive), 300 MB of RAM. 
Kali Linux contains a lot of selected applications 
designed for penetration testing. An attacker would likely 
begin at application EvilAP. EvilAP is application for 
creating a false Wi-Fi hotspot, which is ready for 
eavesdropping. EvilAP can know how to redirect all requests 
from the surroundings at the same time; because of that 
hotspot with the client (another phone, tablet, and laptop) can 
connect without their owner knowing. Once that happens, all 
communications can be monitored. If this attacker fails to 
create a fake hotspot, Aircrack-ng remains the most 
important application for network injection which is used to 
crack passwords of secured wireless networks using WEP 
(Wired Equivalent Privacy) or WPA-PSK (Wi-Fi Protected 
Access). This application requires Wi-Fi card or Wi-Fi 
adapter, which can be switched into monitoring mode, 
connecting the wireless adapter is possible on tablet. 
Application Wireshark (formerly Ethereal) is a protocol 
analyzer and packet sniffer. Among the most common 
applications is included analysis and debugging problems in 
wireless networks, software development, development of 
communication 
protocols 
and 
scanning 
network 
communication. Another useful tool for hackers is Wireshark 
application that allows setting the network interfaces to 
various modes, allowing seeing all the traffic on these 
interfaces, including broadcast and multicast. Wireshark has 
collected a lot of raw data and hackers then use many filters 
and select just data which are important. Default version of 
Kali Linux is provided with more than 300 security tools for 
hacking and penetration testing. If it still misses some 
application, user can instantly install it from the repositories 
of Linux. Kali Linux contains every tool, which hacker needs 
and expects from Linux distributions. 
As it is written below Kali Linux is a Linux distribution, 
which is free and easy to HW, also there exists images for 
small computers ranging from the popular Raspberry Pi and 
ending by some Chromebooks, this fact makes Kali Linux 
even more useful for low costs projects. 
A phenomenon known as BYOD, is increasing 
worldwide. Solution where employees use their private 
device is used in foreign countries and in the Czech Republic 
by more and more companies. BYOD solution has many 
advantages and disadvantages. The primary advantage for 
the company is economic saving, saving of the acquisition of 
working devices and software, employee together do not 
have to carry more equipment and working with it, to which 
they are accustomed. On the other side, this solution has 
many disadvantages, main disadvantage is security. 
BYOD in organizations is increasingly common, at 
present 38 percent of organizations does not provide 
employees with working IT (Information technology) 
equipment. According to a global survey by Gartner CIO 
(Chief information officer) is expected that by the end of the 
year will exceed the number of steps minded companies 40 
percent. The main reason why more and more organizations 
are thinking this way, is economic fact. But apart from the 
costs which organizations save on IT devices and the 
renewal of IT devices, employees are also more satisfied if 
they can work on their devices. BYOD also supports 
organization’s innovation by increasing the number of users 
of mobile applications in the organization’s environment. 
When BYOD is most prevalent in medium and large 
organizations, it is suitable for smaller business that can help 
development of organizations without large investments. 
BYOD is widespread throughout the world; however, the 
organizations in the United States use BYOD more than 
organizations in Europe. Not surprisingly, the highest safety 
arouses interest in using the technology BYOD. Risk of data 
lost on mobile platforms is particularly urgent. Some security 
policy organizations using BYOD are designed to share data 
taking place only in the cloud, which generally reduces the 
risk of safety. 
Since 2012, tablets have become a phenomenon in 
organizations, the organization overwhelmingly reaching for 
tablets running Android and iOS, tablets with Windows OS 
(operating systems) and other, occupy at market a negligible 
2% popularity. BYOD tablets were at the beginning of 2012, 
the domain of iOS, which occupied a market of over 60%, 
but by 2013 this number is reduced when Android gets to the 
forefront. According to analysts, this is due to one thing and 
that is the economy, the cheapest devices which use iOS 
participate at the market price of 250 USD (United States 
dollar), while the price of useful Android devices start at US 
(United States) $ 100. Currently, the difference is clearly 
noticeable, tablets running Android, with nearly 70% share 
of installations in organizations; clearly defeats tablet 
devices running iOS. 
This fact is playing right into potential hackers hands for 
attacking wireless networks using tablets running Android. 
Hacker who uses attack tablets must use the Android system, 
as shown by surveys, most organizations use precisely the 
Android device and the attacker becomes less conspicuous 
for the neighborhood [1]-[6]. 
IV. 
KALI LINUX INSTALLATION FOR ANDROID  
   For Kali Linux developers, it was firstly important to 
make their products work seamlessly even on devices that 
are using Android. Currently, Kali Linux distribution can be 
installed on devices with Android 4.4 and above. Installation 
requires at least 5 GB of free memory in the internal memory 
or external storage and a fast Internet connection [3]. 
A. Configuring Kali Linux for Android 
To install Kali Linux user must do a few basic things. 
The user can select their architecture to verify that the 
downloaded distribution Kali Linux is genuine; set the type 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

and location of the installation on the device. In Figure 1 are 
all necessary settings for the installation of Kali Linux [3]. 
 
Figure 1.  Linux Deploy properties. 
 
B. Downloading Kali Linux image 
Once the user makes all settings as you can see in Figure 
2, Kali Linux begins to download image from Linux servers. 
This process is directly dependent on the speed of your 
Internet connection. 
 
Figure 2.  Linux Deploy properties. 
C. Starting chroot Kali Linux 
Once the user makes all settings, as you can see in Figure 
3, Kali Linux begins to download image from Linux servers. 
This process is directly dependent on the speed of your 
Internet connection. 
 
Figure 3.  Starting Linux Deploy properties. 
D. Login to chroot Kali Linux 
After installing and starting Linux Kali user must login 
into the GUI (Graphical User Interface), to begin working in 
Kali Linux. For this purpose were used androidvnc. Android 
browser VNC (Virtual Network Computing) needs to set just 
a few trinkets, first he selects the new connection type, enters 
a nickname, enters a password changeme, and 5900 as a port.  
After this is all filled in, just click a button to connect, as you 
can see in Figure 4. [3]. 
 
Figure 4.  Android VNC properties. 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

After logging in to the tablet version of Kali Linux users 
will work with the same graphical interface as in classical 
version of the desktop Kali Linux.  
V. 
KALI LINUX ENVIRONMENT 
After successful installation of Kali Linux, users will see 
graphic environment of Kali Linux. As seen in Figure 5, Kali 
Linux distribution has the same graphical environment both 
on a tablet and a laptop; moreover tablet version of Kali 
Linux offers the same features as the live version that runs 
on a laptop. 
 
Figure 5.  Linux Deploy environment. 
For hacker is most important to connect to the 
organization's wireless network. Depending on the used 
device, networks can be scanned by device's internal 
antenna, or by external antenna connected to the tablet as 
seen in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6.  Kali Linux ethernet settings. 
In case it is possible to scan wireless network, so for 
sniffing passwords is ideal tools Aircrack-ng, as shows 
Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7.  Kali Linux Aircrack-ng. 
After connecting to wireless network hacker is already 
able to do all sorts of network security tests or security 
attacks. It is important to hacker to monitor network traffic, 
for this purpose it is suitable Wireshark, Dsniff, TShark, 
through which hacker can capture passwords, for example 
passwords from POP3 (Post Office Protocol) email accounts. 
Furthermore hacker can use Nmap tool, which enables it to 
obtain information about the computers on the network, what 
services are available in the network, what types of network 
firewalls and uses and much more. Hacker can also forge AP 
(access point) in an organizationn and can use the tablet as a 
fake AP, on which the other users can connect. Except of 
attacks on organizations network, attacks can be realized via 
tablet bluetooth attacks on mobile phones in the 
organization. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this work, we described security risks of BYOD 
solution when using a tablet. The main advantage of this 
BYOD solution is another chance for security attack by an 
organization, which organizations often ignore. Tablet as a 
penetration tool provides same value as a notebook, but with 
less cost and far less conspicuous for the surroundings. It 
was closely examined that the tablets with the installation of 
Kali Linux provide the same attacks as a full-fledged 
notebook. The motivation for the approach that was outlined 
in work is absolutely inconspicuousness of attacker in an 
organization which uses BYOD for their employees. 
Popularity of BYOD is still growing, organizations says, that 
primary advantage is economic savings compared to buying 
your own equipment. Organizations are aware of security 
risks of BYOD and primary separate corporate and user’s 
private data. If an employee uses a BYOD tablet in 
organization, so in most cases employee works with 
corporate data in the cloud, on remote desktop, which is 
connected to the tablet. Proposed solution provides hacker 
more anonymity, because attacker with the tablet in an 
organization which uses BYOD tablets becomes even more 
unobtrusive than attacker who uses a laptop. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Internal Grant Agency of 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
Tomas 
Bata 
University 
under 
the 
project 
No. 
IGA/FAI/2016/026. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Hayes and K. Kotwica, “Bring Your Own Device to Work: 
Trend Report,“ Oxford: Newnes, 2013. 
[2] D. Assing S. Calé, “Mobile Access Safety: Beyond BYOD, “ 
London: John Wiley & Sons, 2013. 
[3] M. Alamanni, “Kali Linux Wireless Penetration Testing 
Essentials, “ Birningham: Packt Publishing Ltd, 2013. 
[4] M. 
Karch, 
“Android 
for 
Work: 
Productivity 
for 
Professionals,“ New York: Apress, 2010. 
[5] Gartner, “Gartner Predicts by 2017, Half of Employers will 
Require Employees to Supply Their Own Device for Work 
Purposes. 
“ 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2466615 
[6] Gartner. Gartner Says Tablets Are the Sweet Spot of BYOD 
Programs. 
“ 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2909217.  
Article in a journal: 
[7] U. Vignesh and S. Asha, “Modifying Security Policies 
Towards BYOD” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 50, May 
2015, pp. 511 – 516, doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.04.023 
[8] M. Olalere, M. Abdullah, R. Mahmod and A. Abdullah, “A 
Review of Bring Your Own Device on Security Issues” 
Volume 
4, 
No. 
4, 
April 
2015, 
pp. 
62-73, 
doi: 
10.1177/2158244015580372
 
 
 
 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-493-0
SECURWARE 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

