Secure Distributed System inspired by Ant Colonies  
for Road Traffic Management in Emergency Situations  
 
A. Peinado, A. Ortiz-García, J. Munilla 
Dept. Ingeniería de Comunicaciones 
E.T.S. Ingeniería de Telecomunicación, Universidad de Málaga 
Málaga, Spain 
apeinado@ic.uma.es, aortiz@ic.uma.es, munilla@ic.uma.es 
 
 
Abstract—In this work, we present a distributed system 
designed for road traffic management. The system is inspired 
by the behavior of the ant colonies. The distributed design 
responds to the particular limitations of an emergency 
situation; mainly, the fixed infrastructures are out of service 
because no energy supply is available. The implementation is 
based on the VANET facilities complemented with passive 
RFID tags or GPS localization. The vehicles can use the 
information of previous vehicles to dynamically decide the best 
path. A scale prototype has been developed to validate the 
system. It consists of several small size robotic vehicles, a test 
road circuit and a visual monitorization system. The security of 
the system is provided by a combination of data aggregation 
and reputation lists. 
Keywords - security;emergency;reputation lists;ant colonies; 
road traffic;RFID;VANET;robotic vehicles 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Currently, road traffic management systems are based on 
centralized strategies that use a variety of technologies, such 
as cameras and sensors to obtain information about the actual 
traffic state. The data are analyzed in a data processing 
center where decisions are made and communicated to the 
operational services and the drivers through panels and 
displays located on the road itself. An example is the panels 
that inform drivers of the maximum speed on motorways and 
highways to access certain cities, which varies depending on 
traffic conditions [3], [15]. 
In emergency situations, it is very common that 
telecommunications networks do not work properly, mainly 
affected by falling energy sources that feed the fixed 
infrastructure of these networks. Consequently, although the 
data processing centers have alternative power sources, and 
even their own networks for data communication, the lack of 
energy affects the cameras and sensors in a very high 
percentage. 
In this paper, we propose a system for road traffic 
management which can continue to operate when the energy 
supply is not available for the infrastructure, in short, a 
system that does not rely on such infrastructure to reach the 
objective. This system is mainly supported on the advantages 
of vehicular networks (VANETs), as no external energy 
supply is needed. 
Vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs) [6] are presented 
as a generation of networks oriented to improve the safety 
and driving comfort. These networks allow connectivity 
among mobile hosts (vehicles). This way, vehicles in a 
VANET can share information to each other in a short range 
by using WAVE wireless protocol, i.e., the IEEE 802.11p 
technology [7]. This communication between nodes is 
named V2V (for vehicle-to-vehicle).  
The use of a light infrastructure or a backup network is 
also considered in VANET scenarios as a mean to improve 
the services offered by the network providing the so called 
vehicle-to-infrastructure communication (V2I or I2V).  
The vast majority of defined and developed applications 
in VANETs are related to road safety, and are based on the 
transmission of information between vehicles on accidents, 
congestion levels in certain parts of the road, signaling 
dangerous sections, etc.. Sometimes the information is 
generated in a vehicle that begins to transmit it to the others. 
Other times the information is generated in the infrastructure 
and transmitted through the Road side units (RSU) [1]. 
These architectures also allow the development, in a 
natural way, of traffic management systems getting 
information about the current traffic and informing drivers 
instantly. However, the use of the infrastructure represents a 
risk to consider in emergency situations [15]. 
Accordingly, the traffic management system should be 
based only on V2V communications. We proposed such a 
system, in which every vehicle decides the path at each node 
(crossroad) using the information provided by previous 
vehicles following a procedure inspired by the behavior of 
the ant colonies.  
Section II describes the proposed model for road traffic 
management inspired by the ant colonies. Section III focuses 
on the security aspects of the proposed system. Sections IV 
and V deal with the implementation details and a scale 
prototype performed to validate the system and demonstrate 
its operation. Section VI describes the results and future 
work.  
II. 
MODEL INSPIRED BY ANT COLONIES 
Taking into account the particular conditions of 
emergency situations, it seems reasonable to implement a 
management algorithm that can be performed in a distributed 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

manner, i.e., through the collaboration of the vehicles 
themselves, without the need for fixed infrastructure. 
Therefore, in this paper, we propose the use of a system 
based on the behavior of ant colonies [5]. While there are 
numerous algorithms for transport and logistics based on this 
principle, all of them are applied in simulation and 
optimization tasks, in order to calculate the a priori best 
routes 
[4],[17]. 
The 
present 
proposal 
is 
a 
direct 
implementation of the algorithm used by ants to search for 
food. This implementation allows the vehicles to choose the 
suitable route in real-time while drive on the road. 
In general terms, each ant initially chooses a random 
walk from the nest in search of food. When an ant finds food, 
it leaves a trail of pheromones on their way back to the nest 
so that the other ants can follow it. This substance disappears 
as time passes. This fact allows the ants always decide to 
follow the path with the higher level of pheromone. Thus, all 
ants end up finding the shortest path to the food. 
This operating principle can be applied, with some minor 
modifications, to control the road traffic, providing every 
vehicle with the capacity to leave a "trace" and detect the 
presence of "pheromone"; that is, providing a distributed 
mechanism without the help of a fixed infrastructure. The 
goal, in this case, would not be to find the shortest path, but 
properly distribute the traffic so as to reduce overall 
congestion level, and sometimes, as in emergency cases, help 
the vehicles to find the available routes. 
The main modifications to be applied to the original 
algorithm are the followings. 
A. Route selection 
Provided that the vehicles have the ability to detect a trail 
of pheromones, unlike ants, vehicles should choose the path 
with lower level of pheromones. In this way, the vehicles 
could be distributed uniformly avoiding large concentrations 
along the same route. 
It is important to note that the choice of the route is done 
by the driver finally. This means that the algorithm only 
informs the driver about the route he should take. If the 
driver chooses not to follow the recommendation, the system 
also operates properly as the pheromone trail detected by 
other vehicles will always corresponds to actual state of the 
road, as the vehicles leave the trail on the route they are 
really driving. 
Moreover, the criterion for choosing the recommended 
route may be configurable in order to meet the different 
needs of users. Sometimes the vehicles may be interested to 
take the road less congested and other times, in emergency 
situations, it may be more efficient that everyone follows the 
same route, because it is probably the only one available. 
B. Trail generation 
The trail of pheromone should be emitted and maintained 
in a discontinuous way. Instead of leaving the trail along the 
whole route, the vehicles should generate a given amount of 
pheromones concentrated on a specific point of the road. 
That amount should be the equivalent to the pheromones 
emitted during a bounded path. In this way, the vehicles 
detect the trail of pheromones only in those specific points. 
This modification requires preliminary planning to 
analyze the strategic points where to generate and detect 
pheromones. 
C. Pheromones storage 
The level of pheromones cannot be stored on the road, 
but in the vehicles for reasons of synchronization, as 
described in the next section. Hence, the proposed algorithm 
for traffic management is a distributed implementation of the 
algorithm used by ant colonies to find food. 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS 
The algorithm presented in the previous section mainly 
relies on V2V communications. This resource allows the 
vehicles to send and receive messages representing the 
generation and detection of pheromones. 
However, an auxiliary system is mandatory to manage 
the locations where the vehicles have to generate and/or 
detect the pheromones. In this paper, we consider two 
different proposals: RFID and GPS location. Next, this and 
other implementation aspects are described.  
A. Location system 
The radio frequency identification (RFID) systems have 
been outlined from the beginning as a way to extend the 
functionality of the Internet of Things (IoT) [2] to all kinds 
of objects, adding one tag with certain information that can 
be read and/or modified through a radio interface [9]. 
These systems basically consist of reader devices that 
interrogate some passive devices (tags), which respond by 
using energy they take from the field applied by the reader. 
Communication between the reader and the tag is established 
wirelessly by inductive coupling in the case of HF tags or 
backscattering in the case of UHF tags. 
Since the communication between the tag and the reader 
is wireless and the tags do not need a power supply (they are 
passive), RFID system is a perfect candidate for our system. 
RFID provides I2V and V2I connections. Applications for 
toll control and automatic detection of traffic signs are 
supported by RFID [8],[13], [14]. 
Moreover, the Global Positioning System (GPS) is the 
most widely used location system based on satellite. At 
present, we can consider that the great majority of vehicles 
have a GPS signal receiver. In emergency situations, the 
vehicle may continue to use the system [16]. Therefore, it 
constitutes a good choice for the management system 
proposed in this paper. 
In any case, RFID or GPS are necessary to establish the 
points of generation and detection of pheromones and route 
selection. These places are called control places. 
B. Definition of control places. 
The definition of control places is performed by means of 
the identification of the most significant nodes of the road. 
These nodes are the most important junctions or 
roundabouts. At each input, all possible outputs are 
considered. 
Input locations are associated with locations where 
vehicles have to decide where to continue the route. To do 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

so, the vehicles consult the data received from other vehicles. 
Output locations are used to indicate the vehicles when they 
must emit pheromones (Fig. 1). This emission consists of a 
message that primarily contains two values: 
• 
IDSVeh : Identification of the vehicle that caused the 
message 
• 
IDloc : Identification of the location that corresponds 
to the sending of the message 
 
Figure 1.  Identification of relevant places 
C. Vehicle configuration 
Pheromone levels generated by the vehicles are not 
stored on the road, as would ants, but kept updated in each 
vehicle independently. That is, each vehicle controls every 
pheromone emission produced in its area of interest. 
To do so, vehicles use a register (internal local variable) 
for each output. We consider that, in this first stage of 
definition and prototyping, the vehicles know the control 
places before they begin to apply this system. In future 
stages, currently under work, we will consider that the 
control places will be dynamically discovered by the vehicles 
and incorporated to their internal maps.  
The registers are initialized to zero. Each time a vehicle 
drives through a control place, a message that contains IDSVeh 
and IDloc is broadcasted, following the usual scheme 
employed in VANETS. When a vehicle receives a message, 
the register associated to IDloc is updated. 
Updating registers is not merely cumulative because we 
must take into account the effect of disappearance 
(evaporation) of pheromones in function of time. For this 
reason, it is essential to know the time between messages 
related to the same route. 
This time control is locally (internally) performed. That 
is, the vehicles' clocks are not synchronized. The important 
thing is to know the arrival time difference of the messages 
related to the same route. Therefore, the vehicle will store the 
last timestamp received in each register. 
D. Pheromones generation 
Unlike ants, the vehicles generate pheromones at discrete 
points. In any case, the general behavior is very similar, in 
such a way that the generated pheromones are added to the 
existing quantity at every discrete point. At the same time, 
the accumulated amount of pheromones disappears as time 
passes. Hence, the generation and updating processes are as 
follows: 
• 
Generation process. When a vehicle drives over a 
generation point, it sends a message with the 
identification number IDloc of that location. 
• 
Disappearing effect. When a vehicle drives over a 
generation point, it compares the timestamps of all 
registers with its current local time. In this way, the 
vehicle computes the time elapsed from the last 
pheromones 
generation. 
The 
time 
difference 
multiplied by a constant coefficient is applied to 
reduce the value of every register. Non-negatives 
values are not permitted. 
The rest of vehicles apply the same reducing 
algorithm when they receive the message. Each 
vehicle computes time differences and reduces the 
values of registers. Non-negatives values are not 
permitted. 
• 
Increase of pheromones. Once the disappearing 
effect has been applied, every vehicle included the 
one that generates the pheromones, increases the 
register value in a constant quantity of 50. This value 
maybe modified. In the experiments performed 50 
has resulted a suitable value. 
E. Route selection 
Each time a vehicle drives over a selection location, it 
performs the following operations:  
• 
Disappearing effect. The procedure described in 
previous phase is applied to update the pheromones 
status of every decision node. 
• 
Selection. The vehicle chooses the output road with 
the lowest level of pheromones. Actually, the vehicle 
only makes a recommendation. The driver chooses 
the output path following the recommendation. The 
driver could choose a different route.  In any case, 
the final decision will be reflected on the system by 
means of pheromones generated when the vehicle 
drives over the route selected. 
 
IV. 
SECURITY ANALYSIS 
The ant algorithm has proven to be effective and ensures 
its adaptation to dynamic changes in the routes. This section 
discusses the security aspects of the proposed algorithm. 
A. General considerations. 
The proposed algorithm for traffic management is based 
on V2V message exchange through the VANET. Therefore, 
we should apply the same security mechanisms as other 
messages that are used to improve road safety. As described 
in [10] and [11], authentication is the main security 
mechanism to detect false messages. Confidentiality of 
information is not a priority because the main goal is to give 
maximum exposure while ensuring the authenticity of the 
same. Accordingly, the messages described in section III 
incorporate a signature to allow verification of the 
authenticity. The signatures are generated by means of 
asymmetric or identity-based cryptosystems.  
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Finally, since the algorithm of the ants has local 
significance, the life time of the messages must be small. 
That is, the number of hops should be limited in the routing 
protocol to a small value.  
B. Reputation Lists and Data Aggregation 
Authentication is the first barrier to prevent fraudulent 
messages. However, it is not enough since an authentic 
message can convey a false content devised by a user who 
wants to sabotage the system. 
An attacker could try to overload a route sending false 
messages always indicating the same location, making 
believe that there are many vehicles on the road. In this way, 
the attacker would be reserving a path for himself, as other 
vehicles not choose a route congested. 
In [11], reputation lists are proposed to identify vehicles 
that generate false content. Specifically, two types of lists 
were proposed: the individual reputation list (IRL) that 
internally updates each vehicle when it detects a fraudulent 
message, and global reputation list (GRL) that are shared 
with all vehicles with the help of some RSU. Messages 
generated by vehicles in one of these lists will be discarded 
and not retransmitted. 
In this paper, we only use IRL because GRL rely on 
infrastructure and would not work in emergency situations. 
The IRL generation process is as follows: 
• 
When a vehicle wants to emit pheromones sends a 
message containing its own identity IDSVeh and its 
location IDloc. 
• 
Vehicles that receive the message check if IDSVeh is 
in IRL. If so, then the message is discarded and not 
retransmitted.  
• 
If IDSVeh is not in the IRL, the vehicle checks 
whether IDloc is consistent with their location, that is, 
that the message has been delivered from a nearby. 
Otherwise IDSVeh is included in the IRL and the 
message is discarded and not retransmitted. 
In a VANET, relaying messages cannot always be done 
at the right time. When a vehicle is not close to another 
vehicle, it cannot communicate. In these cases, the usual 
mode of operation of VANETs is to store the message and 
broadcast it later when another vehicle is found. This 
behavior affects the IRL, as a vehicle that receives a delayed 
message will have a different (distant) location, from which 
the message was originated, and therefore, will be considered 
as false. 
To avoid this effect, this paper proposes aggregation of 
signatures as a method of message verification to 
complement the IRL. In [10], it is proposed the use of 
aggregation for warning messages on accidents and incidents 
affecting traffic safety. A vehicle that receives a message 
will add its signature only if it detects the same incident on 
the road. 
This scheme is not applicable, as is, in the case of traffic 
management proposed in this paper. The ants algorithm only 
needs to send and receive messages containing the location 
of vehicles. Thus, vehicles can only detect if a message 
carrying IDloc was sent from near or far to that location. 
The combination of IRL and aggregation of signatures is 
performed as follows: 
• 
When a vehicle wants to emit pheromones sends a 
message containing its own identity IDSVeh and its 
location IDloc. The message will be sent only if 
neighbor vehicles exist. Delayed messages will not 
be sent. 
• 
Vehicles that receive the message check if IDSVeh is 
in IRL. If so, then the message is discarded and not 
retransmitted.  
• 
If IDSVeh is not in IRL, the vehicle checks wether 
IDloc is consistent with their location, that is, that the 
message has been delivered from a nearby. If so, the 
vehicle adds his signature to the message and 
retransmit it.  
• 
If IDSVeh is not in IRL, and IDloc is not consistent 
with the current location, then if the message 
contains aggregated signatures, the message is 
accepted and retransmitted. Otherwise, IDSVeh is 
included in the IRL and the message is discarded and 
not retransmitted. 
C. Analysis of Possible Attacks 
In a VANET, the main security threats come from fake 
content generation. An attacker could send messages 
indicating that is circulating in a location other than the one 
actually has, with intent to influence the overall perceived 
congestion on other vehicles. 
In the particular case of the algorithm proposed, the 
security threats are less serious because it has implicit 
security. This means that the operation of the system itself 
makes attacker benefits are minimal. 
Then we analyze security of the proposed system against 
possible attacks. 
• 
False messages. They are detected by means of the 
usual authentication mechanism in VANETs. 
• 
False content (fraudulent messages). They are 
detected by means of the combination of IRL and 
signature aggregation described in the previous 
subsection.  
In any case, if a false content escapes to the control 
of the proposed mechanisms, the implicit security of 
this traffic management algorithm minimizes the 
risk. So, if a vehicle sends a false content, the effect 
on the management system will be minimal, because 
if a single message gets to change the decision of 
other vehicles is because all the routes had a similar 
level of congestion. Equivalently, one could say that 
a single ant does not alter the behavior of the entire 
colony. 
• 
False content flooding. Since a single message can 
not affect the rest of the vehicles, an attacker could 
generate a large number of fake messages containing 
the same location to achieve his goal. The procedure 
based on IRL and signature aggregation detects these 
fake messages. Furthermore, in the case that the 
procedure does not work properly, the situation is 
easily detected because the vehicles receive 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

messages with the same IDloc and IDSVeh in a short 
period of time. If the attacker decided to space in 
time the messages, then the success probability 
would 
decrease 
due 
to 
the 
effect 
of 
the 
disappearance of the accumulated pheromones. 
• 
Conspiracy. A large number of attackers may 
collude to send messages with the same but different 
IDSVeh IDloc. If the messages are false, the IRL in 
combination with signature aggregation detect them. 
If this mechanism does not work properly, this type 
of attack is not the most efficient because it needs a 
large number of organized attackers to book the 
same route. They themselves would collapse the 
route.  
• 
Discarding an aggregate message. The attacker 
will not retransmit the authentic messages, with the 
intention to perform a denial of service. This attack 
is not efficient. If the vehicle density is low, then the 
message will not be retransmitted but the influence 
on the traffic control will be negligible. If the density 
is high, there is a very high probability that another 
vehicle retransmit it. 
V. 
PROTOTYPE 
The model proposed in the previous section has been 
implemented as a scale prototype with two major objectives 
in mind: to broadcast the advantages of VANETs, and to 
provide a demonstrator platform where the effects on traffic 
management can be easily perceived. In this sense, we have 
chosen a real scenario determined by the road paths between 
two major hospitals at Málaga city, Spain. 
The prototype is composed of one road circuit, several 
robotic vehicles, and a monitorization system. The 
communications between the actors are performed by means 
of RFID tags and readers and ZigBee modules.  
A. Test road circuit 
The road circuit has been printed on a 150 x 90 cm paper 
size. The dimensions are determined by the maximum width 
of the print area of the available printer device (90 cm), the 
size of vehicles and a value of length allowing to handle the 
prototype.  
The road circuit has been previously designed using 
Microsoft Office Visio 2007 paying attention not only to the 
particular road paths to test, but also to aesthetic criteria in 
order to enhance the visual effect. Different road circuits, 
following the same guidelines, have been previously used to 
demonstrate 
the 
performance 
of 
other 
VANET 
functionalities [13]. 
The printed road circuit used in this protocol corresponds 
to a simplification of a real scenario located in Málaga city 
(Spain) between two major hospitals, "Carlos Haya" 
University Regional Hospital and "Virgen de la Victoria" 
University Clinical Hospital. Fig 2 shows the real map. Fig 3 
shows the simplification that contains only the main avenues 
and streets, but maintaining the traffic senses. The circuit 
includes six decision nodes, marked with colors. 
On the other hand, as one can see in Fig 3, the road is 
printed in white color (90 mm width) with a centered black 
line (20 mm width) to help the vehicles in the auto-drive 
functionality. 
 
Figure 2.  Real scenario (source: Google Maps) 
 
Figure 3.  Prototype test road  
 
Figure 4.  Robotic vehicles 
B. Robotic Vehicles 
The vehicles are little size robots with the ability to track 
a black line. This functionality is governed by a main PIC 
microcontroller and a secondary microcontroller dedicated to 
control the wheels movements.  
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

The vehicles have been constructed using the educational 
Moway mini-robot as the starting point [12]. An additional 
PCB with an RFID reader and a Zigbee transceiver has been 
designed, developed and incorporated to every robot. Finally, 
the RFID antenna has been integrated in the own robotic 
vehicle (see Fig 4). 
The robotic vehicles have been programmed to read the 
RFID tags located at the road and send and receive 
information over the ZigBee interface.  
C. Wireless communications 
The communication between the road and the vehicles is 
implemented by means of RFID technology. Read-only 
EM4100 passive tags operating at 125 kHz are located in the 
middle of lanes near the decision nodes. The vehicles are 
provided with the SM125-M1 RFID reader module by 
SonMicro Electronics.  
V2V communications are implemented over a ZigBee 
interface. ZigBee is used, instead of another wireless 
technology, due to the reduced size of the prototype 
elements. Each vehicle is provided with a XBee module by 
Digi International, Inc. This module allows the vehicles the 
reception and transmission of pheromones.  
The same Xbee module has been employed to develop an 
infrastructure point, in such a way that V2I communications 
could be performed. Actually, the model proposed in this 
work does not need the support of any infrastructure. 
However, the monitorization system, developed as part of 
the prototype, uses this service to obtain the status 
information from the circuit. 
Finally, I2V communications are not implemented 
because the monitorization system does not return any 
information to the vehicles.   
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
We have proposed an algorithm, based on ant colonies, 
for road traffic management. The implementation of the 
algorithm does not rely on fixed infrastructures in order to 
operate in emergency situations. It only uses the VANET 
V2V communications and location systems that do not 
require contact with a fixed infrastructure. 
The algorithm uses signature aggregation and reputation 
lists to ensure system security. Furthermore, the algorithm 
has an implicit security that minimizes the risks in case of 
attacks. 
A scale prototype has been designed and implemented to 
validate the algorithm using RFID location system. 
However, this proposal needs further work to optimize 
some configuration parameters and perform simulations to 
provide data about the final distribution of congestion. 
Currently, identification of the locations is static. At a 
later stage, we will consider the integration of the proposal 
with dynamic maps, without prior planning. However, the 
current static solution is completely valid for emergency 
situations. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by Ministry of Science 
and Innovation under Project TIN2011-25452 ("TUERI: 
Technologies for secUre and Efficient wiReless networks 
within the Internet of things with applications in transport 
and logistics") and by Universidad de Málaga. Campus de 
Excelencia Internacional Andalucía Tech. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Asset-road 
Project, 
2010, 
http://www.project-asset.com 
[retrieved: June, 2013] 
[2] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, "The Internet of Things: 
A survey", Computer Networks, 2010, vol. 54, p. 2787-2805.  
[3] E. S. Davison, H. Shmizu, and H. Naraki, “Traffic Signal 
control algorithms of a traffic network”, Proc. of IFAC 
Symposium Large Scale Systems, LSS’95, London, 1995, pp. 
509-514.  
[4] Y. Fang and L.B. Wu, "Parallel Ant Colony Algorithm for the 
Logistics Scheduling Problem”, International Conference on 
Multimedia Communications (Mediacom), Aug. 2010, 
pp.116-119. 
[5] A. Gutiérrez Martín and F. Monasterio-Huelin, "Algoritmos 
de rastreo inspirados en colonias de hormigas", Actas de las 
XXVII Jornadas de Automática, 2006, pp 299-305. 
[6] H. Hartenstein, VANET: vehicular applications and inter-
networking technologies, John Wiley & sons, 2009.  
[7] IEEE 802.11p, “Draft standard for information technology - 
telecommunications and information exchange between 
systems - local and metropolitan area networks - specific 
requirements: Wireless access in vehicular environments.” 
IEEE P802.11p/D9.0, September 2009. 
[8] Y.M. Lee, C.G. Yoo, M. Park, M. Kim, and M. Gerla, 
“Installation and Evaluation of RFID readers on Moving 
Vehicles”, in Proc. of the sixth ACM international workshop 
on VehiculAr InterNETworking,VANET’09, 2009, pp. 99-
108. 
[9] S.B. Miles, S.E. Sarma, J.R. Williams, RFID. Technology and 
applications, Cambridge University Press, 2008. 
[10] J.Molina, P.Caballero, and C.Caballero, “Data Aggregation 
for Information Authentication in VANETs”, Information 
Assurance and Security Letters, 1, 2010, pp. 47-52. 
[11] J. Molina, C. Caballero, and P.Caballero, “Reputation Lists 
and 
Groups 
to 
Promote 
Cooperation”, 
International 
conference on Computer Systems and Technologies, 
CompSysTech’11, 2011, pp. 460-465, Vienna, Austria. 
[12] Moway mini-robot. http://moway-robot.com [retrieved: June, 
2013]  
[13] J. Munilla, A. Ortiz, and A. Peinado, "Robotic vehicles to 
simulate RFID-based vehicular ad hoc networks", Proc 3rd 
International ICST Conference on Simulation Tools and 
Techniques (SIMUTools 2010), Torremolinos, Málaga, 
Spain, 2010, pp. 49,1-49,2. 
[14] A. Ortiz, A. Peinado, and J. Munilla, “A Scaled Test Bench 
for Vanets using RFID Signalling”. in Comp. Intelligence in 
Security for Information Systems, 2009 
[15] Roughan and O’Donovan – AECOM Alliance, Goodbody 
Economic Consultants, NRA National Roads Traffic 
Management Study, National Roads Authority Publications, 
Ireland 2011 
[16] S. E. Shladover and S. K. Tan, “Analysis of vehicle 
positioning accuracy requirements for communication-based 
cooperative collision warning”, J. Intell. Transp. Syst., 
Technol., Plan., Oper., vol. 10, no. 3, 2006, pp. 131–140. 
[17] D. Xiao-Hua Yu, "Traffic signal optimization using Ant 
Colony Algorithm", Neural Networks (IJCNN), The 2012 
International Joint Conference on , June 2012,  pp.1-7, 10-15. 
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-298-1
SECURWARE 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

