A Novel Financial Instrument to Incentivize
Investments in Information Security Controls and
Mitigate Residual Risk
Pankaj Pandey
Gjovik University College, Norway
University of Antwerp, Belgium
Email: pankaj.pandey2@hig.no; pankaj.pandey@uantwerpen.be
Steven De Haes
Antwerp Management School, Belgium
University of Antwerp, Belgium
Email: steven.dehaes@uantwerpen.be
Abstract—Recent cyber-attacks on various organizations indicate
that even the most sophisticated technical controls are vulnerable.
Furthermore, due to the problem of misaligned incentives it is
inevitable to achieve absolute protection with technical controls
against the risks and its impact. Thus, there is a space for
alternative risk management methods. However, there is a lack
of an (effective) ﬁnancial mechanism to incentivize coordinated
efforts by stakeholders in addressing the problem of information
asymmetry, negative externality, and free-riding in the informa-
tion security ecosystem. Therefore, we propose a novel ﬁnancial
instrument called information security ﬁnancial instrument to
incentivize investments in collaborative and multistakeholder
initiatives to develop and implement stronger defense systems.
The mechanism can contribute to an improvement in information
security environment in a time bound manner. We have used
a case-study to demonstrate the application of the information
security ﬁnancial instrument. Furthermore, we have analyzed the
information security ﬁnancial instrument against a set of require-
ments and its usefulness over cyber-insurance in incentivizing
investments in information security mechanisms to manage risks.
In our analysis, we found that information security ﬁnancial
instruments can be a solution to address (at least to some extent)
various economic problems in the information security domain.
Keywords–Information Security; Security Economics; Risk
Management; Financial Instrument.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In today’s technology-driven world, where organizations
are heavily dependent upon information and communications
technology, any attack on the technology infrastructure, and
services offered over a computer network may lead to op-
erational disruptions. The information and communication
infrastructure (cyber ecosystem) face a wide variety of risks
posed by a variety of threats such as distributed denial of
services (DDoS) attacks, intrusion, eavesdropping, etc. These
risks if materialized may have a huge negative impact on
the organization including a negative impact on proﬁts, brand
value, and reputation. Furthermore, a successful cyber attack
on the company may lead to negative impact on stock prices
and overall corporate value [1]–[3]. Therefore, to reduce the
likelihood and impact of the information (cyber) security
risks, organizations have traditionally resorted to technical
controls such as antivirus software, ﬁrewall, intrusion detection
systems, intrusion prevention systems, and so on. However,
cyber-attacks on various organizations such as JP Morgan [4],
SONY [5], Target [6], and many more [4] indicate that even
the most sophisticated technical controls are vulnerable.
When pursuing information security from an economic
perspective, the failure of technical controls in providing
100% defense against the information security threats can
be explained with the following reasons: (i) The problem
of ’lemons market’ [7], i.e., security product vendors do
not have enough incentives to ship robust products in the
market; (ii) The problem of misaligned incentives [8], i.e.,
information security stakeholders such as users (individual
or organizations), security product vendors (e.g., McAfee,
Symantec), cyber-insurance providers (e.g., Zurich Insurance)
and regulatory bodies (e.g., ﬁnancial markets regulator SEC
in USA, Insurance regulator, regulatory bodies dealing with
data protection and privacy, etc.) have misaligned incentives;
(iii) The problem of ’tragedy of commons’ [9], i.e., the issue
of negative externalities and free riding in the network. In the
light of the barriers mentioned above, it is inevitable to achieve
near 100% protection against the risks and its impact, thus
creating a space for alternative risk management methods.
Problem Statement: Lack of an (effective) ﬁnancial mech-
anism to incentivize coordinated efforts of stakeholders in
addressing the problem of information asymmetry, misaligned
incentives, negative externality and free-riding in information
(cyber) security ecosystem.
Motivation:
Currently, cyber-insurance is only commer-
cially available ﬁnancial product that can be used to miti-
gate residual information security risks [10]. The proponents
of cyber-insurance argue that it has the potential to align
the incentives of security product vendors, users, and cyber-
insurance providers, thereby creating a robust information
security environment. However, there is a very little evidence
to suggest that the cyber-insurance products can improve the
network security by providing adequate incentives to organi-
zations and individuals to invest aptly in information security
controls [11][12].
Some researchers have mathematically proved that the
cyber-insurance markets are inefﬁcient [13][14]. These re-
searchers have reported that though the cyber-insurance prod-
ucts satisfy all the other stakeholders but they fail to satisfy
the regulatory bodies and sometimes the cyber-insurer provider
itself. The regulatory bodies are unsatisﬁed due to the sub-
optimal network robustness occurring due to under-investment
in security controls by the network users. On the other hand,
due to the interdependent and correlated nature of informa-
tion security risks the uncertainty about the quantum of risk
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

exposure leads to the fear of systemic and huge losses for
cyber-insurance providers. The notion of making no proﬁts
(or facing huge losses) in the future leads to dissatisfaction in
cyber-insurance providers.
Thus, in absence of adequate market mechanisms for risk
acceptance, the interest of entities who wish to transfer their
risks and those who are willing to accept the risk by means
of pooling and necessary expertise, are reduced [15].
Objective: To develop a ﬁnancial instrument to address
the problem of misaligned incentives and incentivize the
stakeholders in making coordinated efforts in improving the
information security ecosystem.
Contributions:
1)
Developed a novel ﬁnancial instrument called In-
formation Security Financial Instrument (ISFI) to
incentivize coordinated efforts of information security
stakeholders (investors) in improving the information
security ecosystem in a time bound manner.
2)
Demonstrated the application of the ﬁnancial in-
strument to improve the performance of a speciﬁc
ﬁrewall.
3)
Analyzed and explained the usefulness of the in-
formation security ﬁnancial instruments in dealing
with the problem of information asymmetry, negative
externality and free riding in the information security
domain. Furthermore, we analyzed the usefulness of
the instrument as a risk management tool.
4)
Contributed to the knowledge base of interdisci-
plinary research on information security economics.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section
2 presents an overview of the research method followed for the
article. Section 3 presents an overview of the background work.
Section 4 identiﬁes the requirements for information security
ﬁnancial instruments. Section 5 describes the proposed infor-
mation security ﬁnancial instrument. Section 6 demonstrates
the application of the proposed information security ﬁnancial
instrument. Section 7 presents an evaluation of the information
security ﬁnancial instruments. Section 8 concludes the article
with conclusion and directions for future research.
II.
RESEARCH METHOD
The research follows the Design Science Research Ap-
proach (DSRA). DSRA is useful when innovations and ideas
are created for the development of technical capabilities and
products that will be instrumental in effective and efﬁcient
process development for artifacts [16]. A process ﬂow model
for DSRA is shown in Figure 1.
A. Explicate Problem
The ﬁrst step is to formulate the initial problem, justify its
importance and investigate the underlying causes [16].
To explicate the problem we started with examining the
literature on information security investment models, and cur-
rently available market methods and ﬁnancial instruments for
the management of information security risks. This enabled us
in identifying the gaps in existing methods of (ﬁnancial) risk
management in information security domain. The identiﬁed
problem is given as the problem statement in Section 1, and
we have explained the background issues in Section 3.
Figure 1. Process Flow Model for Design Science Research Approach [16].
B. Deﬁne Requirements
The second step is to identify and outline an artifact
to address the explicated problem and to elicit requirements
for the artifact [16]. A requirement is the property of the
artifact that is desired by stakeholders in practice and is used
for design and development of the artifact. A requirement
can be functional, structural, or environmental in nature. The
requirements for the artifact to address the problems identiﬁed
in the previous step are given in Section 4.
C. Design and Development of the Artifact
The third step leads to the creation of an artifact that
fulﬁlls the requirements identiﬁed in the previous (second)
step. This includes designing the functionality and structure of
the artifact [16]. The functionality and structure of the artifact
are explained in Section 5.
D. Demonstration of the Artifact
The fourth step proves the feasibility of the artifact by
demonstrating its use in one case. Primarily, it consists of
descriptive knowledge explaining the working of the artifact in
one situation [16]. The demonstration shows that the artifact
can, in fact, solve the problem (or some aspects of it) in the
illustrative case. This demonstration can be considered as a
weak form of evaluation. It indicates that if the artifact can
address the problem in one situation; then it might be able to
address the problem in other situations as well [16]. We have
demonstrated the use of the artifact in Section 6.
E. Evaluation of the Artifact
The ﬁfth step is to evaluate the artifact. This determines the
extent to which the artifact can solve the explicated problem
and its requirements [16]. An evaluation strategy can be an ex-
ante or ex-post on the one hand and naturalistic or artiﬁcial on
the other [16]. An ex-post evaluation implies that the artifact
is evaluated without being fully developed or used. An ex-post
evaluation implies that the artifact is evaluated after it has been
implemented. A naturalistic evaluation implies that the artifact
is evaluated in practice for which it is developed. An artiﬁcial
evaluation implies that the artifact is evaluated in an artiﬁcial
and contrived setting.
We have evaluated our artifact in Section 7 against the
explicated problem and its requirements. We have used the
’informed argument’ form of evaluation. Informed argument
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

form of evaluation is an ex-ante, artiﬁcial evaluation method,
and it consists of arguments from the developers of the artifact
[16]. In this case, researchers evaluate the artifact by reasoning
and arguments for its usefulness in meeting the deﬁned require-
ments and solving the explicated problem. Informed argument
form of evaluation is often used to evaluate the artifacts that
are highly innovative and are still immature [16].
III.
BACKGROUND WORK
This section looks at the information security market from
an economic perspective. In an efﬁcient market for informa-
tion security, buyers and sellers, both are expected to have
sufﬁcient information about the products. However, this is not
currently the case. The information security goods are traded
in markets with insufﬁcient information similar to ”The Mar-
ket for Lemons” and ”Market for Insurance”. The following
subsections explain the problems of information asymmetry,
externality, and free-riding with the well-established economic
theories.
A. The Market for Lemons
If the buyers lack information about the good and it then
suggests that the sellers have sufﬁcient information, then there
is an asymmetry of information between the buyers and the
sellers. This can be explained with the theory of ”The Market
for Lemons” proposed by George A. Akerlof [7]. Akerlof
introduced ”The Market for Lemons” with the question of why
there is a ”large price difference between new cars and those
which have just left the showroom” [7]. He analyzed the rules
of a market with information asymmetry between the buyer
and the seller. He argued that a typical buyer of a used car
cannot distinguish between the good cars and the bad cars
(termed as ”lemons”), as unlike the seller, the buyer does not
know the true history of the used car. In such a scenario, the
buyer is suspicious about the condition of the (good) car and
is thus unwilling to pay more than the price of lemon (bad
car). This type of market condition leads to under-supply of
good condition used cars.
”The Market for Lemons” when mapped on to information
security suggests that security product vendors do not have
sufﬁcient incentive to provide adequate security. It suggests
that information security is a trust good and is not visible to
the buyer. As a buyer cannot differentiate between the secure
and insecure products, the product is traded at the price of
insecure products (lemons). This leaves little incentive for the
security product vendor to invest in the development of secure
products. The security product vendor would rather prefer to
have a less secure product and reach the market ﬁrst to capture
the market share or to invest in features that are more visible
to the buyer.
B. Market for Insurance
Logically, it is unacceptable to suggest that only buyers
lack the information and sellers have that information. Roth-
schild and Stiglitz examined the market of insurance as one
”in which the characteristics of the commodities exchanged
are not fully known to at least one of the parties” [17].
They claimed that ”not only may a competitive equilibrium
not exist, but when equilibria exist, they may have strange
properties. In the insurance market, sales offers do not specify
a price at which customers can buy all the insurance that
they want, but instead consist of a price and a quantity – a
particular amount of insurance that the individual can buy at
that price. Furthermore, if individuals were willing or able to
reveal their information, everybody could be made better off.
By their very being, high-risk individuals cause an externality:
the low-risk individuals are worse off than they would be in
the absence of the high-risk individuals” [17]. This has an
echo of ”The Market for Lemons” but it is like a counter
theory (mirror image) to Akerlof’s work. Rothschild & Stiglitz
assumed that ”individuals know their accident probabilities,
while companies do not” [17]. This is information asymmetry.
As discussed, the problem of information asymmetry has a
negative effect on the insurance ecosystem, where it is difﬁcult
to distinguish between the high-risk and low-risk user types.
This is commonly known as the problem of adverse selection.
Similarly, users purchasing insurance policies when they know
that they are highly likely to get affected, and they adversely
affect the loss probabilities of the insurance providers. This is
termed as the problem of moral hazard.
The theory of ’Market for Insurance’ when mapped on
to information security suggests that security product vendors
know (at least to some extent) about the vulnerabilities in their
products, however the users of the product are unaware about
the vulnerabilities. Similarly, individuals and organizations
purchasing cyber-insurance products have some information
about the weaknesses in their defense system. However cyber-
insurance providers lack a standard and evidence-based tool
to check the strengths and weaknesses of the system. This
information asymmetry leads to higher premiums, a large
number of exclusions and the liability issue.
C. The Tragedy of Commons
The infrastructure of information and communication tech-
nology is largely interconnected and thus poses a challenge
of collective security efforts by the participants. In economic
terms, this can be explained with the theory of ”Tragedy of
Commons” proposed by Garrett Hardin [9]. According to the
theory of the tragedy of commons, individuals acting rationally
and independently in their self-interest with no consideration to
long-term best interests of other members of the group would
eventually lead to depletion of the common resources.
”The Tragedy of Common” when applied to information
security domain explains the unwillingness of users to demand
high security products. In a large distributed network, risks
(and beneﬁts) are spread over a set of nodes and are correlated.
Thus, the information security is the property of the network
and is not limited to its individual nodes. An investment in
information security controls by one user to counter its risk
exposure strengthens its security, and the node will strongly
defend against the attacks. Thus, the beneﬁt of defense gets
propagated to other nodes in the network, and this is called
’positive externality’. Similarly, if the network is attacked,
say by botnets, and one of the nodes gets corrupted then the
risk of attack is propagated to other nodes leading to higher
expected loss. In such a scenario, the cost (impact) of the attack
is distributed between all the nodes. This is called ’negative
externality’.
This suggests that the risks and beneﬁts are all distributed
between the nodes. This leads to a situation where individual
nodes do not have a strong incentive to invest in information
security unilaterally. They all tend to take a ’free-ride’ on the
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

investments made by other nodes, thus depleting the common
resource (security).
IV.
REQUIREMENTS FOR INFORMATION SECURITY
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
A report from World Economic Forum states that ”No one
organization can resolve the (cyber-security) issue by itself and
a collaborative, multistakeholder approach must be taken; even
competitors in a given industry must become partners in the
effort to ensure a stable and trusted environment” [18]. Another
report from World Economic Forum states that ”Opportunities
will emerge for new businesses in insurance or risk markets
to help businesses mitigate the potential downside from cyber
risks” [19].
As shown in Figure 2, Risk markets are one of the two ways
to deal with systemic risk in information security domain [18].
Risk markets can provide a variety of ﬁnancial instruments
such as indemniﬁcation, insurance and structured risk-transfer
solutions for an organization to address the information secu-
rity risks [19].
Figure 2. Cyber Risk Framework [18].
Therefore, keeping in view the problems identiﬁed in Sec-
tion 3 of this article and the ﬁndings of World Economic Forum
in [18][19], we have identiﬁed the following requirements for
the Information Security Financial Instruments(ISFI):
Functional Requirements
•
ISFI should incentivize coordinated efforts and invest-
ments in strengthening the security ecosystem.
•
ISFI should tie the ﬁnancial returns to the achievement
of measurable or observable impact (performance or
results), as speciﬁed in contract’s speciﬁcation.
•
ISFI should ﬁx accountability on the information
security stakeholders, such as on project executors, or
information security product vendors, to achieve the
desired objectives.
•
ISFI should clearly deﬁne the return structure.
•
ISFI can be designed as an equity, debt or convertible
instrument.
Usability Requirements
•
Only veriﬁed traders/investors should be allowed to
deal with ISFI.
•
ISFI should be traded in a transparent environment.
•
ISFI should be listed at (traded via) a regulated
platform.
•
ISFI should allow anonymous trading/investing.
•
ISFI should be traded in a manipulation resistant
environment.
•
ISFI should be traded at low transaction cost.
•
ISFI should be traded in a liquid environment.
V.
INFORMATION SECURITY FINANCIAL INSTRUMENT
This section presents a novel ﬁnancial instrument, called
Information Security Financial Instrument (ISFI) to incentivize
investments in collaborative and multistakeholder initiatives to
develop and implement stronger defense systems. The returns
on ISFI are linked to the achievement of certain security
objectives and mitigation of underlying risks. An application
scenario for ISFI is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3. An Application Scenario for ISFI.
The ISFI can be implemented in at least following two
forms:
•
Results based Information Security Financial In-
struments: This type of instruments provides a mech-
anism and strategies designed to tie purposefully the
investments in information security controls and risk
mitigation methods and thus incentivize the efﬁcient
allocation of resources provided by security stakehold-
ers. Properly designed and well-implemented results
based information security ﬁnancial instruments may
result in improvement in quality and timely delivery
of (more) secure products, lower risk exposure, a
shift towards a result oriented rather than a ship next
day approach, and an improved security ecosystem.
However, these beneﬁts come at the expense of some
opportunity costs, the need to monitor and test the
performance, and exposure to the risk of incorrect
incentive system.
•
Information Security Performance Instruments:
Information security performance instruments, if de-
signed properly, can be helpful in achieving the long-
term improvement in the information security ecosys-
tem, increasing efﬁciency and creating a favorable
environment to attract investment capital. Information
security performance instruments can be designed to
meet security goals for critical public infrastructure
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

such as power grids, in the oil and gas sector, ﬁ-
nancial sector and others, and include time-bound
performance goals against which the performance of
the service operator is measured. ISFI can be useful
in sourcing funds for the projects where traditional
funding sources are not (or less) useful.
The process of designing an information security ﬁnancial
instrument is shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4. Process of Designing and Trading an ISFI.
The six processes shown in Figure 4 are explained in the
following subsections.
A. Identiﬁcation of Security Objectives
The design of useful information security ﬁnancial instru-
ments to incentivize investments in improving cyber-defense
systems and risk mitigation depends upon the identiﬁcation
of useful ’objectives’. The incentive system depends upon
the achievement of desired and predeﬁned underlying security
objectives to which returns are linked.
The underlying objectives of an information security ﬁnan-
cial instrument can be structured in at least the following ﬁve
ways:
•
Reductions: For example, reduction in number of
vulnerabilities in a piece of software.
•
Improvements: For example, improvement in the
cyber-intelligence tool used by a law enforcement
agency.
•
Increasing: For example, increase in the detection of
new viruses in the cyber space.
•
Decreasing: For example, decrease in the false accep-
tance rate of a biometric authentication system.
•
Compliance Goals: For example, meeting the industry
compliance and regulations, such as HIPAA, SOX,
etc., and thus avoiding any ﬁne for violation of the
norms.
Table 1 presents a set of entities (stakeholders) that can
play a vital role in identiﬁcation of the underlying objectives
for information security ﬁnancial instruments.
TABLE I. TYPICAL STAKEHOLDERS OF ISFI.
Issuer
Issuer entity can be a government body, regulatory body or a
ﬁnancial institution interested in achieving an information security
objective. Also, an industry body charged with the responsibility
of achieving speciﬁc goals or a beneﬁciary of achievement of ob-
jectives can be an issuer. Cyber-Insurance providers, Reinsurance
providers, security product vendors, etc., can be instrumental in
identifying the information security objectives for which ﬁnancial
instruments are to be issued.
Investors
Investors are interested in allocating capital and resources to fund
large scale information security projects (critical infrastructure
like power grids, implementation of privacy policy at a coun-
try/industry/EU level, etc.), earn proﬁts tied to the achievement
of objectives, and hedge the risks associated with the underly-
ing objectives. Insurance providers, reinsurance providers, project
executors, users, etc., can be investors.
Executors
They are the entities with the responsibility of achieving the
objectives as speciﬁed in the contract (ﬁnancial instrument) de-
scription. Depending upon the underlying objectives, executors
can be software product vendors, vendor’s competitors, security
researchers, etc.
Clearing
House
Clearing house acts as an inter-mediator between the issuer,
investors and executors. Clearing house manages the credit risk,
trader/investor veriﬁcation, acts as an absolute authority on set-
tlement of contracts, and an independent third party for the
veriﬁcation of claims.
Furthermore, it is not necessary to have clear demarcation
of roles between the above entities and multiple functions can
be performed by a single or a combination of above entities.
B. Identiﬁcation of Payment Trigger Criteria
The payment trigger criteria should be clearly deﬁned, be
measurable or impact observable, transparent, and veriﬁable by
an independent third party. Further, the contract speciﬁcation
on the trigger criteria should avoid any present and foreseeable
conﬂict of interests between the issuing entity and other
administrative stakeholders.
The ISFIs can be structured with various types of measur-
able and observable impact criteria, such as ’reduction’ (e.g.,
2%, 5%, etc.) in number of vulnerabilities discovered in a piece
of software (thereby making the software more secure), an
’increase’ (e.g., 3%, 7%, etc.) in accuracy of a new biometric
based authentication system, and so on.
Table 2 presents a set of payment trigger criteria for ISFIs
(equities, bonds, and convertibles).
C. Types of Financial Instruments
The ISFI can be designed as ’debt’, ’equity’, or ’convert-
ible’ instruments.
•
Debt Instrument: A debt instrument is a contract
between a lender and a borrower under which bor-
rower borrows money in exchange of payments of the
principal amount and ﬁxed interests over a deﬁned
period. One such instrument is a ’bond’.
The issuer i.e., the indebted entity issues a bond spec-
ifying the coupon i.e., interest rate that will be paid
with the principal amount on the maturity date. The
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

TABLE II. PAYMENT TRIGGER CRITERIA FOR ISFI.
Trigger Criteria
Examples
Performance Index
Such as ISE Cyber Security ETF (HACK) [20], UK
Cyber Vulnerability Index [21], Global Cybersecurity
Index (GCI) [22], Index of Cyber Security [23]
Results Indicators
Such as Technological Indicators (improvement in
performance of antivirus software,ﬁrewall, etc.), Pro-
cess and Procedural Indicators (compliance with data
management & privacy policies, such as deletion of
user data after certain period, etc.), so on.
Customized
Indicators
Such as a combination of performance index and result
indicators, Qualitative analysis of security strength,
penetration of antivirus, ﬁrewall and other security
defense systems, so on.
two key features that determine the interest rate on the
bond are duration and credit quality. An independent
third party can be involved to certify the credit quality
of the bond.
•
Equity Instrument: Equity instruments are tradable
assets i.e., tradable capital packages with unique
structures and characteristics. Equity instruments are
different from debt instruments in a way that they
provide some control and ownership of the business.
A commonly known equity instruments is stock.
•
Convertible Instrument: Financial instruments that can
be converted to common stocks are known as convert-
ibles, such as bonds and preferred shares. For example,
holders of convertible bonds are allowed to convert
their position to equities at an agreed price.
Convertible ﬁnancial instruments are attractive to in-
vestors looking for higher returns than bonds and
equities. For example, convertible bonds will have
lower coupon rate than traditional bonds. However,
the option of converting the bond to common stocks
provides an added value to the holder.
Table 3 presents three types of ISFIs and corresponding
trigger criteria for payments.
TABLE III. TYPES OF ISFI AND PAYMENT TRIGGER CRITERIA.
ISFI Type
Payment Trigger Criteria
Information Security Equity
Result Indicators
Information Security Bonds
Performance Indices
Information Security Convertibles
Pre-speciﬁed Indicators
D. Contract Speciﬁcations
Next step in the process of creation and trading of ISFIs
is the speciﬁcation of contracts. We have identiﬁed a set of
speciﬁcations which needs to be considered when creating
an ISFI. Table 4 presents a template with the speciﬁcations
identiﬁed for the information security contracts.
E. Return Structure
The returns on ISFIs can be structured in a variety of ways
depending on the objectives of the issuing entity. The triggers
for returns are linked to the achieving the speciﬁc objectives
as speciﬁed in the contract description. Table 5 presents a set
of return structures for ISFIs.
The ISFIs can be designed with other types of return
structures, or a combination of return structures can be used.
TABLE IV. TEMPLATE FOR SPECIFICATIONS OF ISFI.
Issuer
Objective of the Funding
Benchmark Measurement Criteria
Total Funding Required
Amount :
Currency :
Project Start Date
Project End Date
Information Security Financial Instrument Type
Transferable Instrument
Decision Criteria
Initial Benchmark Value
Minimum Investment Required
Amount :
Currency :
Eligible Investors
Independent Third Party Quality Rating Required
Yes/No
Independent Third Party Veriﬁcation Required
Yes/No
Management Fee
Know Your Trader/Investor Required
Yes/No
Return Structure
Pay-Off Horizon
Bonus Payment
Yes/No
Trigger for Bonus Payment
If applicable
TABLE V. RETURN STRUCTURE FOR ISFI.
Fixed
Return
Structure
The returns i.e., bond yields or stock dividends are ﬁxed and
based on achievement of pre-determined objective. For instance,
improvement in performance of ’XYZ’ ﬁrewall in defending
against ’UVW’ types of attacks by 10% in 01 year will provide
a return of 3%
Increasing
Return
Structure
In this case, returns are proportionately linked to increase in
performance or quality or impact outcomes. For instance, for
every 1% improvement in performance of ’XYZ’ ﬁrewall in
defending against ’UVW’ type attack will provide 0.1% return
Tiered
Return
Structure
In this structure, returns depend upon the level of outcomes, i.e.,
the return structure is tiered (increase or decrease). For instance,
a 5% improvement in performance of ’XYZ’ ﬁrewall will yield
3% return, and an improvement of 10% will yield 7%, and so
on.
Decreasing
Return
Structure
In this structure the return decreases with decrease in performance
outcomes. This leads to reduction in interest disbursements and
thus, creates a tangible reward for the issuing entity.
For instance, a ﬁxed return structure can be used up to a certain
level and then a tiered return structure is used, etc.
The structure of ISFIs will depend upon the speciﬁc infor-
mation security objectives of issuing entity. For instance, for
improvement in performance of a particular cyber-intelligence
tool which is used by government organizations and has been
developed by or in collaboration with a private organization,
then a tiered return structure can be used for the ISFI. In
this case, the instrument will have a base return and a bonus
return will be awarded if the performance of the said cyber-
intelligence tool is assessed to be above the threshold as
speciﬁed in the contract (ﬁnancial instrument) speciﬁcations.
Table 6 presents a set of ISFIs, respective return structures and
trigger criteria.
TABLE VI. ISFI, RETURN STRUCTURE, AND TRIGGER CRITERIA.
ISFI Type
Return Structure
Trigger Criteria
Bonds
Fixed Return
Performance Index
Equity
Increasing Return
Result Indicators
Convertibles
Decreasing Return
Customized Indicators
Convertibles
Tiered Return
Customized Indicators
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

F. Listing of Contracts
Once the ISFIs are created they can then be traded over-
the-counter (OTC) or they can be listed at the information
security prediction market to allow trading of the contracts. In-
formation security prediction market is the preferred platform,
as it is expected to facilitate information elicitation, trading
transparency, lower transaction cost, liquidity, efﬁciency and
manipulation resistance.
VI.
EXAMPLE APPLICATION
In this section, we demonstrate the application of ISFI in
improving the performance of ﬁrewalls developed by Europe-
based organizations against a particular ’UVW’ type of attacks.
As Firewalls are the ﬁrst line of defense against information
security attacks, an improvement in performance of ﬁrewalls
is highly important in addressing the ’public goods’ nature of
information security and addressing the problem of negative
externality and free riding. An application scenario of infor-
mation security bonds in strengthening the security ecosystem
is shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5. Application of ISFI in Strengthening Information Security
Ecosystem.
An information security bond issued by the association of
information security product vendors in Europe, to improve the
performance of ﬁrewalls developed by Europe based organi-
zations to defend against the ’UVW’ type of attacks is shown
in Table 7.
If an investor invests USD 100,000 in the information
security bond shown in Table 7, then the investor will earn
returns based on the average performance of ﬁrewalls against
the ’UVW’ type attacks as shown in Table 8.
TABLE VIII. RETURNS ON INVESTMENT OF USD 100,000 FROM
INFORMATION SECURITY BONDS.
Result
Performance
Score
on
31/Dec/2017
Return
Returns to
Investors
Performance unchanged
10
10%
$10,000
Performance improves by 10%
11
20%
$20,000
Performance improves by 20%
12
25%
$25,000
Performance improves by 30%
13
30%
$30,000
As shown in Table 7 and Table 8, information security
stakeholders can coordinate their efforts in strengthening the
information security ecosystem and can reap signiﬁcant proﬁts
from the ﬁnancial instruments.
VII.
AN EVALUATION OF ISFI
The artifact evaluation consists of three sub-activities [16].
The ﬁrst activity ’analyze context’, analyzes and describes the
context of evaluation. The second, ’select goals and strategy’,
is not only about deciding the goals and strategy for the
evaluation but also about selection of research strategy and
methods. The third sub-activity, designs the evaluation study
and then executes the same.
Figure 6 shows the artifact (ISFI) evaluation process.
Figure 6. ISFI Evaluation Process (adapted from [16]).
•
Input: describes the knowledge or object which is the
input to evaluation activity.
•
Output: describes the knowledge or object which is
the outcome of the evaluation activity.
•
Controls: describes the knowledge that is used for
evaluation activity, including evaluation strategies.
•
Resources: describes the knowledge which is used as
the basis for the evaluation exercise, i.e., the knowl-
edge base.
A. Analyze Context
The ﬁrst sub-activity is ’Analyze Context’, and it primarily
identiﬁes the constraints in the evaluation environment [16].
The main constraint in the evaluation of ISFI are the techno-
logical, ﬁnancial, legal and time constraints.
B. Select Goals and Strategy
The second sub-activity ’Select Goals and Strategy’ is
based on the evaluation context. The goals selected are to
evaluate the ISFI against the identiﬁed requirements, and its
usefulness in addressing the previously identiﬁed problems,
using formative evaluation. One of the six evaluation types
stated in [24] is to ’Comparison’. It implies that the artifact is
not evaluated in isolation indeed it is studied in comparison to
other artifacts meant for the same or similar purpose. There-
fore, where necessary, we have compared our artifact with
cyber-insurance products. The evaluation strategy selected is
artiﬁcial, and ex-ante. The ISFI is evaluated using an ’informed
argument’ strategy. The formative evaluation is chosen because
the results of the evaluation may lead to several iterations
before the design of ISFI is ﬁnalized.
C. Carry Out Evaluation
The evaluation consists of two parts. First, to evaluate the
artifact against the ISFI requirements. Second, to evaluate the
usefulness of ISFI.
1) Evaluation against ISFI Requirements: The following
evaluation is only for the functional requirements of ISFI. As
the usability requirements (and their achievements) are depen-
dent upon the mechanism facilitating the trading/investment in
the instrument, thus the usability requirements should be eval-
uated with respect to the platform. Therefore, the evaluation of
usability requirements is beyond the scope of this evaluation.
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

TABLE VII. AN EXAMPLE APPLICATION OF INFORMATION SECURITY FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS.
Issuer
Information Security Product Vendors Association
Objective of the Funding
To improve the performance of ﬁrewalls developed by Europe based companies to defend against UVW type attacks
in two years
Benchmark Measurement Criteria
Firewall performance index against UVW type attacks
Total Funding Required
Amount : 1,000,000; Currency : USD
Project Start Date
01-Jan-2016
Project End Date
31-Dec-2017
Information Security Financial Instrument Type
Information Security Bond
Transferable Instrument
Yes, only to veriﬁed traders/investors registered with the clearing house/information security prediction market
Decision Criteria
The average performance of ﬁrewalls developed by European companies against the UVW type attacks must
improve by at least 10% before the project end date.
Initial Benchmark Value
Let us assume that there are three ﬁrewalls developed by European companies and providing defense against UVW
type attacks and each has a global market coverage of at least 30%
Firewall 1 : Average Performance Index between 01-Jan-2015 to 31-Dec-2015 is 10
Firewall 2 : Average Performance Index between 01-Jan-2015 to 31-Dec-2015 is 8
Firewall 3 : Average Performance Index between 01-Jan-2015 to 31-Dec-2015 is 12
Average Performance Index for the three ﬁrewalls between 01-Jan-2015 to 31-Dec-2015 is 10
Minimum Investment Required
Amount : 10,000; Currency : USD
Eligible Investors
Information Security Product Vendors, Cyber-Insurance Providers, Reinsurance Providers, Information Security
Researchers, Security Industry Consortium, Investment Managers, Product Users
Independent Third Party Quality Rating Required
Yes, for credit rating of issuer
Independent Third Party Veriﬁcation Required
Yes, for the performance evaluation of the ﬁrewall
Management Fee
2%
Know Your Trader/Investor Required
Yes, veriﬁcation of personal and minimal ﬁnancial background of participants.
Return Structure
Mixed (Tiered and Incremental)
Base Return: 10% irrespective of ﬁrewall performance index after two years.
The incremental returns are linked to the actual performance outcome of ﬁrewalls developed by European companies
as below:
(i) Base Yield = 10%; (ii) 10% above the reference = 20%
(iii) 20% above the reference = 25%; (iv) 30% above the reference = 30%
For performance between the above tiers, returns are calculated on pro-rata basis.
Pay-Off Horizon
07 days from the project end date
Bonus Payment
Yes
Trigger for Bonus Payment
As speciﬁed in return structure section
•
Coordinated Efforts and Investments: In the absence
of efﬁcient and effective cyber-insurance markets, in-
centives to engage in prevention and insurance are re-
duced. In the absence of an effective cyber-reinsurance
market, the government is expected to become the
ﬁnancier of huge systemic losses [25]. Alternatively,
governments can encourage the information security
stakeholders to engage in risk ﬁnancing through ISFI
that, in turn may cover the risk exposures. ISFIs can
provide a project based approach to manage systemic
risk through mitigation or risk transfer, will reduce
speciﬁc ’threat/vulnerability’ exposure and may lead
to better risk management practice, thus strengthening
the information security ecosystem.
ISFIs can be used as a mechanism to combine risk
exposures spread over several information security
defense products. This can be achieved by pooling
the systemic risk exposure across the product types to
provide a natural ﬁrst line of defense by engaging the
stakeholders in coordinating the efforts to strengthen
the information security ecosystem. It may also pro-
vide a scale economics to ﬁnance risk arrangements
in international information security markets.
As demonstrated in Section 6, an ISFI (bond) is used
to engage various information security stakeholders
particularly the companies developing ﬁrewalls in
Europe and providing a defense against ’UVW’ type
attacks. Through the information security bonds, these
ﬁrewall developers can invest in coordinated efforts to
improve the performance of their ﬁrewalls to defend
against the ’UVW’ type attacks. After the end of
the project, the project (performance) data can be
used to market their ﬁrewalls as a (more) effective
product, thereby better positioned against the ﬁrewall
developers from other regions.
•
Tied Returns: The combination of higher event fre-
quency and extended exposure increase the potential
damages. Despite the growing information security
risk exposure, cyber-insurance markets are not mature
and effective enough to counter the risks. Therefore,
most of the organizations (and individual users) are
exposed to information security risks and do not have
(adequate) ﬁnancial coverage. Given the fact, a ’proac-
tive’ use of alternative risk management mechanism
may be worth considering.
ISFI can provide a ’proactive’ mechanism for informa-
tion security risk management. To achieve this, returns
on ISFI are tied to the achievements of pre-speciﬁed
performance or results expectations. These payment
triggers are clearly deﬁned, objectively measurable
and independently veriﬁable.
As demonstrated in Section 6, ISFI (bonds) are issued
with an objective of improving the performance of
ﬁrewalls developed by Europe-based companies, and
the returns are tied to the ’ﬁrewall performance index’.
•
Accountability: Researchers, industry practitioners and
the legal fraternity have been arguing for a very long
time over the issue of software ’bug/vulnerability’
liability [26]–[29]. However, the discussion on the
topic remains inconclusive. ISFI aims to target this
issue by ﬁxing the accountability on the stakeholders
(such as on a product vendor) to ﬁx the bug or to
reduce the number of bugs in a piece of software in
lieu of returns tied to the achievement of the same.
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

As demonstrated in Section 6, the ’information se-
curity product vendors association’ is the issuer and
owns the accountability to achieve the desired per-
formance of ﬁrewalls against the speciﬁed attacks. A
failure to achieve the desired performance is likely to
result into losing the competition to others, facing the
opportunity cost, and so on.
•
Return Structure: ISFI provides a variety of return
structure depending on the objective of the issuer
and other security stakeholders. The payment triggers
are linked to the achievement of pre-speciﬁed perfor-
mance or observable results.
As demonstrated in Section 6, the information security
bond provides a mixed return structure. It incentivizes
achievement of as high as the possible performance of
the ﬁrewall, so as to earn maximum possible returns
based on the incremental tier structure.
•
Designed as Equity, Debt or Convertible Instrument:
ISFI are tailor made products to address the speciﬁc
(underlying) problems or objectives. Therefore, to
cater to the variety of objectives, events, and needs
of security stakeholders, ISFI have the ﬂexibility to
be designed as equity, debt, and convertibles.
As demonstrated in Section 6, ISFI is a bond type
instruments designed to source funds to improve the
performance of ﬁrewalls. Similarly, equity and con-
vertible types of instruments can be drawn to meet
speciﬁc functional requirements.
2) Evaluation against ISFI Usefulness: The evaluation of
ISFI against its usefulness in dealing with the problem of
information asymmetry, negative externality, and free riding
is as follows:
•
The Market for Lemons: ISFI targets the problem
of information asymmetry where sellers have no (or
minimal) incentive in producing robust products. ISFI
can be used as a method to prove the performance of
the target products.
For instance, as demonstrated in Section 6, the ﬁre-
wall vendors can use the performance data of the
information security bond to prove that their ﬁrewalls
are better than the other (lemons) ﬁrewalls providing
defense against the UVW type attacks. This works as
a product rating or quality assurance for the buyer. In
such a scenario, ﬁrewall vendor with proven perfor-
mance of the ﬁrewall may charge a higher price than
its competitors (i.e., lemons).
•
The Market for Insurance: ISFI can be used to address
the problem of ’market for insurance’. In such a sce-
nario, customers willing to purchase cyber-insurance
policies can prove the resilience of their information
security defense system by using the software, hard-
ware and practices & policies, which have achieved
a certain level of performance as exhibited through
ISFI. This will create a level of conﬁdence in the
cyber-insurance provider, and the insurance buyer can
negotiate for a lower premium or inclusion of certain
other risk coverage.
For instance, as demonstrated in Section 6, a user
using one of the ﬁrewall which achieved the desired
performance as per the information security bond
can claim a better protection against UVW attacks
compared to those who are using other ﬁrewalls and
thus negotiate for a lower premium.
•
The Tragedy of Commons: ISFI targets the problem of
negative externality and free riding by incentivizing
the coordinated efforts of various stakeholders. ISFI
encourages investments in robust security products,
and visibility of quality and performance of these
products will lead to natural robustness in the ecosys-
tem.
For instance, as demonstrated in Section 6, if the
information security bonds lead to achievement of
desired performance of the ﬁrewalls then the govern-
ment can bring in mechanisms like tax credit [30] to
encourage usage of proven security products and wide
acceptance of these products will help in eliminating
the issue of negative externality and free riding from
the information security ecosystem.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have shown a need for an alternative risk
management method. We have identiﬁed a set of requirements
for Information Security Financial Instruments (ISFI) which
can be used as an alternative risk management mechanism
to incentivize coordinated efforts by security stakeholders in
strengthening the information security ecosystem. We have
designed the ISFI and demonstrated its application with an
imaginary case of improving ﬁrewall performance. Then, we
analyzed the ISFI against the set of functional requirements
and its usefulness in addressing various economic problems
prevalent in information security domain. In our analysis, we
found that the ISFI meets all the functional requirements for
the instrument. Also, on the issue of addressing the problems
of information asymmetry, negative externality and free riding,
ISFI can be highly useful. However, as our analysis is based on
’informed argument’ evaluation method, the evaluation faces
a high risk of false positives.
There are three limitations in the paper: (i) ISFI is demon-
strated with a ’bond’ type instrument only. Application of
equity and convertible type instruments are not presented and
left to the future work. (ii) Our evaluation of ISFI is only for
the functional requirements; however usability requirements
may have a signiﬁcant impact on success or failure of the
instrument, and this is left for future work. (iii) We have
demonstrated and evaluated the ISFI based on an imaginary
case; however there could be several constraints when imple-
menting the instrument in a naturalistic setting.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. A. Gordon, M. P. Loeb, and L. Zhou, “The impact of information
security breaches: Has there been a downward shift in costs?” Journal
of Computer Security, vol. 19, no. 1, Jan. 2011, pp. 33–56.
[2]
B. Cashell, W. D. Jackson, M. Jickling, and B. Webel, “The eco-
nomic impact of cyber-attacks,” Government and Finance Division,
Congressional Research Service,, CRS Report for Congress Order Code
RL3233, April 2004.
[3]
A. Smith. Share prices are rarely hit hard by cyber attacks. Finan-
cial Times. http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/348d7f1a-417e-11e3-9073-
00144feabdc0.html. [retrieved: Apr, 2015]
[4]
D. Y. Emily Glazer. J.p. morgan says about 76 million households
affected by cyber breach. Wall Street Journal. [Online]. Avail-
able:
http://www.wsj.com/articles/j-p-morgan-says-about-76-million-
households-affected-by-cyber-breach-1412283372
[retrieved:
Apr,
2015]
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[5]
J. Tom Huddleston. What you need to know after sony’s hacker attack.
Fortune. [Online]. Available: http://fortune.com/2014/12/03/need-to-
know-cyber-attacks/ [retrieved: Apr, 2015]
[6]
H. Kuchler and A. Raval. Target data theft sounds wake-up call
for retailers. Financial Times. http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/7d5f28bc-
7d81-11e3-81dd-00144feabdc0.html. [retrieved: Apr, 2015]
[7]
G. A. Akerlof, “The market for ’lemons’: Quality uncertainty and the
market mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (The MIT Press),
vol. 84(3), 1970, pp. 488–500.
[8]
R. Anderson, T. Moore, S. Nagaraja, and A. Ozment, Algorithmic Game
Theory, 2007, ch. Incentives and Information Security, pp. 633–649.
[9]
G. Hardin, “The tragedy of the commons,” Science, vol. 162, 1968, pp.
1243–1248.
[10]
E.
R.
McNicholas.
Cybersecurity
insurance
to
mitigate
cyber-
risks
and
sec
disclosure
obligations.
The
Bureau
of
National
Affairs, Inc. http://www.bna.com/cybersecurity-insurance-to-mitigate-
cyber-risks-and-sec-disclosure-obligations/. [retrieved: Apr, 2015]
[11]
Zurich American Insurance Company vs Sony Corporation of America,
no. No. 651982/2011.
NewYork Supreme Court, Jul 2011.
[12]
R. King. Cyber insurance capacity is very small: Aig ceo. CIO Journal.
Wall Street Journal. [Online]. Available: http://blogs.wsj.com/cio/2015/
04/02/cyber-insurance-capacity-is-very-small-aig-ceo/ [retrieved: Apr,
2015]
[13]
M. Lelarge and J. Bolot, “Economic incentives to increase security in
the internet: The case for insurance,” in INFOCOM 2009, IEEE. IEEE,
2009, pp. 1494–1502.
[14]
Z. Yang and J. C. Lui, “Security adoption and inﬂuence of cyber-
insurance markets in heterogeneous networks,” Performance Evaluation,
vol. 74, no. 0, 2014, pp. 1 – 17.
[15]
K. J. Arrow, “Uncertainty and the welfare economics of medical care,”
The American Economic Review, vol. 53, no. 5, 1963, pp. 941–973.
[16]
P. Johannesson and E. Perjons, An Introduction to Design Science,
1st ed.
Springer International Publishing, 2014, iSBN: 978-3-319-
10631-1.
[17]
M. Rothschild and J. Stiglitz, “Equilibrium in competitive insurance
markets: an essay on the economics of imperfect information,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, vol. 90, 1976, p. 629.
[18]
WEF and Partners, “Partnering for cyber resilience: Risk and respon-
sibility in a hyperconnected world - principles and guidelines,” World
Economic Forum, Tech. Rep. Ref. 270912, March 2012.
[19]
WEF and Partner, “Risk and responsibility in a hyperconnected world,”
World Economic Forum in collaboration with McKinsey & Company,
Tech. Rep., Jan 2014.
[20]
“Purefunds ise cyber security etf,” Pure Funds, Tech. Rep., 2014.
[Online]. Available: http://pureetfs.com/etfs/hack.html
[21]
“Uk cyber vulnerability index 2013,” KPMG Consulting, Business and
industry issue, May 2014.
[22]
“Global cybersecurity index,” International Telecommunication Union
and ABI Research, Tech. Rep., 2014.
[23]
Index
of
cyber
security.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.
cybersecurityindex.org/ [retrieved: Apr, 2015]
[24]
J. Venable, J. Pries-Heje, and R. Baskerville, “A comprehensive frame-
work for evaluation in design science research,” in Design Science
Research in Information Systems. Advances in Theory and Practice.
Springer, 2012, pp. 423–438.
[25]
A. Gray. Government resists calls to fund backstop for cyber disaster
losses. Financial Times. [Online]. Available: http://www.ft.com/cms/s/
0/7f9d8326-d096-11e4-a840-00144feab7de.html [retrieved: Apr, 2015]
[26]
R. Clarke, “Who is liable for software errors? proposed new product
liability law in australia,” Computer Law & Security Review, vol. 5,
no. 1, 1989, pp. 28 – 32.
[27]
J. Armour and W. S. Humphrey, “Software product liability,” School
of Law, University of Pittsburgh and SEI, Carnegie Mellon University,
USA, Tech. Rep. CMU/SEI-93-TR-13, ESC-TR-93-190, Aug 1993.
[28]
J.
Goodchild.
Security
experts:
Developers
responsible
for
programming
problems.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//www.csoonline.com/article/2124824/malware-cybercrime/security-
experts--developers-responsible-for-programming-problems.html
[retrieved: Apr, 2015]
[29]
M. Masnick. U.k. court says software company can be liable for
buggy software. [Online]. Available: https://www.techdirt.com/blog/
innovation/articles/20100513/0053499408.shtml [retrieved: Apr, 2015]
[30]
113th Congress (2013-2014), Ed., Cyber Information Sharing Tax
Credit Act, no. S.2717, Senate of the United States.
Senate - Finance,
July 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.congress.gov/bill/113th-
congress/senate-bill/2717/text
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-427-5
SECURWARE 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

