Security Aspects for Large Scale Distributed Environments 
The AutoBAHN use case 
 
Giorgos Adam1,2, Christos Bouras1,2, Ioannis Kalligeros1,2, Kostas Stamos1,2,3, and Ioannis Zaoudis1,2 
 
1Computer Technology Institute and Press "Diophantus", N. Kazantzaki Str, University Campus 26504, Rio Greece 
2Computer Engineering and Informatics Dept., University of Patras 
3Technological Educational Institute of Patra, Greece 
{adam,stamos,bouras,zaoudis}@cti.gr, kallige@ceid.upatras.gr
 
 
Abstract 
— 
Automated 
Bandwidth 
Allocation 
across 
Heterogeneous Networks (AutoBAHN) is a tool under active 
development that supports a Bandwidth on Demand (BoD) 
service, intended to operate in a multi-domain environment 
using 
heterogeneous 
transmission 
technologies. 
The 
AutoBAHN system aims at providing a guaranteed capacity, 
connection-oriented service between two end points. Due to the 
level of access that the tool has to critical parts of the network, 
the 
importance 
of 
a 
trustworthy 
Authentication 
and 
Authorization Infrastructure (AAI) cannot be overestimated. 
This paper highlights the design and implementation for the 
Authentication and Authorization Infrastructure which is part 
of the AutoBAHN service and the decisions taken. The AAI is a 
service dedicated to enforce system security and to prevent 
unauthorized access and usage of resources. The BoD service 
modules may interact with AAI multiple times during a single 
request execution. After the initial authentication and 
authorisation check, the BoD system will apply additional, 
specific to BoD rules and policies to the request. The security 
mechanisms allow trustworthy operations in a multi-domain 
service without significant impact on performance. 
Keywords - Bandwidth on Demand; AAI; security; Quality of 
Service 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The GN3 European project [1] is a research project 
funded by the European Union and Europe's National 
Research and Education Networks (NRENs). It is a 
continuation of the previous GN2 project [19] and aims at 
building and supporting the next generation of the pan-
European research and education network, which connects 
universities, institutions and other research and educational 
organizations around Europe and interconnects them to the 
rest of the Internet using high-speed backbone connections. 
In the context of this project, a BoD service is being 
developed and the service is supported by the AutoBAHN 
tool. The AutoBAHN system is capable of provisioning 
circuits in heterogeneous, multi-domain environments that 
constitute the European academic and research space and 
allows for both immediate and advanced circuit reservations. 
The overall architecture of the AutoBAHN system, its goal 
and the network mechanisms it employs are thoroughly 
presented in [2]. This paper highlights the AAI architecture 
of the AutoBAHN service, the implementations challenges, 
the decisions taken and the basic security aspects and 
components of the AutoBAHN system.  
AutoBAHN is using part of GÉANT’s AA Framework 
[20] which addresses security issues for a number of 
different multi-domain network services in the GÉANT 
Service Area. This framework provides software developers 
with a common and flexible authentication and authorization 
solution to facilitate their software development process. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 
describes the GN3 project while Section 3 presents the 
general architecture of the AutoBAHN system. In Section 4, 
we analyze how similar projects handled AA issues while 
Section 5 presents the general architecture related to 
authentication and authorization procedures. Section 6 
describes the way that communication between system 
components can be considered secure. Section 7 presents 
some quantitative measurements and finally, Section 8 
concludes the paper and presents future fields of this study. 
II. 
GN3 
Gigabit European Advanced Network Technology 
(GÉANT) is the main European multi-gigabit computer 
network for research and education purposes. It brings 
together over 400 participants from 32 NRENs, TERENA 
[21], DANTE [22], and over 20 subcontractors and third 
parties. It provides a dedicated, high capacity, 50,000 km 
data network that brings together 40 million users in research 
institutions across 40 countries, underpinning critical 
projects that would previously have been impossible without 
its capacity and reliability.  
In the context of the GN3 project, a number of activities 
and services are prototyped and tested. Among them is 
AutoBAHN BoD service. 
This BoD service is an end-to-end, point-to-point 
bidirectional connectivity service for data transport. It allows 
users to reserve bandwidth on demand between the 
participating end points. The data transport capacity 
dedicated to a connection can range from 1 Mbps up to 10 
Gbps in steps of 1 Mbps. This service is offered 
collaboratively by GÉANT and a set of adjacent domains 
(NRENs or external partners) that adhere to the requirements 
of the service. These joint networks form a multi-domain 
area where the service is provided. 
The service offers a high security level in the sense that 
the carried traffic is isolated from other traffic. It has to be 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

noted that the traffic is isolated at logical layer and not 
necessarily at physical layer. This means that the core 
network will carry data from multiple users but there will be 
no “crosstalk” between the traffic streams.  
III. 
AUTOBAHN BOD SYSTEM 
The AutoBAHN system is comprised by the Inter-
Domain Manager (IDM), a module responsible for inter-
domain operations of circuit reservation on behalf of a 
domain. 
This 
includes 
inter-domain 
communication, 
resource negotiations with adjacent domains, request 
handling and topology advertisements. 
Furthermore, in order to build a real end-to-end circuit, 
the Domain Manager (DM) is another module that manages 
intra-domain resources. The IDM has an interface to the 
local DM from which it undertakes all intra-domain 
functions (abstracting the topology towards the IDM, 
scheduling and pre-reserving resources, monitoring etc.). 
This southbound interface of the IDM is the part of the 
AutoBAHN system that needs to be tailored to the domain-
specific conditions. 
In each domain, the data plane is controlled by the DM 
module using a range of techniques, including interfaces to 
the Network Management System (NMS), signaling 
protocols or network elements. As part of the AutoBAHN, a 
dedicated and independent Technology Proxy module allows 
the support of a range of technologies and vendors according 
to domain and global requirements.  
 
 
Figure 1. Basic architecture of AutoBAHN 
 
 
The local NMS or service provisioning system, 
monitoring infrastructure, administration policies and 
security, may need to be adjusted for each networking 
domain making each Technology Proxy implementation and 
configuration unique. However, the design of the DM has 
been optimized to support modular deployment and leverage 
the management infrastructure already deployed in any 
domain.  
The above set of modules is deployed in each domain 
(NREN) that participates in the BoD service. A web based 
graphical environment (WebGUI) is used as a centralized 
portal for user access to the whole set of deployed instances. 
The above described architecture defines a multitude of 
communication interfaces that transfer sensitive information 
over the network. A potential security compromise (eaves 
dropping, message modification, unauthorized access, 
message replay) could have very important consequences as 
the system manages production networks. Furthermore, 
because of its distributed nature, the system needs a well-
defined 
distributed 
authentication 
and 
authorization 
architecture as it spans a large number of independent 
administrative domains. 
IV. 
RELATED WORK  
The AutoBAHN BoD system has been influenced by a 
number of other projects dealing with similar challenges for 
bandwidth on demand provisioning. In this section we 
present some of the most closely related ones, with an 
emphasis on their approach to AAI. 
The Dynamic Resource Allocation across GMPLS 
Optical Networks (DRAGON) project [3] is also conducting 
research and developing technologies to enable dynamic 
provisioning of network resources on an inter-domain basis 
across heterogeneous network technologies. It mainly deals 
with GMPLS enabled domains and in a smaller scale 
compared to AutoBAHN. Regarding the AAI, the DRAGON 
project incorporates AAA policy into path computation, 
resource allocation and signaling functions.  This requires 
high level associations of policy with users (or groups of 
users) as well as lower level associations of policy with 
actual network elements at a fidelity sufficient to implement 
meaningful policy based resource allocations. These two 
levels are loosely described as call control and connection 
control. Their approach is the synthesis of higher level AAA 
information into policy information which is associated with 
the Traffic Engineering (TE) resource level. They also utilize 
higher level AAA information to develop a set of policy 
rules.  The TE policy data and the policy rules are used 
during path computation to incorporate AAA policy into 
provisioning operations. AAA policy decision can be 
combined with TE based provisioning decision [4]. 
OSCARS/BRUW project [5] which is another BoD 
service focuses on Layer 3 Multiprotocol Label Switching 
(L3 MPLS) QoS. Regarding AA, requests for inter-domain 
reservations are authenticated in the originating domain on 
the basis of an individual user and in the subsequent domains 
on the basis of the adjacent domain [6]. Users are 
authenticated and authorized for actions in their home 
domain and inter-domain authorization depends on the 
domains that participate. It also depends on the assurance 
that a request is coming from a trusted server in a trusted 
domain. Normally, all requests forwarded between domains 
are signed SOAP messages. The forwarded message adds the 
Technology 
Proxy
Domain Manager
Intra-domain 
Pathfinder
Timer
Monitoring
Inter-Domain Manager
User access
module
AAI
Request 
handling logic
Resource 
modelling
Inter-domain 
pathfinder
Reservation 
Handler
Topology
Abstraction
Calendar
User Interface
Data plane
AutoBAHN system
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

name of the originating user in case other domains wish to 
use that information for authorization or auditing. Currently, 
at the time of provisioning no further authentication is done. 
Provisioning is triggered by the time of the reservation. Once 
the provisioning has been completed, any traffic coming 
from the specified ingress router is able to use the requested 
bandwidth. 
Moreover, the University of Amsterdam's Advanced 
Internet Research group has published a number of papers 
describing both the networking and the AAA issues for such 
a system [7][8][9]. They are using IETF’s AAA Framework 
[10] and OASIS eXtensible Access Control Markup 
Language (XACML) Version 2 to describe policy, which is 
also followed by OSCARS for Authentication. They have 
also defined a Network Description Language, which is an 
RDF-based method to describe networks and to facilitate 
inter-domain interoperability [11]. 
V. 
AAI ARCHITECTURE 
AutoBAHN uses part of GÉANT’s AA Framework 
which utilizes existing frameworks, industry standards and 
best practices in order to avoid re-inventing the wheel and to 
take advantage of its extensible design. It is Java-based, 
making use of Spring Security Framework, Crowd 
Integration library, OIOSAML java library and Maven. 
In addition, we have developed our own architectural 
elements, such as our multi-domain user authorization which 
is described below, in order to bind and supplement the 
above technologies and meet our unique AAI requirements. 
The current AA Framework implementation allows 
developers to make their own choice of Authentication 
Providers, User Attributes Providers and ACL services to 
use: the diagram below (Figure 2) shows the options offered 
to the service developers. 
 
 
 
 
AutoBAHN can be configured to use XML or Atlassian 
Crowd [15] for Authentication and User Attributes Provider. 
It can also support the existing eduGAIN [12] infrastructure 
for authentication and authorization. In addition, LDAP [14] 
or Relational Databases can be used as Authentication and 
User Attributes Providers. They also have the additional 
capability of supporting Access Control Lists for flexible 
definition of authorization policies.  
A. User Authentication 
The AutoBAHN system has been designed in such a way 
so that multiple authentication methods may be used, in a 
modular way. The authentication mechanism is based on the 
Spring Security Java framework [13] that provides advanced 
authentication, authorization and other security features for 
enterprise applications. 
The architecture of the authentication mechanism is 
based on a simple flow in which the main system 
components that are invoked during the authentication 
procedure are the Authentication Manager and the 
Authentication Provider. The user submits his credentials to 
the AutoBAHN Server and an Authentication Request is 
created at server-side. This request is sent to the 
Authentication Manager which is responsible for forwarding 
requests through a chain of Authentication Providers. The 
provider will request from the UserDetails Service to provide 
the granted authorities for this user. These authorities are 
later 
used 
during 
the 
Authorization 
phase. 
The 
Authentication Manager receives back the result of the 
described procedure and decides whether the authentication 
is successful or not. 
TABLE I.  IMPLEMENTATION CHOICES AVAILABLE FOR DEVELOPERS [20] 
Provider 
Available choices 
Authentication 
Provider 
User Attributes 
Provider 
ACL 
Services 
Attlasian 
Crowd 
Yes 
Yes 
N.A. 
eduGAIN 
Yes 
N.A. 
N.A. 
LDAP 
Yes 
Yes 
N.A. 
Relational 
Databases 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
XML 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
 
When a user connects to the graphical environment to 
submit a reservation request, his supplied credentials can be 
authenticated against the Authentication Provider which is 
currently used. The authorization mechanism is able to 
cooperate with interchangeable authentication modules as 
long as the authentication provider also supplies the 
necessary attributes that enable authorization decisions. As 
the eduGAIN scenario is the most complicated and 
interesting one, it will be described in more detail below. 
In principle, when a user tries to access the AutoBAHN 
system, the user is redirected to the Single Sign-On (SSO) 
service of his/her federation. Then the user is authenticated 
through the federation software which sends the SSO 
response and SAML 2.0 authorization back to the 
AutoBAHN 
system. 
The 
response 
contains 
both 
authentication and authorization information as SAML 2.0 
 
Figure 2. The architecture of AA Framework [20] 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

attributes. Finally, the AutoBAHN system checks the SSO 
response and SAML 2.0 attributes and responds to the user 
with a permission or denial to access the resources. The 
attributes that are transmitted are the following: 
1) Identifier: A unique id of the user that wants to 
make a reservation. This could be either the name 
or the email of the user or a combination of both. 
2) Organization: The organization/domain/federation 
of which the user is a member. 
3) Project Membership: This attribute contains a 
specified 
value 
(e.g. 
AUTOBAHN) 
that 
demonstrates that this user is an authorized 
AutoBAHN user. 
4) Project Role: This attribute offers granularity in 
terms of the subset of available actions that the user 
is allowed to perform and can contain values such 
as Service user, AutoBAHN administrator, etc. 
The various project roles currently supported are: 
1) Service User: People from e-science communities, 
other BoD systems, external client applications that 
become “service owners”. 
2) Network Administrator: People responsible for the 
data plane e.g., the underlying data network 
infrastructure. 
3) Autobahn Administrator: People responsible for the 
control plane software. 
In AutoBAHN system, the above attributes are 
considered to be equivalent of granted authorities meaning 
that based on the policy that is defined by the administrator, 
those attributes also define the appropriate jurisdictions and 
capabilities that a user can have during the usage of the 
system. 
B. Multi-domain User Authorization 
Authorization is the function of specifying whether a user 
has the access rights to perform an action on the system 
resources. AutoBAHN implements multi-domain user 
authorization, which means that the above procedure is done 
on every single Domain Manager.  
After the authentication phase, the user is able to request 
access to the available resources. The authorization 
procedure takes place at the Domain Manager which 
determines whether the user is authorized to access the 
requested resource. This decision is based on the access 
policies that each DM has defined. 
For operations that are decided along a multi-domain 
path ( 
Figure 3), there are multiple Domain Managers. Thus, the 
decision has to be taken in every domain along the 
reservation path based on user attributes that have to be 
transmitted with the reservation request and mapped to the 
policies implemented by each domain. 
As described earlier, the user attributes are retrieved 
during the authentication phase. These attributes are then 
forwarded to each domain of the reservation path at server-
side. Before a request is examined by the system at each 
domain, the attributes are compared against the policy 
module to check whether the user has the required privileges. 
The policy is based on logical operations among the user 
attributes: identifier, organization, project membership and 
role. 
 
Figure 3 shows the whole procedure for authentication 
and authorization when a user wants to create a service 
request. In Step 1, the user (through a web browser) tries to 
access the service submission interface and the request is 
intercepted by the eduGAIN filter.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. The user creates a reservation between different domains 
IDM
DM
Authorization 
Module
Policy Store
11,12,16,17
14,19
15,18
10,13
AutoBAHN instance Domain 1
IDM
DM
Authorization 
Module
Policy Store
AutoBAHN instance Domain 2
User Interface
(WebGUI)
eduGAIN 
Filter
Identity and 
Attribute 
Provider 
(IdP)
1,2
7,8
6
3,4,5
9
20
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
The eduGAIN filter redirects the user to his local AAI 
(Step 2). The user’s web browser sends an http request to the 
IdP server (Step 3). The IdP server sends to the web browser 
a page to authenticate the user and the user submits his 
credentials to the IdP server (Steps 4 and 5). The IdP server 
redirects the user to the WebGUI request page, and 
associated attributes are also sent (Step 6). The user fills in 
necessary parameters and submits the service request which 
may bundle multiple circuit reservation requests (Steps 7 and 
8). The WebGUI forwards the service request and user 
attributes to the initiating IDM (Step 9).  
The IDM deals with each reservation in the service 
separately. For the first reservation, it forwards the user 
attributes and reservation parameters to the AuthR module 
and the AuthR module constructs a policy evaluation query 
(Steps 10 and 11). The query is checked against the existing 
policies stored in the Policy Store and the AuthR module 
returns an answer (Steps 12 and 13). Assuming the response 
allows such a request, the IDM forwards it to the DM for 
intra-domain checking (Step 14). The DM calculates 
possible paths and forwards the reservation parameters to the 
AuthR module (Step 15). The AuthR module constructs a 
policy evaluation query and the query is checked against the 
existing policies stored in the Policy Store (Steps 16 and 17). 
The AuthR module returns an answer and the DM replies to 
the IDM about the feasibility of the reservation (Steps 18 and 
19). The IDM forwards the request and the user attributes to 
the next domain along the path for further processing (Step 
20) and finally, this process is repeated for all domains until 
the first reservation request has been evaluated. If a service 
request contains more than one reservation, this process is 
repeated for all reservations within this service request. 
VI. 
TRUSTED AND SECURE COMMUNICATION BETWEEN 
SYSTEM COMPONENTS 
To ensure a secure and trusted communication between 
system components, WS-Security standard [23] is used in 
addition with Edugain PKI infrastructure [24].  
WS-Security (Web Services Security, short WSS) is a 
flexible and feature-rich extension to SOAP to apply security 
to web services. It is a member of the WS-* family of web 
service specifications and was published by OASIS. 
The protocol specifies how integrity and confidentiality 
can be enforced on messages and allows the communication 
of various security token formats such as SAML, Kerberos, 
and X.509. Its main focus is the use of XML Signature, 
XML Encryption and XML Timestamp to provide end-to-
end security and in our case all three options are available for 
use. 
WS-Security makes heavy use of public/private key 
cryptography [16]. With public key cryptography, a user has 
a pair of public and private keys. A central problem for use 
of public-key cryptography is confidence (ideally proof) that 
a public key is correct, belongs to the person or entity 
claimed (i.e., is 'authentic') and has not been tampered with 
or replaced by a malicious third party. The usual approach to 
this problem is to use a public-key infrastructure (PKI) in 
which one or more third parties, known as certificate 
authorities, certifies ownership of key pairs. 
AutoBAHN makes use of eduGAIN PKI for validating 
the identity of the components. The trust establishment 
process is enabled by means of using TLS connections for 
each eduGAIN interaction and including XML-Sig digital 
signatures for the appropriate protocol elements and 
assertions. 
eduGAIN inter-component trust is based on X.509 
certificates. It is rooted at a set of Certification Authorities 
(CA) created and maintained within the project. This set will 
be referred to as the eduGAIN truststore and all AutoBAHN 
components accept any of the CAs contained by the 
truststore as valid roots of trust. CAs in the eduGAIN 
truststore conform to the eduGAIN Certificate Policy, a 
document defining the rules and procedures agreed by the 
eduGAIN participants to rely on digital public certificates 
issued to the components of the infrastructure. 
At least one of these CAs will be specifically established 
and run by the project. This root CA is referred as the 
eduGAINCA. The self-signed certificate of the eduGAINCA 
is the minimum content of the eduGAIN truststore. 
A. PKI Structure 
The structure of the eduGAIN PKI is shown in Figure 4. 
Each CA inside the eduGAIN truststore (shown as “Acc CA” 
in the figure) is accredited to issue certificates for 
components in a particular branch of the eduGAIN 
component identifier namespace (shown as “CId” in the 
figure). Certificates for components outside these branches 
are under the eduGAIN CA. The eduGAINCA issues 
certificates only to other CAs and these subordinated CAs 
will in turn be responsible for issuing certificates to the 
individual 
components. 
The 
eduGAIN 
infrastructure 
provides at least one of these subordinated CAs, known as 
the eduGAINSCA. 
 
 
Figure 4. eduGAIN PKI Structure 
 
The eduGAINSCA is able to provide a set of separately 
managed Registration Authorities (RA), according to the 
management 
procedures 
of 
the 
different 
eduGAIN 
namespaces under its responsibility. 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

B. Trust Validation Procedure 
Trust validation is performed by eduGAIN components 
according to a two-step procedure: 
1. 
The received certificate shall be evaluated to check 
whether the whole trust path correctly resolves to the 
eduGAIN root of trust. 
2. 
The eduGAIN component identifier contained in 
the Subject Alternate Name extension of the received 
certificate shall be evaluated against the metadata available 
for this interaction. It must match with the component 
identifier as stored in these metadata. 
A failure in any of the verifications above causes a 
rejection of the requested operation with a TrustError result. 
This procedure implies that for a proper trust evaluation, all 
metadata exchange through the MDS must contain the 
eduGAIN component identifiers applicable in each case. 
Unless otherwise specified in the corresponding profile, 
all connections between any two eduGAIN components uses 
TLS and perform two-way certificate validation (both 
initiator and responder) according to the above procedures. 
Validation of the certificates associated with XML 
Signatures follow the procedures described above. 
In principle, when the client module wants to 
communicate with another module (the resource), it sends its 
request to the required resource along with its X.509 
certificate 
signed 
by 
eduGAIN 
CA. 
The 
resource 
authenticates the client by validating its certificate using 
eduGAIN API. The certificate contains identification 
information that allows the resource to authenticate only 
designated clients. 
The detailed procedure in the context of the AutoBAHN 
system for the trusted communication between AutoBAHN 
modules is as followed. 
1) The 
AutoBAHN 
module 
that 
wants 
to 
communicate (client) must have a certificate so no 
interaction for credentials is needed. The X.509 
certificate is issued by a Certificate Authority (CA) 
subordinated to one of the eduGAIN roots of trust. 
2) The client module sends its request and the 
certificate to the resource. 
3) The resource module performs trust validation by 
checking that the whole trust path of the certificate 
correctly resolves to the root(s) of trust defined by 
eduGAIN. 
4) The resource checks that the client module is 
allowed to access it. 
5) The resource provides the requested answer to the 
client module. 
 
VII. 
QUANTITATIVE MEASUREMENTS 
In order to verify the scalability of the system, we have 
taken some quantitative measurements using Apache JMeter 
[25] as benchmarking tool. The test scenario specified the 
submission of 200 requests in time frame of 50 seconds 
resulting in 4 requests per second. The following graph 
presents the response time against the number of active 
threads. The lines refer to various steps during the 
submission of a reservation request in Client Portal.  
The response time peaks at 330 milliseconds when the 
greatest number of requests is being processed.  
 
 
Figure 5. Response Time vs Active Threads 
VIII. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented an Authorization and 
Authentication Infrastructure that is used in AutoBAHN 
project to ensure a secure and trusted communication among 
its components.  
AutoBAHN is considered a distributed system since each 
NREN deploys an instance based on their specific network 
technology and their needs in general. Because of that, it was 
important to emphasize in multi-domain user authorization 
ensuring that this communication is secured by WS-Security 
specification. 
Also, a strong advantage of AutoBAHN’s authentication 
and authorization mechanism compared to approaches of 
similar projects is the fact that it can support third party 
providers such as LDAP or Atlassian Crowd increasing the 
flexibility 
and 
the 
interoperability 
of 
the 
project. 
Furthermore, the AA process takes place in each single 
domain that is involved to a reservation path making the 
allocation of network resources more secure and robust. It’s 
not a one-time procedure that takes place only in the 
originating domain.  
AutoBAHN is designed in a highly scalable manner 
based on modules that perform specific tasks and 
communicate with one another. AuthR module handles AA 
tasks and then communicates with local DM, which later on 
sends the appropriate messages through the IDM to the rest 
of the AutoBAHN instances. This separation allows for a 
more convenient administration of the AAI in order to keep 
it up to date by adopting latest technology standards.  
Currently AutoBAHN has been deployed in 6 NRENs 
creating a pan-european bandwidth on demand service. 
Several more NRENs have expressed interest or are already 
in the process of joining the service. This service is currently 
fully operable and being offered to NREN staff and clients. 
The main lesson learnt was that the utilization of existing 
frameworks and open standards enabled us to implement our 
own custom AAI solution for a complex multi-domain 
environment and at the same time ensure extensibility and 
flexibility. In addition, due to the importance of the security 
mechanisms to the operation of the service, we consider it 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

essential that the specification of the AAI architecture needs 
to be an integral part of the system design from the start. 
Next step is the full integration of the latest AA 
Infrastructure that is a result of SA2/Task5 Common 
Framework efforts [17]. The WS-Security standard is based 
on WSS4J, a well-known and commonly used Java library 
for securing Web Services. In our case, we can additionally 
use AA Framework’s two way SSL communication as an 
extra security layer above WS-Security, which is based on 
X.509 certificates that are issued by eduPKI CA, the next-
generation CA of GÉANT’s project [18]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to acknowledge the contribution 
of their GN3 partners and especially the JRA2 Task 2 and 
SA2 Task 5 groups. 
REFERENCES 
[1] “GN3 European Project,” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.geant.net/pages/home.aspx. [retrieved: June, 
2012] 
[2] M. Campanella, R. Krzywania, V. Reijs, A. Sevasti, K. 
Stamos, C. Tziouvaras, and D. Wilson, “Bandwidth on 
Demand Services for European Research and Education 
Networks,” in 1st IEEE International Workshop on 
Bandwidth on Demand, San Francisco (USA), pp. 65-72, 
2006. 
[3] F. Leung, J. Flidr, C. Tracy, X. Yang, T. Lehman, B. Jabbari, 
D. Riley, and J. Sobieski, “The DRAGON Project and 
Application Specific Topologies,” in Broadnets, San Jose, 
California, USA, pp. 1-10, 2006.  
[4] Xi Yang, Tom Lehman, Chris Tracy, Jerry Sobieski, Shujia 
Gong, Payam Torab, and Bijan Jabbari, “Policy-Based 
Resource Management and Service Provisioning in GMPLS 
Networks",  IEEE INFOCOM, pp. 1-12, 2006 
[5] C. Guok, “ESnet On-Demand Secure Circuits and Advance 
Reservation System (OSCARS),” in Internet2 Joint Techs 
Workshop, Salt Lake City, Utah, 2005.  
[6] Chin Guok,   Robertson, D.,   Thompson M.,   Lee 
J.,   Tierney B.,   and Johnston W. “Intra and Interdomain 
Circuit Provisioning Using the OSCARS Reservation 
System”, Broadband Communications, Networks and 
Systems, pp. 1-8, 2006. BROADNETS 2006. 3rd 
International Conference 
[7] L. Gommans, C. de Laat, and R. Meijer, "Token based path 
authorization at interconnection points between hybrid 
networks aind a lambda grid," in Proceedings of IEEE 
GRIDNETS 2005 
[8] L Gommans B van Oudenaarde F Dijkstra, C. de Laat, T. 
Lavian I Monga, A Taal F Travostino, and A Wan 
"Applications drive secure lightpath creation across 
heterogeneous domains,' IEEE Communications Magazine, 
vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 100-106, 2006. 
[9] Y Demchenko, L. Gommans, C. de Laat, A. Tokmakoff, and 
R. van Buren, "Policy based access control in dynamic Grid-
based collaborative environment," in International 
Symposium on Collaborative Technologies and Systems, pp. 
64-73, 2006. 
[10] J. Vollbrecht, P. Calhoun, S. Farrell, L. Gommans, G. Gross, 
B. de Bruijn, C. de Laat, M. Holdrege, and D. Spence, "AAA 
authorization framework," IETF RFC 2904,  Aug. 2000. 
[11] J.J van der Ham, F. Dijkstra, F. Travostino, H.M.A. Andree, 
and C.T.A.M de Laat "Using RDF to describe nfetworks"' 
iGrid 2005 special issue, Future Generation Computer 
Systems, vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 862-867, 2006. 
[12] “Deliverable DJ5.2.3,3: Best Practice Guide - AAI Cookbook 
- Third Edition”, [Online]. Available: 
http://www.geant2.net/upload/pdf/GN2-08-130-DJ5-2-3-
3_eduGAIN_AAI_CookBook-1.pdf [retrieved: June, 2012] 
[13] “Spring Security Framework,” [Online]. Available: 
http://static.springsource.org/spring-security/site/ [retrieved: 
June, 2012]. 
[14] “LDAP,” [Online]. Available: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lightweight_Directory_Access_
Protocol [retrieved: June, 2012]. 
[15] “Crowd,” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.atlassian.com/software/crowd/ [retrieved: June, 
2012]. 
[16] “Public Key Cryptography,” [Online]. Available: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public-key_cryptography 
[retrieved: June, 2012]. 
[17] G. Forge, “GÉANT AA Framework,” [Online]. Available: 
https://forge.geant.net/forge/display/AAI/Home [retrieved: 
June, 2012]. 
[18] “eduPKI”, [Online]. Available: 
http://www.geant.net/SERVICES/ENDUSERAPPLICATION
SERVICES/Pages/eduPKI.aspx [retrieved: June, 2012]. 
[19] “GN2 Project”, [Online]. Available: http://www.geant2.net/ 
[retrieved: June, 2012] 
[20] “GEANT AA Framework”, [Online]. Available: 
http://www.geant.net/Services/NetworkPerformanceServices/
Pages/GEANT_Framework.aspx [retrieved: June, 2012] 
[21] “TERENA”, [Online]. Available: http://www.terena.org/ 
[retrieved: June, 2012] 
[22] “DANTE”, [Online]. Available: http://www.dante.net/ 
[retrieved: June, 2012] 
[23] “WS-Security”, [Online]. Available: https://www.oasis-
open.org/committees/tc_home.php?wg_abbrev=wss 
[retrieved: June, 2012] 
[24] “eduPKI”, [Online]. Available: 
http://www.geant.net/Services/UserAccessAndApplications/P
ages/eduPKI.aspx [retrieved: June, 2012] 
[25] “Apache JMeter” , [Online]. Available: 
http://jmeter.apache.org/index.html [retrieved: June, 2012] 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

