Identiﬁcation of Automotive Digital Forensics
Stakeholders
Kevin Gomez Buquerin
C-ECOS
Technical University Ingolstadt
Ingolstadt, Germany
e-mail: extern.kevinklaus.gomezbuquerin@thi.de
Hans-Joachim Hof
C-ECOS
Technical University Ingolstadt
Ingolstadt, Germany
e-mail: hof@thi.de
Abstract—New technologies and features emerging in modern
vehicles are widening the attack surface for malicious tampering.
As a result, security incidents including vehicles are on the rise.
Automotive digital forensics investigations allow resolving such
security incidents. This paper presents a stakeholder-based refer-
ence model for automotive digital forensics. It is essential to focus
on stakeholders to provide the best possible automotive digital
forensics investigation for them. We identiﬁed twelve distinct
stakeholders relevant to automotive digital forensics and assigned
them to the vehicle life-cycle’s relevant phases. Furthermore,
the stakeholders’ questions for forensics investigations and their
resources get analyzed. We created a Venn diagram to highlight
differences and similarities between the stakeholders.
Keywords—automotive; digital forensics; forensic; cyber secu-
rity; embedded; vehicle; car; automobile; stakeholder
I. INTRODUCTION
Features, such as car sharing or function-on-demand deter-
mine the design of modern vehicles. These use-cases are very
attractive to customers. However, they allow cyber criminals
to abuse novel use-cases for malicious purposes. Automotive
Digital Forensics (ADF) must efﬁciently investigate and re-
solve resulting security incidents.
Vehicle manufacturer spend additional resources in security
features and technologies. New security regulations such as
the UNECE [12] or ISO-21434 [13] set new requirements
for secure automotive systems and development of such.
This change in the automotive domain, leads to additional
stakeholders such as the UNECE approval authority. Also,
the automotive industry sees a switch of focus from existing
stakeholders in ADF. Addressing the needs and capabilities
of stakeholders is important to ensure the best possible ADF
investigation. This paper reports about our research on the
questions: “Which are ADF stakeholders?” and “ What foren-
sic questions are they interested in?”. The research on these
questions contributes the following items:
• A list of twelve unique ADF stakeholders.
• Forensic questions asked by and relevant for ADF stake-
holders.
• Forensic resources available to ADF stakeholders.
• Position of the ADF stakeholders in the vehicle life-cycle.
• A comparison between the ADF stakeholders based on
deﬁned close curves in a Venn diagram.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents related
work on ADF and argues, why our work is unique. Section
3 provides a useful deﬁnition of ADF stakeholders. Section 4
summarizes methods to identify and describe ADF stakehold-
ers. Section 5 presents the main contribution of our paper—
the ADF stakeholders identiﬁed in our work. Section 6 elabo-
rates differences in similarities of the identiﬁed stakeholders.
Section 7 evaluates the quality of the identiﬁcation of the
stakeholders and shows, that indeed all relevant stakeholders
were identiﬁed. Section 8 concludes the paper and gives an
outlook on future work.
II. RELATED WORK
Several scientists from academy and industry already pub-
lished research on ADF. Only a minority of papers focus
on stakeholders or interest groups of the technologies and
methods.
Armstrong [5] deﬁnes stakeholder groups in Digital Foren-
sics (DF) programs and evaluated a bias for each towards their
aim for prosecution. The author presents the victim group and
associates, law enforcement, forensic scientists and experts,
witnesses, perpetrator group and associates of the perpetrator,
judiciary, technology providers, media, and the public as
relevant stakeholders. Based on these groups, requirements
for the program are deﬁned. Furthermore, the author captures
differences and similar interests between the groups. As a
result, the DF programs are implemented based on the input
collected from the primary users.
Al Fahdi et al. [6] interviewed different stakeholders to
determine future challenges in DF. Based on those, the most
relevant areas of research are deﬁned. The paper identi-
ﬁes two distinct stakeholder groups, forensic researchers and
practitioners. The authors list three top challenges for these
stakeholders: cloud computing, anti-forensics, and encryption.
Mansor [4] presents automotive stakeholders in the area
of security. The paper lists attack motivations, methods,
and capabilities for each stakeholder. Based on this, a
comprehensive understanding of each stakeholder is available.
The
authors
deﬁne
ﬁve
stakeholder
groups:
Original
Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs), users (e. g., car owner
and drivers), service provides (e. g., dealers and workshops),
insurance providers, and hackers (e. g., researchers, technical
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

enthusiasts, thieves, and OEM competitors).
All available research focuses on general and offensive
automotive security. To the best of our knowledge, we are
the ﬁrst to present stakeholders in the automotive domain
for ADF and general defense techniques. However, a solid
understanding of stakeholders in the automotive domain is
of uttermost importance for the design and development of
sufﬁcient technologies and methods for ADF investigations.
III. DEFINITION OF AUTOMOTIVE DIGITAL FORENSICS
STAKEHOLDERS
ADF utilizes DF techniques and methods within vehicular
systems and the supporting infrastructure. It includes different
data types and data sources. We deﬁne automotive systems as
components installed in vehicles such as Electronic Control
Units (ECUs) and modules connected to the vehicle such as
manufacturer’s backend, smartphones, or Vehicle to X (V2X)
devices. X can be other vehicles, infrastructure components,
smartphones, smart-home, backend-systems, and more. ADF
includes many tasks, ranging from quickly collecting data
from an in-vehicle black-box to in-depth analysis such as
embedded forensics techniques. The general goal of ADF is
answering questions asked by the entity that requests forensic
investigation (vulgo stakeholder). The questions (6 WH’s)
include: How, Why, Where, When, Who, and What.
Freeman and Reed present two methods to deﬁne stake-
holders. According to them, stakeholders are a “group or [an]
individual who can affect the achievement of an organiza-
tion’s objectives or who is affected by the achievement of an
organization’s objectives” [1] or stakeholders are a “group
or [an] individual on which the organization is dependent
for this continued survival” [1]. Based on these deﬁnitions,
the relevance for ADF stakeholders can be deﬁned: “ADF
stakeholders are relevant if they have a signiﬁcant negative
or positive inﬂuence on digital forensics in the automotive
sector. This includes in-vehicle systems and their supporting
infrastructure.”.
IV. IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION OF AUTOMOTIVE
DIGITAL FORENSICS STAKEHOLDERS
Bryson [2] presents multiple methods to identify and an-
alyze stakeholders. He introduces two identiﬁcation methods.
The ﬁrst method is a brainstorming technique, having multiple
people determine relevant stakeholders. Bryson suggests to
involve people which have “information that cannot be gained
otherwise” [2], to ensure that the determined stakeholders are
the most relevant for the speciﬁc domain. The second method
is a snow-ball technique that is based on King et al. [10]. Each
identiﬁed stakeholder gets contacted and asked to lists other
potential stakeholders. This method utilizes the experience
and knowledge of existing stakeholders and allows the initial
determination of stakeholders to be general and incomplete.
Bryson presents multiple analysis methods. It contains
power-versus-interests grids that show the level of interest
on the X-axis and the level of power on the Y-axis. The
method allows to determine crowds, subjects, context setters,
and players in the different quadrants. In addition, Bryson con-
stitutes stakeholder inﬂuence diagrams that expand on power-
versus-interests grids. Here, lines are drawn between identiﬁed
stakeholders and interest ﬂows as well as directions of interests
are identiﬁed. Inﬂuence diagrams allow to determine the most
important stakeholders of a group.
We decided to use the brainstorming technique. The snow-
ball method is neglected as it is not feasible for groups such as
criminals and government organizations. In addition, no stake-
holder analysis is performed. This research does not focus on
public value or business interest for an ADF company. Instead,
this work focuses on identifying stakeholders, including their
interests in, resources for, and potential impact on ADF.
Three different groups of attendees for the brainstorming
session were selected. First, from academia with a focus on
automotive security, second vehicle manufacturer staff work-
ing in automotive security, and third a mixed session including
automotive security researchers, vehicle manufacturer staff,
car owners, supplier staff, and insurer staff. As a result,
the different groups consist of car owners, a professor, PhD
students, OEM employees, tier one supplier employees, and
insurer employees.
There are multiple possibilities to describe ADF stakehold-
ers. A bare listing of stakeholders is likely to be unclear and
incomplete, and a reference to the automotive domain may not
be evident. Hence, this work categorizes stakeholders based on
the vehicle life-cycle that are production, use, and end-of-life
[3]. The importance of ADF for a stakeholder is associated
with the progression of the vehicle life-cycle. The advantage
of such a categorization is the focus on ADF during speciﬁc
steps of the manufacturing process. Our method is open to
integration of additional stakeholders and to the adaption of
existing collaborators in the future. To describe stakeholders,
we use the following properties:
• The position in the vehicle life-cycle describes the stage
in which the stakeholders has an impact on the vehicle
or a focus on ADF.
• The stakeholders interests and exemplary forensic ques-
tions regarding the 6 WH’s of DF.
• Resources available to the stakeholder. Capabilities of
the stakeholder to perform or assist ADF investigations.
Resources includes hardware, software, documentation,
and experience.
• Examples for the stakeholder group.
We select a Venn diagram to visually present different stake-
holders. Venn diagrams allow to easily recognize similarities
as well as differences. Based on the brainstorming sessions, we
identiﬁed different interests and focus areas of the stakeholder.
Based on those, three closed curves are deﬁned: Trustworthi-
ness, Functionality, and Law as A. Protection and Security as
B. Misuse, Tampering, and Hacking as C. Stakeholders in the
closed curve A focus on trustworthiness and functionality of
the vehicle systems. Furthermore, their interest is in fulﬁllment
of regulations. Protection of the intellectual property as well
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

as ensuring security of the automotive systems do group
stakeholders in B. Closed curve C comprises stakeholders that
try to misuse, tamper with, and hack automotive systems.
V. AUTOMOTIVE DIGITAL FORENSICS STAKEHOLDER
Three brainstorming sessions were performed. All are based
on Bryson’s methodology presented in [2]. Within session one,
one professor, four PhD students, and one master student were
involved. The professor as well as all students are part of an
automotive security research group at an university. Four PhD
students with a focus on automotive security as well as two
OEM employees and one tier one employee participated in the
second session. Session three included one insurer employee,
one tier one employee, two OEM employees, and two PhD
students. All participants work in the area of automotive
security and are car owners or business car users. We decided
to have three brainstorming sessions in order to involve various
relevant participants and stakeholders from different areas. All
stated participants contribute to one session only. Further, PhD
students as well as other contributors are not the same.
The following paragraphs present the identiﬁed stakehold-
ers. Furthermore, forensic questions of the stakeholders, their
position in the vehicle life-cycle and examples are presented.
All results are from the brainstorming sessions.
a) OEM: OEMs are located in the production (vehicle
development) as well as use (maintenance and sale of spare
parts) phase of the vehicle life-cycle. OEMs are interested
in identifying issues in their products. Forensic questions
concern, among other things, the clariﬁcation of guilt questions
such as “Did a vehicle system cause the accident?” or of
legal questions such as “Was there an inadequate handling
of personal data in the vehicle?”. Due to the development
background and the system knowledge, there are effects on
vehicle development. In addition, OEMs have access to in-
ternal information of the vehicles that is valuable in digital
forensic investigations (e. g., manufacturer-speciﬁc Uniﬁed
Diagnostic Services (UDS) identiﬁers). Examples are Audi,
BMW, Daimler, Tesla, and Toyota.
b) Business car owner: Business car owners own a ﬂeet
of vehicles. The position in the vehicle life-cycle lies in
the use phase. They are interested in protecting employee
data and in low insurance costs. Forensic questions include
“Was the driver or the vehicle to blame in the accident?” or
“Who extracted the personal data from the vehicle?”. Business
car owners have no system knowledge and sometimes use
additional devices such as digital logbooks. Examples are
companies such as Telekom or the police that own a vehicle
ﬂeet.
c) Private car owner: Private car owners have no ad-
ditional resources to conduct ADF investigations. They use
the car and are interested in the protection of personal data
such as the travel route. Private car owners could also utilize
ADF investigations to determine why their car is no longer
reliable (e. g., a vulnerable device is installed and not properly
patched). Examples are people who own a vehicle.
d) Supplier:
Suppliers support the OEM in the de-
velopment of vehicle components and functions during the
production phase. This gives them partial system knowledge.
However, this knowledge is very deep because a supplier
implements certain subsystems. ADF supports suppliers in
troubleshooting and resolving issues during investigations.
In addition, suppliers have manufacturer-speciﬁc information
(e. g., manufacturer-speciﬁc UDS identiﬁers). Examples are
Continental, Bosch, and Faurecia.
e) Mobility provider: Mobility providers are in the use
phase of the vehicle life-cycle. They protect their intellectual
property and the personal data of their customers. Forensic
questions are similar to those of the business car owner,
such as “Was the accident caused by the customer or the
vehicle?” or “Who extracted the personal data from the
vehicle?”. Due to additional components such as tracking
devices or tachographs, mobility providers sometimes have
system knowledge. Examples are SIXT, Hertz, and DriveNow.
f) Legal
institution:
Legal
institutions
own
ofﬁcial
testers, maintenance equipment, and contracts with the manu-
facturer to carry out tests on vehicles. They use these resources
to determine whether laws and regulations are being followed,
which can lead to ADF investigations. They also offer services
such as the extraction of Diagnostic Trouble Codes (DTCs).
Legal institutions are located in the production and end of life
phase of the vehicle life-cycle. Examples are the German T ¨UV,
independent workshops, and the Federal Motor Transport
Authority.
g) Government organization: Government organizations
have an inﬂuence on ADF in the use and end of life phase.
They protect vehicles with a sovereign role (e. g., the gov-
ernment ﬂeet). ADF questions include “Has the vehicle been
compromised?” and “What data was collected by vehicle
systems?”. System knowledge is available by requesting neces-
sary information from the manufacturer. In addition, there are
special agreements on compliance with laws when the safety
of vehicles with sovereign issues is affected. Examples are
BND, NSA, CIA, MI5, and Mossad.
h) Insurer: Insurers affects ADF in the use phase of the
vehicle life-cycle. They tend to determine whether the status
of the vehicle permits registration and assess the insurance
coverage. ADF questions are but are not limited to “Has
the vehicle accelerated by itself?” and “Has the vehicle been
manipulated (tuned)?”. System knowledge is partly given
through the cooperation with manufacturers. Examples are
DEKRA or Allianz.
i) Criminal: Criminals concentrate on ADF in the pro-
duction and use phases of the vehicle life-cycle. They aim
to activate chargeable services and products. In addition,
criminals disable immobilizers and steal intellectual property
or personal data. ADF questions include “What personal
information can be stolen” and “What intellectual property
can be collected?”. Their system knowledge varies between
threat actors. Advanced attackers can be very skilled.
j) Tuner: Tuners are in the use phase of the vehicle life-
cycle. Their goal is to achieve increases in performance and
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

to carry out vehicle conﬁgurations. Therefore, ADF questions
could be “Where can you ﬁnd speciﬁc information about a
functionality in the vehicle?” and “Where is the conﬁguration
of the engine stored?”. Their system knowledge is high and
there is networking as well as cooperation between the tuners.
Hardware for communication with the vehicle is also available.
Examples are Brabus, MTM, and MHD.
k) Researcher: Researchers are in the use phase of the
vehicle life-cycle. Their aim is to carry out scientiﬁc research
on vehicles and, for example, to identify problems within
vehicle components. ADF questions include “Which personal
data are stored by modern vehicles” and “Which compo-
nents contain forensically relevant data?”. System knowledge
may be available. It is determined by open source resources
and reverse engineering of components. The researchers are
networked through conferences and publications. Examples
are academic researchers, private researchers, and penetration
testers.
l) Approval authority:
Approval authorities position
themselves in all three phases of the vehicle life-cycle. They
determine the fulﬁllment of legal requirements. New regula-
tions such as UNECE place demands on automotive security,
security development, and forensics. An example for a model
based security framework is presented by Volkersdorfer and
Hof in [11]. Such research directly addresses challenges
in security development and testing for modern automotive
systems. ADF questions include “Is personal data stored
and protected in the vehicle?” and “What information is
stored in vehicle systems?”. Approval authorities have no
system knowledge. However, there is close cooperation with
the manufacturers and they can collect documentation for
components. One example is the approval authority for the
UNECE standard.
VI. COMPARISON OF THE AUTOMOTIVE DIGITAL
FORENSICS STAKEHOLDER
To visualize all presented ADF stakeholders, a Venn di-
agram is created and presented in Figure 1. This research
focuses on the main interests and areas of focus in ADF of the
shown stakeholders. The results come from the brainstorming
sessions. The authors are aware that multiple stakeholders
do have interest in all areas. However, we categorized stake-
holders based on strong interest in one of the closed curves:
Trustworthiness, Functionality, and Law as A. Protection and
Security as B. Misuse, Tampering, and Hacking as C. Various
key interests were identiﬁed during the brainstorming sessions.
The closed curves result from these.
Table I presents the results of the comparison. Set A holds
the insurer and approval authority. The business car owner is
included in B, while the criminal is in Set C. Set A ∩ B
contains the OEM, legal institution, researcher, and supplier.
The tuner is located in Set A ∩ C. Government organizations
in Set B ∩ C. Finally, Set A ∩ B ∩ C contains the private car
owner and mobility provider.
The Venn diagram visualizes similarities and differences.
Similarities are shared between stakeholders in the same or
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF AUTOMOTIVE DIGITAL FORENSICS STAKEHOLDER
BASED ON A VENN DIAGRAM
Set
Stakeholder
A
Insurer, approval authority
B
Business car owner
C
Criminal
A ∩ B
OEM, legal institution, researchers, supplier
A ∩ C
Tuner
B ∩ C
Government organization
A ∩ B ∩ C
Private car owner, mobility provider
adjoining sets. Differences are represented by closed curves
in which there is a symmetrical difference. The symmetric
difference is compared for all pairs of close curves, that is
A △ B, A △ C, and B △ C.
One example for the symmetric difference A △ C is the
insurer and the criminal. The insurer tends to not change
automotive components and ensure their safety, while the
criminal tampers with devices while not properly testing the
safety of performance increases. Another example of the
symmetrical difference A △ B is the licensing authority and
the government organization. Differences are represented by
closed curves in which there is a symmetrical difference.
Figure 1. Automotive Digital Forensics Stakeholders in a Venn Diagram
VII. EVALUATION
The next step is to evaluated the shown results. It includes a
validation for the methodology and the presented stakeholder
table.
A. Completeness of the Automotive Digital Forensics Stake-
holder Table
To evaluate completeness of the stakeholder tables, we
assessed them using the following list. The list is created based
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

on prior research in stakeholder identiﬁcation and analysis
work:
• A: Used identiﬁcation techniques are in the context of
identiﬁcation and analysis [7].
• B: Involved phases are included in the stakeholder iden-
tiﬁcation process [7].
• C: Accessible resources are utilized [7].
• D: A suitable identiﬁcation method is used [2] [10].
• E: Suitable factors to identify stakeholders are used [8].
• F: Legitimacy, urgency, and proximity of stakeholders are
considered [9].
a) A, B, C: In [7], Luyet et al. stated that stakeholder
identiﬁcation techniques depend on the context of the iden-
tiﬁcation and analysis, the phase involved, and the accessi-
ble resources. In case of this research, context and phase
is “stakeholder identiﬁcation”. Accessible resources depend
on the identiﬁcation technique. As a result, evaluation is
performed on techniques that focus on identiﬁcation and not
on stakeholder analysis. Furthermore, required resources are
included in the evaluation criteria that comprises access to
stakeholder groups (OEM employees, supplier employees,
PhD students, master students, professors, insurer employees,
and car owners), number of interviews (3), and interview type
(physical and online).
b) D: In [2], Bryson presented 15 stakeholder identi-
ﬁcation and analysis techniques. To evaluate completeness
of the automotive stakeholder tables we determine which
identiﬁcation method is used in all 15 techniques. In 12 of
15 techniques, brainstorming is mentioned for stakeholder
identiﬁcation. 3 of 15 techniques do not mention a stake-
holder identiﬁcation technique. Prior the stakeholder analysis,
the method assumes that stakeholders have been identiﬁed.
Furthermore, snow-ball technique by King et al. [10] is not
feasible for ADF stakeholders, because no interviews are
viable with government institutions or criminals.
c) E: Creighton implemented different factors to identify
stakeholders [8]. Those include proximity, economy, and social
values. Those characteristics are relevant for stakeholder iden-
tiﬁcation in speciﬁc geographical areas. It is not feasible for
ADF stakeholders because this topic of DF is not dependent
on geographical areas. Hence, we did not include factors
presented by the author.
d) F: In [9], Mitchell et al. identiﬁed stakeholders based
on legitimacy, urgency, and proximity. These characteristics
are covered by their position in the vehicle life-cycle. Le-
gitimacy is covered because each stakeholder is part of the
life-cycle—otherwise there would not be any impact from the
stakeholder. Due to the different life-cycle phases, urgency and
proximity is given for each stakeholder.
B. Validation of Stakeholder List
We performed multiple interviews with identiﬁed stake-
holders to validate the stakeholder list. To achieve sufﬁcient
coverage we aimed to interview at least one representative
for each identiﬁed stakeholder group. During each interview,
we described the aim of this research. Each representative
was able to comment on the table and the shown results.
Furthermore, they were instructed to speciﬁcally look into
interests and resources for their associated stakeholder group.
We were not able to contact a representative for government
organizations, criminals, approval authority, or tuners. The
following results were collected:
• 2 OEM representatives: Missed offensive stakeholders.
The aim of this thesis is to identify automotive forensics
stakeholders and not offensive security stakeholders.
• 2 business car owner representatives: No comments.
• 6 private car owner representatives: Missed reliability of
the car as one of their interests. Added this interest to
the table.
• 1 supplier representative: No comments.
• 1 mobility provider representative: No comments
• 1 legal institution representative: Missed fulﬁllment of
safety requirements as one of their interests. We include
those into laws since fulﬁllment of safety requirements
is mandatory for a vehicle registration.
• 1 insurer representative: Missed fulﬁllment of safety re-
quirements as one of their interests. We include those into
laws since fulﬁllment of safety requirements is mandatory
for a vehicle registration.
• 2 researcher representative: No comments
• 0 government organization representative: No interview
performed.
• 0 criminal representative: No interview performed.
• 0 tuner representative: No interview performed.
• 0 approval authority representative: No interview per-
formed.
We showed validity for 8 out of 12 presented stakeholders
based on the stated interviews. Furthermore, we added missing
interests mentioned by the stakeholders. However, additional
interviews and surveys with stakeholder group would be
beneﬁcial.
C. Limitations of the Presented List of Automotive Digital
Forensics Stakeholder
The presented list of ADF stakeholders is a snapshot. The
automotive industry is changing frequently. As a result, the list
of stakeholders can change in the course of time. However, our
method of adding new stakeholders or adapting interests and
resources of existing stakeholders is independent of changes
in the industry. New technologies and opportunities lead to
adjustments of the stakeholders interests and resources. New
regulations can add additional stakeholders—similar to the
introduction of UNECE and the approval authority as a new
stakeholder in automotive security.
We further emphasize that this research and the resulting
stakeholder list is focusing on ADF only. We are aware that
stakeholders as well as their interests and resources are similar
to general and offensive automotive stakeholders. However,
differences between the areas of research are present.
As mentioned in Section VII-B, we were not able to in-
terview representatives for the stakeholder groups government
organizations, criminals, approval authority, or tuners. Hence,
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

results for these stakeholders are not sufﬁciently validated.
In addition, more brainstorming sessions including relevant
participates could result in more detailed results.
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
One challenge in automotive digital forensics is the amount
of research questions and forensic problems. Knowing stake-
holders relevant in this domain allows researchers to identify
problems and ask valuable research questions. Furthermore,
vehicles and their components are expensive. Extensive re-
search with multiple evidence items is difﬁcult to achieve.
Hence, researchers must fall back to experience and questions
asked by practitioners (i. e. stakeholders).
In this work, we determined twelve unique stakeholders
relevant in the area of ADF. We were able to identity those,
by adapting three brainstorming sessions with relevant partic-
ipants from academia, the automotive industry, and insurance
domain. To present the relevance and impact on each stake-
holder, we determined their position on the vehicle life-cycle,
their main interest in ADF, as well as their resources and
capabilities in performing and assisting ADF investigations. To
identify differences and similarities between all stakeholders,
we created a Venn diagram with three closed curves.
Future work will focus on interviews of different stakehold-
ers. Based on those, requirements for forensics investigations
and DF questions can be determined. This opens new research
areas in the ﬁeld of ADF. Furthermore, constant reﬁnement
of the list of relevant stakeholders is required to work on a
roster that is up to date. We will identify relevant research
questions for the shown stakeholders. These research questions
will allow us to create a more fundamental understanding of
ADF.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Freeman and D. L. Reed, “Stockholders and Stakeholders: A New
Perspective on Corporate Governance”, California Management Review,
vol. 25, pp. 88-106, April 1983.
[2] J. M. Bryson, “What to do when Stakeholders matter”, Public Manage-
ment Review, num. 1, vol. 6, pp. 21-53, March 2004.
[3] T. R. Hawkins, B. Singh, G. Majeau-Bettez, and A. Hammer Strømman,
“Comparative Environmental Life Cycle Assessment of Conventional
and Electric Vehicles”, Journal of Industrial Ecology, num. 1, vol. 17,
pp. 53-64, October 2012.
[4] H. Mansor, “Security and Privacy Aspects of Automotive Systems”,
Royal Holloway, University of London, July 2017.
[5] C. Armstrong, “Including Stakeholder Perspectives in Digital Forensic
Programs”, 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,
January 2012.
[6] M. Al Fahdi, N. L. Clarke, and S.M. Furnell, “Challenges to digital
forensics: A survey of researchers, practitioners attitudes and opinions”,
Information Security for South Africa, IEEE, August 2013.
[7] V. Luyet, R. Schlaepfer, M. B. Parlange, A. and Buttler, “A framework to
implement Stakeholder participation in environmental projects”, Journal
of Environmental Management, Elsevier BV, pp. 213-219, November
2012.
[8] J. L. Creighton, “Managing Conﬂict in Public Involvement Settings:
Training Manual for Bonneville Power Administration”, Creighton and
Creighton, 1986.
[9] R. K. Mitchell, B. R. Agle, and D. J. Wood, “Toward a theory of
stakeholder identiﬁcation and salience: the principle of who and what
really count” Academy of Management Review 22, 1997.
[10] C. S. King, K. M. Feltey, and B. O. Sused, “The question of partici-
pation: toward authentic public participation in public administration”
Public Administration Review 58 (4), 1998.
[11] T. Volkersdorfer and H. J. Hof, “A Concept of an Attack Model for a
Model-Based Security Testing Framework”, SECURWARE 2020, The
Fourteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information,
Systems and Technologies, 2020.
[12] Economic and Social Council, “Proposal for a new UN Regulation on
uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles with regards to
cyber security and cyber security management system”, UNECE WP.29
Standard, June 2020.
[13] ISO/SAE, “ISO/SAE 21434:2021: Road vehicles — Cybersecurity en-
gineering”, edition: 1, August 2021.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-919-5
SECURWARE 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

