Frictionless Authentication Systems:
Emerging Trends, Research Challenges and Opportunities
Tim Van hamme, Vera Rimmer,
Davy Preuveneers, and Wouter Joosen
imec-DistriNet KU Leuven
Celestijnenlaan 200A, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium
Email: {firstname.lastname}@cs.kuleuven.be
Mustafa A. Mustafa, Aysajan Abidin,
and Enrique Argones R´ua
imec-COSIC KU Leuven
Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium
Email: {firstname.lastname}@esat.kuleuven.be
Abstract—Authentication and authorization are critical security
layers to protect a wide range of online systems, services and
content. However, the increased prevalence of wearable and
mobile devices, the expectations of a frictionless experience and
the diverse user environments will challenge the way users are au-
thenticated. Consumers demand secure and privacy-aware access
from any device, whenever and wherever they are, without any
obstacles. This paper reviews emerging trends and challenges with
frictionless authentication systems and identiﬁes opportunities for
further research related to the enrollment of users, the usability
of authentication schemes, as well as security and privacy trade-
offs of mobile and wearable continuous authentication systems.
Keywords–Frictionless authentication; Behaviometrics; Secu-
rity; Privacy; Usability.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, the ubiquitous nature of mobile and wearable
devices has allowed users to access a multitude of new
applications, services and content. More and more personal
related information is stored on (or accessed via) personal
devices such as smart phones, which enhances users’ expe-
rience and convenience, and creates new opportunities for
both, consumers and service providers. However, such access
of multitude applications via personal devices also brings
new challenges for service providers that must now secure
access from a wide variety of devices [1]. Moreover, there
is a continuous growth of mobile malware and other mobile
security threats. Thus, it is important these mobile devices
to be equipped with reliable means of authentication and
authorization.
However, usually, these mobile and wearable devices have
limited computational and interaction capabilities. Further-
more, because these devices are small, light, and easy to carry,
there is also an associated risk in that they are susceptible
to loss and theft, and easier to break. The use of context
information (such as the user’s current location, his typical
behavior, etc.) may also trigger privacy concerns. Moreover,
due to the increased prevalence of wearable and mobile
applications, users nowadays expect a frictionless customer
experience, making minimum effort. Taking into account these
characteristics, the way users are authenticated and granted
access to a wide range of online services and content becomes
more challenging.
Homogeneous and static 
Authorization
Authentication
Heterogeneous, dynamic and 
low-friction experience
Authorization
Authentication
Risk
single high-end
device
collaborative 
mobile devices
context, threat model, 
heuristics, policies, 
metrics, thresholds
MULTI-FACTOR
SECURITY LEVELS
adaptive, local and global
factors, access history
versatile assets, 
services, operations  
and security levels
rigid policies
Figure 1. Collaborative, frictionless and adaptive mulﬁ-factor authentication
with many mobile devices.
Ideally, users’ devices will jointly and continuously operate
in the background to establish the identity of the individual
by continuously monitoring the context and detecting unusual
deviations, as depicted in Figure 1. The advantage is that this
will move the veriﬁcation of the additional factors away from
the user, making it transparent, and thereby greatly improving
the convenience for the user, but posing important privacy
challenges when sensitive context information is used, the
addressing of which is an important aspect. The objective of
pursuing a collaborative multi-device approach is that it can be
less vulnerable against malicious users or unauthorized access
after theft or loss of a device. Systems that support such user
experience are called frictionless authentication systems [2].
In this paper we provide an overview of the emerging
trends, research challenges and opportunities in such friction-
less authentication systems that allow users to authenticate
themselves using their devices to service providers without
intentionally performing any speciﬁc authentication-related
actions, such as entering a password.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Section II,
we review the current state of practice in mobile and multi-
factor authentication, as well as risk-adaptive solutions. Emerg-
ing trends on collaborative and behavioral are highlighted in
Section III. Section IV reviews challenges and opportunities
for further research. We conclude the paper in Section V.
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Authenticate
Username &
Password
Behavioral
Biometrics
Context
User Behavior 
Analytics
Success
Failure
Identity and Access 
Management: 
Step-up Authentication
SMS             Email                e-ID
Figure 2. Risk-adaptive step-up authentication leveraging context and behaviometrics adopted within contemporary Identity and Access Management systems.
II.
STATE-OF-PRACTICE IN AUTHENTICATION
Before highlighting emerging trends in frictionless authen-
tication systems, we will brieﬂy review current best practices
and the state-of-the-art in multi-factor authentication.
A. Mobile and Multi-Factor Authentication
Weak passwords are a major cause of data and security
breaches [3]. With dictionary attacks and optimized password
cracking tools, users with simple or short (i.e., less than 8
characters) passwords are easy prey, especially if they use
the same password for various services. Additionally, com-
plex passwords are difﬁcult to enter on mobile and wearable
devices. This illustrates the generally acknowledged concep-
tion that passwords are problematic. Therefore, efforts are
ongoing to replace password-based authentication with better
alternatives [4]–[7]. With multi-factor authentication, users
authenticate with a combination of authentication factors, i.e.,
knowledge, intrinsic (biometrics) and possession. Biometric
factors like speaker recognition, ﬁngerprints, iris or retina scans
cannot be forgotten, but may require expensive equipment
to implement. Furthermore, such solutions require storing
biometric templates, which can also be compromised and
which are often cumbersome to revoke.
An interesting alternative to multi-factor mobile authenti-
cation is the Pico, a concept introduced by Stajano [8]. The
Pico is a dedicated hardware token to authenticate the user to a
myriad of remote servers; it is designed to be very secure while
remaining quasi-effortless for users. The authentication process
is based on the use of public-key cryptography and certiﬁcates,
making common attacks on passwords (such as snifﬁng, phish-
ing, guessing, and social engineering) impossible. Although
being an interesting proposal, an actual implementation is
currently lacking.
Leveraging on these recent initiatives, dynamic, multi-
factor, collaborative and context-based authentication could
further improve the current state-of-the-art on mobile au-
thentication, ﬁnding an optimal balance between cost, user-
convenience and security and privacy. Early work in this
direction was presented in [9] in which the authors presented
SmartAuth, a scalable context-aware authentication framework
built on top of OpenAM, a state-of-practice Identity and
Access Management (IAM) suite (see Figure 2). It uses adap-
tive and dynamic context ﬁngerprinting based on Hoeffding
trees [10] to continuously ascertain the authenticity of a user’s
identity.
However, existing solutions that exploit context informa-
tion often depend on a single device. Especially for mobile
devices, a simple device or browser ﬁngerprint is hardly unique
and can easily be intercepted and spoofed by an attacker [11].
B. Risk-based Access Control and Enabling Technologies
Authentication is a basic building block of practically all
business models. As mobile devices and wearables continue to
proliferate and become part of the user’s expanded computing
environment - fundamentally changing the way people access
services and content - there is an associated security risk in
that these devices are susceptible to loss and theft because they
are small, light, and easy to carry.
The latest trend in access control models is Risk-Adaptive
Access Control (RAdAC) where access decisions depend on
dynamic risk assessments. There is a large body of knowledge
on this topic in the scientiﬁc literature [12]–[19], and risk-
based authentication and access controls are being adopted
in contemporary identity and access management solutions,
such as SecureAuth IdP 8.0, RSA SecurID Risk-Based Au-
thentication, CA Technologies and ForgeRock’s OpenAM 14.
Contextual information (device ﬁngerprints, user location, time
zone, IP address, time of day and other parameters) is used to
evaluate the risk of users attempting to access a resource, but
the approach is often based on weighted score functions or
meaningless user-deﬁned risk thresholds.
III.
EMERGING TRENDS
In this section we provide an overview of the emerging
trends in collaborative authentication and behaviometrics.
A. Collaborative Authentication
Authentication means solely based on possession factors
bear the risk that the unique possession factor could be lost or
stolen, hence compromising the security of the authentication
system. Combining these schemes with other authentication
factors, such as passwords or PINs, could improve the security,
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

but at the cost of user-friendliness. Furthermore, one still
needs to take into account the typical attacks on knowledge-
based authentication factors, such as PIN guessing or phishing
attacks. An interesting alternative are collaborative authentica-
tion schemes, where multiple devices jointly authenticate to a
remote server or within a device-to-device setting. To limit the
cost, the combination of wearables and the user’s smartphone
would be preferred. Such collaborative authentication schemes
overcome the security problems of using a single possession
factor during the authentication process as an adversary would
have to steal multiple wearables to successfully impersonate a
user, while still offering user-friendliness. Moreover, by using
wearables the user is carrying anyhow, one avoids the need
of employing external hardware authentication tokens, which
could be quite costly.
The concept of collaborative authentication is to transform
a challenge-response protocol with a single prover and veriﬁer,
to a challenge-response protocol with multiple collaborating
provers and a single veriﬁer. To mitigate the threat of wearables
being stolen or lost, and the fact that the set of wearables
is dynamic (the user is not always carrying the same set of
wearables), threshold-based cryptography is used. The aim
of threshold cryptography is to protect a key by sharing it
amongst a number of entities in such a way that only a subset
of minimal size, namely a threshold t+1, can use the key. No
information about the key can be learnt from t or less shares.
Shamir [20] was the ﬁrst to introduce this concept of secret
sharing. Feldman [21] extended this concept by introducing
veriﬁable secret sharing. Pedersen [22] then used this idea to
construct the ﬁrst Distributed Key Generation (DKG) protocol.
Shoup [23] showed how signature schemes such as RSA could
be transformed into a threshold-based variant.
To increase the resilience in a threshold-based authentica-
tion scheme, the number of devices included in the threshold
scheme should be maximized. Therefore, Simoens et al. [24]
presented a new DKG protocol and demonstrated how this
allows wearables not capable of securely storing secret shares
to be incorporated. Peeters et al. [25] used this idea to propose
a threshold-based distance bounding protocol. A gap that
remains to be ﬁlled is a threshold-based mobile authentica-
tion scheme, where the secret keying material is distributed
among a set of personal wearables. For recent developments
in continuous authentication, we refer the reader to [26].
B. Behaviometrics
A recent trend in the area of continuous authentication is
the use of behaviometrics. DARPA hosted the Active Authen-
tication program [27] in which various kinds of behavioral
biometrics, i.e., metrics that measure human behavior to rec-
ognize or verify the identity of a person, are investigated.
Several studies have investigated the application of using
behaviometrics in order to provide an authentication method
that is (a) continuous, during an entire user session, and (b)
non-intrusive, since the normal user interaction with the system
is analyzed. It has been demonstrated that a user identity can
be recognized and veriﬁed by means of several behaviometrics,
such as keystroke dynamics, mouse movements (together with
display resolution) [28], gait analysis [29], CPU and RAM us-
age [30], accelerometer [31] and battery ﬁngerprints of mobile
devices [32], stylometry [33], web browsing behavior [34], etc.
Security
Context
Usability
Privacy
Figure 3. Security, privacy and usability trade-offs in frictionless
authentication.
An overview of techniques can be found in these works [35]–
[37] and survey [38]. A key challenge will be to investigate
which combination of behaviometrics will deliver a sufﬁcient
low number of false positives (mistakenly granted access =
security concern) and false negatives (mistakenly denied access
= user experience concern) such that the risk is acceptable
given the circumstances.
IV.
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
A frictionless authentication system is a complex system,
involving multiple devices and sensors that interact with each
other. This complexity makes such systems also a very ﬂexible
kind of authentication system. Nonetheless, several challenges
and research opportunities remain. Authentication systems are
usually characterized by the following interacting dimensions
(see Figure 3):
-
Security, which refers to how difﬁcult it is for an
impostor to be falsely authenticated.
-
Usability, which describes how easy and convenient it
is for genuine users to be authenticated.
-
Privacy, which describes how any private information
about the user being used are securely stored and/or
processed by the system.
Security and usability are usually a trade-off in most
authentication systems. For instance, False Acceptance and
False Rejection Rates (FAR and FRR, respectively) are usually
depicted in a ROC curve in biometric systems, and the lower
the FAR is the higher the FRR is, where FAR is related to
security, and FRR is related to usability. Hence, authentication
systems are characterized by a speciﬁc security-usability trade-
off. Regarding privacy, it can be also related to the security and
usability of an authentication system. For instance, biometric
systems based on protected templates, with a superior privacy
protection when compared to their unprotected counterparts,
usually provide an inferior set of working points regarding
usability and security. In addition, the disclosure of a biometric
template can lead to a security problem, unless appropriate
revocation mechanisms are incorporated.
Active authentication systems involve multiple devices and
sensors that interact with each other. This complexity also
makes a frictionless authentication system a very ﬂexible and
powerful kind of system, which can be dynamically adapted
to different usage scenarios, security-usability trade-offs, and
overcome situations in which other types of authentication
mechanisms would normally fail. In what follows, we expose
different challenges and opportunities related to these three
dimensions, security, usability and privacy, and speciﬁc to
frictionless authentication systems
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

A. Security
Regarding security, active authentication systems based
on multiple behaviometrics and/or biometrics can provide
increased security, since they are intrinsically multi-factor,
and each employed behavioural modality makes them more
difﬁcult to spoof. However, the authentication decision will be
based on the outcome of the classiﬁcation and/or clustering al-
gorithms. Such algorithms are usually not 100% accurate [38],
and in some cases the templates must be retrained by discard-
ing old data to account for changes in the user’s behaviour.
This creates an opportunity for an attacker to impersonate a
legitimate user by manipulating input data to compromise the
learning process (i.e., a poisoning attack).
A speciﬁc security concern in continuous authentication
systems is related to the enrollment. The enrollment phase
establishes the identity of the subject within the authentication
systems. Typically, this is based on credentials or certiﬁcates.
However, with behavioral and context-dependent authentica-
tion, the enrollment phase becomes far more challenging,
especially when using a collaborative authentication relying
on multiple mobile and wearable devices. In the case of
other biometrics, this can be done by ensuring the identity
of the user during the enrollment phase by other means.
However, since the enrollment in behaviometrics is done in
an uncontrolled environment, the enrollment can also pose a
threat to security, since it may be easier to inject artiﬁcial
data to the system. Furthermore, behavioral authentication
systems relying on machine learning methods require a time-
consuming training step on an individual basis before they
become effective.
B. Usability
Regarding usability, the frictionless nature of continuous
authentication makes these systems one of the most convenient
and easy to use modalities, since the user does not even need to
learn how to use the authentication system, and the authentica-
tion process is transparent, potentially providing a smooth user
experience. Furthermore, the availability of different sensors
and modalities opens the opportunity to provide a very ﬂexible
authentication mechanism, where the system can implement
different security/usability trade-offs for controlling the access
to different functionalities or services. However, this also
poses a challenge regarding the design of template protection
techniques, since this ﬂexibility may increase signiﬁcantly the
complexity of the system.
C. Privacy
Another key challenge with frictionless authentication sys-
tems is addressing the privacy concerns which arise when user
behaviour analytics on sensitive data is used to continuously
authenticate against online services. Honest but curious service
providers can use the keystrokes − collected for behavioral
authentication purposes − to reconstruct the original text typed
by the users. In addition, accelerometer data could be used by
the same kind of adversary to reconstruct the whole history
of a user’s location. Furthermore, continuous authentication
can also use physiological biometric measurements, whose
implications regarding privacy are well known. Hence, em-
ploying the adequate biometric template protection mecha-
nisms and appropriately imposing data minimality principles
in the system design is even more important in continuous
authentication.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
There is a continuous quest for stronger authentication
systems that at the same time offer a frictionless experience
towards users of mobile and wearable devices. Context and
behavioral information are nowadays being adopted in the
enterprise marketplace as part of an adaptive authentication
strategy that better serves the needs of the mobile consumer in
diverse situational circumstances. However, irrespective of the
technological advances to have multiple mobile and wearable
devices collaborate to authenticate a user, the adoption of
frictionless authentication will only be successful when the
right balance between usability, security and privacy can be
found that meets the demands of a diverse set of users.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was partially supported by the Research Council
KU Leuven: C16/15/058. In addition, it was also funded by
FWO through SBO SPITE S002417N and imec through ICON
DiskMan. DiskMan is a project realized in collaboration with
imec. Project partners are Sony, IS4U and Televic Conference,
with project support from VLAIO (Flanders Innovation and
Entrepreneurship).
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Sagiroglu and D. Sinanc, “Big data: A review,” in International
Conference on Collaboration Technologies and Systems (CTS 2013),
May 2013, pp. 42–47.
[2]
M. A. Mustafa, A. Abidin, and E. Argones R´ua, “Frictionless authenti-
cation system: Security & privacy analysis and potential solutions,” in
the 11-th International Conference on Emerging Security Information,
Systems and Technologies (SECURWARE 2017).
IARIA, 2017.
[3]
M. Jakobsson and M. Dhiman, The Beneﬁts of Understanding Pass-
words.
New York, NY: Springer New York, 2013, pp. 5–24.
[4]
A. Bhargav-Spantzel, A. Squicciarini, and E. Bertino, “Privacy preserv-
ing multi-factor authentication with biometrics,” in Proceedings of the
Second ACM Workshop on Digital Identity Management, ser. DIM ’06.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2006, pp. 63–72.
[5]
J. Bonneau, C. Herley, P. C. v. Oorschot, and F. Stajano, “The quest
to replace passwords: A framework for comparative evaluation of web
authentication schemes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy, ser. SP ’12.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE
Computer Society, 2012, pp. 553–567.
[6]
E. Grosse and M. Upadhyay, “Authentication at scale,” IEEE Security
Privacy, vol. 11, no. 1, Jan 2013, pp. 15–22.
[7]
R. P. Guidorizzi, “Security: Active authentication,” IT Professional,
vol. 15, no. 4, July 2013, pp. 4–7.
[8]
F. Stajano, Pico: No More Passwords!
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 49–81.
[9]
D. Preuveneers and W. Joosen, “Smartauth: Dynamic context ﬁnger-
printing for continuous user authentication,” in Proceedings of the 30th
Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, ser. SAC ’15.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2015, pp. 2185–2191.
[10]
P. Domingos and G. Hulten, “Mining high-speed data streams,” in
Proceedings of the Sixth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, ser. KDD ’00, 2000, pp. 71–80.
[11]
J. Spooren, D. Preuveneers, and W. Joosen, “Mobile device ﬁngerprint-
ing considered harmful for risk-based authentication,” in Proceedings of
the Eighth European Workshop on System Security, ser. EuroSec ’15.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[12]
J. Li, Y. Bai, and N. Zaman, “A fuzzy modeling approach for risk-based
access control in ehealth cloud,” in 12th IEEE International Conference
on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications, July
2013, pp. 17–23.
[13]
I. Molloy, L. Dickens, C. Morisset, P.-C. Cheng, J. Lobo, and A. Russo,
“Risk-based security decisions under uncertainty,” in Proceedings of the
Second ACM Conference on Data and Application Security and Privacy,
ser. CODASPY ’12.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 157–168.
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

[14]
R. A. Shaikh, K. Adi, and L. Logrippo, “Dynamic risk-based decision
methods for access control systems,” Computers and Security, vol. 31,
no. 4, 2012, pp. 447 – 464.
[15]
Q. Ni, E. Bertino, and J. Lobo, “Risk-based access control systems built
on fuzzy inferences,” in Proceedings of the 5th ACM Symposium on
Information, Computer and Communications Security, ser. ASIACCS
’10.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp. 250–260.
[16]
D. R. d. Santos, C. M. Westphall, and C. B. Westphall, “A dynamic risk-
based access control architecture for cloud computing,” in 2014 IEEE
Network Operations and Management Symposium (NOMS), May 2014,
pp. 1–9.
[17]
“An adaptive risk management and access control framework to
mitigate insider threats,” Computers and Security, vol. 39, 2013, pp.
237 – 254. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0167404813001119
[18]
H. Khambhammettu, S. Boulares, K. Adi, and L. Logrippo, “A frame-
work for risk assessment in access control systems,” Computers &
Security, vol. 39, 2013, pp. 86 – 103.
[19]
S. Kandala, R. Sandhu, and V. Bhamidipati, “An attribute based
framework for risk-adaptive access control models,” in 6th International
Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security, Aug 2011, pp. 236–
241.
[20]
A. Shamir, “How to share a secret,” Communications of the ACM,
vol. 22, no. 11, 1979, pp. 612–613.
[21]
P. Feldman, “A practical scheme for non-interactive veriﬁable secret
sharing,” in SFCS ’87, ser. SFCS ’87, 1987, pp. 427–438.
[22]
T. P. Pedersen, “Non-interactive and information-theoretic secure veri-
ﬁable secret sharing,” in CRYPTO’91, ser. LNCS, vol. 576.
Springer,
1992, p. 129140.
[23]
V. Shoup, “Practical threshold signatures,” in Advances in Cryptology–
EUROCRYPT 2000.
Springer, 2000, pp. 207–220.
[24]
K. Simoens, R. Peeters, and B. Preneel, “Increased resilience in
threshold cryptography: Sharing a secret with devices that cannot store
shares,” in International Conference on Pairing-Based Cryptography,
ser. LNCS, vol. 6487.
Springer, 2010, pp. 116–135.
[25]
R. Peeters, D. Singelee, and B. Preneel, “Toward more secure and
reliable access control,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 11, no. 3,
2012, pp. 76–83.
[26]
V. M. Patel, R. Chellappa, D. Chandra, and B. Barbello, “Continuous
user authentication on mobile devices: Recent progress and remaining
challenges,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 33, no. 4, 2016,
pp. 49–61.
[27]
R. P. Guidorizzi, “Security: active authentication,” IT Professional,
vol. 15, no. 4, 2013, pp. 4–7.
[28]
P. X. de Oliveira, V. Channarayappa, E. O’Donnel, B. Sinha,
A. Vadakkencherry, T. Londhe, U. Gatkal, N. Bakelman, J. V. Monaco,
and C. C. Tappert, “Mouse movement biometric system,” Proc. CSIS
Research Day, 2013.
[29]
T. V. hamme, D. Preuveneers, and W. Joosen, “Improving resilience
of behaviometric based continuous authentication with multiple ac-
celerometers,” in Data and Applications Security and Privacy XXXI
- 31st Annual IFIP WG 11.3 Conference, DBSec 2017, Philadelphia,
PA, USA, July 19-21, 2017, Proceedings, 2017, pp. 473–485.
[30]
I. Deutschmann, P. Nordstr¨om, and L. Nilsson, “Continuous authentica-
tion using behavioral biometrics,” IT Professional, vol. 15, no. 4, 2013,
pp. 12–15.
[31]
T. van Goethem, W. Scheepers, D. Preuveneers, and W. Joosen,
“Accelerometer-based device ﬁngerprinting for multi-factor mobile
authentication,” in Engineering Secure Software and Systems - 8th
International Symposium, ESSoS 2016, London, UK, April 6-8, 2016.
Proceedings, 2016, pp. 106–121.
[32]
J. Spooren, D. Preuveneers, and W. Joosen, “Leveraging battery usage
from mobile devices for active authentication,” Mobile Information
Systems, vol. 2017, 2017, pp. 1 367 064:1–1 367 064:14.
[33]
K. Calix, M. Connors, D. Levy, H. Manzar, G. MCabe, and S. West-
cott, “Stylometry for e-mail author identiﬁcation and authentication,”
Proceedings of CSIS Research Day, Pace University, 2008, pp. 1048–
1054.
[34]
M. Abramson and D. W. Aha, “User authentication from web browsing
behavior,” DTIC Document, Tech. Rep., 2013.
[35]
M. Karnan, M. Akila, and N. Krishnaraj, “Biometric personal authenti-
cation using keystroke dynamics: A review,” Applied Soft Computing,
vol. 11, no. 2, 2011, pp. 1565 – 1573.
[36]
I. Deutschmann, P. Nordstrm, and L. Nilsson, “Continuous authentica-
tion using behavioral biometrics,” IT Professional, vol. 15, no. 4, July
2013, pp. 12–15.
[37]
H. Saevanee, N. L. Clarke, and S. M. Furnell, Multi-modal Behavioural
Biometric Authentication for Mobile Devices.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 465–474.
[38]
L. Wang, Behavioral Biometrics for Human Identiﬁcation: Intelligent
Applications.
IGI Global, 2009.
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-582-1
SECURWARE 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

