Establishing Authentication Trust in Open Environment
Using Social Approach
Hidehito Gomi
Yahoo! JAPAN Research
Yahoo! Japan Corporation
Tokyo, Japan
hgomi@yahoo-corp.jp
Abstract—A trust metric is described for a user to ensure
the authenticity of another user who is not known to system
entities in an open environment. On the basis of the metric,
an identity federation framework is proposed for propagat-
ing an authentication assertion for an unknown user across
system entities. The unknown user directly interacts with an
authenticating user with the support of an entity mediating the
authentication. By use of the proposed framework, an entity
receiving an authentication assertion can derive and evaluate
the trust value of its corresponding user in a quantitative
fashion to ﬂexibly control his or her access.
Keywords-trust metric;identity federation;delegation
I. INTRODUCTION
Conventional security systems usually need to authenti-
cate users to control their accesses to restricted services. For
this, the users are required to register their personal infor-
mation and obtain credentials to be used for authentication.
This is a common procedure and is a convenient way to
clarify which entity is responsible for authorizing accesses.
However, a user who would like to use a service but cannot
be authenticated by the service often becomes unwilling to
use the service because the process of registering personal
information is troublesome or time-consuming. Namely,
there is a trade-off between ﬂexible service provisioning and
secure access control.
A use case requiring ﬂexible service provisioning is
delegation, in which a user provides all or some of his or her
privileges to another user to perform tasks. In delegation, the
complexity of the system increases because the user attempt-
ing to execute a task (delegatee) is different from the user
who already has privileges to perform the task (delegator)
but who delegates the task. When a service provider (SP)
does not have any information about the delegatee, access
control based on his or her identity becomes impossible even
if the SP knows about the delegator delegating the task
to the delegatee. This situation occurs in many scenarios
for open and distributed applications. If the SP obtains a
certiﬁcate containing information about the delegatee issued
by a trusted entity, the SP may possibly grant the delegated
access by evaluating the trustworthiness of the delegatee’s
identity.
Much work on the exchange of security- and privacy-
related information in terms of identity management has
been conducted. Recently emerging technical speciﬁca-
tions [1]–[3] provide a framework for federated identity
management (FIM) systems. In this framework, an identity
provider (IdP) authenticates a user by means of particular
authentication methods and issues an authentication asser-
tion about the user to an SP that provides a restricted
service to authorized users. Although this framework enables
propagation of information about an authenticated user based
on trust between an IdP and SP, it still cannot propagate
information about a user who has not been registered at
the IdP, which is the same as in conventional security
systems. In many delegation scenarios, a delegator trusts in
a delegatee and can recognize his or her identity based on
many criteria. Therefore, the information that a delegator
has on a delegatee can effectively be shared for an SP
to authorize the delegatee’s access even if an IdP cannot
authenticate him or her directly.
A trust metric for a user to authenticate another user who
has not been registered in the system is proposed, as is
the metric’s framework for propagating the authentication
information among the system entities, based on the author’s
previous work on FIM systems [4]. The framework intro-
duces a speciﬁc authentication federation method by which
a direct interaction between the two users can be reﬂected
in the authentication assertion with the support of an entity
that mediates the authentication. With the framework, an
SP receiving the assertion about the unregistered user can
ﬂexibly control his or her access in a quantitative fashion.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
reviews related work. Section III introduces an authenti-
cation trust metric for FIM systems. Section IV proposes
a user-centric authentication federation scheme. Section V
describes the derivation of the authentication trust value
for an entity calling a resource on behalf of its owner.
Section VII concludes the paper and presents future work.
II. RELATED WORK
Trust models, metrics, and formalization have been fre-
quently researched. Prior work on general trust has focused
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

on deﬁning the semantics of trust and modeling trust-based
systems. A variety of trust classes, trust types, and reputation
systems [5] has been investigated.
Existing work on trust formalization focuses on assigning
numerical values of trustworthiness to paths representing
relationships between entities [6]–[8]. Beth et al. [6] pre-
sented a formal representation of trust relationships and the
algorithms for deriving them to estimate the trustworthiness
of entities in open networks. Reiter and Stubblebine [7]
presented a set of guiding principles for the design of
authentication metrics. Huang and Nicol [8] introduced a
formal representation of trust in a public key infrastructure
(PKI) and proposed a mechanism for quantifying trust in
certiﬁcate chains. However, their models focused on general
trust and do not deal with user-to-user authentication.
Work related to identity and trust management can also
be found in the literature [9]. Thomas et al. [10] deﬁned
the semantics of the authentication trust level and provided
a method for combining two trust levels of a multifactor
authentication in a FIM environment. Although their work
shares the author’s goal of ﬂexible and quantitative access
control, it did not consider a social authentication approach
as proposed in this work. Gomi [4] proposed an authentica-
tion trust metric for FIM systems. The author enhances his
approach for propagating the trust level of a person to a more
general framework for controlling access by an unregistered
user by using social authentication in an open environment.
Another related line of research is end-to-end trust estab-
lishment methods in limited network environments. Seigneur
et al. [11] proposed an entity recognition approach in
which dynamic enrollment enables spontaneous interactions
with unknown entities in pervasive computing environments.
Theodorakopoulos and Baras [12] proposed a method for
evaluating trust between entities in ad-hoc networks. The
limitation of these methods is that they do not support the
derivation of authentication results among entities.
III. AUTHENTICATION TRUST FOR IDENTITY
FEDERATION
This section describes the semantics and the formal rep-
resentation of authentication trust for FIM systems [4].
A. Trust Semantics
The model’s trust relationships are deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 1 (Identity Trust). Identity trust is the certainty
that the identity of an entity is identical to the identity
claimed by the entity itself or by other parties regarding
the entity on the basis of the authentication context.
In the above statement, authentication context [13] de-
notes the information about the characteristics of the mech-
anisms and processes by which the authentication conﬁrms
the entity’s identity. For example, the information includes
authentication methods such as presentation of a password
over a protected transport channel and veriﬁcation of a dig-
ital signature using an X.509 certiﬁcate. The authenticating
entity validates the presented credential and determines the
trustworthiness of the entity with some level of certainty
depending on the above authentication context.
Identity trust is a foundation for authorizing an interacting
entity to access restricted resources or for regulating interac-
tions with the entity in trust-based systems, including FIM
systems. Accordingly, the semantics of identity trust can be
deﬁned as follows:
trust(i)
pq (x) ≡ authn(p, q, x)
x ∈ AC, (1)
where AC stands for a set of information about the au-
thentication context, trust(i)
pq (x) expresses that entity p has
identity trust in entity q on the basis of a speciﬁc authen-
tication context x, and authn(p, q, x) means that entity p
authenticates entity q by means of an authentication method
represented in an authentication context x. This axiom
represents a practical procedure for entity authentication in
FIM systems associated with the identity trust relationship
in this trust model.
Many metrics for evaluating this trust relationship have
already been proposed. For example, many PKI trust models
focus on the relationships among certiﬁcation authorities for
X.509 certiﬁcates. In such a credential-focused system, long-
term, non-transitive cryptographic credentials such as X.509
are issued without involving an IdP [14].
In contrast, FIM systems are relationship-focused ones in
which an online IdP dynamically issues short-term security
tokens while restricting its transitivity on the basis of the
relationships between the issuer (IdP) and recipient (SP).
In this paper, a formal representation of authentication trust
by introducing the above trust relationship is examined. The
following deﬁnitions are related to the identity-trust-deriving
capabilities that are speciﬁc to FIM systems.
Deﬁnition 2 (Attestation Trust). Attestation trust is the
certainty about an entity’s capability to accurately create
and assert information necessary for a recipient in a format
appropriate for the recipient and to securely transmit the
information to the recipient.
On the basis of the above deﬁnition, if trust(a)
pq (x) des-
ignates attestation trust by trustor p in trustee q regarding
information x, its semantics are given in ﬁrst-order logic as
trust(a)
pq (x) ≡ assert(q, x) ⇒ accept(p, x),
(2)
where assert(q, x) means that q creates an assertion con-
taining information x and accept(p, x) represents p accept-
ing that x is true. The ⇒ operator designates the implication
that whenever the antecedent (expression to the left of the
operator) is true, the consequent (expression to the right of
the operator) is true.
In the above axiom, x is general propagated information.
However, if x corresponds to an authentication context, the
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Propagation Trust
(Attestation)
p
q
r
Identity Trust
Assertion
Identity Trust
Figure 1.
Authentication trust transitivity.
axiom speciﬁcally denotes that the authentication context is
propagated from q to p in a particular encoded format. This
leads to the establishment of authentication trust as a basic
principle in FIM systems.
B. Authentication Trust Derivation
For derivation of user authentication, propagation trust is
deﬁned as follows.
trust(i,a)
pq
(x) ≡ trust(i)
pq (y) ∧ trust(a)
pq (x).
(3)
In this axiom, trust(i,a)
pq
(x) denotes the attestation mode of
propagation trust from p to q regarding information x that
q propagates to p. This means that p has attestation trust in
q regarding information x and p also has identity trust in q.
Note that the authentication context propagated to p is not
q’s authentication context y but x.
The basic principles of trust-based systems are described
in previous literature [5]. In general, trust transits from entity
to entity. The idea behind trust transitivity is that when Alice
trusts Bob, and Bob trusts Charlie, and Bob refers Charlie
to Alice, then Alice can derive a measure of trust in Charlie
based on Bob’s referral combined with her trust in Bob.
Although this principle holds true for authentication trust in
FIM systems, it additionally involves end-to-end authentica-
tion procedures for deriving trustworthy information about
the authenticity of an entity as well as the attesting capability
of an entity propagating the information. This is illustrated
in Figure 1. The solid and dashed lines indicate identity trust
and propagation trust, respectively, from the viewpoint of r’s
authentication.
From this observation, the following rule is obtained.
Rule 1 (Authentication Trust Derivation).
trust(i)
pr (x) ⇐ trust(i,a)
pq
(x) ∧ trust(i)
qr (x).
(4)
This rule means that p has assurance in an authentication
assertion containing x regarding r attested by q since p trusts
in q’s identity and attestation capability. It clearly explains
a typical identity federation scenario in which p, q, and r
correspond to an SP, an IdP, and a user, respectively, in FIM
systems. The authentication trust in r transits from q to p
in the opposite direction of the propagation of the assertion
encapsulating x.
IV. USER-MANAGED AUTHENTICATION
This section proposes a new scheme for obtaining authen-
tication trust within the scope of the trust model described
in Section III.
A. User-managed Authentication Trust
First, a deﬁnition for a trust semantic is given.
Deﬁnition 3 (User-managed Authentication Trust). User-
managed authentication trust is the certainty about a user’s
capability to authenticate another user within a particular
authentication context with the support of an entity mediat-
ing the authentication (authentication mediator).
In the above statement, “user-managed authentication”
(UA) means an authentication procedure in which a user
(trustor) him or herself directly authenticates another user
(trustee) online. The trustor has some capability of identify-
ing the trustee, and conﬁrming the identity of the trustee by
means of an authentication method and procedure. However,
the trustor does not have any capability for attestation
as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2, so he or she needs assistance
in performing the authentication and in demonstrating the
trustworthiness of the authentication results.
The authentication mediator (AM) mediates UA by pro-
viding an infrastructure for the above assistance to a trustor.
The AM can provide a secure transport channel for inter-
actions with and between a trustor and a trustee, and can
monitor the interactions so that the validity of the authenti-
cation procedure between the trustor and trustee is ensured.
Since the AM has some capability for attestation, it can
produce and issue an assertion stipulating an authentication
event within a speciﬁc authentication context regarding UA.
With this scheme, an entity receiving an assertion of UA can
evaluate the trustworthiness of a trustee’s identity within the
scope of FIM systems described in Section III.
Various types of authentication contexts for UA can be
considered. Following are some examples.
Examples (User-managed Authentication Contexts).
• Secret code sharing. A trustor provides a trustee with
a secret code unique to the trustee as a password that
the trustee needs to present during authentication in a
secure way such that it is not disclosed to other users.
• Secret questions. A trustor asks a trustee questions
about information that is shared only with the trustee
as a means of authenticating the trustee in a secure
communication mediated by an AM. If the trustor
receives answers from the trustee and accepts them as
appropriate, the authentication successfully ends, with
the trustor having conﬁdence in the trustee’s identity.
• Context validation. A trustor speciﬁes the type of a
trustee’s context (e.g., geo-location) to an AM and then
validates the appropriateness of the context information
obtained by the AM using its functionality (e.g., GPS).
For example, if the trustor is close to the trustee, the
geo-location should indicate that the trustee is within a
short distance from the trustor’s current location.
As shown in the above examples, there are variations
about which entity (trustor or AM) has the knowledge and
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Trustor
9.  Notification of Trustee’s access
6. Notification of readiness for authentication 
(access URL) 
10.  Question for Trustee
Trustee
11. Forward question from Trustor
1.  Sign on (credential)
4.  Request for authentication mediation (Trustee’s contact address)
5.  Response 
2.  Session establishment
7. Request for authentication 
8. Temporal session establishment & 
association with  Trustor’s session
12. Answer question
13. Forward answer from Trustee  
Repetition of questions & answers
14. Confirm authentication
3.  Response (session ID, access URL)
15. Respond with authentication completion 
(session ID) 
AM
Figure 2.
Interactions for user-managed authentication.
functionality for performing authentication and validating
the procedure. In the contexts, the entity and how it vali-
dates are speciﬁed for SPs to evaluate the strength of the
authentication.
B. User-managed Authentication Interactions
The following authentication interactions are considered
as instances of UAs, shown in Figure 2.
1) First, the trustor signs on, presenting his or her cre-
dentials to the AM.
2) The AM establishes a session and assigns it with an
identiﬁer after validating the trustor’s credential.
3) The AM returns a response including the session
identiﬁer and a URL that the trustor can access to
request UA mediation.
4) The trustor sends a request for UA at the received
URL attaching the trustee’s contact address.
5) The AM responds in acknowledgement and tells the
trustor to wait for the trustee to access the URL.
6) The AM informs the trustee that the trustor will
authenticate the trustee at the access URL of the AM.
7) The trustee is given access to the speciﬁed URL for
authentication.
8) When the AM receives the authentication request from
the trustee, it assigns a temporary session to the trustee
and associates the session with the trustor’s session.
9) The AM informs the trustor of the trustee’s authenti-
cation request and prompts the trustor to input his or
her question for the trustee.
10) The trustor presents his or her question to the AM.
11) The AM shows the trustor’s question to the trustee in
the session of the trustee associated with the trustor’s
one.
12) The trustee sends the answer to the received question
to the AM.
13) The AM forwards the received answer to the trustor.
The trustor determines whether the answer is appro-
priate to trust in the trustee’s identity.
Propagation Trust
(User-Managed 
Authentication)
p
(IdP/SP)
u
(User)
W
(User)
Identity Trust
Identity Trust
Figure 3.
User-managed authentication trust.
14) The trustor obtains more conﬁdence in the trustee’s
identity by repeating Steps 10–13. If the trustor has
adequate assurance in the trustee’s identity, the trustor
notiﬁes the AM of the authentication completion.
15) The AM updates the trustee’s session so that it in-
dicates that the trustee has a legitimate identity as
claimed by the trustor.
During the above authentication interactions, the messages
are transmitted in a secure communication channel. For each
interaction, a speciﬁc authentication context is deﬁned for
characterizing its authentication method and strength.
C. User-managed Authentication Trust Derivation
In the authentication interactions described above, the
AM is not involved with the sharing and validation of the
credentials or questions. Instead, it mediates the exchange
and conﬁrmation of that information between the trustor
and the trustee. Although the AM does not directly execute
the procedure for authenticating the trustee, it can accept
the trustee’s identity as authenticated by the trustor in
accordance with the AM’s identity trust in the trustor, i.e.,
UA trust. These relationships are illustrated in Figure 3. The
trust relationships among the entities shown in this ﬁgure are
similar to the ones depicted in Figure 1. However, entity q
in Figure 1 has an attesting capability whereas user u in
Figure 3 does not have such a capability for propagating an
assertion including authentication results to another party
using a secure communication channel.
Let trust(ua)
pq
(x) designate UA trust of trustor p in trustee
q regarding authentication context x. By using this, Deﬁni-
tion 3 is formally given as follows:
trust(ua)
pu (x) ≡ authn(u, w, x) ⇒ accept(p, x).
(5)
In this axiom, trust(ua)
pu (x) means that if u authenticates w
in authentication context x, p accepts x.
The UA trust of p in user u naturally depends on the
identity trust in u since it is from u that p receives the
authentication context. Here, another propagation trust for
UA from p to u, trust(i,ua)
pu
(x), is deﬁned as follows:
trust(i,ua)
pu
(x) ≡ trust(i)
pu(y) ∧ trust(ua)
pu (x).
(6)
With this axiom, the rule of the authentication trust
derivation for UA is as follows.
Rule 2 (User-managed Authentication Trust Derivation).
trust(i)
pw(x) ⇐ trust(i,ua)
pu
(x) ∧ trust(i)
uw(x).
(7)
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

Service Invocation
u
(Delegator)
w
(Delegatee)
q
(IdP)
p
(SP)
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
Figure 4.
Combinational cases for delegatee authentication.
V. AUTHENTICATION TRUST EVALUATION FOR
DELEGATEES
This section examines the authentication trust in a delega-
tion situation in which a delegator delegates to a delegatee
the delegator’s privilege to access his or her personal in-
formation. Let us assume that there are an IdP, an SP, and
two users (delegator and delegatee). The IdP has an attesting
capability and the SP grants or denies the delegatee’s access
in accordance with his or her authentication trust.
A. Authentication Trust in Delegatees
The following cases for collaboratively authenticating a
delegatee are possible. They are shown in Figure 4, where
the areas surrounded by the dotted lines indicate the scope
of the entities involved with a delegatee’s authentication.
Consider the authentication trust of an SP in a delegatee for
each case.
(i) Anonymous access. SP p does not identify delegatee
w’s identity because p does not have any information
about w.
(ii) Authentication by SP. SP p successfully authenticates
w directly by itself. In this case, the authentication
trust in w corresponds to trust(i)
pw(x) if its authentica-
tion context x is given, as deﬁned in (1).
(iii) UA supported by SP. SP p obtains UA trust in w by
means of delegator u’s corresponding direct authen-
tication of w. Its authentication trust trust(i)
pw(x) is
obtained using (7).
(iv) Authentication federation between IdP and SP.
IdP q directly authenticates w and provides p with
its corresponding authentication assertion related to
authentication context x for w. Its authentication trust
is given by (4).
(v) UA supported by IdP plus authentication federa-
tion between IdP and SP. First, IdP q obtains UA
trust in w by means of delegator u’s corresponding
direct authentication of w. Its authentication trust is
represented by trust(i)
qw(x) using (7),
trust(i)
qw(x) ⇐ trust(i,ua)
qu
(x) ∧ trust(i)
uw(x).
(8)
Then, by applying (7) and (8) to (4), the authentication
trust trust(i)
pw(x) is obtained as follows:
trust(i)
pw(x) ⇐ trust(i,a)
pq
(x) ∧ trust(i)
qw(x).
(9)
p
q
r
(a) Propagation trust aggregation.
p
q
r
(b) Direct trust aggregation.
Figure 5.
Trust aggregation with Beth-Borcherding-Klein metric.
In this way, possible cases for authentication trust in a
delegatee are driven using the proposed trust model for an
SP to control the delegatee’s access.
B. Authentication Trust Calculation
A direct authentication occurs if an entity authenticates
a user in an authentication context. The value of entity
p’s direct authentication trust in entity q in authentication
context x, i.e., v(i)
pq (x), is deﬁned on the basis of the
semantics of (1) as
v(i)
pq (x)
def
= Pr(authn(p, q, x)).
(10)
This trust value can be a probability derived from the data
accumulated in transactions between p and q. Alternatively,
p’s administrator can set a value as a subjective probability
or as an assurance level in the range [0,1]. For example,
NIST Special Publication 800-63 (NIST: National Institute
of Standards and Technology) [15] describes four assurance
levels for the certainty values associated with an assertion
according to the types of authentication mechanisms.
For propagation authentication trust, the acceptance of
propagated information depends on the authentication of
the entity propagating the information. On the basis of the
relationship between probability and conditionals and the se-
mantics of (2) and (5), the following values of authentication
trust for attestation and mediation are deﬁned:
v(a)
pq (x)
def
= Pr(accept(p,x)|assert(q,x)∧authn(p,q,y)), (11)
v(ua)
pq (x)
def
= Pr(accept(p,x)|accept(q,x)∧authn(p,q,y)). (12)
Let v(i,a)
pq
(x) and v(i,ua)
pq
(x) be the authentication trust values
for trust(i,a)
pq
(x) and trust(i,ua)
pq
(x), respectively, in (3) and
(6). The following equations are then obtained:
v(i,a)
pq
(x) = v(a)
pq (x) · v(i)
pq (x),
(13)
v(i,ua)
pq
(x) = v(ua)
pq
(x) · v(i)
pq (x).
(14)
On the basis of the above deﬁnitions of authentication
trust values, the Beth-Borcherding-Klein (BBK) metric [6]
is applied to calculate the values of direct and propagation
trust, shown in Figure 5. In an aggregated trust value,
the BBK metric reﬂects the direct trust value more than
the propagation value when the two values aggregated are
sequentially located in the trust chain.
Next, each trust value for the ﬁve cases explained in
Section V-A is calculated. The trust value for w’s anonymous
access, shown in case (i), is 0, since p does not have
any information about w. The trust value for case (ii) is
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

(
)
p
(SP)
(
g
)
u
(Delegator)
(
g
)
w
(Delegatee)
(a) Trust aggregation for case (iii).
(
)
p
(SP)
q
(IdP)
(
g
)
w
(Delegatee)
(b) Trust aggregation for case (iv).
(
)
p
(SP)
(
)
q
(IdP)
(
g
)
u
(Delegator)
w
(Delegatee)
(c) Trust aggregation for case (v).
Figure 6.
Authentication trust aggregation for delegatees.
equal to v(i)
pw(x), as deﬁned in (10). The trust aggregations
for cases (iii), (iv), and (v) are shown in Figures 6(a),
6(b), and 6(c), respectively. If we let a utility function
F(v1, v2) calculate 1 − (1 − v2)v1 for propagation trust
aggregation in Figure 5(a), v(i)
pw(x) for cases (iii) and (iv) are
obtained as F(v(i,ua)
pu
(x), v(i)
uw(x)) and F(v(i,a)
pq
(x), v(i)
qw(x)),
respectively. Similarly, v(i)
pw(x) for case (v) is derived as
F(v(i,a)
pq
(x) · v(i,ua)
qu
(x), v(i)
uw(x)) using the above results.
VI. DISCUSSION
The proposed model enables authentication of a trustee
who is not known to an AM by a trustor’s identiﬁcation
of the trustee. This is effective because the scheme does
not require registration of the trustee, which is needed for
authentication in conventional security systems and often
causes users to forgo proceeding with use of the service.
An IdP in the proposed framework can propagate authen-
tication contexts using UA to SPs. In this approach, there
is some vulnerability to a malicious trustor’s attestation of
a false or invalid authentication context. In this case, an SP
receiving the context about an illegitimate trustee may grant
his or her access inappropriately. Therefore, the framework
needs to have a method for evaluating the trustworthiness of
users and assessing the risk associated with their access as
well as a formal and semantic representation of authentica-
tion contexts for UA, which will be future work.
UA can especially be strengthened if an AM can gain
a trustee’s accurate authentication context using its func-
tionality that is validated by the trustor, as explained in the
context validation example. In this sense, the strength of
UA varies in authentication methods and their combinations.
However, the ﬂexibility of UA arises from the responsibility
for authentication lying not with an AM, but with a trustor.
This is an open issue in terms of which entity ensures a
trustee’s identity and how its integrity is assured.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
A trust metric for deriving authentication context in an
open environment was described. Based on the model, an
authentication federation framework was proposed for prop-
agating authentication trust in a person. In the framework,
a user trusting in the person and an entity mediating the
user’s authentication of the person share the corresponding
authentication context in a user-centric way. The logically
derived authentication trust enables ﬂexible access control
in a quantitative fashion. Future work includes further inves-
tigation on the representation of authentication contexts, the
responsibility of authentication, and risk assessment using
the proposed framework.
REFERENCES
[1] OASIS, “Assertions and protocol for the OASIS security
assertion markup language (SAML) v2.0,” Mar. 2005.
[2] IBM, Microsoft, BEA, RSA, and VeriSign, “Web Services
Federation Language,” Jul. 2003.
[3] OpenID, “OpenID Authentication 2.0 - Final,” Dec. 2007.
[4] H. Gomi, “An Authentication Trust Metric for Federated
Identity Management Systems,” in Proceedings of the 6th
International Workshop on Security and Trust Management
(STM’10), Sep. 2010, pp. 113–128.
[5] A. Jøsang, R. Ismail, and C. Boyd, “A Survey of Trust and
Reputation Systems for Online Service Provision,” Decision
Support Systems, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 618–644, Mar. 2007.
[6] T. Beth, M. Borcherding, and B. Klein, “Valuation of Trust
in Open Networks,” in Proceedings of the 3rd European
Symposium on Research in Computer Security (ESORICS’94),
1994, pp. 3–18.
[7] M. Reiter and S. Stubblebine, “Authentication Metric Anal-
ysis and Design,” ACM Transactions on Information and
System Securiry, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 138–158, 1999.
[8] J. Huang and D. Nicol, “A Calculus of Trust and Its Ap-
plication to PKI and Identity Management,” in Proceedings
of the 8th Symposium on Identity and Trust on the Internet
(IDtrust’09), Apr. 2009, pp. 23–37.
[9] A. Jøsang, J. Fabre, B. Hay, J. Dalziel, and S. Pope, “Trust
Requirements in Identity Management,” in Proceedings of the
Australasian Workshop on Grid Computing and E-research,
2005, pp. 99–108.
[10] I. Thomas, M. Menzel, and C. Meinel, “Using Quantiﬁed
Trust Levels to Describe Authentication Requirements in
Federated Identity Management,” in Proceedings of the ACM
Workshop on Secure Web Services (SWS’08), Oct. 2008, pp.
71–80.
[11] J.-M. Seigneur, S. Farrell, C. D. Jensen, E. Gray, and Y. Chen,
“End-to-End Trust Starts with Recognition,” in Proceedings
of the 1st International Conference on Security in Pervasive
Computing (SPC’03), 2003.
[12] G. Theodorakopoulos and J. Baras, “Trust Evaluation in Ad-
Hoc Networks,” in Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Workshop on
Wireless Security (WiSe’04), 2004, pp. 1–10.
[13] OASIS, “Authentication Context for the OASIS Security
Assertion Markup Language (SAML) V2.0,” Mar. 2005.
[14] A. Bhargav-Spantzel, J. Camenish, T. Gross, and D. Sommer,
“User Centricity: A Taxonomy and Open Issues,” Journal of
Computer Security, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 493–527, 2007.
[15] W. Burr, D. Dodson, and W. Polk, “Electronic Authentica-
tion Guideline,” Apr. 2006, http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/
nistpubs/800-63/SP800-63V1 0 2.pdf.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SECURWARE 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

