Involvers’ Behavior-based Modeling in Cyber Targeted Attack 
Youngsoo Kim and Ikkyun Kim 
Cyber Security Research Laboratory 
Electronics & Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Korea 
e-mail: {blitzkrieg, ikkim21}@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— Cyber targeted attack has sophisticated techniques 
using malwares to exploit vulnerabilities in systems and an 
external command and control is continuously monitoring and 
extracting data off a specific target. Since this attacking 
process is working continuously and uses diverse malicious 
codes and attacking routes, it is considered to be difficult to 
detect in advance. In this paper, we categorized cyber targeted 
attacks into four steps and defined potential behaviors of 
involvers like attackers or victims, in order to make a model. 
Each behavior of our model can include a couple of methods. 
Furthermore, we applied our behavior-based model to the real 
targeted attacks, “3.20 South Korean Malware Attack” and 
“The Targeted Attack for SK Communications”. 
Keywords-APT; Targeted Attacks; Behavior-based Modeling; 
Malicious Codes; 3.20 DarkSeoul. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cyber targeted attack, which is also known as Advanced 
Persistent Threat (APT), is a kind of intelligent attacking 
method having a goal of acquiring classified information or 
control of critical infrastructure, by penetrating networks of 
targets in a stealthy way and staying there in the long term. It 
usually targets organizations or nations for business or 
political motives. It has complicated techniques using 
malicious codes to take advantage of vulnerabilities in 
systems and an outer command and control is constantly 
observing and deriving data from a specific target [1]. This 
attacking method is working continuously and utilizes 
various malwares and attacking routes, so it is deemed to be 
hard to discover beforehand. In Section 2, we classified 
advanced persistent threat and described possible behaviors 
of involvers like attackers or victims for modeling. Each 
behavior of our model can include several methods. In 
Section 3, we introduced a couple of real targeted attacks and 
indicated that our behavior-based model is fit to depict them 
and described some useful cases of proposed modeling map, 
and conclude with some remarks and further works in 
Section 4. 
II. 
EACH STEP OF BEHAVIORS/METHODS FOR 
CYBER TARGETED ATTACKS 
Cyber targeted attacks can be divided into 4 phases: The 
preparation phase, the penetration phase, the control phase, 
and the achievement phase. Figure 1 depicts the detailed 
behaviors of attackers and victims. 
In the preparation phase, attackers collect and analyze 
diverse data of targeting web sites, and they hack servers 
with vulnerabilities and make them Command and Control 
(C&C) servers. Also, they use various ways for triggering 
download of malicious codes. In the penetration phase, 
attackers try to acquire user authority using diverse methods 
and user’s Personal Computers (PCs) can be infected with 
malicious codes by running malicious attached files, 
updating falsified software, or using unauthorized USBs. In 
the control phase, attackers try to acquire additional user 
authorities and collect additional information using various 
ways. They can also control victimized systems with 
backdoors or web-shells and spread malicious codes to all 
connected devices. In the achievement phase, attackers can 
acquire critical information using remote commands or web-
mails and they can also emasculate systems using automatic 
termination or remote starting. 
A. The Preparation Phase 
If attackers decide attacking targets, they visit targeting 
web pages for looking into vulnerabilities [2]. They could 
acquire user information by falsifying URLs of targets. First, 
they register the targeting website and try to read web-board 
messages requiring the higher-level accessing authority. 
Even though they are rejected to access, they can watch an 
URL of web-board message which they want to read using 
right-hand mouse-clicking. And then, they try to falsify that 
URL to acquire user information without reading authority. 
They can collect and analyze information related to 
targeting victims using web-crawlers or bots, which look 
around enormous web pages, including web sites providing 
Social Network Service (SNS), such as Facebook, Twitter, 
etc., to get information. They can also use meta-search 
engines connecting diverse searching engines for same 
reason. 
Attackers hack servers (e.g., web-board, web-mail server, 
and web-disk) with vulnerabilities and make them C&C 
servers. After they acquire authorities of accessing the 
targeting servers using malicious codes, they falsify them to 
play a role of the C&C servers. 
After that, attackers prepare for inducing the victims to 
download malicious codes in diverse ways. They could send 
e-mails including attached malicious codes to targeting users 
or attach them to web-board messages for triggering 
downloads. Also, they could falsify software of updating 
servers in case of installing. If they can do it, users download 
them and install falsified updating software unconsciously. 
They could use Cross Site Script (XSS) vulnerabilities in two 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

ways, i.e., Stored XSS and Reflected XSS. Attackers can 
insert malicious scripts to web-board messages using XSS-
vulnerability of the targets for triggering infection of 
malicious scripts. After they find that XSS vulnerability, they 
write web-board messages with malicious scripts and post 
those messages on the web-board [3]. They could also send 
e-mails including URL links of targeting web sites having 
malicious scripts to users for infection. After they find the 
XSS vulnerability of targeting web sites, they write e-mail 
messages including URL links having malicious scripts and 
send them to the targeting users in order to be infected by 
clicking those URL links. Sometimes, they prepare USB 
sticks including malicious codes and putting them on 
somewhere in the targeted area [4]. Also, attackers could 
replace attached files of unwritten web-mails with malicious 
files using ID/password of web-mail collected in advance. 
After they collect many pairs of ID/password, they check 
unwritten web-mails using collected ID/passwords and 
replace attached files with malicious files.  
B. The Penetration Phase 
After preparing, attackers try to acquire user authority 
using diverse methods, such as URL falsification, weak 
passwords, command injection, or SQL injection. They 
acquire user authority by falsifying the URL of targeting web 
site. First, they check a pattern of URL attributes of the 
targets and repeatedly access to those web sites by typing 
randomly changed URL links. They could login and acquire 
user authorities if randomized user-codes are matched. 
Sometimes, attackers acquire weak passwords using 
password cracking tools. Additionally, they run local system 
commands remotely because of the vulnerability of 
insufficient authorizing input variables [5]. First, they check 
the address of targeting web site. After injecting a system 
command to this address, they could access with this 
changes address. And then, they could see and get some 
system information. Finally, attackers could watch, falsify, 
or delete database data by fabricating input data of database 
application [6]. It occurs since database applications do not 
check the validity of input data from users. They could 
Figure 1. Each Step Behaviors/Methods for Cyber Targeted Attacks 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

bypass certificating process for users or administrators using 
SQL injection. After checking if they could input special 
characters to log-in windows, they input SQL commands to 
log-in windows and then, they become able to log-in without 
a certificating process. 
User PCs can be infected with malicious codes in various 
methods. A user runs attached files of received e-mails 
including malicious codes and he becomes infected. When a 
user receives an e-mail attaching malicious files, he reads the 
message of that e-mail. And then, if he activates malicious 
attached files, he will become infected. If a user runs 
malicious files attached in web-board messages and he 
becomes infected. When a user clicks a message of web-hard, 
web-server, or web-board having attached malicious files, he 
runs attached malicious files. As a result, he becomes 
infected. Furthermore, a user could be infected through 
automatic activating of updating software falsified in 
advance. First, updating software having been falsified in 
advance are executed automatically. If a user activates the 
updating process or automatic updates are activated, the 
user’s PC is infected. A user could be infected by reading a 
web-board message including malicious scripts. After 
accessing the web, a user read a web-board message having 
malicious scripts. And then, contents of the web-board 
message including malicious scripts are sent to the user. 
Finally, the user’s PC is infected and the user’s cookies are 
sent to the attacker. Sometimes, if a user receives an e-mail 
with a malicious URL link and accesses to that URL link, he 
could be infected by malicious scripts. First, he receives an 
e-mail including a malicious URL link and clicks that link. 
As a result, he can access a link having a malicious script, 
and the user PC is infected since the malicious script is 
activated. Finally, the user’s cookies are sent to the attacker. 
Local systems could be infected by bringing and executing 
infected unauthorized USB sticks. If a user brings infected 
unauthorized USB sticks and he put them on local systems 
like PCs or servers, local systems are infected. A user could 
also be infected by running a falsified attached file of a web-
mail. If a user logs in his web-mail account and checks an 
attached file of web-mail falsified by an attacker in advance, 
his PC is infected by executing the attached file. 
C. The Control Phase 
To achieve final goals, attackers try to acquire additional 
user authorities using weakness of shared folders or key-
loggers and collect additional information using various 
ways such as port scanning, weak points of Network Access 
Control 
(NAC), 
vulnerabilities 
of 
applications, 
etc. 
Furthermore, they can control victimized systems by 
installing backdoors or uploading web-shells and spread 
malicious codes to all connected devices by falsifying 
updating servers or web servers of targets.  
Attackers could access the shared PC if a pair of 
ID/password of the infected PC is same as that of the shared 
PC. After that, they could access the agent server at a time, if 
they install a scheduler like at.exe at the shared PC. If they 
log in with a pair of ID/password of infected PC, they try to 
access to the shared PC using the same pair. In case that the 
pair is the same, they could access. If they install a scheduler 
at the shared PC, they could access the agent server at a time. 
Additionally, all keyboard-typing logs on infected PCs could 
be recorded in real-time using key-loggers. First, attackers 
install a key-logging program on infected PCs. If users make 
use of the infected PCs, the key-logging program records all 
keyboard-typing logs in real-time. After receiving recorded 
logging data, attackers check and get some pairs of 
ID/password. 
Attackers can get additional information by analyzing 
vulnerabilities of various web applications such as SQL 
injection, file upload, XSS, path traversal, cookies, parameter 
manipulation, configuration setting errors, admin page, 
backup/temporal files, etc. Attackers can also collect 
additional information by finding unencrypted folders or 
files in infected PCs. After logging in the infected PCs, they 
search all folders or files. If they find unencrypted ones, they 
can get additional information. Sometimes, attackers can find 
vulnerabilities of NAC by checking security policies or 
security solutions, and then, can access to the local network 
without authority checks. They find vulnerabilities of NAC 
by checking security policies or security solutions in order to 
access to the targeting local network. And then, they can 
access servers and check data to get information. Attackers 
can access the infected PCs and scan all ports to check 
whether they are open or not. They access the infected PCs 
and check opened ports using nmap command or port-
scanning tools to get information. They can also check the 
status of local network, for example some PCs are grouping 
or some devices are powered off, by scanning such as 
nbtscan, nbtstat, etc. Additionally, attackers harvest target 
information related to the final goals. They access to the 
admin computer dealing with local information and find and 
harvest the target information.  
Attackers can hide backdoor files in advance, and they 
get root authority by activating them to control the target 
system [7]. First, they access the infected PCs and make 
backdoor files. Backdoor files are compiled at temp directory. 
And then, they run backdoor files in a general account, they 
get root authority and become to be able to control the target 
system. Attackers can also control the targeting system by 
installing terminal programs for remote control and database 
accessing tools, after finding PCs operating 24 hours a day. 
First, they find PCs operating 24 hours a day, and they install 
database related tools and terminal programs for remote 
control. And then, they check database and logs on the 
mainframe computer. As a result, they become to control the 
targeting system and gets information. Sometimes, attackers 
acquire critical information and control the targeting system 
by monitoring the infected PCs with Virtual Network 
Computing (VNC). After accessing the infected PCs, they 
install a VNC program. If administrators or developers use 
the infected PCs, attackers can watch what they do with 
VNC. As a result, they can control the targeting system and 
acquire critical information. Attackers can acquire control of 
the target system by uploading a web-shell, a web script file 
(e.g., asp, jsp, php, and sci) usually made maliciously in 
order to run instructions on the targeting web server remotely 
[8]. First, they make a web script file and upload it on local 
web-board. After searching a URL enabling them to move 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

into the uploading location using file attributes, they access 
the shell by entering this URL. And then, they get some 
system information by using some commands. Additionally, 
attackers connect the infected PCs with themselves or C&Cs 
for sending instructions or additional malicious codes to the 
infected PCs or receiving the targeting system information 
from them. After getting control of system, they send 
instructions or additional malicious codes to the infected PCs 
or receive the targeting system information by way of C&Cs. 
Attackers can spread malicious codes using the updating 
server including falsified updating software. All PCs 
activating automatic updates can be infected. They can also 
trigger infection of malicious codes through adding falsified 
web pages or banners enabling users to access and click on 
them. They add web pages or banners including malicious 
codes to the target web server. And then, if users visit the 
targeting web site, their PCs are infected. 
D. The Achievement Phase 
In this phase, attackers can acquire critical information 
by copying files with remote commands or using web-mails 
or encrypted packets. Also, they can emasculate systems by 
destructing Master Boot Record (MBR)/Volume Boot 
Record (VBR), for example, or quit systems using automatic 
termination or remote starting. 
Attacker can control infected PCs and take away critical 
files from them using a remote command like scp or web-
mails. They can also encrypt packets of critical data using 
packet-extracting commands/tools and take them. Attackers 
run destruction commands for MBR/VBR of infected PCs 
and preclude system booting. Additionally, they can catch 
the following decisive opportunities by monitoring and 
analyzing infected PCs. Sometimes, attackers terminate the 
targeting system using commands for automatic termination 
of specific software or hardware or quit the targeting system 
using commands for remote starting. 
III. 
MODELLING FOR REAL CASES 
We applied our behavior-based model to two real 
targeted attacks. One was occurred in July of 2011 and the 
other was occurred in March 20, 2013.  
Figure 2. Mapping result of the 3.20 cyber-attack through behavior-based modeling map 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

 
A. Modelling for 3.20 South Korean Malware Attack 
The attack, dubbed DarkSeoul, against South Korean 
media and banking organizations severely disrupted a 
handful of organizations with a coordinated distribution of 
“wiper” malware designed to destroy data on hard drives and 
render them unbootable [9]. It is known that the malware 
will overwrite MBR and VBR. The records and files 
overwritten by the malware so far have been wiped with 
patterns of 'HASTATI' or 'PR!NCPES’. We referenced some 
analysis reports and described detailed processes of this 
attack as follows [10]. We mapped 8 steps of this attack to 
potential behaviors we categorized. Figure 2 depicts the 
mapping result of the 3.20 cyber-attack. 
 
1. An attacker secures C&Cs using vulnerabilities of 
web-boards or web-mails. 
2. The attacker falsifies the (C&C #1 and C&C #2) 
web-server and uploads malicious code #1. 
3. A user (User #1) accesses falsified web-server and 
is infected with malicious code #1. 
4. User #1 sends his file-list to C&C #1 and receives 
and runs malicious code #2. 
5. User #1 is infected with malicious code #2 and 
performs port-scanning. 
6. User #1 sends results of port-scanning and 
downloads/performs malicious code #3 and #4. 
7. With malicious code #3 and #4, user #1 acquires an 
authority of Patch Management System (PMS) 
server and uploads a malicious code for system-
destruction. 
8. Other users update vaccine programs and their 
hard-disks are broke down. 
 
B. Modeling for Targeted Attack for SK Communications 
Between 18 and 25 July 2011, attackers infected over 60 
SK Communications computers and used them to gain 
access to the user databases. They infected these computers 
by first compromising a server belonging to a South Korean 
Figure 3. Mapping result of the Targeted Attack for SK Communications through behavior-based modeling map 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

software company, used to deliver software updates to 
customers (including SK Communications). Attackers 
modified the server so that the SK Communications 
computers would receive a trojaned update file when they 
conducted their routine checks for software updates [11]. We 
mapped 5 steps of this attack to potential behaviors we 
categorized. Figure 3 depicts the mapping result of the 3.20 
cyber-attack. 
 
1. An attacker hacks Alzip update server and uploads 
a malicious code through accessing backdoors [12]. 
2. A user updates Alzip program and downloads a 
malicious code from the redirecting server 
unconsciously. 
3. The key-logger is installed in that user’s computer 
and user’s password can be logged when he uses it 
for accessing database. 
4. The attacker requests and receives key-logging 
information. 
5. The attacker orders to dump and send database and 
gets it from the key-loggers of user’s PC. 
 
This proposed involver’s behavior-based model of cyber 
targeted attack could be useful for the following cases.  
First, attacking methods are very diverse, so our model 
can be a basic scale for deciding whether the attack is cyber 
targeted attack or not. Second, generally cyber targeted 
attack can occur over a long period of time. If some 
behaviors related to cyber targeted attack can be found in its 
middle stages, the following potential behaviors can be 
prevented in advance, referencing to our model. Third, if 
some attacking behaviors are found in its middle stages or 
final stages, we can guess what happened in the beginning 
stages using our model. Fourth, since our model includes 
analysis points at each phase, it can be a guidance map for 
analyzing causes of hacking accidents. If cause analysis can 
be achieved rapidly, services delayed due to this hacking 
accident could be restored faster. Finally, according to 44 
methods of our model, detailed analyses of devices relating 
to involvers can be done. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We categorized cyber targeted attacks into 4 steps and 
defined potential behaviors of involvers like attackers or 
victims, in order to make a model. Each behavior of our 
model can include a couple of methods. Furthermore, we 
applied our behavior-based model to the real targeted attacks, 
“3.20 South Korean Malware Attack” and “The Targeted 
Attack for SK Communications” and described use cases. 
For testing, we are building the cyber hacking test-bed 
including routers, switches, servers, PCs, and notebooks. We 
have plans to make some APT-scenarios similar to real 
targeted attack like DarkSeoul, and implement them on the 
cyber hacking test-bed to verify our model. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Virvilis and D. Gritzalis, “The big four-what we did wrong 
in protecting critical ICT infrastructures from Advanced 
Persistent Threat detection?,” The Eighth International 
Conference on Availability, Reliability & Security (ARES 
2013), 
IEEE 
Press, 
Sep. 
2013, 
pp. 
248-254, 
doi:10.1109/ARES.2013.32. 
[2] W. Gary and S. Zhendong, “Sound and precise analysis of 
web applications for injection vulnerabilities,” Conference on 
Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI 
2007), ACM, Jun. 2007, pp. 32-41, ISBN: 978-1-59593-633-2. 
[3] M. Michael and L. Monica, “Automatic generation of XSS 
and SQL injection attacks with goal-directed model 
checking,” Proc. of the Conference on Security Symposium 
(SS 2008), USENIX Association Berkeley, Jul. 2008, pp. 31-
43. 
[4] C. Harlan and A. Cory, “Tracking USB storage: Analysis of 
windows artifacts generated by USB storage devices,” Digital 
Investigation, 
vol. 
2, 
Jun. 
2005, 
pp. 
94-100, 
doi:10.1016/j.diin.2005.04.006. 
[5] S. Zhendong and W. Gary, “The essence of command 
injection attacks in web applications,” Conference record of 
the 33rd ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles 
of Programming Language (POPL 2006), ACM, Jan. 2006, pp. 
372-382, ISBN: 1-59593-027-2. 
[6] W. Halfond, J. Viegas, and A. Orso, “A classification of SQL-
injection attacks and countermeasures,” Proc. of the IEEE 
International Symposium on Secure Software Engineering, 
IEEE, Mar. 2006, pp. 13-15. 
[7] S. Gaspers and S. Stefan, “Backdoors to Satisfaction,” The 
Multivariate Algorithmic Revolution and Beyond, Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 287-317, Nov. 2012, ISBN: 978-3-
642-30890-1. 
[8] A. Straniery and Z. John, “WebShell: The development of 
web based expert systems,” Research and Development in 
Intelligent Systems XVIII. Springer London, Dec. 2001, pp. 
245-258, ISBN: 978-1-85233-535-9. 
[9] US-CERT, 
“South 
Korean 
Malware 
Attack”, 
2013. 
https://www.us-cert.gov/sites/default/files/publications 
[Retrived: Oct, 2014]. 
[10] IssueMakersLab, “Operation 1Mission aka 3.20 DarkSeoul,” 
http://www.issuemakerslab.com [Retrived: Oct, 2014]. 
[11] L. Moon-young, “Personal Information Hack Traced to 
Chinese IP address,” The Hankyoreh Media Company, 2011. 
http://english.hani.co.kr/arti/english_edition/e_national/491514.
html [Retrived: Oct, 2014] 
[12] Altools, http://www.altools.com [Retrived: Oct, 2014] 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-376-6
SECURWARE 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

