Experimental Evaluations of the Impact of High availability on the Quality of 
Protection of Hybrid Clouds 
 
Syed Naqvi, Michael Van de Borne, Arnaud Michot 
Centre d'Excellence en Technologies de l'Information et de la Communication (CETIC) 
29 Rue des Frères Wright, 6041 Charleroi, Belgium 
{syed.naqvi, michael.vandeborne, arnaud.michot}@cetic.be 
 
 
Abstract—A common perception of security services is an 
overhead 
on 
distributed 
system's 
performance 
that 
exponentially increases with scale and heterogeneity of the 
system's components. While this perception is not untrue, there 
is no precedence of experimenting the exact impact on its 
overall performance in terms of quality of protection. This 
paper presents a formal way of testing the impact of scalability 
and heterogeneity on the federated Cloud security services. 
The work presented in this paper aims to develop a mean of 
quantifying the impact on security functions under various 
operating conditions and parameters of federated Cloud 
deployments. The results of this experimental study will help 
businesses to identify the best security architecture that will fit 
their Cloud architectures and performance requirements. 
Keywords-Cloud computing; security architecture; performance 
parameters. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Monitoring of security performance is an established 
requirement of highly available services and infrastructures 
[1]. Moreover, insight into the composition of security 
mechanisms is one of the research areas identified by the 
United States National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST) in its report on directions in security metrics research 
[2]. However, as of today, most of the proposed approaches 
only deal with the monitoring of application level security 
measures such as monitoring of antivirus updates, installa-
tion of patches, IDS (intrusion detection system) buffer 
monitoring, etc. The range of available commercial products 
to perform security monitoring generally examine various 
high level parameters. For example, Cisco's MARS 
(Monitoring, Analysis and Response System) [3] is designed 
to monitor logs and to monitor threats; Hewlett Packard's IT 
Performance Suite [4] is designed to monitor security and 
risk management processes (such as number of systems 
under security control, risk indicators, etc.). However, none 
of these tools provide any information about the monitoring 
of the impact on security at the infrastructure level. 
It is generally understood that security takes its toll on 
system performance; and providing consistent security to 
scalable distributed systems requires careful consideration of 
performance overheads [5]. However, no tangible efforts are 
made to quantify the performance degradation by relating the 
quality of protection with the system performance. The 
knowledge of the impact of security at infrastructure level is 
particularly important to cope with the emerging challenges 
of hybrid Clouds such as scalability, heterogeneity, criticality 
of their applications, etc. It is therefore important to 
determine an empirically validated function for security 
services: on different application loads; for a number of 
virtual machines; on different cloud technologies; with 
different types of hypervisors. 
In this paper, we present our security monitoring 
experiment that aims to examine the implications of security 
on the back-end system of emerging realm of IT services - 
i.e. hybrid Cloud infrastructures. This experiment - ExSec: 
Experimenting 
Scalability 
of 
Continuous 
Security 
Monitoring - is one of the experiments of European Future 
Internet experimental facility and experimentally-driven 
research project BonFIRE [6]. Main objectives of the ExSec 
experiment is to study and quantify the impact on the quality 
of protection of Future Internet based applications that will 
be highly scalable in nature and use heterogeneous 
underlying technologies. These experimental evaluations 
will be useful to determine the stretching limit of Cloud 
security functions; and eventually, workout some remedial 
solutions especially to explore the possibility of making use 
of abundance of Cloud resources to compensate the 
performance degradation. 
The test scenarios of the ExSec experiment are designed 
to reflect real-life situations where in a routine business 
context, organizations forming a virtual organization (VO) 
are most likely to run heterogeneous cloud managers; and 
hence the situation often arises where hypervisors of 
different types using different virtual execution environment 
managers are required to collaborate to form a VO. The 
bottom line of this study is to develop a mean of quantifying 
the impact on security functions under various operating 
conditions and parameters of Cloud deployments. 
The rest of this paper is organized as: Section II outlines 
the context of our work. A set of security policy rules and 
impact factors are outlined in Section III. The experimental 
set up of our study is detailed in Section IV. Section V 
provides a pragmatic discussion of the scope and 
perspectives of our work. Finally, some conclusions are 
drawn in Section VI together with a brief account of our 
future directions. 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

II. 
CONTEXT AND MOTIVATIONS 
A. Background of Experimental Study 
We implemented a security framework for Grid compu-
ting environments in one of our previous European projects - 
GridTrust [7]. This work included a prototype implemen-
tation of the Usage Control (UCON) concept in the context 
of virtual organizations (VO). This work consisted of a 
vertical approach for Grid security from requirements level 
right down to application and middleware levels. The 
GridTrust framework provides policy-driven autonomic 
access control solutions that provide a continuous monitoring 
of the usage of resources (usage control) by users. This 
groundwork on the deployment of UCON model in the 
security framework of a highly distributed environment gave 
us an insight in the problematic of security monitoring; and 
the awareness of the impact of scale on security 
performance. 
Unlike 
access 
control, 
usage 
control 
perpetually monitors security parameters and is directly 
affected by the scale of the system being controlled. 
Therefore, its impact on the performance may become 
significant enough to be overlooked. However, to the best of 
our knowledge, there is no formal way of quantifying this 
relationship or to extrapolate it for complex scenarios. 
We explored the monitoring of Cloud security services in 
the 
European 
Cloud 
computing 
flagship 
project 
RESERVOIR [8] with particular focus on the audit logging 
for data location compliance issues. The underlying Cloud 
technology 
used 
in 
the 
RESERVOIR 
project 
was 
OpenNebula [9] that was uniformly deployed across various 
sites of the RESERVOIR Cloud. We are therefore using a 
FIRE (Future Internet Research Experimentation) facility - 
more precisely the BonFIRE project - now to have access to 
a large-scale heterogeneous Cloud environment that provides 
opportunity to perform tests on real infrastructures of scale. 
Moreover, our study is facilitated by a range of technical 
solutions provided by the BonFIRE infrastructure such as 
monitoring tool (ZABBIX [10]), client library for RESTful 
APIs (RESTfully [11]), JSON [12] interface for data-
interchange, etc. 
B. Related Work 
Most of the ongoing Cloud computing endeavors are still 
pointed to the challenges of their large scale deployments. 
Security 
is 
undoubtedly 
the 
cornerstone 
of 
these 
deployments; however, the progress in this area is still in its 
earlier stage. Therefore, not too many initiatives are taken in 
this direction so far. Some of these approaches are evaluated 
in this section. 
CloudSec [13] provides active, transparent and real-time 
security monitoring for multiple concurrent VMs hosted on a 
Cloud platform in an IaaS setting. CloudSec employs VMI 
(virtual machine introspection) [14] for monitoring VMs at 
the hypervisor level. CloudSec aims to protect kernel data 
structures. However, it does not address the impact of these 
multiple concurrent VMs on Cloud platform security. 
Another important security area where monitoring 
technology has an important role to play is digital investiga-
tions. Security monitoring can facilitate conception of foren-
sic friendly IT infrastructures such as electronic communica-
tions [15]. Reliability of monitoring data is of prime 
importance in this domain as the validity of data as an 
acceptable proof in court of law is crucial in digital 
investigations. This aspect of security monitoring is useful to 
keep track of security information. However, it does not 
offer any solution to the problem of estimating the accuracy 
of security monitoring for a particular scale and its 
dependence on specific underlying technology. 
Our work presented in this paper is a pioneer initiative in 
the direction of quantitative analysis of the impact of 
scalability and heterogeneity on security functions. This 
work will enable businesses to deploy some Cloud solutions 
with optimal security architecture that will fit to their Cloud 
architectures and performance requirements. 
III. 
SECURITY POLICY FOR THE EVALUATIONS 
This section outlines the security policy for the ExSec 
experiment’s evaluations. The overall objective of this 
rigorous security policy is to ascertain a real life situation 
that will use the federated cloud infrastructure for its routine 
operations. The nature and scope of such paradigm will 
require simultaneous fulfillment of several policy rules. This 
situation will strain the overall security policy enforcement 
mechanism in general; and its policy decision point (PDP) 
in particular.  
A. Scenario description 
The security policy scenario depicts a Future Internet 
based social application where access to digital contents 
(such as music files) requires a number of conditions to be 
satisfied such as:  
1. The foremost condition is to ensure that the subject has 
paid for the contents he/she intends to access. 
2. The type of contents (e.g. latest songs or the songs 
released a couple of years before the access request) 
3. The type of access (e.g. premium for priority download, 
or ordinary for slower download speed) 
4. The access limit (e.g. unlimited access or some limits are 
applied such as maximum number of songs that can be 
downloaded in a given time; specific download time – 
night only, weekend only, etc.  
5. The geographical location of the user to protect the rights 
of the digital distributions. 
 
Moreover, a number of events may raise suspicions 
leading to some corrective measures such as: 
1. If a user with individual subscription simultaneously 
attempts to access the contents from different locations.  
2. If a user makes more than a specific number of futile 
attempts to access the contents. 
 
Figure 1 depicts a non-exhaustive list of major decision 
parameters for the Policy Decision Point (PDP) for the 
abovementioned Future Internet based digital contents 
application. The impact of the range of these parameters on 
the performance of PDP is exacerbated when a big number 
of (scalable) requests are concurrently made to the 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

application gateway. We aim to quantify this impact and 
establish relationship between the load on the PDP and its 
impact on the performance. System calls are intercepted to 
have a lower level control over the incoming requests. Major 
security challenges of this scenario are to ensure firm access 
control despite higher scale of requests; to enforce usage 
control policies; and to cope with the heterogeneity of the 
underlying technologies. 
 
Figure 1.  Overview of the security policy scenario 
B. Policy rules 
This section summaries some example security policy 
rules and the impact parameters to be studied in the course 
of ExSec experiment. 
1) Access control policy rules 
• AC1: Access to digital contents files is restricted to 
users in good standing  
• AC2: Have enough credit for requested digital contents 
• AC3: Maximum number of digital contents files is not 
reached 
• AC4: Access digital contents from the eligible location 
2) Usage control policy rules 
• UC1: Maximum number of downloads granted 
• UC2: Maximum number of downloads in a specific time 
(e.g. per hour) 
• UC3: Maximum number of downloads of specific type 
of files (e.g. classical music) 
3) Monitoring policy testing scenarios 
• Security verification for an end-user web application 
running on the same underlying VM Host technology - 
for example KVM. 
• Security verification for an end-user web application 
running 
on 
the 
different 
underlying 
VM 
Host 
technologies - for example KVM and Xen. 
• Security verification for an end-user web application 
running on the same underlying Cloud engine - for 
example a sub-experiment on OpenNebula or a 
proprietary technology such as the one offered by the HP 
for BonFIRE. 
• Security verification for an end-user web application 
running on the heterogeneous Cloud engines - for 
example, a cloud management environment composed of 
OpenNebula and HP technology. 
• Security verification for a completely heterogeneous 
environment with diverse VM Hosts and Cloud engines. 
4) Impact parameters 
• Gradually increase number of clients (download 
requests) to get access to digital contents file (cf. 
network throughput, CPU utilization, RAM, etc.) 
• Add timeslot constraint for the download requests 
(maximum number of permissible downloads per hour) 
• Add file type constraint for the download requests (type 
of digital contents that can be downloaded – e.g. files of 
type A, B, and C) 
• Add location constraint for the download requests (such 
as number of download requests per server) 
• Placement of PEP/PDP 
• Within a VM 
• One at each BonFIRE site 
• One for the entire infrastructure 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP OF OUR STUDY 
A security policy enforcement architecture using 
XACML [16] is deployed as a first step of this study so as to  
 
 
Figure 2.  ExSec credentials management system 
secure access to the BonFIRE resources. This security policy 
enforcement architecture is shown in Figure 2. Access to the 
BonFIRE infrastructure is based on the authentication 
mechanism where we have installed a filter to intercept all 
HTTP requests sent to the ExSec experiment's WebApp. 
This filter constructs an XACML request with the client 
information (e.g. the requesting IP address). The Policy 
Enforcement Point (PEP) invokes the AccessControl service 
followed by the evaluation of access request by the Policy 
Decision Point (PDP) that returns TRUE if the access is 
permitted, or FALSE otherwise. The interactions of PEP and 
PDP together with their port numbers are provided in Figure 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

3. Additional filters will be used for monitoring of security 
parameters by using UCON model. 
We now present fine-grained architectural information of 
our proposed architectural set-up. We first describe different 
schemes of placing security policy enforcement points (PEP) 
in the BonFIRE computer resources followed by the number 
of testing scenarios for the study. 
A. Case-1: When PEP module is integrated inside server 
node 
Jikes Java Virtual Machine (JVM) launches a RESTlet 
HTTP server. Every system call from this REST server to 
gain physical access to a file (e.g. to open a file) is 
intercepted by the Jikes JVM, which queries the PEP 
module. The latter applies the Usage Control security policy 
(i.e. one download at a time), and returns this answer to 
Jikes, which grants or denies the physical access request for 
a file. In this case, there is a PEP module shipped with each 
compute node. This scheme is presented in the Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3.  BonFIRE Compute Resource with integrated PEP module 
B. Case-2: When PEP module lies outside server node 
In this set-up, the server nodes are similar to the case-1, 
but the PEP module is hosted in an external VM. Requests to 
the external PEP module are triggered over the network. This 
scheme might result in some performance degradations. 
ExSec experiment aims to measure the impact of using 
external PEP on the functioning of security policy 
enforcement. The architectural set-up is shown in the Figure 
4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  BonFIRE Compute Resource with external PEP module 
C. Testing scenarios 
This section outlines the set of scenarios of ExSec experi-
ment to study the impact of security. 
1) Basic test scenarios 
First we deployed a basic test scenario where only two 
VMs are used. One contains a server node configuration with 
an integrated PEP module; and the other performs download 
request to the first one. We use HAProxy load-testing tool to 
generate large numbers of HTTP client requests to simulate 
multiple clients. The behavior of the server node is analyzed 
according to the number of client requests it serves. This 
scenario is shown in the Figure 5. This test is designed to 
study the impact of a sizable number of clients’ requests on 
the infrastructure performance. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Basic load testing scenario for BonFIRE testbed 
2) Load testing scenario (integrated PEP modules in 
servers) 
This scenario, as shown in the Figure 6, is meant to 
analyze the system behavior when multiple client requests 
are distributed across several server nodes. These could be 
spread across various BonFIRE testbeds. In this scenario, the 
PEP modules are integrated into the server nodes. 
Synchronization of different PEPs can incur some 
performance overheads. We workout the impact on 
performance due to increasing load and management 
overheads. 
 
Figure 6.  Load testing scenario with integrated PEP module 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

3) Load testing scenario (one PEP module per BonFIRE 
site) 
This scenario is similar to the previous one, but server 
nodes are no longer hosting the PEP modules. They are 
externalized on separate computing resources. However, this 
scenario provides one PEP module per BonFIRE testbed. 
This scheme is shown in Figure 7. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Load testing scenario with one PEP module per BonFIRE site 
4) Load testing scenario (one PEP module for the entire 
infrastructure) 
This is a similar scenario as the previous one. However 
there is only one PEP module, so that server nodes will have 
to perform Usage Control policy requests across BonFIRE 
sites. This arrangement is shown in the Figure 8. It would be 
more measurable to have the PEP on an independent node 
without server node on it. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Load testing scenario with one PEP module 
V. 
DISCUSSIONS 
Impact on security functions of the wireless devices and 
platforms is widely explored [17][18][19], mainly due to 
their significance on the power consumption. The principal 
objective of these studies is pointed towards improving the 
battery life of wireless devices instead of investigating the 
impact on the global functioning of the resources. Whereas, 
ExSec is aiming to quantify the impact on security 
performance by studying the impact of its different 
parameters. 
Impact of security services in a client/server exchange of 
information is evaluated in [20]. The composition of these 
environments is generally fixed and investigation of the 
impact of security services on the performance requires less 
parameters compared to virtual, dynamic and decentralized 
environments such as federated Clouds. Heterogeneity 
besides scalability is a non-trivial challenge that we are 
facing in ExSec experiment. The dynamic nature of the 
distributed systems is giving rise to adaptive security 
monitoring systems [21]. The decision making process for 
their adaptiveness also inflicts performance overheads. 
However, this performance factor is not considered in our 
work. 
Hardware-based security solutions such as Trusted 
Computing [22] are often seen as rigorous in quality of 
protection. This inspiration has led to the development of 
hardware-based process security monitoring system such as 
VMInsight [23] that can provide load-time and run-time 
monitoring for processes. It can be an interesting follow-up 
direction for the ExSec experiment; however, the current 
BonFIRE infrastructure has no Trusted Platform Module 
(TPM) support. We can nevertheless envision extrapolating 
ExSec results on some Cloud infrastructure with TPM such 
as CertiCloud  [24]. 
Our work mainly deals with infrastructural side of the 
performance impact on security. The results can be used to 
advise Cloud customers and users on the security and 
performance tradeoffs. However, infrastructure providers 
(such as Amazon EC2 [25]) do not take responsibility of 
ensuring protection of their customers' contents. For 
example, clause 4.2 of Amazon's Customer Agreement 
explicitly ask their customers to be responsible for taking 
necessary security measures. It clearly states: You are 
responsible for ... taking your own steps to maintain 
appropriate security and protection, which may include the 
use of encryption technology to protect Your Content from 
unauthorized access and routine archiving Your Content. 
Likewise, a recent study of Security of Cloud Computing 
Providers [26] reported that around three quarters (73% of 
US and 75% of European service providers) responded that 
their cloud services do not substantially protect and secure 
their customers’ confidential or sensitive information. 
Moreover, nearly two-thirds of the responded (62% of US 
and 63% of European providers) were not confident that 
their Cloud applications and resources were secure. It is 
therefore necessary for the Cloud customers to enforce their 
security policy and to ensure that its impact on performance 
remains within acceptable range. Our work can be useful for 
this kind of public. They can use it together with some trust 
establishing mechanism for choosing the most appropriate 
Cloud provider. Example of trust establishing mechanism 
includes privacy penetration testing [27]. 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
This paper presented our experimental investigations that 
aim to relate two peculiar characteristics of highly available 
systems - scalability and heterogeneity - with the 
performance of security functions. We are working to 
develop a formal way of quantifying the impact on security 
services under various operating conditions and parameters 
of federated Cloud deployments. We as a technology transfer 
centre perform this experimental study to help businesses 
(especially SMEs) identify the best security architecture that 
will fit their Cloud architectures and performance 
requirements.  
Our study is a pioneer work in analyzing the impact of 
the peculiar characteristics of hybrid Cloud architectures on 
the much-needed effective security solutions. We are 
conducting this experimental study on a real life operational 
hybrid Cloud infrastructure through a set of test scenarios 
depicting 
real-life 
situations 
of 
routine 
business 
environments. Our work will also stimulate new research 
directions in the area of Cloud security and its performance 
parameters; as the security solutions of the pre-Cloud era 
may not be simply ported to this novel paradigm without 
necessary improvements.  
We are currently implementing usage control (UCON) 
security policy. Our future directions include implementation 
of more complex policy rules to better reflect the emerging 
security requirements. Examples include security policy 
rules for reputation component that grants or denies usage 
requests according to the client's reputation. We plan to 
explore such new policies to broaden the scope of the ExSec 
experiment beyond the single experimentation policy. We 
are also going to explore ways of compensating performance 
degradation by making use of available Cloud resources to 
fill the gap. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research leading to the results presented in this paper 
has received funding from the European Union's seventh 
framework programme (FP7 2007-2013) Project BonFIRE 
under grant agreement number 257386. Authors would also 
like to express their gratitude to Damien Hubaux and Florian 
Schreiner who have provided their valuable help in 
conducting the ExSec experiment. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Data Center Post, How Network Performance and Security 
Monitoring are Useful in Today's Data Center, online article at 
Technorati.com, 26 April 2011 [retrieved: June 2012] 
[2] 
W. Jansen, Directions in Security Metrics Research, NIST 
Interagency/Internal Report (IR) no. 7564, March 2009 [retrieved: 
June 2012] 
[3] 
Cisco product: Security Monitoring, Analysis and Response System 
(MARS) [retrieved: June 2012] 
[4] 
Hewlett Packard (HP) product: IT Performance Suite [retrieved: June 
2012] 
[5] 
J.M. Cary, Data security and performance overhead in a distributed 
architecture system, UMI Research Press, 1981 [retrieved: June 2012] 
[6] 
European 7th Framework project BonFIRE: Building Service 
Testbeds on FIRE (Future Internet Research Experimentation) 
[7] 
S. Naqvi and P. Mori, Security and Trust Management for Virtual 
Organizations: GridTrust Approach, IFIP International Conference on 
Trust Management (IFIPTM'09), West Lafayette, USA, June 2009 
[8] 
European 7th Framework project RESERVOIR: Resources and 
Services Virtualization without Barriers 
[9] 
The OpenNebula Cloud Management Engine [retrieved: June 2012] 
[10] The ZABBIX Performance Monitoring Tool - www.zabbix.com 
[11] Restfully: A general-purpose client library for RESTful APIs 
[retrieved: June 2012] 
[12] The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) data-interchange format 
[retrieved: June 2012] 
[13] A.S. Ibrahim, J.H. Hamlyn-Harris, J. Grundy,  and M. Almorsy, 
CloudSec: A security monitoring appliance for Virtual Machines in 
the IaaS cloud model,  in proceedings of the 5th International 
Conference on Network and System Security (NSS), 2011, pp.113-
120, 6-8 September 2011, Milan, Italy, ISBN: 978-1-4577-0458-1 
[14] T. Garfinkel, and M. Rosenblum, A Virtual Machine Introspection 
Based Architecture for Intrusion Detection, in proceedings of the 10th 
Network and Distributed Systems Security Symposium (NDSS) 2003, 
pp 191-206, 6-7 February 2003, San Diego, CA, USA 
[15] F. Van Staden, and H. Venter, Adding digital forensic readiness to 
electronic communication using a security monitoring tool, in 
proceedings of the IEEE Information Security South Africa (ISSA) 
2011, 15-17 August 2011, Johannesburg, South Africa 
[16] OASIS Extensible Access Control Markup Language (XACML) 
[17] S. Kolahi, Z. Qu, B. Soorty, N. Chand, The Impact of Security on the 
Performance of IPv4 and IPv6 Using 802.11n Wireless LAN, in 
Proceeding of the 3rd International Conference on  New 
Technologies, Mobility and Security 2009 (NTMS 2009), 20-23 
December 2009, Cairo, Egypt, ISBN: 978-1-4244-4765-7 
[18] J. Schonwalder and V. Marinov, On the Impact of Security Protocols 
on the Performance of SNMP, IEEE Transactions on Network and 
Service Management, pp.52-64, Vol. 8, Issue 1, 2011 
[19] A. K. Agarwal and W. Wang, Measuring performance impact of 
security protocols in wireless local area networks, in Proceedings of 
the 2nd IEEE International Conference on Broadband Networks 2005 
(BroadNets 2005), 3-7 October 2005, Boston, MA, USA 
[20] S. Cavalieri, G. Cutuli, S. Monteleone, Evaluating impact of security 
on OPC UA performance, 3rd IEEE Conference on Human System 
Interactions 2010 (HSI 2010), 13-15 May 2010, Rzeszow, Poland 
[21] R. Savola and P. Heinonen, Security-Measurability-Enhancing 
Mechanisms for a Distributed Adaptive Security Monitoring System, 
in proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Emerging 
Security 
Information, 
Systems 
and 
Technologies 
2010 
(SECURWARE'10), 18-25 July 2010, Venice, Italy  
[22] The Trusted Computing Group technologies [retrieved: June 2012] 
[23] X. Li, C. Jiang, J. Li, B. Li, VMInsight: Hardware Virtualization-
Based Process Security Monitoring System, in Proceedings of the 
IEEE Int. Conference on Network Computing and Information 
Security 2011 (NCIS 2011), 14-15 May 2011, Guilin, China 
[24] B. Bertholon, S. Varrette, and P. Bouvry, CertiCloud: A Novel TPM-
based Approach to Ensure Cloud IaaS Security, in Proceedings of the 
4th IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing 2011 
(CLOUD 2011), 4-9 July 2011, Washington DC, USA 
[25] Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) 
[26] Ponemon Institute study (sponsored by CA Technologies), Security 
of Cloud Computing Providers Study, April 2011 [retrieved: June 
2012] 
[27] C. Probst, A. Sasse, W. Pieters, T. Dimkov, E. Luysterborg, and M. 
Arnaud, Privacy penetration testing: How to establish trust in your 
Cloud provider, In: European Data Protection - In Good Health? S. 
Gutwirth, R. Leenes, P. De Hert, Y. Poullet (Eds.), 2012 
 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-209-7
SECURWARE 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and Technologies

