Modelling of an Ontology for a Communication Platform 
More safety at football events by improving the communication between stakeholders 
 
Jürgen Moßgraber, Manfred Schenk, Desiree Hilbring 
Fraunhofer Institute of Optronics, System Technologies and Image Exploitation IOSB 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
e-mail: {juergen.mossgraber, manfred.schenk, desiree.hilbring}@iosb.fraunhofer.de 
 
 
Abstract— Safety and security in football events has been a 
heavily debated topic in the media for years. Especially 
communication processes between the police authorities, 
private security services, town councils, supporters and other 
spectators 
have 
often 
been 
neglected. 
Communication 
processes in the context of football matches can encounter 
technical limitations. Traditional communication channels are 
often characterized by a one-way communication structure, 
delayed forwarding of information or limited quality (e.g., 
stadium announcements). To address these problems, a new 
communication platform is explored. The semantic basis for 
this platform is formed by an ontology. The usage and benefits 
of the ontology are manifold: 1) The design process created a 
better understanding among the stakeholders. 2) The actors, 
roles and their relations are used for information filtering and 
access restrictions. 3) The relations of the ontology are used for 
structuring the information and navigating through it. 4) 
Heterogeneous information is fused into the platform from 
existing systems by annotating the data with concepts from the 
ontology. In this paper, the design of the ontology based on 
research of already existing ontologies is presented. 
Keywords-ontology design; communication platform; Web 
Ontology Language (OWL). 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the football season 2013/2014, about 13 million people 
attended the matches of the German Bundesliga (first league) 
[1]. The games of the second, third and lower leagues were 
attended by several additional millions of spectators. On 
their journey to the stadium and back home, they travel 
through crowded urban regions and depend on using the 
local infrastructures. 
In order to implement such big football events, a 
cooperation of police forces, local town councils, football 
clubs and private security services is necessary to provide a 
safe and secure environment. Together with spectators and 
supporter groups, these stakeholders strive for peaceful and 
positive sport events. By doing this, different perspectives on 
freedom, safety and security must be balanced. Following 
these presuppositions, the following research question 
emerges: How can the safety and security creation in the 
context of football games be optimized via communication? 
The research project SiKomFan (Mehr Sicherheit im 
Fußball – Verbessern der Kommunikationsstrukturen und 
Optimieren des Fandialogs) [2], funded by the German 
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), therefore 
researches 
possible 
improvements 
of 
communication 
strategies, including technical solutions to support them. By 
using a broad perspective that involves 25 football locations 
in Germany’s three professional football leagues the most 
relevant stakeholders are examined in order to contribute to a 
successful dialogue with supporters. So far, the inquiry 
revealed that there are different communication strategies in 
different locations leading to different results.  
Examining the topic of communication processes in the 
context of football games can be done from different 
specialist perspectives and by using different methods. 
SiKomFan combines four disciplines, namely sociology, 
risk- and security management, law and computer science as 
well as their specific methods. 
Communication processes in the context of football 
matches can encounter technical limitations. Traditional 
communication channels are often characterized by a one-
way communication structure, delayed forwarding of 
information 
or 
limited 
quality 
(e.g., 
stadium 
announcements). New media, such as Twitter, provide 
opportunities for flexible, timely and rapid exchange of 
information, but have the disadvantages of information 
overflow [3] and uncertainty (the content is not reliable). To 
address these problems, a new communication platform is 
explored, implemented and tested in a demonstration 
scenario. All participating parties (e.g., police, private 
security services, supporters, etc.) can communicate with 
each other by means of the most appropriate way at football 
events. Using an app on a smartphone, football supporters 
and other stakeholders can access this platform in order to 
obtain relevant event information or to provide new 
information. The overall architecture of the SiKomFan 
system is described in [2]. 
The semantic base of this communication platform is 
formed by an ontology, which is presented in this paper. 
The paper is structured as follows. The Section II starts 
with related work, followed by Section III describing the 
used methodology for designing the ontology. The following 
sections IV to VIII are structured along the lines of the 
methodology: Section IV describes the purpose of the 
ontology. In Sections V to VII the building of the ontology is 
shown. Section VIII is about evaluating the ontology. The 
paper ends with an outlook on future work and a conclusion 
in Section IX. 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

II. 
RELATED WORK 
The research presented in this paper was influenced and 
partly based on several existing ontologies. Those ontologies 
can be clustered by forming the following groups: Generic 
base 
ontologies, 
geospatial 
ontologies, 
time 
related 
ontologies, event ontologies (in the meaning "something 
happening"), event ontologies (like concerts or sport events) 
and sport ontologies, especially for the topic football/soccer.  
The "DOLCE+DnS Ultralite Ontology" (DUL) has been 
developed as a common base for ontologies in the field of 
context modelling, e.g., it provides concepts like persons, 
organizations and roles along with relations among them. 
Another widely used base ontology regarding the modelling 
of persons and their relations is the "Friend of a Friend" 
(FOAF) ontology. This ontology only covers a smaller 
spectrum of the needed concepts. 
The GeoNames ontology does not only define the 
structure for modelling locations and relations between them, 
it also provides a large amount of actual data. The 
GeoNames ontology itself uses the "Basic Geo Vocabulary" 
for defining the structures. 
The Basic Geo Vocabulary [8] is a vocabulary for 
representing latitude, longitude and altitude information in 
the WGS84 geodetic reference datum, defined by the W3C 
Semantic Web Interest Group. 
Time modelling aspects are addressed in the "Ontology 
of Time for the Semantic Web" (OWL-TIME). It provides a 
vocabulary for durations, time intervals and instants of time. 
The "Event-Model-F" is based on the DUL ontology and 
added support for representing time and space, objects, 
persons and relationships between events. In contrast to other 
event 
ontologies, it 
allows 
modelling 
of 
causality 
relationships and representing different interpretations of the 
same event. 
Further relations are shown in Section VI, where the 
integration and reuse of existing ontologies is discussed. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
For the design process of the SiKomFan ontology, the 
methodology suggested by Uschold and King [9] was used, 
which is a general approach for ontology design with a focus 
on the informal aspects. 
The methodology foresees several steps: 
1) Identify the purpose of the ontology: It is important to 
be clear about why the ontology is being built, what its 
intended uses are. Furthermore, the stakeholders and their 
environment must be defined. 
2) Building the ontology, splits up into several sub-
steps: 
a) Ontology Capture: Identification of the key 
concepts and relationships in the domain of interest. 
Production of precise unambiguous text definitions for 
concepts and relationships. Identification of terms to refer to 
such concepts and relationships. Agreeing on all of the 
above. 
b) Ontology Coding: Explicit representation of the 
conceptualization captured in a formal language. 
c) Integrating Existing Ontologies: Use existing 
ontologies, which are already in use and widely accepted in 
the research community. 
3) Evaluation: make a technical judgment of the 
ontologies, their associated software environments, and 
documentation with respect to the frame of reference. The 
frame of reference may be the requirements specification, 
competency questions and/or the real world 
4) Documentation: important for updating and re-using 
important assumptions for understanding (Meta models). 
Inadequate documentation is one of the main barriers for 
effective use of ontologies. 
 
The following sections are structured by these steps of 
the methodology. Step 2b and 2c are swapped since it 
showed to make more sense to first research existing 
ontologies for reuse before starting to code.  
IV. 
PURPOSE OF THE SIKOMFAN ONTOLOGY 
The application of the ontology in the communication 
platform is threefold: 
1. 
It will store a model of the current situation during a 
football event. Information coming into the system will be 
annotated with elements from the ontology to create a 
common meaning. Having such a common meaning is 
especially helpful for data integration of already existing 
systems. 
2. 
All actors, which are involved into an event, are 
modelled including their relations, tasks and roles. 
3. 
The structure of the ontology (relations between 
concepts) is used to navigate the system and the mobile app. 
V. 
BUILDING THE ONTOLOGY – ONTOLOGY CAPTURE 
To identify the ontological classes and relations a 
workshop was held, which brought together the different 
stakeholders of the project with their different research and 
domain knowledge backgrounds. This group of about ten 
people was a good size for effective discussion and the 
interdisciplinary meeting brought many new insights into the 
domain. 
As a side effect also caused by the formalized nature of 
an ontology, the understanding of the involved actors and 
their relations was hugely increased between the project 
partners during the necessary discussion. In addition, the 
requirement to be specific about the formalization brought up 
topics, which were so far not fully understood. These open 
issues created new research items and therefore influenced 
the research of the other work packages. 
A. Stakeholders 
Figure 1. displays the top-level of all stakeholders, which 
participate directly or indirectly in the event football match 
and therefore have specific information and communication 
needs. Each of these top-level stakeholders contains a tree 
of up to ten specific groups, which are not displayed to keep 
the figure small. 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

  
Figure 1.  Top-level stakeholders of the event “football match” 
A football organization is, e.g., an association like in 
Germany the Deutscher Fußball-Bund e.V. (DFB). They can 
send representatives to high-risk matches to check the safety 
precautions. 
The stakeholder Information System is a special case since 
these are not human beings. Examples are existing systems 
for transport, police communication, information sites of 
clubs, etc. These systems provide information for the 
platform. 
The club has several aspects: representatives of the guest 
and host club, the owner and manager of the stadium, the 
organizer, etc. The public is divided in visitors of the match 
and uninvolved people like abutters and affected travelers 
(train, car). 
The Transport Companies are responsible for getting from 
and to the stadium, for example by train, bus or tram. 
Visitors are interested in delays and additional transport 
options for the match.  
The Media are newspapers, radio, television, and Internet 
sites. 
The Public and Private Security are emergency services like 
police, fire department, rescue services and private security 
companies. In Germany, there is the special situation that 
for one match there is police from different states involved 
and additionally also the Bundespolizei (federal police), 
which takes care about the railroad safety. 
These stakeholders are the actors in the technical use-cases 
described in the following section. 
B. Use-Case Scenarios 
For inquiring communication processes between the 
different actors, a football event is split up into four 
scenarios. 
The first one deals with the arrival and departure of 
spectators on the railway system of Deutsche Bahn AG 
(DB). In this sub-scenario, the (communicative) co-action of 
the federal police, the carriers and its services as well as the 
measures by football clubs are examined. 
The second covers the travelling of spectators from a train 
station to the stadium. There are many different models in 
existence, for example the organized supporter march, the 
use of shuttle busses and the individual arrival by foot or 
with public transportation. The analysis in this context was 
focused on actions by state police and town councils but 
also accompanying measures by football clubs and public 
transport services. 
The next scenario focuses on the interface of public area and 
the responsibility of the match-host: the entry controls. 
There, co-operation modalities between state police, town 
council and the club security commissioner as well as the 
private security service in the stadium are being included in 
the inquiry. 
The fourth and last scenario examines the spectators’ visit in 
the stadium area. Here, actions by private security services 
in the stadium, the cooperation of different safety and 
security actors, for example in the safety and security 
operations headquarter, and the integration of the stadium 
announcer into communication concepts are inquired. 
 
Figure 2.  Top level Technical Use-Cases 
From these scenarios, technical use-cases were created. 
Figure 2. depicts the top-level classification into the needs 
of the public and emergency services. Both of them are 
further 
divided 
into 
information 
(one-way) 
and 
communication (bi-directional). The complete mind map 
contains over 40 use-cases, therefore only some examples 
will be given: 
 A father has lost his child in the crowded stadium and 
wonders whom to contact for support. 
 A security officer wants to give an information to people 
in a certain area, e.g., “this entrance is overcrowded, 
please use entrance B”. 
 A supporter wants to know which supporter items are 
allowed to bring into the stadium. 
VI. 
BUILDING THE ONTOLOGY – INTEGRATING EXISTING 
ONTOLOGIES 
The evaluated ontologies (see Table I and also Section II) 
can be divided into the following categories: 
 base ontologies (# 1 and 2) 
 spatial ontologies (# 3 and 4) 
 time related ontologies (# 5, 6, and 7) 
 events (# 8 and 9), in the meaning of sport event or music 
event 
 events (# 10 and 11), in the meaning that something 
happens and causes a reaction 
 Sport and football ( # 12, 13 and 14) 
Additionally, ontologies from the domains of early 
warning and disaster would have been of interest but no 
suitable ontologies were found. 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Based on our study we decided to pick "DOLCE+DnS 
Ultralite Ontology" (DUL) as the base ontology because it 
already covers the basic elements like people, organizations, 
roles, events and all relations between them.  
 
VII. BUILDING THE ONTOLOGY – ONTOLOGY CODING 
Building on DUL all actors (supporters, transportation 
companies, clubs, unions, security organizations, police, 
press, etc.) and their roles were modelled. After that, time 
(for events and phases) and space (e.g., location of stadium) 
was added. Deciding on DUL set also the decision to use 
OWL (Web Ontology Language)/XML [10] as the coding 
language. 
The decision to use automatic reasoning within the 
project poses an extra challenge for the combination of 
ontologies: The simple combination of different ontologies 
by defining equivalence relations between classes will lead 
to an inconsistent world model in most cases if not done 
carefully. This resulted in the definition of some criteria for 
the evaluation of other additional ontologies: The ontology 
should add substantial value to the base. It has to be 
combinable with DUL, i.e., it should have an OWL 
representation and defining classes from both ontologies as 
equivalent should not lead to inconsistencies. Furthermore, 
the integration of an ontology should only result in a minimal 
set of required dependencies since a larger number of 
involved ontologies will increment the potential of 
inconsistencies. In some cases, a consistent re-modelling of 
aspects from an existing ontology should be preferred over 
integrating the original ontology.  
A. Integration of Space and Time 
The “Geo-Pos” ontology [8] which was chosen for the 
spatial aspects is originally modelled as RDFS/XML and had 
to be transferred to OWL/XML. 
The SiKomFan Ontology introduces the new class 
<#Position> (Fig. 3) as junction between the three ontologies 
DUL, Geo-Pos and SiKomFan. It is defined as subclass of 
<#SpaceRegion> from DUL since it is a spatial restriction in 
terms of the DUL terminology. The location attributes 
defined in Geo-Pos are added by declaring the Position class 
as EquivalentClass to <#Point> from Geo-Pos. With the help 
of this class, it is now possible to assign some absolute 
coordinates to entities. 
 
Figure 3.  OWLClass Position 
Some use cases of SiKomFan require the modelling of 
trajectories for persons and objects. This introduces the need 
for some time related attributes. To achieve this, the new 
class <#TemporalPosition> (Fig. 4) is defined that links 
<#Position> and <#TimeInterval>. It is defined by the 
restriction to have exactly one Position as location and to be 
observable at exactly one TimeInterval. The order of 
TemporalPositions within a trajectory is modelled with 
predecessor 
and 
successor 
relations 
between 
them.
 
Figure 4.  OWLClass TemporalPosition  
B. Extensions 
For the modelling of events (in the meaning of sport 
events), the decision was made to use a simple model based 
on the OWLClasses available in the DUL instead of 
importing a completely event-specific ontology. As an 
example, the football league is modeled as a new OWLClass  
<#League>, which is a subclass of <#Competition> which 
itself is a subclass of <#Event> from DUL. Other terms like 
arrival, match or season have been modeled in a similar way. 
Persons acting as senders and receivers in the context of 
communication are important for the SiKomFan project.  
Based on research carried out by another work package in 
the project, some selected persons were modeled as part of 
the ontology. Therefore, the OWLClass <#SocialPerson> 
from DUL has been subdivided into several subhierarchies. 
The <#EmergencyServicesPerson> is the top-level class for 
all persons from emergency services, which are modelled in 
detail. In a similar way, the <#EventVisitor> is the top of 
another hierarchy for the persons visiting the event.  
Besides the persons, IT systems can also be the origin of 
communication and have to be modeled also. In this case, 
<#System> is defined as the common base class for systems 
like Social Media, information pages, press portals and 
traffic information services. That class is defined as subclass 
of <#PhysicalAgent> from DUL. 
The last major extension to the DUL is the subhierarchy 
beneath <#Organization> from DUL.  This subhierarchy 
contains all the organizational aspects of emergency services 
as well as fan groups, companies (e.g., railway operators) 
and football clubs. 
Table II shows some simple metrics of the three 
ontologies DUL, Geo-Pos and SiKomFan in comparison. 
 
 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

VIII. EVALUATION OF THE ONTOLOGY IN THE 
COMMUNICATION PLATFORM 
The system architecture of the communication platform 
has been derived from the use-case scenarios as well. 
Components of the sequence diagrams describing the 
technical use-cases have been grouped according to their 
functionalities: 
user 
interface 
(Apps 
and 
Desktop 
Applications), services (e.g., map or positioning services), 
data (e.g., information about the football event) and data 
sources (e.g., stakeholders or social media). 
The main part of the system is the so-called Situation; it 
contains the connected information about the current football 
event. It can be visualized on a map showing various aspects 
for different actors and roles. For example, a visitor can see 
the location and availability of the transfer shuttle to the train 
station. The Situation is saved in an ontology store using 
OpenLink Virtuoso [7] facilitating the SiKomFan-ontology 
described above. The ontology store is connected to a web 
content management system (WCMS), which implements 
the additional functionality like visualization of a situation, 
role authorization, group notifications, etc. 
The ontology was tested with queries and example data 
created from the SiKomFan use-cases. 
Fig.5 shows a SPARQL [11] query, which returns 
positions of relief units at a specific time: 
 
 
Figure 5.  SPARQL query for evaluation 
Several scenarios with up to 2000 police officers were 
simulated for the evaluation of the queries. Depending on the 
scenario size the query execution duration varied between 
20ms and 3000ms. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, the first iteration of the SiKomFan ontology 
was presented, which addresses the manifold stakeholders 
and use-cases of the event football match. Using the 
methodology suggested by Uschold the purpose of the 
ontology was identified first and their content was defined at 
a stakeholder’s workshop. After that, the ontology was 
designed building upon existing established ontologies. 
Finally, the ontology was evaluated by testing the SiKomFan 
use-cases. 
Moreover, but not presented here, parallel sub-projects 
examine supporter cultures and their perspectives on safety 
and security as well as legal recommendations for a better 
information exchange and for optimizing the cognizance of 
public actors around football matches. These sub-projects 
therefore seek to deliver suggestions to optimize the 
communication 
strategies 
of 
the 
stakeholders, 
the 
communication processes between the stakeholders and 
especially to optimize the dialogue between supporters and 
the stakeholders. The new results of this interdisciplinary 
research will be taken into account and the ontology will be 
adapted accordingly in the second phase of the project. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research project SiKomFan is funded by the German 
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF). SiKomFan is 
currently in its second year of research and will conclude 
with final results in August 2016. For more information see: 
www.sikomfan.de. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Zuschauergeschichte 
[Online] 
available 
from 
http://www.kicker.de/news/fussball/bundesliga/spieltag/1-
bundesliga/zuschauer-geschichte.html  2015.05.20 
[2] J. Moßgraber, T. Kubera, and A. Werner, “More Safety for 
Football 
Events: 
Improving 
the 
Communication 
of 
Stakeholders and the Dialogue with Supporters,” Proceedings 
of the Future Security 2014, Berlin, Germany, 2014. 
[3] Manuel, G., Gummadi, K., & Schoelkopf, B. (in press). Quantifying 
Information Overload in Social Media and its Impact on Social 
Contagions. 
In 
ICSWM 
'14. 
[Online] 
Available 
from 
http://hdl.handle.net/11858/00-001M-0000-0026-AE1B-4 
2015.05.20 
[4] J. R. Hobbs and F. Pan, “An Ontology of Time for the 
Semantic Web,” ACM Transactions on Asian Language 
Processing (TALIP): Special issue on Temporal Information 
Processing, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 66-85, 2004. 
[5] A. Scherp, T. Franz, C. Saathoff, and S. Staab, “F---A Model 
of Events based on the Foundational Ontology DOLCE+DnS 
Ultralight,” 
International 
Conference 
on 
Knowledge 
Capturing (K-CAP), Redondo Beach, CA, USA, September, 
2009. 
[6] R. Troncy, B. Malocha, and A.Fialho, “Linking events with 
media,” In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on 
Semantic Systems (I-SEMANTICS '10), Adrian Paschke, 
Nicola Henze, and Tassilo Pellegrini (Eds.). ACM, New 
York, 
NY, 
USA, 
, 
Article 
42 
, 
4 
pages. 
DOI=10.1145/1839707.1839759 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1839707.1839759, 2010.  
[7] O. Erling and I. Mikhailov, “Virtuoso: RDF Support in a 
Native RDBMS,” Semantic Web Information Management, 
2009, pp. 501-519. 
[8] Geo-Pos 
Ontology 
[Online] 
available 
from 
http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84_pos# 2015.05.20 
[9] M. Uschold and M. King, “Towards a Methodology for 
Building Ontologies,” AIAI-TR-183, presented at Workshop 
on Basic Ontological Issuesin Knowledge Sharing; held in 
conjunction with IJCAI-95, 1995. 
[10] G. Antoniou and F. van Harmelen, "Web Ontology Language: 
OWL," Handbook on Ontologies, International Handbooks on 
Information Systems 2004, pp 67-92, 2004. 
[11] E. Prud’hommeaux and A. Seaborne, “Sparql query language 
for rdf,” W3C Working Draft, http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-
sparql-query/, 2006. 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

TABLE I.  
RESEARCHED ONTOLOGIES FOR INTEGRATION INTO THE SIKOMFAN ONTOLOGY 
# 
URL 
Coding 
Language 
License 
Published 
Comment 
 
Base ontologies 
1 
http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/ont/dul/DUL.owl 
OWL/XML 
en, it 
 
 
Organizations, 
Relations, 
Planning, Events, 
… 
2 
http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/ 
OWL/XML 
en 
CC BY 
1.0 
2014 
Persons, 
Organizations and 
their relations 
 
Location ontologies 
3 
http://www.geonames.org/ontology/documentation.html 
OWL/XML 
en, no, sv, 
bg, ru 
CC BY 
3.0 
2012 
Locations, 
Countries, 
Population, ZIP, 
… 
4 
http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/ 
RDFS/XML 
en 
 
2009 
Geo locations 
 
Time related ontologies 
5 
http://www.w3.org/2006/time#  
OWL/XML 
en 
 
2006 
Time 
6 
http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/timeindexedsituation.owl 
OWL/XML 
en 
 
2011 
Order of events 
7 
http://motools.sourceforge.net/timeline/timeline.html 
OWL/XML 
en 
 
2007 
Order of events, 
extends OWL-
Time 
 
Events (in the meaning of sport event or music event) ontologies 
8 
http://motools.sourceforge.net/event/event.html 
OWL/N3 
en 
CC BY 
3.0 
2007 
Rudimentary 
9 
http://linkedevents.org/ontology/ 
OWL/XML 
en 
CC BY-
SA 3.0 
2010 
Rudimentary 
 
Events (something happens and causes a reaction) ontologies 
10 http://west.uni-koblenz.de/Research/ontologies/events/index_html 
OWL/XML 
en 
 
2009 
Time and space, 
objects, cause and 
impact; extends 
DUL 
11 http://www.dcs.shef.ac.uk/~vita/files/ER-events.owl 
OWL/XML 
en 
 
20xx 
Diseases, fire 
protest, weather. 
No Properties. 
 
Sport events ontologies 
12 http://purl.org/ontology/sport/ 
OWL/XML 
en 
 
2011 
Sport events, 
leagues, teams, 
etc. 
13 http://www.r4isstatic.com/linkeddata/ontologies/football/football.owl 
OWL/XML 
en 
 
2009 
Leagues, teams, 
countries 
 
Ontologies about football (the game itself) 
14 http://www.lgi2p.ema.fr/~ranwezs/ontologies/soccerV2.0.daml 
DAML/XML en 
 
2002 
Events in the 
game 
TABLE II.  
ONTOLOGY METRICS 
Ontology 
Class count 
ObjectProperty count 
DatatypeProperty count 
Individual Count 
DUL 
75 
104 
5 
- 
Geo-Pos 
2 
1 
3 
- 
SiKomFan (without DUL and 
Geo-Pos) 
124 
38 
21 
210 
 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

