A Document Authoring System for Credible Enterprise Reporting with Data
Analysis from Data Warehouse
Masao Mori
IR Ofﬁce, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan
mori@ir.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Toshie Tanaka
IR Ofﬁce, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan
tanaka@ir.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Sachio Hirokawa
Research Institute for Information Technology,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
hirokawa@cc.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In rapid progress of information technology, we
are facing difﬁculties, “information explosion”. From stand-
point of using enormous quantity of data, there are many
researches such as information retrieval and clustering in-
formation. On the other hand, in terms of creating credible
enterprise reports, information explosion also becomes a big
problem. If most of digital documents are unstructured, report
writers may have signiﬁcant difﬁculties with management and
arrangement of digital documents. Actually in the case of
university evaluations, report writers have been confronted
with that difﬁculties. In addition, quantitative data from data
warehouse is indispensable for enterprise reports. In this paper,
we developed a document authoring system cooperating with
data warehouse to settle these problems from viewpoint of
reusing and reconstructing components of reports.
Keywords-digital document; data warehouse; accreditation;
knowledge management; web service
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years opportunities of enterprise reporting in
companies, institutions and universities have been increasing
rapidly. So that business intelligence and content man-
agement system for enterprise reporting are desirable, for
instance, Priebe[1]. What is required to create credible enter-
prise reports? Morimoto et al.[2] asserts the following four
processes of enterprise reporting from viewpoint of knowl-
edge management: (1) collecting and accumulating docu-
ments, (2) searching and browsing documents, (3) extracting
and identifying documents and (4) creating credible reports.
In order to realize these processes completely, information
must be structured. DITA[3] is one of the ideal architectures
to extract information from documents effectively and to
manage documents efﬁciently. However, not infrequently,
non-structured information exceeds structured information,
especially on-the-spot of university evaluations.
All Japaneses universities are obliged to be evaluated by
certiﬁed organization, called institutional certiﬁed evaluation
and accreditation. In addition, all Japaneses national uni-
versities must be evaluated for the purpose of information
disclosure to government and nation, called national uni-
versity corporation evaluation. They are called university
evaluations which is undergone every six years. Univer-
sities must prepare self-assessment reports for university
Fields
Schools
Contents of report
Sections
Viewpoints
Pages
Education
31
8
12
959
Research
20
5
5
311
Figure 1.
An example of amounts of documents in the corporation
evaluation report of educational and research activity of Kyushu university
2009
evaluations. Educational and research activities of university
vary in many ways. In Kyushu university, one of national
universities in Japan, though documents of committee and
faculty council were stored, they had not yet been managed
systematically. How to reuse these documents becomes a
big problem. Authors of this paper have been supporting
faculties and bureaus to create university evaluation reports.
As in Figure1, the amount of document in evaluation report
of Kyushu university 2009 was so large-scaled that it was
hard even to ﬁx formats of documents. In addition, many
items and themes appear many times in both reports. So the
writer must be thoughtful for consistency of both reports.
From our experience to support creation of evaluation
reports, we have developed a document authoring system
for enterprise report, especially for university evaluations,
cooperating with data warehouse. In order to manage un-
structured information efﬁciently, the proposing system pro-
vides users with a simple and uniform data structure for
report components. Users can create enterprise reports by
arranging report components in the tree structure of sections.
Moreover, by reusing report components users can make
sure of consistency of enterprise report.
Our system challenges the two targets as follows: (1)
management of items and themes which appear frequently
in various enterprise reports, (2) light-weight cooperation
with data warehouse. This system is developed using Ruby
on Rails and MySQL. Demonstration of our system can be
seen on Youtube1.
The paper is structured as follows: In Section 2 we review
related works. In Section 3 we overview our system and
introduce three main concepts, report components, report
1http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=okAT6aseks8
218
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

Figure 2.
Views of the document authoring system
tree and data analysis queries. In Section 4 we present
features of our approach comparing with related work. We
conclude the paper with summary and future work.
II. RELATED WORK
We start to discuss related work by reviewing the assertion
of processes for enterprise report in Morimoto et al.[2]:
(1) collecting and accumulating documents, (2) searching
and browsing documents, (3) extracting and identifying
documents and (4) creating credible reports.
Considering document management, information retrieval
is indispensable for accumulated digital documents. Beyer
et al.[4] propose a method to discover patterns and rules of
texts in structured documents in order to generate efﬁcient
search index. Linked Data[5] would be helpful to capture re-
lationship between digital documents if they were structured.
But we found that the prime consideration for documents
in enterprise reporting, especially in university evaluation,
is meta-data of digital documents and materials, such as
their jurisdiction, creators and meanings of the documents.
As a university is a complex organization consisting of
many departments and bureaus with autonomy, meta-data
of documents is indispensable for document management in
the scene of university evaluations.
DITA[3][6] is a document architecture for extraction and
management of documents. DITA enables users to extract
and update information efﬁciently in large amounts of
documents[7]. In order to adopt DITA and Linked Data, it is
required to deﬁne an ontology for knowledge of enterprise.
Since it is difﬁcult to apply an ontology to present progres-
sive enterprise processes and legacy systems, we decide to
extract text from digital document by hand and to collect
minimum concrete information (such as “Section 2 on page
23”) as meta-data about digital documents.
Generally speaking, accumulating daily reports ensures
enterprise reports, moreover it is advisable to study how
to obtain meanings and attributes of documents[2]. If an
enterprise report is required to be prompt, integration of
document creation with OLAP is desirable[1]. In the case of
university evaluation reports, frequency of reports is much
lower than daily reports in companies. Actually evaluation
report is usually conducted every year or every month at
219
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

most. A long-term vision rather than promptness is necessary
for university management. One of important requests in
university evaluations is to select documents efﬁciently and
to organize them effectively rather than automatic reporting
function. The proposing system provides users with an in-
teractive interface to select documents and organize reports.
Integration of structured data in data warehouse and
unstructured data in texts on news sites and blogs has
been studied in [1][5][8][9]. Most of them are based on
information retrieval and assume that ontology for structured
data is given, whereas we assume that ontology is not given
but the design of enterprise reports is given, like university
evaluations. Our approach is different from those related
work in terms of these assumptions.
III. OVERVIEW
A. Report Component and Report Tree
In this subsection, we will introduce the document au-
thoring system for enterprise reporting (DASER for short).
As we mentioned in the introduction, it is important to
provide users with a uniform data structure in order to bundle
essential information of materials and documents. A data
structure, report component, is a unit in DASER, which
consists of seven elements as follows:
1) id,
2) title (user input),
3) comment (user input),
4) data analysis query (user input),
5) data analysis,
6) attached documents (user input), and
7) meta-data.
Users may input data into attributes such as comment,
data analysis query and attached documents. Data analysis is
visualization of data obtained from data warehouse through
“data analysis query” (DAQ for short). DAQ is URL of a
CGI program in data warehouse. We will discuss DAQ in
the next section. Meta-data is owner information and time-
stamp. Each report component have visualizing function for
CSV data obtained from DAQ.
The window on the right in Figure 2 is an example of
report component. The graph is generated from CSV data
which is obtained from data warehouse through DAQ. Note
that the visualizing function does not depend on DAQ. One
can visualize static CSV ﬁles located in other web server.
In DASER, we can deﬁne structure of enterprise report
by giving a tree structure with report components as leaves
and sections as internal nodes. This is called a report tree.
Report tree is changeable corresponding to contents of every
enterprise report, and it also can be changed depending on
individual needs from users. Report tree can be construct
with report component as leaf nodes, and with the root node
and internal nodes. A root node and internal nodes have the
same data structure as a report component and additional
attributes as follows:
Figure 3.
The report authoring system and data warehouse
8) a list of ids of children and
9) its parent’s id.
Note that each report component does not depend on the
deﬁnition of report tree.
B. Data Analysis Query
In this section we introduce data warehouse (DW for
short) and its data analysis query. DAQ is WebAPI of
DW. Data sources of DW is backup data of operational
(business) systems. In the context of university evaluation,
for example, they are information about students, teachers,
teaching, research and ﬁnance of university. Flat ﬁles such
as spreadsheets, are also data source of DW.
Administrator of DW provides users with programs in
order to analyze data in DW. That is called data analysis
query. As DAQs are implemented as CGI programs, one can
access DW with DAQs over restful HTTP communication.
DAQs return data in CSV format.
Let us consider the case of analyzing international stu-
dents enrollment. One need to calculate numbers of students
for every year and every department in order to show their
changes. For example, the DAQ
http://dw.mydom/int_stdt.cgi?yr=5&dpt=eng
returns CSV data about changes of international students in
the department of engineering (dpt=eng) for the past ﬁve
years (yr=5). This DAQ is available for other departments
and other year terms by changing parameters.
IV. FEATURES
In the introduction, we mentioned that our challenges
are: (1) management of items and themes which appear
frequently in various enterprise reports, and (2) light-weight
cooperation with data warehouse. In this section we will see
achievement to the challenges.
A. Consistency and Credibility
Firstly we discuss how the proposing system contributes
to consistency for enterprise reports.
Generally speaking, contents of an enterprise report form
a tree structure. Leaf nodes are topics and themes and
internal nodes are sections and chapters. So we deﬁne a
220
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

report component as a leaf node, which is a data structure
with seven attributes, and chapters and section as internal
nodes. When users create multiple reports in such as our case
of two university evaluations, what user have to do is setting
each report tree corresponding to a conﬁguration of each
report. Then DASER ﬂexibly generates multiple reports.
Even if some report components appear many times in
different reports, DASER ensures consistency and credibility
between different reports. Related work, such as [1][5][8][9],
have not focused on the problem of multiple reports. This
is one of unique features of our approach.
B. Light-weight cooperation and its effectiveness
DASER is connected to DW only through DAQs by restful
http communication which is one of web service techniques.
We could successfully develop DASER and DW separately.
In other words, DW can offer the CSV data to other service
besides DASER, and DASER can refer to static CSV ﬁles
from other data source besides DW.
Sharing data warehouse inside of intranet has been a trend
for a decade [10]. Our approach is to develop an integration
of qualitative data and quantitative data for enterprise re-
porting, whereas we must develop data warehouse for not
only reporting but also sharing information inside of our
university. This situation is different from [8][1].
C. Flood of unstructured and valuable XML data
In order to accomplish information disclosure, enterprise
documents are always accumulated. This issue is for not
only big organizations such as big universities, for but also
any small organizations such as elementary schools.
Unfortunately, in many universities and schools in Japan,
most of their digital documents, like word processor ﬁles
and spread sheets, are unstructured data. That is why we
must assume nonexistence of ontology for our approach.
When user creates an enterprise report on our system, she/he
is supposed to set up report components and report trees.
Giving report components and report trees would lead to
the ontology for the enterprise report. That is one of unique
feature of our system.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper we developed a document authoring system
for enterprise reporting cooperating with data warehouse.
And we realized a light-weight cooperation between our
system by using the technique of restful http communication.
Two problems still remain. First problem is ﬂexibility of
report component. Under current conﬁguration of DASER,
user cannot variously set the contents of report component
to the context of each enterprise reporting. Second problem
is ﬂexibility of composing results of DAQ. Cross tabulation
of two or more results of DAQs is impossible. From our
researches like [11][12], it is considerable to apply the
method of web mash-ups to the second problem.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Priebe and G. Pernul, “Ontology-based integration of
olap and information retrieval,” in Proceedings of the 14th
International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems
Applications, 2003, p. 610.
[2] Y. Morimoto, H. Mase, and H. Tsuji, “Perspectives on reuse
process support systems for document-type knowledge,” in
Human-Computer Interaction, Part IV, HCII 2007, ser. Lec-
ture Note in Computer Science 4553, 2007, pp. 682–691.
[3] O. Standard, DITA Version 1.1 Architectural Speciﬁcation,
OASIS, 2007.
[4] K. Beyer, V. Ercegovac, and R. K. et al., “Towards a scalable
enterprise content analytics platform,” Bulletin of the IEEE
Computer Society Technical Committee on Data Engineering,
2009.
[5] C. Bizer, T. Health, K. Idehen, and T. Berners-Lee, “Linked
data on the web (ldow2008),” in Proceeding of the 17th
international conference on World Wide Web, 2008, pp. 1265–
1266.
[6] M. Priestley, “Dita xml: A reuse by reference architecture
for technical documentation,” in Proceedings of SIGDOC’01,
October 2001, pp. 152–156, santa Fe, New Mexico, USA.
[7] O. D`ıaz, F. I. Anfurrutia, and J. Kortabitarte, “Using dita for
documenting software product lines,” in Proceedings of the
9th ACM symposium on Document engineering. Association
for Computing Machinery, 2009, pp. 231–240.
[8] A. Ferr´andez and J. Peral, “The beneﬁts of the interaction
between data warehouses and question answering,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 2010 EDBT/ICDT Workshops, ser. ACM
International Conference Proceeding Series, vol. 426, 2010.
[9] B. Riger, A. Kleber, and E. von Maur, “Metadatabased inte-
gration of qualitative and quantitative information resources
approaching knowledge management,” in ECIS 2000 Pro-
ceedings, 2000.
[10] R. Kimball and R. Merz, The Data Webhouse Toolkit: Build-
ing the Web-Enabled Data Warehouse.
Wiley, 2000.
[11] M. Mori, T. Nakatoh, and S. Hirokawa, “Links anc cycles
of web databases,” in The 4th Italian Workshop on Semantic
Web Applications and Perspectives, 2007, pp. 21–30.
[12] ——, “Functional composition of web databases,” in Pro-
ceedings of International Conference Asian Digital Libraries
2006, ser. Lecture Note in Computer Science 4312. Springer
Verlag, 2006, pp. 439–448.
[13] S. Mushhad, M. Gilani, J. Ahmed, and M. A. Abbas, “Elec-
tronic document management: A paperless university model,”
in Proceedings of 2009 2nd IEEE International Conference
on Computer Science and Information Technology, 2009, pp.
440–444.
221
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

