Intensive Care Unit – Clinical Decision Support System
Seçil Bayrak
Dept. of Computer Engineering
Dokuz Eylul University
Izmır, Turkey 
e-mail: bayraksecil@gmail.com
Reyat Yılmaz 
Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Dokuz Eylul University
Izmır, Turkey 
e-mail: reyat.yilmaz@ceng.deu.edu.tr
Yunus Doğan 
Dept. of Computer Engineering
Dokuz Eylul University
Izmır, Turkey 
e-mail: yunus@cs.deu.edu.tr
Alp Kut
Dept. of Computer Engineering
Dokuz Eylul University
Izmır, Turkey 
e-mail: alp.kut@ceng.deu.edu.tr
Abstract- The Intensive Care Unit Automation System
and Clinical Decision Support System (ICU-CDSS) were
developed in the scope of our project as a multi-
disciplined study within 1507-TUBITAK. ICU-CDSS
software
collects
vital
information
from
medical
equipment and makes it available for the needs of the
medical doctors and the nurses of the Intensive Care
Unit (ICU) via Web based and mobile interfaces.
Collected data could also be easily accessed immediately,
using the query tools for research purposes by the
authorized physicians. The forms which were formerly
filled manually will be able to get reported digitally. Also,
data
mining
assisted
decision
support
system
is
developed and used. Decision Support System will be
able to make suggestions to the physicians for detecting
critical states before they happen. The appropriate size
ICU automation devices will be sterilized and will allow
easy data input by the side of the patient bed. Doctors
and nurses will be able to use the system within the
authorities
granted
to
their
roles.
The
performed
operations will also be registered in log records. ICU-
CDSS will be tested and used primarily in Dokuz Eylul
University ICU Clinic.
Keywords- Data Mining; Hospital Information Systems;
Web
Services;
Decision
Support
System;
Vital
Risk
Scoring.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The aim of the project is to create an easy to use
intensive care unit automation software and decision support
system. The software also has capabilities for integrating
ICU medical devices and Hospital Information System
(HIS).
All of the brands that work intensively in this market in
Turkey are foreign companies. Major brands; GE, Siemens,
EvoluCare, Drager, IMD (MetaVision) are companies. All
of them are serving only 10% of intensive care units in our
country. The automation is not available by 90% of the
intensive care unit because of the high price of the products
and the stipulating of the firms to use their own brands.
The outline of this project could be summarized as
follows:
-An electronic data collection device is used for collecting
data from the Hospital’s Intensive Care (IC) Division.
-A Web Based Software is implemented for Automation.
Apachi, Sofa, Rifle Scoring Techniques are implemented for
monitoring current status of IC Division Patients.
-Clustering and Classification Techniques are used for
predicting patient’s future state.
-A mobile Web application was developed for providing
mobile access to our system.
The software will use vital patient information, such as
the one obtained from mechanical ventilator, etc., for
clinical research and also will collect information for future
data mining analysis.
Using digitally collected data will decrease errors
instead of using manually entered data. Intensive Care Unit
staff physicians and nurses will be able to access the
database which contains fresh information gathered from
related devices.
Through Risk Identification and Data Mining Decision
Support System, which use techniques to gather information
prior to a possible critical situation, physicians are informed
on and can be guided in their type of treatment based on
these Vıtal Operations. Because of this, it is a positive 
development in the patient’s health status.
II.
RELATED WORK
The main reference projects related to our work are
described below.
Artificial Neural Networks, which are one example of
the Data Mining algorithms, showed successful results in
the ICU [1].
The ICU data center stores in the database
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

clean and reliable data for medical studies. The Multi-
parameter Intelligent Monitoring in Intensive Care II
(MIMIC-II) study consisted of almost 25,000 intensive care
unit stays. It established a resource for research, supporting
a diverse range of analytic studies, clinical decision-rule
development, and electronic tool development [2].
Intensive Care Information System Impacts (ICSI)
enable intensive care physicians and staff to use the system
in a more meaningful way for better patient care. This study
provides a better understanding and greater insight into the
effectiveness
of ICIS
in
improving
patient
care
and
decreasing health care expense [3].
The PDMS innovation has been selected in 2003 has
been configured in 2004 and has been in use since 2005 [4].
Large-scale employees are held daily in intensive care units
due to the workload required to carry out the regular work
plan. It has been observed that a lot of time is wasted for
other administrative work. Therefore, we emphasize the
importance of a data management system that is easy to
control [5].
Successful results for intensive care unit have been
observed in real-time by using of the support vector
regression
algorithm
in
this
study.
The
implemented
interfaces are also included in the study and shed light on
our project [6].
Business
planning,
management,
monitoring,
and
decision support systems in Intensive Care have provided
successful results [7].
The
results
have
been
obtained
for
renovation
forecasting with data from the ICU data mining algorithms
(Decision Tree Learning, First Order Random Forests,
Naive Bayesian networks and Tree-Augmented Naive
Bayesian networks) and also, they have been compared [8].
Consisting of clean data from the device and formed by
the continuous flow of current data, intensive care unit’s
data-intensive
data
mining
and
artificial
intelligence
algorithms constitute an important input to yield successful
results. This study has highlighted that the use of these
algorithms in the intensive care unit of a smart system
appears to play an important role in the quality of patient
care observed [9].
The study SANDS_A demonstrates the feasibility of the
architecture, which is a Service-oriented Architecture for the
National Health Information Networks for clinical decision
support. Service-oriented Architecture is used for the
Decision Support System [10].
This article shows that the information platform assists
in the presentation of user queries from the services in order
to form individualized suggestions. A service-oriented
architecture model is used that calculates asynchronous
duties, modularity and flexibility. It is shown that this study
is used to discover and process data in Web for transforming
into knowledge [11].
In another study, a service-oriented architecture is used
for communication with each other; XML, Service-Oriented
Architecture
Protocol
and
Web-Service
Description
Language communication protocols are used for supplying
Web
services
functionalities.
This
paper
gives
a
comprehensive account on improving the software system
for Clinical Decision Support by using Health Level Seven.
By means of this architecture, the implementation of rule
based CDSS will be developed [12].
III.
BACKGROUND
Requirements Analysis, Functional and non-functional
requirements were determined. The requirements analysis
report has been prepared in accordance with the IEEE 830
standard.
The
design
modeling
part
of the
"Unified
Modeling Language" has been using. The design modeled
User Scenarios (Use-Case diagram) and class / object
diagrams have been drawn. To create the database, we
designed the Entity Relationship Diagram. SOA (service-
oriented / based architecture) was drawn on the diagram.
A. Device Integration
The serial interface of the Ethernet enables a conversion
between the hardware units developed in this project. To use
in intensive care units, a device that transfers data to the
snapshot automation software is developed and designed.
This data can be accessed instantly via any mobile or fixed
devices. Our software is based on the V model process and
collects this data for the decision support system. The
patients are able to start the required device sterilization
process with the appropriate touch interface.
Figure 1. Hospital System View
This unit supports more than one medical device
connection and has a buffer against communication failure
(Figure 1).
B. ICA-DSS Operation Steps
- Requirements Analysis- At this stage, all standards and
requirements
(interfaces,
security
and
performance
requirements) were defined by physicians in team meetings.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

The documentation with the standards defined and all the
requirements has been prepared.
- Data Transferred to The Intensive Care Device- This
module’s task is to obtain real-time data transfer to the
database through the front of the devices formed in the
design stage.
Figure 2. Interaction Modules
-
Development
of
Intensive
Care
Patient
Tracking
Application Process- Patient registration and other patient
medical information are connected by Web-Based Software.
This service is used with both the Web-Based Software
Module and Mobile Web Module. It increases the security
of the system and provides the ability to support the new
platform.
- Risk Identification and Development of Decision Support
System- It includes patient demographics, laboratory results,
diagnostic and treatment data, such as results formed an
important
part
of
parameters
to
be
investigated.
Subsequently, data mining literature review on the use of
algorithms provided a vision for the work to be done.
- Development of Mobile Web Applications- The main task
was to improve the visual interface on the stage of the
Mobile Web application. Therefore, we considered the ease
of use of mobile devices and requirements analysis to
provide all of the components obtained at the design stage.
- Integration and Testing of Software Modules- The project
team worked together in an integrated process, analyzing the
potential problems and testing again
- Pilot Application and User Tests- The project team
worked together in the testing process, analyzing the
potential problems and testing again.
IV. PROPOSED SOLUTION
Our project provides the ability for medical devices used
in a system to instantly record patient data from the intensive
care unit. Patient data from intensive care units in Turkey is
not stored in the electronic media. It is a big disadvantage in
terms of operation and clinical research. Patient data can be
often taken automatically by the system software modules.
Data from patients participating in clinical trials can be
accessed in batches, in seconds.
ICA-DSS hospital is the primary recording system
"Hospital
Information
Management
System"
able
to
communicate with the HL7 protocol. Another factor is that it
enables private cloud computing innovation of our project
(Private Cloud Computing) to be used.
The goals of our project are listed as the following list;
•
decreasing the error accrued by reducing the manual
entry of the patient records
•
storing the data obtained from the medical instruments
automatically.
•
creating a new database which is capable for clinical
researches.
•
reducing the diagnosis and treatment time
•
reducing the duration of hospitalization in intensive care
unit
•
reducing the mortality and morbidity rates.
There are 8 parameters for diagnosis Sepsis. A clinical
decision support system is introduced by analyzing data with
these parameters. By using this system the mortility rate is
predicted to be reduced by 50%.
The
project,
Knowledge
Discovery
in
Databases
(Knowledge Discovery in Databases - KDD) steps (Problem
Definition, Data Processing, Data Mining and Information
Report) was monitored.
Clustering, Data Mining Association Rules such as
classification and analysis methods were used. Neural
network
classification
algorithms,
decision
trees
and
Bayesian, Association Rules Apriori and Fp-Growth for the
analysis, clustering algorithm was also planned to be used as
SOM and K-means ++. APACHE, SOFA, ICU and RIFLE
were used as scoring standards. In addition, Decision
Support Systems for solving complex problems of ensuring
the effective use of data and models were created. Thus, this
system was able to identify situations that could occur in
advance, use instant analysis capabilities and provide
advanced communications capabilities.
Figure 3. An example interface of ICU-CDSS
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Hygiene,
Activity,
Excretion,
Security,
Infusion,
Neurovascular, Rubbing and Scratching, Vital, Ventilator,
Neurology and other topics are elaborated in our project.
Figure 3 shows an example interface for all patients with the
status of these topics.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In our country, healthcare cost takes up a good part of
our country's budget because of the importance of human
health. Another important fact is that there is too much
dependence on foreign countries for medical expenses. In
addition to the software, hospital devices also come from
abroad. The software does not contain any Data Mining
algorithms
for
Decision
Support
Systems
which
help
physicians and the nurses.
ICU-CDSS is developed in the scope of our project as a
multi-disciplined study. Using digitally collected data will
help decrease errors compared to using manually entered
data. Intensive Care Unit staff physicians and nurses will be
able to access the database which contains recent information
gathered from related devices. Thus, our country will have a
large data warehouse for future medical research.
ICU-CDSS software collects vital information from the
medical equipment and makes it available for the needs of
medical doctors and the nurses of the ICU via Web based
and mobile interfaces. The collected data could also be easily
accessed immediately, using the query tools for research
purposes by the authorized physicians. The forms which
were formerly filled manually are archived and will be able
to get reported digitally. Also, a data mining assisted
decision support system is developed and used. The Decision
Support System will enable the users to make suggestions to
the physicians in order to detect critical states before they
happen. The appropriate sizes ICU Automation devices will
be sterilized and will allow easy data input by the side of the
patient bed. Doctors and nurses will be able to use the system
within the authorities granted to their roles.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Thanks to Prof. Dr. Necati Gökmen who supervised and
allowed us to work at ICU in Dokuz Eylül University
Hospital.
REFERENCES
[1]
Castellanos, I., Schüttler, J., Prokosch, H.,U., Bürkle, T., Does
introduction of a Patient Data Management System (PDMS)
improve the financial situation of an intensive care unit? (2013).
[2]
Saeed M., Villarroel M., Reisner, A.,T., Clifford G., Lehman L.,W.,
Moody, G., Heldt T., Kyaw, T., H., Moody, B., Mark, R.,G.,
“Multiparameter
Intelligent
Monitoring
in
Intensive
Care
II
(MIMIC-II)”, A public-Access Intensive Care Unit Database, 2011
[3]
Ehteshami A., Sadoughi, F., Ahmadi, M., Kashefi, P.,Intensive
Care Information System Impacts, 2013.
[4]
Nelwan, SP., Dam, TB.,V., Meij, SH., Putten, NHJJ V.,D.,
“Implementation and Use of a Patient Data Management System in
the Intensive Care Unit”, A Two-Year Experience, 2007.
[5]
Matlakala,
M.,C.,
Bezuidenhout,
M.,C.,
Botha,
A.,D.,H.,
Challenges encountered by critical care unit managers in the large
intensive care units, 2014.
[6]
Huang G., He, J., Cao, J., Qiao, Z., Steyn, M., Taraporewalla, K., A
Real-Time Abnormality Detection System for Intensive Care
Management, 2013.
[7]
Lundgrén-Lainel, H., Kontio, E., Perttilä, J., Korvenranta, J.,
Forsström, J., Salanterä, S., “Managing daily intensive care
activities”, An observational study concerning ad hoc decision
making of charge nurses and intensivists, 2011.
[8]
Guiza, F., Fierens, D., Ramon, J., Blockeel, H., Bruynooghe, M.,
Meyfroid, G., Berghe, G.,V.,D.,
Predictive Data Mining in
Intensive Care, 2006.
[9]
Hanson, C.,W., Marshall, B.,E., Artificial intelligence applications
in the intensive care unit, 2001.
[10] J BioInf - SANDS_A service-oriented architecture for clinical
decision support in a National Health Information Network, 2008.
[11] Wanner,
Leo,
Harald
Bosch, Nadjet Bouayad-Agha,
Gerard
Casamayor, Thomas Ertl, Désirée Hilbring, and others, ‘Getting the
Environmental Information across: From the Web to the User’,
2014.
[12] Fehre, K, and K P Adlassing, Service Oriented Arden-Syntax-
Based Clinical Decision Support. Ehealth 2011, Health Informatics,
2011
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

