Semantic Workflow Adaption in Support of Workflow Diversity 
 
Gregor Grambow and Roy Oberhauser 
Computer Science Dept. 
Aalen University 
Aalen, Germany 
{gregor.grambow, roy.oberhauser}@htw-aalen.de 
Manfred Reichert 
Institute for Databases and Information Systems 
Ulm University 
Ulm, Germany 
manfred.reichert@uni-ulm.de
 
 
Abstract — The application of business process execution and 
guidance to environments with highly dynamic situations and 
workflow diversity is hindered by rigid predefined workflow 
models. Software engineering environments constitute an acute 
example where developers could benefit from automated 
workflow guidance if the workflows were made sufficiently 
concrete and conformant to actual situations. A context-aware 
software engineering environment was developed utilizing 
semantic processing and situational method engineering to 
automatically adapt workflows utilizing an adaptive process-
aware information system. Workflows are constructed via 
context knowledge congruent to the current situation. 
Preliminary results suggest this technique can be beneficial in 
addressing high workflow diversity while providing useable 
guidance and reducing workflow modeling effort. 
Keywords- application of semantic processing; domain-
oriented semantic applications; automated workflow adaptation; 
situational method engineering; process-aware information 
systems; software engineering environments 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Business process management (BPM) and automated 
human process guidance have been shown to be beneficial in 
various 
industries 
[10][15]. 
However, 
BPMs 
often 
prerequisite and rigid model makes its application in highly 
dynamic and possibly evolving domains with diverse 
workflows, such as software engineering (SE), difficult. SE 
has multiform and divergent process models, unique 
projects, multifarious issues, a creative and intellectual 
process, and collaborative team interactions, all of which 
affect workflow models. These challenges have hitherto 
hindered automated concrete process guidance and often 
relegated processes to generalized and rather abstract process 
models (Open Unified Process, VM-XT, etc.) with inanimate 
documentation for guidance. Manual project-specific process 
model tailoring is typically done via documentation without 
investing in automated workflow guidance. Although 
automated workflows could assist overburdened software 
engineers by providing orientation and guidance for 
problems, guidance that does not coincide with the reality of 
the situation must be ignored and may cause the entire 
system to be mistrusted. Thus, adaption and pertinence to the 
dynamic and diverse SE situations is requisite for adoption 
of automated workflow guidance in SE environments 
(SEEs). 
While classical application techniques may lend 
themselves to foreseeable common workflows with 
conformant sequences (intrinsic workflows), workflow 
integration for non-generalized diverse workflows that are 
external to the process model (extrinsic) presents a 
challenge. Considering SE, guidance is desirable for issues 
such as specialized refactoring, fixing bugs, etc., yet it is 
generally not feasible to pre-model workflows for SE issue 
processing, since SE issue types can vary greatly (tool 
problems, 
component 
versioning, 
merge 
problems, 
documentation inconsistencies, etc.). Either one complex 
workflow model with many branches is necessary that takes 
all cases into account, or many workflow variants need to be 
modeled, adapted, and maintained for such dynamic 
environments. The associated exorbitant expenditures thus 
limit workflow usage to well-known common sequences as 
typically seen with industrial BPM usage. 
To briefly illustrate, SE issues that are not modeled in the 
standard process flow of defined SE processes (such as 
OpenUP [19] and VM-XT [25]) include bug fixing, 
refactoring, technology swapping, or infrastructural issues. 
Since there are so many different kinds of issues with 
ambiguous and subjective delineation, it is difficult and 
burdensome to universally and correctly model them in 
advance for acceptability and practicality. Many tasks may 
appear in multiple issues but are not necessarily required, 
bloating different SE issue workflows with many conditional 
tasks if pre-modeled. Figure 1 shows such a workflow just 
for bug fixing which is explained in the following. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Example of pre-modeled workflow for bug fixing 
158
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

The above workflow contains over 30 activities, and the 
snippet shows only different reviewing tasks from which one 
is chosen due to different project parameters (risk, urgency). 
Thereafter, it loops back if the post-review code or document 
rework was insufficient. The subsequent tasks deal with 
documenting the changes. Again, due to different project 
parameters the appropriate task has to be chosen, whereby 
none, one, or both of the tasks may be applicable. 
The resulting workflow problems for environments such 
as SE are first that the exorbitant cost of modeling diverse 
workflows results in the absence of extrinsic workflow 
models and subsequently automated guidance for these 
types, yet these unique cases are often the ones where 
guidance is most desirable. Second, rigid, pre-defined 
workflow models are limited in their adaptability, thus the 
workflows become situationally irrelevant and are thus 
ignored. Third, entwining the complex modeling of 
situational property influences (as risk or urgency) on 
workflows within the workflows themselves incorporates an 
implicit modeling that unduly increases their complexity and 
makes correct maintenance difficult. The cognitive effort 
required to create and maintain large process models 
syntactically 
can 
lower 
the 
attention 
towards 
the 
incorporated semantic problem-oriented content.  
Previous work has described a holistic approach that 
includes semantic technologies for SE lifecycles [18] and 
context-awareness [16], while this work focuses on applying 
context-awareness 
utilizing 
semantic 
processing 
and 
situational method engineering [22] for automatically 
adapting workflows in a process-aware information system. 
Support is provided for both intrinsic workflows, denoting 
workflows pre-modeled in archetype SE processes, and 
extrinsic workflows, indicating sets of activities not modeled 
in workflows of those archetype processes. The modeling of 
contextual property influences is transferred from the 
workflows themselves to an ontology, simplifying the 
modeling and making property effects explicit. Dynamic on-
the-fly workflow generation and adaptation using contextual 
knowledge for a large set of diverse workflow variants is 
thus supported, enabling pertinent workflow guidance for 
workers in such environments. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: the 
solution approach is described in Section II. In Section III, 
the realization is portrayed and then evaluated in Section IV. 
Related work is discussed in Section V, followed by the 
conclusion. 
II. 
SOLUTION APPROACH 
As a background to the solution approach, the 
incorporated frameworks that affected the environment and 
influenced the solution will first be discussed. 
A. Software Engineering Environment 
CoSEEEK 
(Context-aware 
Software 
Engineering 
Environment Event-driven frameworK) [16] consists of a 
hybrid semantic computing approach towards improved 
context-aware SEEs. The conceptual architecture is shown in 
Figure 2. Event Extraction consists of SE Tool sensor events 
(e.g., creation of a certain source code file) that are acquired 
and then stored in an XML Tuple Space, where it may 
optionally be annotated with relevant contextual information 
(e.g., link to a requirement for traceability). Event Processing 
detects higher-level events. This may result in workflow 
adjustment (e.g., according to the type of source code file, an 
activity Implement Solution or Implement Test may be 
chosen), and the software engineer is informed of a change 
in tasks via process management in their IDE (Integrated 
Development Environment). The Context Module includes 
an ontology and reasoner.  
 
SE Tools
Event Extraction
Process Management
Artifacts
Event Processing
Context Module
XML Tuple Space
 
Figure 2.  CoSEEEK conceptual architecture 
Process Management requires an adaptable process-
aware information system due to the dynamic nature of the 
problem the current approach seeks to address. Therefore the 
AristaFlow BPM suite (formerly ADEPT2) [3] was chosen 
for its realization. It allows authorized agents to dynamically 
adapt and evolve the structure of process models during 
runtime. Such dynamic process changes do not lead to an 
unstable system behavior, i.e., none of the guarantees 
achieved by formal checks at build-time are violated due to 
the dynamic change at runtime. Correctness is ensured in 
two stages. First, structural and behavioral soundness of the 
modified process model is guaranteed independent from 
whether or not the change is applied at the process instance 
level. Second, when performing structural schema changes at 
the process instance level, this must not lead to inconsistent 
or erroneous process states afterwards. AristaFlow applies 
well-elaborated correctness principles in this context [23]. 
Despite its comprehensive support for dynamic process 
changes, ADEPT2 has not considered automated workflow 
adaptations.  
CoSEEEK provides comprehensive automated process 
support to address the aforementioned challenges. That 
implies workflows belonging to SE processes as well as 
workflows dealing with SE issues that are not modeled in 
those processes. While the automated support for intrinsic 
workflows is described in [17], the support for extrinsic 
workflows and the approach for their semantic problem-
oriented modeling utilizing situational method engineering is 
the focus of this paper. 
B. Application of Situational Method Engineering 
Situational method engineering adapts generic methods 
to the actual situation of a project. This is done based on 
different influence factors called process properties which 
capture the impact of the current situation, and product 
properties which realize the impact of the product currently 
being processed (for this context the type of component, e.g., 
159
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

a GUI or database component). To strike a balance between 
rigidly pre-modeled workflows and no process guidance, the 
idea is to have a basic workflow for each case that is then 
dynamically extended with activities matching the current 
situation. The construction of the workflows utilizes a case 
base as well as a method repository. The case base contains a 
workflow skeleton for each different case. This workflow 
only contains the absolutely fundamental activities that are 
always executed for that case. The method repository 
contains all further activities whose execution is possible 
according to the case. To be able to choose the appropriate 
activities for the current artifact and situation, the activities 
are connected to properties that realize product and process 
properties of situational method engineering.  
Each SE issue, such as refactoring or bug fixing, is 
mapped to exactly one case relating to exactly one workflow 
skeleton. To realize a pre-selection of activities (e.g., Create 
Branch or Code Review) which semantically match an issue, 
the issue is connected to the activity via an n-m relation. The 
activities are in turn connected to properties specifying the 
dependencies among them. The selection of an activity can 
depend on various process as well as product properties. To 
model the characteristic of an issue leading to the selection 
of concrete activities, the issue is connected to various 
properties. The properties have a computed value indicating 
the degree in which they apply to the current situation. An 
example for a property would be ‘risk’ with a value of ‘very 
high’, marking that issue as a very high-risk issue. Utilizing 
the connection of activity and property, selection rules for 
activities based on the values of the properties can be 
specified. 
C. Information Gathering 
To leverage the automatic support for extrinsic 
workflows, the computation of the values of the properties is 
a key factor. The approach presented in this paper unifies 
process and product properties in the concept of the property, 
which can be influenced by a wide range of factors. The 
integration of different modules and applications and the 
unification of various project areas in CoSEEEK enable 
automatic computation of the values comprising context 
knowledge. On the one hand, tool integration can provide 
meaningful information about the artifact that is processed in 
the current case. For example, if the artifact is a source code 
file, static code analysis tools such as PMD can be used to 
execute various measurements on that file, revealing various 
potential problems. If a high coupling factor was detected, 
this would raise the product property ‘risk’ associated to that 
file. On the other hand, the integration of various project 
areas like resource planning entails context knowledge about 
the entire development process. An example would be the 
raising of the property ‘risk’ if the person processing the 
current case is a junior engineer. 
Both of these aspects deal with implicit information 
gathering. Since not all aspects of a case are necessarily 
covered by implicit information, and not all options for 
gaining knowledge about the case are always present, the 
system also utilizes explicit information gathering from the 
user processing the case. To enable and encourage the user to 
provide 
meaningful 
information, 
a 
simple 
response 
mechanism is integrated into the CoSEEEK GUI (to be 
shown in the next section). Via this mechanism, the user can 
directly influence process as well as product properties. To 
keep the number of adjustable parameters rather small, the 
concept of a product category was introduced. The product 
category unites the product properties in a pre-specified way. 
An example for this would be a database component versus a 
GUI component: the database component is likely to have 
more dependencies, whereas the GUI component presumably 
has more direct user impact. The influence of the product 
categories on the different properties is specified in advance 
and can be adapted to fit various projects. Selected process 
properties can be set directly. The computation of all other 
influences on the properties is explained in the following 
section. 
D. Activity selection and sequencing 
To be able to dynamically build up the workflow for an 
SE issue, after completing the computation of the property 
values activities have to be selected and placed in the correct 
order. This is done utilizing the connection between 
properties and activities. An activity can depend on one or 
more properties. Examples include selection rules such as: 
• ‘Choose activity code inspection if risk is very high and 
criticality is high and urgency is low’ or  
• ‘Choose activity code review if risk is high and 
criticality is high’. 
The selection of activities results in an unordered list of 
activities that have to be correctly sequenced and inserted 
into the workflow skeleton. To guarantee this, CoSEEEK 
uses a set of simple semantic constraints. These constraints 
do not only enforce which activities are permitted in a 
particular workflow, but also determine their correct 
ordering. A predefined sequencing of the activities is 
required since the workflow is built up at the beginning of its 
execution. That implies that each of the activities must have 
a binary relation to all other activities so that every possible 
set of activities can be sequenced. For the time being, the 
approach presented requires a proper specification of these 
constraints and only deals with linear workflows. Future 
work will concentrate on constraints that are more complex 
and the integration of workflow patterns. Table I enumerates 
the constraints currently used.  
TABLE I.  
ACTIVITY SEQUENCING CONSTRAINTS 
Constraint 
Meaning 
X before Y 
if X and Y are present, X should appear before Y 
X after Y 
if X and Y are present, X should appear after Y 
required after 
if Y is present X must also be present, after Y 
required before 
if Y is present X must also be present, before Y 
mutual exclusion 
if X is present the presence of Y is prohibited 
 
Structural integrity of the workflows is guaranteed based 
on the built-in mechanisms of AristaFlow, which imply 
correctness checks for each change operation applied to the 
workflow as discussed in [3]. 
160
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

E. Concrete Procedure 
The concrete procedure for the handling of an SE issue in 
the presented approach is as follows. As entry point for the 
workflow there is an event in the framework indicating that 
an SE issue is assigned to a user. This event can come from 
various sources. Examples include the assignment of an SE 
issue to a person in a bug tracker system or the manual 
triggering by a user via the GUI. The next step is the 
determination of a case for that issue like ‘Bug fixing’ or 
‘Refactoring’. Depending on the origin of the event, this can 
be done implicitly or explicitly by the user. 
When the case is specified, the workflow starts for the 
user using the workflow skeleton assigned to that case, as 
does the contextual information-gathering phase for the 
properties of the case. 
After having determined the properties for the case, the 
additional activities matching the current situation and 
product are selected. This set of activities is then checked for 
integrity and correctly sequenced utilizing semantic 
constraints. Subsequently, the activities are integrated into 
the running process instance.  
If one or more of the properties change during the 
execution of the workflow, the prospective activities are 
deleted (if still possible) and a new sequence of activities is 
computed for the rest of the workflow. 
III. 
TECHNICAL REALIZATION 
This section describes the concrete implementation of the 
SE issue process explained in the preceding section.  
All communication between the modules is performed 
using an XML implementation of the Tuple Space paradigm 
[6] on top of the eXist XML database [5] for event storage 
and Apache CXF for web service communication. To enable 
CoSEEEK to receive events from external SE tools, the 
Hackystat framework [8] is used, which provides a rich set 
of sensors for various applications. In the concrete case, the 
bug tracker Mantis is used in conjunction with a sensor that 
generates an event when an SE issue is assigned to a person. 
That event contains information about the kind of issue for 
case selection and about the person. In case of a real ad hoc 
issue that is not recorded in a bug tracker, the event for 
instantiation of an issue workflow can be triggered from the 
GUI as well, requiring the user to select a case manually.  
The event is then automatically received by the process 
module which instantiates a skeleton workflow based on the 
process template relating to the selected case. The activity 
components of AristaFlow for these workflows are 
customized to communicate over the Tuple Space and thus 
enable user interaction during the execution of each task. The 
first task of each SE issue is ‘Analyze Issue’ to let the user 
gain knowledge about the issue and provide information 
about process and product properties to the system via the 
GUI. The GUI is a lightweight web interface developed in 
PHP that can be executed in a web browser as well as 
preferably directly in the users IDE. Figure 3 shows the GUI 
enabling the user to directly set process properties and to 
choose a product category that affects product properties. On 
the lower part of the GUI, the current task is shown as well 
as one possible upcoming task from other workflows the user 
is working in. In that way, task switching is facilitated 
without subjecting the user to information overload showing 
all available tasks of all open workflows. Via the dropdown 
list at the bottom of the GUI, the user can switch between 
available tasks for the case when the pre-selection is 
inappropriate. 
The Context module has three main responsibilities: it 
realizes the case base, the method repository, and contains 
context 
information 
about 
the 
entire 
project. 
This 
information is stored in an OWL-DL [28] ontology to unify 
the project knowledge and enable reasoning over it. The use 
of 
an ontology 
reduces 
portability, 
flexibility 
and 
information sharing problems that are often coupled to 
relational databases. Additionally, ontologies facilitate 
extensibility since they are, in contrast to relational 
databases, based on an open world assumption and thus 
allow the modeling of incomplete knowledge. To 
programmatically access the ontology, the Jena API [13] is 
used within the Context Module. 
 
 
Figure 3.  GUI for property acquisition 
The adaptation of the running instances works as follows: 
The skeleton process is instantiated, offering the user the 
aforementioned ‘Analyze Issue’ task to provide information. 
The information from the user is encapsulated in an event 
that is received by the process module. The process module 
queries the context module, which provides the set of 
activities to be inserted in the process instance and performs 
the adaptation. Thus, the process is already aligned to the 
current situation and product when the user continues. 
A. Context Module  
This subsection describes how the context module 
utilizes the ontology to derive property values and select 
appropriate activities. To leverage real contextual-awareness, 
the ontology features various concepts for different areas of a 
project. These are semantic enhancements to process 
management utilized for intrinsic workflows, quality 
management, project staffing, or traceability. For process 
management the concepts of Activity, Workflow, Assignment, 
and AtomicTask are used to enrich processes, activities, and 
tasks with semantic information. Quality management 
features the concepts of the Metric, Measure, Problem, Risk, 
Severity and KPI (key performance indicator) to incorporate 
161
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

and manage quality aspects in the project context. The 
concepts of Person, Team, Role, Effort, SkillLevel and Tool 
are integrated to connect project staffing with other parts of 
the project. To further integrate all project areas and facilitate 
a comprehensive end-to-end traceability the concepts of Tag 
and Event can be connected and used in conjunction with all 
other concepts. Due to space limitations, only the concepts 
directly relevant to the discussion of extrinsic workflows are 
explained. Figure 4 illustrates the relating classes in the 
ontology. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Classes in the Ontology 
To predefine the different SE issues, a set of template 
classes has been defined with their skeleton workflows and 
activities as well as the properties applying to them. Each 
IssueTemplate is connected to a WorkflowTemplate that 
stores the information about the concrete process template in 
AristaFlow and is in turn connected to multiple 
ActivityTemplates. These define the set of possible Activities 
that can be inserted in the Workflow of that issue. The 
IssueTemplate is also connected to one or more 
PropertyTemplates, yielding the capability to specify not 
only a unique set of Activities for each Issue, but also a 
unique set of Properties with a unique relation to the 
Activities. 
When a new SE Issue is instantiated, it derives the 
Workflow 
and 
the 
Properties 
from 
its 
associated 
IssueTemplate. Each Property holds a value indicating how 
much this Property applies to the current situation. These 
values can be influenced by various factors that are also 
defined by the PropertyTemplate. Figure 5 exemplifies three 
different kinds of influences that are currently used. Future 
work will include the integration of further concepts of the 
ontology influencing the Properties as well as extending the 
ontology to further leverage the context knowledge available 
to CoSEEEK. 
The ProductCategory specified in the GUI has a direct 
influence on the product Properties. Furthermore, there can 
be Problems relating to the processed Artifact indicated by 
violations of metrics. The SkillLevel of the Person dealing 
with the SE Issue serves as example for an influence on the 
process properties here. There are four possible relations 
between entities affecting the Properties and the Properties 
capturing strong and weak negative as well as positive 
impacts (where Figure 5 only shows the weak ones, 
‘enhances’ and ‘deteriorates’). These are all used to compute 
the values of the Properties. The values are initialized with 
‘0 (neutral)’ and incremented / decremented by one or two 
based on the relations to the different influences. The values 
are limited to a range from ‘-2 (very low)’ to ‘2 (very high)’, 
thus representing five possible states for the degree to which 
the property applies to the current situation. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Influences on Properties 
To select appropriate Activities according to the current 
properties, six possible connections are utilized. These are 
‘weaklyDependsOn’, 
‘stronglyDependsOn’ 
and 
‘dependsOn’, meaning the Activity is suitable if the value of 
the Property is ‘1 (high)’ or ‘2 (very high)’, or just positive 
and the other three connections for negative values (for 
simplicity, Figure 4 only shows ‘dependsOn’). Each Activity 
can be connected to multiple Properties. Based on an Issue, 
for each attributed ActivityTemplate a SPARQL query is 
dynamically generated which returns the corresponding 
Activity if the Properties of the current situation match. 
Listing 1 shows such a query for an Activity ‘act’ that is 
based on an ActivityTemplate ‘at’ and depends on two 
different Properties ‘prop1’ and ‘prop2’ which are, in turn, 
based on PropertyTemplates ‘pt1’ and ‘pt2’. 
 
Listing 1 Activity selection SPARQL query 
PREFIX project:  
<http://www.htw-aalen.de/coseeek/context.owl#> 
SELECT ?act 
WHERE { 
?act project:basedOnActivityTemplate ?at. 
?at project:title "AT_CodeReview". 
?issue project:title "CodeFixRequired". 
?issue project:hasProperty ?prop. 
 
?prop project:basedOnPropertyTemplate ?pt. 
?at project:weaklyDependsOn ?pt. 
?prop project:weight "1". 
?issue project:hasProperty ?prop2. 
?prop2 project:basedOnPropertyTemplate ?pt2. 
?at project:stronglyDependsOn ?pt2. 
?prop2 project:weight "2".} 
 
Lastly, the semantic constraints are mapped to 
connections between ActivityTemplates (for simplicity, 
Figure 4 only shows ‘mutualExclusion’). To guarantee 
semantic correctness, the algorithm first checks if all 
required activities are in place or if a mutual exclusion 
constraint is violated. Utilizing the before / after constraints, 
the sequencing is finally done via a simple sorting of the list 
of activities. For simplicity, an abstraction from workflow 
patterns such as loops or decisions is made here. 
162
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

The significance of this contribution is on the one hand 
that SE issue workflows that are extrinsic to archetype SE 
processes are not only explicitly modeled, but also 
dynamically adapted to the current issue and situation based 
on various properties derived from the current product, the 
context, and the user. Thus, it is possible to provide 
situational and tailored support and guidance for software 
engineers processing SE issues. On the other hand, the 
proposed approach shows promise for improvement and 
simplification of process definition activities for extrinsic 
workflows. The initial effort to define all the activities, 
issues, properties, and skeleton workflows may not be less 
than predefining huge workflows for the issues, but the reuse 
of the different concepts is furthered. Thereafter the creation 
of new issues is simplified since they only need to be 
connected to activities they should contain that are later 
automatically inserted to match the current situation. Yet the 
main advantage is of a semantic nature: the process of issue 
creation is much more problem-oriented using the concepts 
in the ontology versus creating immense process models. 
The process engineer can concentrate on activities matching 
the properties of different situations rather than investing 
cognitive effort in the creation of huge rigid process models 
matching every possible situation. Likewise, the analysis of 
issues allows simple queries to the ontology returning 
problem-oriented knowledge such as ‘Which activities apply 
to which issues’ or ‘Which activities are applied for high risk 
time critical situations’.  
IV. 
EVALUATION 
This section illustrates the advantages of the proposed 
approach via a synthetic but concrete practical scenario 
generated in a lab environment to ascertain scalability and 
performance of the initial approach using different 
measurements. It remains difficult to prove the applicability 
of the approach for the majority of real world SE use cases, 
thus future work will include practical case studies utilizing 
CoSEEEK with industrial partners of the research project. 
Additionally, CoSEEEK is in use by the CoSEEEK 
development team itself for the development of CoSEEEK. 
A. Scenario Solved 
The concrete scenario considered shows two possible 
generated workflows for the bug fix issue presented in 
Section I. For this scenario, a set of properties has been 
defined as well as activities and their dependencies on the 
properties. The first case deals with a fix of a GUI 
component. That component is assumed to be part of a 
simple screen not often used by customers. The second case 
deals with a database component. The fix is assumed to have 
an impact on multiple tables in the database. Table II depicts 
the chosen properties for the cases as well as the values that 
were chosen for them by the developer via the CoSEEEK 
web GUI. It is assumed that no other influences exist for the 
properties.The chosen values lead to the selection of 
different activities for the different workflows. For instance, 
due to the direct user impact of the GUI component, the 
activity Document in Patch/Release Change Log has been 
chosen as illustrated in Figure 6 (the generated workflow has 
been rearranged for better readability). 
TABLE II.  
EXAMPLE SME PROPERTIES OF CASES 
 
Component 
GUI (Case 1) DB (Case 2) 
Product 
criticality
o 
+
Properties 
user impact 
++ 
o 
 
dependencies 
- 
+ 
 
complexity 
o 
+ 
 
risk 
o 
+ 
Process 
risk 
- 
o 
Properties 
urgency 
o 
- 
 
complexity 
- 
+ 
 
dependencies 
o 
o 
 
Due to the risk and complexity of the database 
component and the task relating to it, the creation of a 
separate branch as well as a code review and the explicit 
check for dependencies have been prescribed as depicted 
Figure 7. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Example Workflow GUI Component 
 
Figure 7.  Example Workflow Database Component 
Ignoring the abstraction from workflow patterns, they are 
nevertheless much simpler than the pre-modeled example 
mentioned in the Problem Scenario section. This automated 
adaption thus supports workflow diversity, reducing 
complexity and maintenance compared to all-encompassing 
models. The scenario illustrates the usefulness of the 
guidance via the chosen activities by these two considerable 
different workflows containing tasks matching the situation 
as well as the processed artifact. Future case studies will be 
used to further evaluate the usefulness of the workflows and 
to refine the properties and their relation to the activities. 
B. Performance Measurement 
Due to space limitations, only the area of the concept that 
is likely to have the greatest performance impact was 
selected for measurement. This is the sequencing of the 
concrete activities based on the constraints in the context 
module. For performance testing, the test system consisted of 
an AMD dual core Opteron 2.4 GHz processor, 3.2GB 
RAM, Windows XP Pro SP3, and Java Runtime 
Environment 1.5.0_20. All measurements were executed five 
times consecutively using the average of the last three 
measurements. 
The sequencing of the activities is separated into two 
parts to yield better runtime performance: when a new SE 
issue is defined via the issue template or the number of the 
attributed activity templates changes, an indexing procedure 
is started. This procedure uses the ‘after’, ‘before’, 
‘requiredAfter’, and ‘requiredBefore’ constraints to generate 
163
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

a simple index for all activity templates for one issue 
template. The index is later used for the concretely selected 
activities of an issue to accelerate the sequencing. For the 
measurement, it is assumed that half of the activities that are 
possible for one issue have been selected. Table III depicts 
the measured total values for indexing and sequencing for 
different numbers of activities. The values show that after the 
indexing, which happens usually only once after the 
definition of an issue type, the sequencing is not resource-
intensive. 
TABLE III.  
CONTEXT MODULE LATENCY MEASUREMENTS 
Number of activity 
templates per issue 
Indexing 
latency (ms) 
Number of 
activities per issue 
Sequencing 
latency (ms) 
10 
5 
5 
0 
50 
15 
25 
0 
100 
41 
50 
7 
500 
890 
250 
11 
1000 
3532 
500 
15 
 
As can be seen from the plain increase of computation 
times, the results show adequate performance for the 
CoSEEEK approach. 
V. 
RELATED WORK 
The combination of semantic technology and process 
management technology has been used in various 
approaches. The concept described in [9] utilizes the 
combination of Petri Nets and an ontology to achieve 
machine readable process models for better integration and 
automation. This is achieved creating direct mappings of 
Petri Net concepts in the ontology. The main focus of the 
approach presented in [11] is the facilitation of process 
models across various model representations and languages. 
It features multiple levels of semantic annotations as the 
meta-model annotation, the model content annotation, and 
the model profile annotation as well as a process template 
modeling language. The approach described in [12] presents 
a semantic business process repository to automate the 
business process lifecycle. Its features include checking in 
and out as well as locking capabilities and options for simple 
querying and reasoning that is more complex. Business 
process analysis is the main focus of COBRA presented in 
[21]. It develops a core ontology for business process 
analysis with the aim to provide better easier analysis of 
processes to comply with standards or laws like the 
Sarbanes-Oxley act. The approach described in [26] 
proposes the combination of semantic and agent technology 
to monitor business processes, yielding an effective method 
for managing and evaluating business processes. These 
approaches feature a process-management-centric use of 
semantic technology, while CoSEEEK not only aims to 
further integrate process management with semantic 
technology; it also integrates contextual information on a 
semantic level producing novel synergies alongside new 
opportunities for problem-oriented process management.  
With regard to automatic workflow support and 
coordination, several approaches exist. CASDE [7] utilizes 
activity theory to provide a role-based awareness module 
managing mutual awareness of different roles in the project. 
CAISE [2], a collaborative SE framework, enables the 
integration of SE tools and the development of new SE tools 
based on collaboration patterns. Caramba [4] features 
support for ad hoc workflows utilizing connections between 
different artifacts, resources, and processes to provide 
coordination of virtual teams. UML activity diagram 
notation is used for pre-modeled workflows. For ad hoc 
workflows not matching a template, an empty process is 
instantiated. In that case, work between different project 
members is coordinated via so-called Organizational 
Objects. These approaches primarily focus on the 
coordination of dependencies between different project 
members and do not provide unified, context-aware process 
guidance incorporating intrinsic as well as extrinsic 
workflows. 
The problem of rigid processes unaligned to the actual 
situation is addressed in different ways by approaches like 
Worklets [1], DECLARE [20], Agentwork [13], or Pockets 
of Flexibility (PoF) [24]. Worklets feature the capability of 
binding sub-process fragments or services to activities at 
runtime, thus not enforcing concrete binding at design time. 
DECLARE provides a constraint-based model that enables 
any sequencing of activities at runtime as long as no 
constraint is violated. A combination of predefined process 
models and constraint-based declarative modeling has been 
proposed in [24], wherein at certain points in the defined 
process model (called Pockets of Flexibility) it is not exactly 
defined at design time which activities should be executed in 
which sequence. For such a PoF, a set of possible activities 
and a set of constraints are defined enabling some runtime 
flexibility. However, the focus of DECLARE as well as PoF 
is on the constraint-based composition and execution of 
workflows by end users, and less on automatic workflow 
adaptations. 
Agentwork 
features 
automatic 
process 
adaptations utilizing predefined but flexible process models, 
building upon ADEPT1 technology. The adaptations are 
realized via agent technology and used to cope with 
exceptions in the process at runtime. As opposed to the 
CoSEEEK approach, these approaches do not utilize 
semantic processing and do not incorporate a holistic project-
context unifying knowledge from various project areas. For a 
complete discussion of flexibility issues in the process 
lifecycle, we refer to [27]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The SE domain epitomizes the challenge that automated 
adaptive workflow systems face. Since SE is a relatively 
young discipline, automated process enactment in real 
projects is often not mature. One of the issues herein is the 
gap between the top-down abstract archetype SE process 
models that lack automated support and guidance for real 
enactment, and exactly the actual execution with its bottom-
up nature. An important factor affecting this problem are 
activities belonging to specialized issues such as bug fixing 
or refactoring. These are on the one hand not covered by 
archetype SE processes and are on the other hand often so 
variegated that pre-modeling them is not feasible or currently 
cost-effective. 
164
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

The synergistic CoSEEEK approach automatically adapts 
workflows in a process-aware information system by 
combining semantic-based SEE context knowledge with 
situational method engineering and automated process 
instance adaptations. SE issue processing is decomposed into 
various activities influenced by different process and product 
properties dependent on the actual situation, the project 
context knowledge, and the product that is the subject of the 
current SE issue. Based on these properties, an issue 
workflow is constructed automatically, dynamically, and 
uniquely for every SE issue. By combining a case base with 
a method repository, all activities that are requisite for an 
issue are automatically included, avoiding the necessity of 
building the current workflow from scratch.  
The broader application of this approach would benefit 
domains similar to SE that exhibit dynamics and high 
workflow diversity with adaptable workflows for uncommon 
workflows, providing useable context-relevant guidance 
while reducing workflow modeling effort and maintenance 
by modeling influences outside of the workflows themselves.  
Future work will consider issue learning for automated 
tailoring of process templates and to reduce external user 
information needs, continuous adaptation of product 
properties, automated case-learning, and process analysis of 
executed workflow instances.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors wish to thank Stefan Lorenz for his 
assistance with implementation details. This work was 
sponsored by the BMBF (Federal Ministry of Education and 
Research) of the Federal Republic of Germany under 
Contract No. 17N4809. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Adams, M., ter Hofstede, A., Edmond, D., and van der Aalst, W., 
‘Worklets: A service-oriented implementation of dynamic flexibility 
in workflows,’ In: Proc. Coopis'06, LNCS 4275, pp 291-308 (2006) 
[2] 
Cook, C., Churcher, N., and Irwin, W., ‘Towards Synchronous 
Collaborative Software Engineering,’ in Proceedings of the Eleventh 
Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference. Busan, Korea, pp. 
230-239 (2004) 
[3] 
Dadam, P. and Reichert, M., ‘The ADEPT Project: A Decade of 
Research and Development for Robust and Flexible Process Support - 
Challenges and Achievements,’ Springer, Computer Science - 
Research and Development, 23(2), pp. 81-97 (2009) 
[4] 
Dustdar, S., ‘Caramba—A Process-Aware Collaboration System 
Supporting Ad hoc and Collaborative Processes in Virtual Teams,’ in 
Distributed and Parallel Databases Vol. 15, Issue 1, Kluwer 
Academic Publishers Hingham, MA, USA (2004) 
[5] 
Meier, W., ‘eXist: An Open Source Native XML Database,’ in Web, 
Web-Services, and Database Systems, Springer, LNCS vol. 
2593/2009, pp. 169-183 (2009) 
[6] 
Gelernter, D., ‘Generative communication in Linda,’ ACM 
Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, 7(1):80-112, 
January 1985 (1985) 
[7] 
Jiang, T., Ying, J., and Wu, M., ‘CASDE: An Environment for 
Collaborative Software Development,’ in Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work in Design III, Springer, pp. 367-376 (2007) 
[8] 
Johnson, P.M., ‘Requirement and Design Trade-offs in Hackystat: An 
In-Process Software Engineering Measurement and Analysis 
System,’ in Proc. of the 1st Int. Symp. on Empirical Software 
Engineering and Measurement, IEEE Comp. Soc., pp. 81-90 (2007) 
[9] 
Koschmider , A. and Oberweis, A., ‘Ontology based Business Process 
Description,’ in Proceedings of the CAiSE´05 workshops, 2005 
[10] Lenz, R. and Reichert, M., ‘IT Support for Healthcare Processes - 
Premises, 
Challenges, 
Perspectives,’ 
Data 
and 
Knowledge 
Engineering, 61(1): pp. 39-58 (2007) 
[11] Lin, Y. and Strasunskas, D., ‘Ontology-based Semantic Annotation of 
Process Templates for Reuse,’ in Proceedings of the 10th 
International Workshop on Exploring Modeling Methods for Systems 
Analysis and Design (EMMSAD'05), 2005 
[12] Ma, Z., Wetzstein, B., Anicic, D., and Heymans, S., and Leymann, 
F.,. ‘Semantic Business Process Repository’ In Proc. of the Workshop 
on Semantic Business Process and Product Lifecycle Management, 
2007 
[13] McBride, B., ‘Jena: a semantic web toolkit,’ Internet Computing, 
Dec. 2002 
[14] Müller, R., Greiner, U., and Rahm, E., ‘AGENTWORK: A 
Workflow-System Supporting Rule-Based Workflow Adaptation,’ 
Data Knowl. Eng. 51(2), pp. 223-256 (2004) 
[15] Müller, D., Herbst, J., Hammori, M., and Reichert, M., ‘IT Support 
for Release Management Processes in the Automotive Industry,’ 
Proc. 4th Int'l Conf. on Business Process Management (BPM'06), 
Vienna,  LNCS 4102, pp. 368-377 (2006) 
[16] Oberhauser, R., ‘Leveraging Semantic Web Computing for Context-
Aware Software Engineering Environments,’ In G. Wu (ed.) 
Semantic Web, In-Tech, Vienna, Austria, 2010, pp. 157-179 (2010) 
[17] Oberhauser, R., ‘Towards Automated Test Practice Detection and 
Governance,’ Int. Conf. on Advances in System Testing and 
Validation Lifecycle, pp. 19-24 (2009) 
[18] Oberhauser, R. and Schmidt, R., ‘Towards a Holistic Integration of 
Software Lifecycle Processes using the Semantic Web,’ In: Proc. 2nd 
Int. Conf. on Software and Data Technologies (ICSOFT’07), Vol. 3, 
2007, pp. 137-144 (2007) 
[19] OpenUP, http://epf.eclipse.org/wikis/openup/ [June 2010]  
[20] Pesic, M., Schonenberg, H., and van der Aalst, W.M.P., ‘DECLARE: 
Full Support for Loosely-Structured Processes,’ Proc. 11th IEEE 
International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference 
(EDOC 2007), pp. 287-298. Annapolis (2007) 
[21] Pedrinaci, C., Domingue, J., and Alves de Medeiros, A.: ‘A Core 
Ontology for Business Process Analysis’ (2008), pp. 49-64 
[22] Ralyté; J., Brinkkemper, S. and Henderson-Sellers, B. (Eds.), 
‘Situational Method Engineering: Fundamentals and Experiences,’ 
Proc. IFIP WG 8.1 Working Conference, Sep. 2007, Geneva (2007) 
[23] Rinderle-Ma, S., Reichert, M., and Weber, B., ‘Relaxed Compliance 
Notions in Adaptive Process Management Systems,’ In: Proc. 27th 
Int'l Conf. on Conceptual Modeling (ER'08), October 2008, 
Barcelona, LNCS 5231, pp. 232-247 (2008) 
[24] Sadiq, S., Sadiq, W., and Orlowska, M., ‘A framework for constraint 
specification and validation in flexible workflows,’ Information 
Systems 30(5):349 – 378 (2005) 
[25] Rausch, A., Bartelt, C., Ternité, T., and Kuhrmann, M., ‘The V-
Modell XT Applied - Model-Driven and Document-Centric 
Development,’ in 3rd World Congress for Software Quality, Vol. III, 
Online Supplement, pp. 131—138 (2005) 
[26] Thomas, M., Redmond, R., Yoon, V., and Singh, R., ‘A Semantic 
Approach 
to 
Monitor 
Business 
Process 
Performance,’ 
Communications of the ACM, pp. 55-59, 2005 
[27] Weber, B.; Sadiq, S., and Reichert, M., ‘Beyond Rigidity - Dynamic 
Process Lifecycle Support: A Survey on Dynamic Changes in 
Process-aware Information Systems,’ Computer Science - Research 
and Development, 23(2): 47-65 (2009) 
[28] World Wide Web Consortium, ‘OWL Web Ontology Language 
Semantics and Abstract Syntax,’ (2004) [June 2010] 
 
165
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

