A Proposal of Quantiﬁcation Method Describing the Difference between the Meaning of
the Terms in the International Standards for Safety
Yohei Ueda
Department of Information Science and Engineering,
Shibaura Institute of Technology,
Tokyo Japan
Email: ma16013@shibaura-it.ac.jp
Masaomi Kimura
Department of Information Science and Engineering
Shibaura Institute of Technology,
Tokyo Japan
Email:masaomi@sic.shibaura-it.ac.jp
Abstract—International safety standards deﬁne and regularize
many aspects of product safety during manufacturing processes.
However, principles in international standards contain many ho-
mographic keywords or words with similar but slightly different
meanings, which can cause ambiguity. We propose a method
to quantify the differences in the meanings of keywords. We
focus on the different meanings of deﬁnition statements, different
dependency relationship structures, and different tendencies of
the dependency relationships.
Keywords–safety; homograph; international standard; seman-
tics;
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, human injury is caused by many daily-use
products such as electronic devices, toys, and bicycles. This
has recently become a critical situation that requires attention.
Injuries are difﬁcult to avoid by only “human attention.”
Therefore, product manufacturing processes must adhere to
established international safety standards. The primary purpose
of such standards is to deﬁne fundamental safety principles for
product creation.
However, the statements of principles often include many
homographic keywords, i.e., words that are spelled the same
but have different meanings or words with similar but slightly
different meanings; thus, their meaning may be ambiguous.
Misinterpretation of the meanings of terms may cause difﬁ-
culty to discuss in the International Organization for Standard-
ization. Moreover, product designers may not adhere to the
standards; this may result in manufacturers producing inap-
propriate products. Certiﬁcation authorities might authenticate
a dangerous product by mistake.
For example, the ISO/IEC Guide 51 safety standard, de-
ﬁnes “risk” as a “combination of the probability of occurrence
of harm and the severity of that harm.” On the other hand, the
ISO/IEC Guide73 risk management standard deﬁnes “risk” as
the “effect of uncertainty on objectives.” Clearly, the meaning
of “risk” differs in these two standards.
In this study, we introduce a method to quantify the
difference in meanings of safety terms based on international
standards by using the content of terms and deﬁnitions and
other elements (e.g., risk assessment and risk reduction). We
focus on three types of differences, i.e., the meanings of
deﬁnition statements, dependency relationship structures, and
dependency relationship tendencies.
II.
METHODS
A. Difference calculation in deﬁnition statements
In this study, we focused on essential details included in
the “Terms and deﬁnitions” chapter of international standards.
This chapter provides deﬁnitions of safety -related terms. Such
deﬁnitions are very important for quantifying the difference
between the meanings of terms in such documents.
We considered the deﬁnition statements that contain many
important words for characterizing those statements. Because
of the role of the “Terms and deﬁnitions” chapter, important
words must be modiﬁed by other words to limit their meanings.
In other words, a word with many dependency relationships
can be regarded as more important in a sentence than words
with fewer dependency relationships. For example, if we
compare an “event” and a “harmful event,” the latter meaning
of “event” can be more stressed than the former; this represents
a generic event.
Our method focuses on quantifying differences between
the meanings of terms in deﬁnition statements. It measures
the weights of words by estimating how meanings are limited
for reducing ambiguity. In addition, the proposed method
calculates a distance ddef between two international standards
A and B.
To calculate this distance, we deﬁne a weight of word
importance for a deﬁnition statement, vids.
According to our observations, most deﬁnition statements
are noun phrases rather than sentences; this contributes to an
incorrect dependency analysis. Therefore, to change the noun
phrases to sentences, the phrase “this is” was added at the
beginning of each deﬁnition statement.
We used the Stanford Parser to extract a parse tree based
on dependency relationships in sentences. Degree centrality in
the parse tree was used to identify the ratio of modifying or
modiﬁed words to the total number of dependency relation-
ships. Since the degree centrality should be high if a word has
many dependency relationships, the word with a high degree
centrality is considered as important. Therefore, vids can be
expressed as follows:
vids(w) =
k(w)
P
w∈W k(w),
(1)
where k(w) denotes the degree of the node representing the
word w in a word set W in the sentence.
Note that from the viewpoint of importance of words, stop
words (e.g., “a”, “is”, “the”, and “from”) can create noise; thus,
stop words were not included in the word set during analyses.
In addition, after parsing, the appended phrase “this is” was
also not considered. We refer to the obtained words as “word
groups.”
After obtaining the words with their corresponding vids
values in the word groups from international standards A and
B, their distance (ddef) values were calculated on the basis
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

of the concept of Levenshtein distance. Levenshtein distance
is a well-known measurement of the difference between two
strings and is calculated as the minimum number of insertions
and deletions of characters required to transform one string
into the other. In this study, rather than characters, words in
the word groups were replaced. The distance ddef is given as
follows:
ddef =
X
w∈R
vids(w),
(2)
where R is a set of words added or deleted to make the word
group for A coincide with that for B. Note that the words
w ∈ R only appear in one standard. Thus, we used the value
of vids(w) calculated in the network where w appeared.
B. Calculation of word meaning difference in body text
The above mentioned method does not cover the case
in which words are used differently in the body text of
international standards documents but their difference is not
clariﬁed in “Terms and deﬁnitions.”
Therefore, we suggest two quantiﬁcation methods using
the body text of international standards documents. The ﬁrst
method is based on the structure of dependency relationships in
the body text. The corresponding quantiﬁed value is expressed
by dφ = |φA − φB|. The second method is based on latent
semantics appearing in a dependency relationship tendency in
the body text. Here, the quantiﬁed value is denoted dcos.
1) Quantiﬁcation of the difference in meaning using a
dependency relationship structure: As discussed in Section
II-A, the meaning of a word is limited when it is modiﬁed by
other words, and this may cause a difference in meaning and
importance. In other words, if there is a difference between
the importance of the same word in different standards, there
should also be a difference in meaning.
To extract this difference, we introduce an importance
index φ(w) for a word w in the body text of an international
standards document. The index value should be higher, if the
word is limited and should be modiﬁed by words that are
also important and have a high φ value. If φA(w) and φB(w)
are the φ values of w for international standards A and B
respectively, |φA(w)−φB(w)| gives the difference in the extent
of importance of the word w in the body text of the standards.
First, dependency analysis was applied to extract depen-
dency relationships of the words in the body text of a given
standard. Then, each verb was changed to its prototype and
stop words were removed. Dependency relationships were
represented as edges in a network in order to express the
word relationships in the body text. Words in sentences were
considered as nodes.
Secondly, after generating the networks, an importance
value was assigned to each node using PageRank method.
PageRank assigns a higher value to a node linked to many
other nodes that have high values. In this study, the PageRank
value corresponds to a higher importance value assigned to a
word that modiﬁes or is modiﬁed by the various and important
words. In this paper, we denote the value assigned to word w
by PageRank as φ(w).
Finally, the difference in meaning on the basis of the
dependency structure was calculated as |φA(w)−φB(w)|. We
used dφ as a difference index for |φA(w) − φB(w)|.
2) Difference in meaning of the tendency of dependency
relationship: Section 2.2.1 showed how to quantify the differ-
ence in meaning using the structure of modiﬁcation. However,
if two words are modiﬁed by the same number of words, the
difference could be low. For example, international standards
A and B have dependency networks around the word “train,” as
shown in Figs. 1 and 2. However, in international standard A,
“train” means teaching someone, and in international standard
B, “train” means a railway train.
In this case, |φA(train)−φB(train)| could be low because
they have the same structure. In this section, we show that the
difference between word meanings in international standards A
and B are quantiﬁed by expressing the frequency tendency of
dependency relationships as a matrix, applying latent semantic
analysis, and calculating the distance.
Fig. 1. International Standard A
Fig. 2. International Standard B
First, dependency parsing was applied to the sentences
in the body text of each standard. Second, a matrix was
used to quantitatively express words that have dependency
relationships with other words. The matrix M has frequencies
of dependency relationships as elements. The rows correspond
to modiﬁed words that commonly appeared in both standards,
and the columns correspond to the modifying words in the
standards that are handled separately. For example, if word w
modiﬁes word w′ with frequency fwA in international standard
A and with fwB in B, the matrix has a row w′, columns wA
(denoting w in A) and wB (denoting w in B), and elements
fwA and fwB respectively.
It is convenient to use a vector space model to calculate the
semantic similarity of words. To reduce the effect of noise, we
employed latent semantic indexing(LSI) with singular- value
decomposition. By applying singular- value decomposition, M
can be decomposed as follows:
M = UΣV T ,
(3)
where U and V are orthogonal matrices and Σ is a singular
value matrix. The column vectors of V gives principal eigen-
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

vectors corresponding to the modifying words whose cosine
values were used to measure similarity. Let ⃗v(wA) and ⃗v(wB)
denote the principal eigenvectors for wA and wB respectively.
Then, their cosine value is given as follows:
cos θ(⃗v(wA),⃗v(wB)) = ⃗v(wA) · ⃗v(wB)
|⃗v(wA)||⃗v(wB)|,
(4)
whose value is in the range [0, 1]. However, in this study, we
need to use distance rather than similarity. Therefore, we set
the distance dcos as follows:
dcos = 1 − cos θ( ⃗va, ⃗vb).
(5)
We used dcos as a difference index for word meanings
based on the tendency of the meaning of words.
C. Quantiﬁcation of the difference in the meaning of a term
Finally, we merged the above mentioned indices, ddef, dφ
and dcos. On the basis of the idea that the merged index needs
to take a larger value if some or all of the indices have a large
value, we designed it to be a linear combination as follows:
D = αddef + βdcos + γdφ,
(6)
where α,β and γ are coefﬁcients to adjust the ranges of the
indices.
To determine α, β and γ, we investigated the ranges of
ddef, dφ and dcos by calculating them for words that appear
in both the ISO/CD Guide51 and ISO12100 standards. We
found that the ranges were completely different. Since the
average values of ddef, dφ and dcos were 0.323, 0.41 and
0.0019, respectively, we set α = 1.28, β = 1 and γ = 250
such that the product of the average values and the coefﬁcient
for each index equaled one. We expected that the coefﬁcients
would allow the ranges to be in the same order and conﬁrmed
that this method was effective by investigating other document
pairs.
III.
EXPERIMENTS
We conducted experiments to evaluate the D value by
comparing it with each pair in four international standards.
The standards used in our experiment. are listed in TABLE I.
TABLE II lists the paired standards used in our experiment.
TABLE I. STANDARDS USED IN OUR EXPERIMENT
Standards
Summary
ISO/CD Guide 51
Safety aspects
Guidelines for their inclusion in standards
ISO 12100
Safety of machinery
ISO/IEC Guide 50
Safety aspects
Guidelines for child safety
ISO 8124
Safety of toys
Age determination guidelines
TABLE II. PAIRED STANDARDS IN OUR EXPERIMENTS
Standard A
Standard B
#1
ISO/CD Guide 51
ISO 12100
#2
ISO/IEC Guide 50
ISO 8124
We observed the D value containing ddef, dcos and dφ
obtained by our method.
TABLE III. ddef , dcos, dφ AND D VALUES BETWEEN ISO/CD GUIDE
51 AND ISO 12100
Words
ddef
dcos
dφ
D
harm
0.575
0.502267
0.00010945
1.50713
standard
0
0.504292
0.01577331
4.44761
train
0
0.097685
0.00016153
0.13807
TABLE IV. ddef , dcos, dφ AND D VALUES BETWEEN ISO/IEC GUIDE
50 AND ISO 8124
Words
ddef
dcos
dφ
D
harm
0.25
0.262754
0.00134539
1.024101
edge
1
0.421634
0.00630093
3.276866
period
0
0.139401
0.00029886
0.214116
TABLE III and TABLE IV show the ddef, dcos, dφ and D
values for each standard.
As shown in TABLE III, the D value for “standard” was
greater than that for “harm” and “train.” Clearly, there was a
large difference in the meaning of the word “standard” between
ISO/CD Guide 51 and ISO 12100. The D value of “train” was
smaller than that of “harm” and “standard.” The ddef value
of “harm” was greater than that of “standard” and “train.”
As shown in TABLE IV, the D value of “edge” was greater
than that of “harm” and “period.” Clearly, there was a large
difference in the meaning of the word “edge” between ISO/IEC
Guide 50 and ISO 8124. The D value of the word “period”
was smaller than that of “edge” and “harm,” and the ddef value
of “harm” was greater than that of “period” and “edge.”
IV.
DISCUSSION
A. Comparison of ISO/CD Guide51 and ISO12100
Here,
we
discuss
our
index
values
for
the
words
“harm,”which is deﬁned in “Terms and deﬁnitions” in each
standard, with “standard” having a large D value and “train”
having a small D value.
•
harm The word “harm” had large ddef and dcos val-
ues. Deﬁnition statements in both standards included
the meaning “physical injury or damage to the health
of people,” while deﬁnition statements in Guide51
included “damage to property or the environment.”
This difference inﬂuenced the ddef value. TABLE V
lists the words modiﬁed by “harm” and their frequency
in ISO/CD Guide51 and ISO12100.
TABLE V. WORDS WITH A DEPENDENCY RELATIONSHIP WITH “HARM”
AND THEIR FREQUENCY
dependency relationship
Frequency
ISO/CD Guide51
harm → present
4
harm → eliminate
1
harm → avoid
4
ISO12100
harm → severity
3
harm → occurrence
3
As can be seen in TABLE V, there was no common
word modiﬁed by “harm” in ISO/CD Guide51 and
ISO12100; this resulted in high dcos values. No
deﬁnition statements limited the meaning of “harm;”
this resulted in a small φ and, therefore, a low value
of dφ. Thus, we observed that the values of the
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

indices included in D coincide with the situation
related to “harm.”
•
standard The large value of D for “standard” origi-
nates in the value of dφ.
TABLE VI shows the total number of words that
modify “standard” in Guide51 and ISO12100. As can
TABLE VI. TOTAL NUMBER OF WORDS THAT MODIFY “STANDARD” IN
GUIDE51 AND ISO12100
Guide51
ISO12100
Total
22
3
be seen in Table VI, more words modiﬁed “standard”
in Guide51 than in ISO12100, i.e., in Guide51,
“standard” is limited more by other words than in
ISO12100. We believe this is because Guide51 is
an introductory safety guideline; thus, “standard”
is modiﬁed by many other words. This means its
modiﬁcation structures give different φ values and
high dφ values.
•
train The word “train,” which has a small D value,
did not have a deﬁnition statement in either of the
standards. Furthermore, each instance of “train” had
few dependency relationships with other words. Re-
garding dcos, there was a common dependency rela-
tionship, i.e., “train → skill,” between Guide51 and
ISO12100. This shows that both standards use “train”
to mean “teach.” In addition, “train” was not modiﬁed
in either standard and, thereby, dφ took small values;
consequently, dφ took a small value. Therefore, we
obtained a small D value.
B.
ISO/IEC Guide50 and ISO 8124
Words subject to evaluation were “harm,” which had def-
initions in “Terms and deﬁnitions” in each standard; “edge,”
which had a large D value; and “period,” which had a small
D value.
•
harm
The word “harm” had different meanings in deﬁ-
nition statements, i.e., “physical injury” or “injury.”
However, there was a common statement “damage to
the health of people, or damage to property or the
environment.” Therefore, we obtained a small ddef
value. The value of dφ was relatively high. TABLE VII
shows the total number of words that modify “harm”
in ISO/IEC Guide50 and ISO 8124.
TABLE VII. TOTAL NUMBER OF WORDS THAT MODIFY “HARM” IN
ISO/IEC GUIDE50 AND ISO 8124
Guide50
ISO 8124
Total
9
3
There were more words that modiﬁed “harm” in
ISO/IEC Guide50 than in ISO 8124, i.e., “harm” in
Guide50 is more limited by other words than in ISO
8124, which gave the high dφ value.
•
edge
The word “edge” had a large dφ value. TABLE
VIII shows the total number of words that modify
“edge” in ISO/IEC Guide50 and ISO 8124. There
TABLE VIII. TOTAL NUMBER OF WORDS THAT MODIFY “EDGE” IN
ISO/IEC GUIDE50 AND ISO 8124
ISO/IEC Guide50
ISO 8124
Total
5
47
are more words that modify “edge” in ISO8124 than
in Guide50. In the body of Guide50, “edge” had an
abstract meaning, e.g., “corner, end.” However, there
are many sentences that deﬁne “edge” speciﬁed with
concrete values in ISO8124. Furthermore, the value of
ddef was 1 because although there was no deﬁnition
statement for “edge” in Guide51, there was a deﬁnition
statement for “edge” in ISO8124, i.e., “line, formed
at the junction of two surfaces, whose length exceeds
2,0 mm.” We considered the case without a deﬁnition
statement as a deﬁnition with “no word.” Moreover,
we obtained a high dφ value because of the difference
in modiﬁcation structures. Therefore, a large D value
was obtained for “edge.”
•
period The word “period” had a small D value,
which was primarily because of the small dφ value.
TABLE IX shows the words that have a dependency
relationship with “period” and their frequencies in
ISO/IEC Guide50 and ISO 8124.
TABLE IX. WORDS THAT HAVE DEPENDENCY WITH “PERIOD” AND THEIR
FREQUENCIES(ISO/IEC GUIDE50)
dependency relationship
Frequency
ISO/IEC Guide50
certain → period
1
extend → period
1
long → period
1
time → period
2
ISO 8124
h → period
1
time → period
1
According to Table IX, the difference in the number
of words that modify “period” was 2. There were
more words that directly modify “period” in ISO/IEC
Guide50. In contrast, the word “h,” which is a unit for
“hour” in ISO 8124, was modiﬁed by many numbers,
such as “72.” Therefore, there were many words that
modify “period” indirectly.
Consequently, the value of dφ was small because the
difference of meaning based on limiting a meaning
was not large.
V.
CONCLUSION
Principles in international standards contain many homo-
graphic keywords that may cause ambiguity for readers. Fur-
thermore, previous studies have not quantiﬁed the difference
in the meanings of words in international standards because
this is a difﬁcult task to know it.
In this study, we proposed a method and indices to quantify
this difference, on the basis of three types of differences the
meanings of deﬁnition statements, structure of dependency
relationships, and tendency of dependency relationships.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

For the ﬁrst difference, the source of the extent of differ-
ence was considered to be the relationships of word modiﬁ-
cations in deﬁnition sentences, weighting, and calculation of
distances. Based on this, we proposed the index ddef.
For the second difference, it was considered to the different
structures of dependency relationships. The index dφ was
calculated by creating networks that express the relationships
among words in the complete text of the standards and by
applying PageRank to the networks.
For the third difference, the idea of a latent semantic index
was applied to obtain the trends of word meanings. The value
of dcos was computed as the cosine similarity of the obtained
characteristic vectors.
Finally, we combined these three indices to obtain an index
D to evaluate different word meanings in international safety
standards.
Consequently, a high D value was obtained when the
number of words with different dependency relationships and
the number of different meanings for the deﬁnition statements
were large and vice versa.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Mukaidono,”The basic concept of safety design”, Japanese Standards
Association, Tokyo, 2007, ISBN: 4542404056
[2]
International Organization for Standardization, COMMITTEE DRAFT
ISO/CD Guide51, ISO/TC COPOLCO / SC IEC/ACOS N 49, 2012
[3]
Y. Miyazaki; T. Shioi, and K. Hatano, ”A Word Sense Disambiguation
Method based on Dependency Relations”, ”Information Science and
Technology Forum Proceedings”, no. D-021, Aug. 2015, pp.111-112
[4]
T. Michishita; K. Nakayama; T. Hara; S. Nishio, and ”A Word Sense
Disambiguation Method by Using Topics of Documents in Wikipedia,”
Information Processing Society of Japan Kansai Branch Conference
Papers”, no. C-12, 2009
[5]
International Organization for Standardization, Safety of machinery
General principles for design Risk assessment and risk reduction, ISO
12100:2010(E), 2010
[6]
M. Ishida, Text mining introductory study in R, Morikita Publishing Co.,
Ltd., Tokyo, ISBN: 4627848412
[7]
H. Toyoda, An introduction to Data mining, Tokyo Tosho Co., Ltd.,
Tokyo, ISBN: 4489020457
[8]
T. Suzuki, Data science to learn in R 8 Network analysis, Kyoritsu
Publishing Co., Ltd., Tokyo, ISBN: 4320019288
[9]
The Stanford Natural Language Processing Group, The Stanford
Parser: A statistical parser, http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lexparser.
shtmlhttp://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml/[accessed:
2014-
01-12].
[10]
International Organization for Standardization, Safety aspects - Guide-
lines for child safety in standards and other speciﬁcations, ISO/IEC
Guide50:2014, 2014
[11]
International Organization for Standardization, Safety of toys Part
1:Safety aspects related to mechanical and physical properties, ISO 8124-
1:2009(E), 2009
[12]
International Organization for Standardization, Cycles - Safety require-
ments for bicycles, ISO 4210:2014, 2014
[13]
International Organization for Standardization, Bicycles for young chil-
dren - Safety requirements and test methods, EN 14765:2005, 2005
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

