A Semantic-based Recommender System Using A Simulated Annealing Algorithm 
Romain Picot-Clémente, Christophe Cruz, Christophe Nicolle 
LE2I, UMR CNRS 5158 
University of Bourgogne, Dijon, France 
{romain.picot-clemente, christophe.cruz, christophe.nicolle}@u-bourgogne.fr
 
Abstract— A recommender system based on semantic web 
technologies and on an adaptive hypermedia architecture is 
shown in this paper. The system uses a stochastic algorithm to 
provide recommendations to users. The paper presents the 
system architecture based on the semantic Web technologies 
and explains a simulated annealing algorithm performing the 
recommendations. A mobile application for the tourism 
domain proving the feasibility of this system is described at 
the end of the paper, some benchmarks are presented. In this 
application, the recommendations are defined as combinations 
of tourism products, which are linked to each other. The 
paper is mainly focused on the architecture and the 
recommendation process of the system. 
Keywords - Semantic based recommender system, adaptive 
hypermedia system, simulated annealing algorithm, tourist 
travel. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
These last years, the number of customer relationship 
management 
(CRM) 
implementations 
has 
increased 
enormously. CRM systems aim at allowing organizations to 
provide fast and efficient user-focused services. A CRM 
system uses client related information or knowledge to 
provide relevant products or services to clients [1]. The 
increasing use of digital technologies by customers, and 
particularly the Web and mobile devices, is changing what 
is possible and what is expected in terms of customer 
management. CRM evolved from business processes such 
as the need to improve the client retention by the effective 
management of customer relationships [2]. 
Our project aims to facilitate tourists for the definition of 
a complete journey on the region Côte d’Or in Burgundy, 
France from a database composed of more than 4 thousand 
geo-localized tourism products. Today, searching and 
finding relevant tourism products related to a user profile is 
tedious. Consequently, a recommendation system has been 
defined. The use of personalized recommender systems [3] 
[4] [5] to assist customers in the selection of products is 
becoming more and more popular and wide-spread. Most of 
the recommender systems is based on algorithms computing 
recommendations using methods like collaborative filtering 
[6] [7], content-based classifier [8] [9] and hybrids of these 
two techniques [10] [11] [12]. 
Recommender systems suggest information sources and 
products to users based on learning from examples of their 
likes and dislikes [4]. A typical recommender system has 
three steps: 1/ Users provide examples of their tastes. These 
can be explicit, like demanding ratings of specific items, or 
implicit, like analyzing his browsing behavior. 2/ A user 
profile is computed using the information from the first 
step. It is a representation of the user’s likes and dislikes; 
3/The system computes recommendations using these user 
profiles. 
Content-based (CB) and collaborative filtering (CF) 
methods are two of the main approaches used to form 
recommendations. Hybrid techniques integrating these two 
different approaches have also been proposed. The CB 
method has been based on the textual filtering model 
described in [13]. Generally, in CB systems, the user profile 
is inferred automatically from documents' content that the 
user has seen and rated. The profiles and domain documents 
are then used as input of a classification algorithm. The 
documents which are similar (in content) to the user profile 
are considered interesting and are recommended to the user. 
CF systems [6] [7] are an alternative to CB systems. The 
basic idea is to go beyond the experience of an individual 
user profile and instead to use the experiences of a 
population or community of users. These systems are 
designed with the assumption that a good way to find 
interesting content is to find people with similar tastes and 
to propose items they like. Typically, each user is associated 
to a set of nearest-neighbor users, comparing profiles’ 
information. With this method, objects recommendations 
are based on similarities of users rather than the similarities 
of objects. 
Both CF and CB systems have strengths and 
weaknesses. In CF systems, the main problem is that the 
new objects with no rate cannot be recommended. CB 
systems suffer from deficiencies in the way of selecting 
items for recommendation. Indeed, the objects are 
recommended if the user has seen and liked similar objects 
in the past. Consequently, a variety of hybrid systems have 
recently been developed: 1/ Some use other users’ ratings as 
additional features in a CB system [10]. 2/ Some use CB 
methods for the creation of bots producing additional data 
for “pseudo-users”. These data are combined with real 
users’ data using CF methods [12]. 3/ Others use CB 
predictions to “fill out” the probable user-items’ ratings in 
order to allow CF techniques to produce more accurate 
recommendations [11]. 
We have developed a CB system inspired by Adaptive 
Hypermedia systems. Adaptive hypermedia systems are 
hypermedia systems (websites, e-learning platforms, etc.) 
with adaptive behavior to provide adaptive content, 
presentation and navigation to users, based on their 
knowledge, preferences, goals, etc. The purpose of the 
proposed system is to find the best combination of 
individuals from a domain ontology that fit to the user 
interest and we propose the use a simulated annealing 
algorithm to do this. The first part explains what an adaptive 
132
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

hypermedia system is. It is also shown in this part how 
adaptive hypermedia systems are positioned relative to 
recommender systems. Then, a part describes the 
architecture, the properties and the recommendation process 
of the proposed recommender system applied to tourism 
domain. The next part shows a utilization example for a 
touristic journey proposition and the final one gives some 
benchmark of the application. 
II. 
ADAPTIVE HYPERMEDIA SYSTEMS 
The research domain of adaptive hypermedia has been 
very prolific these 10 last years. Some systems [14] [15] 
[16] have been developed, giving principally solutions for 
e-Learning which is considered as the first application 
domain. Each system brings its own architecture and 
methods. Moreover, few attempts have been made to define 
reference models [17] [18] [19] [20] but without success 
because of being not enough generic to take account of the 
new trends and innovations. Nevertheless, most of the 
systems and models are based on a set of layers, also called 
models, which separate clearly the different tasks. Then, we 
can see that there are at least three models in common, 
necessary and sufficient to achieve adaptive hypermedia 
systems according to Brusilovsky [21]. It needs to 
primarily be a hypermedia system based on a domain. The 
domain model is a representation of the knowledge on a 
given subject the creator wants to deliver. It describes how 
the domain is organized and interconnected. The second 
model is called a user model which is a representation of 
the user within the system. It models all user information 
which may require the system to provide an adaptation. The 
last model is the adaptation model. It performs all the 
adaptive algorithms based on other models to provide an 
adaptation to the user. Beyond the use of domain, user and 
adaptation models, the trend is to use additional models like 
presentation, goals, context or other models. This allows to 
better identify the different performed tasks and to facilitate 
the 
construction 
of 
adaptive 
hypermedia 
systems. 
Nevertheless, there is no generic model integrating them 
for the moment. 
Methods to model domain/user (adaptation principles 
are also described): 
The keywords vectors space methods consider that 
each document and user profile is described by a set of 
weighted keywords vectors [22] [23] [24]. At the adaptation 
model, the weights are used to calculate the similarity 
degree between two vectors and then to propose relevant 
document to the user. The keywords representation is 
popular because of its simplicity and its efficiency. 
Nevertheless, the main drawback is that a lot of information 
is lost during the representation phase. 
In semantic networks, each node represents a concept. 
Minio and Tasso [25] present a semantic networks based 
approach where each node contains a particular word of a 
corpus and arcs are created following the co-occurrences of 
the words from connected nodes into the documents. Each 
domain document is represented like that. In simple systems 
using only one semantic network to model the user, each 
node contains only one keyword. The keywords are 
extracted from pages which the user gives its taste. Then, 
they are treated to keep only the most relevant ones and are 
weighted in order to remove those with a weight lesser than 
a predefined threshold. The selected keywords are then 
added to the semantic network where each node represents a 
keyword and each arc their co-occurrence into the 
documents. With this method, it is possible to evaluate the 
relevance of a document compared to the user profile. 
Indeed, it suffices to construct a semantic network of a 
document and compare it to the semantic network of the 
user to classify it to interesting, uninteresting or indifferent 
documents. 
Ontology approach is similar to the semantic network 
approach in the sense that both are represented using nodes 
and relations between nodes. Nevertheless, in concepts 
based profiles, nodes represent abstract subjects and not 
word or set of words. Moreover, links are not only co-
occurrence relations between words, they have several 
significations. The use of ontology can keep a maximum of 
information. In QuickStep [26], the ontology is used for the 
research domain and has been created by domain experts. 
The ontology concepts are represented as vectors of article 
examples. The users’ papers from their publication list are 
modeled as characteristic’ vectors and are linked to concepts 
using the nearest neighbor algorithm. These concepts are 
then used to form a user profile. Each concept is weighted 
by the number of papers linked to it. Recommendations are 
then made from the correlations between the current 
interests of the user to topics and papers that are related to 
these topics. In [27] and [28], a predefined ontology is used 
to model the domain. User profiles are represented with a 
set of weighted concepts where weight represents the user’s 
interest for a concept. Its interests are determined by 
analyzing its behavior. 
Three types of adaptation have been highlighted in the 
researches on adaptive hypermedia systems: content, 
navigation and presentation adaptation. The content 
adaptation consists in hiding/showing or highlighting some 
information. The adaptation model makes the decision of 
which content has to be adapted and how to display it. The 
navigation adaptation consists in modifying the link 
structure suggesting links or forcing the user to follow a 
destination. There is URLs’ adaptation or destinations 
adaptation. In the first, the adaptation model provides 
destination links to the presentation model; these links are 
displayed at the page generation. Whereas, in the second 
one, the adaptation model provides links without fixed 
destination to the presentation model; the destination is 
decided by the adaptation model when the link is accessed 
by the user. The presentation adaptation consists in insisting 
(or not) on the content parts or on the links. It consists also 
in adapting the preferences setting to the device or the page. 
The adaptation model process makes the decision of which 
content or links to insist in following the presentation 
context. 
Even 
if 
recommender 
systems 
are 
often 
differentiated from adaptive hypermedia systems, a lot of 
similarity between these two types of systems can be 
133
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

highlighted. Indeed, the recommender systems provide 
recommendations using different algorithms, as it is done in 
the adaptation model. Moreover, we can see that they model 
also users’ tastes and domain’s items, as it is done in 
adaptive hypermedia systems with the user model and 
domain 
model. 
Nevertheless, 
recommender 
systems 
perform only adaptation of the content whereas adaptive 
hypermedia systems realize two more adaptation types. 
Following these observations, a recommendation system 
appears to be a constrained adaptive hypermedia system. 
Thus, it seems clear that recommender systems can be 
defined as a subset of adaptive hypermedia systems, 
whatever its type (CB or CF). 
The use of an adaptive hypermedia architecture for the 
creation of recommender systems is interesting because we 
can clearly define the tasks associated with each part of the 
application, and it gives the opportunity to evolve the 
system adding modules and/or other types of adaptation 
without 
difficult 
modifications 
of 
parts 
already 
implemented. For instance, a CB recommender system 
could be improved with features of CF systems, adding a 
group model where clusters of users can be defined. For the 
creation of our CB recommender system, we base on 
adaptive hypermedia architecture. Beyond the use of the 
three main ones (domain, user and adaptation model), a goal 
model has been added. It allows the modeling of users’ 
goals. A description of the architecture is explained in the 
following part. 
III. 
THE PROPOSED RECOMMENDER SYSTEM 
This part describes, first, the architecture of the proposed 
recommender system. Then, the recommendation process is 
explained, it is based on a simulated annealing algorithm. It 
is followed by an overview of the implementation for the 
tourism application. 
A. Architecture 
The proposed recommendation system is based on a set 
of layers (models). It consists of a user model, a domain 
model, an adaptation model and a goal model. This 
modeling allows a clear separation between the tasks. The 
domain model defines the whole domain knowledge. It 
consists of sets of domain concepts and relations between 
concepts. Generally, the concepts index the contents or the 
pages in order to be provided to the user. The most 
appropriate structure we have chosen for this modeling is 
the ontology. Actually, it facilitates the creation of complex 
structures. It allows also the inferences and this structure is 
portable thanks to the standardized OWL language. The 
ontology 
concepts 
are 
populated 
by 
individuals 
representing instances of these concepts which can be 
provided to the user. 
The goal model is an overlay model on the domain 
model. Actually, it consists of a set of goal concepts that 
bring together individuals of the domain model. A goal 
concept is a set of domain model individuals, knowing that 
different goal concepts can group same individuals. A goal 
is defined by an SWRL rule allowing the selection of the 
individuals which verifies the rule. 
The user model aims at modeling the user into the 
system. In the present case, it is composed of two parts. The 
first part is based on the goal model which is based, by 
definition, on the domain model. This part is called overlay 
part on the domain or domain dependant part, or even 
dynamic part because it is very changeable. Instead, the 
second part is called static part; it is a domain independent 
part. The user model is composed of a set of goals concepts, 
selected using the user behavior and <attribute-value> pairs 
for data such as date of birth, gender, etc. With the dynamic 
part, we have an idea of the user interests on domain 
individuals. Actually, when an individual appears into more 
than one goal concept selected by the user, then this 
individual is considered more important for the user. Thus, 
we can induce interest weights on the domain individuals 
related to the selected goal concepts. Moreover, we can 
propagate these weights to the entire domain model using 
the links into the domain ontology. 
The adaptation model is considered as the core of the 
system, the adaptive algorithms are carry out in this level. 
The recommendations provided to the user are formulated 
as a combination of individuals from the domain model, 
according its user model. The problem consists in finding 
the optimal combination of individuals from the domain 
model constrained by a user model. Browsing all the 
possible combinations to find the best one is not possible in 
a short time, consequently, we propose the use of a 
stochastic algorithm called simulated annealing in order to 
find a combination which is close to the best one in a short 
time. Simulated annealing [29] is an optimization technique 
particularly well suited to overcoming the multiple minima 
problem. Unlike gradient-descent methods, simulated 
annealing can cross barriers between minima and thus can 
explore a greater volume of the parameter space to find 
better models in deeper minima. 
This algorithm is used to minimize an energy function 
defining the relevance of a combination according to a user 
model. This energy depends mainly on the interest weights 
deduced from the user dynamic part on the domain 
individuals. But, depending on the type of application, more 
parameters can be taken into account. For instance, we can 
use geographic parameters for an application which aims to 
provide a nearby restaurant corresponding to the user 
requirements and coordinates. Moreover, constraints can be 
defined in the ontology between individuals or/and 
concepts. For instance, a medical application which 
provides a combination of medicines has to indicate in the 
ontology when one medicine cannot be given with another 
one, so that the application cannot generate a bad 
combination. 
B. Recommendation process 
The recommender system aims at providing a 
combination of individuals from the ontology. This part 
presents how this recommendation is undertaken. 
In order to solve the problem of providing the best 
combination of individuals from the domain model, we 
134
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

propose the use of a stochastic algorithm called simulated 
annealing for its resolution. Actually, this kind of algorithms 
allows to find a solution that approaches the best (or is the 
best) in a very short time. The simulated annealing is 
inspired from a method used in the steel industry. To obtain 
a metal with a perfect structure crystal type (fundamental 
state corresponding to the minimum internal energy), the 
process is as follow: after bringing the material to liquid, the 
temperature is lowered to solidification state. If the decrease 
of temperature is very sudden, a “glass” is obtained, feature 
of the technique of “hardening”. On the contrary, if it is very 
gradual, allowing time for atoms to reach statistical 
equilibrium, it will tend toward more regular structures, to 
finish in the ground state: the “crystal”, characterizing the 
system freeze. If this lower of temperature is not slow 
enough, defects could appear. Then, it would be necessary 
to correct them by heating the material again slightly to 
allow atoms to regain freedom of movement and facilitating 
a possible rearrangement toward a more stable structure. 
The simulated annealing algorithm used into the 
adaptation model is based on this principle. At the 
beginning, the algorithm chooses an initial random 
combination of individuals following a given pattern (for 
instance, a combination consisting of a hotel, two 
restaurants and two activities). This combination has an 
energy E0, called the initial energy, which represents the 
quality of a combination. The lower the energy is, the better 
the combination is. A variable T, called temperature, 
decreases in increments over time. At each level of 
temperature is tested a number of elementary random 
changes on the current combination. A cost df is associated 
to each modification; it is defined as the difference between 
the combination’s energy after the modification and the one 
before. A negative cost signifies the current combination 
has a lesser energy than the previous one (thus better by 
definition), it is then kept. Conversely, a positive cost 
represents a “bad” change. Nevertheless, it can be kept 
according a given probability (acceptance rate
at
) 
depending on the temperature and the cost. The higher the 
temperature is, the higher the probability is. Thus, over 
time, the number of changes allowed decreases as the 
temperature decreases, until no longer accepting any 
changes. Finally, the system is said frozen, and the current 
combination becomes the final combination to be presented 
to the user. The acceptance rate is defined in (1) where Tk is 
the temperature at the level k, k 
 N. 
k
f
T
d
a
e
t
a
fmean
t
d
T
1
ln
0
An initial temperature T0 is computed using this 
formula and setting the values of the acceptance rate and 
the cost. The initial acceptance rate is defined arbitrarily 
and the cost is set calculating the average cost by 
performing multiple changes on random combinations. 
Thus, the initial temperature is presented in (2) where dfmean 
is the average cost of the modifications. 
The temperature decrease is achieved through a 
geometric decay at each level: 
0
1
1)
(
T
coef
T
coef
g T
T
k
k
k
k
where k is the current level and 0<coef<1. 
The relevance of a combination is determined by an 
energy function. The quality of the final combination, given 
by the simulated annealing algorithm, depends a lot on the 
definition of this energy. This function is highly dependent 
on the type of application. For instance, in a tourism 
application, the individuals and user coordinates could be 
taken into account, whereas these data are useless in a 
medical application. Nevertheless, the energy function is 
based, in all cases, on the user interests deduced from its 
dynamic part.  
The dynamic part is constituted of goals determined by 
the user clicks on icons which are linked to goals. Thus, 
each time a user clicks on an icon, the related goal is added 
to the dynamic part of its user model. To deduce the user’s 
interest weights on the ontology individuals, an algorithm of 
weight propagation uses the fact that each goal is a set of 
rules including individuals from the domain model. Thus, 
each time an individual is selected by a rule, its weight is 
incremented. 
Therefore, 
this 
weighting 
allows 
the 
demarcation of some individuals, giving an idea of the user 
interests. With this modeling, after few user clicks on icons, 
the system can quickly provide a combination of domain 
individuals that matches its interests. According the 
definition, this type of recommender system is a CB system. 
Nevertheless, it is also possible to base on group of users to 
have the benefits of CF systems. It just needs to add a group 
model to the system. The next part shows an application of 
this modeling for a tourism application which is currently in 
development. 
C. Tourism implementation 
This modeling is being applied to the tourism domain in 
the region of Côte-d’Or in France for the company Côte-
d’Or Tourisme. The aim is to create a tourism application 
that should provide a combination of tourism products from 
Côte-d’Or according to a user profile. At the beginning, a 
domain ontology has been created with all the concepts and 
the individuals related to the application domain. This 
ontology was supplied from a database composed of more 
than 3000 tourism products. Then, a goal model has been 
defined using goal concepts like “Week end”, “Going out 
with friends”, “with a baby”, etc. This knowledge was 
generated from the specialists of the domain represented by 
people working for the company Côte-d’Or Tourisme.   
135
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

An empirical pattern is defined to determine what kind 
of combination the adaptation model has to return. The 
energy function which gives the relevance of a combination 
is based on the interest weights and the coordinates of the 
tourism products, because it is not relevant to propose an 
activity in the morning and a restaurant for lunch with a 
distance of more than 50 kilometers. The traveling time 
required to reach the restaurant after the activity ending is 
inappropriate.  
A variance threshold needs to be set in order to define 
the maximum preferred variance between the individuals 
coordinates. 
This 
variance 
characterized 
the 
value 
dispersion regarding the average, in this case the threshold. 
The subsets in this pattern are possible. For instance, we can 
define a pattern like “Accommodation, Restaurant1, 
Activity, Restaurant2” in which “Accomodation and 
Restaurant1” are the first subset, and “Activity and 
Restaurant2” the second subset. In addition, a variance 
threshold is defined for each one. Thereby, the system can 
use more complex patterns for the combinations. 
The variance of a combination is defined as follow: 
1
0
2
2
1
0
2
1
0
1
1
1
)
var(
N
i
N
i
iy
iy
N
i
ix
ix
C
N
C
C
N
C
N
C
where C is a combination, N the number of elements into 
the combination, Ci the ith element of the combination, and 
Cix and Ciy the x and y coordinates of the ith element. 
The weight of a combination is defined as follow: 
1
0
1
)
(
N
i
Ciweight
N
C
weight
where Ciweight is the weight of the ith element. 
Using the variance and the weight function, the energy 
of a combination is: 
1
0
)
var(
)
var(
)
(
1
)
(
L
j
G
Cj
C
Cj
Threshold
G
E
Threshold
C
E
weight C
C
Energy
where E(X) is the integer part of X, ThresholdC is the 
variance threshold of the geographic coordinates for the 
combination C, 
ThresholdGCj
 is the variance threshold of the 
geographic coordinates for the jth subset of C, and L the 
number avec subsets. Thus, the system performs the 
simulated annealing algorithm using this energy function 
and a user profile, so that it can provide a combination of 
tourism products matching its interests and close 
coordinates. The result of the algorithm gives a 
combination of close products with high weights. The next 
part shows an example of a touristic journey provided by 
this implementation. An interface has been developed for 
iPhone. 
IV. 
AN UTILIZATION EXAMPLE  
An interface for this tourism implementation has been 
developed for iPhone. This part explains briefly the 
utilization of this application. The user is first invited to 
define his profile by giving his stay duration and by clicking 
on goal icons in order to inform on its interests. Moreover, 
the geographic coordinates of the user can be used or 
specific geographic coordinates can be specified for a 
preferred area. Nevertheless, if no area is given, the area 
will be the entire region of Côte-d’Or. Tourism products can 
be also selected and a complete stay will be generated 
relevantly according these selections. After this step, the 
adaptation process is performed using the simulated 
annealing algorithm and the system provides a combination 
of tourism offers, corresponding to the user's profile, in a 
carousel. If the solution does not satisfy the user, he is able 
to demand a new generation, keeping some elements if 
wanted. Thus, the system takes the kept elements into 
account to provide a new combination. This new solution is 
generated by fixing the kept elements into the combination. 
Thus, only the others elements of the combination are 
modified during the process of researching the best 
combination. The kept elements are only considered for the 
energy computations. A benchmark is presented in the next 
part to show the relevance of the simulated annealing 
algorithm. 
V. 
BENCHMARK 
Some tests of the algorithm for the generation of 
combinations have been done on a set of three thousand 
tourism products. We did comparisons between the energy 
of random combinations, the energy of the solutions found 
by the algorithm and the energy of the optimal combination. 
The solutions given by the simulated annealing algorithm 
are closed or equal to the optimal solution in terms of 
energy. In these tests, the average time required for the 
generation of a combination of six products was around 3 
seconds. But, this time depends on the different parameters 
(temperature decrease rate, the number of iteration per level 
of temperature) necessary to perform the simulated 
annealing algorithm. The faster is the temperature decrease 
and the lower is the number of iterations, the faster is the 
generation, but the worse is the resulting combination. In 
any case, this time is better than the time required to find the 
best combination by browsing all the possibilities. For 
example, in our test, finding the best combination needed 
around 3 hours against 3 seconds using the simulated 
annealing algorithm. These times are only given to have 
orders of magnitude, more tests need to be performed to 
have exacts results and to prove the interest of our 
proposition. Nevertheless, given these few results, the 
algorithm seems to give a relevant solution according a 
predefined energy function with a lesser cost (in terms of 
time) than calculating the optimal solution. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this article, we presented a new content based 
recommender system in order to improve the customer 
136
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

relationship management in e-tourism. The idea consists to 
take advantages of the semantic Web technologies, the 
properties of adaptive hypermedia systems, and to combine 
them with combinatory algorithms in order to create a 
recommender system. The simulated annealing algorithm is 
used in order to solve the problem of the polynomial time 
search required to generate a combination of tourism 
products. It gives a solution which approaches the best 
solution in a short time. The few results seem to be good 
considering the time required to obtain them and comparing 
to the best solutions. Nevertheless, for the future, we need to 
make more tests and benchmarks to quantify more precisely 
the relevance of our system. Moreover, we could improve 
the quality of the propositions by taking into account some 
group of users as it is done in collaborative filtering 
recommender systems. This is possible by adding a group 
model into the architecture. Thus, the recommender system 
would become a hybrid recommender system. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is done in collaboration with Côte-d’Or 
Tourisme, a company which aims to promote tourism in its 
region. The authors would like to thank Quentin Collin and 
Erwan Privat for their help. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Levine, S. 2000. The rise of CRM, America’s Network, Vol. 104, 
No. 6, pp. 34. 
[2] Bull, C. 2003. Strategic issues in customer relationship management 
(CRM) implementation, Business Process Management Journal 9, 
No. 5, pp. 592-602. 
[3] Tintarev, N. and Masthoff, J.  2007. A survey of explanations in 
recommender systems, ICDE'07 Workshop on Recommender 
System, pp. 801-810, Istanbul, Turkey. 
[4] Bilgic, M. and Mooney, R. J. 2005. Explaining recommendations: 
Satisfaction vs. promotion. In Beyond Personalization Workshop, 
IUI’05, pp. 13-18. 
[5] Mcsherry, D. 2005. Explanation in recommender systems. Artificial 
Intelligence Review, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 179-197. 
[6] Goldberg, D., Nichols, D., Oki, B. M., and Terry, D. 1992. Using 
collaborative 
filtering 
to 
weave 
an 
information 
tapestry. 
Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery, Vol. 
35, No. 12, pp. 61-70. 
[7] Herlocker, J., Konstan, J., Borchers, A., and Riedl, J. 2000. An 
algorithmic framework for performing collaborative filtering. In 
Proceedings of 22nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on 
Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 230-237, 
Berkeley, CA. 
[8] Mooney, R. J. and Roy, L. 2000. Content-based book recommending 
using learning for text categorization. In Proceedings of the Fifth 
ACM Conference on Digital Libraries, pp. 195-204, San Antonio, 
TX. 
[9] Pazzani, M. J., Muramatsu, J., and Billsus, D. 1996. Syskill & 
Webert: Identifying interesting web sites. In Proceedings of the 
Thirteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-96), 
pp. 54-61, Portland, OR. 
[10] Basu, C., Hirsh, H., and Cohen, W. W. 1998. Recommendation as 
classification: Using social and content-based information in 
recommendation. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth National 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-98), pp. 714-720, 
Madison, WI. 
[11] Melville, P., Mooney, R. J., and Nagarajan, R. 2002. Contentboosted 
collaborative 
filtering 
for 
improved 
recommendations. 
In 
Proceedings of the Eighteenth National Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (AAAI-2002), pp. 187-192, Edmonton, Alberta. 
[12] Sarwar, B. M., Konstan, J. A., Borchers, A., Herlocker, J., Miller, B., 
and Riedl, J. 1998. Using filtering agents to improve prediction 
quality in the grouplens research collaborative filtering system. In 
Proceedings of the 1998 ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work, pp. 345-354, Seattle, Washington, USA. 
[13] Oard, D. 1997. The State of the Art in Text Filtering, User Modeling 
and User Adapted Interaction, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 141-178. 
[14] Brusilovsky, P., Eklund, J., and Schwarz, E. 1998. Web-based 
education for all: A tool for developing adaptive courseware, 
Computer Networks, Vol. 30, No. 1-7, pp. 291-300. 
[15] Cristea, A. and De Mooij, A. 2003. LAOS: Layered WWW AHS 
authoring model and their corresponding algebraic operators, In 
Proceedings of WWW'03, Budapest, Hungary. 
[16] Henze, N.  2000. Adaptive hyperbooks: Adaptation for project-based 
learning resources. PhD Dissertation, University of Hannover. 
[17] Cristea, A. and Calvi, L. 2003. The Three Layers of Adaptation 
Granularity. In Proc. of the International Conference on User 
Modelling, pp. 4-14, Johnstown, PA, USA. 
[18] Hendrix, M. and Cristea, 2008. A. Meta-levels of adaptation in 
education, Proceedings of 11th IASTED International Conference on 
Computers and Advanced Technology in Education, V. Uskov (Ed.), 
IASTED, Innsbruck, Austria. 
[19] De Bra, P., Houben, G-J., and Kornatzky, Y. 1992. An extensible 
data model for hyperdocuments, Proceedings of the ACM 
Conference on Hypertext, pp. 222-231, New York, NY: ACM. 
[20] De Bra, P., Houben, G-J., and Wu, H. 1999. AHAM: A dexter-based 
reference model for adaptive hypermedia, in Hypertext’99: 
Proceedings of the 10th ACMConference on Hypertext and 
Hypermedia: Returning to our Diverse Roots, pp.147-156, New 
York. 
[21] Brusilovsky, P. 2001. Adaptive hypermedia, User modeling and 
user-adapted interaction, Vol. 11 No. 1-2, pp. 87-110. 
[22] Moukas, A. 1997. Amalthaea: Information Discovery and Filtering 
using a Multiagent Evolving Ecosystem. J. Appl. Intell, Vol. 11, No. 
5, pp. 437-457. 
[23] Kamba, T., Sakagami, H., and Koseki, Y. 1997. Antagonomy: A 
Personalized Newspaper on the World Wide Web, Int’l J. Human-
Computer Studies, Vol. 46, No. 6, pp. 789-803. 
[24] Armstrong, R., Freitag, D., Joachims, T., and Mitchell, T. 1995. 
WebWatcher: A Learning Apprentice for the World Wide Web, in 
Proceedings of the 1995 AAAI Spring Symposium on Information 
Gathering from Heterogeneous, Distributed Environments, Stanford. 
[25] Minio, M. and Tasso, C. 1996. User Modeling for Information 
Filtering on INTERNET Services: Exploiting an Extended Version 
of the UMT Shell. In UM96 Workshop on User Modeling for 
Information Filtering on the WWW; Kailua-Kona, Hawaii. 
[26] Middleton, S., Alani, H., Shadbolt, N., and De Roure, D. 2002. 
Exploiting synergy between ontologies and recommender systems. 
In Proceedings of the WWW international workshop on the semantic 
web, Maui, HW, USA. 
[27] Cantador, I. and Castells, P. 2006. A multilayered ontology-based 
user profiles and semantic social networks for recommender 
systems. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Web 
Personalisation, Recommender Systems and Intelligent User 
Interfaces (WPRSIUI 2006), at the 4th International Conference on 
Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive Web-Based Systems (AH 2006), 
Dublin, Ireland. 
[28] Sieg, A., Mobasher, B., and Burke, R. 2007. Learning Ontology-
Based User Profiles: A Semantic Approach to Personalized Web 
Search. In IEEE Intelligent Informatics Bulletin, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 7-
18. 
[29] Laarhoven, P.J.M. and Aarts, E.H.L. 1987. Simulated Annealing: 
Theory and Applications. D Reidel Publishing Company, Germany. 
137
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

