Optimizing Geographical Entity and Scope Resolution in Texts using
Non-Geographical Semantic Information
Panos Alexopoulos and Carlos Ruiz
iSOCO, Intelligent Software Components S.A.
Av. del Partenon, 16-18, 28042, Madrid, Spain,
Email: {palexopoulos, cruiz}@isoco.com
Abstract—Assigning geographical meta-information to tex-
tual pieces of information in an automatic way is a challenging
semantic processing task that has been getting increasing atten-
tion from application and research areas that need to exploit
this kind of information. With that in mind, in this paper, we
propose a novel ontology-based framework for correctly identi-
fying geographical entity references within texts and mapping
them to corresponding ontological uris, as well as determining
the geographical scope of texts, namely the areas and regions
to which the texts are geographically relevant. Unlike other
approaches which utilize only geographical information for
performing these tasks, our approach allows the exploitation
of any kind of semantic information that is explicitly or
implicitly related to geographical entities in the given domain
and application scenario. This exploitation, according to our
experiments, manages to substantially improve the effectiveness
of the geographical entity and scope resolution tasks, especially
in scenarios where explicit geographical information is scarce.
Keywords-Location Disambiguation; Geographical Scope Res-
olution; Ontologies.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the rapidly increasing popularity of Social Media
sites, a lot of user-generated content has been injected in the
Web resulting in a large amount of both multimedia items
and textual data (tags and other text-based documents) [1].
As a consequence, it has become increasingly difﬁcult to ﬁnd
exactly the objects that best match the users’ information
needs. Besides, as more of those searches are performed
from mobile applications, geographic intent and scope be-
come indispensable as users expect a search system not only
to know their current location, but to understand their entire
geographic context. Therefore, it is crucial for the system to
be able to infer what is the location (if any) implicit in their
search and the user-generated content.
Thus, Geographical Intention Retrieval [2] concerns all
kinds of techniques related to the retrieval of information
involving some kind of spatial awareness. These methods
can improve all kinds of services and applications that
rely on geographical information, ranging from its quite
straightforward use in map services, to more advanced
techniques of personalization. For example, a user searching
for cheap ﬂights to Paris has the implicit intent of ﬂying
from his current location, although the latter was not stated.
This implicit geographic nature of user queries is called
geographic intent.
On the other hand, a text or a query has a geographic
scope. For example, a query for cheap ﬂights from London
to Paris would include both London and Paris in the geo-
graphic scope, but not locations in between. Similarly, a text
describing the Eiffel tower will have the geographic scope
of Paris, rather than of France, although both locations could
be mentioned in the tag set.
Geo-location services enable retrieval of likely geograph-
ical locations for given keywords or text [3]. Most of them
apply data mining and statistical techniques on big-scale data
sets in the Internet, nevertheless they rely only in syntactic
analysis, missing the beneﬁts of exploiting the real meaning
of a piece of text. This leaves them suffering issues such as
disambiguation problems with locations with the same name
(Paris, France vs. Paris, Texas) or locations named somehow
similar to non-geographic concepts (such as Reading, UK).
On the other hand, semantic analysis, either built on
top of statistical analysis or as a standalone approach,
can improve the previous approach by extracting not only
geographical entities from a text, but also other types of
entities (people, companies, etc.) that can, via reasoning or
inference techniques, extract further geographic information.
Of course, the main limitation of semantic approaches
is the need for geographical knowledge bases as input to
the system, typically a bottleneck in the whole process.
Previous approaches have tried to build geographic knowl-
edge on top of different kind of resources, including ad
hoc ontologies, geo-gazetteers or more generic knowledge
hubs such as Wikipedia. However, the reuse of Open Data
is a key element for improving this approach, avoiding or
at least limiting the initial entry barriers for geographical
semantic analysis. In particular, the Linked Data initiative
[4] provides a crucial starting point for building a large
and reliable geographical centered knowledge base, with
enough information from other type of entities to allow for
a comprehensive coverage of most domains.
Given the above, in this paper, we focus on geographical
analysis of textual information and we propose a novel
ontology-based framework for tackling two problems:
1) The problem of geographical
entity
resolution,
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

namely the detection within a text of geographical en-
tity references and their correct mapping to ontological
uris that represent them.
2) The problem of geographical
scope
resolution,
namely the determination of areas and regions to
which the text is geographically relevant.
The distinguishing characteristic of this framework is that,
unlike other ontology-based approaches which utilize only
geographical information for performing the above tasks, it
allows the exploitation of any kind of semantic information
that is explicitly or implicitly related to geographical entities
in the given domain and application scenario. In that way,
it manages to signiﬁcantly improve the accuracy of the
the above tasks, especially in domains and scenarios where
explicit geographical information is scarce.
The rest of the paper is as follows. Section II presents
related works. Section III presents our proposed frame-
work and its components while Section IV presents and
discusses experimental results regarding the evaluation of the
framework’s effectiveness. Finally, conclusions are drawn in
Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
Most related approaches to our work originate from the
area of geographical information retrieval [2], where several
approaches based on information retrieval, machine learning
or semantic techniques are proposed to resolve geographic
entities and scope.
Andogah et al. [5] describe an approach to place am-
biguity resolution in text consisting of three components;
a geographical tagger, a geographical scope resolver, and
a placename referent resolver. The same authors, in [6],
also propose determining the geographical scope as means
to improve the accuracy in relevance ranking and query
expansion in search applications. However these processes
only rely on limited geographical information rather than
using some other data available.
More related to the process of attempting to discern
whether a texts topic is location-related, Mei et al. [7] present
methods for ﬁnding latent semantic topics over locations
(states or countries) and Wang et al. [8] propose a Location-
Aware Topic Model based on Latent Dirichlet Allocation [9].
Besides, some other general approaches related to location
disambiguation and inference are based on a query expan-
sion process that augments a user’s query with additional
terms in order to improve the results, plus a ﬁltering process
for determining the relevance of results to the original
query. For that, different dimensions can be taken into
account in terms of how the relevance should be mea-
sured, ranging from its accuracy in a particular context to
the inner meaning between terms. There are two primary
query expansion approaches [10], [11]: on the one hand,
probabilistic approaches sample from terms that co-occur
with the original query as the basis for the expansion in
a local or global context, and, on the other hand, the use
of ontologies by semantic approaches for query expansion
relies on the formal and strongly deﬁned structure they
introduce, exploiting the existent relations between different
concepts and entities.
Following a strict semantic approach, Kauppinen et al.
[12] present an approach using two ontologies (SUO - a
large Finnish place ontology, and SAPO - a historical and
geographical ontology) and logic rules to deal with heritage
information where modern and historical information is
available (e.g., new name for a place, new borders in a
country). This method is combined with some faceted search
functionalities, but they do not propose any method for
disambiguating texts.
More related to the fact that the disambiguation of a
location depends on the context (such as in “London, Eng-
land” vs. “London, Ontario”), Peng et al. [13] propose an
ontology-based method based on local context and sense
proﬁles combining evidence (location sense context in train-
ing documents, local neighbor context, and the popularity of
individual location sense) for such disambiguation.
III. PROPOSED GEOGRAPHICAL SCOPE RESOLUTION
FRAMEWORK
Our proposed framework targets the two tasks of geo-
graphical entity and scope resolution based on a common
assumption: that the existence of both geographical and
non-geographical entities within a text may be used as
evidence that indicate which is the most probable meaning
of an ambiguous location term as well as which locations
constitute the geographical scope of the whole text.
To see why this assumption is valid, consider a historical
text containing the term “Tripoli”. If this term is collo-
cated with terms like “Siege of Tripolitsa” and “Theodoros
Kolokotronis” (the commander of the Greeks in this siege)
then it is fair to assume that this term refers to the city of
Tripoli in Greece rather than the capital of Libya. Also, in
a historical text like “The victory of Greece in the Siege of
Tripolitsa under the command of Kolokotronis was decisive
for the liberation from Turkey”, the evidence provided by
“Siege of Tripolitsa” and “Kolokotronis” and “Greece”
indicates that Tripoli is more likely to be the location the
text is about rather than Turkey.
Of course, which entities and to what extent may serve
as evidence in a given application scenario depends on the
domain and expected content of the texts that are to be
analyzed. For example, in the case of historical texts we
expect to use as evidence historical events and persons that
have participated in them. For that reason, our approach
is based on the a priori determination and acquisition of
the optimal evidential knowledge for the scenario in hand.
This knowledge is expected to be available in the form of
an ontology and it’s used within the framework in order
to perform geographical entity and scope resolution. In
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

particular, our proposed framework comprises the following
components:
• A Geographical Resolution Evidence Model that con-
tains both geographical and non-geographical semantic
entities that may serve as location-related evidence for
the application scenario and domain at hand. Each en-
tity is assigned evidential power degrees which denote
its usefulness as evidence for the two resolution tasks.
• A Geographical Entity Resolution Process that uses
the evidence model to detect and extract from a given
text terms that refer to locations. Each term is linked
to one or more possible location uris along with a
conﬁdence score calculated for each of them. The
uri with the highest conﬁdence should be the correct
location the term refers to.
• A Geographical Scope Resolution Process that uses
the evidence model to determine, for a given text, the
location uris that potentially fall within its geographical
scope. A conﬁdence score for each uri is used to denote
the most probable locations.
In the following paragraphs, we elaborate on each of the
above components.
A. Geographical Resolution Evidence Model
For the purpose of this paper, we deﬁne an ontology as a
tuple O = {C, R, I, iC, iR} where
• C is a set of concepts.
• I is a set of instances.
• R is a set of binary relations that may link pairs of
concept instances.
• iC is a concept instantiation function C → I.
• iR is a relation instantiation function R → I × I.
Given an ontology, the Geographical Resolution Evi-
dence Model deﬁnes which ontological instances and to
what extent should be used as evidence towards i) the correct
meaning interpretation of a location term to be found within
the text and ii) the correct geographical scope resolution
of the whole text. More formally, given a domain ontology
O and a set of locations L ⊆ I, a geographical resolution
evidence model consists of two functions:
• A location meaning evidence function lmef : L ×
I → [0, 1]. If l ∈ L and i ∈ I then lmef(l, i) is
the degree to which the existence, within the text, of i
should be considered an indication that l is the correct
meaning of any text term that has l within its possible
interpretations.
• A geographical scope evidence function gsef : L ×
I → [0, 1]. If l ∈ L and i ∈ I then gsef(l, i) is
the degree to which the existence, within the text, of i
should be considered an indication that l represents the
geographical scope of the text.
In order to determine the above functions for a given
domain and scenario we need to consider the concepts whose
instances are directly or indirectly related to locations and
which are expected to be present in the text to be analyzed.
This, in turn, means that some a priori knowledge about the
domain and content of the text(s) should be available. The
more domain speciﬁc the texts are, the smaller the ontology
needs to be and the more effective and efﬁcient the whole
resolution process is expected to be. In fact, it might be
that using a larger ontology than necessary could reduce the
effectiveness of the resolution process.
To illustrate this point assume that the texts to be analyzed
are about American History. This would mean that the
locations mentioned within these texts are normally related
to events that are part of this history and, consequently,
locations that had nothing to do with these events need not
be considered. In that way, the range of possible meanings
for location terms within the texts as well as the latter’s
potential scope is considerably reduced.
Thus, a strategy for selecting the minimum required
instances that should be included in the location evidence
model would be the following:
• First, identify the concepts whose instances may act as
location evidence in the given domain and texts.
• Then, identify the subset of these concepts which
constitute the central meaning of the texts and thus
“determine” mostly their location scope.
• Finally, use these concepts in order to limit the number
of possible locations that may appear within the text as
well as the number of instances of the other evidential
concepts.
For example, when building a location evidence model for
texts that describe historical events, some concepts whose
instances may act as evidence for locations expected to be
found in these texts are related locations, historical events,
and historical groups and persons that participated in these
events. The most location-determining concept would be
the Historical Event, so from all the possible locations,
groups and persons we consider only those that are, directly
or indirectly, related to some event. Indirectly means, for
example, that while “Siege of Tripolitsa” is directly related
to “Tripoli”, it is indirectly related to Greece as well.
The result of the above process should be a location
evidence mapping function lem
:
C
→
Rn which
given an evidential concept c ∈ C returns the relations
{r1, r2, ..., rn} ∈ Rn whose composition links c’s instances
to locations. Table I shows such a mapping for the history
domain and in particular about that of military conﬂicts.
Using this mapping function, we can then calculate the
location meaning evidence function lmef as follows. Given
a location l ∈ L and an instance i ∈ I, which belongs
to some concept c ∈ C and is related to l through the
composition of relations {r1, r2, ..., rn} ∈ lem(c), we derive
i) the set of instances Iamb ⊆ I which share common names
with i and ii) the set of locations Lamb ⊆ L which share
common names with l and are also related to i through
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Table I
LOCATION EVIDENCE MAPPING FUNCTION FOR MILITARY CONFLICTS
DOMAIN
Evidence Concept
Location Linking Relation(s)
Military Conﬂict
tookPlaceAtLocation
Military Conﬂict
tookPlaceAtLocation, isPartOfLocation
Military Person
participatedInConﬂict,
tookPlaceAtLo-
cation
Combatant
participatedInConﬂict,
tookPlaceAtLo-
cation
Location
isPartOfLocation
{r1, r2, ..., rn} ∈ lem(c). Then the value of the function
lmef for this location and this instance is:
lmef(l, i) =
1
|Lamb| · |Iamb|
(1)
The intuition behind this formula is that the evidential
power of a given instance is inversely proportional to its
own ambiguity as well as to the number of different target
locations it provides evidence for. If, for example, a given
military person has fought in many different locations with
the same name, then its evidential power for this name is
low. Similarly, if a given military person’s name is very
ambiguous (i.e., there are many persons with the same name)
then its evidential power is also low.
Using the same equation we can also calculate the geo-
graphical scope evidence function gsef, the only difference
being that we consider the set L′
amb that contains all the
locations related to i, not just the ones with the same name
as l:
gsef(l, i) =
1
|L′
amb| · |Iamb|
(2)
The intuition here is that the geographical scope-related
evidential power of a given instance is inversely proportional
to the number of different locations it is related to.
B. Geographical Entity Resolution
The geographical entity resolution process for a given text
document and a location meaning evidence function works
as follows. First, we extract from the text the set of terms
T that match to some i ∈ I along with a term-meaning
mapping function m : T → I that returns for a given term
t ∈ T the instances it may refer to. We also consider Itext
to be the superset of these instances.
Then, we consider the set of potential locations found
within the text Ltext ⊆ Itext and for each l ∈ Ltext we de-
rive all the instances from Itext that belong to some concept
c ∈ C for which lem(c) ̸= ∅. Subsequently, by combining
the location evidence model function lmef with the term
meaning function m we are able to derive a location-term
meaning support function supm : Ltext × T → [0, 1] that
returns for a location l ∈ Ltext and a term t ∈ T the degree
to which t supports l. If l ∈ Ltext, t ∈ T then
supm(l, t) =
1
|m(t)| ·
∑
i∈m(t)
lmef(l, i)
(3)
Using this function, we are able to calculate for a given
term t ∈ T in the text the conﬁdence that it refers to location
l ∈ m(t):
cref(l) =
∑
tj∈T K(l, tj)
∑
l′∈m(t)
∑
tj∈T K(l′, tj) ·
∑
tj∈T
supm(l, tj) (4)
where K(l, t) = 1 if supm(l, t) > 0 and 0 otherwise.
In other words, the overall support score for a given
candidate location is equal to the sum of the location’s partial
supports (i.e., function supm) weighted by the relative
number of terms that support it. It should be noted that in
the above process, we adopt the one referent per discourse
approach which assumes one and only one meaning for a
location in a discourse.
C. Geographical Scope Resolution
The process of geographical scope resolution is similar
to the entity resolution one, the difference being that we
consider as candidate scope locations not only those found
within the text but practically all those that are related
to instances of the evidential concepts in the ontology. In
that way, even if a location is not explicitly mentioned
within the text, it still can be part of the latter’s scope.
More speciﬁcally, given a text document and a geographical
scope evidence function gsef we ﬁrst consider as candidate
locations all those for which there is evidence within the text,
that is all those for which gsef(l, i) > 0, l ∈ L, i ∈ Itext.
We call this set Lcand. Then, for a given l ∈ Lcand we
compute the scope related support it receives from the terms
found within the text as follows:
sups(l, t) =
1
|m(t)| ·
∑
i∈m(t)
gsef(l, i)
(5)
Finally, we compute the conﬁdence that l belongs to the
geographical scope of the text in the same way as Equation
4 but with sups substituting supm:
cscope(l) =
∑
tj∈T K(l, tj)
∑
l′∈Lcand
∑
tj∈T K(l′, tj) ·
∑
tj∈T
sups(l, tj)
(6)
where K(l, t) = 1 if sups(l, t) > 0 and 0 otherwise.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
To illustrate the effectiveness of our proposed framework
we performed two experiments on historical texts describing
military conﬂicts. In the ﬁrst experiment, we focused on
correctly resolving ambiguous location references within
the texts while in the second, on correctly determining the
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

texts’ geographical scope. In both cases, we built a common
location evidence model using an appropriate ontology,
derived from DBPedia, comprising about 4120 military con-
ﬂicts, 1660 military persons, 4270 locations, 890 combatants
and, of course, the relations between them (conﬂicts with
locations, conﬂicts with persons etc.). The model’s location
evidence mapping function was that of Table I and it was
used to calculate the evidential functions lmef and gsef for
all pairs of locations and evidential entities (other locations,
conﬂicts, persons and combatants).
Table II shows a small sample of these pairs where,
for example, James Montgomery acts as evidence for the
disambiguation of Beaufort County, South Carolina because
he’s fought a battle there. Moreover, his evidential power for
that location is 0.25, practically because there are 3 other
military persons in the ontology also named Montgomery.
Similarly, Pancho Villa acts as evidence for the consideration
of Columbus, New Mexico as the scope of a text (because
he’s fought a battle there) and his evidential power for that
is 0.2 since, according to the ontology, he’s fought battles
in 4 other locations as well.
Table II
EXAMPLES OF LOCATION EVIDENTIAL ENTITIES
Location
Evidential Entity
lmef
gsef
Columbus, Geor-
gia
James H. Wilson
1.0
0.17
Columbus,
New
Mexico
Pancho Villa
1.0
0.2
Beaufort County,
South Carolina
James Montgomery
0.25
0.25
Using this model, we ﬁrst applied our proposed geo-
graphic entity resolution process in a dataset of 50 short texts
describing military conﬂicts. All texts contained ambiguous
location entities but little other geographical information
and, in average, each ambiguous location reference had
2.5 possible interpretations. For each such reference, we
determined its possible interpretations and ranked them
using the conﬁdence score derived from Equation 4. We then
measured the effectiveness of the process by determining
the number of correctly interpreted location references,
namely references whose highest ranked interpretation was
the correct one.
Table III shows results achieved by our approach com-
pared to those achieved by some well-known publicly
available semantic annotation and disambiguation services,
namely DBPedia Spotlight [14], Wikimeta [15], Zemanta
[16], AlchemyAPI [17] and Yahoo! [18]. As one can see,
the consideration of non-geographical semantic information
that our approach enables, manages to signiﬁcantly improve
the effectiveness of the geographical entity resolution task.
For the second experiment, we applied our proposed ge-
ographic scope resolution process in two different datasets,
all comprising 50 short military conﬂict related texts but
Table III
GEOGRAPHICAL ENTITY RESOLUTION EVALUATION RESULTS
System/Approach
Effectiveness
Proposed Approach
72%
DBPedia Spotlight
54%
Wikimeta
33%
Zemanta
26%
AlchemyAPI
26%
Yahoo!
24%
with different characteristics. The ﬁrst dataset comprised
texts whose geographical scope was not explicitly mentioned
within them and which contained little other geographical
information. The second dataset comprised texts whose
geographical scope related locations were explicitly and
unambiguously mentioned within them but along with other
geographical entities that were not part of this scope.
In both cases, we determined for each text the possible
locations that comprised its geographical scope and ranked
them using the conﬁdence score derived from equation
6. We then measured the effectiveness of the process by
determining the number of correctly scope resolved texts,
namely texts whose highest ranked scope locations were the
correct ones. As a baseline, we compared our results to the
ones derived from Yahoo! Placemaker [19] geoparsing web
service.
The results of the above process are shown in Table IV.
As one can see, the improvement our method achieves in the
effectiveness of the scope resolution task is quite signiﬁcant
in both datasets and especially in the ﬁrst one where the
scope-related locations are not explicitly mentioned within
the texts. This veriﬁes the central idea of our approach
that non-geographical semantic information can signiﬁcantly
improve the geographical scope resolution process and in
particular the subtasks of:
1) Inferring relevant to the text’s geographical scope
locations even in the absence of explicit reference of
them within the text (ﬁrst dataset).
2) Distinguishing between relevant and non-relevant to
the text’s geographical scope locations, even in the
presence of non-relevant location references within the
text (second dataset).
Table IV
GEOGRAPHICAL SCOPE RESOLUTION EVALUATION RESULTS
System/Approach
Dataset 1
Dataset 2
Proposed Approach
70%
85%
Yahoo! Placemaker
18%
30%
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a novel framework for op-
timizing geographical entity and scope resolution in texts
by means of domain and application scenario speciﬁc non-
geographical semantic information. First, we described how,
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

given a priori knowledge about the domain(s) and expected
content of the texts that are to be analyzed, one can deﬁne a
model that deﬁnes which and to what extent semantic entities
(especially non-geographical ones) can be used as contextual
evidence indicating two things:
• Which is the most probable meaning of an ambiguous
location reference within a text (geographical entity
resolution task).
• Which locations constitute the geographical scope of
the whole text (geographical scope resolution task).
Then, we described how such a model can be used for the
two tasks of geographical entity and scope resolution by pro-
viding corresponding processes. The effectiveness of these
processes was experimentally evaluated in a comprehensive
and comparative to other systems way. The evaluation results
veriﬁed the ability of our framework to signiﬁcantly improve
the effectiveness of the two resolution tasks by exploiting
non-geographical semantic information.
It should be noted that our proposed framework is not
meant as a substitute or rival of other geographical resolution
approaches (that operate in open domains, use geographical
information and relevant heuristics and apply machine learn-
ing and statistical methods) but rather as a complement of
them in application scenarios where text domain and content
are a priori known and comprehensive domain ontological
knowledge is available (as in the case of historical texts used
in our experiments). In fact, given these two requirements for
our approach’s applicability, future work will focus on in-
vestigating how statistical and machine learning approaches
may be used, in conjunction with our approach, in order to i)
automatically build geographical resolution evidence models
based on text corpora and ii) deal with cases where available
domain semantic information is incomplete.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the European Commission
under contract FP7- 248984 GLOCAL.
REFERENCES
[1] A. M. Kaplan and M. Haenlein, “Users of the world, unite!
the challenges and opportunities of social media,” Business
Horizons, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 59–68, 2010.
[2] C. B. Jones and R. S. Purves, “Geographical information
retrieval,” Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 219–228,
Jan. 2008.
[3] J. Raper, G. Gartner, H. Karimi, and C. Rizos, “Applications
of location-based services: a selected review,” J. Locat. Based
Serv., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 89–111, Jun. 2007.
[4] C. Bizer, T. Heath, and T. Berners-Lee, “Linked data - the
story so far,” Int. J. Semantic Web Inf. Syst., vol. 5, no. 3, p.
122, 2009.
[5] G. Andogah, G. Bouma, J. Nerbonne, and E. Koster, “Place-
name ambiguity resolution,” in Methodologies and Resources
for Processing Spatial Language (Workshop at LREC 2008),
2008.
[6] G. Andogah, G. Bouma, and J. Nerbonne, “Every document
has a geographical scope,” Data and Knowledge Engineering,
2012.
[7] Q. Mei, C. Liu, H. Su, and C. Zhai, “A probabilistic approach
to spatiotemporal theme pattern mining on weblogs,” in
Proceedings of the 15th international conference on World
Wide Web, ser. WWW ’06.
New York, NY, USA: ACM,
2006, pp. 533–542.
[8] C. Wang, J. Wang, X. Xie, and W.-Y. Ma, “Mining geographic
knowledge using location aware topic model,” in Proceedings
of the 4th ACM workshop on Geographical information
retrieval, ser. GIR ’07.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2007,
pp. 65–70.
[9] D.
M.
Blei,
A.
Y.
Ng,
and
M.
I.
Jordan,
“Latent
dirichlet
allocation,”
J.
Mach.
Learn.
Res.,
vol. 3, pp. 993–1022, Mar. 2003. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=944919.944937
[10] J. Xu and W. B. Croft, “Query expansion using local and
global document analysis,” in Proceedings of the 19th an-
nual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval, ser. SIGIR ’96.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 1996, pp. 4–11.
[11] J. Bhogal, A. Macfarlane, and P. Smith, “A review of ontology
based query expansion,” Inf. Process. Manage., vol. 43, no. 4,
pp. 866–886, Jul. 2007.
[12] T. Kauppinen, R. Henriksson, R. Sinkkil, R. Lindroos, J. Vti-
nen, and E. Hyvnen, “Ontology-based disambiguation of
spatiotemporal locations,” in Proceedings of the 1st interna-
tional workshop on Identity and Reference on the Semantic
Web (IRSW2008), 5th European Semantic Web Conference
2008 (ESWC 2008).
Tenerife, Spain: CEUR Workshop
Proceedings, ISSN 1613-0073, June 1-5 2008.
[13] Y. Peng, D. He, and M. Mao, “Geographic named entity dis-
ambiguation with automatic proﬁle generation,” in Proceed-
ings of the 2006 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference
on Web Intelligence, ser. WI ’06.
Washington, DC, USA:
IEEE Computer Society, 2006, pp. 522–525.
[14] “Dbpedia spotlight,” http://dbpedia.org/spotlight, accessed:
05/07/2012.
[15] “Dbpedia
spotlight,”
http://www.wikimeta.com,
accessed:
05/07/2012.
[16] “Zemanta,” http://www.zemanta.com, accessed: 05/07/2012.
[17] “Alchemy
api,”
http://www.alchemyapi.com,
accessed:
05/07/2012.
[18] “Yahoo!”
http://developer.yahoo.com/search/
con-
tent/V2/contentAnalysis.html, accessed: 05/07/2012.
[19] “Yahoo! placemaker,” http://developer.yahoo.com/geo/placemaker/,
accessed: 05/07/2012.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

