Assessing Legislative Alignment – An Ontological Approach 
Work in progress 
Rosetta Romano  
Faculty of Government Business and Law 
University of Canberra 
Canberra, Australia 
rosetta.romano@canberra.edu.au 
 
 
Abstract—An ontology provides the agreed definitions and 
describes how the terms in a subject area or domain, are 
related.  It is a model that can be read by humans and coded 
for use by computers.  Across the globe, governments are using 
ontologies 
in 
innovative 
ways 
to 
solve 
long-standing 
government problems.  The problem is that there is no single 
approach used by government agencies to assess whether their 
systems are aligned to the legislation.  In a social welfare 
setting, if there is any misalignment between the legislation and 
the systems, then, it may result in an unintentional 
disadvantage to those most in need. This paper outlines the 
research design using a case study to detect and to compare the 
ontological patterns existing in legislation and an online claim 
form relating to a family tax benefit in Australia.  
Keywords-Ontology; 
Ontology 
alignment; 
Legislation; 
Government claim forms; Online claim forms. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Around the globe, different governments are using 
ontologies in innovative ways to solve long-standing 
government problems.  An ontology is an artefact that 
provides a community with the agreed definitions and 
describes how the terms in a subject area or domain, are 
related.  As a model, it can be read by humans, and coded for 
computers. Besides being useful as an agreed dictionary, its 
strength lies in the way that technology can consume it.  
Ontologies allow sophisticated machine manipulation, 
aggregation of information, pattern analysis and inferences 
from vast quantities of data that ordinary humans would not 
be able to handle [1]. It is for this capability that 
governments are using ontologies to contribute to the 
development of e-government.  E-government is a way for 
government to use new technologies to provide people with 
more convenient access to government information and 
services, to improve the quality of services and to provide 
greater opportunities to participate in the democratic 
institutions and processes [2]. 
In Australia, e-government is supporting the move away 
from traditional service delivery.  Historically, a single 
agency would have sole responsibility to deliver all 
components of a service to consumers.  Connected 
government, and increased partnership with the private 
sector, now requires the responsibility for the delivery of 
services to be shared, and new ways of using technology to 
manage the complexity need to be found. 
The literature has reported many different ways that 
governments are using ontologies to solve long-standing 
government problems.  For example, in Greece, Italy, 
Denmark and Germany, ontologies have been used to 
enhance public participation in the development of 
legislation [3].  In the Netherlands, ontologies have been 
used to compare legislation across jurisdictions [4], while in 
Spain, ontologies have been used to improve the retrieval of 
legal documents for citizens [5], and in the UK, the 
government has used ontology to model the notification of 
multiple agencies of a change of circumstance and replace it 
with a single local authority [6]. 
This paper reports on research-in-progress to address 
another long-standing problem for government responding to 
frequent and complex legislative change.  In Australia, 
ministers must establish audit committees and provide an 
annual compliance report that the effectiveness of review for 
monitoring compliance with laws, regulations and associated 
government policies [7].  This requires processes to ensure 
that information systems evolve in line with the law. An 
information system is the application of people, technologies 
and procedures to solve a business problem and government 
information systems are used to solve government problems 
[8]. 
Many government information systems involve decision 
making.  Decision making is big business for many 
government agencies [9].  For the recipients of welfare, any 
misalignment between the legislation and the systems may 
result in unintentional disadvantage.  There is no single 
approach used by government agencies to assess whether the 
government information systems and legislation are 
conceptually aligned.  This paper outlines the design of novel 
research using the ontology patterns existing in legislation to 
assess the alignment between legislation and government 
information systems.   
There has been work to explore how administrative 
organisations can use ontologies to manage the complex 
policy change management [10].  This research-in-progress 
explores the comparison of ontological patterns existing in 
different artefacts within a single domain to assure ministers 
and service consumers that systems and legislation are 
aligned. The artefacts being compared are the legislation and 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

the claim form for an Australian Government Family Tax 
Benefit (FTB) payment.  These artefacts are key components 
of the government information systems used to administer 
the law. 
The FTB claim form is completed by service consumers 
and used as evidence by the service providing agencies that 
are responsible for the administration of the payment.  It is a 
record of the claimant’s application for the payment.  The 
evidence being collected in the form should be aligned to the 
regulatory requirements [10].  For the FTB payment in 
Australia, the legislation supports two consecutive legislative 
processes: (1) assess the eligibility of the applicant, and (2) if 
the applicant is eligible, then, assess the payment value.   
The FTB claim form should therefore be designed to 
collect the data that is necessary for the government 
information systems to assess (1) the eligibility in 
accordance with the ‘A New Tax System (Family Assistance) 
Act 1999’, and (2) to determine the value of the payment in 
accordance with A New Tax System (Family Assistance) 
(Administration) Act 1999.  No more, and no less.  If the 
claim form seeks more data, or less data, then this may 
indicate misalignment. 
The online claim form for a FTB payment is very 
complex.  An applicant seeking the payment must provide no 
less than 946 data items about themselves, 145 about their 
partner, and 52 items about each of their children.  Perhaps 
the complex legislation requires all this data.  In that case, 
we would expect that the investigation will determine that 
alignment exists.  
Government information systems are developed by 
experts who have a deep understanding of the legislation and 
the government information systems that enact it.  Rather 
than relying on a few key experts perhaps there is a way to 
model the information so that the knowledge can be shared 
by government agencies and service consumers alike.  
Meeting the greater expectation from citizens is made 
possible with modern information technologies [12].  With a 
model of the knowledge that is currently hidden behind 
complex legislation, more opportunities to streamline 
payments and processes, reduce duplication and enhance the 
online experience are expected to emerge.  
By comparing a conceptual model of the legislation to 
the conceptual model of the claim form, it should be possible 
to identify any misalignment between them.  A conceptual 
model is an abstract and simplified description of the reality 
that is being represented [2].  
The conceptual structure in the legislation and the online 
claim form will each be modelled as ontologies.  An 
ontology is defined as “an explicit specification of a 
conceptualisation” [13].  An ontology specifies and organises 
the concepts in a domain [14] in a model as an abstract and 
simplified view of the domain [15].  It is a shared 
understanding accomplished by agreeing on an appropriate 
way to conceptualize the domain, and then to make it explicit 
in some language [16].  An ontology can be used by humans 
and formalised for computers. 
Like an ontology, legislation provides definitions of 
terms in a domain and describes the relations between these 
terms. It is a primary source for government agencies to 
harvest terms to build an ontology. While it is a rich source, 
legislation is difficult to understand because: not all terms 
are defined; the relations between terms are not always clear; 
and the context can sometimes only be understood by 
accessing all cross-referenced sections or legislation. 
This paper describes the research design that will be used 
to develop a conceptual model of the legislation and the 
claim form related to the FTB payment domain.  The 
research in progress will contribute a strategy and method of 
conducting ontological analysis, and a novel means of using 
ontology to determine alignment.  It will apply an 
instrumental case study to gain a broader appreciation of 
how legislation is being translated in the claim form.  It is 
expected that the processes used to detect, extract and 
analyse the concepts from legislation will be generalizable. 
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows: in 
Section II, the research setting is described. In Section III, 
the research strategy is outlined.  In Section IV, the research 
limitations and risks are presented.  Finally the research 
contributions are discussed in Section V. 
II. 
RESEARCH SETTING 
In Australia, the government has the powers to pass laws.  
There are three arms of government: the parliament, the 
executive and the judiciary (see Figure 1).  The parliament 
makes the law; the executive operationalises the law, and the 
the judiciary interprets the law. The interpretation of the law 
is not a focus of this paper.  In Figure 1 the research setting, 
overview and scope are modelled.  This research in progress 
will apply a case study using the FTB payment to 
demonstrate how the conceptual structure of the legislation 
drafted by the parliament, i.e., the government agency 
making the law, has been operationalised in the claim form 
by the executive, i.e., the service delivery agency 
Department of Human Services, on behalf of the APS policy 
agency, the Department of Social Services.  While the 
minister for the policy department is responsible for the 
legislation, (2) the minister for the service delivery 
department is responsible for delivering the services i.e., to 
determine the eligibility for the payment, and to assess the 
value of the payment. 
 
The FTB legislation
 
The Judiciary        
interprets the 
law
The three arms 
of law making in 
Australia
The Executive  
operationalises 
the law
The policy – Helping families with the cost of raising children
The Parliament 
makes the law
SCOPE
Acts Interpretation Act 1991
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) Act 1999 
A New Tax Systems (Family 
Assistance)(Administration) Act 
Department of Social Services
- Family Assistance Policy
Department of Human Services
Is there 
conceptual 
alignment ?
CASE STUDY INFORMATION SYSTEM ARTEFACTS
The FTB claim form
Case law
Decisions
 
Figure 1.  Research setting, overview and scope. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

III. 
RESEARCH STRATEGY 
This section outlines the proposed research strategy in three 
sections.  Section A identifies the research methodology to 
be used.  Section B provides an overview of case study 
methodology, and Section C describes the research methods 
that will be used to undertake the data collection and 
analysis. 
A. Research methodology 
This research will use a case study methodology.  The 
case study has two phases the build and the appraisal (see 
Figure 2).  This work-in-progress paper describes the 
research design for the first build phase only.  In the build 
phase, an ontological investigation will be undertaken to 
identify the concepts as they exist in the two pieces of 
legislation and the claim form.  Then, in the appraisal phase, 
the domain ontology developed by the researcher will be 
reviewed by key informants to appraise its appropriateness to 
confirm whether it as an objective representation of the FTB 
domain.  The assessors will include representatives from 
candidate legal, ICT, Business and policy departmental 
groups. 
 
B. Case study methodology 
Case study is a research strategy that has been used in both 
policy and public administration research [17]. The research 
in progress will apply an instrumental case study that is 
defined as a study that uses a particular case to gain a 
broader appreciation of an issue or phenomenon [17].  The 
research will use the legislation and the claim form relating 
to the payment of FTB in normal circumstances to gain a 
broader and deeper appreciation of alignment issues that may 
exist.  The reason for concentrating on the normal 
circumstances is to constrain the study, and ensure it is 
completed within a reasonable timeframe. 
Regulation includes any laws or other rules that govern 
the conduct of people or businesses (service consumers) and 
affect them either directly or indirectly, sometimes in ways 
that are more apparent than others [11]. For example, it is 
apparent that the payment of FTB is covered by Division 1 
‘Family tax benefit’, of Part 3 ‘Payment of family 
assistance’, in the ‘A New Tax System (Family Assistance) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Research setting, overview and scope. 
FTB
Eligibility 
legislation 
ontology
FTB 
Payment 
legislation 
ontology
FTB 
Claim form 
ontology
 FTB 
Domain 
ontology
Ontology 1
Relationship concepts as they exist in 
‘A New Tax System (Family Assistance), Act 1999’
Ontology 2
Relationship concepts as they exist in  ‘A New Tax 
System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act, 1999’
Ontology 3 
Relationship concepts as they exist in the Claim for an 
annual lump sum payment of Family Tax Benefit 
Ontology 4
The set of unique relationship concepts as they exist 
in Ontologies 1, 2 and 3 
 
Figure 3.  The ontology outputs from Phase 1 – The Build. 
(Administration) Act, 1999’.  In Australia, the Acts 
Interpretation Act, 1901 is a reference for reading any 
Commonwealth Act.  It provides a dictionary to make 
Commonwealth legislation shorter, less complex and more 
consistent in operation and should be referred to for common 
definitions of such terms as person, individual, and Minister.   
A reader must be more attuned, to less-apparent 
connections existing in legislation.    These legislative 
connections are only possible to identify by tracing all cross-
referencing in the legislation.  For FTB, the two core pieces 
of legislation cross-reference another 13 pieces of legislation.  
These include the Migration Act, 1958; Income Tax 
Assessment 
Act, 
1997; 
Military 
Rehabilitation 
and 
Compensation Act, 2004; and the Social Security Act, 1991.  
The connections are not intuitive, but exist nevertheless. 
C. Research method 
The case study uses two different methods to generate the 
data for the research. The first method requires the researcher 
to undertake a manual exercise to identify the terms in the 
two pieces of legislation and the claim form, and to develop 
three separate models as ontologies as well as a single view, 
or domain model (see Figure 3).  The process used to build 
the ontologies and any observations from the build phase 
will presented for appraisal to key informants from Business, 
ICT, and legal areas of the policy and service delivery 
departments. 
The research will develop a set of assumptions to indicate 
where misalignment may exist, and if found to exist, will 
require some correction.  Although the researcher will 
suggest the possible implication of any misalignment 
identified, it is only by appraisal by key informants that the 
action to correct the misalignment will be made to the 
department responsible for the information system.   
So far, the research in progress has identified the 
following three patterns indicating possible misalignment, 
(1) the legislative terms, or synonyms for these terms in 
Ontologies 1 or 2, are not present in the Claim form 
Ontology 3, (2)   the Claim form ontology 3 introduces terms 
that are not present in the legislation ontologies 2 or 3, and 
(3) relations between terms in the Claim form ontology do 
not maintain the structure used in the legislation ontologies 1 
and 2.   
  
Step 1 - Identify the concepts
Step 2 - Model the concepts as ontologies
Step 4 - Compare ontologies & assess alignment 
Phase 1 – The Build
Phase 2 – The appraisal 
Step 5 -  Document the  findings
Step 3 - Build the ontology using an ontology construction tool 
Steps  1..n
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Where  any of these patterns are identified then a closer 
investigation will be undertaken.   Figure 4 is an example 
where the legislative term ‘Adopted child’ is not used in the 
Claim form.  Further investigation shows that the Claim 
form is using a related term ‘adoptive parent’.  That is, the 
Claim form has introduced a term that is not present in the 
legislation.  If a synonym term is being used, it will be 
necessary to conduct an ontological assessment to confirm 
whether it is a synonym or another term.  A synonymy is a 
relation between terms in a given language representing the 
same concept [19].  For example, in the legislation providing 
for payment of the FTB, two forms of FTB Child ‘of’ are 
used.  (1) FTB Child of the individual, and (2) FTB Child of 
the adult. By analyzing the legislation, the individual and the 
adult are synonyms, therefore, when building the domain 
ontology only one relationship will be modelled, and one 
synonym will be recorded.  This is an example of how logic 
based reasoning is being used to understand the differences 
between similar terms.  The power of ontology is that it can 
return inferences and aggregations provided the information 
has been declared (coded) in a software-processable format. 
These examples demonstrate how a manual process can 
be used to identify misalignment between the legislation and 
the Claim form in the FTB domain.  Rather than supporting 
two views, government can agree to harmonize and use only 
one term in the future.  Alternatively it may be agreed that 
more than one term will be maintained, and this may require 
the development of further guidance material for service 
providers and service consumers.  Whatever the decision, an 
agreed and explicit understanding can be captured in an 
ontology, and this would remove the reliance on a few highly 
skilled legal interpreters. It is likely that the research in 
progress will detect ambiguities existing in the legislation, or 
the claim form.  By removing the ambiguities, a closer 
legislative alignment will be possible. 
Another related method is ontology matching.  The focus 
of matching is to discover the differences between two 
ontology versions.  The challenges for ontology matching 
process, have received recent attention, and include: 
discovering missing background knowledge, selection, user 
involvement, explanation of matching results, and alignment 
management [18]. Once a domain ontology has been created 
it will be important to undertake matching on a regular basis 
to manage the continued alignment.  This is another 
requirement for legislative change management that will be 
considered in future research. 
The representation of the knowledge will be captured in 
Resource Description Framework (RDF), a standardized 
syntax for encoding RDF statements to make them software 
processable [20].  All RDF triples can be developed as a 
distributed graph, and captured as a Uniform Resource 
Identifier (URI) address for location by other resources.  The 
relationships between the service providers and service  
 
 
Figure 4.  Adopted child example. 
subject/predicate/object form statements.   Two examples of 
triples are shown in Figure 5.   The triples describe that (1) 
an applicant must be responsible for a child, and that (2) an 
applicant must apply for the payment to the Secretary.    
The ontological representations will be entered in an 
ontology builder to provide a model of the relationships.  
The output will include a model of the FTB domain and, an 
ontology for each of the separate pieces of legislation, and 
the claim form. 
In the development of the domain ontology, government 
is interested in the relationship of the parent and the child.  
For the FTB, the agencies connected to this payment through 
the legislation are interested in the way the FTB legislation 
describes these terms. For service consumers who are parents 
with children, they too would enjoy a model that described 
the relationship for FTB, as opposed to any other payment.  
Government as a whole would also be interested in 
understanding the ‘parent picture’ in its entirety.  All these 
views can be accommodated using ontologies. 
This section has outlined the proposed research strategy 
for the first phase of this research.  It has described the case 
study methodology and the methods that will be used to 
build the research artefacts and to gather the necessary data 
to conduct the research. 
IV. 
RESEARCH LIMITATIONS AND RISKS 
This section will describe the limitations and risks of 
undertaking this research using the methods outlined in 
Section III.  Two limitations of the research arise because the   
selection of the legislation is restricted to the FTB payment 
in normal circumstances.  The first limitation is that only 
some of the legislation relating to the FTB payment will be 
modelled as an ontology.  The second limitation is that only 
system end-points will be compared i.e., the current 
legislation and claim form.  The changes to the legislation 
and the form that have occurred since the legislation’s 
commencement date cannot and will not be individually 
analysed.  This point-in time analysis will be useful to 
identify the alignment issues, but it will not be possible to 
understand the reasons for the alignment issues. 
V. 
CONTRIBUTION 
The manual process used to detect and compare the 
ontological patterns existing in the legislation and the claim 
form are expected to be transferable to other information 
system artefacts used to operationalise the legislation.  If the 
terms and relationships existing in the family tax benefit 
domain can be modeled as an ontology, then, it should be 
possible to model all legislation being administered by 
Government. The contribution is a novel strategy and 
method of conducting ontological analysis, and a novel 
means of conducting alignment assessment. The power of 
 
Child
Applicant
Secretary
Is_responsible for
Makes_application_to
Triple 1
Triple 2
 
Figure 5.  Two examples of relationships captured as RDF triples. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

ontologies in e-government would mean that a new use of 
technologies will result in more convenient access to 
government information and services, and provide service 
consumers greater opportunities to participate in the 
democratic institutions and processes [2].  
If a domain ontology exists, and a legislation change 
occurs, the ontology could be used by government to identify 
the owners of: systems, processes, activities, guidelines, 
forms, etc., that may be impacted. Evidence-based 
assessments would improve the quality of such assessments 
for policy makers, service providers, and service consumers. 
Policy makers exploring changes to legislation would be 
better informed as an evidence-based estimate of a whole of 
government impact would be possible. Service Delivery 
departments could schedule programs of work anticipating 
the changes to the systems and processes to comply with the 
legislation, and with this knowledge, they will be able to 
improve their engagement through clear messaging to 
service consumers. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This research develops a new way to reveal important 
aspects of the relationship between legislation and its 
implementation in government information systems, using 
ontologies.  This work-in-progress paper has described the 
research approach that will be used to assure ministers and 
service consumers that systems and legislation are aligned.  
A strategy has been outlined describing the method of 
conducting ontological analysis as a novel way to use 
ontology to determine alignment.  An instrumental case 
study has been described using the FTB legislation applying 
to the payment in normal circumstances.  The reasons for the 
selection of the FTB payment in normal circumstances have 
been outlined. The limitations and the risks of this research 
design and the contributions of the proposed research have 
been discussed. The research offers a new approach using 
technology for all government agencies to assure their 
ministers that information systems are aligned to the 
legislation.  This research attempts to develop a method to 
detect the underlying ontologies existing in legislation that 
can be used more broadly across all legislation being used in 
Australian government service delivery. Future work will 
explore automatic and semi-automatic ways to identify 
relationships existing in legislation. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Lambe, Organising Knowledge: Taxonomies, Knowledge 
and 
Organisational 
Effectiveness. 
Oxford: 
Chandos 
Publishing (Oxford) Limited, 2007. 
[2] J.E. Stiglitz, and P.R.Orszag, The Role of Government in a 
Digital Age, Report commissioned by the Computer & 
Communications Industry Association (CCIA), 2000. 
[3] E. N. Loukis, “An Ontology for G2G Collaboration in Public 
Policy Making, Implementation and Evaluation.” Artificial 
Intelligence and Law, 15.1, 2007, pp. 19-48. 
[4] A. Boer, T. van Engers, and R. Winkels. “Using Ontologies 
for Comparing and Harmonizing Legislation,” in Proceedings 
of the 9th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
and Law. ACM, 2003, pp. 60-69.  
[5] A. Gomez-Perez, F. Ortiz-Rodriguez, and B. Villazon-
Terrazas, “Legal Ontologies for the Spanish e-Government,” 
in Current Topics in Artificial Intelligence, Springer. Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 301-310. 
[6] L. Cabral, J. Domingue, L. Gutierrez, M. Rowlatt, and R. 
Davies, “WP 9: Case Study eGovernment D9.5 Change of 
Circumstance WSMO Descriptions.” Change 9 (2005): 5.  
[7] The Australian National Audit Office, Public Sector Audit 
Committees. 
Independent 
Assurance 
and 
Advice 
for 
Accountable 
Authorities. 
 
Better 
Practice 
Guide.  
Commonwealth of Australia. March 2015. 
[8] K. Lynch, P. Baltzan, and P. Blakey, Business Driven 
Information Systems 2nd ed., Australia: McGraw-Hill 
Education – Europe, 2013. 
[9] Australian Government, Administrative Review Council, 
“Automated assistance in administrative decision making” 
Report no. 46, to the Attorney-General, November 2004. 
[10] Y. Gong, and M. Janssen. Adaptive and Compliant Policy 
Implementation: Creating Administrative Processes Using 
Semantic 
Web 
Services 
and 
Business 
Rules. 
 
In 
Collaborative, Trusted and Privacy-Aware e/m-Services. 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 298-310. 
[11] The Auditor-General, “Administering Regulation, Better 
Practice Guide”, March 2007. 
[12] J. Bourgon, “The Future of Public Service: a Search for a 
New Balance,” Australian Journal of Public Administration, 
67, no. 4, 2008, pp. 390-404. 
[13] T. R. Gruber, “A Translation Approach to Portable Ontology 
Specifications,” Knowledge Acquisition, 5, no. 2, 1993, pp. 
193-220. 
[14] R. Mizoguchi, “Tutorial on Ontological Engineering Part 2: 
Ontology Development, Tools and Languages,” New 
Generation Computing, 22, no. 1, 2004, pp. 61-96. 
[15] G. P. Malafsky, and B. Newman. “Organising Knowledge 
with Ontologies and Taxonomies”, [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.techi2.com/download/Malafsky%20KM%20taxon
omy_ontology.pdf. 2015.05.08. 
[16] R. Jasper, and M. Uschold. “A Framework for Understanding 
and Classifying Ontology Applications,” in Proceedings of 
the 12th International Workshop on Knowledge Acquisition, 
Modelling, and Management KAWVol. 99, 1999.  
[17] R. K. Yin, Case Study Research Design and Methods. 
Beverly Hills. Sage Publications, 1994. 
[18] P. Shvaiko, and J. Euzenat. “Ten Challenges for Ontology 
Matching,” in Proceedings of the 7th International conference 
on ontologies, dataBases, and applications of semantics 
(ODBASE), 2008, 1163-1181. 
[19] ISO 1087-1:2000 Terminilogy work – Vocabulary – Part 1: 
Theory and Application, ISO, 2000. 
[20] L. W. Lacy, Owl: Representing Information Using the Web 
Ontology Language, Trafford Publishing, Victoria, BC, 
Canada, 2005. 
 
 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

