Toward the Automatic Generation of a Semantic VRML Model from Unorganized 
3D Point Clouds
Helmi Ben Hmida, Frank Boochs 
Institut i3mainz, am Fachbereich Geoinformatik und 
Vermessung 
Fachhochschule Mainz, Lucy-Hillebrand-Str. 255128 Mainz, 
Germany 
e-mail: {helmi.benhmida, boochs}@geoinform.fh-mainz.de 
 
Christophe Cruz, Christophe Nicolle 
Laboratoire Le2i, UFR Sciences et Techniques 
 
Université de Bourgogne 
B.P. 47870, 21078 Dijon Cedex, France 
e-mail: {christophe.cruz, cnicolle}@u-bourgogne.fr 
Abstract—This paper presents our experience regarding the 
creation of 3D semantic facility model out of unorganized 3D 
point clouds. Thus, a knowledge-based detection approach of 
objects using the OWL ontology language is presented. This 
knowledge is used to define SWRL detection rules. In addition, 
the combination of 3D processing built-ins and topological 
Built-Ins in SWRL rules aims at combining geometrical 
analysis of 3D point clouds and specialist’s knowledge. This 
combination allows more flexible and intelligent detection and 
the annotation of objects contained in 3D point clouds. The 
created WiDOP prototype takes a set of 3D point clouds as 
input, and produces an indexed scene of colored objects 
visualized within VRML language as output. The context of 
the study is the detection of railway objects materialized within 
the Deutsche Bahn scene such as signals, technical cupboards, 
electric poles, etc. Therefore, the resulting enriched and 
populated domain ontology, that contains the annotations of 
objects in the point clouds, is used to feed a GIS system. 
Keywords-Semantic 
facility 
information 
model; 
Semantic VRML model; Geometric analysis; Topological 
analysis; 3D processing algorithm; Semantic web; knowledge 
modeling; 
ontology; 
3D 
scene 
reconstruction; 
object 
identification. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The technical survey of facility aims to build a digital 
model based on geometric analysis. Such a process becomes 
more and more tedious, especially with the generation of the 
new terrestrial laser scanners, faster, accurate, where huge 
amount of 3D point clouds is generated. Within such new 
technologies, new challenges have seen the light where the 
basic one is to make the reconstruction process automatic 
and more accurate. Thus, early works on 3D point clouds 
have investigated the reconstruction and the recognition of 
geometrical shapes [1], [2]. This problematic was 
investigated as a topic of the computer graphic and the signal 
processing research where most works focused on 
segmentation or visualization aspects. As most recent works, 
new tendency related to the use of semantic has been 
explored [3]. In fact, we agree with the assumption that it 
helps the improvement of the automation, the accuracy and 
the result quality, but we think that it has to be well studied 
and proved. Otherwise, how the detection process can get 
support within different knowledge about the scene objects 
and what´s its impact compared to classic approach. In such 
scenario, knowledge about such objects has to include 
detailed information about the objects geometry, structure, 
3D algorithms, etc. 
By this contribution, we suggest a solution to the 
problematic of facility survey model creation from 3D point 
clouds with knowledge support. The suggested system is 
materialized via WiDOP project [4]. Furthermore, the 
created WiDOP platform is able to generate an indexed 
scene from unorganized 3D point clouds visualized within 
virtual reality modeling language [5]. 
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows: The 
next section describes briefly the most recent related works, 
followed by the prototype definition in section three. In 
section four, more focus on the domain ontology structure 
presenting the core behind WiDOP prototype will take place 
where we highlight the ontology structure and the created 
extension with the SWRL language to satisfy the target 
purpose. Section five presents a use cased materialized by 
the scene of the German rail way. Finally, we conclude and 
give insight on our future work in section six.  
II. 
BACKGROUND CONCEPT AND METHODOLOGY 
      The technical survey of facilities, as a long and costly 
process, aims at building a digital model based on 
geometric analysis since the modeling of a facility as a set 
of vectors is not sufficient in most cases. To resolve this 
problem a new standard was developed over ten years by 
the International Alliance for Interoperability (IAI). This 
standard, called IFC [6], considers the facility elements as 
objects that are defined by a 3D geometry and normalized 
semantic [14]. The problematic of 3D object detection and 
scene reconstruction including semantic knowledge was 
recently treated within different domain, basically the 
photogrammetry one [7], the construction one, the robotics 
[8] and recently the knowledge engineering one [4]. 
Modeling a survey, in which low-level point cloud or 
surface representation is transformed into a semantically 
rich model is done in three tasks where the first is the data 
collection, in which dense point measurements of the 
facility are collected using laser scans taken from key 
locations throughout the facility; Then data processing, in 
which the sets of point clouds from the collected scanners 
are processed. Finally, modeling the survey in which the 
low-level point cloud is transformed into a semantically 
rich model. This is done via modeling geometric 
knowledge, qualifying topological relations and finally 
assigning an object category to each geometry [9]. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Concerning the geometry modeling, we remind here that 
the goal is to create simplified representations of facility 
components by fitting geometric primitives to the point 
cloud data [17]. The modeled components are labeled with 
an object category. Establishing relationships between 
components is important in a facility model and must also 
be established. In fact, relationships between objects in a 
facility model are useful in many scenarios. In addition, 
spatial relationships between objects provide contextual 
information to assist in object recognition [10]. Within the 
literature, three main strategies are described to rich such a 
model where the first one is based on human interaction 
with provided software’s for point clouds classifications 
and annotations [11]. While the second strategy relies more 
on the automatic data processing without any human 
interaction by using different segmentation techniques for 
feature extraction [8]. Finally, new techniques presenting 
an improvement compared with the cited ones by 
integrating semantic networks to guide the reconstruction 
process [12]. 
A. Manual survey model creation 
In current practice, the creation of facility model is 
largely a manual process performed by service providers 
who are contracted to scan and model a facility. In reality, a 
project may require several months to be achieved, 
depending on the complexity of the facility and the 
modeling requirements. Reverse engineering tools excel at 
geometric modeling of surfaces, but with lack of volumetric 
representations, while such design systems cannot handle 
the massive data sets from laser scanners. As a result, 
modelers often shuttle intermediate results back and forth 
between different software packages during the modeling 
process, giving rise to the possibility of information loss due 
to limitations of data exchange standards or errors in the 
implementation of the standards within the software tools 
[13]. Prior knowledge about component geometry, such as 
the diameter of a column, can be used to constrain the 
modeling process, or the characteristics of known 
components may be kept in a standard component library. 
Finally, the class of the detected geometry is determined by 
the modeler once the object created. In some cases, 
relationships between components are established either 
manually or in a semi-automated manner.  
B. Semi-Automatic and Automatic methods 
The manual process for constructing a survey model is 
time consuming, labour-intensive, tedious, subjective, and 
requires skilled workers. Even if modeling of individual 
geometric primitives can be fairly quick, modeling a facility 
may require thousands of primitives. The combined 
modeling time can be several months for an average sized 
facility. Since the same types of primitives must be modeled 
throughout a facility, the steps are highly repetitive and 
tedious [12]. The above mentioned observations and others 
illustrate the need for semi-automated and automated 
techniques for facility model creation. Ideally, a system 
could be developed that would take a point cloud of a 
facility as input and produce a fully annotated as-built 
model of the facility as output. The first step within the 
automatic process is the geometric modeling. It presents the 
process of constructing simplified representations of the 3D 
shape of survey components from point cloud data. In 
general, the shape representation is supported by CSG [15] 
or B-Rep [16] representation. The representation of 
geometric shapes has been studied extensively [15]. Once 
geometric elements are detected and stored via a specific 
presentation, the final task within a facility modeling task is 
the object recognition. It presents the process of labeling a 
set of data points or geometric primitives extracted from the 
data with a named object or object class. Whereas the 
modeling task would find a set of points to be a vertical 
plane, the recognition task would label that plane as being a 
wall, for instance. Often, the knowledge describing the 
shapes to be recognized is encoded in a set of descriptors 
that implicitly capture object shape. Research on recognition 
of facilities specific components related to a facility is still 
in its early stages. Methods in this category typically 
perform an initial shape-based segmentation of the scene, 
into planar regions, for example, and then use features 
derived from the segments to recognize objects. This 
approach is exemplified by Rusu et al. who use heuristics to 
detect walls, floors, ceilings, and cabinets in a kitchen 
environment [8]. A similar approach was proposed by Pu 
and Vosselman to model facility façades [18].  
To reduce the search space of object recognition 
algorithms, the use of knowledge related to a specific 
facility can be a fundamental solution. For instance, Yue et 
al. overlay a design model of a facility with the as-built 
point cloud to guide the process of identifying which data 
points belong to specific objects and to detect differences 
between the as-built and as-designed conditions [19]. In 
such cases, object recognition problem is simplified to be a 
matching problem between the scene model entities and the 
data points. Another similar approach is presented in [20]. 
Other promising approaches have only been tested on 
limited and very simple examples, and it is equally difficult 
to predict how they would fare when faced with more 
complex and realistic data sets. For example, the semantic 
network methods for recognizing components using context 
work well for simple examples of hallways and barren, 
rectangular rooms [10], but how would they handle spaces 
with complex geometries and clutter.  
C. Discussion: 
The presented methods for survey modeling and object 
recognition rely on hand-coded knowledge about the 
domain. Concepts like “Signals are vertical” and “Signals 
intersect with the ground” are encoded within the algorithms 
either explicitly, through sets of rules, or implicitly, through 
the design of the algorithm. Such hard-coded, rule based 
approaches tend to be brittle and break down when tested in 
new and slightly different environments. Furthermore, it can 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

be difficult to extend an algorithm with new rule or to 
modify the rules to work in new environments. Based on 
these observations, we predict that more standard and 
flexible representations of facility objects and more 
sophisticated guidance based algorithms for object detection 
instead of a standard one will open the way to significant 
improvement in facility modeling capability and generality.  
III. 
WIDOP PROTOTYPE 
WiDOP platform is a Java platform presenting a 
knowledge based detection of objects in point clouds based 
on OWL ontology language, Semantic Web Rule Language, 
and 3D processing algorithms. It aims at combining 
geometrical analysis of 3D point clouds and specialist’s 
knowledge to get a more reliable facility model. In fact, this 
combination allows the detection and the annotation of 
objects contained in point clouds. WiDOP prototype takes 
in consideration the adjustment of the old methods and, in 
the meantime, profit from the advantages of the emerging 
cutting edge technology. From the principal point of view, 
our system still retains the storing mechanism within the 
existent 3D processing algorithms; in addition, suggest a 
new field of detection and annotation, where we are getting 
a real-time support from the target scene knowledge. Add to 
that, we suggest a collaborative Java Platform based on 
semantic web technology (OWL, RDF, and SWRL) and 
knowledge engineering in order to handle the information 
provided from the knowledge base and the 3D packages 
results. 
The field of the Deutsch Bahn railway scene is treated 
for object detection. The objective of the system consists 
in creating, from a set of point cloud files, from an 
ontology that contains knowledge about the DB railway 
objects and 3D processing algorithms, an automatic process 
that produces as output a set of tagged elements contained 
in the point clouds. 
The process enriches and populates the ontology with 
new individuals and relationships between them. In order 
to graphically represent these objects within the scene 
point clouds, a VRML model file [5] is generated and 
visualized within the prototype where the color of objects 
in the VRML file represents its semantic definition. The 
resulting ontology contains enough knowledge to feed a 
GIS system, and to generate IFC file [6] for CAD 
software. As seen in Figure 1, the created system is 
composed of three parts. 
 
• 
Generation of a set of geometries from a point 
could file based on the target object characteristics 
• 
Computation of business rules with geometry, 
semantic and topological constrains in order to 
annotate the different detected geometries.  
• 
Generation of a VRML model related to the scene 
within the detected and annotated elements 
 
 
Figure 1. the WiDOP use case diagram 
 
To rich such a target, three main steps aim at detecting and 
identifying objects are established: 
 
• 
From 3D point clouds to geometric elements. 
• 
From geometry to topological relations. 
• 
From geometric and/or topological relations to 
semantic elements annotation. 
 
As a first impression, the system responds to the target 
requirement since it would take a point cloud of a facility as 
input and produce a fully annotated as-built model of the 
facility as output. In the next, we focus on the core of the 
WiDOP prototype which is materialized via an ontology 
base structure to guide the 3D scene reconstruction process.  
IV. 
ONTOLOGY BASED PROTOTYPE 
In recent years, formal ontology has been suggested as a 
solution to the problem of 3D objects reconstruction from 
3D point clouds [21]. In this area, ontology structure was 
defined as a formal representation of knowledge by a set of 
concepts within a domain, and the relationships between 
those concepts. It is used to reason about the entities within 
that domain, and may be used to describe the domain. 
Conventionally, ontology presents a "formal, explicit 
specification of a shared  conceptualization"  [22]. 
Well-made ontology owns a number of positive aspects like 
the ability to define a precise vocabulary of terms, the 
ability to inherit and extends exiting ones, the ability to 
declare relationships between defined concepts and finally 
the ability to infer new relationship by reasoning on existing 
ones. Through the scientific community, the basic strength 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

of formal ontology is their ability to reason in a logical way 
based on Description Logics DL. The last one presents a 
form of logic to reason on objects. In fact, despite the 
richness of OWL's set of relational properties, the axiom 
does not cover the full range of expressive possibilities for 
object relationships that we might find. For that, it is useful 
to declare a relationship in term of conditions or even rules. 
Some of the evolved languages are related to the semantic 
web rule language (SWRL) and advanced Jena rules [23]. 
SWRL is a proposal as a Semantic Web rules language, 
combining sublanguages of the OWL Web Ontology 
Language with the Rule Markup Language [24]. 
A. Ontology schema 
This section discusses the different aspects related to the 
Deutsche Bahn scene ontology structure installed behind the 
WiDOP Deutsche Bahn prototype [4]. The domain ontology 
presents the core of WiDOP project and provides a 
knowledge base to the created application. The global 
schema of the modeled ontology structure offers a suitable 
framework to characterize the different Deutsche Bahn 
elements from the 3D processing point of view. The created 
ontology is used basically for two purposes: 
• 
To guide the processing algorithm sequence 
creation based on the target object characteristics. 
• 
To facilitate the semantic annotation of the 
different detected objects inside the target scene. 
 
The created knowledge base related to the Deutsche Bahn 
scene has been inspired next to our discussion with the 
domain expert and next to our study based on the official 
Web site for the German rail way specification [25]. The 
current ontology is divided onto three main parts: the 
Deutsche Bahn concepts, the algorithm concepts and the 
geometry concepts. However, they will be used with others 
to facilitate the object detection based on SWRL and the 
automatic annotation of Bounding Box geometry based on 
inference engine tools. At this level, no real interaction 
between human and the knowledge base is taken in 
consideration, since the 3D detection process algorithm and 
parameters are alimented directly from the knowledge base 
and then interpreted by the SWRL rules and Description 
Logics tools. The ontology is managed through different 
components of Description Logics. There are five main 
classes within other data and objects properties able to 
characterize the scene in question. 
• 
Algorithm 
• 
Geometry 
• 
DomainConcept 
• 
Characteristics 
• 
Scene 
 
The class DomainConcept can be considered the main 
class in this ontology as it is the class where the different 
elements within a 3D scene are defined. It was designed 
after the DB scene observation. It contains all kinds of 
elements, which have to be detected and is divided in two 
general classes, one for the Furniture and one for the 
Facility Element. However, the importance of other classes 
cannot be ignored. They are used to either describe the 
domain concept geometry and characteristics or to define 
the 3D processing algorithms within the target geometry. 
The subclasses of the Algorithm class represent the 
different developed algorithms. They are related to several 
properties which are able to detect. These properties 
(Geometric 
and 
semantic) 
are 
shared 
with 
the 
DomainConcept and the Geometry classes. By this way, a 
created sequence of algorithms can detect all the 
characteristics of an element while the Geometry class 
represents every kind of geometry, which can be detected 
in the point cloud scene.  
The connection between the basic mentioned classes is 
carried out through object and data properties. There exist 
object properties for each mentioned activities. Besides, 
the object properties are also used to relate an object to 
other objects via topological relations. In general, there are 
five general object properties in the ontology which have 
their specialized properties for the specialized activities. 
They are 
• 
hasTopologicRelation 
• 
IsDeseignedFor 
• 
hasGeometry 
• 
hasCharacteristics, 
 
Figure 2 demonstrates the general layout schema of the 
application. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Ontology general schema overview 
B. Enrichment of the ontology within processing and 
topologic operations 
To support the defined use cases, two basic further layers 
to the semantic one are added to ontology in order to ensure 
the geometry detection and annotation process tasks. These 
operations are the 3D processing and topological relations 
qualification respectively. 
 
1) 3D processing operations 
      The 3D processing layer contains all relevant aspects 
related to the 3D processing algorithms. Its integration into 
the WiDOP semantic framework is done by special Built-Ins. 
They manage the interaction between the above mentioned 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

layers and the semantic one. In addition, it contains the 
different algorithm definitions, properties, and the related 
geometries to the each defined algorithms. An important 
achievement is the detection and the identification of objects 
with specific characteristics such as a signal, indicator 
columns, and electric pole, etc. through utilizing their 
geometric properties. Since the information in point cloud 
data sometimes is unclear and insufficient. 
 
2) Topological operations 
The layer of the topological knowledge represents 
topological relationships between scene elements since the 
object properties are also used to link an object to others 
by a topological relation. For instance, a topological 
relation between a distant signal and a main one can be 
defined, as both have to be distant from one kilometer. 
The qualification of topological relations into the 
semantic framework is done by topological Built-Ins.   
 
C. Extension of SWRL with 3D processing and topological 
operations 
This section resumes the adopted approach to integrate 
the mentioned processing and topologic operation with help 
of the swrl language (Horn clauses) in order to define new 
knowledge (Classes and properties) related to the as built 
facility modeling. We recall that SWRL Built-ins allow 
further extensions within a defined taxonomy. In fact, it 
helps in the interoperation of SWRL with other formalisms 
by providing an extensible, modular built-ins infrastructure 
for Semantic Web Languages and knowledge based 
applications. For such a reason, we opt to be based on such 
a technology to extend the actual knowledge base within 
two basic Built-Ins: Topologic Built-Ins and Processing 
Built-Ins. 
 
1) Extension of standard SWRL with processing 
operations 
The first step aims at the geometric elements' detection. 
Thus, Semantic Web Rule Language within extended built-
ins is used to execute a real 3D processing algorithm first, 
and to populate the provided knowledge within the ontology 
(e.g., 
Table 
1). 
The 
“3D_swrlb_Processing: 
VerticalElementDetection” built-ins for example, aims at 
the detection of geometry with vertical orientation. The 
prototype of the designed Built-in is:  
 
3D_swrlb_Processing:VerticalElementDetection 
(?Vert, ?Dir)  
 
where the first parameter presents the target object class, 
and the last one presents the point clouds' directory defined 
within the created scene in the ontology structure. At this 
point, the detection process will result bounding boxes, 
representing a rough position and orientation of the detected 
object. Table 1 show the mapping between the 3D 
processing built-ins, which is computer and translated to 
predicate, and the corresponding class. 
 
 TABLE 1. 3D PROCESSING BUILT-INS MAPPING PROCESS 
 
3D Processing Built-Ins 
Correspondent Simple class 
3D_swrlb_Processing: 
VerticalElementDetection (?Vert,?Dir) 
 
Vertical_BoundingBox(?x) 
3D_swrlb_Processing: 
HorizentalElementDetection (?Vert,?Dir) 
 
Horizental_BoundingBox(?y) 
 
2) Extension of standard SWRL with topologic 
operations 
Once geometries are detected, the second step, aims at 
verifying certain topology properties between detected 
geometries. Thus, 3D_Topologic built-ins have been added 
in order to extend the SWRL language. Topological rules 
are used to define constrains between different elements. 
After parsing the topological built-ins and its execution, the 
result is used to enrich the ontology with relationships 
between individuals that verify the rules. Similarly, to the 
3D processing built-ins, our engine translates the rules with 
topological built-ins to standard rules, Table 2.  
TABLE 2. EXAMPLE OF TOPOLOGICAL BUILT-INS 
Processing Built-Ins 
Correspondent object 
property 
3D_swrlb_Topology:Upper(?x, ?y) 
Upper(?x,?y) 
3D_swrlb_Topology:Intersect(?x, ?y) 
Intersect (?x,?y) 
V. 
CASE STUDY  
For the demonstration of our prototype, 500 m from the 
scanned point clouds related to Deutsch Bahn scene in the 
city of Nürnberg was extracted. It contains a variety of the 
target objects. The whole scene has been scanned using a 
terrestrial laser scanner fixed within a train, resulting in a 
large point cloud representing the surfaces of the scene 
objects. Within the created prototype, different rules are 
processed, (see Figure 3). First, geometrical elements will 
be searched in the area of interest based on dynamic 3D 
processing algorithm sequence created based on semantic 
object properties, and then topological relations between 
detected geometries are qualified. Subsequently, further 
annotation may be relayed on aspects expressing facts to 
orientation or size of elements, which may be sufficient to 
finalize a decision upon the semantic of an object or on a 
fact expressing topological relationship or both of them.  
This second step within our approach aims to identify 
existing topologies between the detected geometries. To do, 
useful topologies for geometry annotation are tested. 
Topological 
Built-Ins 
like 
isConnected, 
touch, 
Perpendicular, isDistantfrom are created. As a 
result, relations found between geometric elements are  
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
 
Figure 3. WiDOP prototype and example of used swrl rules within Built-Ins extention 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Detected and annotated elements visaliazation within VRML language 
 
 
propagated into the ontology, serving as an improved 
knowledge base for further processing and decision steps. 
The last step consists in annotating the different geometries. 
Vertical elements of certain characteristics can be annotated 
directly.  In more sophisticated cases, our prototype allows 
the combination of semantic information and topological 
ones that can deduce more robust results by minimizing the 
false acceptation rate. Finally, based on a list of SWRL 
rules, most of the detected geometries are annotated. In this 
example, among 13 elements are classified as Masts, 15 as 
Schaltanlage, three basic signals and finally, three secondary 
signals.   
However, next to our experience, some limits are 
encountered. They are especially related very small 
elements detection and qualification where some noise on 
the ground still considered as semantic element. From our 
point of view, we think that the reason for such a false 
annotation is the lack of semantic characteristics related to 
such elements since until now; there is no real internal or 
external topology, neither internal geometric characteristic 
that discriminate such an element compared to others. 
The created WiDOP platform offers the opportunity to 
materialize the annotation process by the generation and the 
visualization based on a VRML structure alimented from 
the knowledge base. It ensures an interactive visualization 
of the resulted annotation elements beginning from the 
initial state, to a set of intermediate states coming finally to 
an ending state, (see Figure 4), where the set of swrl rules 
are totally executed.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS  
We have presented an automatic system for survey 
information model creation based on semantic knowledge 
modeling. Our solution aims to perform the detection of 
objects from laser scanner technology by using available 
knowledge about a specific domain (DB). The designed 
prototype as simple, as efficient and intelligent it is since it 
takes 3D point clouds of a facility and produce fully 
annotated scene within a VRML model file. The suggested 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

solution for this challenging problem has proven its 
efficiency through real tests within the Deutsche Bahn 
scene. The creation of processing and topological Built-Ins 
has presented a robust solution to resolve our problematic 
and to prove the ability of the semantic web language to 
intervene in any domain and create the difference.  
Future work will include a more robust identification and 
annotation process of objects based on each object 
characteristics add to the integration of new 3D parameter  
knowledge’s that can intervene within the detection and 
annotation process to make the process more flexible and 
intelligent. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper presents work performed in the framework of 
the research project funded by the German ministry of 
research and education under contract No. 1758X09. The 
authors cordially thank for this funding. Special thinks 
also 
for 
Hung 
Truong, 
Andreas 
Marbs, 
Ashish 
Karmacharya, Yoann Rous and Romain Tribotté for their 
contribution. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Wessel, R., Wahl, R., Klein, R., and Schnabel R, "Shape 
recognition in 3D point clouds," in Proc. Conf. in Central 
Europe on Computer Graphics, Visualization and Computer 
Vision., vol. 2, 2008. 
[2] Kim, A., Funkhouser, VG., and Golovinskiy, T. "Shape-based 
recognition of 3d point clouds in urban environments," in 
IEEE 12th International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 
2154-2161, 2009. 
[3] Cruz, C., Nicolle, C., and Duan, Y. "Architectural 
Reconstruction of 3D Building Objects through Semantic 
Knowledge Management," in 11th ACIS International 
Conference on Software Engineering, Artificial Intelligence 
Networking and Parallel/Distributed Computing (SNPD), pp. 
261-266, 2010. 
[4] Ben Hmida,H., Cruz, C., Nicolle, C., and Boochs, F. 
"Semantic-based Technique for the Automation the 3D 
Reconstruction Process," in SEMAPRO 2010, The Fourth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advances 
in 
Semantic 
Processing, Florence, Italy, pp. 191-198, 2010. 
[5] VRML Virtual Reality Modeling Language. (1995, Apr.) 
W3C. [Online]. http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/VRML/. The last 
access date: 09-2011. 
[6] Vanland, R., Nicolle, C., and Cruz, C. "IFC and building 
lifecycle management," Automation in Construction, vol. 18, 
pp. 70-78, 2008. 
[7] Vosselman, S. "Extracting windows from terrestrial laser 
scanning," in Intl Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote 
Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, vol. 36, pp. 12-14, 
2007. 
[8] Marton, R B., Blodow, Z C., Holzbach, N., Beetz, A., and 
Rusu, M. "Model-based and learned semantic object labeling 
in 3D point cloud maps of kitchen environments," in 
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and 
Systems, IROS, pp. 3601-3608, 2009. 
[9] Ben Hmida, H., Marbs, A., Truong, H., Karmacharya, A., 
Cruz, C., Habed, A., Nicolle, C., Voisin,Y., and Boochs, F. 
"Integration of knowledge to support automatic object 
reconstruction from images and 3D data," in International 
Multi-Conference on Systems, Signals & Devices, Sousse 
Tunisia, March 22-25, 2011. 
[10] Cantzler, H. "Improving architectural 3D reconstruction by 
constrained modelling," College of Science and Engineering. 
School of Informatics, 2003. 
[11] Leica 
Cyclone. 
[Online]. 
http://hds.leica-
geosystems.com/en/Leica-Cyclone_6515.htm. The last access 
date: 09-2011. 
[12] Andreas, N., "Automatic Model Refinement for 3D 
Reconstruction with Mobile Robots," Fourth International 
Conference on 3-D Digital Imaging and Modeling, 3DIM, pp. 
394-401, 2003. 
[13] Goldberg, H.E. "State of the AEC industry: BIM 
implementation slow, but inevitable," Revista CADalyst, 
maio, 2005. 
[14] Hajian, H. and Becerik-Gerber, B. "A Research Outlook for 
Real-Time Project Information Management by Integrating 
Advanced Field Data Acquisition Systems and Building 
Information Modeling," , 2009. 
[15] Leadwerks Corporation. (2006) What is Constructive Solid 
Geometry?[Online]. http://www.leadwerks.com/files/csg.pdf. 
The last access date: 09-2011. 
[16] OPEN CASCADE. (2000) OpenCascade - an open source 
library 
for 
BRep 
solid 
modeling. 
[Online]. 
http://www.opencascade.org/. The last access date: 09-2011. 
[17] Campbell, R.J. and Flynn, P.J. "A survey of free-form object 
representation and recognition techniques," Computer Vision 
and Image Understanding, vol. 81, pp. 166-210, 2001. 
[18] Pu, S. and Vosselman, G, "Knowledge based reconstruction 
of building models from terrestrial laser scanning data," 
ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, vol. 
64, pp. 575-584, 2009. 
[19] Huber, K., Akinci, D., Krishnamurti, B., Yue, R. "The 
ASDMCon project: The challenge of detecting defects on 
construction sites," International Symposium on 3D Data 
Processing Visualization and Transmission, vol. 0, pp. 1048-
1055, 2006. 
[20] Haas, K., Bosche, CT. "Automated retrieval of 3D CAD 
model objects in construction range images," Automation in 
Construction, vol. 17, pp. 499-512, 2008. 
[21] Marzani, F., Boochs, F., Cruz, C. "Ontology-driven 3D 
reconstruction of architectural objects," VISAPP (Special 
Sessions),  pp. 47-54, 2007. 
[22] Gruber, T R. "A translation approach to portable ontology 
specifications," Knowledge acquisition, vol. 5, pp. 199-220, 
1993. 
[23] Dickinson, J J., Dollin, I., Reynolds, C., Seaborne, D., 
Wilkinson, A., and Carroll, K. "Jena: implementing the 
semantic web recommendations," in Proceedings of the 13th 
international World Wide Web conference on Alternate track 
papers & posters, pp. 74-83, 2004. 
[24] 
 
 
 
Patel-Schneider, I., Boley, P F., Tabet, H., Grosof, S., Dean, 
B., and Horrocks, M. "SWRL: A semantic web rule language 
combining OWL and RuleML," W3C Member submission, 
vol. 21, p. 79, 2004. 
[25] Alles über Stellwerke. (2007) [Online].  www.stellwerke.de/. 
The last access date: 09-2011. 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

