A Survey of Ontology Learning from Text 
Kaoutar Belhoucine and Mohammed Mourchid 
MISC laboratory, Faculty of Science  
Ibn Tofail University 
Kenitra, Morocco 
e-mail: kaouar.belhoucine@gmail.com, mourchidm@hotmail.com  
 
Abstract—Ontologies are considered to be a major solution to 
semantic interoperability in modern information systems. The 
explosion of textual information on the Web and advanced 
state in related fields, such as Natural Language Processing 
(NLP), information retrieval, and data mining, have made 
(semi-) automatic ontology learning from text a particularly 
promising research area. This article summarizes the state-of-
the-art in ontology learning from text, and discusses the 
research questions and challenges that remain in this field. 
Keywords-Ontology Learning from Text; Ontology Learning 
Layer Cake Model; Ontology Evaluation; Trends; Challenges. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Ontologies constitute an approach for knowledge 
representation that defines concepts and their relationships, 
constraints, axioms, and the vocabulary of a given domain. 
An ontology should be machine understandable (which 
excludes natural language), and should capture the 
consensual knowledge, that is not private to an individual, 
but accepted by a group as committee of practice. 
Ontologies 
are 
of 
great importance 
to 
modern 
knowledge-based systems. By providing a shared schema, 
they facilitate query answering and reasoning over disparate 
data sources. However, the manual construction of 
ontologies is a difficult and expensive task that usually 
requires a collaboration between domain experts and skilled 
ontology engineers. Even then, once the ontology has been 
constructed, 
our 
evolving 
knowledge 
and 
updated 
application requirements demand a process of continuous 
maintenance on the ontology. 
This diﬃculty in capturing the knowledge required by 
knowledge-based systems is called “knowledge acquisition 
bottleneck”. To overcome this bottleneck, an automatic or 
semi-automatic support for ontology construction is desired. 
This area of research is usually referred to as ontology 
learning [1]-[3].  
We present in this paper a survey of ontology learning 
from text. Section 2 introduces the ontology concept as it is 
considered in this discipline. Section 3 discusses the overall 
process of ontology learning from text: inputs, approaches, 
techniques, and prominent ontology learning systems. 
Evaluation methods for ontology learning are discussed in 
Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes with a ﬁnal 
discussion on the contemporary trends and remaining 
challenges in the field. 
II. 
ONTOLOGIES 
Before defining the process of ontology learning from 
text, we must first clarify what we mean by the term 
"ontology." The term "ontology" comes from the branch of 
philosophy that is concerned with the study of being or 
existence. However, within the discipline of Artificial 
Intelligence, scholars, such as T. Gruber define an ontology 
as a formal specification of the concepts of the domain of 
interest, where their relationships, constraints, and axioms 
are expressed, thus defining a common vocabulary for 
sharing knowledge [4]. Indeed, these two interdisciplinary 
definitions are complementary; what must be represented in 
a knowledge-based system is what exists. In other words, an 
ontology is composed of two parts; the first part consisting 
of concepts, taxonomic relations (relations which define a 
conceptual hierarchy) and of the non-taxonomic relations 
between them. Further, the other part is constructed of 
conceptual instances and assertions about them. More 
formally, an ontology can be defined, according to [5][6], as 
a tuple: 

ϑ (C, HC, R, rel, Aϑ).

Where: 
 
C is the set of ontology concepts. The concepts 
represent the entities of the domain being modeled. 
They are designated by one or more natural language 
terms and are normally referenced inside the ontology 
by a unique identifier. 
 
HC ⊆ C × C is a set of taxonomic relationships between 
the concepts. Such relationships define the concept 
hierarchy. 
 
R is the set of non-taxonomic relationships.  
 
The function rel: R → C × C maps the relation 
identifiers to the actual relationships. 
 
Aϑ is a set of axioms, usually formalized into logic 
language. These axioms specify additional constraints 
on the ontology and can be used in ontology 
consistency checking, as well as inferring new 
knowledge from the ontology through an inference 
mechanism. 
Besides these elements, there are also the instances of the 
concepts and relationships, e.g., the instances of the 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

elements of C, HC and R. A knowledge base is composed by 
an ontology ϑ and its instances. 
III. 
ONTOLOGY LEARNING FROM TEXT 
Ontology learning from text refers to the (semi)-automatic 
support for identifying concepts, relations, and (optionally) 
axioms from textual information and using them to first 
construct and, then, maintain an ontology. Techniques from 
established fields, such as information retrieval, data mining, 
and NLP, have all been fundamental in the development of 
ontology learning systems. This section examines the input 
used to learn ontologies, their learning approaches, their 
techniques, and the most prominent ontology learning 
systems. 
A. The input used to learn ontologies 
Ontology learning requires input data from which to learn 
the concepts relevant for any given domain and their 
definitions, as well as the relationships between them. 
Dominik Benz [7] defines three different kinds of ontology 
learning input data: 
 
Structured data: means data represented according to 
deﬁned schema such as Database (DB) schemes, 
existing ontologies and knowledge bases. 
 
Semi-structured data: designates the use of some 
mixed structured data with free text, for example: 
dictionaries such as WordNet [9] or the Wiktionary 
[10], HTML and XML documents or Wikis and User 
Tags.  
 
Unstructured data: consists of natural language texts 
such as Word and PDF documents, or Web pages.  
The term ontology learning from text is used if ontology 
learning is based on unstructured data [23]. This type of 
resources is the most available format as input for ontology 
learning processes. They reflect mostly the domain 
knowledge for which the user is building the ontology. In 
addition, they describe the terminology, concepts and 
conceptual structures of the given domain. However, some 
authors, such as M. Rogger et al. [11], consider that 
processing unstructured data is the most complicated 
problem because most of the knowledge is implicit and 
allows conceptualizing it by different people in different 
ways, even using the same words. For these reasons, this 
paper focuses especially on ontology learning from 
unstructured data. 
B.  Ontology learning approaches and techniques 
As we have shown in the previous sections, ontology 
learning is primarily concerned with definition of concepts, 
relations, and (optionally) axioms from textual information 
and using them to construct and maintain an ontology. 
Although there is no standard regarding this development 
process, P. Cimiano [13] describes the tasks involved in 
ontology learning as forming a layer cake. As illustrated in 
Figure 1, the cake is composed, in ascending order, of terms, 
synonyms, concepts, taxonomies, relations, and, finally, 
axioms and rules. We shall now examine this cake layer by 
layer and present the different approaches and techniques 
used. 
 
 
 
1) Terms 
Terms are the most basic building blocks of the ontology 
learning cake. Terms can be simple (i.e., single word) or 
complex (i.e., multi-word) and are considered as linguistic 
realizations of domain-specific concepts. There are many 
term extraction methods in ontology learning from text. 
Most of these extraction methods are based on terminology 
and NLP research [14]-[16], whilst others are based on 
information retrieval methods for term indexing [17]. The 
leading approaches of term extraction use tokenization (or 
part-of-speech tagging of the domain corpus) to identify 
terms 
by 
manually 
constructing 
ad-hoc 
patterns. 
Additionally, in order to identify only relevant term 
candidates, a statistical processing step may be used to 
compare 
the 
distribution 
of 
terms 
between 
domain specific and general corpora. 
2) Synonyms 
The synonyms layer addresses the acquisition of semantic 
term variants in and between languages. It is either based on 
sets, 
such 
as 
WordNet 
synsets [18] (after 
sense 
disambiguation), on clustering techniques [19]-[22] or other 
similar 
methods, 
including 
Web-based 
knowledge 
acquisition. 
3) Concepts 
Concepts can be abstract or concrete, real or fictitious. 
However, the consensus in this field is that concepts should 
include: 
 
Intension: formal definition of the set of objects that 
this concept describes. 
 
Extension: a set of objects that the definition of this 
concept describes. 
 
Lexical realizations: a set of linguistic realizations, 
(multilingual) terms for this concept. 
Most of the research in concept extraction addresses the 
question from a clustering perspective, regarding concepts 
as clusters of related terms [13]. Obviously, this approach 
overlaps almost entirely with that of term and synonym 
extraction [23] and can be found in [24]-[27]. 
Alternatively, researchers have also addressed concept 
formation from an extensional point of view. For example, 
in the approach of [28][29], they derive hierarchies of 
Figure 1. Ontology Learning “Layer Cake” [13]. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

named entities from text whilst also ascertaining concepts 
from an extensional point of view [13]. 
4) Concept Hierarchies (Taxonomy) 
There are currently three main paradigms to induce 
concept hierarchies from textual data: 
 
The first one is the application of lexico-syntactic 
patterns to detect hyponymy relations, as proposed by 
[30]. However, it is well known that these patterns 
occur rarely in corpora. Consequently, though 
approaches relying on lexico-syntactic patterns have a 
reasonable degree of precision, their recall is very low.  
 
The 
second 
paradigm 
is 
based 
on 
Harris's 
distributional analysis [31]. In this paradigm, 
researchers have exploited clustering algorithms to  
automatically derive concept hierarchies from text.  
 
The third paradigm stems from the information 
retrieval community and relies on a document-based 
notion of term subsumption, as proposed for example 
in [32]. 
5) Relations (non-hierarchical) 
Non-hierarchical relation extraction from text has been 
addressed primarily within the biomedical field, as there are 
a large text collections readily available for this area of 
research (e.g., PubMed [70]). The goal of this work is to 
discover new relationships between known concepts (i.e., 
symptoms, drugs, diseases, etc.) by analyzing large 
quantities of biomedical scientific articles (see e.g., [33]-
[35]). Relation extraction through text mining for ontology 
development was introduced in work on association rules in 
[36]. Recent efforts in relation extraction from text have been 
carried on under the Automatic Content Extraction (ACE) 
program, where entities (i.e., individuals) are distinguished 
from their mentions. Normalization, the process of 
establishing links between mentions in a document, and 
individual entities represented in an ontology, is part of the 
task for certain kind of mentions (e.g., temporal expressions). 
6) Axioms and rules 
The extraction of rules from text occurs at an early stage 
[37]. Initial blueprints for this task can be found in the work 
of [38]. This work used an unsupervised method for 
discovering inference rules from the text, which was based 
on an extended version of the Harris’ distributional 
hypothesis. Furthermore, the European Union-funded project 
Pascal [39] on textual entailment challenge has strongly 
increased the awareness of the problem of deriving lexical 
entailment rules. The focus of Pascal, therefore, was to learn 
lexical entailments for application in question answering 
systems. 
C. Prominent systems 
Several ontology learning systems have been proposed 
with the goal of reducing both the time and cost for 
ontology development. We present in this section the most 
prominent ontology learning systems according to the 
following 
criteria: 
broad 
adoption 
or 
popularity, 
completeness in the number of ontology learning tasks and 
outcomes, or recency of work. 
 
ASIUM [40] is a semi-automated ontology learning 
system that learns subcategorization frames of verbs 
and ontologies from syntactic parsing of technical texts 
in natural language (French). ASIUM successively 
aggregates the clusters to form new concepts in the 
form of a generality graph that represents the ontology 
of the domain. 
 
Text-to-Onto [21] is a framework for semi-automatic 
ontology learning from texts which implements a 
variety of algorithms for diverse ontology learning 
subtask. It leverages data mining and NLP techniques 
in the ontology development and maintenance task. It 
proceeds through ontology import, extraction, pruning, 
and refinement. 
 
SYNDIKATE [42] is a system for automatically 
acquiring knowledge from real-world texts, and for 
transferring their content to formal representation 
structures which constitute a corresponding text 
knowledge base. SYNDIKATE uses only linguistics-
based techniques to perform its ontology learning tasks. 
 
OntoLearn [43] is a system for (semi-)automated 
ontology learning from domain texts. OntoLearn uses 
text mining techniques and existing linguistic resources, 
such as WordNet [9] and SemCor [69] to learn, from 
available document warehouses and dedicated Web 
sites, domain concepts and taxonomic relations among 
them. 
 
CRCTOL [44], known as Concept‐Relation‐Concept 
Tuple‐based Ontology Learning, is a system to mine 
ontologies 
automatically 
from 
domain 
specific 
documents. CRCTOL uses linguistics and statistics-
based techniques to perform its ontology learning tasks. 
 
OntoGain [22] is a system for unsupervised ontology 
acquisition from unstructured text which relies on 
multi-word term extraction. OntoGain uses linguistics 
and statistics-based techniques to perform its ontology 
learning tasks. 
 
OntoCmaps [58] is a domain-independent and ontology 
learning tool that extracts deep semantic representations 
from corpora. OntoCmaps generates rich conceptual 
representations in the form of concept maps and 
proposes an innovative filtering mechanism based on 
Degree (number of edges from and to a given term), 
Betweenness (number of shortest paths that pass 
through a term), PageRank (fraction of time spent 
visiting a term) and Hits (ranks terms according to the 
importance of hubs and authorities) metrics from graph 
theory. 
 
LexOnt [59] is a semi-automatic ontology creation tool 
that uses the Programmable Web directory of services. 
Its algorithm generates and ranks frequent terms and 
significant phrases by comparing them to external 
domain knowledge such as Wikipedia, WordNet and 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

the current state of the ontology. LexOnt constructs the 
ontology iteratively, by interacting with the user. The 
user can choose, add these terms to the ontology and 
rank terms. 
 Table I provides a comparison of the inputs used, 
outputs supported, and techniques employed by the 
prominent ontology learning systems from text. 
 
TABLE I.  SUMMARY OF PROMINENT ONTOLOGY LEARNING SYSTEMS FROM TEXT 
System 
Input Language 
Input Type 
Output 
Technique 
Linguistics-based 
Statistics-based 
Logic-based 
ASIUM (2000) 
French 
Unstructured 
(corpora) 
Terms 
Sentence parsing, Syntactic 
Structure analysis, 
Subcategorization frames 
 
 
Concepts 
Taxonomic 
relations 
 
Agglomerative 
Clustering 
Text-to-Onto 
(2000) 
German, XML, 
HTML, 
Document Type 
Definition (DTD)  
Natural language 
texts, Web docs, 
semi-structured 
(XML, DTD) and 
structured (DB 
schema, ontology) 
data 
Terms 
Part-of-speech tagging, 
Sentence parsing, Syntactic 
Structure analysis 
 
 
Concepts 
Concepts from domain 
lexicon 
Co-occurrence 
analysis 
Taxonomic 
relations 
Hypernyms from WordNet, 
Lexico-syntactic patterns 
Agglomerative 
Clustering 
Non-taxonomic 
relations 
 
Association rule 
mining 
SYNDIKATE 
(2001) 
German 
Unstructured text 
Terms 
Syntactic Structure analysis, 
Anaphora resolution 
 
 
Concepts 
Use of semantic templates 
and domain knowledge 
 
Inference 
engine 
Taxonomic 
relations 
 
 
 
Non-taxonomic 
relations 
OntoLearn 
(2002) 
French 
Unstructured/semi 
structured text 
Terms 
Part-of-speech tagging, 
Sentence parsing 
Relevance 
analysis 
 
Concepts 
Concepts and glossary from 
WordNet 
 
Taxonomic 
relations 
Hypernyms from WordNet 
CRCTOL (2005) 
English 
Unstructured/semi 
structured text 
(WordNet) 
Terms and 
Concepts 
Part-of-speech tagging, 
Sentence parsing, use of 
domain lexicon, Word sense 
disambiguation 
Relevance 
analysis 
 
Taxonomic and 
Non-taxonomic 
relations 
Lexico-syntactic patterns, 
Syntactic Structure analysis 
 
OntoGain (2010) 
English 
Unstructured/semi 
structured text 
(WordNet) 
Terms and 
Concepts 
Part-of-speech tagging, 
Shallow parsing, Relevance 
analysis 
 
 
Taxonomic 
relations 
 
Agglomerative 
Clustering, 
Formal concept 
analysis 
Non-taxonomic 
relations 
 
Association rule 
mining 
OntoCmaps 
(2011) 
English 
Unstructured/semi 
structured text 
Terms 
Part-of-speech tagging and 
syntactic patterns based on 
dependency grammar 
formalism 
Relevance 
analysis 
 
Concepts 
Taxonomic 
relations 
Non-taxonomic 
relations 
LexOnt (2012) 
English 
Unstructured, semi-
structured 
(Wikipedia, 
WordNet) and 
structured 
(ontology) data 
Terms 
Linguistic patterns to 
determinate collocations 
Relevance 
analysis 
 
Taxonomic 
relations 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
As shown in Table I, most of the existing ontology 
learning systems focus only on concept and relation 
extraction. They generally rely on shallow NLP techniques 
and statistical methods. Though these systems are able to 
address the requirements of constructing small ‘toy’ 
ontologies, in time, the need for researchers to return to the 
basics and address more fundamental issues about 
knowledge acquisition bottleneck is revealed. This explains 
the reduction in the number of complete ontology learning 
systems developed in the last few years. 
IV. 
ONTOLOGY EVALUATION 
“Ontology evaluation is defined in the context of two 
interesting concepts; verification and validation. The 
definition is interesting because it also offers a way to 
categorize current ontology evaluation endeavors. Ontology 
verification is concerned with building an ontology 
correctly, while ontology validation on the other hand is 
concerned with building the correct ontology” [61].  
A. Evaluation approaches 
A variety of approaches to ontology evaluation have 
been proposed in the literature [61][62][47]. Depending on 
the kind of ontology and the purpose of the evaluation, these 
approaches can be grouped into the following categories. 
1) Gold Standard-based evaluation 
Attempts to compare the learned ontology with a 
predefined gold standard ontology that represents an 
idealized outcome of the learning algorithm. However, 
having a suitable gold ontology can be challenging, since it 
should be one that was created under similar conditions with 
similar goals to the learned ontology [62]. 
2) Task-based evaluation 
Examines how the results of the ontology-based 
application are affected by using the ontology [45]. For 
example, in the case of an ontology designed to improve the 
performance of document retrieval, users may collect some 
sample queries and determine if the documents retrieved are 
more relevant when the ontology is used.  
3) Corpus-based evaluation  
Evaluates how far an ontology is able to cover any 
given domain [45]. This type of approach compares the 
learned ontology with the content of a text corpus that 
significantly covers the corresponding domain. Techniques 
from natural language processing or information extraction 
are used to analyze the content of the corpus.  
4) Criteria-based evaluation 
Measures to what extent an ontology adheres to certain 
desirable criteria. We can distinguish between measures 
related to the structure of an ontology and more 
sophisticated measures [62].  
B. Evaluation tools 
Since the OntoWeb 2 position statement stressed the 
insufficient research on ontology evaluation and the lack of 
evaluation tools [48], several ontology evaluation tools have 
been developed. They differ according to the context of the 
evaluation. We present the most important examples below 
[12]: 
 
Swoogle [52] is an ontology search engine that offers a 
limited search facility that can be interpreted as topic 
coverage. Given a search keyword, Swoogle can 
retrieve ontologies that contain a class or a relation that 
(lexically) matches the given keyword.  
 
OntoKhoj [53] is an ontology search engine that 
extends 
the 
traditional 
(keyword-based 
search) 
approach to consider word senses when ranking 
ontologies covering any given topic. It accommodates a 
manual sense disambiguation process, then, according 
to the sense chosen by the user, hypernyms and 
synonyms are selected from WordNet. 
 
OntoQA [54] is a tool that measures the quality of 
ontology from the consumer perspective, using schema 
and instance metrics. It takes as an input a crawled 
populated ontology or a set of user supplied search 
terms, and ranks them according to metrics related to 
various aspects of an ontology.  
 
OntoCAT [55] provides a comprehensive set of metrics 
for use by the ontology consumer or knowledge 
engineer to assist in ontology evaluation for re-use. 
This evaluation process is focused on the ontology 
summaries that are based on size, structural, hub, and 
root properties. 
 
AKTiveRank [56] is a tool that ranks ontologies using a 
set of ontology structure-based metrics. It processes 
keywords as an input, and queries Swoogle for the 
given keywords in order to extract candidate ontologies. 
After that, it then applies measures based on the 
coverage and the structure of the ontologies to rank 
them accordingly. Its shortcoming is that its measures 
are at the “class level” only. 
 
OS_Rank [57] is an ontology evaluation system that 
evaluates ontologies and ranks them based on class 
name, the degree of detail for each searched class, the 
number of semantic relations of searched classes, and 
the interest domain based on WordNet to resolve 
different semantic problems. 
 
OOPS! (OntOlogy Pitfall Scanner!) [60] is a tool that 
scans ontologies looking for potential pitfalls that could 
led to modeling errors. OOPS! is very useful for 
ontology developers during the ontology validation 
activity, concretely during the diagnosis phase. The tool 
operates independently of any ontology development 
platform. 
V. 
ONTOLOGY LEARNING TRENDS AND PROBLEMS 
To summarize the progress and trends that the ontology 
learning community has witnessed over the past years, we 
sent queries to Google Scholar, relating to ontology learning 
and compared the number of returned publications from 
2007 to 2017. Some of our results are shown in Figure 2. 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
 
 
 
We browsed a large number of research papers that 
were returned. As a result of our research, we have observed 
the following trends: 
 
The most recent literature points to an increase in 
interest in using Web data to address the 
knowledge acquisition bottleneck and to make 
ontology learning operational on a Web scale. 
 
Current research efforts are focused on either 
enhancing existing term recognition techniques or 
moving to the more advanced phase of relation 
discovery. 
 
The measures of terms extraction from texts have 
more or less stabilized, with an F-measure 
generally above 90%. The current state-of-the-art 
techniques 
are 
based 
mainly 
on 
statistical 
semantics, and paradigmatic and syntagmatic 
relations [63] - that is to say, the relevance of 
search terms is determined through general 
observations in very large samples of data and 
through the way the constituent parts of the search 
term are constructed. 
 
There is a noticeable trend of increased application 
of lexico-syntactic patterns [64], machine learning 
methods [65], or hybrid approach that combines 
lexico-syntactic pattern analysis with supervised 
classification [66][67] for taxonomic and non-
taxonomic relation discovery on very large datasets 
from the Web. The relative redundancy of Web 
data has allowed this group of techniques that rely 
on repetitions and regularities to be revived and 
flourish.  
 
(Semi)-structured Web data, such as Wikipedia 
[68] and Freebase [41], have become a necessary 
part of emerging work for relations discovery. 
 
Efforts are not being towards the development of 
new ontology learning tools, but instead towards 
the improvement of existing ones: increasing in 
automation, precision, recall and F-measure. 
We have also identified the following open issues: 
 
The fully automatic learning of ontologies may not 
be possible, considering that an ontology is, after 
all, a shared conceptualization of a domain. 
 
The results for discovery of relations between 
concepts is less than satisfactory. 
 
The axiom learning from text is currently in the 
early stages of development. 
 
There is a lack of reusable services for ontology 
learning. 
Many 
proposed 
ontology 
learning 
methods and approaches highly depend on their 
specific environment consisting of language, 
domain, application and input. 
 
A common evaluation platform for ontologies is 
currently absent, but is needed. 
Figure 2.  Publications Trends. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE CHALLENGES 
This work presented a survey of ontology learning from 
text. For this intent, we have identified the ontology learning 
tasks, and introduced, the most used techniques to perform 
each task. Further, we have provided a comparison table of 
ontology learning systems, a brief overview of ontology 
evaluation, and summarized the current trends and open 
problems in this field. In addition to these problems, the 
growing use of Web data will introduce new challenges. 
Firstly, research efforts increasingly be dedicated to creating 
new, or adapting existing techniques to work with the noise, 
richness, and diversity of Web data. Secondly, the amount of 
Web data, which is growing exponentially, will be a 
significant challenge which merits further attention in the 
future. Questions of efficiency and robustness in processing 
data will be at the forefront of this challenge. Thirdly, as 
more communities of different cultural and linguistic 
backgrounds contribute to the Web, the availability of textual 
resources required for multilingual ontology learning will 
improve. Lastly, as the availability of ontologies increases, 
ontology alignment will become more pertinent.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
P. Cimiano, J. Volker, and R. Studer, “Ontologies on demand? - a 
description of the state-of-the-art, applications, challenges and trends 
for ontology learning from text”, Information, Wissenschaft und 
Praxis,  pp. 315-320, 2006. 
[2] 
B. Omelayenko, “Learning of ontologies for the Web: the analysis of 
existent approaches”, In: Proceedings of the International Workshop 
on Web Dynamics, pp. 16-25, 2001. 
[3] 
V. Novacek, “Ontology learning”. Master’s thesis, Faculty of 
Informatics, Masaryk University, Czech Republic, is.muni.cz, 2006. 
[4] 
T. Gruber, “Toward principles for the design of ontologies used for 
knowledge sharing”, International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, pp. 907-928, 1995. 
[5] 
A. Maedche and S. Staab, “Ontology Learning for the Semantic 
Web”, Intelligent Systems, IEEE, pp.72-79 , 2002. 
[6] 
L. Drumond, R. Girardi, “A Survey of Ontology Learning 
Procedures”,  Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Ontologies and 
their Applications, vol. 427 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings, 
Salvador, Bahia, Brazil, 2008. 
[7] 
D. Benz, “Collaborative ontology learning”, Master’s thesis, 
University of Freiburg, 2007. 
[8] 
V. Kashyap, “Design and creation of ontologies for environmental 
information retrieval”, Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on 
Knowledge Acquisition, Modeling and Management (KAW), Banff, 
Alberta, Canada ,1999. 
[9] 
G. Miller, “Wordnet: a lexical database for english”, Commun, ACM 
38(11), pp.39-41, 1995. 
[10] Wiktionary, accessible from en.wiktionary.org. 
[11] M. Rogger and S .Thaler, “Ontology Learning”, Seminar paper, 
Applied 
Ontology 
Engineering, 
Leopold–Franzens–University 
Innsbruck, 2010. 
[12]  A. B. Bouiadjra and S. M. Benslimane, “FOEval: Full Ontology 
Evaluation, Model and Perspectives”, In Proceedings of the 7th 
International Conference on Natural Language Processing and 
Knowledge Engineering, pp. 464-468, IEEE, Nov. 2011. 
[13] P. Cimiano, “Ontology Learning and Population from Text”, ISBN: 
978-0- 387-30632-2, Springer, 2006. 
[14] D. Borigault, C. Jacquemin, and M.-C. L’Homme, editors, “Recent 
Advances in Computational Terminology”, Natural language 
processing series, vol. 2, pp. 328-332 John Benjamins Publishing 
Company, 2001. 
[15] K. Frantzi and S .Ananiadou, “The c-value / nc-value domain 
independent method for multiword term extraction”, Journal of 
Natural Language Processing, pp. 145-179, 1999. 
[16] P. Pantel and D. Lin, “A statistical corpus-based term extractor”, In E. 
Stroulia and S. Matwin, editors, AI 2001, Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intellingence, pp. 36-46, Springer Verlag, 2001. 
[17] G. Salton and C. Buckley, “Term-weighting approaches in automatic 
text retrieval Information Processing & Management 24(5), pp. 515–
523, 1988. 
[18] G. Miller, R. Beckwith,  C. Fellbaum , D. Gross , and K. J. Miller, 
“Introduction 
to 
WordNet: 
An 
On-line 
Lexical 
Database”,   
International Journal of Lexicography 3, pp. 235-244, Dec. 1990. 
[19] D. Bourigault and C. Jacquemin,“Term extraction+ term clustering: 
An integrated platform for computer-aided terminology”, In 
Proceedings of the ninth conference on European chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 15-22, 1999.  
[20] D. Faure and C. Nedellec, “Knowledge acquisition of predicate 
argument structures from technical texts using machine learning: The 
system 
ASIUM”. 
Knowledge 
Acquisition, 
Modeling 
and 
Management, pp. 329-334, 1999. 
[21] A. Maedche and S. Staab, “The text-to-onto ontology learning 
environment”, In Software Demonstration at ICCS-2000-Eight 
International Conference on Conceptual Structures, Aug., 2000. 
[22] E. Drymonas, K. Zervanou, and E. Petrakis, “Unsupervised ontology 
acquisition from plain texts: The OntoGain system”, Natural 
Language Processing and Information Systems, pp. 277-287, 2010. 
[23] P. Buitelaar, P. Cimiano, and B. Magnini,  “Ontology Learning from 
Text: An Overview”, Ontology Learning from Text: Methods, 
Evaluation and Applications, IOS Press, 2005. 
[24] D. 
Hindle, 
“Noun 
Classification 
from 
Predicate-Argument 
Structures”, In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistic, pp. 268-275, 1990. 
[25] D. Lin and P. Pantel, “Induction of Semantic Classes from Natural 
Language Text”, In Proceedings of ACM SIGKDD Conference on 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 317-322, 2001. 
[26] D. Lin and P. Pantel, “Concept Discovery from Text”, In Proceedings 
of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING), pp. 577-583, 2002. 
[27] M. Reinberger and P. Spyns, “Unsupervised Text Mining for the 
Learning of DOGMA-inspired Ontologies”, Ontology Learning from 
Text: Methods, Evaluation and Applications, IOS Press, 2005. 
[28] R. Evans, ”A Framework for Named Entity Recognition in the Open 
Domain”, In Proceedings of the Recent Advances in Natural 
Language Processing (RANLP-2003), pp. 137-144, 2003. 
[29] O. Etzioni et al., ”Web-Scale Information Extraction in KnowItAll 
(Preliminary Results)”, In Proceedings of the 13th World Wide Web 
Conference (WWW), pp. 100-109, 2004. 
[30] M. A. Hearst, “Automatic acquisition of hyponyms from large text 
corpora”, In Proceedings of the 14th conference on Computational 
linguistics, vol. 2, pp. 539-545, Association for Computational 
Linguistic, 1992. 
[31] Z. Harris, Mathematical Structures of Language, John Wiley & Sons, 
1968. 
[32] M. Sanderson and B. Croft, “Deriving concept hierarchies from text”, 
In Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 206-213. 
1999. 
[33] T. Rindflesch, L. Tanabe, J. Weinstein, and L. Hunter. Edgar, 
“Extraction of drugs, genes, and relations from biomedical literature”, 
In Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing, 2000. 
[34] J. Pustejovsky, J. Castano, J. Zhang, B. Cochran, and M. Kotecki, 
“Robust relational parsing over biomedical literature: Extracting 
inhibit relations”, In Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing, 2002. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
[35] S. Vintar, L. Todorovski, D. Sonntag, and P. Buitelaar, “Evaluating 
context features for medical relation mining”, In ECML/PKDD 
Workshop on Data Mining and Text Mining for Bioinformatics, 2003. 
[36] A. Maedche and S. Staab, “Discovering conceptual relations from 
text”, In W. Horn, editor, Proceedings of the 14th European 
Conference on Artificial Intellignece (ECAI’2000), 2000. 
[37] D. Lin and P. Pantel, “DIRT - Discovery of Inference Rules from 
Text”, In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Conference on 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 323-328, 2001. 
[38] D. Lin and P. Pantel, “Induction of Semantic Classes from Natural 
Language Text”, In Proceedings of ACM SIGKDD Conference on 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 317-322, 2001. 
[39] I. Dagan, O. Glickman, and B. Magnini, “The PASCAL Recognising 
Textual Entailment Challenge”. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
vol. 3944, pp.177-190, Jan. 2006. 
[40] D. Faure and C. Nedellec, “Knowledge acquisition of predicate 
argument structures from technical texts using machine learning: The 
system 
ASIUM”. 
Knowledge 
Acquisition, 
Modeling 
and 
Management, pp. 329-334, 1999. 
[41] K. Xu, S. Reddy, Y. Feng, S. Huang, and D. Zhao, “Question 
Answering on Freebase via Relation Extraction and Textual 
Evidence”, arXiv.org, 2016. 
[42] U. Hahn, M. Romacker, and S. Schulz, “MedSynDiKATe--design 
considerations for an ontologybased medical text understanding 
system”, In Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium, pp. 330-334, 
American Medical Informatics Association, 2000. 
[43] R. Navigli and P. Velardi, “Learning Domain Ontologies from 
Document Warehouses and Dedicated Websites”, Computational 
Linguistics, 30(2), MIT Press, pp. 151-179, 2004. 
[44] X. Jiang and A. H. Tan, “CRCTOL: A semantic‐ based domain 
ontology learning system”, Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology, 61(1), pp. 150-168, 2009. 
[45] K. Dellschaft and S. Staab, “Strategies for the evaluation of ontology 
learning”, In Ontology Learning and Population: Bridging the Gap 
between Text and Knowledge, P. Buitelaar and P. Cimiano, Eds. IOS 
Press, pp. 253-273, 2008, Amsterdam. 
[46] R. Porzel and R. Malaka, “A task-based approach for ontology 
evaluation”, In Proceedings of the 16th European Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence,Valencia, Spain, Citeseer, 2004. 
[47] W. Wong, W. Liu, and M. Bennamoun, “Ontology Learning from 
Text: A Look Back and into the Future”, Article in ACM Computing 
Surveys, Article 20, Jan. 2011. 
[48] Y. Kalfoglou, “Evaluating ontologies during deployment in 
applications, position statement”, OntoWeb 2 meeting, Amsterdam, 
Dec. 2002. 
[49] A. Maedche and S. Staab, “Measuring similarity between ontologies”. 
In Proceedings of the European Conference on Knowledge 
Acquisition and Management (EKAW), pp. 251-263, 2002. 
[50] M. Sabou, C. Wroe, C. Goble and G. Mishne, “Learning domain 
ontologies for Web service descriptions: An experiment in 
bioinformatics”, In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference 
on the World Wide Web, pp. 190-198, 2005. 
[51] K. Dellschaft and S. Staab, “On how to perform a gold standard based 
evaluation of ontology learning”, In Proceedings of the 5th 
International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC), pp. 228-241, 2006. 
[52] L. Ding et al., “Swoogle: A Search and Metadata Engine for the 
Semantic Web”. In Proceedings of the 13th CIKM, pp. 652-659, 
2004. 
[53] C. Patel, K. Supekar, Y. Lee, and E. K. Park. OntoKhoj, “A Semantic 
Web Portal for Ontology Searching, Ranking and Classification”, In 
Proceeding of the Workshop On Web Information And Data 
Management, pp. 58-61, ACM, 2003. 
[54] S. Tartir, I. B. Arpinar, M. Moore, A. P. Sheth, and B. Aleman-Meza, 
“OntoQA Metric-Based Ontology Quality Analysis”, IEEE Workshop 
on 
Knowledge 
Acquisition 
from 
Distributed, 
Autonomous, 
Semantically Heterogeneous Data and Knowledge Sources, Houston, 
TX, USA, 2005. 
[55] V. Cross and A. Pal, “OntoCAT: An Ontology Consumer Analysis 
Tool and Its Use on Product Services Categorization Standards”, In 
Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Applications and 
Business Aspects of the Semantic Web, pp. 44-58, 2006. 
[56] M. Jones and H. Alani, “Content-based ontology ranking”, In 
Proceedings of the 9th International Protege Conference, pp. 92-96, 
2006. 
[57] Y. Wei and J. Chen, “Ranking Ontology based on Structure 
Analysis”, 
Second 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Knowledge 
Acquisition and Modeling IEEE, pp. 119-122, 2009. 
[58] A. Zouaq, D. Gasevic, and M. Hatala, “Towards open ontology 
learning and filtering”, Information Systems, vol. 36, no.7, pp. 1064–
1081, 2011. 
[59]  K. Arabshian, P. Danielsen and S. Afroz, “LexOnt: A Semi-
Automatic Ontology Creation Tool for Programmable Web”, In : 
AAAI Spring Symposium: Intelligent Web Services Meet Social 
Computing, pp. 2-8, 2012. 
[60] M. Poveda Villalon and MC. Suárez-Figueroa, “OOPS!–OntOlogy 
Pitfalls Scanner!”, oa.upm.es, 2012. 
[61] H. Hlomani and D .Stacey, “Approaches, methods, metrics, measures, 
and subjectivity in ontology evaluation: A survey”, Semantic Web 
Journal, pp. 1-11, 2014. 
[62] J. Raad and C. Cruz, “A Survey on Ontology Evaluation Methods”, 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Knowledge 
Engineering and Ontology Development, pp. 179-186, Nov 2015. 
[63] F. Sun, J. Guo, Y. Lan, J. Xu, and X. Cheng, “Learning Word 
Representations by Jointly Modeling Syntagmatic and Paradigmatic 
Relations”, Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 136-145, 2015. 
[64] S. Faralli and S. P. Ponzetto, “DWS at the 2016 Open Knowledge 
Extraction Challenge: A Hearst-Like Pattern-Based Approach to 
Hypernym 
Extraction 
and 
Class 
Induction”, 
Springer: 
Communications in Computer and Information Science, vol. 641, pp. 
48-60, 2016.  
[65] J. Gao and S. Mazumda, “Exploiting Linked Open Data to Uncover 
Entity Types”, Springer: Communications in Computer and 
Information Science, vol. 548, pp. 51-62, 2016. 
[66] S. Consoli, D. Reforgiato Recupero, “Using FRED for Named Entity 
Resolution, Linking and Typing for Knowledge Base Population”, 
Springer: Communications in Computer and Information Science, 
vol. 548, pp. 40-50, 2016.  
[67] T. Kliegr and O. Zamazal, “LHD 2.0: A text mining approach to 
typing entities in knowledge graphs”, Web Semantics: Science, 
Services and Agents on the World Wide Web, 2016. 
[68] P. Arnold and E .Rahm, “Automatic extraction of semantic relations 
from wikipedia”, International Journal on Artificial Intelligence Tools 
vol. 24, No. 2 , 2015. 
[69] S. Landes, C. Leacock and R.I. Tengi, “Building Semantic 
Concordances”, In Christiane Fellbaum (editor), WordNet: an 
Electronic 
Lexical 
Database, 
pp. 
199– 
216, 
MIT 
Press, 
Cambridge,1999. 
[70] PubMed, accessible from pubmedcentral.nih.gov. 
 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

