The Semantic Web in the Internet of Production:
A Strategic Approach with Use-Case Examples
Johannes Lipp
(i) Chair of Databases and Information Systems
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
(ii) Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Information Technology
Sankt Augustin, Germany
orcid.org/0000-0002-2639-1949
email: lipp@dbis.rwth-aachen.de
Katrin Schilling
Laboratory for Machine Tools
and Production Engineering (WZL)
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
email: k.schilling@wzl.rwth-aachen.de
Abstract—The semantic interoperability of data, models, sys-
tems, and knowledge in general is a core element of the Internet
of Production, i.e., a cross-life cycle and interdisciplinary net-
working of all levels in manufacturing technology. Semantic Web
technologies are a good choice for the implementation of such
applications, but, despite numerous academic research projects,
its true potential is still rarely used in practice. One reason is the
lack of knowledge among practitioners about both the technology
itself and possible application areas, as manufacturing engineers
usually are no Semantic Web experts and vice versa. In this paper,
we present ﬁve essential application areas for Semantic Web
technologies in production engineering, and give ﬁve examples
of how we use these in practice in the Internet of Production.
Our two-folded presentation intends to clarify potentials within
application areas, and at the same time support the ramp-up of
practical applications based on our examples.
Keywords—Semantic Web; Internet of Production; Use-Cases.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Semantic Web [1] and its community proposed multiple
recommendations and standards to improve semantic interop-
erability in the interconnected World Wide Web. It addresses,
among others, the tasks of knowledge sharing, validation, and
reasoning. Users can tackle these tasks via combinations of
a broad range of solutions, including Persistent IDentiﬁers
(PIDs), ontologies, data shapes, and reasoning rules. Semantic
Web solutions in general do not intend to replace other
solutions like relational databases or machine learning, but
aim to cooperate closely with them.
In the ﬁeld of production technology, the idea of the
Semantic Web got attention in various, mostly academic,
research projects. Unfortunately, these technologies have not
yet reached a broad acceptance or implementation in in-
dustry. This is mainly due to lacking ontology knowledge
among employees, missing tool support, imprecise problem
statements in industry use-cases, and unclear beneﬁts like
the return on invest for the extensive modeling effort. These
issues in industry range among multiple levels and domains,
and effect engineers, domain experts, ontology engineers,
and C-level managers. For these reasons, even though some
interesting concepts and the technical feasibility were analyzed
in demo implementations, hardly any application was properly
realized in a productive system or product. Most applications
in production did never leave an experimental stage.
There indeed are strong reasons to continue the research
on Semantic Web technologies for production engineering.
Following the achievements in the vision of ”Industry 4.0” in
the recent years, a proper infrastructure – a basic prerequisite
for a networked production – has been created. Nowadays,
the latest generation of products in automation technology are
equipped with the necessary interfaces and communication
protocols to enable distributed, data-driven applications. In
particular, this means that ”data” is now available outside
the devices and applications with low effort. Availability and
accessibility of data alone however are not sufﬁcient to match
the vision of the Internet of Production [2], which requires
the networking of all systems and data-based optimization
along in the entire production process. For example, with a
higher level of maturity for knowledge-based applications like
artiﬁcial intelligence, lifting simple data to proper knowledge
is a crucial factor. This need for semantic technologies is
supported by the increased attention for protocols like OPC
Uniﬁed Architecture (OPC UA) [3] as they add semantics to
data interactions and also support interoperability. We argue
that the development of these solutions did not fully take into
account the previous achievements by the Semantic Web and
thus tend to partially re-invent the wheel.
Both aspects, the better availability of data through an ad-
vanced infrastructure of production systems, and the increasing
demand for semantically described data for new applications,
show that a Semantic Web in action is required by the Internet
of Production. In this paper, a state of the art overview is in
Section II, before, in Section III, we demonstrate the beneﬁts
of the Semantic Web for both ontology experts and non-experts
in order to convince all above-mentioned users in a handy way.
We subsequently in Section IV present concrete use-cases that
we observed in the research project Internet of Production and
thus support industry and institutes in planning their use-cases,
before we conclude our work in Section V.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-813-6
SEMAPRO 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

sameAs
What's up there?
A
Uhh, that‘s bullshit!
D
Integrating Domains
While collaborating among multiple 
domains, you need a translator. You 
can integrate information from different 
domains via semantic linking.
Dude, what do you mean?
B
Data Aggregation
The characterization of a system is composed 
of heterogeneous data and models that are 
related to each other and thus reflect the 
system’s situation and environment.
The situation? Well, it’s complex…
E
Let me ask you something…
C
Semantic Web Application Areas in Production
via
find
dbis:Internet
OfProduction
wzl-wm:IoP
Data / Service Catalog
In order to find something, you need a directory, 
similar to a library’s catalogue for literature.
failed experiments
SELECT DISTINCT id, timestamp FROM 
Experiments WHERE Pressure<240 OR NOT 
Temperature BETWEEN 240 AND 275 OR ...
Database Access
Querying complex data requires much 
time and knowledge. Ontology-based 
data access offers queries in the 
language of the engineer.
Consistency and Reasoning
In a dynamic system, where various models come 
together, nonsense happens quite easily! Logical 
deductions can be used to detect such errors.
“42 experiments today, but the 
final report contains 39.
 We lost information!”
“-550.34° does not 
look like a valid 
Celsius value…”
Datasets
Services
Specific Details
Measurement methods, 
simulation parameters, …
General Details
Title, category, format, …
Context
ctx:location
ctx:machine 
state
ctx:user
wzm:FeedRate
wzm:FuncCode
foaf:Person
foaf:Member
locn:Address
Fig. 1. Illustration of the main application areas for the Semantic Web in the context of production. This ﬁgure supports demonstrate the beneﬁts to both
experts and non-experts. These include, but are not limited to, the ﬁve areas data/service catalog, integrating domains, database access, consistency and
reasoning, and data aggregation.
II. STATE OF THE ART
The potential of the Semantic Web idea in the context of
production technology has been discussed in research projects.
Upper ontologies for manufacturing, such as DOLCE [4],
Cyc [5], SUMO [6] or MASON [7], as well as speciﬁc domain
ontologies, were developed. An overview and comparison can
be found in [8]. In particular, the challenge of breaking up
silos and linking information across value chains is essential in
the ”Industry 4.0”; the concept of the administration shell is a
concrete example [9]. It is still difﬁcult to ﬁnd these ontologies
and reuse that work.
Semantic Web technologies have also been applied to solve
a wide range of concrete research questions: From dynamic
processor orchestration [10], over worker assistance [11], up
to visualization via augmented reality [12], just to name a few
examples. Furthermore, initiatives such as the Open Services
for Lifecycle Collaboration (OSLC) try to establish the appli-
cation in (engineering) tools through industry cooperations.
Unfortunately, all this knowledge and experience is still not
well known outside these participating disciplines. Especially
classical engineering disciplines, which have had little contact
with software engineering and information modeling, often
face difﬁculties in transferring the often abstract paradigms
to problems in their own domain. Our goal is not to replace
any established or advanced technologies of these experts with
Semantic Web technologies. Rather, the intention is to support
the use of Semantic Web technologies as a ”glue” to connect
the speciﬁc technologies and expert domains by providing a
descriptive set of application areas.
III. APPLICATION AREAS IN PRODUCTION
This section presents possible application areas for the
Semantic Web in production and it is intended to give a
high-level overview for all relevant people. The following
explanations refer to the graphical overview shown in Figure 1
and which we use as a one-page ﬂyer to advertise this at
partners.
A Data / Service Catalog (A) probably is the mostly used
application and is well-known among most people. It is a
directory of any data sources of interest, such as datasets,
services, programs, people, projects, or sensors. Such a catalog
enables people to ﬁnd information based on given search
details. Prominent examples are open data portals such as [13]
or [14], where users typically can apply a wide range of pa-
rameters to their search, including keywords, usage rules, and
both spatial and temporal ranges. Another frequently applied
example is the dynamic management of semantically described
functions for a service-oriented / skill-based management of
production processes, described in [10], [15].
A catalog usually is deployed independent from the data
itself, which means that it can be easily applied to any existing
data management system. Note that, as depicted in Figure 1, it
supports searching for general ﬁlters as well as speciﬁc details.
The former represents domain-independent information that
can be applied to most catalogs and thus can and should
be shared among these. Concretely, this means that catalog
developers should reuse existing (de-facto) standards such as
the Data CATalog Vocabulary (DCAT) [16] to enable smooth
interoperability on this level between different catalogs. The
latter, namely speciﬁc details, stands for information that is
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-813-6
SEMAPRO 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

particular for a certain domain. Deﬁning these requires much
communication between both disciplines Semantic Web and
the domain, as only the annotated pieces of information can
be included in search requests afterwards.
The area Integrating Domains (B) supports human under-
standing as well as interoperability on machine level. Since
it is not useful to re-invent the wheel for each small area
one works on, people tie together knowledge from different
domains in order to represent their particular use-case best.
Combining pieces of different knowledge sources such as on-
tologies usually leads to intersections or overlaps, which often
are not clear for humans and machines. With methods from
the Semantic Web, we can solve these issues by introducing
relations like sameAs, broader, or narrower between
concepts from different domains.
Ontology Based Data Access (OBDA) provides the potential
of simple Database Access (C) on a semantic level. By
deﬁning basic concepts such as ”failed experiments” for a spe-
ciﬁc scenario, the domain expert (without extensive database
knowledge) is enabled to easily articulate even complicated
queries. The goal is to separate a user-friendly wording of the
queries from the concrete database structure.
The potential to check semantically described data for
Consistency and to derive insights through Reasoning (D)
is beneﬁcial in the complex ecosystem of production technol-
ogy: Errors can rapidly occur during the transition between
different applications, systems from multiple manufacturers,
and various standards along the product’s life cycle. But even
logical conﬂicts within the data sets can be identiﬁed.
The Aggregation of Data and models (E) enables the map-
ping of complex situations and environmental conditions based
on heterogeneous information sources. Semantic relationships
of potentially very different aspects characterizing a situation
allow an abstraction of concepts (such as location, states,
persons) with their individual representation, even if they are
represented in different structures.
IV. APPLICATION EXAMPLES IN THE INTERNET OF
PRODUCTION
This section presents ﬁve use-case examples we identiﬁed
in the research project Internet of Production and which we
will fully implement in the near future. They all originate from
open research questions in different domains, and aim to im-
prove existent processes in terms of usability, stability, speed,
or precision. These concrete examples are intended to be used
by researchers as models for any application area in the future,
and might even be translated into archetypes. Figure 2 clearly
illustrates which application areas from Figure 1 are covered
by the ﬁve example applications. All examples cover one or
two areas, and all areas are covered by at least one example.
Example 1: An example of an application for area (A) is
the creation of a cross-disciplinary catalogue that provides
a searchable overview of the various research activities and
the data generated in the project. The catalogue makes it
easier for researchers in computer science, mechanical engi-
neering, economics and social sciences to ﬁnd links between
Fig. 2. Allocation of the use-case examples presented in Section IV to the
application areas from Section III. Note that some examples cover multiple
areas, and that all areas are covered.
(sub-) projects, solutions for similar problems or potential
research partners. A concrete implementation plan includes
both a distributed ﬁle system that stores the data, and Apache
Jena Fuseki [17] metadata system that provides metadata
management and a convenient query interface via the SPARQL
Protocol and RDF Query Language (SPARQL) [18]. The
catalogued information includes, but is not limited to, a vast
amount of datasets consisting of sensor values collected from
production machines or simulations. Required annotations and
search ﬁlter in this example include responsible person, tempo-
ral characteristics, accrual periodicity, domain and ﬁle format.
Note that providing data to others requires the data steward
to add most of the above-mentioned annotations manually, as
only some ﬁelds can be ﬁlled automatically. It is not a trivial
task to motivate data providers to execute this step properly.
Example 2: The second application is the integration of
different engineering models and to relate these with each
other, which combines areas (A) and (B). In the product
development process, a wide variety of models is created
and their relations are mostly implicit knowledge only. Our
partners asked for techniques to explicitly annotate important
relations between models and query these afterwards. Please
note that the models are very heterogeneous in terms of
domain, ﬁle format, and level of detail. The ﬁle format, for
instance, ranges from simulation scripts over 3D sketches
to rich Computer-Aided Design (CAD) models. We tackle
area (B) in this use-case by introducing a minimal ontology,
which is depicted in Figure 3 and is aligned with DCAT. This
ontology is used to properly relate models with each other,
which includes to tell that (i) two models represent the same
thing, (ii) an element in one model represents the same thing
than one from another, or (iii) an element in a model or a
complete model is more speciﬁc or general than another. The
ﬁrst realized concrete axioms state that a particular engine
within a CAD model of a Audi A4 car represents the same
as a blender 3D visualization’s part that depicts the engine of
a Volkswagen Amarok. Since we did not only link models to
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-813-6
SEMAPRO 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

each other via these properties, but also catalogize them in a
model catalog, this use-case combines areas (A) and (B) and
enables a holistic integration of individual (sub-)models along
the life cycle.
Fig. 3. The minimal ontology we created for the model catalog use-case. It
is aligned with DCAT and represents any model as a distribution that has a
ﬁle format (dark blue above). In this WebVOWL [19] screenshot, the light
blue properties below show possible relations between models and elements
within these, which are linked via the property has part.
Example 3: Another promising use-case is an implemen-
tation of the OBDA approach (C) for Ultrashort Pulse Laser
Processing (USP). In this process, we record time series of
a laser’s three-dimensional position as well as temperature
data of four locations, and store it in a relational database.
Analyzing the data requires the USP domain experts to design
complex Structured Query Language (SQL) queries, which
however is not part of their expertise. We avoid the time-
consuming and error-prone individual process via OBDA
mappings and a minimal ontology, which are both designed
cooperatively by the USP domain experts and ourselves. The
current demonstrator can be queried locally via the Ontop
plugin for Prot´eg´e and allows the engineers in particular query
failed experiments, crucial temperature developments, stable
runs etc. in their own wording via SPARQL. A full imple-
mentation of this use-case includes to identify and understand
all existing SQL queries, create new ones where required, and
specify proper OBDA mappings that are easy to understand
for the end users.
Example 4: An example for the data aggregation (E) as
well as the integration of domains (B) is a context-sensitive
user interface that adapts the user’s position to show relevant
information regarding the nearest, dynamic environment. For
this purpose, a predeﬁned information object is labeled with
contextual tags (e.g., a location, device category, user role,
machine state). Depending on the user’s devices (e.g., tablet or
glasses) the localization can be determined in different ways:
An indoor tracking system such as Bluetooth Low Energy
beacons refers to the referencing anchors; image recognition
enables tracking based on visual signiﬁcant features in the
environment; augmented reality frameworks (e.g., Google
ARCore) combine multiple technologies and deﬁne virtual
anchors. A semantic description of the spatial references links
them to the concrete information object via the concept of
localization. This is applied in the same way to other tags
such as machine state or the user role.
Example 5: The last use-case we present models production
planning, logistics, and control for injection molding in plas-
tics processing. It combines areas (D) and (A), as we construct
and manage both reasoning rules and instances, respectively.
In this example, we together with the experts from plastics
processing fully model the required complexity of production
planning in this domain. That are in particular dependencies
and consequences between possible choices, and support to
infer new knowledge from given the input in form of annotated
instances. Possible outcomes of this use-case include the
ability to produce optimal production plans from given inputs,
as well as to derive new knowledge in that area, which can
be shared among humans and machines. In order to complete
this, all necessary information on the machines’ availability,
incoming orders, and matching rules need to be extracted in
a semi-automatic way from an Enterprise Resource Planning
(ERP) system.
This section presented ﬁve exemplary use-cases that we
observed, and which are intended to support future researchers
in their tasks to leverage the Semantic Web in their projects.
As shown in Figure 2, these examples cover one or two
application areas from Figure 1 each, and all areas are covered.
The presented examples tackle practical problems occurring in
different domains, ranging from data access and management
to analysis and reasoning. In the concrete implementation,
domain experts work together with Semantic Web experts to
build target-oriented solutions for practical use.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper we argued that, especially in the recent years,
the push of the Semantic Web matches well with the pull from
the ever growing amount of networked information sources in
the Internet of Production. This leads to an increased need for
an actual application of Semantic Web technologies within
various domains including production. We grouped the major
strengths of the Semantic Web in the production domain into
ﬁve areas that are intended to support motivating these to
different people in research and industry.
With ﬁve exemplary use-cases that we observed in the
project Internet of Production, we demonstrate possible solu-
tions and their effectiveness to future researchers. These use-
cases show that a strong collaboration of experts from both the
Semantic Web and the application domain is essential indeed.
Our paper is a good step towards bridging these domains, as
we showed important matches between possibilities on the one
side and requirements in use-cases on the other side.
Future work includes to further design, implement, and
document these ﬁve use-cases. Further leveraging the strengths
of the Semantic Web and its community in production will
enable a semantically interconnected Internet of Production.
The importance of collaboration between experts from both
ﬁelds remains, and is crucial to drive both domains semantics
and production.
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-813-6
SEMAPRO 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG,
German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence
Strategy – EXC-2023 Internet of Production – 390621612.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila, “The Semantic Web,”
Scientiﬁc American, vol. 284, no. 5, pp. 34–43, 2001.
[2] J. Pennekamp et al., “Towards an Infrastructure Enabling the Internet
of Production,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Industrial
Cyber Physical Systems (ICPS), May 2019, pp. 31–37.
[3] T. Hannelius, M. Salmenpera, and S. Kuikka, “Roadmap to Adopting
OPC UA,” in 2008 6th IEEE International Conference on Industrial
Informatics.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 756–761.
[4] A. Gangemi, N. Guarino, C. Masolo, A. Oltramari, and L. Schneider,
“Sweetening Ontologies with DOLCE,” in International Conference on
Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management.
Springer, 2002,
pp. 166–181.
[5] D. B. Lenat and R. V. Guha, Building Large Knowledge-based Systems;
Representation and Inference in the Cyc Project.
Addison-Wesley
Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 1989.
[6] I. Niles and A. Pease, “Towards a Standard Upper Ontology,” in
Proceedings of the international conference on Formal Ontology in
Information Systems-Volume 2001, 2001, pp. 2–9.
[7] S. Lemaignan, A. Siadat, J. Dantan, and A. Semenenko, “Mason: A
proposal for an ontology of manufacturing domain,” in IEEE Workshop
on Distributed Intelligent Systems: Collective Intelligence and Its Ap-
plications (DIS’06), 2006, pp. 195–200.
[8] N. Khilwani, J. A. Harding, and A. K. Choudhary, “Semantic Web in
Manufacturing,” Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers,
Part B: Journal of Engineering Manufacture, vol. 223, no. 7, pp. 905–
924, 2009.
[9] I. Grangel-Gonz´alez, L. Halilaj, S. Auer, S. Lohmann, C. Lange, and
D. Collarana, “An RDF-based Approach for Implementing Industry 4.0
Components with Administration Shells,” in 2016 IEEE 21st Interna-
tional Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation
(ETFA), 2016, pp. 1–8.
[10] M. Loskyll, J. Schlick, S. Hodek, L. Ollinger, T. Gerber, and B. Pˆırvu,
“Semantic Service Discovery and Orchestration for Manufacturing Pro-
cesses,” in ETFA2011, 2011, pp. 1–8.
[11] D. Gorecky, M. Loskyll, and C. Stahl, “Semantic Digital Factory
– Using Engineering Knowledge to Create Ontologies for Virtual
Training,” IFAC Proceedings Volumes, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 7825
– 7830, 2014, 19th IFAC World Congress. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1474667016428454
[12] I. Mizutani, M. Kritzler, K. Garcia, and F. Michahelles, “Intuitive
Interaction with Semantics Using Augmented Reality: A Case Study of
Workforce Management in an Industrial Setting,” in Proceedings of the
Seventh International Conference on the Internet of Things, ser. IoT
’17.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2017. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3131542.3131550
[13] “GOVData,” https://govdata.de, accessed: 2020-10-21.
[14] “EU Open Data Portal,” https://data.europa.eu/euodp, accessed: 2020-
10-21.
[15] C. Brecher, E. Kusmenko, A. Lindt, B. Rumpe, S. Storms, S. Wein,
M.
von
Wenckstern,
and
A.
Wortmann,
“Multi-Level
Modeling
Framework for Machine as a Service Applications Based on Product
Process Resource Models,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International
Symposium on Computer Science and Intelligent Control, ser. ISCSIC
’18.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3284557.3284714
[16] R. Albertoni, D. Browning, S. Cox, A. G. Beltran, A. Perego, and
P. Winstanley, “Data Catalog Vocabulary (DCAT)-Version 2,” W3C
Recommendation, vol. 3, 2019, [Accessed 2020.09.15].
[17] The Apache Software Foundation, “Apache Jena Fuseki,” https://jena.
apache.org/documentation/fuseki2/, 2011, [Accessed 2020.09.15].
[18] E. Prud’hommeaux and A. Seaborne, “SPARQL 1.1 language to
query and manipulate RDF graph content, W3C Recommendation, 21
March 2013,” https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-overview/, 2013, [Ac-
cessed 2020.09.15].
[19] S. Lohmann, V. Link, E. Marbach, and S. Negru, “WebVOWL: Web-
based Visualization of Ontologies,” in International Conference on
Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management.
Springer, 2014,
pp. 154–158.
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-813-6
SEMAPRO 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

