An Ontology-based Framework for Enriching Event-log Data
Thanh Tran Thi Kim, Hannes Werthner
e-commerce group
Institute of Software Technology and Interactive Systems, Vienna, Austria
Email: kimthanh@ec.tuwien.ac.at, werthner@ec.tuwien.ac.at
Abstract—Using process-aware information systems in en-
terprises is becoming popular in the business environment.
The systems have the capability to generate event log data
that capture information about what is practically happening
within enterprises. Event log data is used for process mining to
extract the hidden knowledge which can assist the manager in
business process management. However, the knowledge hidden
in event logs would be more useful if the event logs are enriched
by relevant external data sources. In this paper, we propose
an approach to enrich event logs with external data sources
by using ontology based data integration. We use database-
to-ontology mapping techniques to integrate data sources and
use semantic reasoning techniques for inferring the knowledge
hidden in the data sources. A framework for the approach,
illustrating examples for the implementation and expected
results are presented in this paper.
Keywords-process-aware information systems; data integra-
tion; process mining.
I. INTRODUCTION
Process-aware Information Systems (PAISs) are increas-
ingly used by many enterprises in the modern business
environment. A PAIS is deﬁned as a software system that
manages and executes operational processes involving peo-
ple, applications, and/or information sources on the basis of
process models [1]. Moreover, the system has the capability
to generate event log ﬁles, which record the information of
real executions within enterprises. The knowledge hidden
in the event logs is extracted by process mining tech-
niques and used for model construction and analysis [2]. In
particular, process mining application includes features of
three categories: model construction, statistical performance
analysis and knowledge discovery. Model construction refers
to the dynamic building of business process based on the
information contained in event logs. Statistical performance
analysis aims to extract predeﬁned statistical measures.
Knowledge discovery is the incorporation of event log data
with other data sources to search for hidden patterns and
relationships [3]. Several studies have been carried out to
show the potential of this incorporation. Most of them
use data warehouse techniques for integrating data sources
and extracting knowledge from the data sources [3], [4].
However, complexity problems are raised as challenges for
this approach [4], [5]. Workﬂow executions may generate
different kinds of facts about workﬂow activities, resources,
and instances. Because of the multiple, related types of
facts, the approach may be faced with semantic problems.
Particularly, the presence of these kinds of facts needs to
ensure semantic correctness to avoid information loss [5].
To avoid the problems of the data warehouse approach,
we propose the framework for integrating event logs with
other data sources based on the TOVE ontology [6], [7].
TOVE (TOronto Virtual Enterprise) is an integrated ontology
for supporting enterprise modeling which contains concepts
related to business models, such as activity, organization
agent, cost, resources, etc. Event logs are exported by PAISs
to record the operations of business processes in companies,
such as the information about who performs which activities
at what time. The approach is raised by the question how to
enrich event log data and what knowledge could be gained
from the enrichment. Merging data in event logs with other
data sources are mentioned in [3] as a potential approach
for knowledge discovery in process mining. The beneﬁt
of the approach could be seen in the enriched event logs
which is extended with relevant information by linking to
ontologies. Therefore, the knowledge extracted from event
logs is collected not only from the event logs but also from
others company related data sources, which are related and
linked to them. For instance, cost data is not included in
event logs but can be inferred by reasoning from the cost
ontology in TOVE. Therefore, the results of process mining
in can be opened to new perspectives, e.g., cost perspective.
In general, our approach contains two main parts: ontol-
ogy based data integration and knowledge discovery. Ontolo-
gies are very useful in knowledge sharing and integration
as well as knowledge research and extraction [8]. In our
study, we use TOVE ontology as a conceptual framework
for integrating data sources. In particular, event log data
and organizational data are migrated to TOVE ontology as
instances. Hence, TOVE becomes a knowledge base and can
be used for knowledge discovery. As a result, competency
questions related to business process management can be
answered by querying the axioms constructed in TOVE.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows:
Section 2 introduces the various data sources and the TOVE
ontology which are the main objects of the integration.
Section 3 presents the framework for mapping event logs and
other data sources to the TOVE ontology. Section 4 illus-
trates the querying axioms for answering questions related
to business process management and the expected results.
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Section 5 presents the related work, including knowledge
discovery in process mining, semantic process mining and
TOVE ontology. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.
II. THE TOVE ONTOLOGY AND VARIOUS DATA SOURCES
A. The TOVE ontology
TOVE is an integrated set of ontologies for supporting
enterprise modeling [9]. The development of the TOVE
ontology is driven by the speciﬁcation of tasks that arise
from enterprise engineering within the TOVE project [7].
The goal of enterprise engineering is to formalize the
knowledge required for business process reengineering and
create an environment that facilitates the application of this
knowledge to a particular company. The ontology consists
of a set of generic core ontologies, including an activity
ontology, resource ontology, organization ontology, product
ontology. It also includes a set of extensions to these generic
ontologies to cover concepts such as cost and quality.
The primary component of the ontology is its terminology
for classes of processes and relations of processes and re-
sources, along with deﬁnitions of these classes and relations.
Within TOVE, the activity ontology plays an important role
and relates to most of axioms [9], [10]. In TOVE, activities
are deﬁned as the basic entities that specify a transformation
in the world. An activity in TOVE is accompanied with its
corresponding states which deﬁnes what has to be true in the
world in order for the activity to be performed. Moreover,
an activity is performed by an organization agent with a par-
ticular amount of resources. Based on the relations between
activity, organization, resource ontologies, most of questions
related to enterprise management are satisﬁed by querying
the axioms built in the ontology. Another prominent part of
TOVE is the cost ontology. Costs are related to consuming
resources and time when performing activities. Figure 1
shows a set of generic core ontologies in TOVE.
The
TOVE
ontology
presents
a
mature
framework
whereas event log data have a simple data structure. Event
logs contain information about activites, originators who
perform the activities, the process instances which the ac-
tivites belong to, and the timestamp when the activities
occur. Opposite with the simplicity of event log data, TOVE
contains many concepts, as shown in Figure 1 and most of
the concepts of TOVE are not related directly to event log
data elements. Therefore, we use a part of TOVE which
are simpliﬁed to be suitable with the event log data. For
example, the activity ontology in TOVE has relations with
the product requirement constraints concept. However, we
bypass the product requirement constraints concept because
the data of the product requirement constraints do not exist
in event log data.
In our approach, we select the activity ontology, orga-
nization ontology, resource ontology and cost ontology. In
addition, we add a new concept to TOVE (i.e., process
concept) and modify some properties of concepts in TOVE
to correspond with the properties of event log data and
organization database. The knowledge derived from TOVE
will be used to enhance process models as results of the
process mining.
B. Various data sources
The different data sources in our project are event log data
and organization databases. We assume that in companies
which are using information systems to support business
management, event log data can be received from a PAIS
and organization databases obviously exist in a particular
database system. The details of event log data and organi-
zation database are described as follows.
PAISs produce event log ﬁles to record the operation of
business processes. Depending on the particular PAISs in
use, event log data may contain various types of information
in different formats. Generally, an event log data record is
consisting of an activity (task name), originator, timestamp,
event type and case identiﬁcation elements [2]. The activity
element indicates the name of the activity or the task
which is operated. Originator implies entities who initiate or
perform the activity. Timestamp is the point of time when
the activity happened. Event type denotes the state of the
activity (e.g., the start or completion or postpone of the
activity). And case identiﬁcation is a unique number that
identiﬁes a speciﬁc process instance to which the activity
belongs. Although the contents of a log data record may
vary, event logs need to contain at least activity and case
identiﬁcation elements.
As the example of Table I shows, activity A was performed
by Mark at the time 17-05-2008:16:09; the activity was in
the start state and belongs to the case 1. Case 1 includes a
number of activities, such as activity A and activity B. All
the activities are ordered by their respective timestamp.
Table I
EXAMPLE OF AN EVENT LOG
case id
activity id
originator
timestamp
event type
case 1
activity A
Mark
17-05-2008:16:09
start
case 2
activity B
Chris
18-05-2008:09:12
start
case 1
activity C
Tom
18-05-2008:10:06
complete
case 3
activity B
Mary
18-05-2008:15:02
start
...
...
...
...
...
In terms of semantics, a log ﬁle refers to a set of process
instances (i.e., cases). Each process instance includes a
number of events happened within the process. An event
occurs when an activity is operated by an originator at a
certain point of time (i.e., timestamp). Each event has an
event type representing the status of the event when it is
performed, e.g., start or complete. Hence, one can observe
that TOVE ontological concepts for enterprise operation are
considerably similar to the concepts appearing in event logs.
Considering the data ﬁelds in event logs, there is the
originator element which contains information of employees
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
Figure 1.
TOVE Ontology [11]
who perform activities. For business management, it is
obvious to store the data of employees in a database, i.e.,
an organizational database with data schema as presented in
Figure 2.
The important tables in the database are employee and
activity which are related directly to originator and activity
respectively in event log data. Based on the properties in
these table, the information of originator and activity in
event log could be extended. For instance, an originator
has information about address, experience year or the labour
cost, etc.
III. FRAMEWORK FOR INTEGRATING EVENT LOGS AND
OTHER DATA SOURCES BASED ON THE TOVE ONTOLOGY
There are two main functionality blocks in the framework:
mapping and knowledge discovery. In this context, mapping
refers to the adding of instances into the TOVE ontology
from data sources. The derived result of the mapping is
the TOVE ontology with instances which is regarded as
a knowledge base. Knowledge discovery is performed by
querying axioms in the knowledge base. Figure 3 represents
brieﬂy the framework of the ontology based integration in
our approach.
We have two types of data sources, event log data
and organizational database. As mentioned in Section 2,
we suppose event log data contains information about ac-
tivities, originators, timestamps, and cases identiﬁcations.
Organizational database contains the information support
for enterprise management dealing with cost accounting,
human resources management or resources. The mapping
TOVE ontology
Knowledge 
base
Organizational 
Database
Event log data
concept mapping
concept mapping
instance populating
instance populating
integrating
Figure 3.
Mapping event log data and extra data sources to the TOVE
ontology.
from event log data to TOVE ontology is considered as the
migration instances from data ﬁelds (i.e., activity, originator
and case) to concepts (i.e., activity, organization-agent and
process) respectively. Particularly, the values of the name
properties in TOVE ontology is ﬁlled by the values of the
data ﬁelds in the event logs. The values of the rest of the
properties in TOVE are ﬁlled by the values of data ﬁelds
in the organizational database. The mapping is referred to
database-to-ontology mapping whereby a database and an
ontology are semantically related at a conceptual level [12],
[13]. In our approach, we assume the concept of originator
in event logs is similar to an organization agent in TOVE.
Likewise, event and timestamp correspond to activity and
timestamp, respectively. Therefore, the integration based on
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Figure 2.
Organizational Database
the TOVE ontology is feasible.
Using reasoning techniques over the ontologies can dis-
cover knowledge hidden in the data sources. The reasoning
is done by querying the axioms in the TOVE ontology.
Note that there are a huge number of axioms in TOVE
which support for answering the question related to enter-
prise management and modeling [9], [10], [14]. Thus, the
reasoning may be valuable for knowledge discovery. As a
result, combining the semantic reasoning and process mining
techniques for discovering knowledge in the enriched event
log data represents a sound approach for semantic process
mining.
To implement the framework, we use Java [15] as a foun-
dation to combine several techniques. In particular, the event
log ﬁles are stored in XML format and the organizational
database is managed by MySQL [16] . The TOVE ontology
and the knowledge base are encoded and stored in WSML
format [17]. Besides, several java packages are utilized for
data integration (e.g., javax.xml.xpath, java.sql, etc. ) and
knowledge extraction (e.g., wsmo4j). Within this paper, we
introduce a part of knowledge base and the expected results
of the knowledge extraction in Section 4.
IV. QUERYING AXIOMS FOR ANSWERING QUESTIONS
RELATED TO BUSINESS PROCESS MANAGEMENT
As a result of the ontology-based data integration process,
we obtain an knowledge base containing event log data
and organizational data. In this section, we illustrate an
example about querying axioms for answering questions
related to costs of business processes. Figure 4 shows a part
of the knowledge base as a diagram of concepts with their
properties.
activity
has_name:  _string
consumes: resource
has_originator: organization_agent
resource
has_name:  _string
has_fee_comsume: _integer
organization_agent
has_name:  _string
has_address: _string
member_of: division
member_of_team: team
has_role: role
has_labour_fee: _integer
has_experience:year: _integer
performed by
consumes resource
process
has_name:  _string
has_activity: activity
has_originator: organization_agent
has_time: _string
has_cost: _integer
has_goal: sub_goal
has activity
has originator
Figure 4.
A part of the knowledge base
There are four concepts resource, activity, organization-
agent and process. They are related by the relationships con-
sumes resource, performed by, has activity, has originator.
Considering the concept process, it is an additional concept
which is added to TOVE to use information about process
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

instances in event log data. Based on this concept, questions
related to processes can be answered.
Deriving costs of business processes is currently not
possible with process mining. In our approach, an interesting
question that can be answered is "How much does a process
cost"?. We use the WSML toolkit for building the ontology
and testing axioms as shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5.
Reasoning with WSML toolkit
Figure 5 displays an axiom of the knowledge base in
WSML format for costing a process. WSML utilizes logical
expression syntax for the speciﬁcation of axioms, in other
words, rules are deﬁned as logical expression in WSML.
In the example, the rule "how much does a process (e.g.,
process 1) cost?" is demonstrated. In detail, the process 1 is
deﬁned by two instances of the concept process (i.e., case1
and case2). The process 1 has two activities, activityA and
activityC. Each activity consumes resources which have par-
ticular costs associated. In this case, the resourceA has cost 7
and resourceB has cost 23 which are values of the property
has_fee_consume . Therefore, the cost of the process 1 is
inferred from the cost of
resourceA and resourceB which
are used by activityA and activityC respectively.
Moreover, based on the constraints between the concepts
shown in Figure 4, various kinds of questions can be
answered, such as:
- How much does the consumption of resources cost for
performing activity A in process 1?
- Which resources are consumed in process 1?
- How much does it cost for performing process 1?
V. RELATED WORK
Knowledge discovery in process mining by incorporating
event logs with other data sources is mentioned in [3], [4],
[5]. Most of the authors use a data warehouse approach for
integrating and extracting knowledge from the data sources.
It provides a platform for mining unknown and valuable
patterns and relationships. Some of the signiﬁcant techniques
in this area, such as OLAP (online analytical processing),
traditional database queries, data mining, and etc., are used
in this ﬁeld. OLAP technology enables data warehouses
to be used effectively for online analysis, providing rapid
responses to interactive complex analytical queries [3]. On
the other hand, traditional database queries can answer
simple questions. In contrast, data mining with speciﬁc
algorithms can identify discernible patterns and trends in
data, and it can support prediction and decision making. The
merging of data from event logs with other data sources are
carried out within several studies [3], [4], [18].
Process mining aims to discover what really happened
in the enterprise systems based on event logs recorded by
PAISs. Depending on the kind of information contained
in event logs, the process mining is separated into three
perspectives, i.e., process perspective, organizational per-
spective and case perspective which respectively answers
the question "How?", "Who?" and "What?" [2]. The results
delivered from process mining might be process models,
analysis diagrams, or answers for questions involved to busi-
ness process management. Although some process mining
algorithms are borrowed from data mining or others ﬁelds,
all of them are developed and adapted for the goals of pro-
cess mining as mentioned above. The signiﬁcant capability
of process mining is to reveal the hidden knowledge in event
logs to aid the enterprises to know what is really going on in
their systems [2]. To practice process mining, more than 280
plug-ins have been implemented in ProM [19], [20]. Some of
process mining techniques have been implemented as tools
and applied in the real systems such as health care systems
in hospitals or invoice processing systems, and brought out
beneﬁts for the enterprises in the domains [2], [21].
To keep improve the achievements gained in process
mining, a new approach has been researched which is called
semantic process mining and carried out within the SUPER
project [22]. Basically, the methodology is to connect ele-
ments in event logs with adequate concepts in ontologies
and cooperate the process mining and semantic techniques
to deliver on expected results. With this approach, process
mining has been raised from the syntactic level to the
concept level in which it is more effective and useful for
business analysts as well as normal users [23]. Compared
with our approach, in the SUPER approach event logs are
also enriched by connecting with concepts in ontologies.
However, the difference is that the knowledge discovery
in the SUPER approach is done by enriching event logs,
whereas in our approach it is performed in the TOVE
ontology (i.e., the knowledge base). Moreover, with the
ontology based integration, the enrichment can be done with
different data sources.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper proposed a framework for integrating event
logs with other data sources and mapping them to on-
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

tologies and afterwards using these results in semantic
process mining. The mapping is termed as database-to-
ontology mapping and supported by several existing tools.
For this purpose, we use the TOVE ontology, which in our
case is populated with instances extracted from different
data sources. The integration enriches the event logs with
extra information from the other data sources. It serves for
answering questions (by reasoning) relating event logs with
organizational data. This framework is already implemented
and currently evaluated.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Dumas, W. M. van der Aalst, and A. H. ter Hofstede,
Process-aware information systems: bridging people and soft-
ware through process technology. New York, NY, USA: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2005.
[2] W. M. P. van der Aalst, H. A. Reijers, A. J. M. M. Weijters,
B. F. van Dongen, A. K. A. de Medeiros, M. Song, and
H. M. W. E. Verbeek, “Business process mining: An industrial
application,” Inf. Syst., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 713–732, 2007.
[3] J. E. Ingvaldsen and J. A. Gulla, “Model-based business
process mining,” IS Management, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 19–31,
2006.
[4] M. zur Mühlen, “Process-driven management information
systems - combining data warehouses and workﬂow tech-
nology,” in Fourth International Conference on Electronic
Commerce Research, B. Gavish, Ed., 2001, pp. 550–566,
dallas.
[5] A. Bonifati, F. Casati, U. Dayal, and M.-C. Shan, “Warehous-
ing workﬂow data: Challenges and opportunities,” in VLDB
’01: Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on
Very Large Data Bases.
San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2001, pp. 649–652.
[6] M. S. Fox, M. Barbuceanu, and M. Grüningerr, An Or-
ganisation Ontology for Enterprise Modelling: Preliminary
Concepts for Linking Structure and Behaviour, 1995, pp.
123–134.
[7] E.
I.
Laboratory,
“Tove
ontology
project,”
http://www.eil.utoronto.ca/enterprise-modelling/tove/,
retrieved: August, 2011.
[8] M. Hepp, “Ontologies: State of the art, business potential, and
grand challenges,” in Ontology Management, Semantic Web,
Semantic Web Services, and Business Applications. Springer,
2008, pp. 3–22.
[9] M. Grüninger, K. Ateﬁ, and M. S. Fox, “Ontologies to support
process integration in enterprise engineering,” Comput. Math.
Organ. Theory, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 381–394, 2000.
[10] M. Grüninger and M. S. Fox, “An activity ontology for
enterprise modelling,” in Submitted to: Workshop on Enabling
Technologies - Infrastructures for Collaborative Enterprises,
West Virginia University, 1994.
[11] M. S. Fox and M. Grüninger, “Enterprise modeling,” AI
Magazine, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 109–121, 1998.
[12] N. C. Raji Ghawi, “Database-to-ontology mapping generation
for semantic interoperability,” in Third International Work-
shop on Database Interoperability, 2007.
[13] J. Barrasa, s. Corcho, and A. Gómez-pérez, “R2o, an exten-
sible and semantically based database-to-ontology mapping
language,” in in In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on
Semantic Web and Databases(SWDB2004.
Springer, 2004,
pp. 1069–1070.
[14] D. Tham, M. S. Fox, and M. Grüninger, “A cost ontology
for enterprise modelling,” in Proceedings of third Workshop
on Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative
Enterprises, Morgantown,WV, 1994, pp. 111–117.
[15] Oracle,
“Oracle
technology
network
for
java
develop-
ers,” http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/index.html, re-
trieved: August, 2011.
[16] “Mysql:: The world’s most popular open source database,”
http://www.mysql.com, retrieved: August, 2011.
[17] S. T. I. S. I. ESSI WSML working group, “Web service
modeling language wsml,” http://www.wsmo.org/wsml/wsml-
syntax#l, retrieved: August, 2011.
[18] D. Grigori, F. Casati, M. Castellanos, U. Dayal, M. Sayal,
and M.-C. Shan, “Business process intelligence,” Comput.
Ind., vol. 53, pp. 321–343, April 2004. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=982250.982256
[19] B. F. van Dongen, A. K. A. de Medeiros, H. M. W. Verbeek,
A. J. M. M. Weijters, and W. M. P. van der Aalst, “The proM
framework: A new era in process mining tool support.” in
Lecture Notes in Computer Science: Applications and Theory
of Petri Nets 2005: 26th International Conference, ICATPN
2005, Miami, USA, June 20-25, 2005. / Gianfranco Ciardo,
Philippe Darondeau (Eds.), vol. 3536.
Springer Verlag, Jun.
2005, pp. 444–454.
[20] E. T. U. Process Mining Group, “Prom - the leading process
mining toolkit,” http://prom.win.tue.nl/tools/prom/, 2009, re-
trieved: August, 2011.
[21] R. S. Mans, H. Schonenberg, M. Song, W. M. P. van der
Aalst, and P. J. M. Bakker, “Application of process mining in
healthcare - a case study in a dutch hospital,” in BIOSTEC
(Selected Papers), 2008, pp. 425–438.
[22] SUPER,
“Super
integrated
project,”
http://www.ip-
super.org/content/view/71/73/, retrieved: August, 2011.
[23] A. K. Alves De Medeiros, W. Van Der Aalst, and C. Pedri-
naci, “Semantic process mining tools: Core building blocks,”
in 16th European Conference on Information Systems,
W. Golden, T. Acton, K. Conboy, H. van der Heijden, and
V. K. Tuunainen, Eds., Galway, Ireland, 2008, pp. 1953–1964.
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

