A Semantic Environmental GIS for Solid Waste Management  
 
Miguel Felix Mata Rivera, Roberto Zagal Flores 
Computing Mobile Laboratory 
UPIITA- IPN, ESCOM- IPN 
Mexico City 
{mmatar@ipn.mx,@zagalmmx@gmail.com} 
Diana Castro Frontana, Consuelo Garcia Mendoza 
Soil Laboratory, Systems Department 
ENCB-IPN, ESCOM-IPN 
Mexico City 
{dgcastro@ipn.mx,varinia400@hotmail.com}
 
 
Abstract— Nowadays, solid waste handling is a critic problem. 
Governments and specialists of different disciplines wrestle 
with environmental problems that poor waste handling 
generate. For example, in México city the sanitary landfills 
have been overstepped in their capacity. Then, they are 
inadequate for the collection and processing of municipal solid 
waste. We propose as a solution a multi-criteria approach 
based on semantics, in order to get the adequate place to built 
any waste handling facility. In this research, a methodology 
implemented in an environmental GIS system (EGIS) is shown. 
EGIS identifies and estimates several parameters required for 
planning or to dimension a waste handling facility (sanitary 
landfills). The approach proposed involves a multi-criteria 
solution 
that 
includes: 
environment 
considerations, 
administrative parameters, spatial analysis, constraints and 
Mexican regulations. All of them are combined and processed 
based on Mexican normative rules. In order to get a 
management of municipal solid waste (MSW) and a geo-
environmental recommendation to locate sanitary landfills in 
places that comply with official regulations. The results are 
potential locations for a sanitary landfill site. In addition, 
information of possible financing sources is given to carry out 
waste handling projects accordingly. Methodology can be 
applied to other countries with similar problems regarding to 
sanitary landfills. Results obtained are better when semantics 
and multicriteria are combined that when they are used 
isolated.   
Keywords-Solid Waste Management; Environmental GIS; 
Spatial Semantics 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Today, the handling of Solid waste generation is a critic 
problem for Mexican municipalities. The Mexican Secretary 
for the Environment and Natural Resources (SEMARNAT 
by its acronym in Spanish) [3] have reported that there are 
only 82 authorized sanitary landfills for 2400 municipalities 
in the Mexican Republic. This is obviously insufficient to 
control the substantial quantity of waste collected. In 
Mexico, urban solid waste handling is under jurisdiction of 
municipalities. Solid Waste are those originated in the 
domestic and commercial activity of cities and towns. The 
waste produced by urban dwellers include garbage, old 
furniture and appliances. Packaging and waste from 
commercial activity, remains the care of the gardens, 
cleaning the streets. 
Mexico is confronted with major problems in the 
management of solid waste. Owing to rapid industrialization 
and population growth in urban centers. There are programs 
at the municipal level for Prevention and Management of 
Municipal Solid Waste (MSW). They require several stages 
from analysis and diagnosis, assessment to strategy approval 
and publication of results. In order to qualify the feasibility 
to construct a new sanitary landfill that complies with 
Mexican regulations and norms. 
 
Another problem is that the availability of information 
and tools for proper management of solid waste is missing. 
(Regulations, available technologies, cost analyses, viability 
studies). Among other issues are completely unknown by 
people involved. Therefore, the public or private sectors 
rejects projects of this nature by consequence. Several 
studies have already identified the causes for the inefficient 
waste handling en Mexico [4]. Main of them are: Poor 
application of the concepts involved in proper waste 
management; null knowledge of technical waste handling 
issues: idle recycling plants owing to high operation costs, 
sanitary landfills that get full very fast owing bad planning 
and operation, etc. In Mexico, several institutions grant 
financial aid for projects related to waste management. 
Nevertheless, it is required to present a cost-benefit analysis 
of their project to improve waste handling (municipalities 
have no people to generate it). 
 
Therefore, it is necessary to develop systems that support 
each of the aspects. They can provide preventive measures 
and planning to the future. We proposed the development of 
an Environmental Geographic Information System (GIS).  
On it, each municipality manages information on waste 
handling projects. It is addressed to municipal authorities or 
environmental professionals. They might be working in 
waste handling projects. System is available for any other 
people interested in knowing data regarding waste 
generation. This information can be processed for any 
Mexican municipality. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
An environmental system is a unit whose elements 
interact together as they continually affect each other. They 
operate toward a common goal: take care of the environment 
around us. Landfill Management is a problem that has been 
treated from long time. A multicriteria approach has been 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

used in [1], where a system manages recollection, 
transportation, recovery and disposal activities. But the 
issues of a landfill construction are not treated. In addition, 
not semantics processing is used. In [9], a multi-criteria 
decision analysis for supporting the waste was formulated by 
integrating interval-parameter, mixed-integer, and chance-
constrained programming methods. But is addressed to find a 
balance between cost and diversion rate of waste 
management. While in [10] research is focused on the 
optimum selection of the treatment and disposal facilities, 
their capacity planning and waste allocation under 
uncertainty associated with the long-term planning for solid 
waste management. The difference with our work is the 
planning; we take into account long, short and medium term. 
Other works have treated Solid Waste, but at recollection 
level like in [4] the work is focused on location of the 
containers. As well as, the amount estimation of the 
deposited therein, and routes generation for recollection in 
municipality of Prat de Llobregat. A similar approach to our 
work is presented in [2], where Multi-Criteria Decision 
Making ontology with an inference engine is used. Opposed 
to our work the paper referenced is focused on distributed 
autonomous devices. Otherwise, logistic regression model 
have been used as a methodology in [5] as a part of studies 
related with MSW. Neverthless, semantics processing was 
not used. In our research, spatial semantics is used to analyze 
data. In a similar way that a person who interprets qualitative 
variables. This approach has been used in works like [6]. 
Other related approach where semantics processing is used, 
can be found in [7, 8]. A survey in [11] reviewed the models 
of MSW generation and to propose beneficial design options 
concerning regional sampling and other factors, the final 
result is a relevance tree for methodology used in the works 
reviewed. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY  
The methodology used in this work is described in four 
steps as follows:  
1) Define axioms and establish rules using Mexican 
legislation, specilist criteria and the mexican norm (NOM-
083 by ist acronym in spanish) 
2) Design and built ontology based on constraints from 
NOM-083 and define spatial semantics relations. 
3) Define geographic operations (spatial analysis)  to 
answer generated queries in semantic module 
4) Design and implement Web services and mobile app.  
 
The methodology is applied into a system composed of 
four modules: 1) Semantic 2) Geographical, 3) Web, 4) 
Environment, 5) Mobile. General functionality is described 
as follows and posteriorly in detail: 
Environment module: It is a Management Solid Waste 
(MSW) calculator. It receives data from user and processes 
them with data from official data sources, taking into account 
the requirements, constraints and statistical data. Such as: 
what is minimum distance required to built a MSW from an 
airport, from a natural protected area, moreover the module 
indicates if these distances can be relaxed if other studies are 
made. As well as topographic and geologic aspects, among 
others. The module works using a semiautomatic process.  
Semantic module: Determine the set of geographical 
operations and queries to find the adequate zones for sanitary 
landfill construction to any municipality. The data input are 
processed, filtered and analyzed in conjunction with a set of 
rules from Mexican norm (NOM-083-SEMARNAT-2003) 
and environmental constraints. The result is a set of 
attributive parameters such a as: what type of landfill 
sanitary should be built (in accordance with population size), 
the candidate geographic area, and constraints-descriptions 
of geographic objects within of area selected. Data are re-
sent formatted as a geographic query to geographic module.  
Geographic module: Here, the goal is to make the 
spatial analysis required to answer the geographic queries 
received by the semantics module. For example, flooding 
areas at 10 km to each possible landfill sanitary location.  
Output is a map with the potential zones to become a 
landfill sanitary.  
Web and Mobile module: Displays area suitable for 
construction of a landfill. On maps interface. In addition, 
detailed reports with suggestions for financing the 
construction of an landfill sanitary. The mobile version 
offers the same functionality. It uses a set of Web services 
to communicate with the modules. Each module is able to 
respond itself, however it is necessary, the interaction of all 
modules, receiving the correct inputs and generating outputs 
when is necessary. Figure 1 shows the general operation of 
system. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Working diagram ( inputs and outputs of system) 
Figure 1 shows the flow process, and what operations 
belong to each module, letters ABC is the type of landfill. 
The system processed information from official sources such 
as Mexican Geography Institute (INEGI). These sources are 
used to estimate total waste generation, size of a landfill and 
population growth.  In other cases, where official 
information was not available, data from specialized 
literature is integrated to the system. For example, the 
method for designing the size of a landfill for any 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

municipality was taken from publications by the Health Pan-
American Organization [5]. Environment module receives 
the following input parameters: population size, subproducts 
suitable of being recycled, possible financing sources, etc.  
Output is a set of parameters: type of landfill sanitary, sort of 
financing and required geographic area. These parameters 
are interpreted by the semantic module (applying axioms) 
and sent as a geographic query to geographic module. For 
example, if output is: landfill sanitary of type three. The 
constraints applied to this sanitary type are retrieved from 
semantics relations of this concept. It can be the required 
area, the estimated growth population, estimated percentage 
of recollection per day. These constraints are formatted as a 
string array and sent to geographic module to be transformed 
into a geographical query (in this case, find areas of 20 km in 
municipality, because this area is required by landfill type 3). 
Then, geographical module determines which spatial 
analysis are required to perform in order to satisfy this query. 
The result is a map showing potential areas to landfill 
sanitary. The map display is performed via the web and 
mobile 
module 
which 
is 
rendered 
for 
appropiate 
visualization on each device. The general architecture,with 
some technical details describes the functionality; see Figure 
2. In Section IV, the semantic processing is described in 
detail. 
 
 
Figure 2.  General architecture of system. 
Figure 2 shows the data sources and scheme of 
communications. Data sources are divided into semantic and 
gepgraphic module, it is due to heterogeneity, data are 
inserted by XML format. In the case of web module, the 
communication with semantic module is direct by sending 
the candidate geographic area (polygon of location). The 
mobile module is made by using a Web services. The 
complete process is described in Section IV. 
IV. 
SEMANTIC AND GEOENVIRONMENTAL PROCESSING 
Semantic processing involves applying several axioms to 
get the appropriate place to build a landfill sanitary.  
Computing the growth population projection, estimation of 
solid waste generation, among other geographic and 
environment factors. There are constraints that can be 
applied to these factors. Some rules and axioms are defined 
in order to define which of them should be applied. Also, the 
spatial analysis should be performed. Moreover, in what 
cases some value factors can be relaxed. In addition, to find 
financial sources to built a landfill sanitary in municipalities 
with a small budget. The ontology contains 4 classes and 17 
entities. The rules are grouped as follows:  
a) Geographic areas conditioned for a sanitary landfill 
contruction. It means that these areas can be availability if 
some additional studies and formalities are made; b)  
Geographic areas not allowed. For example, wells at a 
certain distance, proximity of lakes, etc., c) Minimum and 
recommended values of distances between geographic 
objects and possible areas of landfill construction.  
Figure 3 shows the ontology with its classes, too, 
constraints, relations and concepts that allows to make the 
semantics processing for data inputs. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Graph of ontology. 
In Figure 3 appears grouped by hypernymy, meronimy 
semantic relations and the concepts that are classified as not 
allowed zones.  In the same way are grouped to conditioned 
zones. The following are some examples of axioms used in 
semantics processing: 
Axiom A: If municipality has airport, then minimum 
distance to airport location is 20 km from landfill location. 
Flexibility: Aviary study. If an aviary study is presented, the 
minimum distance is reduced to 13 Km.  
Axiom B: If landfill location is close to flooding then a 
long term of flooding (50 years). 
Axiom C: If data total waste generation (twg) > 70 
ton/day then the municipality can apply for resources from a 
Mexican infrastructure fund like PRORESOL (acronym in 
Spanish). 
Axiom D: If twg > 100 tonnes/day then a “type A” 
landfill applies [3,2]. Depending on the geographical zone 
values of waste composition percentages are applied. Factor 
of twg is then multiplied by the percentages from this table 
[3]. The system analyses the input data to define which of 
them complies with the conditions and requisites requested 
by financing institutions to get sources of financing. In the 
case that not match was found the system indicates what 
studies or analysis are missing in order to get the funds. The 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

software Protégé [12] was used to build the ontology in 
similar form like in [6]. The knowledge model eas 
implemented in OWL language. Ontology exploration is 
made using Hermit reasoner [13] with a OWL API. The 
semantic processing is performed in three steps: load 
ontology, runs the reasoning Hermit, relations are explored. 
The ontology returns a string array to be interpreted as a 
geograhic query by PostgreSQL engine. An example of the 
output is shown as follows. 
 
ARRAY[ 
 
['', 'distance = 2000', 'MinimunDistance = 1000', 'exists = 1','', 'weight = 
0.7', 'name = Lakes',''], 
['', 'distance = 1600', 'MinimunDistance = 500', 'exists = 0','', 'weight = 0.7', 
'name = Pozos',''], 
['', 'distance = 0','', 'exists = 0','', 'weight = 0.8', 'name = Wetlands',''], 
['', 'distance = 0','', 'exists = 0','', 'weight = 0.6', 'name = Soiltype,''], 
['', 'distance = 2000', 'MinimunDistance = 1000', 'exists = 0','', 'weight = 
0.7', 'name = Estuaries',''], 
['', 'distance = 13000','', 'exists = 1','', 'weight = 0.3', 'name = Airports',''], 
['', 'distance = 2000', 'MinimunDistance = 1000', 'exists = 1','', 'weight = 
0.7', 'name = Lagoons',''], 
['', 'distance = 0','', 'exists = 0','', 'weight = 0.7', 'name = Mangroves',''], 
 
As is shown into array, several parameters appear; the 
'weight' attribute is computed based on the number of 
conditions complied and constraints  flexibility. The scale 
used is from value 0 to value 1, where value 0 means that 
this place not qualify as a candidate for landfill construction. 
The attribute 'exists' represents if the municipality has a 
manage plan and funds to built the sanitary landfill. The 
value 0 means that no funds are required and value 1 means 
that is required a financial plan in order to get funds. Each 
one of these parameters is parsed by geographic module and 
transformed into a geographic query.  
For example, the attributes:  
'MinimunDistance = 1000', 'name = Lakes',  
are transformed in query:  
QG1=SELECT ST_Buffer_Meters(the_geom, num_meters) FROM 
MunicipalitiesTable; 
 
The semantic engine consists of a browser, semantic 
reasoner and query designer. The process is as follows: a 
polygon (candidate area to a landfill construction) is received 
from Web module in WKT format (Well-known text) with 
its location. The reasoner performs an exploration of 
ontology to find the concepts associated, the output is 
formatted as a string array. And it is sent as an input 
parameter to the query designer. It get browser parameters. 
Parse the strings array and transformed into queries. They are 
executed in PostgreSQL [14] such as "find locations match 
conditions”. The array syntax is: 
 
SELECT * FROM getHollows( ARRAY[[ name=zzz', distance=#', 
`minimundistance=#', weight=#', 'exists=#', 'ManagementPlan=#']...] ,"polygon"); 
where: 
_Name is the name of the layer 
distance: normal distance in meters between an element of a layer and MSW 
_ Minimum distance: in meters for a feature and MSW. 
(constraint added by the expert) 
_ weight: is a weight (0 to 1) designated by the expert to identify which place 
has a greater weight than another. 
_ ManagementPlan: exists (1) or not (0) a Management Plan. 
 
The result is a list of objects containing geometry in 
WKT, the area of the polygon, the weight assigned to the 
layer, the layer name, the name of the polygon and the 
existence 
of 
the 
management 
plan. 
The 
function 
getLayersOntology() returns in a record two layers of 
possible locations: one with the normal distance and the 
other with the minimum distances (relaxed).  
 
V. 
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
The study case for testing the system is with 
municipalities from San Luis Potosi (SLP) State, from 
Mexico. The attributes and values belong to these 
municipalities. A set of attributes is listed with values 
associated to define the size and type of landfill. Figure 4 
shows a map from SLP State. On it is displayed the 
candidate areas to built a landfill sanitary considering the 
Mexican regulations and suggestions of specialists. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Potencial areas identified to be a landfill sanitary. 
Figure 5 shows the areas generated. They represent the 
potential areas to build a sanitary landfill. Colors indicate the 
different levels of match. It means that an area match with 
the requirements from a 70% to 100%.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Potential area identified to become a landfill sanitary. 
As Figure 5 shown, the descriptive data are obtained 
associated with the places showed on a map. In this case in 
green appears a rectangle drawed by user, the idea is to 
define if this area make with hand tool, is a good candidate 
to be a sanitary landfill. 
  
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Figure 6 shows the mobile interface of system, the initial 
screen is a formulary to get the input data: state, 
municipality, period of term (years of study), etc. Other data 
are completed automatically by the app. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Input data into app in smartphone. 
The process is started when data is entered and a 
connection with geographic module by web service is 
established. A mapping application mobile shown the result. 
See Figure 7. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Mobile version of calculator. 
The green polygon in Figure 7 shows in this case the 
candidate area location to build a sanitary landfill in 
accordance with the user input’s data. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
In this approach, semantics processing is used to solve 
the cases when a sanitary landfill will be constructed in an 
area where some constraints are applied. As an example 
when a sanitary landfill will be near an airport. The Mexican 
norm establishes a minimum distance of 20km. In this case, 
the constraint is processed semantically and is obtained that 
if is performed an aviary study. Then, the distance can be 
reduced to 13 km. In this scenery without semantics 
processing will not be possible to get this result.  
In addition, is shown how the semantics processing is 
combined with a multicriteria approach. In order to find a 
point where constraints can be flexible and comply with the 
rule. The methodology can be applied to other similar 
sceneries.  
The multicriteria approach is based on weight schemes in 
order to get relevance for the geographic candidate areas. 
Based on it, is possible to offer a list of candidates for 
sanitary landfill construction. 
This research is part of a multidisciplinary project. The 
main contribution is to use a multi-criteria approach 
combined with semantics.  Here is described the overall 
functionality.  
Results are compared with the results obtained without 
semantics processing. For constraints related with distances. 
The results are better using semantics processing.  Because 
other areas are found as candidates, while that using only 
multicriteria approach these areas do not appear as 
candidates. At this moment, a panel of users is testing the 
system. 
They 
have 
different 
levels 
of 
expertise 
(environmental engineers, computer engineers, geographers 
and students.) The future work considers to include all the 
constraints for Mexican norm to be processed using the 
approach mentioned. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors want to thank COFAA, EDD, and SIP–IPN for 
its support. This Project is part of a multidisciplinary project 
with numbers: 20113429 and 20120504. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Bazzani, Guido Maria, “Integrated solid waste management: a 
multicriteria approach”. Sixth Joint Conference on Food, 
Agriculture and the environment. University of Minnesota, 
1998, 
http://ageconsearch.umn.edu/bitstream/14492/1/c6bazz01.pdf 
[retrieved: July, 2012]. 
[2] Ghadi Mahmoudi and Christian Müller-Schloer, "Semantic 
multi-criteria 
decision 
making 
SeMCDM", 
IEEE 
Symposium 
Series 
on 
Computational 
Intelligence, 
Symposium 
on 
Computational 
Intelligence 
in 
Multicriteria Decision Making, 2009, Nashville, USA 
[3] Official 
Mexican 
Norm, 
NOM-083-Semarnat-2003 
http://www.profepa.gob.mx/innovaportal/.../nom-083-
semarnat-2003.pdf [retrieved: July, 2012]. 
[4] Sanz 
Conde 
and 
M. 
Mercedes, 
Universitat 
Politecnica 
de 
Catalunya. 
Departament 
d'Enginyeria 
del 
Terreny, 
Cartografica, 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

http://upcommons.upc.edu/handle/2099.1/7293. 
[retrieved: 
May, 2012]. 
[5] W. Perez and A. Tamayo, “El uso de las aplicaciones SIG 
para 
el 
manejo 
y 
tratamiento 
de 
residuos 
sólidos 
domiciliarios”. 
http://www.oterra.cl/descargables.html 
[retrieved: March, 2012]. 
[6] M. 
Moreno-Ibarra, 
“Semantic 
similarity 
applied 
to 
generalization of geospatial data”. Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science. Vol. 4853. 2007. pp. 247-255 
[7] R. Quintero, Representación semántica de datos espaciales 
raster. Tesis Doctoral. Instituto Politécnico Nacional. 2007. 
pp. 77-108. 
[8] R. Quintero, M. Torres, M. Moreno, and G. Guzmán, 
“Metodología para generar una representación semántica de 
datos raster”. T. Delgado, J. Capote (editors). Semántica 
espacial y descubrimiento de conocimiento para desarrollo 
sostenible. Ed. CUJAE. La Habana. 2009. pp. 119-145. 
[9] B. D. Xi, J. Su, G. H. Huang, X. S. Qin, Y.H Jiang, S. L. Huo, 
D. F. Ji, and B. Yao. 2010. Brief paper: “An integrated 
optimization approach and multi-criteria decision analysis for 
supporting the waste-management system of the city of 
Beijing, China”. Journal Engineering Applications of 
Artificial Intelligence. Volume 23 Issue 4, June, 2010  
pp. 620-631 
[10] Amitabh Kumar Srivastava and Arvind K. Nema, “Fuzzy 
parametric programming model for multi-objective integrated 
solid waste management under uncertainty”. Journal Expert 
Systems with Applications: An International Journal aVolume 
39 
Issue 
5, 
April, 
2012  
pp. 4657-4678 
[11] P. Beigl, S. Lebersorger and S. Salhofer, “Modelling of 
municipal solid waste generation: A review”. Waste 
Management. 2008, v28 i1. 200-214 
[12] http://protege.stanford.edu/ [retrieved: August, 2012]. 
[13] http://www.hermit-reasoner.com [retrieved: August, 2012]. 
[14] http://www.postgresql.org/ [retrieved: July, 2012]. 
 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

