Semantic Web Technogies for IoT-Based Health Care Information Systems
Emine Sezer, Okan Bursa, Ozgu Can and Murat Osman Unalir
Department of Computer Engineering, Ege University, 35100 Bornova, Izmir, Turkey
e-mail:{emine.sezer, okan.bursa, ozgu.can, murat.osman.unalir}@ege.edu.tr
Abstract— The IoT (Internet of Things), as the most
popular trend in the next generation Internet technologies, has
a variety of application domains, including health care. The
healthcare domain is a big and significant area where people,
different organizations and various institutions get services as
well as provide services at the same time. It is one of the few
areas that have a huge amount of domain knowledge. A
significant part of this knowledge is composed of the data that is
produced by the medical devices and sensors. This health data
can be processed to monitor the health status of any person. In
this paper, a semantic Web approach for IoT-based health care
information systems is proposed. To transfer health data
collected from IoT devices to smart devices and then from
smart devices to the cloud platform without changing its
meaning, the ontologies developed for medical devices and the
health domain should describe this data. This way, health care
services for the clinical domain can process the data according
to the defined rules with the help of semantic rules and
inference engines.
Keywords- Internet of Things (IoT); Healthcare Information
Systems; Healthcare; Semantic Web; Ontology.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The improvement in Internet technologies allows people,
devices, services and systems to be interconnected 24/7.
Thereby, due to the rapid increase of the interaction between
users and computer technologies with the advances in
information
and
communication
systems,
intelligent
ecosystems are needed. Internet of Things – IoT, which can
be thought as one of these ecosystems, is a concept reflecting
a connected set of anyone, anything, any place, any service,
and any network [1]. IoT aims to exchange the data between
all connected “things” to provide full automation with lots of
benefits. Getting any data from anywhere at any time
supports the analysis of different types of collected data in
real-time, as well as over time. The first samples began to
develop for IoT applications, such as smart cities, smart
traffic
control
systems,
waste
management,
security,
emergency services, logistics and health care [2]-[6].
Health information systems are important application
areas where IoT technologies can be used to provide more
effective solutions. The healthcare domain is a significant
domain, where people, different organizations and various
institutions get services as well as provide services at the
same time. It is one of the few areas that need a huge amount
of domain knowledge. The important part of this knowledge
is composed by the information that is gathered by the
medical devices.
Remote patient monitoring activities can be carried out in
a dynamic way as a result of analyzing the collected patient
data from different devices so that many health care
applications like monitoring of chronic diseases, elderly care,
wellness and fitness programs can be followed and managed
for sustainability. Regarding this aspect, medical, diagnostic
and imaging devices and sensors which are used effectively
for diagnosing, treatment and medication constitute the
objects of IoT health care ecosystem. Blood pressure
monitor, blood glucose meter, thermometer, and heart rate
sensors can be given as examples for IoT in health care. The
storage, querying and analyzing this health data, which is
collected from these devices, can also be used to define
required alarms with defining rules under certain conditions.
These applications create IoT-based health care services that
are expected to reduce costs, increase the quality of life with
guiding the patient’s experience, and also reduce the time
spent from the perspective of health care providers.
In this context, ensuring consistency in the related
terminology, sharing the data between devices and systems,
and data exchange without losing its meaning during this
sharing are extremely important elements that have to be
provided by IoT ecosystems. For this purpose, the semantic
Web technologies can be used to define the data that is
collected from the IoT health care devices and sensors and
also to define rules about IoT-based health care services.
In this work, the use of semantics and ontologies to share
large
amounts
of
distributed
medical
information
is
described to support interoperability between IoT-based
health care information systems. In Section 2, the proposed
model is introduced. Lastly, in Section 3, a brief conclusion
is given with future works.
II.
SEMANTIC WEB AND IOT-BASED HEALTH CARE
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Semantic Web is defined as the extension of the current
Web where information is given in a well-defined meaning
and leads to better collaboration between computers and
people [7]. In semantic Web, the data about each real world
concept as well as the data about concept relationships are
described. So that, an information network is developed and
by using this network, interoperability between systems,
services, computer, and people can be achieved.
Ontologies
are
very
important
for
interoperability
between systems. To provide full interoperability, the
semantics of information have to be the same for all systems.
Ontology presents format as an explicit specification of a
conceptualization [8]. An ontology can be handled by
machines and describes the definitions of these concepts and
restrictions on possible interpretations between these terms
to create a structure on the domain and how these concepts
are related with each other [9]. In a certain domain,
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

ontologies which represent the knowledge of that domain
provide interoperability to be connected with other networks.
There is a huge amount of information and data in the
health care domain. In order to reuse health data for various
purposes, it should be shared between systems and services.
For that reason, ontologies are used as information bases for
a common framework in health information systems.
IoT is the most popular trend of the next generation
Internet applications with the promise of sharing the
information from everywhere continuously and accurately in
today’s information systems. The current applications in this
area are quite new. Health care is a domain that is expected
to give personalized services with huge amount of data.
Therefore, different opinions are available for developing
IoT-based health care information systems which collect the
heath related data from medical devices and sensors like
blood pressure monitor, blood glucose meter, thermometer,
oximeter and heart rate sensors that are used personally at
their home on IoT platforms. The main purpose of these
opinions is transferring the data form medical devices to
smart devices and form smart devices to cloud without
changing its definition, and in a secure way.
In the health domain, compared with the other domains,
any new application or technology should be carried out very
carefully to prevent mortal or permanent disability results.
Thus, it is quite important to collect data in the most proper
way, to store and to transfer this data in the most accurate
and secure way while ensuring the patient privacy, to analyze
this health data to help the health care providers to monitor
the patient’s status, and also to respond by giving proper
alarms
in
emergency
cases
for
quick
and
effective
intervention.
IoT technologies are expected to be implemented to
support each health service which offer different solutions
for various health care applications. In the scope of the
health domain, there is no standard that is currently
developed to define the IoT-based health care services.
However, there are some cases where the service cannot be
separated
objectively
from
a
particular
solution
or
application. Therefore, a service has a general level due to its
structure and has a potential to be a building block for some
solutions and applications. In addition, some changes for
general services and protocols required in IoT frameworks
may be needed in order to be functioning properly in health
care scenarios. These include notification services, resource
sharing services, Internet services, cross-link protocols for
heterogeneous devices and link protocols for the main
connections. Simple, safe and low power devices and
services can be added to this list [10].
In Fig. 1, we show a model for an IoT-based health care
information system which is supported with ontologies.
Health data is collected from IoT medical devices and
sensors and defined inside ontologies. Nowadays, with the
rapid changes in advancing technology, there are small and
practical medical devices that measure blood pressure, fever,
blood glucose level, and etc. Transfer of this data collected
from medical devices to smart phones, tablets or other smart
devices and to the cloud platform by using the current
Internet infrastructure is also another important research and
application area [11]-[15].
Figure 1. The proposed semantic web model for IoT-based health care information system.
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Proper patient care can be done by reliable health data.
To transfer the health data without losing its semantics, we
are proposing to define health data with ontologies. For
this purpose, first of all, ontologies for medical devices
and sensors that produce health data have to be developed.
Ontologies developed for these IoT devices describe the
data not only by its measurement value, but also its
relationships with the other data sources and also with
descriptive properties like where and when it is produced.
The described health care data should be related with
the clinical domain knowledge where it is needed to
monitor the patient’s health situation. In that case, the
specific health domain ontologies like Vaccine Ontology,
Infectious Disease Ontology or Blood Test Ontology are
needed to process collected health data [16]. Also, to be
able to share data between different health information
systems, in other words in order to reuse the health data,
the health data standards like SNOMED-CT [17] and ICD
10 [18] should be supported by these health domain
ontologies.
The
interoperability
between
information
systems
is
achieved
by
using
general
information
descriptions and describing data with its semantics.
After the data is transferred to the cloud, the health
care services can provide proper information or services
by using the inference and role engines that are offered by
semantic Web technologies to the health care providers
and clinics.
To describe the overall system interaction, a sample
scenario is given. A person who had a heart attack is
discharged from the hospital and his responsible physician
is supposed to measure his blood pressure twice a day. His
physician also defines some limiting values and rules for
his measurements. If a measurement exceeds the defined
limit, the system requests to make measurements more
frequently, such as once an hour. However, if the
measurements reach the alarm levels, the system should
give an alert. The physician is informed quickly with a
message or a call, and also with the health institute that is
the nearest one to the patient’s location. If the patient
specified a person to be informed in emergency situations
for himself, the system should also give information to that
person. The system should be adaptable and self-driven to
different situations.
III.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
In this work, we propose an IoT-based health care
information system model which uses semantic Web
technologies to describe the domain and device data and
also to define rules to make proper inferences to execute
health care services. In this model, the health data
collected from any medical device or clinic is meant to be
reused and shared not only at the point where it was
produced, but also on other authorized services, devices
and people by using semantic Web technologies. Thus,
interoperability between information systems can be
achieved.
To implement the proposed model, an application
domain area from the health care is determined, primarily.
The medical devices, sensors, diagnostic and monitoring
devices used in that domain are determined as IoT objects.
For the application domain, the health care services are
determined and then the information needed for these
services is defined. With the goal of interoperable devices
and systems and also reusable health care data, IoT device
ontologies and specific health domain ontologies should be
developed. The developed ontologies will be integrated
with Sofia 2 platform. Sofia 2 (Smart Objects for
Intelligent Applications) was developed as R&D Artemis
project by 19 stakeholders such as companies like Nokia,
Philips, Fiat and Acciona from the European Union [19]. It
is widely used in IoT applications, works on Eclipse
platform [20] and is an open source platform. Sofia 2
platform is defined as a layer that provides seamless
interoperability between different devices and systems.
The data handled from IoT devices will be stored on Sofia
2 platform that offers big data storage by describing the
defined ontologies.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. M. R. Islam, D. Kwak, M.D. H. Kabir, M. Hossain and
K. S. Kwak, “The Internet of Things for Health Care: A
Comprehensive Survey”, IEEE Access, Vol. 3, pp. 678-
704, 2015.
[2]
J. Höller, V. Tsiatsis, C. Mulligan, S. Karnouskos, S.
Avesand, and D. Boyle, “From Machine-to-Machine to the
Internet
of
Things:
Introduction
to
a
New Age
of
Intelligence”,
Amsterdam,
The
Netherlands:
Elsevier,
2014.
[3]
G. Kortuem, F. Kawsar, D. Fitton, and V. Sundramoorthy,
“Smart objects as building blocks for the Internet of
Things”, IEEE Internet Computing, 14(1), pp. 44-51, 2010.
[4]
K. Romer, B. Ostermaier, F. Mattern, M. Fahrmair, M., and
W. Kellerer, “Real-time search for real-world entities: A
survey”, Proc. of IEEE, 98(11), pp. 1887-1902, 2010.
[5]
D. Guinard, V. Trifa, V., and E. Wilde, “A resource
oriented architecture for the Web of Things”, in Proc.
Internet Things (IOT), pp. 1-8, 2010.
[6]
L. Tan, and N. Wang, “Future Internet: The Internet of
Things”, in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Adv. Comput. Theory Eng.
(ICACTE), Vol. 5., pp. 375-380, 2010.
[7]
T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, O. Lassila, "The semantic
web". Scientific American, 284 (5), pp. 34-43, 2001.
[8]
T. Gruber, “Toward principles for the design of ontologies
used for knowledge sharing”, Technical Report KSL93-04,
Knowledge
Systems
Laboratory,
Stanford
University,
1993.
[9]
M. Uschold, “Knowledge level modelling: Concepts and
terminology”, Knowledge Engineering Review, 13(1), pp.
5–29, 1998.
[10] K. Vasanth and J. Sbert. Creating solutions for health
through
technology
innovation.
Texas
Instruments.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.ti.com/lit/wp/sszy006/
sszy006.pdf. [Retrieved: September, 2016]
[11] S. Imadali, A. Karanasiou, A. Petrescu, I. Sifniadis, V.
Veque, and P. Angelidis, “eHealth service support in IPv6
vehicular networks”, in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Wireless
Mobile Comput., Netw. Commun. (WiMob), pp. 579-585,
2012.
[12] A. J. Jara, M. A. Zamora, and A. F. Skarmeta, “Knowledge
acquisition and management architecture for mobile and
personal health environments based on the Internet of
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Things”, in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Trust, Security Privacy
Comput. Commun. (TrustCom), pp. 1811-1818, 2012.
[13] P. Lopez, D. Fernandez, A. J. Jara, and A. F. Skarmeta,
“Survey of Internet of Things technologies for clinical
environments”, in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Adv. Inf. Netw.
Appl. Workshops (WAINA), pp. 1349-1354, 2013.
[14] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The Internet of
Things: A survey”, Computer Networks, 54(15), pp. 2787-
2805, 2010.
[15] M. Hassanalieragh, A. Page, T. Soyata, G. Sharma, M.
Aktas, G. Mateos, B.Kantarci, and S. Andreescu, “Health
Monitorin and Management Using Internet-of-Things (IoT)
Sensing with Cloud-Based Processing: Opportunities and
Challenges”: In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE International
Conference
on
Services
Computing (SCC'15).
IEEE
Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 285-292,
2015.
[16] O. Bursa, E. Sezer, O. Can, M. O. Unalir, "Using FOAF
for
Interoperable
and
Privacy
Protected
Healthcare
Information Systems", Research Conference on Metadata
and Semantics, Springer International Publishing, pp.154 -
161, 2014.
[17] SNOMED-CT,
http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct
[Retrieved: September, 2016]
[18] ICD
10,
http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en
[Retrieved: September, 2016]
[19] Sofia2, SOFIA2 IoT Platform: Technical View, [Online].
Available:
http://sofia2.com/docs/SOFIA2%20-%20
Technical%20-%20IoT%20Platform%20(oct%202014).pdf
[Retrieved: September, 2016]
[20] Eclipse, https://eclipse.org/ [Retrieved: September, 2016]
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

