Semantic Approach for Finding Suitable Commercial Business Location
Felix Mata
Computing Mobile Laboratory
IPN-UPIITA
Mexico City, Mexico
mmatar@ipn.mx
Omar Juarez, Consuelo Garcia, Roberto Zagal
Systems Department
IPN-ESCOM
Mexico City, Mexico
{omarjg82@gmail.com, varinia400@hotmail.com,
rzagalf@ipn.mx}
Abstract—Nowadays, in order to find the best suitable location
for a commercial business, one needs to apply a market
analysis in several steps. This research improves this process
by applying spatial semantics. We define a methodology to find
a list of candidates for the best commercial business location.
Some parameters involved in spatial semantics and market
analysis
are:
floating
population,
taxes
cost,
market
competition,
transportation,
land
use,
geographical
area,
among many others. All of them should be evaluated with
different methods. A list of semantic rules are defined to find
possible location, ontology is built based on the geographic and
market conditions. Each one of places found complies with law
restrictions,
administrative
and
geographic
requirements
defined as input parameters. Additionally, it is possible to relax
the parameters’ weight in order to obtain new results for
possible
locations.
Proofs
include
results
obtained
in
conjunction (semantic and market analysis) that shows better
results that when these criteria are used independently.
Keywords-Spatial
Semantics;
geographic
domain
conceptualization; axiomatic relation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, finding the adequate location for establishing a
business, is a task that includes review aspects of market
(e.g., business market competition, economy, geographic
conditions, etc.). This process is not done by just one person;
it is made by the collaborative work of specialists from
different disciplines (marketers, economists, geographers).
Then, the possibility of automating this task is possible, if we
consider that: 1) ontologies can represent the knowledge
involved in this context (spatial and market conditions), 2)
semantic analysis allows to explore ontologies and define
rules based on certain constraints, 3) the processing of spatial
semantics is used to find locations, based on semantic rules
and geographic conditions. Thus, these three statements are
integrated as a methodology to find a list of possible
locations for a business. In addition, users can assign higher
or lower
relevance to
each
parameter (qualitative or
quantitative configuration) in order to generate a new list of
possible places for locating a business. For example, suppose
the following query:
Q1= “find a business location in a county without market
competition in a radius of 5 km”. It can be relaxed
qualitatively by the user in parameter market competition.
Then, the system generates new queries as follows:
Q1a = “find a business location in a county with low market
competition in a radius of 10 km”.
Q1b: “find a business location in a county without market
competition of first impact in a radius of 5 km”.
The case study focuses on three types of business:
stationer’
shops,
drugstores
and
restaurants.
The
methodology includes definition of semantic processing
algorithms, geographic queries implementation and the
design and implementation of an ontology. The research is
focused on assisting in making a decision about the possible
locations for establishing a business. The implementation
was done into a Web system. The rest of paper is organized
as follows: Section II describes the related work; Section III
explains the methodology definition; Section IV shows the
obtained results and, finally, the conclusions and future work
are outlined in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
The use of an ontology as a resource of knowledge is
well known from tasks such as extracting the semantics, the
meaning, of natural texts to entity recognition (people,
places, companies, and prices) [14]. Ontology is also
employed as a method for identifying categories, concepts,
relations, and rules [5], [6], [8]. In our work, we use this
principle to find the best locations for a business. On the
other hand, the use of ontology in market domain is not new.
Researchers have suggested employing market mechanisms
for the allocation of Web Services [16], while Lamparter and
Schnizler [15] presented an architecture of an ontology-
driven market for trading Semantic Web Services. Auction
schema is enriched by a set of components enabling
semantics based matching, as well as price-based allocations.
Meersman [13] uses the market information into the
knowledge system of a company in order to contribute to the
process of product innovation, competence development and
relevant social interaction. Nevertheless, these previous
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

works do not consider the geographic parameters that are
relevant in the market analysis.
Ontology is also used to inform designers of data models
and information systems to make them better equipped for
handling geographic concepts [1], [3], [7], while Smith and
Mark [5] report the results of a series of experiments
designed to establish how non-expert subjects conceptualize
geospatial phenomena. Subjects were asked to give examples
of geographical categories in response to a series of
differently phrased elicitations. The results yield an ontology
of geographical categories, which consists of a catalog of the
prime geospatial concepts and categories. When combined
with query languages, domain ontologies favor the design
and development of domain-based search engines and their
application to different areas such as in transportation [9]. A
categorization of GIS (Geographic Information System)
tasks and GIR (Geographic Information Retrieval) queries
has been suggested in [10], the approach being applied to
heterogeneous
sources,
including
multimedia
sources.
Moreover, Biletskiy and Ranganathan [17] explain an
ontology and rule-based framework for the development of
business domain applications, which includes semantic
processing of externalized business rules and, to some extent,
externalization of application logic. The framework also
includes a rule learning system to semi-automate the
generation of information extraction rules from source
documents. Summarizing, the use of semantic processing,
and the ontology exploration, have been used in other
domains, but not in combination with the geographic aspects
in market analysis. Thus, in this paper, we show a
methodology to be applied in order to get a useful
application for real life.
III.
METHODOLOGY FOR QUERYING AND SEMANTIC
PROCESSING
The methodology is composed of three phases: 1)
Ontology modeling, 2) Ontology building, and 3) Semantic
processing.
Ontology
modeling
consists
of
capturing
knowledge regarding market context for a set of specific
business and their involved geographical parameters. For
that, one is required to get a set of official data sources with:
1a) geographic data of places to analyze, 1b) statistics
regarding to economy, soil use, population, among others,
1c) mechanisms used in the market to get the type and
behavior
of
it.
These
components
(1a,
1b,
1c)
are
transformed into semantic rules and concepts. The ontology
building consists of reordering the concepts into a taxonomy
and establishing the context for each concept following the
methodology described in [2]. Finally, semantic processing
is responsible to apply the semantic rules and measure the
relevance of query parameters. This means, assign a lesser or
greater importance to one parameter such as: the price of rent
or the proximity of a communication route. This is achieved
using the mechanisms of the market in previous step 1c).
Basically, these mechanisms are surveys and quests made in
others studies.
III.A Modeling Ontology
The modeling consists of taking the knowledge from one
conceptual domain to a logical domain. The knowledge is
acquired and abstracted, then is translated to logical model to
obtain a design (classes and properties). To identify the
domain of ontology, we classified the analysis based on
semantics and market analysis for the location of a business
in: 1) market analysis, 2) proximity analysis and 3) analysis
of buildings infrastructure.
1. Market Analysis. It refers to the analysis of potential
customers and demand generators. It is composed of three
steps:
1a) Compute the size of local market. It is obtained by
processing the total population living in the area, the floating
population (people who do not live in the area but work or
study in it), and income and expense levels by social stratum.
1b) Analyze the market competition. It consists of
calculating the number of businesses in the local market to
determine if the market is saturated or free. There may be
commercial firms who are sacrificing their profit margin just
to have a presence in the area (this is a market strategy).
1c) Detect demand generators: identifying corporate
office buildings, schools, hospitals, recreation and leisure,
and so on.
2. Proximity analysis. It refers to the analysis of the
proximity of a building with relevant points (cultural,
historical places, downtown, etc.). We establish minimum
and maximum distance from 1 km to 5 km for walking
distance, and from 5 km to 10 km driving distance.
2a)
Locate
the
areas
where
most
businesses
are
concentrated. Identify if in the area there are several centers
and commercial corridors (including historical centers).
2b) Identify the areas with high vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
2c) Identify the roads surrounding the area, road type,
high or low level of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
3. Analysis of buildings. It refers to an analysis of the
characteristics
of
the
buildings:
number
of
levels,
construction
material
(concrete,
wood,
etc.),
parking
included, stairs or elevator, number of doors, windows.
III.B Ontology
The ontology was built based on data obtained from
INEGI, an official Mexican organism that produces and
manage the geographical data in Mexico [4] and documents
from other sources such as [11], [12] and with an approach
similar to [14] although it is possible to use Open Street Map
for the mapping data, but the tabular data of economics
parameters should be acquired from other sources as was
described at the beginning of Section III. We identify the
relevant concepts in a business by following the procedures
to measure the behavior of a market in Mexico, (SNIIM in
Spanish) [18].
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

The
concepts
and
terms
are
abstracted
based
on
definitions of Royal Academy of the Spanish language.
Some examples are:
• Offer: Set of property or goods being offered on the
market at one price and at a specific time.
• Demand: Overall amount of purchases of goods and
services performed or provided by a community.
• Market: Set of consumers able to purchase a product or
service.
• Product: Profit.
Moreover, we identify properties and relationships of
each one of the concepts. Then, we obtain the taxonomy and
classes shown in Fig. 1.
Figure 1.
Taxonomy of Ontology.
For the definition of concepts and final model of
ontology, the knowledge acquired and surveys were used.
Some rules and terms used in market context are as follows:
a) Check type and amount of products offered by the
business. b) Check floating market, demand products of
business and the importance of offer and demand. c) Check
the places that people of floating market attend and how
often they attend. d) Check the ways and stations where the
floating market is often attended. f) Evaluate the influence of
interest points and attractions in the area.
Regarding the surveys conducted during the research, we
define a range of values to qualify characteristics of a
building or property (see Table 1).
TABLE I.
TABLE RELATION QUALIFYING- WEIGHT VALUES
Qualifying
Weight value
Without importance
0
Without importance but
required
25
desirable
50
necessary
75
required, essential
100
We used reasoner FaCT ++, for instance creation and
classification, and we explored the ontology using OWL
(Ontology Web language) Java API (Application Program
Interface).
III.C Semantic Processing
The query is received and the processing starts: the query
is analyzed and contextualized through the exploration of the
ontology. Next, the rules of the context are applied (market
analysis constraints). This results in the parameters that
define a geographic query in market domain. Then, the
ontology is explored to find a matching between query
elements and the concepts stored into ontology. Each
element of a query is searched within the ontology (e.g., by
label names). When a concept is found into the ontology,
then its context is extracted. A context is formed by the
neighboring concepts of a matched concept and its semantic
relations are extracted and stored into a vector. The process
works according to the following algorithm depicted in
pseudo code (see Fig. 2):
Figure 2.
Ontology exploration algorithm.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

In Fig. 2, the algorithm illustrates how the search
parameters are used to find relevant information according to
the steps involved in market analysis. A specific Web service
has been developed in order to match a concept name with
the term name commonly used in market analysis. The
matching results are used as a parameter for other queries
that are generated.
Moreover,
the
semantic
processing
includes
an
interpretation for each parameter. For example, in the case of
stores, it is desirable that they are located in a corner (it is a
defined rule), while for a book store, for example, it is more
important that it is located near any school.
Table 2 shows the possible semantic values for some
parameters in a market context.
TABLE II.
SEMANTIC VALUES FOR MARKET PARAMETERS
Parameter
Possible semantic values
Influence of the zone
Low, medium, high.
Market competition
First impact, high impact,
small impact, based on percentage.
Transportation
Fast, without traffic.
Population
Floating, fixed.
In Table 2, the possible values or range of values for each
parameter is showed. For example, when a business requires
a form of transportation, the evaluation is done in two ways:
fast, in terms of time and distance, considering the traffic
during the transportation.
IV.
TEST AND RESULTS
The tests are made by the methodology implementation
on
a
Web
system,
considering
the
three
steps
of
methodology: semantic modeling, semantic building and
semantic processing. A list of best suitable locations for a
particular business on specific geographic area is generated.
Then, users can set these restrictions and display the location
of the commercial business according to requirements and
constraints discussed in previous sections. The business
types considered are: stationer’ shops, drugstores and
restaurants.
For testing the interface, the user sets the query through
capture controls and options. The web interface is in
Spanish, in a local system (see Fig. 3).
Figure 3.
Input parameters (interface Web system).
As Fig. 3 shows, business requirements are defined
through preset options: commercial business type, population
size, neighborhood, type of acquisition, among others.
We consider the following query:
Q1a = “find a business location in Mexico City with
market competition in a radius of 10 km located in corner, or
into the street, rent or buy". The result is the list of properties
that meet the criteria, one of which is shown in Fig. 4.
Figure 4.
Best Rated Property.
Now, if the query Q1 is modified on the relevance of the
parameters: parking and roads near. Then, the new Q1b query
is generated. The result is now a new list of locations.
Q1b: “find a business location in a county without market
competition of first impact in a radius of 5 km, located in
corner, or into the street, rent or buy"”.
Note, that the most appropriate business location from
the previous test, was located now in eighth place (see Fig.
5).
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Figure 5.
The best location for commercial business from Q1A.
It is possible to modify / relax the parameter values to
find new locations, changing the relevance of the parameters:
market competition, offer, property rates, parking, roads, and
location. This is achieved at the interface through sliders. For
example, consider the query Q1A, with the following
changes: the weight factor assigned is set 50% to market
competition. It generates new results shown in Fig. 6.
Figure 6.
Results for new generated query Q1A.
As we can see in Fig. 6, it is possible to relax the values
for any parameter (change or configure to not be taken into
account in the analysis process). Next, a new map will be
displayed with the new results. Another test was conducted
based on the query Q3: “find a location for a restaurant in a
corner and available for purchase, for any price, with fast
transportation available”. The result of this query Q3 is
showed in Fig. 7.
Figure 7.
Best commercial locations for query Q3.
As shown in Fig. 7, the result is only one location that
complied with the values of parameters indicated.
Another test conducted for the query Q4: "Find location
for a stationer’ shop, with a low floating population, located
to 3 km from a zone influenced commercially." The results
obtained show 10 possible locations, the most relevant being
located in: Calle 15 No 100. This is shown in Fig. 8.
Figure 8.
Rated building or property for query Q4.
In Fig. 8, the best rated property for query Q4 is shown;
the relevancy is calculated based on the parameters values, if
a property has the value requested, then it is considered
relevant, but if not, then the value is evaluated, if it is lesser
or higher, the relevance of it is assigned based on evaluation.
For example, the query Q4 the influenced commercial
zone around the all suitable locations is shown in Fig. 9.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Figure 9.
Zone of influence for the best location of query Q4.
Fig. 9 shows a polygon (in orange) that represents the
commercial zone that influences the locations found and
evaluated as good candidates for query Q4.
V. CONCLUSION
The research presented in this paper introduces an
approach to perform geo-market analysis in order to find best
possible places to locate a business. The methodology can be
applied in other places using the corresponding geographic
and statistical data of each country and procedures with
applicable laws in a particular market. This can support
people skilled in the branch to the location of a business and
people without experience.
Semantic processing is driven by a domain ontology. The
queries used are contextualized in order to closely relate
information to market analysis and business location.
The approach is based on a method that matches user-
defined queries with ontological concepts according to the
market domains. The approach has been experimented on an
illustrative case study applied in business from Mexico City.
Further work will consider larger information spaces and
document collections like Web, and an integration of several
distributed databases as well as additional semantic analysis.
The domain ontology can also be enriched by considering
additional
spatial
relations
and
by
application-based
conceptualizations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors of this paper wish to thank the Mobile
Computing
Laboratory-UPIITA,
Instituto
Politécnico
Nacional in Mexico, IPN-UPIITA, IPN-ESCOM, COFAA-
IPN, IPN-SIP and ICyTDF for their support.
REFERENCES
[1]
Camara, G., Monteiro, A., Paiva, J. and Souza, R., 2000. Action-
driven ontologies of the geographical space: beyond the field-object
debate. In: M.J. Egenhofer and D.M. Mark, eds. Proceedings of the
first international conference on geographic information science,
October 2000, GIScience, Savannah, GA. Georgia: AAG, 52–54.
[2]
Quintero R., Guzmán G., Menchaca R., Torres M., and Moreno M.
2012. An ontology-driven approach for the extraction and description
of geographic objects contained in raster spatial data. Expert Syst.
Appl. 39, 10 (August 2012), 9008-9020.
[3]
Fonseca, F., et al., 2002. Using ontologies for integrated geographic
information
systems.
Transactions
in
Geographical
Infomation
Science, 6 (3), 231–257.
[4]
INEGI, 1996, Diccionario de datos topograficos 1:50 000 (Vectorial).
Agnascalientes:
Instituto
Nacional
de
Estadistica
Geografia
e
Informatica.
Technical
report.
ISO/IEC,
2005.
ISO/IEC
18025:2005(E) Information technology - environmental data coding
speci-
fication
(EDCS)
[online].
Available
from:
http://standards.sedris.org/ [retrieved: March 2013].
[5]
Smith,
B.
and
Mark,
D.,
2001.
Geographical
categories:
an
ontological investigation. International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 15 (7), 591–612. 
[6]
Sorrows, M. and Hirtle, S., 1999. The nature of landmarks for real
and electronic spaces. Lecture Notesin Computer Science, 1661, 37–
50.
[7]
Timpf, S., 2002. Ontologies of Wayfinding: a traveler’s perspective.
Networks and Spatial Economics, 2 (1), 9–33.
[8]
Tversky, B. and Hemenway, K., 1984. Objects, parts, and categories.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 113 (2), 169–193.
[9]
Huang, B., Claramunt, C., Spatiotemporal data model and query
language for tracking land use change. Transportation Research
Record, 107-113 (2005)
[10] Larson,
R.R.:
Geographic
Information
Retrieval
and
Spatial
Browsing, University of California, Berkeley. Available from:
https://sherlock.sims.berkeley.edu/geo_ir/PART1.html
[retrieved:
March 2010].
[11] MexicoTop. articulo locales comerciales [in spanish]. Available from:
http://www.mexicotop.com/article/Locales+comerciales
[retrieved:
February 2013].
[12] MINDMAPS. Geomarketing Estudios de Mercado. Available from:
http://www.mindmaps.com/ [retrieved: March 2013].
[13] Davor M. 2007. Market driven product ontologies. In Proceedings of
the 2007 OTM confederated international conference on On the move
to meaningful internet systems - Volume Part I (OTM'07), Robert
Meersman, Zahir Tari, and Pilar Herrero (Eds.), Vol. Part I. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 275-283.
[14] Grefenstette G. 2010. Use of semantics in real life applications.
In Proceedings of the 19th ACM international conference on
Information and knowledge management (CIKM '10). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 5-6.
[15] Lamparter S. and Schnizler B.. 2006. Trading services in ontology-
driven markets. InProceedings of the 2006 ACM symposium on
Applied computing (SAC '06). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1679-
1683.
[16] Li Z, Zhao H. and Ramanathan S. Pricing web services for optimizing
resource allocation an implementation scheme. In Proc. of the
Web2003, Seattle, WA, 2003.
[17] Biletskiy Y. and Ranganathan G. 2010. A semantic approach to a
framework for business domain software systems. Comput. Ind. 61, 8
(October 2010), 750-759.
[18] SIIM
(in
spanish).
Available
from:
http://www.economia-
sniim.gob.mx/nuevo/ [Accessed: March 19, 2013].
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

