Semantics on the Cloud: Toward an Ubiquitous
Business Intelligence 2.0 ERP Desktop
Diletta Cacciagrano∗, Emanuela Merelli∗
Leonardo Vito∗∓
∗UNICAM - School of Science and Technology
∓Logical System srl
Camerino, Italy
Jesi, Italy
{name.surname}@unicam.it
leonardo.vito@gmail.com
Andrea Sergiacomi, Serena Carota
Marche Region,
Ancona, 60125, Italy
{name.surname}@regione.marche.it
Abstract—Adequate information management requires more
than persistently storing data. Owl-Mea
iN inG (to read either
owl-mining or owl-meaning) is an expandable ‘Business Intel-
ligence 2.0’ Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) prototype,
with the aim to lead Public Administration toward Busi-
ness Intelligence and information maturity. Designed for the
Marche Region, Owl-Mea
iN inG allows transforming, analysing
and mining distributed and heterogeneous knowledge through
semantic-driven GUI (Graphical User Interface)-based compo-
nents, integrated on a common semantic knowledge model and
embedded in a Cloud-based middleware. Such an architecture
puts Owl-Mea
iN inG beyond the actual expert-oriented semantic
computing and makes it a user-friendly environment, where
also naive users can easily edit, monitor, execute and store
transformation, analysis and mining operations as new, re-
usable and semantically consistent business process knowledge.
Capabilities of (i) encoding operational knowledge into a
declarative format and (ii) producing new and complex oper-
ational knowledge by composition of simpler declarative one
allows realizing in Owl-Mea
iN inG processes of externalization (i.e.,
converting tacit knowledge into explicit one) and combination
(i.e., creating new explicit knowledge from existing explicit
one). An example of externalization on the top of the Marche
Region’s data warehouse is proposed to show how exploiting
Owl-Mea
iN inG for converting implicit knowledge’s intangible
character in its successful understanding and sharing.
Keywords - Semantic Web; Ontology; Business Intelli-
gence; Data Warehouse; Data Mining.
I. INTRODUCTION
Knowledge represents the intellectual principal of any
company. This is particularly evident nowadays, where a
nontrivial extraction of implicit, previously unknown, poten-
tially useful information from data and its efﬁcient use by
effective Business Intelligence (BI) methods can undoubt-
edly promote business competition and opportunities.
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems are designed
to provide such methods, with the aim of integrating all
company business facets. The umbrella term ERP refers
to the processes of data transformation (e.g., Extraction,
Transformation and Loading—ETL), analysis (e.g., Online
Analytical Processing—OLAP) and mining (e.g., querying
and clustering), as well as to terms such as data quality, data
enrichment, data warehouse (DW), data mart and operational
data store.
ERP systems are multi-module software applications that
help companies to manage important backbone operations.
ERP’s major objectives are (i) integrating all company
departments and functions onto a single system that can
serve all of the company needs, and (ii) enabling companies
to present one face to their customers via integrated business
processes, DWs and easy access to updated operational data.
On the one hand, ERP provides a valuable conceptual
basis. On the other hand, any ERP implementation has to
address several factors: information distribution, semantics
heterogeneity, impossibility to test and reuse logic from
existing transformations (as it is buried in source-speciﬁc
code), information redundancy (when the same source feeds
different data marts, being extracted and transformed by sep-
arately coded routines), absence of constrained information
(complex descriptions of terms are not retained in the DW
dimension tables and, as a consequence, values matching
particular criteria and additional information about a term
cannot be found without directly inspecting the data source),
lack of user support during the mining model speciﬁcation
phase.
Such factors often discourage companies from fully ex-
ploiting ERP solutions, restricting their use to trivial opera-
tions (e.g., for checking and conveying known information
in a more digestible manner, conﬁrming known trends and
relationships, automatically providing data for a what-if
analysis still dependent on experts’ manual judgments).
Major problems arise in the Public Administration (PA),
where factors like low interoperability levels among infor-
mation systems, budgetary restrictions, technological know-
how deﬁcits and a latent change resistance worsen the above
scenario, moving PAs away from the idea to invest on ERP
solutions and on BI techniques.
A. Contribution of the paper: toward a ‘BI 2.0’ ERP desktop
for PAs and private companies
Until recently, theoretical research on applying ontology
to data mining was carried out by several studies: for dealing
with the issue of incorporating ontology in the knowledge
discovery process [1], [2], [3], [4], for integrating OLAP and
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

information retrieval from DWs [5] and for multiple source
integration for DW OLAP construction [6].
Taking inspiration from the literature, Owl-Mea
iN inG (to
read either owl-mining or owl-meaning) aims at providing
an expandable ERP system with ‘BI 2.0’ [7] capabilities,
where:
- Decisions, facts and context are developed through
crowdsourcing.
- Data and reports incorporate context information sup-
plied by users.
- Data have a more direct linkage with action. Excep-
tions, alerts and notiﬁcations are based on dynamic
business rules that learn about user’s business and what
he is interested in.
- User can directly act on information.
- Business decisions can be monitored and hypotheses
about business tactics can be integrated into the decision
support system.
- Visualizing data and complex relationships is easier
and more intuitive models of info-graphics become
mainstream.
- The ability to detect complex patterns in data through
automated analytic routines or intelligent helper models
is built into analytic applications.
- Finding information is easier and search results provide
context. Anyone looking at the same data can see that
context when viewed.
- Linkages with unstructured contents as well as a previ-
ously acquired knowledge base is the key to ensuring
collective knowledge and collaboration.
Owl-Mea
iN inG was born as a UNICAM ICT-outsourcing prod-
uct for answering Marche Region’s demand of semantically
unlocking earned information and ensuring high-quality and
homogeneous internal decision making processes. However
its modular software architecture - a mash up of Semantic
Web, workﬂow techniques, Cloud and Agent computing em-
bedded in a fully web- and GUI (Graphical User Interface)-
based environment - makes Owl-Mea
iN inG a low-cost and eas-
ily customizable solution for any PAs and private companies.
Owl-Mea
iN inG consists of several fully semantic-driven and
GUI-based components (currently, knowledge and workﬂow
management, semantic annotation and visual query systems),
integrated on a common semantic knowledge model and
embedded in a Cloud-based middleware. This architecture
makes Owl-Mea
iN inG not only an innovative ERP system for
transforming, analysing and mining distributed and hetero-
geneous knowledge, but also a user-friendly environment,
where semantics helps naive users to edit, monitor, execute
and store transformation, analysis and mining operations as
new, re-usable and semantically consistent business process
knowledge.
The semantic layer also allows ﬁltering more speciﬁc
search spaces, minimizing the possibilities of illegal settings
of mining models, storing and sharing user’s mining work,
discriminating between usual and newly acquired knowl-
edge.
The possibility of improving Owl-Mea
iN inG through an
incremental and non-invasive reﬁnement process - thanks
to the Owl-Mea
iN inG Cloud-based platform where new BI
components can be plugged in a compositional way - can
lead therefore toward the realization of:
- An integrated knowledge space (instead of a set of
isolated and heterogeneous knowledge resources) that
will unify different perspectives and interpretations of
knowledge resources and will enable their treatment
on a far more ﬁne grained level, allowing for more
sophisticated applications and services.
- A collaborative BI working environment (instead of
a single person decision making process) that will
bring every user to the same level of effectiveness and
productivity and will ensure more efﬁcient knowledge
sharing by providing, at the same time, the reliability
and the consistency of the decision making process.
- A change management system (instead of ad-hoc man-
agement of changes) that will ensure harmonisation of
requests for changes, resolution of changes in a system-
atic way and their consistent and uniﬁed propagation
to the collaborative and knowledge space, in order to
ensure the high quality of the decision-making process.
- A platform for proactive delivery of knowledge (instead
of an one-way knowledge access) that enables cre-
ation of an adaptable knowledge sharing environment
through learning from the collaboration between users
and their interaction with the knowledge repository
and supporting in that way full empowerment and
acceptance of users. A strong involvement of employees
and stakeholder representatives is crucial, since deﬁn-
ing the corporate vision is often the ﬁrst step toward
manifesting strategic thinking in PAs and enterprises.
- An ubiquitous assistive mining environment for stor-
ing/changing/extending/generalizing mining rules, ﬁl-
tering more speciﬁc search spaces by concept-based
queries, minimizing the possibilities of illegal settings
of mining models, storing/re-using user’s work.
Owl-Mea
iN inG
can
be
tried
at
the
link
http://resourceome.cs.unicam.it/eyeOS/(11/08/2012)
(User: owlmining, Passw: tryowlmining) .
B. Plan of the paper
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
Section II presents the Owl-Mea
iN inG overall architecture,
giving details about each components - a declarative
and operational knowledge management environment (Re-
sourceome), a semantic annotation component (DataSMart)
and a semantic-driven visual query editor (OWLEye). Fi-
nally, Section III closes the paper, with a sketch of the
ongoing implementation results and intended future work.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

II. THE Owl-Mea
iN inG ARCHITECTURE
Owl-Mea
iN inG is conceived as a semantic ERP platform,
pivoting on a semantic DW that stores ontology-based se-
mantic annotations, along with semantic-driven mechanisms
for the deﬁnition and the execution of transformation and
meaning processes over the stored data (see Fig. 1). It is
based on a pluggable architecture exploiting and integrating
techniques from diverse areas such as Cloud Computing,
databases, machine learning, cognitive science, Semantic
web, and others.
Currently, Owl-Mea
iN inG embodies as services several fully
semantic-driven and GUI-based components - namely, a
declarative and operational knowledge management envi-
ronment (Resourceome), a semantic annotation component
(DataSMart) and a visual query editor (OWLEye) - pivot-
ing on a common hybrid OWL/SKOS-based multi-layered
knowledge model for the semantic annotation of resources
and activities (see Fig. 2) [8]. A Cloud-based middleware
(EyeOS) provides the needed integration mechanisms be-
tween each Owl-Mea
iN inG component and the knowledge base
(modeled as in Fig. 2) and among Owl-Mea
iN inG components
themselves, allowing also further meaning services (devel-
oped on the top of a knowledge model as in Fig. 2) to
be plugged in Owl-Mea
iN inG without changing its current
architecture.
Figure 1: Owl-Mea
iN inG conceptual view.
A. Resourceome + DataSMart: the semantic ERP kernel
Resourceome and DataSMart are the semantic core of
Owl-Mea
iN inG . Both components work on the top of a
speciﬁc knowledge model (Fig. 2) that, when applied to a
knowledge base, allows contextualizing (i) resources w.r.t.
a given domain and (ii) activities w.r.t. given resources.
Usually, the knowledge base is represented by a DW, but
can be also the integration of the DW with local and remote
sources.
Requirement (i) is satisﬁed by splitting the Domain
Ontology in [9] into two separate ontologies - a Domain
Ontology conceptualizing the chosen domain instance and a
Resource Ontology conceptualizing the resource space - and
connecting them by abstract relations. Abstract relations also
connect Domain and Resource Ontologies to a Task Ontol-
ogy conceptualizing the activity hyperspace; such relations
allow any activity to be linked to its working context and the
involved roles and resources, thereby satisfying requirement
(ii).
upper ontology
resource
domain
task
resource
domain
task
concerns
concerns
top level
base level
application level
ontology enginners
ontology
ontology
ontology
ontology
ontology
ontology
resources individuals
domain concepts
SKOS individuals
as
activities
experts
domain
engineers
Figure 2: The knowledge model.
On the one hand, DataSMart is a BioMart[10]-based
database federation system that makes it possible to present
geographically distributed data sources as federated data in
an integrated database, as well as to access and to cross-
reference data from these data sources using a single user
interface.
However, differently from BioMart, it can be also ex-
ploited as a data warehousing platform enabling ETL, OLAP
and other mining operations (see Fig. 3). Most important,
DataSMart is also a semantic annotation system based on
a drag-and-drop interface, which allows imported data and
attributes to be linked to a given knowledge model instance
(see Fig. 4).
On the other hand, Resourceome [8] provides a web-
based integrated environment for (i) managing distributed
and heterogeneous knowledge as ontology concepts (e.g.,
as declarative knowledge); (ii) designing semantically con-
sistent ETL/mining operations; (iii) running ETL/mining
operations as distributed and mobile agent systems (e.g., as
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Figure 3: ETL-Transform and Load in DataSMart.
Figure 4: Semantic annotation by DataSMart.
operational knowledge); (iv) storing ETL/mining operations
as ontology concepts (e.g., as declarative knowledge). Func-
tionalities (i)-(iv) and (ii)-(iii) are provided respectively by
a Knowledge Management System (KMS) and a Workﬂow
Management System (WMS), both working on the knowl-
edge base (modeled as in Fig. 2). Fig. 5 presents the ﬁnal
screenshot of an analysis process on ﬁnancial data, edited
and executed through Resourceome WMS and visualized by
a Resourceome-driven reporting service.
B. A dragging-and-dropping environment for conceptual
queries
Formulating non-ambiguous queries is often a too de-
manding task for users as they do not have the overview
on the semantics of data stored in the system. Without
complete comprehension of the schema and domain related
knowledge, end users may develop a query based on their
experience or intuition. Therefore, users’ formulation of
queries can possibly fall into some improper pits. This may
lead to incorrect and redundant mining data space or mining
Figure 5: Example of analysis process output visualized by a
Resourceome-driven reporting service.
results and waste the efforts accordingly.
The goal of OWLEye is to overcome this problem by
providing an ontology-based information view of the data
available in the knowledge base, integrated with a visual
querying environment oriented to unskilled users.
OWLeye is equipped with a Query Design component
allowing the graphical rendering of SPARQL queries by
graphical constructs of the vSPARQL language [11]. This
has necessarily entailed the development of a set of graphic
notations - based on SPARQL syntax speciﬁcation - support-
ing the visual representation of SPARQL query components.
Many of the vSPARQL constructs, once rendered, are
selectable objects that can be edited using a popup menu.
The menu allows users to deﬁne ﬁltering, ordering and
grouping information for the selected object. The design
canvas itself can be zoomed and panned to view the entire
query at different levels of resolution.
The possibility of browsing the knowledge model -
embedded in the knowledge base through the DataSMart
semantic annotation - insulates inexperienced users from
the complexity of the query language and guides them in
the process of query formulation. When the knowledge
model is constructed correctly, the user can formulate se-
mantically correct queries in a very intuitive way: dragging-
and-dropping graphical elements allows user to browse
the knowledge base and to select speciﬁc concepts of the
knowledge model, while “stretching” edges permits to select
properties and relations of interest (those associated to the
stretched edges). Finally, query results can be visualized
through several view layouts. An illustrative example of such
features is given in Fig. 6.
Example II.1. We show how Owl-Mea
iN inG has been ex-
ploited to capture implicit knowledge from the Marche Re-
gion’s knowledge base. As a single scenario cannot cover all
the application possibilities, we focus on a speciﬁc Marche
Region’s request: knowing what Struttura (i.e., departments)
are StrutturaVulnerabile (i.e., vulnerable department). For
Marche’s Region a department is considered vulnerable
when at least ﬁve of its SistemaInformaticoAmministrato
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Figure 6: Example of query through OWLEye.
(i.e., information systems) manage personal and sensitive
data.
This fact can be expressed by the OWL rule shown
in Fig. 7, involving the concepts of Struttura, SistemaIn-
formaticoAmministrato, PolicySistemaInformatico and their
relations. Fig. 8 shows the query formulated by OWLEye
and the list of inferred vulnerable departments.
Figure 7: Rule for inferring vulnerable departments.
Figure 8: Query in OWLEye and list of inferred vulnerable depart-
ments.
III. STATE-OF-THE-ART IMPLEMENTATION AND FUTURE
WORK
There are a number of additional application areas for
Owl-Mea
iN inG that we are exploring as part of our current
and future work. In particular, we are studying the possi-
bility to exploit Owl-Mea
iN inG for rule creation, information
integration and knowledge acquisition.
It is well-known that SPARQL CONSTRUCT queries
can be used for information integration and interoperability,
since this kind of queries effectively modify and extend (per-
haps multiple) knowledge bases according to the presence of
information detected from one or more information sources.
Since OWLEye supports the visualization of (among else)
SPARQL CONSTRUCT queries, we argue that OWLEye can
be used in Owl-Mea
iN inG also for editing rules and for rep-
resenting the semantic mappings (or ontology alignments)
between ostensibly disparate ontologies.
Another interesting point concerns the possibility to ex-
ploit Owl-Mea
iN inG for knowledge acquisition. Cluster mining
is usually applied to discover groups in large amounts of data
using large ﬂat ﬁles as input source and, as a consequence,
mining techniques are simply seen as tools trying to discover
patterns.
As in the case of query-based mining, putting semantics
into cluster mining allows to make explicit the conceptual
knowledge structures of data, to take advantage of knowl-
edge acquired in the previous knowledge discovery process
stages, to provide users with further semantics that improves
the understanding of the system, as well as to abstract from
speciﬁc issues (platform, algorithms, parameters, etc).
For this reason, we plan to integrate in Owl-Mea
iN inG a
Resourceome-driven clustering service equipped with a
smart drag-and-drop based editor as OWLEye. Such a service
shall embed a clustering algorithm with a level of accuracy
similar to corpus-based ones but retaining the low compu-
tational complexity of path-based ones. At this aim, we are
studying a weighted and ontology-based variant of the k-
means algorithm [12], where weights are assigned on both
data properties and relations and represent the importance
level (see Fig. 9). The variant relies on a similarity measure
deﬁned as below:
simg =
 m
∑
k
wk(vk,i −vk, j)g
 1
g
where ri = {vi,1,vi,2,...,vi,k} denotes the value list of
the i−th record in the dataset D = {r1,r2,...,rn}, S =
{a1,1,..,a1,n1,a2,1,..,a2,n2,..,ak,1,..,ak,nk} = {a1,a2,..,aN}
the attribute set (with ∑k
i=1 ai,ni = N), ai,k the k−th attribute
of the i−th table, wi ∈ (0..1] the weight of ai.
Notice that simg can express the absolute distance (g = 1),
the euclidean distance (g = 2) and the Chebyshev distance
(g → ∞).
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

E1
E2
E3
1
n
1
1
a1,1
a1,2
a1,3
a1,4
a2,1
a2,2
Media
Sum
Actribute
Entity
1
1
Relation
Isovalue (same weight)
a3,1
a3,2
a3,3
Figure 9: Clustering visualization system.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A special thank to Sergio Villarreal and Constatino
Giuliodori (Marche Region), Sauro Silvestrini (General
Impianti Srl) and Pietro Li`o (University of Cambridge), that
gave an important contribution to the Owl-Mea
iN inG design.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Aronis, F. Provost, and B. Buchanan, “Exploiting back-
ground knowledge in automated discovery,” in In the Proc. of
the Second International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, 1996, pp. 355–358.
[2] S. Sharma, Osei-Bryson, and Kweku-Muata, “Framework for
formal implementation of the business understanding phase
of data mining projects,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 36, no. 2,
pp. 4114–4124, Mar. 2009.
[3] M. Domingues and S. Rezende, “Using taxonomies to facil-
itate the analysis of the association rules,” in In the Proc. of
the Second international workshop on knowledge discovery
and ontologies, 2005.
[4] U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, and P. Smyth, “The kdd
process for extracting useful knowledge from volumes of
data,” Commun. ACM, vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 27–34, Nov. 1996.
[5] T. Priebe and G. Pernul, “Ontology-based integration of olap
and information retrieval,” in In the Proc. of the 14th intern.
workshop on database and expert systems applications, 2003,
pp. 610–614.
[6] W. Lin, M. Tseng, and C. Wu, “Ontology-incorporated mining
of association rules in data warehouse,” Journal of Internet
Technology, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 477–485, 2007.
[7] G. S. Nelson, “Business Intelligence 2.0: Are we there yet?”
in In the Proc. of SAS Global Forum 2010, Paper 040-2010,
2010.
[8] D. Cacciagrano, F. Corradini, E. Merelli, L. Vito, and
G. Romiti, “Resourceome: a multilevel model and a Semantic
Web tool for managing domain and operational knowledge,”
in The Third International Conference on Advances in Se-
mantic Processing (SEMAPRO 2009), P. Dini, J. Hendler, and
J. Noll, Eds.
IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp. 38 – 43.
[9] N. Guarino, Formal Ontology in Information Systems: Pro-
ceedings of the 1st International Conference June 6-8, 1998,
Trento, Italy. Amsterdam, The Netherlands, The Netherlands:
IOS Press, 1998.
[10] J. Zhang, S. Haider, J. Baran, A. Cros, J. Guberman, J. Hsu,
Y. Liang, L. Yao, and A. Kasprzyk, “BioMart: a data feder-
ation framework for large collaborative projects.” Database:
the journal of biological databases and curation, vol. 2011,
no. 0, 2011.
[11] M. Shaw, L. T. Detwiler, N. Noy, J. Brinkley, and D. Suciu,
“vsparql: A view deﬁnition language for the semantic web,”
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 102 –
117, 2011.
[12] J. B. MacQueen, “Some methods for classiﬁcation and anal-
ysis of multivariate observations,” in Proc. of the ﬁfth Berke-
ley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability,
L. M. L. Cam and J. Neyman, Eds., vol. 1.
University of
California Press, 1967, pp. 281–297.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

