Towards Exchanging Wearable-PGHD with EHRs: Developing a Standardized 
Information Model for Wearable-Based Patient Generated Health Data 
Abdullahi Abubakar Kawu  
School of Computer Science,  
Technological University, Dublin 
Dublin, Ireland 
Email: d21125967@mytudublin.ie 
 
Dympna O’Sullivan  
School of Computer Science,  
Technological University, Dublin 
Dublin, Ireland 
Email: 
dympna.osullivan@tudublin.ie 
 
Lucy Hederman 
School of Computer Science and 
Statistics, 
Trinity College Dublin 
Dublin, Ireland 
Email: hederman@tcd.ie
Abstract— Wearables have become commonplace for tracking 
and making sense of patient lifestyle, wellbeing and health 
data. Most of this tracking is done by individuals outside of 
clinical settings, however some data from wearables may be 
useful in a clinical context. As such, wearables may be 
considered a prominent source of Patient Generated Health 
Data (PGHD). Studies have attempted to maximize the use of 
the data from wearables including integrating with Electronic 
Health Records (EHRs). However, usually a limited number of 
wearables are considered for integration and, in many cases, 
only one brand is investigated. In addition, we find limited 
studies on integration of metadata including data quality and 
provenance, despite such data being very relevant for clinical 
decision making. This paper describes a proposed design and 
development of a generic information model for wearable 
based PGHD integration with EHRs. We propose a vendor-
neutral model that can work with a wider range of wearables 
and discuss our proposed method to employ an ontology-based 
approach and provide insights to future work.  
Keywords-wearables; 
electronic 
health 
records; 
interoperability; information model; FHIR; fast healthcare 
interoperability resources. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Patient Generated Health Data (PGHD) refers to health 
data that a patient (or their authorized representative) 
records outside the clinic setting, is relevant to their 
wellbeing and can be used by them or clinicians for their 
health management. PGHD is collected using many 
mediums including Patient Health Records (PHRs), mobile 
health application (mHealth), and wearables. Wearables are 
a prominent source of PGHD identified in literature. 
Wearables can collect various granular types of data using 
inbuilt sensors. These devices combine sensing capabilities 
with algorithms to produce data in both raw and aggregated 
formats  which can be effective for healthcare monitoring 
(by both the patient and clinicians) [1]. Data from sensors is 
used to measure various data – for example, heart rate, daily 
number of steps taken, distance covered, number of calories 
burned, number of floors climbed. From these sensors, data 
such as detailed heart rate history with heart rate zones, 
active minutes and sleep duration and quality can also be 
calculated and can be viewed through the associated web-
based application or mobile app, and for a limited period, on 
the device too. For most wearables, the internal memory of 
the device is only able to store minute-by-minute data of the 
last seven days, and 30 days of daily summaries [2]. Other 
data can also be collected from the trackers too, such as last 
sync date, battery level, etc. [3]. Wearables provide an 
opportunity for tracking patients’ health condition in their 
regular living settings, providing insightful data about a 
patient, more complete than what can be collected during 
infrequent clinical visits. Globally, the number of wearable 
devices has increased from 325 million in 2016 to 722 
million in 2019, more than doubling in only three years [4]. 
By 2022, there will likely be more than one billion of such 
devices worldwide. Vendrico [5] have curated an 
information database of 431 wearable devices produced by 
266 companies; there are potentially other bespoke ones that 
are unaccounted for in this estimate. The use of wearables 
for patient care has benefits such as: connected information, 
patient-oriented healthcare, and gamification [6]. For the 
purposes of this study, our definition of wearable did not 
include belt-based wearables as this has been found to be 
unappealing to users [7].  
 
Due to benefits and prospects of PGHD for personalized 
care and population health, there is significant interest and 
investment in integrating PGHD with electronic health 
records. Jung [8] integrated PHRs with EHR using lifelogs, 
but suggested that wearables could help in reporting more 
objective data, with less burden to the patient. Similarly, 
Plastiras and O’Sullivan [9] developed an information-
model for integrating PGHD and Observation of Daily 
Living (ODL) with EHR. However, they considered only 
one wearable in their study – a Fitbit tracker. We argue that 
this may not be generalizable to other wearables, as there 
could be more data and meta data that is unaccounted for in 
this approach. Also, there is less consideration for meta data 
on data quality such as device accuracy, which is of essence 
in the decision-making process of a clinician. In their study 
of four commercial widely used wearables, Kaewkannate 
and Kim [10], established that Fitbit Flex and Misfit have 
difficulty in detecting when a user climbs or descends stairs. 
Despite Fitbit leading in the consumer market of wrist-worn 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-991-1
SEMAPRO 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

wearables [11], the Fitbit Flex model should not be relied 
upon for use in patient climbing or descending tasks. 
Reporting similar concern for other wearable-based data, 
Wood, Bennett, and Basch [12] state that it is not clear 
whether sleep data or any other data from one wearable can 
be interchangeable with another and whether this will result 
to the same meaning of the data. The aforementioned points 
make metadata information very important for clinical 
decision making, hence our interest in providing valuable 
metadata alongside sensor data to clinicians. 
This short position paper proposes a generic framework 
to enable a wide range of wearable-PGHD to be 
interoperable with EHRs, to allow seamless exchange of 
clinically relevant data from patients to providers. The 
framework will enable a class of wearables to be integrated 
with EHR systems using an ontology-driven Information 
Model (IM) based on Fast Health Interoperability Resources 
(FHIR).  In this paper, we provide a description of our 
proposed IM for transferring information in a standardized 
way between wearables and EHR systems. In the rest of this 
paper, we describe our proposed method to develop the 
interfacing layer between EHR and wearables as well as 
present insight into our proposed future work. In Section II, 
we describe the proposed methodology and architecture, 
outlining stages and steps to be carried out to design the 
proposed model, including the underlining technologies to 
be employed. Section III presents future work on the 
proposed design, and Section IV gives a summary and a 
conclusion on the position paper. 
II. 
PROPOSED METHODOLOGY AND 
ARCHITECTURE 
Plastiras, and O’Sullivan [9] and Plastiras, O’Sullivan, 
and Weller [13] describe steps for designing and developing 
an ontology-driven information model for EHR integration. 
This includes, but may not be limited to, analysis of 
common functionality and data to determine information to 
be exchanged, review of standards, and developing a 
middleware for document exchange. Similar to [9], our 
research proposes the use of an ontology-driven IM to 
address issues of semantic and syntactic interoperability 
between wearable-based PGHD and EHR systems. Figure 1 
below depicts our proposed architecture for wearable-based 
PGHD-EHR integration based on FHIR standard. The 
following section describes the proposed architecture and 
future steps and thoughts around our proposal for 
developing ontology-driven IM, to be derived directly from 
common wearable-based PGHD and functions. 
As previously mentioned, most wearables have a separate 
persistent long-term data staging, visualization and storage 
platform, due to their limited memory and battery size. So, 
in addition to owning a wearable device, most users have an 
accompanying mobile application that they use alongside 
the wearable, to enable them to visualize and store data. In 
addition, they can sync and have access to their data online. 
With this structure, wearable data can be accessed, 
manipulated and shared only through the web or mobile 
application. In our architecture, we have embodied this, but 
in addition, we depict data sharing capabilities that can be 
explored for integration (Figure 1, Stage 1 - 3). Wearable-
based PGHD can be shared with an EHR system using 
standard clinical document exchange format such as Clinical 
Care Document (CCD), Clinical Care Record (CCR), and 
XML [14]. However, because FHIR is the most recent 
standard from Health Level 7 (HL7)[15]  that overcomes the 
shortcomings of the previously mentioned document 
exchange standards, we intend to employ FHIR as the 
messaging standard in our proposed design. FHIR has been 
previously employed to exchange some wearable based data 
with an EHR application [14], [16]. However, most of the 
studies have relied on the use of data from one specific 
brand or device, which may not make it generalizable.  
 
In our design, we propose that whenever wearable-based 
PGHD is to be shared with clinicians (providers), it will go 
via a middleware interface that will transform the data into 
FHIR-ready data, a procedure we refer to as FHIRification 
(Figure 1, Stage 4). At this layer, data will also be mapped 
to standard and custom ontologies present at that interface, 
which can fit to the terminology component of FHIR. The 
FHIRification involves transforming data to fit into existing 
FHIR Resources and Extensions. The transformation engine 
should also generate a FHIR relevant Conformance and 
Capability Statement that documents the required server 
implementation of the FHIR resources. Thereafter, data is 
made available to the EHR for use (Figure 1, Stage 5). 
Similar to the approach in many studies [14], we propose 
that demographic data related to patients are transformed 
into the Patient resource, data related to actual sensor data is 
fitted into the Encounter resource, and data related to the 
device are transformed into the Device resource of FHIR. 
Derived data from patient’s medical history can also be 
considered under Condition resource.  In addition, we intend 
to explore the use of Provenance resource in integration 
[17], to help document data provenance. We also posit that a 
PGHD profile will be desirable to provide a container for all 
PGHD resources, for ease of reference, use and 
management. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-991-1
SEMAPRO 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
Figure 1. Proposed Wearable-based PGHD-EHR integration 
With emerging diseases and in preparation for another 
pandemic, more wearables with new capabilities are 
churned out, leading to newer forms of datasets and features 
and data that are bespoke. Data such as temperature sensing 
(relating to women’s health), ECG (for atrial fibrillation 
monitoring) and skin temperature etc, are evolving and need 
to be considered. Hence, our approach is to make this 
consideration of this diversity in data from these wearables 
to enable wider adoption and use of the framework. 
 
III. 
FUTURE WORK 
Information Model development is carried out in stages 
which include identification, and evaluation of available 
data and functionality, determining candidate data to be 
exchanged, leveraging existing EHR standards required for 
candidate data syntactic integration, and the design of an 
ontology for semantic integration [9]. Hence, more work is 
expected to fully develop the system and demonstrate the 
effectiveness. However, here we outline steps to be 
undertaken towards our proposed ontology-driven IM, and 
how we will leverage other state of art like the use of FHIR 
standards. 
A. Analysis of common wearable functionality and 
features 
We propose to review the features and functionality of 
wearables based on the work of Kaekwannate and Kim [10] 
who identify common data and functions of four popular 
wearable devices. In their studies, they outline features of 
JawboneUp24, Fitbit Flex, Withings Pulse, Misfit Shine 
wearables [10]. However, in addition to this, more 
wearables will be identified from [5] to be included for 
comparison and evaluation. Wearables like Apple Watch 
and Xaiomi are included in the list of wearables to be 
compared for the purpose of common data and functions 
identification. While generalizable categories of data such 
as Activity Tracking Data (Distance, Calories, Floors 
climbed, Intensity), Sleep Data (Duration, Stage, Score), 
Stress Data and other known health data from wearables 
will be prioritized, we will also consider bespoke data. A 
scoring system will be employed to assign a utility score to 
each wearable based on a select criterion, to help us identify 
generalizable data, but also bespoke data and data with the 
most value.  
B. EHR Data Exchange standards and interoperability 
Recent work by Microsoft [18] focused on achieving 
interoperability by developing a platform to share historical 
patient data from Fitbit into FHIR server. We will learn 
from this work but extend it to embrace other data and 
functions that may come from other wearables, and data that 
could enhance Fitbit’s overall value within a PGHD-EHR 
ecosystem, such as accuracy and reliability metadata. In our 
proposed architecture, we intend to pay attention to data 
quality using metadata and provenance, to improve 
clinicians’ confidence in PGHD. Data accuracy, reliability 
validity, and completeness are foremost data quality issues 
that have hindered PGHD integration [19], [20]. In our 
proposed system, data exchanged between wearables and 
EHRs must conform to relevant structure and syntactic 
rules. The syntactic rules will closely align with FHIR 
standards, and in that case, information can be transformed 
to and transferred as a JSON document. However, it will 
also be transformable to legacy standards such as XML. 
C. Design of Wearable-based PGHD Ontology  
We intend to employ open source software Protégé for 
developing a wearable-based PGHD ontology, and OWL to 
instantiate the ontology at the middle interface [13]. Using an 
ontology-based approach, semantic interoperability issues 
can be avoided. The usage of different terms by wearables 
and EHRs to define the same concept can prevent data 
sharing with EHRs. Data such “Oxygen Saturation 
Measurement” in one wearable can be represented as 
“SpO2” in another wearable, hence a standardize ontology 
that will fit appropriately to the Terminology component of 
FHIR becomes desirable. The ontology will define 
relationship, constraints, and concepts about the data from 
the wearables. Similarly, standard coding schemas will be 
employed too. For instance, the SNOMED CT code for 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-991-1
SEMAPRO 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

SpO2 is “431314004”. By assigning this code to Oxygen 
Saturation Measurement, the meaning of these two data 
could be interpreted as same.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Wearables are digital health products or devices that are 
being used to collect, store and process health data, also 
known as PGHD, towards providing holistic digital health 
information that can be used for patient monitoring or to 
encourage or enact behavior change. Data collected by 
wearables are used across a broad set of health domains and 
towards population health, becoming a key contributor to 
digital health initiatives. They are often combined with 
mobile and web applications to process and manage data. In 
this paper, we present preliminary work in designing an 
ontology-based IM for wearable-based PGHD for integration 
with EHR. The proposed IM is proposed to be derived from 
common features and functionality of a wide range of 
consumer-grade wearables and will employ the FHIR 
standard for interoperability with EHR. We outline steps 
required to develop this fully in the future and discussed how 
this can be implemented.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was conducted with the financial support of 
the Science Foundation Ireland Centre for Research Training 
in Digitally Enhanced Reality (d-real) under Grant No. 
18/CRT/6224 and at the ADAPT SFI Research Centre for 
AI-Driven Digital Content Technology under Grant No. 
13/RC/2106_P2 at Technological University Dublin. For the 
purpose of Open Access, the author has applied a CC BY 
public copyright license to any Author Accepted Manuscript 
version arising from this submission. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Godfrey, V. Hetherington, H. Shum, P. Bonato, N. 
Lovell, and S. Stuart, “From A to Z: Wearable technology 
explained,” Maturitas, vol. 113, pp. 40–47, 2018. 
[2] 
M. Schellevis, B. Jacobs, C. Meijer, and J. de Ruiter, 
“Getting access to your own Fitbit data,” Radboud 
University, 2016. 
[3] 
G. Crenshaw, “FitBit API,” The ABCs of Fitbit APIs, Jul. 
11, 2022. https://pages.fitbit.com/2021_11-WebinarVideo-
TheABCsofFitbitAPIs_21-
VideoReplay.html?aliId=eyJpIjoiUlhncUlZUHU0SWVpM
WR6MiIsInQiOiJ2TVd0VEhGS05cL0JBRzc4Zk80d0oyQ
T09In0%253D (accessed Jul. 11, 2022). 
[4] 
F. Larichhia, “Global Connected Devices Worldwide 
2022,” Global Connected Devices Worldwide 2022, 02 
2022. 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/487291/global-
connected-wearable-devices/ (accessed Jun. 07, 2022). 
[5] 
Vendrico, “The Wearables Database,” Wearable Device 
Database, 
Jul. 
08, 
2022. 
https://vandrico.com/wearables.html (accessed Jul. 08, 
2022). 
[6] 
S. R. Islam, D. Kwak, M. H. Kabir, M. Hossain, and K.-S. 
Kwak, “The internet of things for health care: a 
comprehensive survey,” IEEE access, vol. 3, pp. 678–708, 
015. 
[7] 
I. Bendich, “Changes in prospectively collected longitudinal 
patient-generated health data are associated with short-term 
patient-reported outcomes after total joint arthroplasty: a 
pilot study,” Arthroplasty Today, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 61–63, 
2019, doi: 10.1016/j.artd.2019.01.005. 
[8] 
S. Y. Jung, “Development of comprehensive personal 
health records integrating patient-generated health data 
directly from samsung s-health and apple health apps: 
Retrospective cross-sectional observational study,” JMIR 
mHealth and uHealth, vol. 7, no. 5, 2019, doi: 
10.2196/12691. 
[9] 
P. Plastiras and D. O’Sullivan, “Exchanging personal health 
data with electronic health records: A standardized 
information model for patient generated health data and 
observations of daily living,” International journal of 
medical informatics, vol. 120, pp. 116–125, 2018. 
[10] 
K. Kaewkannate and S. Kim, “A comparison of wearable 
fitness devices,” BMC public health, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–
16, 2016. 
[11] 
A. Ng, R. Kornfield, S. M. Schueller, A. K. Zalta, M. 
Brennan, and M. Reddy, “Provider perspectives on 
integrating sensor-captured patient-generated data in mental 
health care,” Proceedings of the ACM on human-computer 
interaction, vol. 3, no. CSCW, pp. 1–25, 2019. 
[12] 
W. A. Wood, A. V. Bennett, and E. Basch, “Emerging uses 
of patient generated health data in clinical research,” 
Molecular oncology, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 1018–1024, 2015. 
[13] 
P. Plastiras, D. O’Sullivan, and P. Weller, “An ontology-
driven information model for interoperability of personal 
and electronic health records,” 2014. 
[14] 
R. K. Saripalle, “Fast Health Interoperability Resources 
(FHIR): 
current 
status 
in 
the 
healthcare 
system,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
E-Health 
and 
Medical 
Communications (IJEHMC), vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 76–93, 
2019. 
[15] 
D. Bender and K. Sartipi, “HL7 FHIR: An Agile and 
RESTful approach to healthcare information exchange,” 
presented at the Proceedings of the 26th IEEE international 
symposium on computer-based medical systems, 2013, pp. 
326–331. 
[16] 
J. Ruminski, A. Bujnowski, T. Kocejko, A. Andrushevich, 
M. Biallas, and R. Kistler, “The data exchange between 
smart glasses and healthcare information systems using the 
HL7 FHIR standard,” presented at the 2016 9th 
International Conference on Human System Interactions 
(HSI), 2016, pp. 525–531. 
[17] 
J. Moehrke, A. Rosenthal, and A. Chapman, “Extending the 
FHIR standard to handle provenance,” The MITRE 
Corporation, 2016. 
[18] 
Microsoft, “FitBit on FHIR.” Accessed: Jul. 06, 2022. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://github.com/microsoft/FitbitOnFHIR 
[19] 
J. Codella, C. Partovian, H.-Y. Chang, and C.-H. Chen, 
“Data quality challenges for person-generated health and 
wellness data,” IBM Journal of Research and Development, 
vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 3–1, 2018. 
[20] 
R. Abdolkhani, “Patient-generated health data management 
and quality challenges in remote patient monitoring,” 
JAMIA Open, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 471–478, 2019, doi: 
10.1093/jamiaopen/ooz036. 
 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-991-1
SEMAPRO 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

