 
 
From a Consensual Conceptual Level to a Formal Ontological Level    
A case study in healthcare organizations 
Fabrício Martins Mendonça  
Maurício Barcellos Almeida 
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais 
Belo Horizonte, Brazil 
E-mail: fabriciommendonca@gmail.com 
E-mail: mba@eci.ufmg.br  
 
 
António Lucas Soares 
Cristóvão Polido Sousa 
INESC TEC  
Universidade do Porto 
Porto, Portugal 
E-mail: als@fe.up.pt 
E-mail: cristovao.dinis@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract — Knowledge representation depend on experts, even 
though such professionals do not have skills to provide the 
formalized knowledge needed to build formal ontologies. In 
this paper, we present a case study in which we investigate 
aspects and challenges in formalizing medical knowledge in a 
healthcare organization. Our experiment used two different 
instruments to conceptualize and formalize knowledge: i) for 
conceptualizing knowledge consensual, we used a collaborative 
framework 
called 
ConceptMe; 
ii) 
for 
analysing 
and 
formalizing of the knowledge collaboratively conceptualized, 
we used principles of the Basic Formal Ontology. Even though 
the process of formalizing knowledge is not a novelty, we try to 
explore how this task has been done in the scenario of 
Semantic Web and ontological engineering. We concluded that 
there is a strong and a sound complementarity between the two 
aforementioned frameworks, since the first provides a well-
done approach for collaborative conceptual modelling and the 
second provides a way of establishing rules for carrying semi-
formal knowledge to a formal level in ontologies. As main 
contributions, we emphasize the description of how to use the 
collaborative environment and the organization of a set of 
rules, as well as their application in real situations. 
Keywords - collaborative conceptualization; formal ontology.  
I.  INTRODUCTION  
People create models using their cognitive skills in a 
process of meaning construction, in general, called 
conceptualization [1]. Conceptualization is generally 
conducted by knowledge engineers along with experts 
(doctors, engineers, lawyers, to name a few). In the recent 
field of Semantic Web and ontological engineering, 
conceptualization is considered a cornerstone [2]. However, 
different specialists have different views of the world, which 
may result in different concurrent conceptualizations, all of 
them correct [3]. Thus, the conceptualizing process should 
be collaborative, and carried out in an environment that 
allows for consensual definitions [2], with the aim of 
reaching a reasonable representation of the needs of users.     
A challenge for the general methodologies for building 
ontologies – such as Methontology [4] or NeON [5] – is to 
find the best way to perform the transition of knowledge 
from a conceptual level (informal and semi-formal levels) to 
a level in which constraints are used to reduce ambiguity in 
the meaning of terms (formal ontological level). The 
conceptual level is, in general, comprised of unstructured 
knowledge, obtained from knowledge acquisition from 
experts. While this conceptual level is essential to building a 
shared view of world, one must add constraints if the goal is 
to build formal ontologies.  
In this paper, we present an ongoing research that 
explores how the transition from the conceptual level to the 
formal level occurs in a medical organization. We 
conducted a case study with the aim of verifying flaws and 
proposing improvements to the transition. Studies on 
knowledge formalization are not a novelty, for example, in 
artificial intelligence [6]. However, the new context of 
ontologies in Semantic Web and the increasing participation 
of experts in modelling activities (for example, in standards 
like OpenEHR [7]) suggest the need for new research. 
In our experiment, we adopted approaches that deal with 
both the conceptual and formal ontological levels. The first 
approach is Conceptualization Modelling Environment 
(ConceptMe), an environment that includes a set of 
principles, resources and tools that allows collaborative 
development of a shared, consensual, semi-informal 
conceptual representation [8]. For the second approach, we 
follow principles, methods, criteria and ontological 
restrictions proposed by Munn and Smith [9], which 
represents the foundations of Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) 
[10].  
In order to accomplish the first stage of our experiment, 
we applied the underlying methods of ConceptMe in the 
ontology for blood transfusion called HEMONTO [11], in 
order to check the existing relations between candidate 
terms to the ontology, and then to come up with a shared 
conceptual model. In the second stage, the conceptual 
relations defined by ConceptMe were evaluated through the 
application of a set of ontological restrictions. So, we were 
able to investigate the transition, problems, flaws and 
improvements in the formalization process. Ultimately, 
results obtained indicate that the underlying method of 
ConceptMe is very efficient to work with knowledge in 
conceptual level and very useful for dealing with experts. 
However, the sort of rules embedded in ConceptMe do not 
permit direct construction of formal ontologies. Indeed, 
some conceptual relations could not be transformed into 
ontological relations for several reasons. For example, many 
relations did not include distinctions between specific types, 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
 
mainly part-of and is-a relations, on which we focused on 
our investigation. On the other hand, the tests with the 
framework ConceptMe associated with the ontological level 
enabled us to reach new alternatives to be considered in the 
formalization processes for ontologies. Our findings 
indicate the need of complementarity between the 
approaches in order to deal with both experts and 
knowledge engineers.    
The remainder of this article is organized as follows: the 
second section presents a research background, which 
highlights both the theory that underlies ConceptMe, as well 
as the essentials and ontological criteria required at the 
formal level. The third section describes our research 
methodology in applying ontological criteria to formalize 
knowledge about human blood, in the context of the blood 
bank. The fourth section presents results obtained with the 
application of ontological criteria to the model developed 
through the ConceptMe, emphasizing the possibility of 
constraining the meaning of terms at the conceptual level. 
Finally, the fifth section presents some remarks, our 
conclusions and suggestions for future works.     
II. BACKGROUND 
The background of this research involves two main parts: 
(i) the approach used in the conceptual viewpoint, which 
includes the theory that based the ConceptMe and (ii) the 
characterization of the relations of the ontological viewpoint 
using principles of the top-level ontology BFO.     
A. Conceptual Level: the theory underlying the ConceptMe  
In this section, we present the approach used in this 
research of the conceptual viewpoint, that corresponds to the 
theory used in the ConceptMe.  
The ConceptMe was developed based on the method 
ColBlend [12], that supports to process of collaborative 
conceptualization in the inter-organizational context and it is 
based in a theory of the cognitive semantic called as 
Conceptual Blending Theory [13]. In this theory, the 
conceptual integration is more than the sum of its 
constituent parts, because it should involve also new 
structures or emergent structures, namely, new information 
deriving from the process of negotiation.   
The process of negotiation of the meaning in the 
ConceptMe follows the method ColBlend and involves the 
following semantic spaces [12]: i) the input spaces - private 
to each party involved in the conceptualization process 
where the knowledge models proposals are built; b) the 
blend space - which contains the proposal resulting from the 
analysis of the input spaces, which is presented for 
discussion. Moreover it proposes new concepts (originally 
not identified) from an overall analysis of the current 
content of the spaces and; c) the generic space - which 
contains the common domain knowledge model composed 
by all parts of the universally accepted proposals that were 
"published" to this shared space. 
The ConceptMe also introduces a multidimensional and 
structured view of the conceptualization process that 
encompasses four main phases: (i) elicitation of concepts, 
(ii) organization of concepts, (iii) sharing of concepts, and 
(iv) negotiation of concepts. It considers two main types of 
processes: (i) terminological processes, and (ii) processes of 
knowledge representation [14]. The conceptual relations are 
treated in the phase of concept organization and as part 
processes of knowledge representation, within a module 
called as Conceptual Relations Reference Model (CRRM), 
which supports domain specialists in the definition of basic 
conceptual relations between objects in that domain. 
The CRRM assists domain specialists in the phase of 
elicitation of conceptual relations, which is considered one 
of the most difficult problems in the conceptualization 
process [15]. Auger and Barrière [14] realized a review of 
the literature about conceptual relations in different 
scientific domains (Artificial Intelligence, Information 
Science, Linguistics, Formal ontology, Cognitive Semantic) 
and from this, it was identified a set of basic conceptual 
relations to be used in the CRRM.  
Obviously, in approaching different knowledge areas, 
the names, definitions and use of the relations mentioned 
vary widely from one application context to the other. In the 
case of the framework ConceptMe, the strategy used to 
approach this diversity of relations was to map them (and 
summarise them), for a set of most basic relations that could 
represent the most common types of relationship between 
the objects of the given domain. The following set of 
relations for the ConceptMe were defined [14]:  
(i) Constitution and containment dependence: part-whole 
conceptual relation;  
(ii) Generic dependence: generic-specific conceptual 
relation;  
(iii) Historical dependence: it was separated into spatial 
conceptual relation and temporal conceptual relation. 
(iv) Participation conceptual relation; 
(v) Causal conceptual relation or cause-effect conceptual 
relation. 
For each relation, the ConceptMe contains a specific 
template of the relation and also a set of competency 
questions that are show to the user of the framework (a 
specialist, for example) for your choice of the relation more 
appropriate within analysed context. The competency 
questions for parthood relation, for example, are [14]: Are A 
and B physically engaged? Is B a component/constituent or 
attached to A? Are A and B nested? 
As previously mentioned, the theory on which 
ConceptMe is based is the approach adopted in this research 
for conceptual viewpoints, however, it is not sufficient for 
the building of formal ontologies. To address the formal 
part, we adopted criteria and ontological restrictions of 
methods regarding development of ontologies. This topic is 
dealt with in the next section of this background. 
  
B. Ontological level: principles and restrictions for the 
characterization of ontological relations 
For dealing the knowledge of a given domain at formal 
level, it is necessary to better characterize such relations. 
We did it, mainly, following the approach presented in 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
 
[9][16][17]. Like this, the next paragraphs present a 
characterization of ontological relations.  
The first characterization discern the types of ontological 
relations from its related entities (relatas), evaluating if they 
are universals or particulars: universals or types are the 
kinds of things that exist in real world, that is, recurrent 
entities sharing some characteristics that could be 
instantiated or exemplified by more than one particular 
thing; particulars refers to a specific object in the real 
world. Particulars are also called instances or tokens or 
individuals [10]. Considering the types of relation with 
universals and instances, we have: (i) <universal, 
universal>:  for example, subsumption: “whole portion of 
blood is_a portion of body substance”; (ii) <instance, 
universal>: for example, instantiation: “John’s blood 
instance_of whole portion of blood”; (iii) <instance, 
instance>: for example, participation: “John’s blood 
participates_in John’s blood transfusion”). 
A second important aspect is to evaluate if the relation 
can be considered ontological from four essential criteria: (i) 
the relations must be genuine ontological relations, in other 
words, they must be obtained from entities in reality, 
independently of our experience or methods of learning 
about them; (ii) the relations must be domain-neutral 
relations or domain independent; (iii) the relations must be 
obtained universally: a statement of the form A relation B 
must obtain for all instances of A, and not just (for example) 
for some statistically representative selection; (iv) The 
relation must be definable in a simple, yet rigorous way. 
This means that intuitive definitions (for example, 
functionally_related_to or physically_related_to of the 
UMLS) should not be made and also some definition is 
required.  
A third characterization refers to the distinction between 
entities 
continuants 
and 
occurrents: 
continuants or 
endurants are entities that continue to exist through time 
maintaining their identity and do not have temporal parts; 
occurrents or perdurants are entities that occur in time and 
they unfold themselves through a period of time in such a 
way that they can be divided into temporal parts or phases 
[10]. For each relation, it is required to define the domain 
and range of the relation and to define if the domain and the 
range must contain a continuant or an occurrent. For 
example, the relation participates_in always must involve a 
continuant in the domain and an occurrent in the range. 
The last and fourth characterization corresponds to basic 
logical properties of each relation, analyzing the related 
entities (relata). The basic ontological properties are known 
as meta-properties in the literature of the area [18][19]: (i) 
reflexivity; (ii) transitivity; (iii) symmetry. The relation part-
of, for example, can be characterized as a relation 
irreflexive, anti-symmetric and transitive. 
These four characterizations presented are general and 
applicable to all ontological relations; however, for each 
specific relation, there are set of specific restrictions that 
must be considered. In this research, we focus our work 
around of two relations:  is_a and part_of, because they are 
the most used in the development of ontologies and their use 
occurs, oftentimes, without concern with their real meaning. 
Thus, in the next paragraphs, we explain the different types 
of relations is_a and part_of.  
For the relation is_a, used in the building of taxonomies 
of the ontologies, it is necessary to consider the following 
types of relations[4][9]: Instantiation: is_a used as synonym 
of instance_of; Specification or specialization: is_a used as 
synonym of subclass_of; Synonymy: is_a used as synonym 
of same_as. 
Regarding relation part_of, we used some types of this 
relation from a taxonomy presented in [16], which 
encompasses a set of types of the mereological and 
meronymic 
viewpoints, 
studied 
and 
addressed 
in 
[19][20][21].  
The taxonomy proposed by Keet and Artale [16] is fairly 
complete with respect to existing types of relations part-of, 
however, it is necessary to adapt such an approach to treat 
cases of the relation part-of that involve temporality and 
spatial localization simultaneously, in addition to relations 
between non-material and material entities, which are, 
extremely, important in biomedical domains. For dealing 
with these types of relations part-of, we follow the approach 
proposed by Schulz et al. [17], that include, for example, 
relations as: (i) Temporary-Part-Of (A, B, t): Amputated toe 
Temporary-Part-Of Body Human; (ii) Permanent-Part-Of 
(A, B, t): My brain Permanent-Part-Of my head; among 
others. 
III. METHODOLOGY 
This section describes the methodological steps adopted 
to make it possible the conceptual-formal transition of the 
knowledge about the domain addressed. This domain 
corresponds to the process of blood transfusion, which 
encompasses the components extracted from human blood 
for certain therapeutic recommendations and also the 
processes used to obtain blood components for the 
transfusion.    
To better describe the methodological steps performed, 
we divide them in four distinct phases: the phases 1 and 2 
address the knowledge at the conceptual level, using the 
framework ConceptMe; the phase 3 corresponds to the 
conceptual-formal ontological transition and where we 
apply the criteria and ontological restrictions of the 
approach adopted; and the phase 4 presents the results of 
this transition in the domain addressed.  
The ontology about blood transfusion (HEMONTO [11]) 
has been developed within the scope of the Blood Project, 
using the software Protégé 4.2 [22]. For the purposes of this 
paper, parts of the HEMONTO were reconstructed in the   
framework ConceptMe, using its interface of conceptual 
graphs. The objective here is to test the theory underlying 
the ConceptMe, using the knowledge of the blood 
transfusion domain. 
Using this approach, the phase 1 was developed 
encompassing 
the 
conceptualization 
of 
the 
domain 
addressed from two distinct semantic spaces, each one with 
a specific perception of the domain: (i) “specialist space”: 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
 
doctors of the Hemominas Foundation developed a 
conceptual model of the domain based on their specialist 
technical knowledge; (ii) “ontologist space”: the own authors 
of this paper, with expertise in ontological engineering and 
having studied the blood domain in the recent years [11], 
developed a conceptual model of the domain based on the 
extraction of information from corpus, using the following 
documents: (a) the guidebook about blood components of 
the Brazilian Health Minister [23]: (b) the international 
standard “ISBT 128: Standard Terminology for Blood, 
Cellular Therapy, and Tissue Product Descriptions” [24]; 
(c) the “Technical Manual about Blood and Cellular 
Therapy” from the international organization AABB [25]; 
and (d) the textbook about clinical hematology: “Wintrobe’s 
Clinical Hematology 12th edition [26]. 
Phase 2 involves negotiation of the semantic meaning of 
the concepts defined in the prior phase. This process is 
realized semi-automatically by ConceptMe based on the 
theory Conceptual Blending Theory [12], as explained 
above; as a result of the negotiation it produces a common 
concept model accepted by the groups involved in the 
conceptualization process, called in the theory of model of 
the generic space.  
Phase 3 corresponds to formalization process, where we 
applied the criteria and ontological restrictions recovered of 
the literature of the area and used at the conceptual-formal 
transition (see Table 1). It represents the main contribution 
of this paper. The strategy adopted here involved the 
selection of criteria and ontological restrictions researched 
that it could be applied in the evaluation of the conceptual 
relations of the type is_a and part_of of the model 
developed, in order to allow its transition to the formal 
level. We created a code and a name for each criterion and 
its description was made based on the literature review, as 
explained below: 
 
• 
The letter “O” is used to denote a basic ontological 
criterion, for example, O1 to ontological nature or 
O2 to universality. 
• 
The letter “I” indicates a common criterion for the 
relations is_a, such as its ontological properties, for 
example, I3 to asymmetry.   
• 
The letter “P” indicates a common criterion for the 
relations part_of, for example, P2 to transitivity.  
• 
For the specific types (subtypes) of the relations 
is_a and part_of were used abbreviations of the 
names of these subtypes, such as I.IN for 
instance_of and P.ST for structural_part_of.  
• 
The criteria defined must be used for relations 
under the forms A relation B and B relation C for 
universals, and a relation b and b relation c for 
particulars.  
 
TABLE  I. CRITERIA AND ONTOLOGICAL RESTRICTIONS 
Code 
Criterion  
Description 
O1 
Ontological nature  
The relation must be identified in the reality, 
independent of human constructions. 
O2 
Universality  
The relation must be obtained universally. 
O3 
Non-intuitiveness 
The name of the relation must not be 
defined in an intuitive way. 
I1 
Is-a Reflexivity 
The entity A is a type of itself. (A is_a A) 
I2 
Is-a Transitivity 
The relation is transitive between three 
entities of the domain, such as: 
If A is_a B and B is_a C then A is_a C 
I3 
Is-a Asymmetry  
If entity A is a subtype or instance of other 
entity B, the inverse is not true:  
If A is_a B then not (B is_a A). That 
propriety must only be applied for the 
relations instance_of and subclass_of and 
not for the relation same_as. 
I.IN 
Type Instance-of  
Relation is_a when a particular instantiates 
a universal A. if a is a continuant A must 
also be, if a is a occurrent A also must be. 
I.SC 
Type Subclass-of  
Relation is_a between two universals (an 
entity is kind of the other entity. If A is a 
continuant B must also be, if A is an 
occurrent B must also be. 
I.SY 
Type Same-as  
Relation is_a between two entities that are 
identical, between particulars, universals, 
continuants, 
occurrents; 
if 
a, 
A 
are 
continuants b, B must also be; and if a, A 
are occurrents b, B must also be. 
P1 
Part-of Reflexivity  
The entity A is part of itself. (A part_of A) 
P2 
Part-of Transitivity 
Relation transitive: If A part_of B and B 
part_of C then A part_of C 
P3 
Part-of Asymmetry  
If entity A is a part of B, the inverse is not 
true: If A part_of B then not (B part_of A).  
P.ST 
Type  
structural-part-of 
Relation part-of between two continuants in 
which the part composes the structure of the 
whole, functionally or structurally.  
P.CO 
Type contained-in 
Relation part-of between two continuants in 
which the part occupies a region 2D inserted 
within the region 3D occupied by the whole. 
P.LO 
Type located-in 
Relation part-of between two continuants in 
which the part occupies a portion of the 
space occupied by the whole. 
P.IN 
Type involved-in 
Relation part-of between two occurrents in 
which a part represents a step of the whole.   
P.ME 
Type member-of 
Relation part-of between continuants such 
that a part is a physical object that composes 
a whole  (a non-physical social object). 
P.CN 
Type constitutes 
Relation part-of between continuants such 
that the part is an amount of matter that 
constitutes the whole (a physical object). 
P.SQ 
Type  
sub-quantity-of 
Relation part-of between continuants that 
are portions of matter and the part is a lower 
portion of the whole portion.  
P.TP 
Type  
temporary-part-of 
Relation part-of between continuants or 
occurrents, in which the part, only at some 
instant, is located as part of the whole.    
P.FP 
Type 
immaterial-
Relation part-of between two continuants so 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
 
part-of 
that the part is a immaterial object and it is 
connected to the whole (a material entity). 
 
Lastly, we have in the phase 4 the results obtained with 
an application of the criteria and ontological restrictions in 
treated domain, in our case, the blood transfusion. In this 
phase, we extracted conceptual statements from the model 
developed in the ConceptMe that contain the relations is_a 
and part_of. ConceptMe represents such statements in the 
form of a conceptual graph, then, we converted these 
statements in conceptual graph to text format so that they 
could be evaluated according to ontological criteria. The 
statements evaluated positively could be transformed in 
ontological relations and composed the final ontological 
model.  
IV. ANALYSIS OF THE RELATIONS AND DISCUSSION 
In order to test and show the practical applicability of 
the proposal presented, we lead a case study in a healthcare 
organization that works with the blood transfusion domain 
named of the Hemominas Foundation. The results of the 
application 
of 
this 
proposal 
of 
conceptual-formal 
ontological transition in the domain addressed are presented 
in this section. 
For the presentation of these results, we used some 
conceptual statements extracted of the model developed in 
the ConceptMe and evaluated them under the criteria and 
ontological restrictions presented in the methodology (Table 
1).   
Each conceptual statement is evaluated from criteria 
used and the result of this evaluation is a short “YES” or 
“NO” answer to inform if the statement meets or no the 
criterion.  The entire sample of all assessment criteria under 
the conceptual statement results in the transition of the 
statement from the conceptual level to ontological (formal) 
level, considering the possibility that in some cases this 
transition is not possible and the statement being classified 
as “non-ontological”.  
Hereafter, we present some examples of analysis of 
conceptual statements extracted from the model developed 
in the ConceptMe. The results of this analysis are presented 
in the Table 2. 
 
1) portion of blood has_quality blue colour 
2) haemoglobin has_format circular 
3) fresh frozen plasma is_a blood component 
4) albumin is_a protein 
5) cryoprecipitate is_a blood component 
6) leukocyte is_a white blood cell 
7) portion of venous blood is_a blood in vein 
8) circulatory system part_of human body 
9) blood in coronary artery part_of heart 
10) blood cells part_of portion of plasma 
11) portion of blood in capillary part_of portion of blood of 
human body 
12) centrifugation part_of process for obtaining erythrocytes 
concentrate 
13) erythrocytes part_of whole portion of blood 
14) nutrients part_of portion of blood 
15) water part_of portion of blood 
16) platelet part_of platelets concentrate 
17) blood component for transfusion part_of portion of 
body substance 
18) portion of blood collected by venipuncture part-of 
portion of body substance 
19) lumen of coronary artery part_of heart 
20) cavity of ventricle part_of heart 
 
TABLE II. RESULTS OF THE ANALYSIS OF THE RELATIONS IN 
THE BLOOD DOMAIN 
Relation 
O1 
O2 
O3 
I123 
P123 
Analysis 
1) 
N 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Non-ontological 
2) 
Y 
N 
N 
- 
- 
Non-ontological 
3) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
YYY 
- 
Instance_of 
4) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
YYY 
- 
Instance_of 
5) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
YYY 
- 
SubClass_of 
6) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
YYY 
- 
Same_as 
7) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
YYY 
- 
Same_as 
8) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
- 
YYY 
Structural_part_of 
9) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
- 
YYY 
Contained-in 
10) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
- 
YYY 
Contained-in 
11) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
- 
YYY 
Located-in 
12) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
- 
YYY 
Involved-in 
13) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
- 
YYY 
Member-part-of 
14) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
- 
YYY 
Constitutes 
15) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
- 
YYY 
Constitutes 
16) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
- 
YYY 
Subquantity-part-of 
17) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
- 
YYY 
Temporary-part-of 
18) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
- 
YYY 
Temporary-part-of 
19) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
- 
YYY 
Immaterial-part-of 
20) 
Y 
Y 
Y 
- 
YYY 
Immaterial-part-of 
V. CONCLUSIONS  
In this article, we described the background and 
essentials of two different approaches involved in 
ontologies development in the scope of healthcare 
organizations. The first one deals with the conceptual level 
and second one deal with the formal level. Then, we 
analyzed relations and entities extracted from an ontology 
about blood transfusion under construction, considering the 
principles 
underlying 
these 
two 
approaches. 
We 
systematized a set of rules to convey knowledge from the 
conceptual level to the formal level using logical 
constraints. Finally, we presented partial results the 
experience of formalization in the case study.  
In the scope of Semantic Web, studies on ontologies 
many times have often emphasized a relevant question in 
knowledge representation, namely, the balance between 
expressivity and computability. The set of principles 
required for a biomedical ontology to become a member of 
the OBO Foundry [27] repository is a good example of an 
initiative like this, and that can mitigate the so-called data-
silo problem, that is, the situation in which systems can not 
automatically interoperate because of different ways of 
modelling. The use of ontological principles seems to be a 
good bet to improve the quality of information systems. 
These approaches have been researched worldwide, and the 
results obtained are expressive. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
 
It is worth observing that these technical-oriented 
approaches, in general, focus on evaluating ontologies and 
their characteristics as software artefacts. We believe that 
when ontologies are developed collaboratively, it is 
essential to consider the way people see the world and to 
understand the social processes that have led to the 
development. In this scenario, we believe that approaches 
like ConceptMe are essential for ontological engineering. 
For future works, we will seek new ways of integrating 
formal and conceptual approaches in organizational 
environments. We believe that, in order to attain sound 
ontologies and ontology-based systems, we should foster the 
complementarity between these approaches. While some 
may claim that this is widely know, we have not observed 
this reality in organizations, which justifies research on 
ontologies oriented to their particular social dynamics.      
 
Acknowledgments 
This work is partially supported by Fundação de Amparo à 
Pesquisa do Estado de Minas Gerais (FAPEMIG), Governo 
do Estado de Minas Gerais, Brazil, Rua Raul Pompéia, 
nº101 - São Pedro, Belo Horizonte, MG, 30.330-080, Brazil. 
This research was financed by the North Portugal Regional 
Operational Programme (ON.2 - O Novo Norte), under the 
National Strategic Reference Framework (NSRF), through 
the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), and by 
national funds, through the Portuguese funding agency, 
Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (FCT), within 
project NORTE-07-0124-FEDER-000057. The authors 
would like to thank INESC TEC for its support and the 
BEST CASE Project for the input and contributions.     
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Pereira, C. Sousa, and A. L. Soares, “Supporting 
conceptualisation processes in collaborative networks: a case 
study on an R&D project,” Inter. Journal of Computer Integ. 
Manufacturing, vol. 26, no. 11, Nov. 2013, pp. 1066–1086..  
[2] T. Tudorache, J. Vendetti, and N. Noy, Web-Protégé. “A 
lightweight OWL ontology editor for the Web”, In: C. 
Dolbear, A. Ruttenberg, and U. Sattler (Eds.), Proceedings of 
the Fifth Workshop on OWL: Experiences and Directions, 
vol. 432 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings. CEUR-WS, 2008.  
[3] M. Berzell, Eletronic Healthcare Ontologies: philosophy, the 
real world and IT structures, PhD thesis, Linkoping 
University, Division of Health and Society, Departament of 
Medical and Health Science, Linkoping, Sweden, 2010, pp. 
163. 
[4] A. Gómez-Pérez, M. Fernandéz, and A. Vicente, “Towards a 
method to conceptualize domain ontologies”, In: ECAI 
Workshop on ontological engineering, 1996, Budapest.  
[5] M. Suárez-Figueroa. NeOn Methodology for Building 
Ontology Networks, Madrid: Facultad de Informatica da 
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 2010.    
[6] A. Newell. “The knowledge level”. Artificial intelligence v. 
18, n. 1, 1982, pp. 87-127.  
[7] D. Kalra, T. Beale, and S. Heard, The OpenEHR Foundation. 
London: IO Press, 2005.   
[8] C. Sousa, C. Pereira, and A. Soares. “Collaborative Elicitation 
of Conceptual Representations: A Corpus-Based Approach”. 
In: Advances in Inf. Systems and Technology, vol. 206, Á. 
Rocha, A. M. Correia, T. Wilson, and K. A. Stroetmann, Eds. 
Berlin: Springer, 2013, pp. 111–124.  
[9] K. Munn and B. Smith, Applied Ontology: An Introduction. 
Heusenstamm, Germany: Ontos Verlag, 2008.    
[10] P. Grenon, B. Smith, and L. Goldberg, “Biodynamic 
Ontology: Applying BFO in the Biomedical Domain”, In: 
Pisanelli (ed.), Ontologies in Medicine, Amsterdam: IOS, 
2004, pp. 20–38. 
[11] F. Mendonça and M. Almeida, “Hemocomponents and 
hemoderivatives ontology (HEMONTO): an ontology about 
blood components”, In: ONTOBRAS, 2013, Belo Horizonte, 
6º Sem. Pesquisas em Ontologias Brasil, 2013, v. 1, pp. 11-
23. 
[12] C. Pereira, C. Sousa, and A. Soares, “A socio-semantic 
approach to support conceptualisation processes: a case study 
in an R&D project”, International Journal of Computer 
Integrated Manufacturing 2012 (July 2), pp. 1–21. 
[13] G. Fauconnier, and M. Turner, “Conceptual Integration 
Networks”, Cognitive Science, vol. 22 (2), 1998, pp. 133-187. 
[14] C. Sousa, A. Soares, C. Pereira, and R. Costa, “Supporting the 
identification of conceptual relations in semi-formal ontology 
development”, In: ColabTKR 2012 - Terminology and 
Knowledge 
Representation 
Workshop 
at 
International 
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, Istanbul. 
[15] A. Auger and C. Barrière, “Probing semantic relations,” 
Probing Semantic Relations: Exploration and Identification in 
Specialized Texts, vol. 23, 2010, pp. 1-14. 
[16] C. Keet and A. Artale, “Representing and reasoning over a 
taxonomy of part-whole relations”. Applied Ontology 3 (1-2), 
2008, pp. 91-110.  
[17] S. Schulz, A. Kumar, and T. Bittner, “Biomedical ontologies: 
What part-of is and isn´t”, Journal of Biomedical Informatics 
39, 2006, pp. 350–361. 
[18] B. Smith, “Relations in Biomedical Ontologies”, Genome 
Biology, 6, R46, 2005. 
[19] T. Bittner and M. Donnely, “Logical properties of 
foundational 
relations 
in 
bio-ontologies”. 
Artificial 
Intelligence in Medicine, vol. 39, n. 3, 2007, pp. 197–216. 
[20] A. Varzi, “Parts, wholes, and part-whole relations: the 
prospects 
of 
mereotopology, 
Data 
and 
Knowledge 
Engineering, vol. 20, 1996, pp. 259-286. 
[21] M. Winston, R. Chaffin, and D. Herrmann, “A taxonomy of 
part-whole relations”. Cognitive Science, 11(4), 1987, pp. 
417-444. 
[22] Stanford Center for Biomedical Informatics Research. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://protege.stanford.edu// 
2015.06.11 
[23] BRAZIL, Ministério da Saúde. Guia para o uso de 
hemocomponentes, Brasília, Brazil, 2008. 
[24] ICCBBA – ISBT 128 Standard, Standard Terminology for 
Blood, Cellular Therapy and Tissue Product Descriptions, v 
3.33, January 2010.  
[25] American Association of Blood Banks (AABB) 17th edition 
Technical Manual, Bethesda, Maryland: AABB 2011. 
[26] J. Greer, J. Foerster, G. Rodgers, F. Paraskevas, B. Glader, D. 
Arber, and R. Means, Wintrobe's Clinical Hematology 12th  
Edition, Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2009. 
[27] B. Smith. “The OBO foundry: Coordinated evolution of 
ontologies to support biomedical data integration”. Nature 
Biotechnology, vol. 25, n. 11, 2007, pp. 1251–1255. 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

