Knowledge BasedRecommendation onOptimal Spectral and Spatial 
RecordingStrategy of Physical Cultural Heritage Objects 
 
Ashish Karmacharya, Stefanie Wefers, Frank Boochs 
i3mainz – Institute for Spatial Information and Surveying Technology, Mainz University of Applied Sciences 
e-mail: {ashish.karmacharya, stefanie.wefers, frank.boochs}@hs-mainz.de 
 
 
Abstract—Ontologies have traditionally been used to represent 
knowledge of a specific domain. They are also used to provide 
a base to infer the knowledge present inside them. However, 
the applications of ontologies within the Cultural Heritage 
(CH) community have been restricted to providing standard 
documentation for significant heritage objects. E.g., widely 
used ontology within CH disciplines, International Committee 
for Documentation Conceptual Reference Model(CIDOC 
CRM) is designed to provide standards in documenting 
archival information of physical CH object. There has been 
hardly any work relating the objects to their documentation 
purposes. In this paper, we present the Colour and Space in 
Cultural Heritage Knowledge Representation (= COSCHKR) 
ontology – a multi-faceted ontology. With COSCHKR, we 
present a system that infers inter-woven descriptive semantics 
of different involved CH disciplines in recording CH objects to 
recommend optimal spatial and spectral technical solutions to 
humanities experts and guide through the underlying 
complexities while recording their objects. It takes numbers of 
facts into consideration including physical characteristics of 
the CH objects, the characteristics of their surroundings and 
even other relevant facts such as budget or staff competence to 
infer against the characteristics of the technologies for a 
proper 
recommendation. 
In 
contrast 
to 
a 
typical 
Recommender System, which does the same for web-based 
content through stochastic methods, we use descriptive 
semantics at the concept level. 
Keywords-Ontology 
development; 
Description 
Logics; 
Humanities;Cultural 
Heritage; 
3D 
Data;Spectral 
Data; 
Descriptive Semantics;Inference 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the last decade digital 3D and spectral recording of 
physical cultural heritage (CH) objects is getting more and 
more common. The digital representations are not only seen 
as support for CH expert’s tasks (e.g., research studies, 
monitoring, and documentation) but as useful items 
especially for dissemination. A wide audience can be 
addressed, e.g., through websitesand interactive digital 
applications. For this tasks appropriate data are needed 
optimally supporting the researcher and/or user.To achieve 
this, the 3D or spectral data recording, its subsequent data 
processing, analysis and visualisation has to involve experts 
from multiple disciplines: (a) CH experts responsible for the 
knowledge about the constraints given by the CH object 
itself (e.g., research question, conservation condition, light 
sensitivity, transportation possibilities); (b) recording 
experts preparing and executing a digitisation strategy (e.g., 
recording device needs specific amount of space, limitations 
of sensors, suitable data accuracy and resolution); (c) IT 
experts applying proper algorithms on the generated data 
(e.g., point cloud registration) to allow data analysis; and (d) 
3D modellers and communication experts visualising the 
data for different audiences. All these parameters influence 
each other. Which 
digitisation 
strategy meets 
the 
requirements of the CH application (A CH application is 
connected to CH research questions which can be answered 
through the generated data – they are a tool illustrating the 
significance about the existence and significance of CH 
objects w.r.t. the history of mankind)depends on (1) the 
parameters of the physical CH object (appearance, size etc.), 
(2) the limitations and abilities of the devices and 
methods,and (3) the impact of the data processing tasks. 
Altogether, the elaboration of a digitisation strategy is a 
complex collaborative and interdisciplinary task. 
The COST Action [34] TD1201: Colour and Space in 
Cultural Heritage (COSCH) [2] [3] contributes to the 
conservation and preservation of cultural heritage (CH) by 
enhancing this mutual understanding among the experts 
from various disciplines. COSCH is a forum for 
communication and interdisciplinary networking. Bridging 
the gap between professionals involved in the recording of 
physical CH objects through discussions and publications 
such as guides to good practice, the COSCH community 
decided to go one step further by developing the knowledge 
model COSCHKR orthe COSCH Knowledge Representation. 
COSCHKR is an OWL 2 XML-serialised ontology based 
model currently under development. It expresses and 
structures the knowledge of the disciplines involved in CH 
object recording. The main intention of COSCHKR is to 
guide CH experts by inferring the optimal spatial and 
spectral technologies for the recording of their specific 
physical CH object based on facts on its physical 
characteristics and the purpose behind the recording.It is 
therefore comparable to a recommender system in a sense 
that it identifies and provides recommendations on optimal 
technologies. A typical recommender system works on 
available data to develop recommendation algorithms based 
on stochastic methods [31]. However in our case, we do not 
have abundant data from successfully completed CH 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

applications for the development of algorithms that filter the 
recommendations. Instead, we rely on experience and 
knowledge 
from 
experts 
to 
create 
the 
entire 
recommendation process and reasoning system within 
COSCHKR. 
The challenge in the development of such an ontology 
lies in capturing expert’s decisions of spatial and spectral 
recording. It needs to capture the core essence of inter-
disciplinary 
dialogues 
and 
activities 
across 
multi-
disciplinary platforms to achieve common goal in a CH 
documentation project. The ontology, therefore, needs to 
describe inter-disciplinary dependencies that echo the real 
world dependencies across disciplines in such a project. 
Various disciplines have to work together to answer 
common research questions of CH applications.  
Interpretations 
and 
observations 
on 
issues 
and 
vocabularies vary across the discipline. The ontology needs 
to fill in these gaps in communication as well. At the core, 
the ontology needs to address what is required and how to 
get it. To elaborate, any CH application requires a digital 
surrogate of the concerned physical CH object providing 
answers to CH research questions. The nature of digital 
surrogates depends on the application and its requirements. 
The requirements for answering the research questions 
thrown by a CH application dictate what the digital data 
should contain. Thisrequirements on digitaldata  in turn 
influence theselection technology(ies). These digital data 
and their nature form a bridge connecting requirements from 
CH 
applications 
and 
possibilities 
from 
recording 
technologies. We use axis “Applications – Data – 
Technologies”(see Fig. 1) to illustrate this further.  
COSCHKR is a knowledge model developed through 
capturing and structuring knowledge of involved disciplines 
inside CH recordings. The discipline inherent knowledge- 
otherwise independent - is interlinked through the 
description logic (DL) concept constructors, which define 
descriptive semantics of the concepts inside the ontology 
[16] (restriction axioms inside the ontology). The 
descriptive semantics are extensively used to 1) bind 
different heterogeneous conceptual axioms and theorems 
inside the ontology and 2) infer the results from the queries. 
The base axis “Applications – Data – Technologies” is 
supported through other axes that define the underlying 
semantics of objects and/or other factors that have 
significant influences on the model and its inference system. 
Technical process is deterministic to the real world 
considerations when generating data: technologies applied 
to a CH object generate data with specific data nature and 
data content under specific external influences that may be 
coming from CH objects themselves or other conditions 
influencing the technologies or CH objects. These 
considerations have to be logically described and are 
described through descriptive semantics of the relevant 
classes inside the ontology. Due to a variety of technologies 
and their underlying instruments and recording strategies, 
the importance of expert knowledge on them is further 
justified while recommending the best suited process. A 
first attempt to give a structured view on characteristics of 
spatial recording techniques has been presented in [15].  
The 
descriptive 
semantics 
binding 
technologies 
parameters to object characteristics should take respective 
views of involved disciplines into account.CH applications 
and their conditions on the requirement on data are also 
described inside the ontology through relevant descriptive 
semantics. The CH applications that ask for specific data 
content intercede 
all 
these inter-linking 
descriptive 
semantics for inferring and navigating through optimal 
recording techniques. 
COSCHKR provides a base for expressing common 
knowledge 
on 
technologies, 
CH 
objects 
and 
CH 
applications. The ontology will be exploited through an 
interactive web based application (COSCHKR platform), 
which will have interactive Graphical User Interfaces 
(GUIs) for users to assert their queries through a guided 
mechanism. The platform will apply those asserted queries 
to 
the 
COSCHKR 
ontological 
model 
to 
infer 
recommendationsfor a recording device, strategy, and 
process, which will support the CH expert to receive 
spectral and/or spatial data with sufficient content and 
quality to answer the underlying research questions.  
The successful creation of such a platform needs to be 
based on mutual understanding of experts from the involved 
fields. It has to start with the consolidation of a common 
vocabulary with unambiguous terms, continue with the 
formalisation of domain inherent knowledge, and end with 
the connection of this formalised knowledge. A special 
challenge is the content capture and its formalisation. For 
example, humanities research questions are often directly 
linked to a specific CH object and domain inherent research 
question. Moreover, the same physical CH object might be 
connected to different research questions which ask for 
differing data requirements. This makes the formalisation of 
decisive factors in humanities research question a sensible 
task, which has a strong impact on the identification of the 
best suitable recording strategy. With this paper, we present 
our hands-on experiences in developing the ontology 
COSCHKR and the challenges during data capturing and 
structuring process. We also present how the descriptive 
semantics inside the ontology lay the necessary foundation 
for inferring the recommendations of the optimal technical 
strategy(ies) in spatial and spectral CH documentation.  
The structure of the paper is as follows. In section 2, the 
state of art, we present the use of semantic and knowledge 
technologies in CH. We also present the existing stochastic 
methods based recommendation systems. In section 3, we 
present our approach, illustrating the purpose and scope and 
then methodology and principles behind it. We also present 
an example use case to demonstrate our approach within this 
section. Lastly, section 4 concludes the paper summarizing 
the actual state and what is the future outlook. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

II. 
STATE OF ART 
Ontologies have evolved as computational artifacts that 
provide conceptual and computational models of any 
particular domain of interest. Ontologies populated with 
concepts are agreed generally to follow the states of uniform 
knowledge representation and provide a computational 
model of a particular domain of interest [8] [4] [19]. The 
main motivation behind ontologies is that they allow for 
sharing and reuse of knowledge bodies in computational 
form [20]. Ontologies have become a popular research topic 
within the communities of the Semantic Web due to the fact 
that they promise a shared and common understanding of 
inter-communicable domains, the primary objective of the 
Semantic Web. The role of ontologies in the Semantic Web 
and the gradual evolution of Web Ontology Language [35] 
are discussed in the research paper [21] [23]. 
A. Description Language Inferences 
The Web Ontology Language is a Description Logic 
based ontology language for the Semantic Web [23]. There 
are effective reasoning algorithms for Description Logics 
that can reason with OWL ontologies. Existing DL 
Reasoners, such as FaCT++ [24], use these algorithms and 
are quite efficient. A DL comprises of ABoxes and TBoxes 
where a TBox describes the terminologies expressed 
through concepts and roles and ABox contains the 
assertions about the instances of the concepts described 
through TBoxes. Most OWL ontology based systems apply 
TBox and ABox inferences for the rightful categorizations 
and relationships. The application of these inferences for 
building up possible components of DL ontologies is 
presented in [25]. The work describes standard and 
nonstandard inferences.  
 A standard inference uses the TBox inference 
provided through the concept descriptions to 
subsume the individuals in the ABox. This facilitates 
computation of hierarchies and internal instance 
relationships.  
 A 
nonstandard 
inference 
uses 
the 
semantic 
descriptions of individuals in ABox to first create, 
categorize and populate themselves into respected 
bottom level concepts. Afterwards, with the least 
common subsumer (lcs) of these bottom level 
concepts, their super-concepts are defined and 
created. The practice continues until the final top 
concepts are created. The concept descriptions of 
each level are defined in the process with having 
individuals as building blocks.  
With both TBox inference and ABox inference, the 
inferences are used to build on DL based knowledge 
representation. 
B. Ontologies and their types 
Applications of ontologies are required to play a role in 
analyzing, modeling and implementing domain knowledge 
and influence problem solving knowledge [20]. Ontologies 
can generally be classified for intentions of capturing and 
modeling static and problem solving knowledge.  
Static ontologies do not internally reason about the 
knowledge, but use it for processing natural language [26], 
achieving interoperability within heterogeneous datasets 
[12], which facilitate communication, such as in E-
commerce. Ontologies within this category fall under 
Reference Ontologies, whose main inclination is toward 
realism [27].  
Problem solving ontologies areintended for problem 
solving knowledge and provide views that could be used for 
reasoning. 
They 
are 
Application 
ontologies 
with 
computational sublogic of full first order logic. The usage of 
ontologies in the Semantic Web can be found in both 
categories: the former with core Semantic Web applications 
like Linked Open Data applications (LOD) and the later 
with Semantic Web Service Discovery.  
Application ontologies combine task/method ontologies 
(containing terms and reasoning mechanisms of problem 
solving methods) together with the domain ontologies 
(containing descriptions of domains of disclosures) to 
provide overall interpretationof the problem and attempt to 
provide answers. Such ontologies are preferred in a 
Recommender System. 
C. Ontologies in Recommender Systems 
Recommender Systems (RSs) are software tools and 
techniques providing suggestions for items to be of use to a 
user [32] [33]. COSCHKRrecommends solutions through 
prior knowledge represented inside its ontology and not 
through analyzing huge amount of data through statistical 
methods as a Recommender System does. Recommender 
Systems are highly influenced by stochastic methods such 
as machine learning. However, ontologies are routinely used 
in recommender systems in combination with machine 
learning and other stochastic methods. Middleton and 
colleagues 
presented 
a 
recommender 
system 
that 
recommends on-line academic research papers through the 
profile descriptions of the readers [28]. The system uses 
classical machine learning algorithms with an ontology 
based approach to design a recommender algorithm. The 
inference mechanism is highly influenced by the amount 
and quality of data for high end results. Similarly, other 
recommender systems such as [29] extract data from music 
ontology within LinkedBrainz (A Linked Open Data 
platform to publish music database) through its SPARQL 
end points, and then matches results with customized 
management of user profiles (according to personal 
preferences). The use of ontologies in Recommender 
System to use prior knowledge on the resources (academic 
paper as in [28] and music as in [29]) along with 
understanding the behavior of the users (through) stochastic 
methods to provide recommendations to them. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

D. Development of ontologies 
While developing multi-faceted ontologies any basic 
metaphors cut across a number of domains [30]. 
Developments of multi-faceted ontologies are common 
today both in scientific and commercial communities. Lim 
and a colleague presented the Multi-faceted product family 
ontology (MFPFO) that manages the complexity in 
relationships between physical components with their 
semantic orientations, such as manufacturing, materials and 
marketing [17]. The relationships between different facets 
should be clearly described in such ontology. These 
knowledge-intensive ontologies need to keep harmony 
across the people, disciplines and the applications in which 
they are involved [18] to maintain semantic consistency 
inside it. Hence, the development issues become much 
crucial in their development.  
Though there is collective experience in designing, 
developing and using ontologies, there is no common 
agreed methodology for building ontologies. Different 
methodologies exist and have been proposed over the years 
[9] [11] [14] [20] [22]. The commonality among all these 
propositions is that the ontology should satisfy the purpose 
of its creation and should not attempt to model the world, 
should be coherent and extendible and should provide 
minimum ontological commitment. Another commonality 
among them is that they prescribe step wise workflow based 
methodological guidance for ontology engineering. The 
NeOn methodology presents a different approach through 
suggesting different pathways for developing ontologies 
[37]. It presents nine different scenarios covering commonly 
occurring 
situations 
while 
developing 
ontologies 
whereCOSCHKRloosely 
complies 
with 
the 
first 
scenario.COSCHKR ontology represents experts’ knowledge 
through inter-linking descriptive knowledge in spatial and 
spectral CH documentation that could be extended to other 
technologies and/or other discipline such as architecture as 
well. The COSCH umbrella provides a base to include 
experts from different domains to evaluate coherency of 
ontology and its underlying theorems and axioms through 
domain specific semantic consistency. 
E. Existing domain ontologies 
Ontologies for CH disciplines such as CIDOC-CRM [1] 
are generally designed as standards for stakeholders such as 
museums 
who 
archive 
CH 
objects. 
Though 
the 
terminologies used within CIDOC-CRM are of interest for 
our research and we actually refer to CIDOC-CRM inside 
our ontology, the intention and application of COSCHKR 
differs 
considerably 
from 
CIDOC-CRM. 
Moreover, 
CIDOC-CRM does not provide a class structure for detailed 
information about the recording of CH objects. The 
CARARE 2.0 metadata schema [7] prepared within the 
frame of the 3D ICONS project provides compatibility to 
the structure of CIDOC-CRM. The schema is based on CH 
standards such as MIDAS (English Heritage 2012), an XML 
based 
harvesting 
schema 
LIDO 
[6], 
and 
EDM-
EuropeanaData Model [5]. It harvests meta-, para-, and 
provenance data of 2D and 3D data of CH objects into 
Europeana (Europeana Professional). The CARARE 2.0 
metadata schema extends the class including technical para- 
and meta-data of recording strategies. However, it is meant 
to harvest the content into open knowledge hubs for linking 
data. The schema does not have provisions to reason itself 
for choosing optimal para- and metadata from the existing 
ones when new cases arise. The development of CARARE 
2.0 metadata schema thus follows a pattern that is necessary 
for ontologies managing and harvesting contents. All in all, 
the core group worked out to develop a new common 
ontology, not integrating existing domain ontologies since 
1) not all involved disciplines have their own well accepted 
ontology (CH has CIDOC-CRM, but for spatial and spectral 
technology there is no widely accepted one such as OPPRA 
cannot be considered as common ontology for spectral 
domain or no ontology at all as in spatial domain) and 2) 
ontologies are designed for different purposes and scopes 
(e.g., CIDOC-CRM is designed for providing standards for 
museums archiving physical CH objects [1] or OPPRA.owl 
is designed for 20th century paint conservation [13]) and 
harmonizing them through inference rules is a long and 
tedious task. 
 
III. 
APPROACH 
An ontology base system that recommends the optimal 
spatial/spectral technologies for a CH documentation 
application requires: 
 
ontology consisting of descriptive semantics of 
- 
involved spatial and spectral technologies 
and data 
- 
CH object and CH applications 
 
a 
recommendation 
mechanism 
that 
infersdescriptive semantics of CH objects, their 
respective 
applications 
against 
those 
of 
technologies 
COSCHKR intends to provide recommendations (on 
spatial and spectral technologies for the CH applications) 
from the conceptual level and not from the data level 
through their analysis as no database exists to be used for 
the purpose. Therefore, there is no possibility of ABox 
inference inside. This negates any possibilities of 
implementing any external stochastic mechanisms within 
inference system. The system hence has to work on pre-
defined expert knowledge at schema level to do reasoning. 
Consequently, it becomes prominent that existing state of 
art solutions have limited implementations on COSCHKR as  
 
the inference on knowledge model needs to use the 
descriptive semantics at concept level for inference 
and not at data or individual level 
 
the intention is not to classify the assertions as 
conventional reasoners in the Semantic Web 
technologies are meant to but to infer right 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

relations between technologies and applications 
through data 
 
till date, there is no ontology on spatial and spectral 
technologies that could be used for the case. This 
limits the assessments of physical objects through 
the semantics of technologies within an ontology 
based system 
 
the existing CH ontology is based for documenting 
biographical information of the CH objects and has 
limited scope to define descriptive semantics of 
concerned object that trigger the technological 
selection process.  
Through COST action we have the leverage of technical 
and humanities expertise in their respected fields. COSCHKR 
represents their knowledge and experiences inside within 
one common framework. They are semantically encoded 
through DL axioms and theorems.COSCHKR reasoning 
engine (used for recommendations) reasons these axioms 
and theorems at TBox level and do not assert any 
individuals inside. Additionally, the engine distances itself 
from using any stochastic methods to carry out reasoning.It 
is solely based on the concepts’ descriptive semantics 
(defined through DL concept constructors), which represent 
the knowledge and experiences of the domain experts. 
A. Purpose and Scope 
COSCHKR isa system that guides CH experts by inferring 
the optimal spatial and spectral technologies for the 
recording of a specific physical CH object based on facts 
about the physical CH object and the CH application. The 
purpose is to help the CH end users to answer their 
competency questions querying for the optimal technical 
solutions. An example of such questions could be “What is 
the right technical solution to record my CH object (a 
Roman coin) for the CH application determining its origin 
and time period”.  Such a purpose was discussed and agreed 
on within the COSCH community and through this the scope 
of involved domains was madeclear: CH domains 
(archaeology, 
conservation, 
art 
history 
etc.), 
spatial 
technology 
domains 
(surveying, 
computer 
vision, 
photogrammetry etc.), spectral technology domains (multi- 
and hyperspectral imaging etc.), and IT domains (algorithms, 
data processing etc.). In meantime a core group comprising 
experts from semantic, spatial and spectral and CH domain 
responsible for designing the top-level ontology was agreed 
on, for evaluation of different approaches in knowledge 
collection, for guidance in knowledge collection, and for 
regular updating of the entire expert group.  
B. COSCHKRontology 
COSCHKRontology 
represents 
inter-disciplinary 
knowledge ofCH recording. It is designed and developed and 
woven together through rules. 
Fig. 1 illustrates the five top level classes of COSCHKR. 
These top level classes and their specializations are defined 
through 1) a logical taxonomical structure based on shared 
concepts 2) the relationships between them and 3) their 
existence defined through the conditions. The green boxes 
are classes related to CH domains, the orange box is a class 
related to spectral and spatial recording domains and the 
blue box is a class related to data processing domains. The 
five top-level classes are linked through different properties 
displayed as arrows. 
The intention is to maintain and support the base of the 
conceptual axis: “Application – Data – Technologies” (see 
grey strip in Fig. 1). We first define the classes under this 
major axis. Class “Technologies” encompasses the technical 
methods, procedures, tools and their setups to generate or 
process the generated data. They are presented through 
specializations of the class where each specialization 
contains semantic descriptions that describe their best 
practice, limitations through their characteristics. These 
specializations generate data which are stored under 
specializations of class “Data”. We can illustrate this with a 
simple example: “Photography” is a technology that 
generates photos. Therefore “Photography” will be a 
specialization of class “Technologies”. Photos are 2D 
images i.e., 2D Data – and hence specialization of class 
“Data”. The class also includes the capabilities and 
limitations of instruments that are used to generate data. For 
instance: “Photography” with a mobile camera can have 
different quality on photo than that with a high end DSLR 
camera. 
 
Fig. 1.COSCHKR top-level classes. 
The first obvious outlet of class “Technologies” is data 
represented through class “Data”. This is bridged through 
the statement “Technologies generate Data” which is 
expressed through the DL concept constructors inside the 
ontology (see (1)). This bridging statement provides a 
conceptual crossover between two. 
Technologies ≡∃hasGenerationOnData.Data 
(1) 
TheseDL concept constructors are ourbase for inference 
rules becausethey will be combined and translated as rules 
for inferring the content inside COSCHKR system. These DL 
constructors 
are 
defined 
and 
formulated 
in 
close 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

collaboration with experts in technical fields of spatial and 
spectral technologies. 
Moving on, the purposes and reasons behind the 
acquiring 
the 
data 
are 
represented 
within 
class 
“Application”. It is a class that determines the nature and 
quality of data that needs to be acquired and lies on the 
other side of the axis “Application – Data – Technologies”. 
The specializations are again defined through the descriptive 
semantics through DL concept constructors. They link to 
data through the expressions of what kind of data is required 
(see (2)). 
Applications ≡∃hasRequirementOnData.Data 
(2) 
Let us continue taking example of “Photography” to 
illustrate our example on applications. We can think of two 
simple applications of photos here: printingfor i.)a 
billboardand ii.) a travel album. Even though both require 
photos as the main product, the qualities required of them 
differ a lot. The photos needed for the billboard need to 
have high resolution photos with different degree of 
sharpness while the same should not holdtrue for the photos 
for the travel albums. They have impacts on the concerned 
technology acquiring the photos. The billboard photos 
should be taken with high end DSLR camera and needs 
some post- processing while those for travel album can be 
taken with simple digital cameras or mobile cameras. 
The classes outside this axis are equally important in 
terms that they affect the technologies. Class “Physical 
Thing” represents the main subject to be measured (in our 
case it is CH Physical Objects). COSCHKR does not define 
these objects as their real world counterparts. They are 
defined through the physical characteristics of which they 
are built-up. For example: churches do not have pseudo 
representation with class “Church” inside the class 
“Physical Thing”. Therefore, they cannot be asserted as 
“Church”. They need to be asserted as composite objects 
(under 
sub-class 
“CompositeObjects”) 
built-up 
with 
different 
individual 
objects 
(under 
class 
“IndividualObjects”). These composite/individual objects 
have certain characteristics like in case of church, they are 
big in size. COSCHKR therefore does not differentiate 
between a church or a building. The main reason is: it is not 
important to know what are being digitized (in terms of how 
they are called in real world), but important to know 
whether the physical characteristics of object support or 
deny its digitization process when certain technology is 
being used. The core mantra is “the physical characteristics 
of the objects decide how any technology should be used to 
digitize them and not objects themselves”. Let us roll back 
to the example of “Photography” and its product “Photos”. 
The possibility of “Close-range Photography” has high 
dependency on the size of the object. It cannot photograph 
big sized objects (see (3)) because it cannot capture entire 
object in one photo shooting action. So a church cannot be 
photographed with close range photography.  
∃hasSuitabilitiesFor.(Physical-Thing⊓∀hasSize.(¬ Big))
 
(3) 
The class “ExternalInfluences” has similar technical 
implications to that of class “Physical Thing”. It defines 
constraining semantics that effect the recommendations of 
the technologies. They include constraints deriving from the 
project limitations such as budget, human resource or from 
the surroundings of the measured objects like available 
space, lights, access and so on. These factors play major 
roles in technical solution and need to be defined inside the 
ontology. 
C. Content capture 
At the very beginning of development of the ontology, 
the 
COSCH community 
established 
a core 
group 
responsible to collect, manage and structure knowledge 
from the relevant expert groups. The core group was also 
responsible to define common vocabulary. It developed 
theoretical concepts on the basis of the collected 
unstructured knowledge through: 1) questionnaire; 2) 
discussion. These theoretical concepts were represented 
through respective axioms and theorems. 
To be able to get an overview of expert’s knowledge 
within the COSCH community, a questionnaire was 
designed, which has the intention to ask for spectral and 
spatial recording approaches and technical details applied in 
various humanities projects. For each group of physical CH 
objects, which were recorded within a humanities project, 
one questionnaire requires to be completed, where a group 
is mainly defined through the purpose of the spectral or 
spatial recording. The actual version of the questionnaire 
consists of twelve main questions with subordinate 
questions asking primarily for technical details [36]. The 
completed questionnaires are supporting the analysis to 
structure the content, to define work areas through the 
determination of relevant terms and vocabularies, and to 
identify contact persons having a specific expertise and 
being available for discussions and feedback. All in all, it 
should be highlighted that this tool cannot have the intention 
to collect knowledge, which is already structured and ready 
for the integration into the ontology (see below). In contrast, 
the specific content related to one physical CH object and 
application, which is described within the completed 
questionnaires, gives evidence for structuring theoretical 
concepts included in the ontology. 
D. Case Study example 
The analysis of the completed questionnaires led to the 
following strategy: the ontology will be developed using 
case studies as framework since it provides concrete facts 
for a discussion with experts from different domains. These 
facts on the one hand are the basis for a common 
understanding and on the other hand are helpful to stay 
focused. Furthermore, a case study provides added 
advantage important for the development of theoretical 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

concepts: the case study discussion can be expanded easily 
by fact modifications even after it has been included through 
theoretical concepts inside the ontology. 
original case study was related to small physical CH objects 
a fact modification could be to imagine the physical CH 
object being very large. Depending on the facts under 
discussion this approach helps to extend
ontology. 
The first selected case study dealt with waterlogged 
wood as through unavoidable conservation treatment the 
shape and volume of these objects is modified. To be able to 
measure the influence of various conservation treatments a 
high number of samples of waterlogged wood were 
recorded in 3D before and after conservation. And through a 
comparison of the two 3D models representing one sampl
changes could be evaluated giving information on the 
influence of the conservation on the shape and volume of 
the objects [10].  
The physical CH objects of interest are samples from 
different time periods having a minimum size of 100 x 60 x 
60 cubic mm (Fig.2 CH Object Size “small”). The material 
condition of the samples before conservation treatment was 
an important issue as the archaeological waterlogged wood 
samples had a dark brown to black appearance and were 
partly shiny. The translucent and reflect
untreated samples had impact on the data quality. However, 
this impact was reduced to a minimum through careful 
toweling of the samples before recording (
Reflectivity “low”). After conservation the appearance of 
the samples sometimes changed immensely as the water 
inside the wood is gone and conservation materials 
stabilized the object causing sometimes a colour change to 
light brown. However, all sample surfaces were dry after 
treatment which means they were not reflectiv
(Fig.2 CH Object Reflectivity “low”). A crucial factor was 
the high number of samples: All in all 777 objects were 
recorded before and after treatment (
Number “large”) why an industrial recording device 
structured light scanner – was chosen as selected processing 
steps could be automated and controlled through scripts of 
associated software (Fig. 2 Workflow Method “Automated, 
semi-automated”). The workflow control was applied for 
quality management of the required data and accu
2 “3D” and “high”). Due to this the operating staff of the 
structured light scanner could be changed without major 
impact on the workflow and data quality as the number of 
possible error sources was reduced to a minimum (
technical competence “low”). However, the varying 
operating staff needed supervision by a 3D recording expert. 
Especially 
the 
above 
mentioned 
workflow 
control 
possibilities determined the choice of the 3D recording 
technique. 
 
the case study discussion can be expanded easily 
even after it has been included through 
. For example, if the 
original case study was related to small physical CH objects 
a fact modification could be to imagine the physical CH 
object being very large. Depending on the facts under 
extend branches of the 
The first selected case study dealt with waterlogged 
wood as through unavoidable conservation treatment the 
objects is modified. To be able to 
measure the influence of various conservation treatments a 
high number of samples of waterlogged wood were 
recorded in 3D before and after conservation. And through a 
comparison of the two 3D models representing one sample 
changes could be evaluated giving information on the 
influence of the conservation on the shape and volume of 
The physical CH objects of interest are samples from 
different time periods having a minimum size of 100 x 60 x 
CH Object Size “small”). The material 
condition of the samples before conservation treatment was 
an important issue as the archaeological waterlogged wood 
samples had a dark brown to black appearance and were 
partly shiny. The translucent and reflective surface of the 
untreated samples had impact on the data quality. However, 
this impact was reduced to a minimum through careful 
toweling of the samples before recording (Fig.2 CH Object 
Reflectivity “low”). After conservation the appearance of 
es sometimes changed immensely as the water 
inside the wood is gone and conservation materials 
stabilized the object causing sometimes a colour change to 
light brown. However, all sample surfaces were dry after 
treatment which means they were not reflective anymore 
CH Object Reflectivity “low”). A crucial factor was 
the high number of samples: All in all 777 objects were 
recorded before and after treatment (Fig.2 CH Object 
Number “large”) why an industrial recording device – a 
was chosen as selected processing 
steps could be automated and controlled through scripts of 
Workflow Method “Automated, 
automated”). The workflow control was applied for 
quality management of the required data and accuracy (Fig. 
“3D” and “high”). Due to this the operating staff of the 
structured light scanner could be changed without major 
impact on the workflow and data quality as the number of 
possible error sources was reduced to a minimum (Fig.2 
ce “low”). However, the varying 
operating staff needed supervision by a 3D recording expert. 
Especially 
the 
above 
mentioned 
workflow 
control 
possibilities determined the choice of the 3D recording 
Fig.2.Simulation of a GUI for the case study 
waterlogged wood”. The red boxes represent the user input and the grey 
boxes represent the inferred information.
Applications ⊓ ≥2 hasRequirementOnData.(Data 
hasRepresentationOf.PhysicalObjects)
The CH application in this case 
deformation of geometry (Fig.
Alteration”). This CH application requires high level of 
accuracy to detect any changes, which also means it requires 
high resolution datasets for the comparison. This needs t
explicit while describing semantics of the class representing 
the 
CH 
Application 
Geometric 
Alteration 
(class 
“Deformation Analysis” – a specialization to top level class 
CH Application). Through these descriptive semantics (see 
below), we relate and compare different classes to derive 
suitable answer. 
Going back to our “Application
(see Fig. 1) conceptual axis, the CH application 
“Deformation Analysis” demands for data representing the 
objects with high accuracy 
“Deformation Analysis” is an immediate sub
ChangeDetection (again a specialization of class 
Applications), defined through the descriptive semantics 
stating that at least two dataset of the same object is required 
(see (4)). 
Besides inheriting these descriptive semantics encoded 
in DL class constructors of parent classes, 
Analysis” describes the semantics of required data 
nature (3D) and accuracy (high) (see 
ChangeDetection⊓∃hasRequirementOn
hasRepresentationOf.(PhysicalObjects
ObjectShape.Shapes) ⊓∃hasSpatialAccuracy
Once the requirement on data is known in the axis 
Applications – Data – Technologies, COSCH
semantic descriptors to infer right 
 
.Simulation of a GUI for the case study “conservation of 
waterlogged wood”. The red boxes represent the user input and the grey 
boxes represent the inferred information. 
hasRequirementOnData.(Data ⊓ (≤ 1 
hasRepresentationOf.PhysicalObjects) 
 (4) 
The CH application in this case study is to compare the 
Fig.2 CH Application “geometric 
Alteration”). This CH application requires high level of 
accuracy to detect any changes, which also means it requires 
high resolution datasets for the comparison. This needs to be 
explicit while describing semantics of the class representing 
the 
CH 
Application 
Geometric 
Alteration 
(class 
a specialization to top level class 
). Through these descriptive semantics (see 
compare different classes to derive 
“Applications – Data – Technology” 
1) conceptual axis, the CH application 
demands for data representing the 
 e.g. depending on their size. 
is an immediate sub-class of 
(again a specialization of class CH 
), defined through the descriptive semantics 
stating that at least two dataset of the same object is required 
s inheriting these descriptive semantics encoded 
in DL class constructors of parent classes, “Deformation 
describes the semantics of required data such as 
nature (3D) and accuracy (high) (see (5)). 
hasRequirementOn-Data.(Data ⊓∃
asRepresentationOf.(PhysicalObjects⊓∃has-
hasSpatialAccuracy.High) (5) 
Once the requirement on data is known in the axis 
Technologies, COSCHKRuses these 
infer right technology(ies). In this 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

case, the descriptive semantics of measurement method 
StructuredLightScanning, which is a specialized class under 
MeasurementMethods(specialization of class Technology)is 
inferred as the recommended because  
1) nature of data and accuracy it can generate with 
∃hasGenerationOnData.(3D_Data ⊓∃
hasSpatialAccuracy.High)   
 
 
(6) 
2) evaluating the technology against the object 
characteristics 
 
a) Size/volume 
 
∃hasSuitabilitiesFor.(PhysicalObjects⊓ (∃
hasObjectSize.2DSize_Small ⊔∃
hasObjectVolume.3DVolume_Small)) 
(7) 
b) textured: non textured 
∃hasSuitabilitiesFor.(PhysicalObjects⊓ (∃
hasObjectTexture.NonTextured) 
(8) 
c) number of objects: large with 777 samples 
In order to determine the effectiveness of the technology 
to manage large number of objects, the technology should 
provide automated or semi-automated work flow. Therefore, 
semantic description of the technology (Structured Light 
Scanning) is semantically described through the workflow 
and number of objects with a single DL statement (see (9)). 
(∃hasSuitabilitiesFor.(PhysicalObjects⊓ (∃
hasObjectQuantity.LargeNumber)) ⊓ (∃
hasWorkflowMethod.(SemiAutomatedWorkflow⊔Autom
atedWorkflow) 
(9) 
d) reflectivity: low 
(∃hasGenerationOnData.(3D_Data ⊓∃
hasSpatialAccuracy.High)) ⊓ (∃
hasSuitabilitiesFor.(PhysicalObjects⊓∃
hasObjectReflectance.Low_Reflectivity)) 
(10) 
The initial reflectivity of the waterlogged wooden 
samples was high because of the higher reflectance of water. 
COSCHKRin such a case does not provide any technology to 
generate high accuracy data with the highly reflected 
objects. Therefore, the ontology does not provide any 
technical solutions for highly reflected wooden samples and 
checks with the user if the reflectance could be lowered. In 
our case, the sample could be wiped to lower the 
reflectance. This again infers StructuredLightScanningas 
right technology. 
e) fragile: no possibilities to put markers 
This again gives no results. The standard setup of the 
technology (Structured Light Scanning) represented through 
class 
MeasurementSetups(a 
specialization 
of 
class 
Technology) will check whether one can stick any markers 
into the object. If the answer is yes then the rule of high 
accurate 3D data will be possible with the structured light 
scanning. The standard setup of the method is described 
through 
class 
StandardStrcturedLightScanning-Setups 
(specialization of class MeasurementSetupswith relation to 
class MeasurementMethods) . 
(∃hasGenerationOnData.(3D_Data ⊓ (∃
hasSpatialAccuracy.High)) ⊓ 
(≥1hasImplementingInstruments.(InternalMarkers⊔Natural
InternalMarker) 
(11) 
3) evaluating technology against external influencing 
characteristics  
Technical competence is the characteristics of the 
project influences. In this case the technical competence 
among operating staff is low. The case resembles the case of 
ii.c. Therefore, the technical competence depends on the 
kind of workflow the technology provides. If it provides 
automated workflow like in this case, the technology will 
only require operating staff with low competence. We 
defined this inside the class of StructuredLightScanning 
(∃hasOperatingProject.(ProjectInfluences⊓ (∃
hasOperatingStaffCompetence.(Competence_Medium⊔Co
mpetence_Low))) ⊓ (∃
hasWorkflowMethod.(SemiAutomatedWorkflow⊔Automat
edWorkflow) 
(12) 
Here class ProjectInfluencesis specialization of top-level 
class ExternalInfluences.  
This summarises that the Structured Light Scanning is 
the optimal recommended technology for scanning wooden 
samples in order to estimate deformation. The technologies 
are sorted out while the ontology processes knowledge 
inside to infer at different level. For example, at the very 
beginning when the requirement was 3D data, the ontology 
suggested all technologies that generate 3D data including 
Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS), Structure from Motion 
(SFM) and so on. As more semantic constraints were 
applied, technologies were filtered out. E.g., when the 
requirement was highly accurate data SFM was ignored, and 
when the object size was asserted “small” TLS was ignored. 
All technologies are semantically defined to support or deny 
the conditions they will be inferred against. At the end, 
semantically defined rules of Structured Light Scanning 
supported all the asserted conditions so the system 
recommended the technology.  
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Different technology might be recommended if and 
when the situation changes or other different constraints are 
added into. The knowledge model will alter the parameters 
of this case study to simulate other situations, e.g., instead 
of a high number of physical CH objects a low number is 
assumed, to identify why and how the recording strategy 
would have changed. 
We are working with two other case studies. They are 
still under development and not yet integrated in 
COSCHKR.They concentrate on a CH application related to 
the 
spectral 
recording 
and 
visualization 
domains 
(www.cosch.info/case-studies). Through these two case 
studies the better part of the technical classes could be 
developed. One of the most important reasons choosing the 
case study related to the spatial recording was the fact that 
the spatial recording expert was personally available for 
face-to-face. The development of a common understanding 
might be a longer iterating exchange of views and content, 
the number of iterations increases with the distance between 
the science fields, why for matter of convergence it is 
proposed to use face-to-face discussions. All in all, it is 
recommended to center the discussions around a case study 
in a process-related manner to stay focused and to create a 
common understanding between the different experts. The 
aim of the discussion is to develop theoretical concepts, 
which could be integrated into the ontology as formal 
axioms presenting the descriptive semantics and which 
finally display the case study as theoretical concepts 
addressing and linking all top-classes within the ontology. 
After the integration of both case studies as theoretical 
concepts in the ontology further identified work areas will 
be approached through discussions with other experts 
creating theoretical concepts related to other case studies. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
CH is arguably one of the most multi-disciplinary areas 
of research where disciplines from highly diverse disciplines 
(incl. human science, technologies and even pure science 
like chemistry) are actively involved. Developing ontology 
that not only smoothen the communication problems but 
also provides inter-disciplinary understandings to support 
recommendation on the best possible technical approach for 
a CH application requires a platform where experts from 
individual respective domain are open to exchange inter-
disciplinary discussions. COSCH – the COST Action 
TD1201 provides such a platform where experts from 
spatial and spectral technologies discuss on specific CH 
research questions with humanities experts to suggest on 
best usages of the technologies for answering them. The 
underlying knowledge from those discussions are captured 
and encapsulated within ontology COSCHKR. 
In this paper, we have presented the experiences we 
gained in developing COSCHKR. With COSCHKR we intend 
to address issues relevant in the area of CH, spatial and 
spectral technologies and the Semantic Web technology 
itself. The usage of semantics within CH communities is 
mostly limited to knowledge management and rarely to 
knowledge processing. They are mostly used to capture, 
document and re-use information on CH objects through 
knowledge management technologies.We see huge potential 
in using semantics to go beyond knowledge management; 
they can be used for knowledge processing with their in-
built reasoning capabilities.  
COSCHKR 
exploits 
Description 
Logics 
reasoning 
capabilities by encoding knowledge already at concept 
level. This has an added benefit against conventional 
recommender systems. We use experts with prior 
knowledge and experience in CH documentation that can be 
already encoded inside the knowledge model and not rely on 
stochastic on huge amount of data at data level. These 
encoded knowledge sets can then be exploited by any 
interpreting systems to infer the right recommendations. In 
addition, the existing databases and knowledge hubs with 
para-, meta- and provenance information could benefit from 
COSCHKR for evaluating their own data.  
COSCHKR is developed within the conceptual axis of 
requirement on data by CH application – generation of data 
by technologies. Other concepts are woven around this axis. 
Though we use the concept with the application field of CH, 
it could be applied in other domains as well. We are 
currently working on a mechanism that interprets 
descriptive semantics encoded through DL concept 
constructors into inferencing rules. These descriptive 
semantics will be parsed into rule based statements that 
could be reasoned by existing reasoning engines to provide 
the recommendations.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partly supported by COST under Action 
TD1201: Colour and Space in Cultural Heritage (COSCH). 
Furthermore, we would like to thank Dipl.-Ing. (FH) Guido 
Heinz M.Eng., Uwe Herz (both RGZM), Marcello Picollo, 
Tatiana Vitorino (both IFAC-CNR), Dr. Julio del Hoyo 
Melendez (The National Museum in Krakow) and Christian 
Degrigny (HE-Arc) for discussions and support in 
developing the classes and rules. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P.L. Boeuf, M. Doerr, C.E. Ore, and S. Stead, Definition of 
the CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model. ICOM/CIDOC 
CRM Special Interest Group, 2013. 
[2] F. Boochs, “COSCH - Colour and Space in Cultural Heritage, 
A New COST Action starts”. The 4th International 
Conference of EuroMed 2012. Ioannides M., Fritsch D., 
Leissner J., Davies R., Remondino F. and Caffo R. eds., pp. 
865-873, 2012. Limassol, Cyprus: LNCS. 
[3] F. Boochs et al., “Towards Optimal Spectral and Spatial 
Documentation of Cultural Heritage. COSCH – An 
Interdisciplinary Action in the COST Framework”.XXIV 
International CIPA Symposium. Strasbourg: International 
Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial 
Information Sciences, pp. 109-113, 2013. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

[4] C. Brewster and K. O'Hara, “Knowledge representation with 
ontologies: 
Present 
challenges 
- 
Future 
possibilities”.International 
Journal 
of 
Human-Computer 
Studiesm vol. 65, no. 7. pp. 563-568, 2007. 
[5] V. Charles, “Introduction to the Europeana data model”. 17th 
International Conference on Theory and Practice of Digital 
Libraries. Malta: International Conference on Theory and 
Practice of Digital Libraries, 2013. 
[6] E. Coburn and R. Stein, LIDO. [Online]  
Avaliable from:http://network.icom.museum/cidoc/working-
groups/lido/. [retrieved: November, 2015] 
[7] K. Fernie, D. Gaverilis, and S. Angeli, TheCARARE meta 
data schema v2.0. Europeana Carare project, 2013. 
[8] G. 
Jakus, 
V. 
Milutinovic, 
S. 
Omerovic, 
and 
S. 
Tomazic,“Concepts, 
Ontologies 
and 
Knowledge 
Representation”. SpringerBriefs in Computer Science, 2013. 
[9] D. B. Lenat and R. V. Guha,Building large knowledge-based 
systems: Representation and inference in the cyc project. 
Boston: Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc, 1989. 
[10] C. Mazzola, “What to do with “Large Quantity Finds in 
Archaeological Collections” - A KUR-project”. News in 
Conservation 6 (December 2009).  
[11] T.R. Gruber,“A Translation Approach to Portable Ontology 
Specifications”. Knowledge Acqusitionvol. 5 no. 2,pp. 199-
220, 1993. 
[12] A. 
Młka, 
B.Kryza, 
and 
J. 
Kitowski,“Integration 
of 
heterogeneous data sources in an ontological knowledge 
base”.Computing and Informaticsvol. 31, no. 1.pp. 189-223, 
2014 
[13] S.A. Odat, A Semantic e-Science Platform for 20th Century 
Paint Conservation, PhD dthesis. University of Queensland, 
Australia, 2014. 
[14] M. Uschold andM. 
Gruninger,“Ontologies: Principles, 
methods and applications”. Knowledge Engineering Review, 
pp. 93-136, 1996. 
[15] A.-K. Wieman, S. Wefers, A. Karmacharya, and F. Boochs, 
“Characterisation of Spatial Techniques for Optimised Use in 
Cultural 
Heritage 
Documentation”.M. 
Ioannides, 
N. 
Mageanat-Thalmann, E. Fink, R. Zarnic, A. Yen, E. Quak, 
eds. Digital Heritage,Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 
374-386, 2014. 
[16] I. Horrocks, P. F. Patel-Schneider, D. L. McGuinness, and 
C.A. Welty, OWL: a Description Logic Based Ontology 
Language for the Semantic Web, 2004. 
[17] S. Lim, Y. Liu, and W. B. Lee, “A methodology for building 
a semantically annotated multi-faceted ontology for product 
family modelling”. Advanced Engineering Informatics, vo. 12, 
no. 2, pp. 147-161, 2011. 
[18] Y. Sure, J. Angele, and S. Staab, “OntoEdit: Multifaceted 
Inferencing for Ontology Engineering”. Journal on Data 
Semantics, 2003, pp. 128-152, 2003. 
[19] S. Grimm, P. Hitzler, and A. Abecker, “Knowledge 
Representation and Ontologies: Logic, Ontologies and 
Semantic Web Languages”. R. Studer, S. Grimm and A. 
eds.,Semantic Web Services. Springer Link, pp 51-105, 2007. 
[20] R. Studer, V. R. Benjamins,and D. Fensel, Knowledge 
Engineering: Principles and Methods, Karlsruhe, 1998. 
[21] S. Grimm, A. Abecker, J. Völker,and R. Studer, “Ontologies 
and the Semantic Web”. J. Domingue, D. Fensel,and J. A. 
Hendler, eds., Handbook of Semantic Web Technologies, 
Springer, pp. 507-579, 2011. 
[22] X. Wang, J. Almeida,and A. Oliviera, “Ontology Design 
Principles and Normalization Techniques in the Web”.Data 
Integration in the Life Sciences, 5th International Workshop, 
DILS 2008, Evry, France, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp 28-
43, 2008. 
[23] I. Horrocks, D. Patel-Schneider, D. L. McGuinness, and C. A. 
Welty, “OWL: a Description Logic Based Ontology 
Language for the Semantic Web”. F. Baader, D. Calvanese, D. 
McGuinness, D. Nardi,and P. F. Schneider, eds, The 
Description Logic Handbook: Theory, Implementation, and 
Applications (2nd Edition), Cambridge University Press, 
2007. 
[24] D. Tsarkov and I. Horrocks, “FaCT++ Description Logic 
Reasoner: System Description”.Automated Reasoning, Bd. 
4130, Nr. LNCS, pp. 292-297, 2006. 
[25] F. Baader and R. Küsters, “Nonstandard Inferences in 
Description Logics: The Story So Far”.Mathematical 
Problems from Applied LogicI, Bd. 4, Springer New York, pp. 
1-75, 2006. 
[26] D. Estival, C. Nowak,and A. Zschorn, “Towards Ontology-
Based Natural Language Processing”.The Workshop on NLP 
and XML (NLPXML-2004): RDF/RDFS and OWL in 
Language 
Technology, 
Strousburg, 
Association 
for 
Computational Linguistics, pp 59-66, 2004. 
[27] C. Menzel, “Reference Ontologies - Application Ontologies: 
Either/Or or Both/And?”The KI2003 Workshop on Reference 
Ontologies and Application Ontologies, 2003. 
[28] S. E. Middleton, D. D. Roure,and N. R. Shadbolt, “Ontology-
Based Recommender Systems”.Handbook on Ontologies, 
Springer, pp. 779-796, 2009. 
[29] M. Á. Rodrígues-García, L. O. Mendoza, R. Valencia-García, 
A. Lopez-Lorca,and G. Beydoun, “Ontology-Based Music 
Recommender System, Distributed Computing and Artificial 
Intelligence”. 12th International Conference of the series 
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, Vol. 373, 
Springer International Publishing, pp. 39-46, 2015. 
[30] G. Lakoff and M. Johnson, Metaphors We Live By. The 
University of Chicago Press, 1980. 
[31] F. Ricci, L. Rokrach,and B. Shapira, “Introduction to 
Recommender Systems Handbook”.Recommender Systems 
Handbook, Springer, pp. 1-35, 2010. 
[32] R. Burke, “Hybrid web recommender systems”.The Adaptive 
Web, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, pp. 377-408, 2007. 
[33] P. Resnick and H. R. Varian, “Recommender systems”. 
Communications of the ACM vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 56-58, 1997. 
[34] COST, COST Action, COST European Cooperation in 
Science 
and 
Technology. 
[Online] 
Available 
fromhttp://www.cost.eu/COST_Actions, 
7 
July 
2015. 
[retrieved: July, 2016] 
[35] S. Bechhofer, F. v. Harmelen, J. Hendler, I. Horrocks, D. L. 
McGuinness, P. F. Patel-Schneider, and L. A. Stein, “OWL 
Web 
Ontology 
Language”. 
W3C 
Recommendation. 
[Online]Available 
from 
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-ref/ 
[retrieved: September, 2016] 
[36] COSCH, COSCHKR, Colour and Space in Cultural 
Heritage.[Online] Available from www.cosch.info/coschkr 
[retrieved: July 2016] 
[37] M. C. Suárez-Figueroa, A. Gómez-Pérez, and M. Fernandez-
Lopez. "The NeOn Methodology framework: A scenario-
based methodology for ontology development." Applied 
Ontology 10, no. 2,pp. 107-145, 2015. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

