A Layered Model for Knowledge Transfer 
 
Felix Schiele, Fritz Laux  
Fakultät Informatik 
Reutlingen University  
Reutlingen, Germany 
Felix.Schiele@Reutlingen-University.de 
Fritz.Laux@Reutlingen-University.de 
Thomas M Connolly 
School of Computing 
University of the West of Scotland 
Paisley, UK 
Thomas.connolly@uws.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract— Knowledge transfer is very important to our 
knowledge-based society and many approaches have been 
proposed to describe this transfer. However, these approaches 
take a rather abstract view on knowledge transfer, which 
makes implementation difficult. In order to address this issue, 
we introduce a layered model for knowledge transfer that 
describes the individual steps of knowledge transfer in more 
detail. This paper gives a description of the process and also an 
example of the application of the layered model for knowledge 
transfer. 
Keywords-knowledge 
transfer; 
transfer of 
knowledge; 
knowledge conversion; impart knowledge. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In our knowledge-based society, the relevance of 
knowledge transfer is increasing. Knowledge management 
and the understanding of economic coherency can help an 
organization to handle the challenges of an increasingly fast-
evolving environment [1]. The transfer of knowledge from 
one person to another is of major importance for enterprises 
[2]. The Socialization, Externalization, Combination, and 
Internalization (SECI) Model of Nonaka and Takeuchi [3] is 
an approach that supports organizations in the handling of 
the important knowledge resource and describes knowledge 
conversions between internal and external knowledge. 
However, the SECI Model does not contain precise 
descriptions of knowledge transfer. This paper aims to 
introduce a model for knowledge transfer that makes 
problems emerging during the transfer visible and 
explainable, and facilitates its implementation through a 
more detailed and clearer structuring. 
This paper is structured as follows: Section II discusses 
and provides working definitions of data, information and 
knowledge. Section III discusses existing communications 
models and Section IV proposes a model of knowledge 
transfer that aims to reduce errors on each of the knowledge 
levels. Section V draws conclusions and discusses future 
directions. 
II. 
DATA, INFORMATION, KNOWLEDGE, CONVERSATION, 
AND COMMUNICATION  
As mentioned by Nonaka [4], the terms information and 
knowledge are sometimes used interchangeably even though 
they have different meanings. In her study on the wisdom 
hierarchy, Rowley [5] pointed out that it is especially 
important to define the concepts of data, information, and 
knowledge. Since this paper focuses on the transfer of 
knowledge, the following section presents definitions to 
distinguish the terms data, information and knowledge. 
Having examined various definitions the authors will present 
their own definitions, which are based on some of the 
previously introduced ones. 
A. Data 
Hasler Roumois [6] stated that data consist of symbols 
that are combined into words by using syntax. The words 
receive a semantic meaning when they are associated to 
things. Davenport and Prusak [7] describe data as the raw 
material for information without an intrinsic meaning. A data 
set can contain facts about an event or thing. This is also the 
view of Wormell cited in Boisot and Canals [8] that data are 
alphabetic or numeric signs that without context do not have 
any meaning. Rainer [9] characterized data items as “an 
elementary description of things, events, activities, and 
transactions that are recorded, classified, and stored but are 
not organized to convey any specific meaning.” Ackoff [10] 
viewed data as “symbols that represent properties of objects, 
events and their environment. They are products of 
observation.” Frické [11] criticized the opinion of those who 
say that data have to be true, which means that the statement 
of the data must be true. The following example confirms 
Frické’s criticism: consider a data set containing incorrect or 
imprecise data, then according to the others this data would 
not be considered data. Weggeman [12] differentiates 
between hard and soft data. If the measuring technique and 
the measurement that created the data are unequivocal, 
Weggeman describes it as hard data, otherwise the data are 
softer. 
Weggeman’s 
classification 
requires, 
however, 
knowledge about the data and the things they represent 
which is beyond the scope of data, instead part of the scope 
of information.  
1) Definition: data  
Data consist of symbols that are combined into words by 
using syntax. Data are produced by humans or machines. 
They can be the result of observations of the real world, 
descriptions of abstract things, or the result of processing 
existing data. Data cannot be true or false since this decision 
is beyond the scope of data. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

B. Information 
In the definition of information, there are two 
fundamentally different theories. The more technical 
approach characterizes information as data where context has 
been added [13]. In the more philosophical approach it 
depends on the receiver whether something is information or 
only data. Hasler Roumois [6] stated that when people 
recognize the meaning of data and consider their relevance 
they become information. Similarly, Davis and Olson [14] 
view information as data that has been processed into a form 
that is meaningful to the recipient. Dretske [15] noted about 
information: “Roughly speaking, information is that 
commodity capable of yielding knowledge, and what 
information a signal carries is what we can learn from it. If 
everything I say to you is false, then I have given you no 
information”. However, the recipient of the message may 
receive the meta information that the other person is lying, 
Dretske stated. Weggeman [12] provides the example that an 
author will look at his book as information whereas others 
may consider it initially as a collection of data. It is up to the 
receiver to consider whether the data are relevant or not. 
Weggeman argues that data becomes information even if it is 
irrelevant to the recipient, because the assessment is a form 
of recognition that leads to information. As stated in the 
example from Dretske, the recipient may receive meta 
information. For this analysis the receiver had to compare the 
message with his personal knowledge base. If he already 
knew the content, this may lead to reinforcement by the 
additional confirmation through the message. Therefore, the 
authors agree with Dretske that the receiver may achieve 
meta information, but in this case the data does not become 
information. Rainer and Cegielski [9] described information 
as organized data that have meaning and value to a recipient. 
1) Definition: information 
Data becomes information when a person receives data, 
decodes them, recognizes the meaning and considers them 
relevant. If the data do not contain anything new for the 
receiver, the data do not become information. However, they 
may result in meta information, such as confirmation of the 
known. 
C. Knowledge 
For the processing of information the existing knowledge 
is of crucial importance. Wormell, cited in Boisot and Canals 
[8], believes knowledge is enriched information by a 
person’s or a system’s own experience; it is cognitive based; 
it is not transferable, but through information we can 
communicate about it. Dretske represents the relation of 
information and knowledge as follows: “Knowledge is 
identified with information-produced (or sustained) belief, 
but the information a person receives is relative to what he 
or she already knows about the possibilities at the source” 
[15]. About knowledge Polanyi [16] said: “I shall reconsider 
human knowledge from the fact that we can know more than 
we can tell”. Thus he shows that knowledge has a secret or 
tacit part and not everything a person knows can be passed. 
Polanyi describes explicit knowledge, which in turn can be 
expressed 
in 
formal, 
semantic 
language, 
and 
tacit 
knowledge, which is personalized and therefore hard to 
express [17]. According to Nonaka [18] explicit knowledge 
is knowledge that can be articulated into formal language, 
such as words, mathematical expressions, specifications and 
computer programmes, and can be readily transmitted to 
others. This is in contrast to tacit knowledge, which is 
personalised and based upon experience, context and the 
actions of an individual; tacit knowledge resides in 
individuals who may be unaware that they possess such 
knowledge. There is also implicit knowledge, which refers to 
knowledge that is revealed in task performance without any 
corresponding phenomenal awareness; implicit knowledge is 
often expressed unintentionally. This characteristic is 
described as type dimension of knowledge [19]. For this 
article, the explicit type of knowledge represents the most 
important knowledge type, because it is the knowledge that 
can be easily externalized. Weggeman [12] firmly believes 
that information and knowledge only exist inside the person 
whereas data can exist outside a person. Davenport and 
Prusak [7] describe knowledge as bound to a person: “It 
[knowledge] originates and is applied in the mind of the 
knowers.” 
The 
transformation 
from 
information 
to 
knowledge takes place when the information is linked to the 
existing knowledge through a thinking process [6]. The 
authors propose the term knowledge base as the collection of 
all facts, rules, and values which are represented in the brain 
of a person. Spitzer [20] depicts that through the learning 
process links are created or dissolved in the brain, which 
results in changes of the knowledge base. Spitzer [20] points 
out that messages, which have the quality of relevance and 
novelty, can be memorized easily. 
1) Definition: knowledge 
Information becomes knowledge if a thinking process 
occurs in which the information is linked to the existing 
knowledge and is stored persistently. The quality of 
information being relevant and new, insofar as there is a 
difference to the existing knowledge, encourages the 
permanent memorization of information. Based on the input 
by the information, the knowledge base of the person may be 
extended or restructured. 
D. Knowledge Conversion 
 Nonaka and Takeuchi [3] described the conversation of 
knowledge 
in 
their 
SECI 
Model. 
For 
this 
work 
externalization and internalization of knowledge are of 
particular importance. Nonaka and Takeuchi describe the 
internalization as conversion from explicit to tacit knowledge 
and the externalization as conversion from tacit to explicit 
knowledge.  The authors use the concepts of externalization 
and internalization with respect to the conversion of data to 
knowledge and vice versa. Externalization enables a person 
to converse parts of the personal knowledge base, making 
them accessible to others. For example, if someone writes 
down what he knows, everyone except him will refer to this 
as data. Internalization will happen when a reader receives 
new knowledge by reading and learning from it.  
Transfer and persistent storage require an externalization 
of knowledge in a recognized and structured language. The 
various levels of messages are related to levels of semiotics, 
which are syntactic, semantic and pragmatic. Krcmar [21] 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

states that syntax declares the rules according to which 
characters can be combined to words and which can be 
combined to sentences. The relation between words and 
objects represented by the words as the relationship between 
characters is denoted by semantics. The intention of a person 
sending words as a message is explained as pragmatic. 
E. Communication 
The protagonist of systems theory, Luhmann [22], 
explained communication as a process consisting of three 
steps of selection. In the first step, the sender decides which 
information he wants to pass on. In the second step, he 
selects a single message from many possible messages. In 
the last step, the recipient selects the information out of the 
message thereby completing the communication. Based on 
Luhmann’s work, Berghaus [23] describes several results, 
which can occur if a sender is forwarding a message to a 
receiver. 
 
Case 1: The receiver picks up the message and 
interprets it in the desired way. 
 
Case 2: The receiver picks up the message but 
interprets it differently. 
 
Case 3: The receiver does not recognize the message 
as a message. 
Only one of the three cases achieves the desired result. In 
this paper the second case and the various reasons for the 
error in communication will be considered in more detail. 
The third case plays a minor role as it is assumed that the 
message is detected as a message because only the messages 
presented as data are considered. 
III. 
RELATED WORK: COMMUNICATION MODELS 
A. Schema of Social Communication 
Figure 1 shows Aufermann’s [24] model for social 
communication in which two parties are involved. The 
sender encodes the statement he intends to submit in a 
message. Therefore, he uses his own character set to encode 
the message. The message is sent via a medium to the 
recipient whereby spatial and temporal distance is overcome. 
When receiving the message the recipient will use his own 
character set for the decoding of the message.  
 
Figure 1. Schema of Social Communication [24] (German) 
The model illustrates the important point of the character 
sets used by sender and recipient and the need to use only 
those characters that are within the shared character set. 
B. A Mathematical Theory of Communication 
In Shannon’s description of the operation of a 
communication system, the sender is named “information 
source” and the receiver is called “destination” [25]. 
Shannon has investigated the frequency of characters 
contained in a message, and compared the expected and the 
actual occurrence of a character.  Using the ‘entropy’ 
Shannon invented a key figure to measure the information 
contained in a message.  Due to the technical use of the 
model, specifically the control of missiles, the emphasis is on 
the transmission of the signal [26]. In addition to 
Aufermann’s schema of social communication, Shannon’s 
model describes the influence of the transmission of a signal 
by a noise source. 
C. Four Forms of Knowledge Conversion 
The SECI Model, developed by Nonaka and Takeuchi 
[3] is focused on the knowledge conversions during 
knowledge transfer. The description of four conversions 
takes place at an abstract level showing the particularities of 
each conversion. However, a detailed description of the 
individual conversions is missing. Nonaka and Takeuchi 
describe socialization as a direct knowledge transfer from the 
tacit knowledge of one person to the tacit knowledge of 
another person, enabled by action and observation. However, 
this abstract view does not show exactly how knowledge is 
transferred in this case. A situation in which socialization 
happens may arise when master and apprentice work 
together. Even though the master does not express his 
knowledge intentionally he externalizes it through his action. 
Based on the perceived action and the results of action, the 
apprentice will unconsciously obtain knowledge by 
internalization. 
D. A Hierarchical Modelling Approach to Intellectual 
Capital Development 
Ammann [19] describes knowledge conversions from 
one person to another, in which the different types of 
knowledge are taken into account. In addition to the 
knowledge conversions described in the SECI Model the 
conversion from latent or conscious knowledge to explicit 
knowledge is described. Even though Ammann’s approach 
represents knowledge transfer in greater detail, this approach 
does not give a precise description of how the transmission 
works. 
IV. 
MODEL OF KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER 
A message is a possible way to impart knowledge. The 
correct interpretation of the message may be prevented by 
interferences that can affect the message. As described by 
Shannon the disruption may be caused by a noise source 
disturbing the medium transmitting the message. In addition 
to the interferences from the outside that may influence the 
transport medium, the personal knowledge base of the sender 
and the receiver may also affect the transfer. The influence 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

of the transfer through the personal knowledge of sender and 
receiver can take place in four layers. The interpretation of 
the message depends on the elements that are used and 
whether they are part of the knowledge base of the receiver 
and equivalent to the elements of the sender’s knowledge 
base. 
A. Layers that Influence the Transfer 
The four layers that influence the transfer of a message 
from one person to another are code, syntactic, semantic and 
pragmatic layer. The concept of a knowledge transfer 
through different layers was influenced by the OSI 
Reference Model [27]. Figure 2 illustrates the transfer of a 
message from the sender to the receiver passing through the 
four layers. 
 
Figure 2. Knowledge Transfer through four layers 
 
1) Code Layer 
At the lowest level of the layer for transfer is the code. 
The code consists of symbols or signs that represent the 
smallest unit, which forms the basis of the higher layers. In 
the case of written language, which is the focus here, the 
smallest elements are the characters, , taken from an 
alphabet . In the case of spoken language it would be 
phonemes, or in sign language gestures. 
2) Syntactic Layer 
The second layer is constituted by the syntax that 
contains rules for the combination of signs or symbols. In 
written language, L, the characters  are combined to form 
words  by the use of production rules P. 
3) Semantic Layer 
The third layer contains the semantics that establish the 
relation between words  and meaning m. This relation, 
called semantics s(, m), connects the word to its meaning, 
which can be a real world entity or an abstract thing. 
4) Pragmatic Layer 
The top layer is the pragmatic layer. Pragmatics p(s, c) 
connects the term represented in semantics with a concept c. 
The concept contains the course of action and the aims and 
moral concepts that are represented in the human brain. They 
influence the thinking and acting of the sender. 
B. Process of a Knowledge Transfer via Messages 
The premise of the following example is the desire of a 
person, called sender, to communicate something to another 
person, called receiver. Even if the model is general, the 
focus is on the written notification. 
1) Sender: Pragmatic Layer 
 
The core of the message is represented in the pragmatic 
layer. The aims and moral concepts of the sender do not only 
affect the externalization of the message, but also the 
assumptions he makes about the receiver.  
2) Sender: Semantic Layer 
This layer contains all words  and their relation to the 
objects. The sender must choose appropriate words that are 
available in his personal knowledge base. Appropriate 
means, not only the term which fits best, but also which refer 
to the knowledge of the recipient. 
3) Sender: Syntactic Layer 
 
This layer contains the rules P according to which the 
sentences and terms are made. The words  chosen to carry 
the meaning are wrapped in sentences. 
4) Sender: Code Layer  
To transfer the message as written communication the 
sender has to write the words  by using characters  that 
are part of an alphabet  of a language. 
5) Transfer: Message  
The communication medium (e.g. letter, email) transmits 
the data from the sender to the receiver. 
6) Receiver: Code Layer 
 
The receiver will view the message and read the 
characters , if he knows them. In the case where the 
message contains characters from an alphabet unknown to 
the receiver, the transfer might be disrupted. With only small 
deviations of the used characters a reconstruction might be 
possible, otherwise it can lead to misinterpretation or stop the 
decryption. 
7) Receiver: Syntactic Layer 
 
The receiver will compose the characters  to words  
and sentences if they are part of a language L he knows. As 
in the decoding of the code small difference can be 
compensated under favourable circumstances, otherwise 
misinterpretation or stopping the decryption are the 
consequences. 
8) Receiver: Semantic Layer 
 
Almost simultaneously with the combination of words 
and sentences the receiver will put the terms in relation to the 
things for which they stand. The more the receiver knows the 
context and the sender of the message, the easier it is to 
capture the meaning of the text. 
9) Receiver: Pragmatic Layer  
In a final step the receiver will interpret the message in 
relation to his own aims and values. The things the receiver 
knows about the sender as well as the assumptions regarding 
the receiver that are influenced by the sender’s own values 
and aims, play an important role in the decoding of the 
message. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

C. Influence of Overlapping Knowledge 
Knowledge about 
the receiver 
is 
an 
important 
requirement for a successful and lossless transfer of a 
message. The better the sender knows the receiver, the easier 
he can encode the message. A proper encoding of the 
message can be done by using elements that exist identically 
in the personal knowledge base of the sender as well as in the 
personal knowledge base of the receiver. If the receiver is 
unknown, only assumptions can be made to support the 
selection. The other way around it is easier for the receiver to 
decode the message if he knows the sender of the message 
very well. Figure 3 visualizes the overlapping of the 
knowledge in different layers. 
 
Figure 3. Overlapping Knowledge 
D. Example of Knowledge Transfer 
A challenge in knowledge transfer is the different 
knowledge base of sender and receiver. In companies, this 
situation may occur when a business analyst explains a 
modelled process to a technician in a department.  The 
business analyst, an expert in business process modelling 
(BPM), will interview the employees of the department to 
review the department’s processes. During the interview he 
will make notes and sketches, which he subsequently 
transfers to business process models.  
The business analyst will show and explain the modelled 
processes to the departmental employees to check that 
everything has been modelled properly so that model and 
practised processes are consistent. When explaining the 
model to the technician, the business analyst must take into 
account that the technician might not have (sufficient) 
knowledge of a business process modelling language. We 
assume that the business analyst and the technician speak the 
same 
language 
and 
have 
had 
similar 
schooling. 
Consequently, symbols that exist in their knowledge base are 
nearly equal although the business analyst might know 
additional symbols such as those used in the business process 
modelling languages. This consensus also occurs in the 
syntactical layer, which contains rules to build words, and 
the semantic layer, where things are represented through 
words. The largest differences in the knowledge base are 
probably found in the pragmatic layer. The basic concepts of 
aim and moral, that are shaped by education, culture, and 
environment, may be similar for both. However, the business 
analyst might have a larger knowledge base in the respective 
aims and concepts of BPM, while the technician might have 
a larger knowledge base in the respective aims, processes, 
and concepts of his special field.  
The business analyst, after seeing that the technician has 
not mastered a business process modelling language, will 
avoid using terms and concepts unknown to the technician. 
When explaining the model, the business analyst will 
introduce the necessary symbols, terms, and concepts to 
explain the process. He can try to use simple explanations 
and he can bring in additional information that facilitates the 
interpretation of the message. The interpretation of the 
symbols is dependent on the knowledge base of the 
interpreting person. The interpretation can be facilitated by 
restrictions; in this example, the terms used for the process 
are terms from the domain of the department as well as from 
BPM. The context the terms are used in thereby facilitates 
the correct interpretation of the process. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
Knowledge transfer is affected by many different 
parameters. Because of the relevance of knowledge transfer, 
it is important to understand the impact of the different 
parameters. The sociologists Luhmann and Aufermann deal 
with communication aspects but they neglect the issue of 
implementation. Shannon’s model focuses on the technical 
implementation but is restricted to the layers of code and 
syntax. The model of Nonaka and Takeuchi deals with 
organizational knowledge and knowledge conversion, but the 
practical transmission is not considered in detail. Ammann 
describes knowledge conversions in more detail. However, 
this model is still too abstract to facilitate implementation. 
The approach presented in this paper addresses these issues 
by introducing a model with different layers. The intention 
behind introducing the layers is to reduce errors on each of 
the knowledge levels. Thus the process of knowledge 
transfer is divided into several steps, which can be examined 
separately.  This makes it easier to detect and identify errors 
and facilitates the prevention of misinterpretation.  
The model is to be used for knowledge transfer in the 
area of business processes. The important knowledge of a 
company, describing the procedures for the production of 
products and services, is incorporated in business processes. 
Due to the fact that business processes represent important 
corporate knowledge they are an interesting area of 
application. With respect to the description of the various 
levels of the model, an appropriate representation will be 
used. The application of the model on business processes 
aims to reduce errors both in modelling and analysing 
business processes. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Dalkir, Knowledge Management in Theory and Practice: 
MIT Press, 2011 
[2] T. H. Powell and V. Ambrosini, “A Pluralistic Approach to 
Knowledge 
Management 
Practices: 
Evidence 
from 
Consultancy Companies,” Long Range Planning, vol. 45, no. 
2–3, 2012, pp. 209–226, http://www.sciencedirect.com/ 
science/article/pii/S002463011200009X, 
[accessed 
June 
2013].  
[3] I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi, The knowledge-creating 
company. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

[4] I. Nonaka, “A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge 
creation,” Organization Science, vol. 5, 1994, pp. 14–37, 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.115.
2590, [accessed July 2012]. 
[5] J. Rowley, “The wisdom hierarchy: representations of the 
DIKW hierarchy,” J. Information Science, vol. 33, no. 2, 
2007, pp. 163–180. 
[6] U. Hasler Roumois, Studienbuch Wissensmanagement: 
Grundlagen der Wissensarbeit in Wirtschafts-, Non-Profit- 
und Public-Organisationen, translated: Record of Study 
Knowledge management: Foundations of knowledge work in 
business-, non-profit- and public-organization, 2nd ed. 
Zürich: Orell Füssli, 2010. 
[7] T. H. Davenport and L. Prusak, Working knowledge: How 
organizations manage what they know. Boston, Mass: 
Harvard Business School Press, 2000. 
[8] M. Boisot and A. Canals, “Data, information and knowledge: 
have we got it right?,” Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 
vol. 14, no. 1, 2004, pp. 43–67. 
[9] R. K. Rainer and C. G. Cegielski, Introduction to information 
systems, 3rd ed. Hoboken, N.J, Chichester: Wiley; John 
Wiley [distributor], 2011. 
[10] R. L. Ackoff, “From Data to Wisdom,” Journal of Applied 
System Analysis, vol. 16, 1989, pp. 3–9. 
[11] M. Frické, “The knowledge pyramid: a critique of the DIKW 
hierarchy,” J. Information Science, vol. 35, no. 2, 2009, pp. 
131–142. 
[12] M. Weggeman, Wissensmanagement: Der richtige Umgang 
mit der wichtigsten Ressource des Unternehmens, translated: 
Knowledge management: The right way to deal with the most 
important resource of the company, 1st ed. Bonn: MITP-Verl, 
1999. 
[13] J. S. Valacich, C. Schneider, and L. M. Jessup, Information 
systems today: Managing in the digital world, 4th ed. Upper 
Saddle River, N.J: Prentice Hall, 2010. 
[14] G. B. Davis and M. H. Olson, Management information 
systems: Conceptual foundations, structure, and development, 
2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1985. 
[15] F. I. Dretske, Knowledge and the flow of information. 
Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications, 1999. 
[16] M. Polanyi, The tacit dimension. London, England: Cox & 
Wyman Ltd, 1966. 
[17] I. Nonaka, P. Byosiere, C. C. Borucki, and N. Konno, 
“Organizational Knowledge Creation Theory: A First 
Comprehensive Test,” Organization Science, 1994. 
[18] I. Nonaka, “The Knowledge-Creating Company,” Harvard 
Business Review, vol. Nov/Dec91, no. Vol. 69 Issue 6, 1991, 
pp. 96–104. 
[19] E. Ammann, “A Hierarchical Modelling Approach to 
Intellectual Capital Development,” in Electronic Journal of 
Knowledge Management Volume 8 Issue 2, C. Bratianu, Ed, 
2010, pp. 181–191. 
[20] M. Spitzer, Lernen: Gehirnforschung und die Schule des 
Lebens, translated: Learning: Brain Research and the School 
of Life, 1st ed. München: Spektrum Akademischer Verlag, 
2007. 
[21] H. 
Krcmar, 
Informationsmanagement, 
translated: 
“Information management”, 5th ed. Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer, 2010. 
[22] N. Luhmann, Soziale Systeme: Grundriss einer allgemeinen 
Theorie, translated: Social Systems: Outline of a general 
theory, 1st ed. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1987. 
[23] M. Berghaus, Luhmann leicht gemacht: Eine Einführung in 
die Systemtheorie, translated: Luhmann made easy: An 
Introduction to Systems Theory,  3rd ed. Köln: Böhlau, 2011. 
[24] J. 
Aufermann, 
Kommunikation 
und 
Modernisierung: 
Meinungsführer 
und 
Gemeinschaftsempfang 
im 
Kommunikationsprozess, translated: Communication and 
modernisation: opinion leaders and community reception in 
the 
communication process, 
München-Pullach: Verlag 
Dokumentation, 1971. 
[25] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” 
SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev, vol. 5, no. 1, 
2001, p. 3. 
[26] A. Roch, Claude E. Shannon: Spielzeug, Leben und die 
geheime 
Geschichte 
seiner 
Theorie 
der 
Information, 
translated: Claude E. Shannon: Toys, life and the secret 
history of his theory of information, 1st ed. Berlin: 
Gegenstalt, 2009. 
[27] H. Zimmermann, “OSI Reference Model--The ISO Model of 
Architecture 
for 
Open 
Systems 
Interconnection,” 
Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 28, no. 4, 1980, 
pp. 
425–432, 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp? 
arnumber=1094702, [accessed May 2013]. 
 
 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

