Semantic Supply Chain Management 
 
Katalin Ternai 
Department of Information Systems 
Corvinus University of Budapest 
1093 Budapest, Fővám tér 13-15., HUNGARY 
ternai@informatika.uni-corvinus.hu 
Ildikó Szabó 
Department of Information Systems 
Corvinus University of Budapest 
1093 Budapest, Fővám tér 13-15., HUNGARY 
iszabo@informatika.uni-corvinus.hu
 
 
Abstract—Small and medium enterprises formed into a supply 
chain are working in a multi-cultural and multilingual 
environment.  The eBEST platform equips these enterprises 
and their associations with state-of-the-art software tools for 
ecosystem-wide business collaboration. To ensure effective 
collaboration through the whole supply chain visible 
communication, traceable workflow and process management 
are required by users. In the eBEST project the semantic 
interoperability was realized by ontological approach and is 
tested by pilots in nowadays. 
Keywords-supply 
chain 
managemen; 
ontology 
based 
communication and workflow management 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The efficiencies of Supply Chain Management (SCM) 
are often impaired by inconsistent exchange and sharing of 
information semantics among supply chain partners. 
Semantics-based technologies, especially ontologies have 
key role in Semantic Supply Chain Management - they are 
responsible 
for domain 
conceptualization, 
structuring 
knowledge 
embedded 
in 
business 
processes. 
The 
standardized ontologies for Supply Chain Management 
enhance the interoperability between the various Supply 
Chain Management systems. They also serve as a basis for 
building more specialized ontologies, for example, process 
ontology for building workflow models. To use ontologies in 
the development of Supply Chain Management systems 
results reusable, easy to integrate applications.  
This paper aims at presenting an ontology-based SCM 
platform within the eBEST project (Empowering Business 
Ecosystems of Small Service Enterprises to Face the 
Economic Crisis) [8]. The project deals with equipping 
SMEs and SME associations with state-of-the-art software 
tools for ecosystem-wide business collaboration. The 
purpose of this paper is to discuss how ontologies may be 
used to raise interoperability and shared understanding in 
inter-organisational processes. Ontologies also play decisive 
role in turning process models into working software, 
providing a visual and textual representation of the 
processes, data, information, resources, collaborations and 
other measurements. 
The paper will be structured as follows: In Section 2, 
theoretical overview about ontologies and Supply Chain 
Management is described. In Section 3, the SCM platform is 
presented in the light of supported ontologies. Finally, 
conclusion and future work are shown.  
II. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
A. Supply chain management 
Supply chain management (SCM) is a rather practical-
oriented 
than 
theoretical 
domain. 
Due 
to 
the 
multidisciplinary origin and the evolution way of this 
domain there isn’t universal supply chain management 
definition. Mentzer et al. [16], Tan [19] and Cooper et al. [5] 
consider SCM as a management philosophy, whilst the next 
definition given by Council of Supply Chain Management 
Professionals emphasizes rather the activities and processes 
of SCM. This definition reflects better the eBEST approach 
than the others. 
"Supply Chain Management encompasses the planning 
and management of all activities involved in sourcing and 
procurement, conversion, and all logistics management 
activities. Importantly, it also includes coordination and 
collaboration with channel partners, which can be suppliers, 
intermediaries, third-party service providers, and customers 
[6].” 
Based on this definition we can distinguish two main 
groups of supply chain activities which are related to each 
other: 
planning 
and 
management 
of 
all 
activities; 
coordination and collaboration with channel partners.  
There are several approaches to present SCM processes 
[7][18], etc.  The most widely accepted framework for 
evaluating and comparing supply chain activities and their 
performance is the Supply Chain Operations Reference 
SCOR® model [18]. It is built on five primary management 
processes of Plan, Source, Make, Deliver and Return  
The planning process provides companies a strategy for 
managing all the resources to satisfy the actual or forecasted 
demand with products or services.  
The sourcing strategy is based on guarantee material 
availability in appropriate quantities at the right time for both 
internal purposes and for sales and distribution. Considering 
stocks and instruments providing production capacities 
companies can get an extent list up about the materials and 
tools, and they can start to choose the suppliers to deliver 
these goods.  
The manufacturing flow process includes all activities 
which are responsible for making products and establishing 
manufacturing flexibility required by serving target markets.  
The activities of deliver process in SCOR model are 
demand management, order management and warehouse 
management.  
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

In the return process, the supply chain planners have to 
create and manage a flexible network on both supplier and 
customer side in order to handle the defective, excess 
products or recyclable/dangerous garbage.  
Due to the complexity of supply chain, we can 
distinguish 
demand-side 
collaboration, 
supply-side 
collaboration or overall synchronization [16].  
Barratt showed that “collaborative” culture is one of the 
major supporting elements of collaboration. It consists of the 
following elements: trust, mutuality, information exchange 
and openness/communication [1]. 
B. Ontology 
In 
our 
interpretation, 
semantic 
supply 
chain 
management means the support of main activities of SCM – 
managing business processes, collaboration and coordination 
with channel partners – by semantic technologies. 
Ontologies have key role in Semantic Supply Chain 
Management; 
they 
are 
responsible 
for 
domain 
conceptualization, structuring knowledge embedded in 
business processes. Considering the scope of ontology-based 
applications (for example cooperative information systems, 
information retrieval, knowledge management, system 
analysis and design, etc.) we can distinguish the next three 
categories of ontology applications which are related to the 
above-mentioned SCM activities:  
 Communication: 
between 
humans 
- 
informal, 
unambiguous ontology can be used for these purposes. 
 Cooperation: between systems - it means translation 
among different tools, paradigms, languages and software 
instruments. In this case the ontology is the basis of data 
change. 
 System design and analysis - the ontology can support 
the analysis and design of software systems with 
submitting a conceptual description. 
The ontology approach has several advantages: 
 Reusability: the ontology is the root of the formal 
description and coding of the most important entities, 
attributes, process and its internal relations. This formal 
description 
provides 
(maybe 
through 
automated 
translation procedure) the reusability and the common or 
shared use inside the given software.  
 Knowledge 
acquisition: 
speed 
and 
reliability 
of 
knowledge acquisition can be accelerated, if ontology can 
be used for analysis or knowledge base creation. 
 Reliability: automatic verification of consistency can be 
assured by the formal description.  
 Specification: 
ontology 
enables 
the 
analysis 
of 
requirements and the determination of   information 
systems specification.  
 Standardization: top-level ontologies can be used well in 
different situations. New types of task and application 
ontologies can be derived from these top-level models 
with specialization. 
 
Ontologies have key role in semantic web [15]. More 
authors draw parallels between ontologies and the role of 
XML in data representation. Ontology describes not only 
data, but also the regularity of connection among data. 
Probably the most important description language of 
semantic web is the OWL (Web Ontology Language)[17] 
preferred by W3C[22]. 
 
In the process ontology, the goal is to be able to 
apply machine reasoning for the translation between the 
business process and executable process spheres, in 
particular for the discovery of processes, process fragments 
and for process composition [2]. Within process ontology 
two types of ontologies are utilized: domain ontologies and 
process specific ontologies. Domain ontologies support 
process modelling in terms of describing the actual data 
that is processed during process execution. Via this 
semantic description of the data, business process analysis 
can be semantically enhanced since the semantic meaning 
of the data is preserved during all phases of the process 
lifecycle [13]. 
C. Supply Chain Management supported by ontologies 
In SCM, the ontology development is to facilitate 
effective information change and knowledge sharing among 
collaborative supply chain partners [21], to model 
operational processes of supply chains and to capture and 
organize 
knowledge 
necessary 
for 
managing 
these 
workflows [3]. In agent-based approach ontologies can serve 
as a knowledge base to manage the agent behaviour through 
a conversation [12] or a base of workflow process modelling 
to facilitate customer service [21].  
In the eBEST approach, ontologies serve as a 
standardized base to exchange data and to model workflow 
process. But the role of our ontologies firstly is to avoid 
communication problems like linguistic and translating 
problems, and to support the cooperation of companies 
community as an ecosystem by providing tools for modelling 
collaboration 
processes 
beyond 
built-in 
operational 
processes. 
III. 
THE E-BEST PLATFORM 
 The main objective of the eBEST project was the 
introduction of new collaboration practices in ecosystems of 
SMEs belonging to different industrial sectors. So, it aims at 
providing easily accessible ICT applications and services to 
enable community building, SME network constitution, and 
SME network operation for the network lead and its 
members. The eBEST platform supports the operation of 
digital business ecosystems. These are clusters of companies, 
small companies in particular, that collaborate within an 
operational context. These companies collaborate with each 
other in a multi-cultural and multilingual environment. In the 
first phase of the project, the collaboration habits and needs 
in the business ecosystems were analyzed and the 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

fundamental functional and non-functional requirements 
were determined [9]: 
 Help shaping the ecosystem: to support the work of a 
group of Ecosystem Architects who are responsible for 
discovering, exploring and shaping interesting potential 
ecosystems. 
 Find out collaboration units: to grasp business 
opportunities proposed by costumers and to participate or 
promote the definition of the relative distributed 
workflows. 
 Increase company visibility: to form a supply chain 
where a company can play a supplier and a costumer role 
simultaneously implies the creation of visible profiles 
and offers provided by companies. 
 Ease communication between companies: to provide a 
private workspace to manage documents and clearly 
defined concepts and terms both in offer and demand 
catalogue too in order to facilitate the exchange a variety 
of documents with the minimum need of human 
intervention.  
 Support network planning: to find out the most 
convenient network configuration for each of the services 
to perform. The network planning algorithm assumes that 
a service is associated to a process model, the process is 
composed by activities and each activity can either be 
executed internally or assigned to candidate suppliers. 
 Support internal resource scheduling:  to provide easy but 
effective scheduling functions to assure that the tasks are 
allocated optimally to the available resources and to 
arrange their production by automatically optimise the 
usage of these resources. It is necessary to assure that 
exceptions are efficiently and timely handled to damp 
down perturbations. 
 Semantic interoperability: to create a semantic repository 
where terms, their definitions and linguistic translations 
are 
collected 
in 
order 
to 
facilitate 
document 
transformation and contents translation. 
 Trust building: customers and suppliers must feel 
confident that their transactions will not be intercepted or 
modified, that both sellers and buyers own the identity 
they claim, and that the transaction mechanisms are 
available, secure and legal. 
 Technical issues: the platform must be perceived by 
companies as ready-to-use solution, and accessible by a 
simple web browser etc.. 
In the point of architectural view, the E-best platform 
proposes three interlinked software environments (presented 
by Figure 1) specifically conceived for networked small 
companies, supported by advanced suite of ICT services and 
applications [8]: 
 Ecosystem shaping - offers the functions that every 
association can employ to promote the constitution and 
characterize new company clusters, and improve their 
image over time, out of the ecosystem of its members. 
 Collaboration framework - offers the functions that the 
single cluster can use to seize business opportunities, 
possibly identified by the association, and to prepare 
itself by designing the corresponding distributed 
processes. 
 Operational framework - provides customers, companies 
and company clusters with a suite of operational 
functions enabling them to communicate, plan the 
distributed processes and schedule the internal resources.  
 
Figure  1 The eBEST platform [10] 
In the point of operational view, these requirements 
demand the creation of a transparent communication 
framework and a traceable collaboration framework 
including workflow management and process management 
tools. This transparency of documents and processes is 
ensured by ontological approach. 
A. Communication between ecosystems 
To ensure an effective communication among the players 
of supply chain it is necessary to provide visible company 
profiles (in Company node), overall view about ecosystems 
(in Ecosystem node), documents with semantic contents 
related to the process elements (in Semantic node).  
The following picture illustrates a general eBest 
environment with different ecosystems and configurations 
[11]. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
Figure 2. eBest environment 
 
The functions of these nodes are the next ones: 
 Semantic node functions. The eBest platform is asked to 
facilitate the business communications within an 
European context, hence it is necessary to pay a relevant 
attention to the linguistic and semantic issues.  
 Ecosystem node functions. When many companies cope 
with each other, it is important to provide an unified view 
on their profiles and offers. Hence, this set of functions is 
mainly addressed to improve the ecosystem visibility and 
its capability of attracting potential new customers. 
 Company node functions. This set of functions is 
conceived to let the companies interact with each other 
within an ecosystem. 
Semantic node functions 
The Semantic Node architecture is depicted by Figure 3 
[11].  
 
Figure 3. Semantic Node architecture  
 
Content Layer handles users and roles having access to 
the semantic node, ontology information shared by all the 
nodes within the same ecosystem: business documents 
structure, 
terms 
translations, 
service 
taxonomy 
and 
information of nodes belonging to the same ecosystem.  
 The primary goal of the eBest semantic repository is to 
provide a unique location where terms, definitions and 
linguistic translations are collected. Ontologies represent the 
building blocks of the eBest solution since static contents 
shared among the eBest nodes become defined. The 
ontologies information must be prepared before the eBest 
platform is deployed and any further change actually 
represents a platform update. Hence, ontologies shall be 
considered almost static objects, whose changes must be 
undertaken with care. eBest is based on three ontologies: 
 Business document ontology. It defines which business 
documents are managed within the ecosystem and their 
specific data structures.  
 Localization ontology. It defines the labels, with their 
relevant translations, addressed to feed the eBest 
application user interfaces. 
 Offer taxonomy. It defines a hierarchy of terms 
conceived for the company offer classification. The offer 
taxonomy should take into account the trade-off between 
a wide taxonomy (very detailed classification with sparse 
samples) and a reduced taxonomy (generic classification 
with dense samples). Each taxonomy term is composed 
by a label and a definition. 
Differently from ontologies, the catalogue vocabulary is 
a repository of terms that companies dynamically feed with 
the terms and definitions used to characterize their offers.  
Service 
Layer 
provides 
user 
authentication 
and 
authorization function, terms translation management 
functions, the access to the catalogue vocabulary terms, 
published by companies, by means of distributed queries, the 
access to ontology items, and the download of ontology 
modules for being embedded in the eBest binary 
distributions. 
Application Layer deals with translating terms, updating 
translations and browsing the ontology structures and term 
lists. 
This node is responsible for feeding all platforms with 
semantic documents to foster effective and transparent 
communication, and to realize semantic interoperability. 
 
B. Communication through the operational process  
 
In the operational framework, the ontological support of 
the processes is to facilitate the exchange variety of 
documents through the supply chain. The next table consists 
of the main activities of the supply chain management and 
ontology elements related to them [14]. These elements are 
provided by the Semantic Node.  
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

TABLE I.  
ONTOLOGY CONCEPTS RELATED TO SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT PROCESSES 
Process description 
Ontology concepts 
Network planning 
It is handled in ecosystem shaping. 
Company 
Sourcing 
It is based catalogues which are divided offer and demand parts.  Besides of the Catalogue of 
provided/requested services or goods, where the product families can be described by terms, 
attachments and parameters. Company profile specifies additional metadata about the company 
which can be used to filter out results of the search of prospective customers.  
Company, Service, Parameter, 
Term, Attachment 
Ordering  
Negotiation phase is implemented using Quotation concept, which is used to initiate ordering 
by Customer. Quotation consists of Configurations, which specifies the properties of the 
requested services or goods and conditions for payment and delivery time. 
Seller can simply confirm receipt of the Quotation and Customer can confirm unchanged 
Quotation by Purchase Order concept. 
Proposed changes to Quotation by the Seller are accomplished by direct modification of the 
Quotation where the Seller can indicate changed conditions or parameters. 
Quotation, Order, Configuration, 
Parameter, Term, Attachment 
Fulfilment 
In the current proposal, only proactive Despatch advice send from the Seller to the Customer is 
supported. 
Additionally Seller can send Order Progress concept where communicates order status and 
progress. 
 
Dispatch Advice 
Billing 
All invoicing types (prepayment invoice, pro-forma invoice and normal invoice) are 
implemented using the same Invoice concept.  
 
Invoice 
Maintenance 
Technical assistance or maintenance contracts are service contracts whose main feature is 
continuity over time. These contracts establishes cases, conditions, methods, times and costs of 
the activities that the Supplier is engaged to perform for guaranteeing the correct operation of a 
certain product or service as well as its repair or recovery after a fault.  
 
Contract, Intervention call, 
Intervention report 
 
These ontology concepts have a crucial role in their 
related processes. They carry unambiguous information for 
executing the ecosystem shaping and operational processes 
without any perturbations. Therefore, they ensure the 
visibility of companies and catalogues, and the transparent 
communication and cooperation. So they contribute the trust 
building among companies. 
C. Collaboration framework 
The Collaboration Framework of the eBEST architecture 
serves as a shared environment for business ecosystem 
members, where member companies can cooperate on 
collective 
activity 
like 
tender 
management, 
event 
organisation, marketing and other areas of common interest. 
In order to fulfil this requirement, the ecosystems need a 
workflow management solution that can be freely 
customized for their specific needs. We have developed a 
process definition scheme and the actual software 
implementation for automated generation of collaboration 
workflow management [20]. 
The objective of this section is to present the 
technological innovation achieved during the development 
of the eBEST Collaboration Framework responsible for 
realizing the common environment for SMEs connected 
through a business cluster (business ecosystem) [20]. The 
theoretical focus is given to the experience derived from the 
creation of conceptual models, process model representation 
by ontology definition, and turning the process ontology 
output into workflow supporting application. The eBEST 
project ensured a practical framework for this transition, but 
the overall goal is to conceive a general implementation 
pattern. The building blocks of the proposed architecture are 
well-founded ideas, the innovation lies in utilizing them in a 
coherent theoretical and architectural framework. 
We have defined an ontology based annotation scheme 
for planning collaborative business processes at a 
conceptual level that can be designed by non-IT personnel 
[20]. The annotation scheme is an extension of the OWL 
(Web Ontology Language), that determines the structure 
and attributes of the workflow processes defined by 
business process modelling.  
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
Figure 4.  The event organisation process ontology in Protégé 
 
We have developed the application framework which is 
able to interpret our workflow model and automatically 
generate the working software instance for workflow 
support [20]. 
 
 
Figure 5. eBEST Collaboration Framework workflow interface [4] 
 
 We have validated the processes in real life 
circumstances with clusters utilizing the eBEST framework. 
The general idea is that business clusters themselves are 
empowered to design processes for their specific needs. 
 
D. Validation of the approach 
 
The performance of pilot experiments was foreseen to 
validate the eBEST approach. The relative software services 
with the twofold objective to demonstrate their effectiveness 
and collect hints for their best deployment to a wide 
population of the companies. The following table 
summarises the demo scenarios that were subject to 
experiment and 
grouped according to the eBEST 
components aiming to test. 
 
 
 
TABLE II.  
PILOT SCENARIOS 
 
 
The results from the pilot experiments are showed by 
the following although initial benefits: 
 
SME-AGs have the possibility to use a neutral and 
innovative support tool for shaping communities of 
potential partners as preliminary condition for their 
constitution as steady collaborative networks. This will 
impact on the competitiveness of networked companies 
and then on the survival and possible economic growth 
of entire ecosystems in the involved regions. 
 
Network leads have the possibility to achieve higher 
efficiency levels in coordinating the respective 
networks. The natural consequence is a stronger 
presence on the market and an increased trust in 
customers preferring direct and fast partnership with the 
lead SME on behalf of the entire network rather than 
managing dispersed relations with a number of 
individual suppliers. 
 
Network members have the possibility to collaborate 
with one or more networks or supply chains assuring 
fast responses to each of them without being affected 
by the need of adapting their legacy systems to the 
different leads. In other words they are finally in the 
condition to gain positions in the market according to 
their skills along with their reliability and collaboration 
efficiency. 
In addition, the resulting collaboration framework and 
ICT platform have proved to be at the same time general 
enough for meeting the requirements of a variety of business 
ecosystem of service companies, and flexible enough to 
adapt to the single specific case.  
IV.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, an ontology-based Supply Chain 
Management platform was presented. The final product of 
the eBEST Framework is a software platform for SME 
clusters and associations, and the knowledge to use it at best 
in different operational conditions. The represented eBEST 
platform can provide several features with that SMEs can 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

overcome the above-mentioned semantic barriers. The 
Ecosystem Shaping helps to find collaboration partners and 
to constitute clusters and improve their image which 
facilitates the preparation of processes. The workflow 
management built in the system provides an appropriate 
base to harmonize the processes. With the help of 
Operational Framework the companies can associate to each 
other through a supply chain and accomplish the promised 
goals. The visibility of companies and catalogues, the 
exchange of standardized semantic documents within the 
business processes are provided by ontological concepts in 
Semantic Node. In the Collaboration Framework an 
application built on ontology-based annotation scheme is 
responsible for automatically generating software instance 
of a new collaborative business process. These semantic 
applications support the realization of system requirements 
(like visibility, semantic interoperability, managing business 
process in transparent manner etc.) and foster collaboration 
and coordination among channel partners. 
V. REFERENCE 
[1] 
M. 
Barratt, 
“Understanding 
the 
Meaning 
of 
Collaboration in the Supply Chain,” Supply Chain 
Management, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 30–42, 2004. 
 [2] J. Cardoso, M. Hepp, and M. D. Lytras, The semantic 
web. Springer, 2007. 
[3] C. Chandra, “Supply Chain Workflow Modeling Using 
Ontologies,” in Collaborative Engineering, A. K. Kamrani 
and E. S. A. Nasr, Eds. Springer US, 2008, pp. 61–87. 
[4] Collaboration Framework. 
http://ebesttest.tade.netpositive.hu/ 
[5] M. C. Cooper, D. M. Lambert, and J. D. Pagh, “Supply 
Chain Management: More Than a New Name for 
Logistics,” International Journal of Logistics Management, 
The, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–14, Jan. 1997. 
[6] Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals, 
“Supply 
Chain 
Management 
Definitions.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://cscmp.org/aboutcscmp/definitions.asp. 
[Accessed: 20-May-2012]. 
 [7] K. L. Croxton, S. J. García-Dastugue, D. M. Lambert, 
and D. S. Rogers, “The Supply Chain Management 
Processes,” International Journal of Logistics Management, 
The, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 13–36, Jan. 2001. 
[8] eBEST:Empowering Business Ecosystems of Small 
Service Enterprises to Face the Economic Crisis. The 
project co-funded by the European Commission, FP7-SME-
2008-2 No. 243554. WWW page. http://www.ebest.eu/ , 
accessed  7.08.2012. 
[9] eBEST Consortium, “Deliverable D2.1 Analysis of 
Exchanged Documents,” 2010 
[10] eBEST Consortium, “Deliverable D3.1 Overall 
Platform Design,” 2010. 
[11] eBEST Consortium, “Tentative platform requirements 
and architecture,” 2010. 
[12] M. S. Fox, M. Barbuceanu, and R. Teigen, “Agent-
Oriented Supply-Chain Management,” International Journal 
of Flexible Manufacturing Systems, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 165–
188, 2000. 
[13] D. Karastoyanova, T. Van Lessen, F. Leymann, Z. Ma, 
J. Nitzsche, B. Wetzstein, S. Bhiri, M. Hauswirth, and M. 
Zaremba, “A reference architecture for semantic business 
process 
management 
systems,” 
in 
Multikonferenz 
Wirtschaftsinformatik, 2008, pp. 1727–1738. 
[14] J. Liu, S. Zhang, and J. Hu, “A case study of an inter-
enterprise workflow-supported supply chain management 
system,” Information & Management, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 
441–454, Mar. 2005. 
[15] T. B. Lee, J. Hendler, O. Lassila, and others, “The 
semantic web,” Scientific American, vol. 284, no. 5, pp. 34–
43, 2001. 
[16] J. T. Mentzer, W. DeWitt, J. S. Keebler, Soonhoong 
Min, N. W. Nix, C. D. Smith, and Z. G. Zacharia, “Defining 
supply chain management,” Journal of Business Logistics, 
vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1–25, 2001. 
[17] OWL Web Ontology Language Guide. W3C 
Recommendation 
10 
February 
2004. 
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-guide/. 
[18] Supply Chain Council, “Overview of SCOR Process 
Reference Model.” [Online]. Available: http://supply-
chain.org/SCOR-overview. [Accessed: 16-Jan-2012]. 
[19] K. C. Tan, “A framework of supply chain management 
literature,” European Journal of Purchasing & Supply 
Management, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 39–48, 2001. 
[20] K. Ternai and M. Torok, “A new approach in the 
development of ontology based workflow architectures,” in 
2011 
17th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Concurrent 
Enterprising (ICE), 2011, pp. 1–10. 
 [21] Y. Ye, D. Yang, Z. Jiang, and L. Tong, “Ontology-
based semantic models for supply chain management,” The 
International 
Journal 
of 
Advanced 
Manufacturing 
Technology, vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 1250–1260, 2008. 
[22] 
W3C: 
World 
Wide 
Web 
Consortium. 
http://www.w3.org. 
 
 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

