Towards Interoperable Ontologies: Blood Test Ontology with FOAF
Emine Sezer, Ozgu Can, Okan Bursa and Murat Osman Unalir
Department of Computer Engineering, Ege University, 35100 Bornova, Izmir, Turkey
e-mail:{emine.sezer, ozgu.can, okan.bursa, murat.osman.unalir}@ege.edu.tr
Abstract— Healthcare systems around the globe are changing
their information systems in order to be able to share and
reuse patients’ information not only in a department where the
information is produced, but also between the departments of
an
organization
and
also
among
the
different
health
organizations or other institutions. For this purpose, lots of
data standards and ontologies are developed in the health care
domain. BloodTestOntology, which is introduced in this
work, describes the substances found in the blood to help
physicians in making a diagnosis. Friend of a Friend (FOAF), a
well-known ontology for defining personal information, is
extended to define required relations for the health care
domain. BloodTestOntology is integrated with extended
FOAF ontology in order to create an interoperable treatment
system with other information systems. The proposed model
can be used for personalized treatment suggestion systems.
Keywords- BloodTestOntology; Extended FOAF; Healthcare
Information Systems; Interperability; Semantic Web.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Information technology attempts to meet the demands for
all kinds of services from anywhere and at anytime, with the
help
of
today’s
current
technologies
and
Internet
infrastructure. Internet activities like e-commerce, banking,
paying taxes, tourism, etc. have become common, as well as
the searching for information and using the social media [1]-
[5].
Healthcare is a lifelong requirement for any person. The
healthcare domain is an area where people, different
organizations and various institutions get services, as well as
provide services at the same time. To meet the requirements
of receiving and delivering health care services with high
quality, efficiency and also ensuring continuity, means using
resources that are geographically dispersed. Also, more
privatized structures have emerged. As a result, the patients'
health information has become dispersed and specialized.
Health authorities also began to create health information
systems
for
healthcare
services
with
the
successful
implementations of information technologies in various
domains. The preliminary applications are the systems that
record the administrative data like patients’ name, surname,
address, insurance, etc.
It is desirable to be able to share and reuse the data not
only in the system where the data is produced, but also
between the systems that need that data. Until recently, it
was not reasonable to share a patient’s data between the
departments of healthcare organizations. Reusing health data
of a person in any health organization where he/she is
admitted for a health service can accelerate the diagnostic
process, while reducing material costs in healthcare.
The Semantic Web is defined as the extension of the
current Web where information is given in a well-defined
meaning and leads to a better collaboration between
computers and humans [6]. The Semantic Web studies focus
on developing domain specific ontologies, as well as
semantic recommendation systems and decision support
systems for defining semantic rules using these ontologies.
In recent years, lots of different ontologies in various
domains have been developed with the increasing popularity
of the Semantic Web studies. Although interoperability
between systems is desired, the developed ontologies must
be reusable. When these ontologies are examined, it is seen
that the ontology can be used only in the system for which it
is developed, whereas it is impossible to share and reuse
information between different systems.
Blood is a red liquid that circulates the whole body by
vessels. The main task of the blood is to transport the
necessary oxygen and nutrients to the cells. When a patient
consults a physician with any complaint, after listening to the
patient's medical history, the physician requests some
medical tests. The priority is always given to the blood tests
in order to analyze the substances found in the blood.
BloodTestOntology, which is introduced in this
work, aims to model the substances measured from the blood
during the blood test with the help of the Semantic Web
technologies. Blood Test Ontology describes the blood tests
being done in the health field, the relationships between
these tests, their results and the rules. Thus, developing a
knowledge base for a system that can query and reuse the
stored information of the personalized test results of blood
tests would be provided.
Friend of a Friend (FOAF) is a project that is the most
common document to represent the demographical properties
of a person. It is represented in RDF (Resource Description
Framework) [29]. FOAF is widely used inside various
domains to describe personal information [7].
In this work, FOAF is used to describe the patients’
information with demographic and dynamic properties and
also to describe the personal health information. Connecting
FOAF with the Blood Test Ontology to use personal
information descriptions in FOAF provides an interoperable,
personalized and more manageable personal data. A personal
health care system needs not only personal information, but
also information about the person’s parents and/or his/her
family. Defining this information with FOAF must support
extendable, open and sharable data that could be used as the
basic description to create a personalized health information
system. By using FOAF, the patient can have full control
over his/her data and the system can give a personalized
experience to him/her during his/her own treatment.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the
relevant related work. Section 3 explains the knowledge
representation
and
development
of
the
BloodTestOntology. A brief explanation is given for
the extended FOAF ontology. Later, the integration of
extended FOAF and BloodTestOntology is described.
Finally, Section 4 concludes and outlines the direction of the
future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
The healthcare domain is one of the few areas that has a
huge amount of domain knowledge. If the ontologies
developed in the health care domain are examined, it is seen
that the studies focus on defining the medical terms of the
domain [8]. Infectious Disease Ontology (IDO) [9] [10],
Saliva Ontology (SALO) [11] and Blood Ontology (BLO)
[12] are ontologies that are described by formal ontology
languages.
IDO
provides
a
consistent
terminology,
taxonomy, and logical representation for the domain of
infectious diseases [9]. IDO has 185 concepts, but does not
ahve any object properties between these concepts and data
properties. IDO covers the terms common for all infectious
diseases, but diseases themselves are not defined in the
ontology. SALO [11] is defined as a consensus-based
controlled vocabulary of terms and relations dedicated to the
salivaomics domain and to saliva-related diagnostics. SALO
is an ongoing exploratory initiative. BLO is designed to
serve as a comprehensive infrastructure to allow the
exploration of information relevant to scientific research and
to human blood manipulation [12]. It is an ongoing project
and the development of the ontology is still a work in
progress.
BLO
describes
the
structure,
diseases
and
abnormalities of the blood.
FOAF
is
a
vocabulary
[30]
to
define
personal
information
using
people-related
constructions
in
a
structured
data.
This
personal
information
includes
demographic information such as name, family name and
birthday in addition to online information such as mailbox,
homepage, URL and much more.
FOAF is used in many
different applications. In research areas, such as distributed
access right management [13], policy and profile integration
[14] and Social Web Integration [15], FOAF is widely used
to
represent
personal
information
in
addition
to
social/friendship networks. Profiling and linking personal
information is an important asset for collaborative filtering
recommender systems. Film Trust [16] is one of the
collaborative recommender systems that use FOAF to
represent all kinds of personal information. Moreover, FOAF
is used to interview the overall social information [17] and
user preferences [18] [19]. Analysis of FOAF documents
shows that most used FOAF attribute is mbox_sha1sum,
which is the unique representation of email address and a
necessity for FOAF vocabulary. FOAF is also used to infer
characteristics of user habits [20]. All of these applications
use FOAF. FOAF is the most used RDF vocabulary due to
its simplicity, well documented and easily applied tools, such
as FOAF-o-Matic [31] and FOAFpress [32].
III.
CONNECTING FOAF WITH BLOOD TEST ONTOLOGY
A.
Blood Test Ontology
In the health care domain, blood tests contain information
that might be used by any clinic.
The same tests are
unfortunately performed repeatedly when the patient goes to
different clinics in the same hospital or different hospitals.
This causes waste of time for the diagnosis of disease as well
as an increase in healthcare costs.
Blood tests can be used for the following reasons:
•
to analyze the general state of a person’s health,
•
to confirm the presence of a bacterial or viral
infection,
•
to see how well certain organs, such as the liver and
kidneys, are functioning,
•
to screen for certain genetic conditions, such as
cystic fibrosis or spinal muscular atrophy,
•
to check what medications the person is taking,
•
to analyze how well the person’s blood is clotting,
•
to diagnose diseases and conditions such as cancer,
HIV/AIDS, diabetes, and coronary heart disease,
•
to find out whether the person has risk factors for
heart disease.
The blood test results may fall outside the normal range
for many reasons. Abnormal results might be a sign of a
disorder or disease. On the other hand, diet, menstrual cycle,
physical activity level, alcohol intake, and medications can
also cause abnormal results.
Many diseases and medical
problems can not be diagnosed with blood tests alone.
However, blood tests can help the physician to learn more
about the patient's health status. Blood tests can also help to
find potential problems early, when treatments or lifestyle
changes may work best.
BloodTestOntology, developed in this work, aims
to model the substances measured from the blood during the
blood test by using Semantic Web technologies. It describes
the blood tests being done in the healthcare domain, the
relationships between these tests, the results of these tests
and the rules about them according to the related domain.
BloodTestOntology provides information about the
blood test results to physicians, health workers and patients.
In this work, we aim to represent the recent blood test result
status with the BloodTestOntology and to use it as a
part of an information base for the clinical information
system. Thus, it could be used to give services to patients
and health workers to organize blood information, to support
the clinical decision system and to improve the clinical trials.
The primary objectives of the BloodTestOntology are
performing
interoperability,
sharing
information
and
providing reusability in the healthcare domain.
BloodTestOntology
has
ALCRIQ(D)
DL
expressivity with 159 classes, 75 object properties and 35
data properties. The main goal of developing this ontology is
using it as an information base for clinical information
system.
The
BloodTestOntology
is
still
being
developed and extended with new concepts, object and data
properties with domain experts from Ege University, Faculty
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

of Medicine [33] according to the Medical Faculty’s
implementation clinics.
BloodTestOntology has a hierarchical structure as
seen in Fig. 1. A medical test can be any test that is applied
to a patient to assess patient’s general state of health. In
BloodTestOntology, these tests correspond to the
human body fluids, such as blood, saliva, stool and urine
with the concepts of BloodTest, SalivaTest, StoolTest
and UrineTest, respectively.
Figure 1.
The basic concepts of The BloodTestOntology.
In this work, we have focused on the substances of the
blood that are measured to analyze a patient’s general state
of health. The core concepts of a blood test that are defined
in
BloodTestOntology
like
FT3,
FT4,
HDL
Cholesterol, LDL Cholesterol, etc. do not exist in the current
blood ontologies in the literature. In hospitals, the blood is
analyzed
in
four
different
laboratories
that
are
endocrinology, biochemistry, microbiology and hematology,
respectively. By taking these situations into consideration,
we classified the blood test concept into four sub-concepts:
EndocrinologyBloodTest,
BiochemistryBloodTest,
MicrobiologyBloodTest and HematologyBloodTest.
For example, the blood tests like Hemogram and Giemsa
are defined as sub-concepts of HematologyBloodTest,
blood tests about thyroid like TSH, FT3 and FT4 are
defined as sub-concepts of EndocrinologyBloodTest. As
the reference values may vary according to the test
laboratory, patients’ age or gender, the reference values of
the substances, which are test concepts, are not defined as
data properties.
B.
Integrating Blood Test Ontology and FOAF
The data can be reused between the systems without
changing
its
given
definition
in
order
to
provide
interoperability.
Using ontologies as the information base
for the systems, the given definition of data can be provided.
However, creating ontologies for the specific domain makes
it difficult to get data with its metadata. For this purpose,
integrating ontologies with the concepts that have the same
meaning presents a useful solution.
Defining personal information as a concept in ontologies
is quite familiar (more than 1,000 RDF documents have
defined terms containing ‘person’) [21]. Literature works
[22]-[27] provide a vision and various examples of FOAF
extensions
that
can
be
used
to
support
Web-based
information systems. In [28], a comparison of FOAF
documents is given.
In this work, FOAF ontology is integrated with the
BloodTestOntology through the concept “Person”.
First, we extended FOAF ontology with proper data and
object properties. The difference between our extended
FOAF ontology and the FOAF is given in Table 1. For
example, FOAF has only one object property “knows”.
However,
in
our
extended
ontology
the
new
object
properties,
“has
Age”,
“hasIncome”,
“hasOccupation”, etc. are inserted.
Later,
the
concept
“Person”
in
BloodTestOntology is imported from the extended
FOAF
ontology.
In
this
way,
data
properties
like
“firstname”,
“surname”,
“birthday”
and
“agevalue” can be used in BloodTestOntology
without describing these properties again. The relation
between these ontologies is shown in Fig. 2.
Figure 2.
The structure of the integrated model.
As seen in Fig. 2, BloodTestOntology also includes
the related SNOMED-CT [34] conceptIDs and ICD-10 [35]
codes. Thus, when there will be another information system
using
the SNOMED-CT vocabulary, that system could
exchange health information with a clinic information
system which is using BloodTestOntology as the
information base.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

TABLE 1. THE EXTENDED FOAF ONTOLOGY.
Class Definition
Information
SubClass/SuperClass
Income
Income values of a Person/Income
Set of a Profile
None
Occupation
Occupation of a
Person/Occupation Set of a
Profile
None
Age
Age Value of a Person/Age Values
Set of a Profiles
None
Object Type Properties
Domain
Range
hasAge
Person
Age
hasIncome
Person
Income
hasOccupation
Person
Occupation
hasProfiles/isProfileOf
Person/MetaProfile:Profile
MetaProfile:Profile/FOAF:Person
hasPreferences/isPreferenceOf
Person/MetaPreference:Preference
MetaPreference:Preference
preferredDomain
Person
PreferenceVersusDomain
Data Type Properties
ageValue
Age
xsd:integer
incomeValue
Income
xsd:integer
occupationValue
Occupation
xsd:string
Is
one of{income, Age}
xsd:integer
can-be
Occupation
xsd:string
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
In this work, an information base that would be the
knowledge base for a treatment system has been created to
provide interoperability and to reuse health data. In order to
perform this, the health standards ICD-10 codes and
SNOMED-CT
ConceptID
are
inserted
inside
the
BloodTestOntology. Therefore, if any information
system using SNOMED-CT vocabulary or ICD-10 codes
that system could exchange health information with a clinic
information system that is using BloodTestOntology as
the information base.
Although blood tests are not sufficient to diagnose
diseases, some blood tests named markers can show certain
diagnostic results. For example, if a patient’s Anti-HCV test
is positive, this person can have chronic Hepatitis-C virus
infection. Hepatitis-C is usually spread by blood-to-blood
contact, so blood transfusion must not be done from these
patients. The patient’s family and friends can be at risk for
this infection. By integrating FOAF ontology with the
BloodTestOntology,
the
risk
group
could
be
determined easily with the defined rules.
As known, some blood test results have different
reference values for genders or ages. Defining domain
specific health rules on the integrated extended FOAF with
BloodTestOntology can also support the creation of
personalized treatment suggestions for patients. As taught in
medical schools that there is no illness, there is the patient; it
could be used to give services to patients and health workers
to organize blood information, to support the clinical
decision system and to improve the clinical trials.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Zhang, M. Zhu, and W. Huang, “A Framework for an
Ontology-based E-commerce Product Information Retrieval
System”, Journal of Computers (JCP), Vol.4/6, pp. 436-443,
2009.
[2]
S. Jeong and H. Kim, “Design of Semantically Interoperable
Adverse Event Reporting Framework”, The Semantic Web -
ASWC 2006, First Asian Semantic Web Conference, LNCS,
vol. 4185, pp. 588-594, 2006.
[3]
M. Austin, M. Kelly, and S. M. Brady, “The benefits of an
ontological
patient
model
in
clinical
decision-support”,
AAAI'08: Proceedings of the 23rd National Conference on
Artificial intelligence, pp. 1774-1775, 2008.
[4]
O. Suominen, E. Hyvönen, K. Viljanen, and E. Hukka,
“HealthFinland - A national semantic publishing network and
portal for health information”, J. Web Sem., 7(4), pp. 287-
297, 2009.
[5]
H. Cheng, Y. Lu, and C. Sheu, “An ontology-based business
intelligence application in a financial knowledge management
system”, Expert Systems with Applications: An International
Journal, v.36 n.2, pp. 3614-3622, March, 2009.
[6]
T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila,
"The semantic
web". Scientific American, 284 (5), pp. 34-43, 2001.
[7]
FOAF, The friend of a friend project, http://www.foaf-
project.org/. [Retrieved: September, 2016]
[8]
D. M. Lopez and B. Blobel, "A development framework for
semantically interoperable health information systems". I. J.
Medical Informatics, 78(2), pp. 83-103, 2009.
[9]
A. Goldfain, B. Smith, and L. G. Cowell, “Dispositions and
the Infectious Disease Ontology”, FOIS 2010, pp. 400–413,
2010.
[10] L. G. Cowell and B. Smith, “Infectious Disease Ontology”,
In: Infectious Disease Informatics, pp. 373–395, 2010.
[11] J. Ai, B. Smith, and D. T. Wong, “Saliva Ontology: An
ontology-based framework for a Salivaomics Knowledge
Base”, BMC Bioinformatics 11, pp. 302, 2010.
[12] M. B. Almeida, A. B. Freitas, C. Proietti, C. Ai,
and B.
Smith, “The Blood Ontology: An Ontology in the Domain of
Hematology”, In: Int. Conf. on Biomedical Ontologies,
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Working with Multiple Biomedical Ontologies Workshop,
Vol. 833 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings, CEUR-WS.org,
2011.
[13] S. R. Kruk, S. Grzonkowski, A. Gzella, T. Woroniecki and H.
C. Choi, “D-FOAF: Distributed Identity Management with
Access Rights Delegation”, in Riichiro Mizoguchi; Zhongzhi
Shi & Fausto Giunchiglia, ed., 'ASWC' , Springer, pp. 140-
154, 2006.
[14] Ö. Can, O. Bursa and M. O. Ünalır, “Personalizable Ontology 
Based Access Control”, Gazi University Journal Of Science,
23(4), pp. 465-474, 2010. ISSN 2147-1762. Available at:
http://gujs.gazi.edu.tr/article/view/1060000078.
[Retrieved:
September, 2016]
[15] J.Golbeck and M. Rothstein, “Linking social networks on the
web with FOAF: a semantic web case study”, In Proceedings
of the 23rd national conference on Artificial intelligence -
Volume 2 (AAAI'08), Anthony Cohn (Ed.), AAAI Press, Vol.
2, pp. 1138-1143, 2008.
[16] J.
Golbeck
and
J.
Hendler,
“Filmtrust:
Movie
recommendations using trust in web-based social networks”,
Proceedings of the IEEE Consumer communications and
networking conference, Vol. 96, pp. 282-286, 2006.
[17] F. Abel, N. Henze, E. Herder, and D. Krause, “Interweaving
public user profiles on the web”, In Proceedings of the 18th
international conference on User Modeling, Adaptation, and
Personalization (UMAP'10), Paul Bra, Alfred Kobsa, and
David Chin (Eds.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp.
16-27,
2010.
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
13470-8_4
[18] Ò. Celma, M. Ramírez, and P. Herrera, "Foafing the music: A
music recommendation system based on rss feeds and user
preferences", IN ISMIR, pp. 464-467, 2005.
[19] O. Bursa, E. Sezer, O. Can, and M. O. Unalir, "Using FOAF
for
Interoperable
and
Privacy
Protected
Healthcare
Information Systems", Research Conference on Metadata and
Semantics, Springer International Publishing, pp. 154-161,
2014.
[20] G. A. Grimnes, P. Edwards, and A. Preece, "Learning Meta-
descriptions of the FOAF Network", The Semantic Web -
ISWC 2004, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3298,
pp. 152-165, 2004.
[21] L. Ding, T. Finin, A. Joshi, R. Pan, R. S. Cost, Y. Peng, P.
Reddivari, V. C. Doshi, and J. Sachs, “Swoogle: A search and
metadata engine for the semantic web,” in Proceedings of the
Thirteenth ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management, pp. 652-659, 2004.
[22] L. A. Adamic, O. Buyukkokten, and E. Adar, “A social
network caught in the web,” First Monday, Vol. 8, No. 6,
Electronic Edition: http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/
article/view/1057, June 2003 [Retrieved: September, 2016]
[23] E. Dumbill, “Finding friends with xml and rdf,” IBM’s XML
Watch, http://www-106.ibm.com/developerworks/xml/library/
x-foaf.html, June 2002. [Retrieved: September, 2016]
[24] E. Dumbill, “Support online communities with foaf: How the
friend-of-a-friend
vocabulary
addresses
issues
of
accountability and privacy,” IBM’s XML Watch, http://www-
106.ibm.com/developerworks/xml/library/x-foaf2.html,
August 2002. [Retrieved: September, 2016]
[25] E. Dumbill, “Tracking provenance of rdf data,” IBM’s XML
Watch, http://www-106.ibm.com/developerworks/xml/library
/x-rdfprov.html, July 2003. [Retrieved: September, 2016]
[26] G. A. Grimnes, P. Edwards, and A. Preece, “Learning meta-
descriptions
of
the
foaf
network”,
In
Proceedings
of
International Semantic Web Conference, Vol. 3298, pp. 152-
165, 2004.
[27] J. Golbeck, B. Parsia, and J. Hendler, “Trust networks on the
semantic web”, In Proceedings of Cooperative Intelligent
Agents, Vol. 2782, pp. 238-249, 2003.
[28] L. Ding, L. Zhou, T. Finin, and A. Joshi, “How the Semantic Web is
Being Used: An Analysis of FOAF Documents”, In Proceedings of
the Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii International Conference
on
System
Sciences
(HICSS'05),
IEEE
Computer
Society,
Washington, DC, USA, Track 4 - Volume 04, Page 113.3,
2005.
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1109/HICSS.2005.299
[29] RDF, http://www.w3.org/RDF (accessed September 2016)
[30] FOAF
Vocabulary
Specification,
http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec
(accessed September 2016)
[31] FOAF-a-Matic, http://www.ldodds.com/foaf/foaf-a-matic.
(accessed
September 2016)
[32] FOAFpress, http://foafpress.org
(accessed September 2016)
[33] Edge University, Faculty of Medicine, http://www.med.ege.edu.tr
(accessed September 2016)
[34] SNOMED-CT, http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct
(accessed September 2016)
[35] ICD-10, http://www.who.int/classifications/ icd/en
(accessed September 2016)
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

