Towards an Ontology for Enterprise Knowledge Management 
 
Eckhard Ammann 
School of Informatics 
Reutlingen University, Reutlingen, Germany 
Eckhard.Ammann@Reutlingen-University.de 
Ismael Navas-Delgado, José F. Aldana-Montes 
E.T.S.I. Informática 
University of Málaga, 29071 Málaga, Spain 
{ismael, jfam}@lcc.uma.es 
 
Abstract—Enterprise 
knowledge 
management 
is 
about 
approaches, methods, and techniques, which will support the 
management of the resource “knowledge” in an enterprise for 
the purpose of support and advancement of businesses. An 
important part of it is knowledge development of individual 
and organizational knowledge. This paper provides an overall 
conception of enterprise knowledge management in the form 
of a layered set of ontologies, which are enriched by 
appropriate rule systems. This set consists of general (i.e. 
enterprise-independent) and of enterprise-specific ontologies. 
General ontologies in this set include ontologies for knowledge 
and knowledge development and for human interaction. 
Enterprise-specific ontologies formalize specific domains in the 
enterprise as well as managerial principles and finally a whole 
enterprise. 
      Keywords—Knowledge management ontology, knowledge 
development, 
organizational 
learning, 
human 
interaction, 
managerial and enterprise ontology. 
 
I.      INTRODUCTION 
 
Enterprise knowledge management is about approaches, 
methods, 
and 
techniques, 
which 
will 
support 
the 
management of the resource knowledge in an enterprise for 
the purpose of support and advancement of businesses. An 
important part of it is knowledge development of individual, 
group, and organizational knowledge. Several approaches 
for knowledge management exist, one of them is the 
process-oriented approach see [1], [12], and [14].  One 
specific approach for enterprise knowledge development is 
EKD (Enterprise Knowledge Development), which aims at 
articulating, modeling and reasoning about knowledge, 
which supports the process of analyzing, planning, 
designing, and changing your business; see [7] and [9] for a 
description of EKD. EKD does not provide a conceptual 
description of knowledge and knowledge development, 
however. An approach for knowledge access and 
development in firms is given by Boisot [6]. Here, 
development scenarios of knowledge in the Information 
Space are provided. For the conception part of knowledge 
development, there exists the well-known approach by 
Nonaka/Takeuchi [14], which is built on the distinction 
between tacit and explicit knowledge and on four 
knowledge conversions between the knowledge types 
(SECI-model). Approaches for knowledge transfer are 
surveyed in [13]. Concepts for organizational learning, 
which is closely related to knowledge management, are 
given by Argyris and Schön [4, 5] and by Senge [17]. The 
latter refers to system thinking as very important fifth 
discipline of organizational learning. In [3] a new 
conception of organizational learning based on knowledge 
dynamics is presented.  
For intellectual capital, which is a more strategic view 
on knowledge in a company, see [19] for an approach 
towards an ontology for this domain. 
In this paper, we propose a conception towards an 
ontology for enterprise knowledge management. To this 
end, we first summon up the tasks of knowledge 
management in an enterprise from a process-oriented point 
of view. Important items are knowledge processes, 
knowledge management processes, knowledge flows, and 
organizational learning. Second, we explain a conception of  
knowledge itself and of knowledge dynamics. 
Based on this, we present a new conception for a 
formalized model for enterprise knowledge management. It 
consists of a layered set of ontologies. This set includes 
ontologies for knowledge and knowledge dynamics, for 
human interaction, for management, and for the whole 
enterprise. They together will support the mentioned 
processes related to knowledge management. 
One of the basic constituents of this model is presented 
in detail as a semantic implementation of the conception of 
knowledge 
and 
knowledge 
dynamics, 
namely 
a 
corresponding ontology and rule system. Other constituents 
of the model have yet to be developed.  
The structure of the paper is as follows. After an 
introduction, section II provides an outline of knowledge 
management and its tasks from a process-oriented point of 
view. This reflects knowledge processes, knowledge 
management processes, knowledge flows and organizational 
learning. Section III shortly presents the conception of 
knowledge and of knowledge dynamics. Then, section IV 
introduces the overall semantic-based concept as a layered 
set of ontologies with special recognition of the processes 
and tasks identified in section II. Section V describes the 
developed 
ontology 
for 
knowledge 
and 
knowledge 
development with the corresponding rule system. A 
summary and outlook section will conclude the paper. 
 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

II.    OVERVIEW ON TASKS AND PROCESSES OF 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
 
In this section, an overall view on the tasks and processes 
of knowledge management is given from a process-oriented 
point of view. We describe knowledge processes, 
knowledge management processes and knowledge flows as 
essentials parts of knowledge management. In addition 
organizational learning is shortly explained, which is closely 
related to knowledge management. 
The extended knowledge cycle was originally introduced 
by Probst [16] as far as the outside cycle is concerned. 
Lehner [12] in addition introduced the correspondence to 
knowledge-intensive business processes and the knowledge 
flows. This again has been rearranged and changed by the 
author to the version as given in Figure 1. 
As basic notion we have knowledge processes (depicted 
as yellow activities in Figure 1), which compose a whole 
knowledge cycle from identification, acquisition, structuring 
(constructing, 
combining, 
representing), 
storage, 
distribution (communication), usage until keeping and 
preservation. They may be grouped into four areas: 
preservation of new and existing knowledge, generation of 
new knowledge, making available knowledge, and using 
knowledge. These groups are indicated by the dotted 
rectangles in Figure 1. Two additional special knowledge 
processes (the blue arrows in Figure 1) are meta-level 
processes and close the overall cycle by goal-setting, 
knowledge evaluation and the feedback. 
 
             
 
 
Figure 1.  Tasks and Processes of Knowledge Management (Sources: Ammann, reworked from Probst [16] and Lehner [12]) 
 
Knowledge Management Processes keep the knowledge 
cycle going. Knowledge goals are set and drive the 
knowledge cycle until an evaluation. In general the blue 
arrows in Figure 1 represent knowledge management 
processes. For example, a knowledge management process 
takes care inside the above-mentioned knowledge process 
group “making knowledge available”, that employees are 
encouraged to communicate knowledge. The final feedback 
in the cycle is an important knowledge management 
process. Here gained knowledge is compared against the 
original goal and possibly a new cycle with a new or 
changed goal is initiated. 
In our process-oriented view, business processes of the 
company, especially the knowledge-intensive ones, relate to 
knowledge processes. For example, in an earlier activity of 
the business process the need for new or re-combined 
knowledge is becoming clear, while in a later phase this 
knowledge is communicated to certain employees.  This 
relation is provided by knowledge flows. In addition, 
knowledge flows can also interrelate different knowledge 
processes, as shown in Figure 1 between the knowledge 
distribution and knowledge preservation processes. 
Organizational Learning is closely related to knowledge 
management. This resembles the classic triad composed of 
knowledge, learning, and storage. The latter one can be 
provided by the organizational memory. Organizational 
learning has been described with the help of single-loop, 
double-loop, and deutero learning, see [4, 5]. A novel 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

approach to build those organizational learning cycles on 
top of knowledge dynamics is given in [3]. See the 
following section for details on this knowledge and 
knowledge dynamics conception.   
 
III.    A CONCEPTION OF KNOWLEDGE AND 
KNOWLEDGE DYNAMICS 
 
In this section, a conception of knowledge and 
knowledge dynamics in a company is shortly described. 
More details of this conception are given in [2]. 
 
A.     Knowledge Conception 
 
We provide a conception of knowledge with types, kinds 
and qualities as three dimensions. As our base notion,  
knowledge is understood as justified true belief (in the 
propositional kind), which is (normally) bound to the human 
being, with a dimension of purpose and intent, identifying 
patterns in its validity scope, brought to bear in action and 
with a generative capability of new information, see [1, 10, 
and 12]. It is a perspective of “knowledge-in-use” [8] 
because of the importance for its utilization in companies 
and for knowledge management. 
The type dimension is the most important for knowledge 
management in a company. It categorizes knowledge 
according to its presence and availability. Is it only available 
to the owning human being, or can it be communicated, 
applied or transferred to the outside, or is it externally 
available in the company’s organizational memory? It is 
crucial for the purposes of the company, and hence a main 
goal of knowledge management activities, to make as much 
as possible knowledge available, i.e. let it be converted from 
internal to more external types. 
Our conception for the type dimension of knowledge 
follows a distinction between the internal and external 
knowledge types, seen from the perspective of the human 
being. As third and intermediary type, explicit knowledge is 
seen as an interface for human interaction and for the 
purpose of knowledge externalization, the latter one ending 
up in external knowledge. Internal (or implicit) knowledge 
is bound to the human being. It can be further divided into 
conscious, latent and tacit knowledge, where those subtypes 
do partly overlap with each other; see [10]. It is all that, 
what a person has “in its brain” due to experience, history, 
activities and learning. Explicit knowledge is “made 
explicit” to the outside world, e.g., through spoken 
language, but is still bound to the human being. External 
knowledge finally is detached from the human being and 
may be kept in appropriate storage media as part of the 
organizational memory.  
In the second dimension of knowledge, four kinds of 
knowledge are distinguished: propositional, procedural and 
strategic knowledge, and familiarity, resembling to a certain 
degree the type dimension in [8]. Propositional knowledge 
is knowledge about content, facts in a domain, semantic 
interrelationship 
and 
theories. 
Experience, 
practical 
knowledge and the knowledge on “how-to-do” constitute 
procedural knowledge. Strategic knowledge is meta-
cognitive knowledge on optimal strategies for structuring a 
problem-solving 
approach. 
Finally, 
familiarity 
is 
acquaintance with certain situations and environments; it 
also resembles aspects of situational knowledge, i.e. 
knowledge about situations, which typically appear in 
particular domains. 
The quality dimension introduces five characteristics of 
knowledge 
with 
an 
appropriate 
qualifying 
and 
is 
independent of the kind dimension: level, structure, 
automation, and generality. See [2, 8] for more details.  
This knowledge conception can be visually represented 
by a knowledge cube as shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The knowledge cube 
 
B.     Knowledge Dynamics 
 
      Knowledge conversions, i.e. the transitions between 
the different knowledge types, kind and qualities between or 
within humans are responsible to a high degree for 
knowledge 
development 
in 
an 
organization. 
These 
conversions are the building blocks to model knowledge 
dynamics, i.e., all of acquisition, conversion, transfer, 
development and usage of knowledge, in an enterprise.  
Five basic knowledge conversions in the type dimension 
 are 
distinguished 
here: 
socialization, 
explicitation, 
externalization, internalization and combination. Basic 
conversion means, that exactly one source knowledge asset 
is converted into exactly one destination knowledge asset 
and exactly one knowledge dimension (i.e. the type 
dimension in this case) is changed.  
Socialization converts tacit knowledge of a person into 
tacit knowledge of another person. This may succeed by 
exchange of experience or in a learning-by-doing situation. 
Explicitation is the internal process of a person, to make 
internal knowledge of the latent or conscious type explicit, 
e.g. by articulation and formulation (in the conscious case) 
or by using metaphors, analogies and models (in the latent 
case). Externalization converts from explicit knowledge to 
external knowledge or information and leads to detached
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

     
               
Figure 3.  Layered set of ontologies with rule systems 
 
knowledge as seen from the perspective of the human being, 
which can be kept in organizational memory systems. 
Internalization 
converts 
either 
external 
or 
explicit 
knowledge into internal knowledge of the conscious or 
latent types. It leads to an integration of experiences and 
competences in 
your 
own 
mental model. 
Finally, 
combination 
combines 
existing 
explicit 
or 
external 
knowledge in new forms.  
Basic knowledge conversions in the kind dimension of 
knowledge do not occur. Those in the quality dimension are 
mostly 
knowledge 
developments 
aiming 
at 
quality 
improvement. Examples include basic conversions changing 
the overview, structure and automation quality, respectively. 
More complex conversions can be easily gained by 
building on this set. They consist of n-to-m-conversions and 
include information assets in addition. General knowledge 
conversions convert several source assets (possibly of 
different types, kinds and quality) to several destination 
assets 
(also possibly 
different in their 
knowledge 
dimensions). In addition, information assets are considered 
as possible contributing or generated parts of general 
knowledge conversions. 
 
IV.    OVERALL SEMANTIC CONCEPT OF 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
 
Having provided the tasks and processes of knowledge 
management in section II and a conception of knowledge 
and knowledge dynamics in section III, we now proceed 
with the introduction of an overall concept for semantic 
support of knowledge management. This can be viewed as a 
step towards an ontology (or a set of ontologies) for 
knowledge management. 
Figure 3 depicts this conception of a layered set of 
ontologies and gives a example, how knowledge processes, 
knowledge management processes, and the knowledge 
flows are supported by the various ontologies in this 
conception. We propose a hierarchical structure, which is 
also divided in a general and a specific part. At the general 
support side, we start with an ontology of knowledge and 
knowledge dynamics at the bottom layer. The Knowledge 
Ontology as described in the following section V 
implements the corresponding conception as introduced in 
section III. It is complemented by a set of rules and (in the 
future) of heuristics, which enhance the support for 
reasoning in incomplete knowledge application scenarios. 
An incomplete scenario consists of one or more general 
knowledge conversions, where one or more places (source 
or 
destination 
knowledge 
objects 
or 
conversions 
themselves) are not known. They may be implied by an 
application of an appropriate rule or a heuristics. While rules 
support the proper handling of knowledge conversions and 
transfers, heuristics will be needed for those cases of 
knowledge dynamics, where no unique resolution of source 
and destination knowledge assets in complex knowledge 
conversions is possible with rules. The following section V 
will 
describe 
the 
Knowledge 
Ontology 
and 
the 
corresponding rule system. 
Built on top of the Knowledge Ontology a Human 
Interaction 
Ontology 
conceptualizes 
human-to-human 
interactions. The knowledge and knowledge dynamics 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

support is utilized here, based on the observation that 
human-to-human interaction always comes along with 
knowledge transfers (conversions). To state is differently, 
human-to-human interaction can be modeled by appropriate 
general knowledge conversions between people. As top 
layer on the general side, a top level ontology will provide 
general concepts like time, locations, and so on. 
On the specific support side, one or more Domain 
Ontologies reflect the domains of interest in the enterprise. 
On top of it, a Managerial Ontology provides management 
conceptions related to knowledge management. This again 
is utilized on the next layer by an Enterprise Ontology, 
which conceptualizes the whole (specific) enterprise. 
Figure 3 gives an example how the knowledge processes, 
knowledge management processes, and the knowledge 
flows are supported by the various ontologies in this 
conception. The same color code is used in Figure 3 as in 
Figure 1.  Each type of processes is supported by the 
Knowledge Ontology and the General Ontology on the 
general side. A knowledge process like “knowledge 
communication” utilizes the Human Interaction Ontology 
and the appropriate specific Domain Ontology in addition. 
The same kind of support can be observed for knowledge 
flows, as can be seen for the flow from ”knowledge 
communication” to “knowledge keeping” in Figure 3. 
Finally knowledge management processes like “Encourage 
Knowledge Communication” will take hold of the Human 
Interaction Ontology from the general side and the 
Managerial and Enterprise Ontologies from the specific 
side. 
V.      THE KNOWLEDGE ONTOLOGY 
 
In this section we present the Knowledge Ontology, 
which implements the conception of knowledge and 
knowledge dynamics as described in Section III. It is one of 
the building blocks in the set of ontologies as described in 
section IV. Here we describe the ontology, restrictions and 
reasoning, and rules. For more details, see [2]. 
The ontology (as visually shown in Figure 4) is divided 
in 
four 
core 
concepts: 
Knowledge, 
Information, 
Knowledge_Conversion and Knowledge_Dimension. The 
three different knowledge dimensions are represented as: 
Type_Dimension, Kind_Dimension and Quality-Dimension. 
Knowledge is defined according to these dimensions. 
Properties are used to model the relationships between 
Knowledge and Dimensions: hasType, hasKind and 
hasQuality. For example, Explicit_Knowledge is defined as 
every piece of knowledge, which is related to the instance 
Explicit_Type via the hasType property. In the same way, 
Knowledge in general must be related to every quality sub-
dimension through the hasQuality property.  
Two properties have been defined to model the 
knowledge conversions: hasSource and hasDestination, 
with knowledge conversions as ranges, and pieces of 
knowledge and information as domains. 
A General Conversion is modeled through the Knowledge 
Conversion concept, and its only restriction is the fact that it 
must have at least one source asset and one destination 
asset. Basic Conversions are more specific, in the sense that  
               
                   
 
Figure 4.  Knowledge ontology hierarchy 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

they have only one source and only one destination. The 
concept Crucial_Conversion gathers those conversions that 
contribute to the goal of making the knowledge available for 
the company. 
     Basic reasoning is based on subsumption mechanisms 
that deal with the ontology hierarchy. However, ontologies 
can contain more complex elements to enable advanced 
reasoning. In this way, the Knowledge Ontology has been 
extended with OWL restrictions to enable new ways of 
generating interesting new knowledge. 
     Ontology 
restrictions 
allow 
us 
to 
infer 
new 
characteristics of a given concept or instance. However, in 
some cases we could require to generate new instances in 
the ontology depending on certain situations. In these cases 
rules have been used, so the Knowledge Ontology will be 
able to infer all the possible conversions given some pieces 
of knowledge. SWRL [18] rules have been defined and the 
Jess rule engine [11] has been used. One rule will create 
basic conversions with all the possible source-destination 
pairs, and then, the same engine will characterize these 
conversions, inferring the changing dimension for each case. 
Six further rules have been established to infer the changing 
dimensions of each of the new discovered conversions: one 
for the type dimension and five for the quality ones. For 
example, the rule for the type dimension is as follows: 
 
 Knowledge(?k1) ^ Knowledge(?k2) ^  
 hasTypeValue(?k1, ?v1)  ^ hasTypeValue(?k2, ?v2) ^  
 differentFrom(?v1, ?v2) ^ Knowledge_Conversion(?c1) ^   
 hasSource(?c, ?k1) ^ hasDestination(?c, ?k2)  
  →  
 hasChangingDimension(?c,  
                          Knowledge_Type_Dimension) 
 
    This development has already opened the path, to solve 
open questions in application scenarios for knowledge 
development. With the help of representations, these 
scenarios can be mapped to general knowledge conversions, 
which are subject to rule processing in relation to the 
Knowledge Ontology. A final interpretation step leads back 
to the solved scenario. See [2] for examples of some 
application scenarios solved with this method. 
 
VI.      SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK 
 
An 
overall 
semantic 
conception 
for 
enterprise 
knowledge management has been given in this paper. It 
consists of a layered set of ontologies of the important and 
relevant sub-domain of this domain. This conception was 
motivated by the observation of tasks of processes of 
knowledge 
management, 
i.e. 
knowledge 
processes, 
knowledge management processes, and knowledge flows.  
One of the basic constituents of this conception, namely 
the knowledge ontology together with reasoning support and 
a rule system already exists and has been described in this 
paper.  
Future work includes the development of the other 
ontologies in our layered set of ontologies on the one side 
and an implementation of knowledge processes, knowledge 
management processes, knowledge flows and organizational 
learning cycles based on the set of ontologies on the other 
side. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]   Ammann, E.: “A Meta-Model for Knowledge Management”, 
        in: 5th Int. Conf. on Intellectual Capital and Knowledge 
        Management (ICICKM), New York 2008, pp 37-44. 
[2]   Ammann, E., Ruiz-Montiel, M.,Navas-Delgado, I., 
        Aldana-Montes, J.F.: “Knowledge Development Conception 
        and its Implementation: Knowledge Ontology, Rule System 
        and Application Scenarios”, in: Proceedings of the 2nd Int. 
        Conf. on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications 
        (COGNITIVE 2010), Lisbon, Portugal, 2010, pp. 60-65. 
[3]   Ammann, E.: “Knowledge Dynamics and Organisational 
        Learning Cycles”, in: Proc. of the 12th European 
        Conference on Knowledge Management 2011, Passau, 
        Germany, 2011, pp.10-19. 
[4]   Argyris, C. and Schön, D.A.: Organizational Learning: a 
        Theory of Action Perspective, Addison-Wesley, Reading, 
        Massachusetts 1978. 
[5]   Argyris, C. and Schön, D.A.: Organizational Learning II – 
        Theory, Method, and Practice, Addison-Wesley, Reading, 
        Massachusetts 1996. 
[6]   Boisot, M.H. Knowledge Assets, Oxford Univ. Press 1999.  
[7]   Bubenko, J.A., Jr., Brash, D., and Stirna, J.: EKD User Guide, 
        Dept. of Computer and System Science, KTH and Stockholm  
        University, Elektrum 212, S-16440, Sweden 1998. 
[8]   De Jong, T., Fergusson-Hessler, M.G.M. “Types and 
        Qualities of Knowledge”, Educational Psychologist, 
        31(2), 1996, pp.105-113. 
[9]   EKD – Enterprise Knowledge Development, 
         ekd.dsv.su.se/home.html. 
[10]  Hasler Rumois, U. Studienbuch Wissensmanagement (in 
         German), UTB orell fuessli, Zürich 2007. 
[11]  Jess Rule Engine, http://www.jessrules.com. 
[12]  Lehner, F.: Wissensmanagement (in German), 3rd ed., Hanser, 
         München 2010. 
[13]  Ling, L.H.: “From Shannon-Weaver to Boisot: A Review on 
         the Research of Knowledge Transfer”, in: Proc. of Wireless 
         Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing 
         (WiCom 2007), 2007, pp. 5439-5442, 
[14]  Nonaka, I. and Takeuchi, H.: The Knowledge-Creating 
         Company, Oxford University Press, London 1995. 
[15]  OWL Web Ontology Language Reference, 
         http://www.w3.org/standards/history/owl-ref. 
[16]  Probst, G., Raab, St., Romhardt, K.: Wissen managen 
         (in German)”, Gabler, 6th ed. 2010.  
[17]  Senge, P.: The Fifth Discipline, Currency Doubleday, New 
         York 1994.  
[18]  SWRL: A Semantic Web Rule Language Combining OWL 
         and RuleML, http://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/ . 
[19]  Vlismas, O. and Venieris, G.: “Towards an Ontology for the 
         Intellectual Capital Domain”, in: Journal of Intellectual 
         Capital, Vol.12, No. 1, 2011, pp. 75-110.                            
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

