Ontological Representation of Knowledge Related to Building Energy-
efficiency 
 
German Nemirovski 
Business and Computer Science 
Albstadt-Sigmaringen-University of Applied Sciences 
Albstadt, Germany 
nemirovskij@hs-albsig.de 
Álvaro Sicilia, Fàtima Galán, Marco Massetti 
Leandro Madrazo 
ARC Enginyeria i Arquitectura La Salle 
Universitat Ramon Llull 
Barcelona, Spain 
 [asicilia, fatima, mmassetti, madrazo]@salleurl.edu 
 
 
Abstract — Within the research project RÉPENER, co- 
financed by the R+D+i Spanish National Plan, an information 
system to capture the energy-related data throughout the 
whole building life cycle is being developed. The purpose of the 
system is to provide improved quality information to the 
various stakeholders participating at the different stages of the 
building life cycle. This higher-quality information is derived 
from interlinking disparate data sources – proprietary and 
open – and from the application of mining techniques to the 
semantically modelled data.  This paper describes the design 
and the most important features of the RÉPENER global 
ontology, which is the core component of the information 
system is being developed. The ontology embraces knowledge 
originated from three realms: canonical domain knowledge, 
praxis-related usage cases and energy-related data stemming 
from various sources. The ontological design process – which 
includes the 
acquisition, 
unification, 
extension, 
formal 
specification and evaluation of the knowledge – is presented as 
a case study on knowledge discovery and engineering. 
Keywords-semantic web; ontology; taxonomy; information 
system; energy-efficiency; energy model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Due to rapid technological development and the 
imminent shortage of fossil energy resources required in 
nearly all technological areas, crucial decisions must be 
made in regards to the reduction of energy consumption. In 
recent years, particularly in the area of building construction, 
a great deal of meaningful data has been collected, the 
analysis of which can help in the decision-making process 
related to this domain. On aggregate, this data appears to be 
a real treasury for data mining and visualization methods, 
which might help to improve the energy performance of 
buildings. However, the available data is located in different 
data sources, heterogeneously structured and formatted. 
Thus, access to data in the right format and at the right time 
remains a substantial challenge for those who will develop 
services that help to improve the energy-efficiency of 
existing and planned buildings.   
Two critical questions must be answered on the way 
towards the development of such services: 1) how to enable 
efficient querying over the entire space of distributed data, 
e.g., for the purposes of data mining; and 2) how to make the 
portfolio of all available data transparent to actors operating 
at each phase of the building life cycle – from the design to 
construction and operation. Subsequently, an information 
system addressing these questions and tasks should provide 
lookup, browsing and data-transformation facilities which 
operate over the entire distributed data space.  
The purpose of the RÉPENER project [2] is to develop 
an ontology-based information system which supports 
decision-making processes and knowledge discovery by 
actors concerned with the energy management of buildings. 
In recent years, studies on data integration using ontologies 
have delivered substantial results. The main example which 
proves the feasibility of tasks solutions is the Linked Open 
Data project [1]. By September 2011, it had integrated 31 
billion data records specified in the RDF format, which is the 
most popular language for the specification of ontology-
related information.  
This paper presents the design of the ontology which is a 
core component in the RÉPENER information system. A 
comprehensive project description can be found in [2]. An 
important feature of this ontological design is the 
conceptualization of the domain knowledge determined from 
three different perspectives: first, the perspective of actors 
expressed through use case specifications such as energy 
consumption 
analysis 
and 
prediction; 
secondly, the 
perspective of canonical domain expertise expressed through 
standardization 
approaches 
in 
the 
field 
of 
energy 
performance of buildings; and thirdly, the perspective of data 
access expressed through models of data sources (e.g., entity 
relationship models).   
The balance of the paper is structured as follows: Section 
II is dedicated to the description of background and 
methodology; in Section III, the process of knowledge 
acquisition is explained; the implementation and the 
ontology coding details are described in Section IV; Section 
V focuses on the goals and method of the ontological 
evolution; and lastly, in Section VI, some conclusions are 
summarized.  
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. Role of ontologies in data integration 
The term "ontology" has been used in computer science 
since the early 1990s. One widely acknowledged definition 
was given by Gruber [3]. Ontology is an explicit 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

conceptualization of a knowledge domain whereby the basic 
ontology element, a concept, represents a term and its 
relationship to other terms from the vocabulary used in this 
domain. Therefore, ontological concepts are interrelated, 
e.g., "house" is a sub-concept of "building." Such 
relationships can be defined in the form of axioms, 
conceptual properties connecting concepts to each other or 
attributes connecting concepts to value domains, such as 
"integer" or "literal". A subsumption hierarchy of concepts 
interrelated 
by 
specialization/generalization 
or 
sub-
concept/super-concept relationship lies at the core of the 
ontology. This is called taxonomy. Ontologies are formally 
specified using Description Logic formalisms, and are coded 
in machine-readable languages like OWL. These features 
make 
ontologies 
essential 
for 
the 
specification 
of 
vocabularies in such fields as natural language processing [4] 
and Semantic Web [5]. 
The general idea of using ontologies for the interlinking 
and querying of distributed data is based upon the property 
of ontological concepts to be represented by their instances. 
For example, the two records "residence of Nobel laureate in 
chemistry Carl Bosch" and "house, located in Schloß-
Wolfsbrunnenweg 33, 69118 Heidelberg" can be specified as 
instances of one single concept titled "Villa Bosch". In this 
case, the semantic equality of these records becomes evident, 
not only for humans but also for artificial agents performing 
ontology-based information retrieval. Even if these records 
are stored in two different sources using different formats 
and data models, an artificial agent searching for occurrences 
of the concept "Villa Bosch" will be able to identify the 
concept/instance relations and retrieve both of them. Thus, 
the interoperability of heterogeneously structured data can be 
achieved by establishing references between data chunks and 
ontological concepts or, in other words, by revealing data 
semantics. This fact has made semantic modelling one of the 
most efficient technologies for the integration of distributed 
heterogeneously structured data. The Linked Open Data 
Project mentioned in the introduction follows a decentralized 
modelling approach based on this principle, and it uses 
shared identifiers (URIs) to interlink data distributed over the 
linked sources. Therefore, most open-link data sources are 
represented by an ontology and a single access point able to 
process queries formulated in a standard query language, 
e.g., SPARQL with respect to this ontology. However, the 
Linked Open Data approach faces two obstacles: 1) the 
structure of single data sources, i.e., the architecture of the 
corresponding ontologies, is usually unknown and, therefore, 
combining data stored in different sources requires 
discovering all sources where data may be located; 2) to 
discover data sources, one needs to interact with multiple 
endpoints offering a data querying interface [6]. In terms of 
openness and flexibility, such an approach works well. 
However, for the sake of efficiency and the completeness of 
the information thus retrieved, a centralized approach is 
preferable.  
According to the centralized modelling approach, a 
single ontology is used as the main reference for all 
distributed data. The data of a single source either refers to 
concepts of the central ontology or to concepts of dedicated 
source ontologies univocally mapped to the central ontology, 
by which each concept of the source ontology corresponds to 
one of the central ontology. In such a system, agents query 
data sources in interaction with a single, central end point, 
whereby all queries use the vocabulary of the central 
ontology. The process of indexing and looking up the entire 
distributed data space constitutes an integrated service of the 
information system. In this context, Calvanese [7] described 
an information integration scenario in which source models 
are mapped onto a central enterprise model specifying the 
entire knowledge over the distributed knowledge space. This 
approach was followed by Doerr [8], using the term "core 
ontology" to refer to an integrative ontology similar to the 
enterprise model. Uschold [9] defined the global ontology as 
either an intersection of local ontologies -- given that it 
encompasses concepts, properties and axioms shared by 
local ontologies -- or as a union of elements from all local 
ontologies in the case of an intended application of the 
global ontology as one which would reference the entire 
space of terms. Calvanese [10] introduced a formal 
framework which facilitates the efficient querying of 
integrated data corpus in a centralized manner.   
The RÉPENER project follows the centralized approach 
of ontology-based data integration, adopting the terminology 
of Uschold [9]. Accordingly, ontologies which specify the 
data located in single sources are called local ontologies, 
while the central ontology serving as a target for the mapping 
of local ontologies, being defined as the union of their 
elements, is called global ontology. 
B. Related approaches for energy data 
Semantic technologies have already been applied to 
model energy information. However, and according to 
Keistead [11], “there is not yet one widely used 
conceptualization for energy systems”.  
However, there are ontologies developed in specific 
domains, such as in building usage and operation. Shah and 
Chao [12] created an electrical home appliance ontology 
which facilitates the occupant's awareness regarding energy 
consumption in the house. For the same purpose, a smart 
home knowledge base has been developed using semantic 
web standards [13]. Additionally, ontologies have been used 
in the process of designing a device platform to integrate 
different device standard models [14]. In this respect, 
semantic technologies have been applied for the purpose of 
ensuring the interoperability among device industry 
standards such as BACnet, KNX, LON, or EnOcean [15]. 
Ontology inference processes have been used to enhance a 
building management system based on ontology modelling 
[16]. More recently, Wagner proposed the semantic web as a 
foundation for the Smart Grid communication architecture 
[17]. 
Applications of semantic technologies to specific 
domains related to energy-efficiency in buildings – 
operation, interoperability, smart grid – are present in the 
literature, but they do not model the energy data generated 
by different applications throughout the building's life cycle. 
To our knowledge, one of the first attempts to model these 
data was carried out during the IntUBE project [18]. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

C. General design strategies: collaboration and modularity 
The design of formally specified ontologies has been an 
object of research since the early 1990s. Two significant 
works in this regard were carried out by Gruber [3] and 
Uschold and King [19]. The former defines the properties of 
ontological knowledge representation for the purposes of the 
engineering sciences. The latter deals with the design process 
of ontologies, being described as consisting of four phases: 
identifying ontology purposes, building the ontology, 
evaluating and documenting. In turn, the phase of ontology 
building is subdivided into three steps: 1) ontology capture, 
namely, definition, naming and description of key concepts 
and relationships between them 2) ontology coding, that is, 
using one of the formal languages or tools and 3) integrating 
existing ontologies. This approach has been further 
elaborated in work on this topic. A survey of up-to-date 
methodologies for ontological design was provided by 
Contreras and Martinez-Comenche [20].  
Already in the 1990s, it became obvious that ontologies 
designed for practical industrial or medical application could 
be large and complex. Therefore, to overcome the 
complexity of ontology management, two approaches have 
emerged: collaborative ontological design supported by 
dedicated multi-user environments, as shown in Swartout 
[21], Sure [22], or Tudorache [23]; and reusing ontology 
elements, e.g., design patterns, as shown in Presutti [24] and 
Gangemi [25], or ontology modules as discussed by Cuenca 
Grau [26].  
In contrast to the classic procedure described by Uschold 
and King [19], the design process of the RÉPENER global 
ontology can be depicted as a sequence of iterations 
encompassing 
knowledge 
capture 
(conceptualization, 
concept naming, and description), and ontology coding using 
OWL 2 specification language and evaluation (Figure 1). 
Our approach followed this scenario. After each iteration, the 
ontology became more and more comprehensive.  
 
Figure 1. Design process of RÉPENER global ontology. 
The design process involved energy-domain experts and 
ontology engineers working at different locations in 
Germany and Spain. In diligence style [20], different ideas 
and proposals were generated in a distributed way through 
tools like Adobe Connect, Skype and Google Docs used as a 
platform for the project development. An Excel document 
was used as an instrument to capture the domain knowledge 
from the different realms in order unify the terms and 
identify relationships between them. The resulting structure 
was the base of the ontological design process (see Section 
III). 
Based upon the approach of modular ontological design, 
RÉPENER global ontology is built on certain selected 
modules of an upper-level ontology. In this way, each 
concept of the global ontology subsumes the concepts of the 
Suggested Upper Merged Ontology (SUMO). In this way, 
the foundational relationships and axioms which are valid for 
SUMO concepts remain valid for those of the RÉPENER 
global ontology. Hence, the philosophical, engineering and 
linguistic issues incorporated by the SUMO ontology have 
been inherited by the RÉPENER global ontology. 
III. 
INFORMATION CAPTURE 
A. Vocabulary acquisition 
In each design iteration, the knowledge capture was 
carried out by: a) keeping in mind the purpose of the 
RÉPENER global ontology, i.e., data management; b) taking 
into account the services to be performed by an information 
system for the energy-efficiency of buildings; and c) 
referring to the canonical knowledge structure of the domain 
of interest. This paradigm is reflected in the three-
dimensional architecture of the term space (Figure 2), which 
became part of an informal knowledge specification aiming 
at determining the ontology vocabulary, including terms, 
relations data types and units of measure. One of the 
challenges in the vocabulary acquisition process is to avoid 
redundancy and terminology mismatching, which usually 
occur in the aggregation of heterogeneous information. To 
avoid this, a maximum number common terms for each 
dimension was identified.  
 
 
Figure 2. Three-dimensional architecture of the RÉPENER term 
space. 
The three dimensions of the term space mentioned above 
are illustrated in Figure 2. The first dimension comprises 
data sources containing two kinds of energy information: 
building information (building systems, energy consumption, 
energy demand, etc.) and contextual data (economic context, 
demographic context, climatic context, etc.). In the initial 
project phase, data from three sources was used: a) a 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

database of LEAKO, a Basque company handling 
installation, distribution, and HVAC control. The database 
contains consumption data for thermal (kwh) consumption 
for heating, hot water, gas and water consumption and indoor 
conditions, e.g., air temperature in several monitored 
residential buildings; b) a database of ICAEN, an 
organization of the Catalan government which gathers the 
energy certificates of newly planned buildings, including 
their simulated performance; and c) AEMET climate data 
from the Spanish Meteorological Agency. In this last case, 
the terms, relationships, data, and units of measure were 
extracted from the entity relationship models specifying the 
data sources.  
The second dimension was built on the basis of standards 
and key parameters classifications, used to manage energy 
performance of buildings. The energy certification of 
buildings defined by DATAMINE project [34], the ISO 
CEN 
standards 
following 
the 
European 
Directive 
2002/91/EC (e.g., ISO 13790:2008) and the Standard 
Network Variable Types from LonWorks (SNVTs), were 
utilized in the first two years of the RÉPENER project. The 
terms were extracted out of document texts and tables.  
The third dimension comprises services addressing 
support to stakeholders in the realms of their decision-
making processes (design, maintenance). The first group of 
prototypically developed services consists of: a) a prediction 
service launched in the design phase, whose goal is to 
provide qualified information regarding the consumption and 
demand of a building construction; b) an operation 
optimization service for building managers to optimize the 
building’s behaviour based on the reference data obtained 
from other buildings; c) a correlation analysis service to 
identify the key factors influencing energy consumption; and 
d) a service for setting the energy targets to be reached in the 
refurbishment of the existing buildings. 
 
 
Figure 3. Data-mining process specification in RapidMiner 
software. 
In this case, terms were extracted from the data-mining 
process specifications that were defined using RapidMiner 
software. In this software, processes are specified in XML 
and presented in a graphical editor, as shown in Figure 3. For 
obtaining terms for the energy model, a simulation of the 
above-described services took place by specifying the 
corresponding RapidMiner processes for propositionalized 
data from LEAKO and ICAEN databases. The terms were 
then extracted from the process specification (Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4. Mapping DATAMINE terms onto the input/output 
parameters of services. 
The result of the vocabulary acquisition has been 
documented in a series of Excel tables implementing 
relationships within the three-dimensional term space, being 
transparent for all participants of the collaborative 
knowledge-capture process. The DATAMINE data structure, 
which includes energy certificate data, general data of the 
building, building envelope data, energy demand and/or 
energy consumption has been used as the primary source of 
the terms. Figure 4 shows how DATAMINE field names (in 
the right part of the figure) are mapped onto the input and 
output terms of the data-analysis services (titled as “use 
cases” in the right part of the table). Three tables of this type 
are required for mapping the three dimensions in succession. 
B. Hierarchy of terms 
In Section III.A, it has been shown how the terms, which 
originated at different realms of the three-dimensional term 
space, are mapped onto each other for the purpose of 
identifying a common vocabulary. Such dimensional 
mapping represents part of the energy model, which is the 
first step in the process of creating a formal ontology.  
The other part of the energy model is a hierarchy of 
terms unified by the mappings. Such a hierarchy has been 
specified by means of the relationships contains/part of. The 
top level of the hierarchy is made of the domain names, 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

while the second level contains terms specifying sub-
domains. This partitioning is extended up to the last 
hierarchy level, which contains terms associated with basic 
parameters such as envelope properties or heat-transfer 
coefficient. 
Figure 5 shows the hierarchy of terms in a simplified 
form. The most important parts of the building energy 
domain, which is the core domain of the energy model, can 
be defined as follows: 
 
General project data: parameters which identify the 
project and define its generic characteristics such as 
location, use, project execution data, and site 
description; 
 
Performance: 
building 
performance 
indicators 
regarding energy use (energy demands, consumption 
of different energy carriers, e.g., gas or electricity, 
and different uses, e.g., heating, cooling, hot water, 
electricity and appliances), CO2 emissions and 
indoor conditions (e.g., temperature and humidity); 
 
Building 
properties: 
geometric 
characteristics, 
construction systems and building services; 
 
Outdoor environment: climate characteristics and 
conditions of the physical environment which 
determine the building’s performance: outdoor 
temperature, wind speed and direction, and solar 
radiation; 
 
Operation: usage and management of the building 
and its facilities for maintaining comfort levels (e.g., 
solar protection and thermostat regulation). It also 
includes the effects of the occupant activity in the 
indoor environment, such as thermal loads produced 
by occupants, lighting and appliances; 
 
Certification: information associated with building 
energy certificates. It includes indicators to qualify a 
building based on performance, e.g., according to a 
conventional scale as (A, B, C, etc.). It also includes 
the certification-process methodology.  
 
 
Figure 5. Energy model domains 
Studies [27] have shown that the energy consumption of 
building correlates to socio-economic factors like real estate 
prices or the income levels of the inhabitants. To take this 
fact into consideration, we included the economic/social 
domain into the building's energy model along with the 
building energy domain.   
IV. 
ARCHITECTURE AND CODING  
A. Ontology Architecture 
As stated in Section II.C, the RÉPENER global ontology 
uses the Suggested Upper Merged Ontology (SUMO) at the 
upper level. The selection of SUMO for this role was made 
after comparing it to other foundational ontologies, such as 
DOLCE, PROTON, General Formal Ontology (GFO) and 
Basic Formal Ontology (BFO). SUMO scored well in such 
fields as simplicity of understanding, applicability for 
reasoning and inference purposes, and potential reuse in the 
Building Energy Domain, for instance, reusing concepts for 
specifying units of measure defined by the SI system (meter, 
watt, joule, etc.). 
Some of the SUMO concepts subsume concepts of the 
RÉPENER ontology. For example, the concept Building is 
subsumed by SUMO's StationaryArtifact and SUMO's 
Attribute subsumes BuildingProperty, which in turn 
subsumes BuildingGeometry: 
 
BuildingGeometry ⊑ BuildingProperty ⊑ Attribute 
 
The resulting RÉPENER global ontology is a 
combination of two hierarchies: one of them is the 
taxonomy based on the concept of subsumption, where the 
upper level of the taxonomy is represented by generic 
SUMO concepts. The second hierarchy consists of the terms 
described in Section III.B, whereby building elements of 
this hierarchy are aggregative has or includes properties 
such as the property hasGeometry (Figure 6). The former 
hierarchy (Figure 5) is required for the formal reasoning, 
while the latter one (Figure 6) represents the knowledge 
from the perspective of the domain experts and users. 
 
Figure 6. hierarchies as the basis structures of the RÉPENER 
global ontology. 
B. Coding 
OWL 2 has, in recent years, become a sort of default 
standard for ontology coding. As shown in Calvanese [28], 
the use of this specification language in its full version may 
be disadvantageous in terms of the computability of 
particular reasoning tasks, particularly those which require 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

conjunctive queries of large data volumes. Poggi [29] 
suggested a somewhat restricted DL-LiteA formalism, which 
helps to overcome this obstacle. This approach was adopted 
by the RÉPENER global ontology.  
A detailed description of DL-LiteA formalism is out of 
scope of this paper. Nevertheless, it is important to mention 
two of the most important features of an OWL-dialect that 
implements DL-LiteA: 1) domain and range of properties can 
be specified only for functional data properties; and 2) 
definition of an object property connecting two OWL 
classes with each other, has to be modelled by means of 
axioms and not by specifying property’s domain and range. 
For example, two following axioms in DL notation use 
subsumption (⊑), existence quantification (∃) and inversion 
(   ) to express that the class BuildingGeometry relates to the 
class Building via the hasGeometry property. 
 
Building ⊑ ∃hasGeometry  
∃hasGeometry    ⊑ BuildingGeometry 
 
In OWL the same is specified as follows: 
 
<SubClassOf> 
<Class IRI="http://www.owl-
ontologies.com/SUMO155.owl#Building"/> 
  <ObjectSomeValuesFrom> 
   <ObjectProperty IRI="#hasGeometry"/> 
   <Class abbreviatedIRI=":Thing"/> 
  </ObjectSomeValuesFrom> 
</SubClassOf> 
 
and 
 
<SubClassOf> 
  <ObjectSomeValuesFrom> 
   <ObjectInverseOf> 
     <ObjectProperty IRI="#hasGeometry"/> 
   </ObjectInverseOf> 
   <Class abbreviatedIRI=":Thing"/> 
  </ObjectSomeValuesFrom> 
  <Class IRI="#BuildingGeometry"/> 
</SubClassOf> 
 
Although domains and ranges of properties are not 
explicitly specified in the code, if an ontology specification 
is valid, they can be inferred by reasoner software to be then 
visualized and viewed by the user. 
V. 
EVALUATION 
Apart of the already mentioned work of Gruber [3], 
different views on essential ontology properties are 
described by Gómez-Pérez, [30], Obrst [31], and Gangemi 
[32]. After a comparative analysis of these approaches, we 
found that the following three criteria are of primary priority 
for the RÉPENER global ontology: 
 
Completeness: in the RÉPENER context this means 
that all terms and relations of the three-dimensional 
space of terms are explicitly specified in the 
ontology code or can be inferred by reasoning. 
 
Intelligibility: the ability of actors using the ontology 
and ontology-based applications in their decision-
making process to understand the ontology structure. 
 
Computational integrity and efficiency: the ability of 
the ontology to support reasoning tasks such as 
conjunctive querying on high efficiency level, i.e., 
with a comparatively short response time.  
Brank [33] described four types of evaluation 
approaches: 1. comparing ontologies with a “golden 
standard”, e.g., another ontology; 2. comparing ontologies 
with source data; 3.evaluating ontology application; and 4. 
evaluation by humans. In the RÉPENER project, we have 
followed three of these approaches: we compared our 
ontology with source data, evaluated it by humans and 
evaluated it through the application of reasoners. 
1. Comparing ontologies with source data to evaluate 
ontology completeness: a set of randomly selected items, 
such as fields and table names from databases of LEAKO 
and ICAEN or terms from the DATAMINE classification, 
are (manually) mapped by testers onto the current version of 
the ontology. If the mapping result for one item corresponds 
to the mapping in the energy model (Figure 4), the resulting 
coefficient, initially nullified, will be incremented by one. 
Success is measured as a percentage where 100% 
corresponds to the number of preselected items. We have 
carried out ten evaluations of this kind, selecting twenty 
different terms from the above-mentioned sources. Six of 
the twenty terms could be identified in the ontology. Three 
evaluations ended with the score 18, and one ended with a 
score of 17. Therefore, the total completeness of the 
ontology was rated at 95.5%, resulting from the following 
calculation: (20·6+18·3+17) ·100 / (10·20). However, 
taking into account the fact that two of nine missing terms 
were intentionally omitted from the ontology, the 
completeness would be 96.5%.  
2. Evaluation by humans aiming at the quantification of 
intelligibility: independent testers (who did not participate 
in the design process) are given the task of navigating the 
ontology or, in other words, finding a concept. The 
navigation is carried out in an ontology viewer developed 
for this purpose. The shortest navigation path from the top 
of the concept hierarchy (depending on the task, it can be 
the energy model or the concept taxonomy) is calculated in 
advance. The result of evaluation is measured as a 
percentage, where 100% corresponds to the number 
navigation steps equal to the number of edges in the shortest 
path minus one and 0% to this number plus 30, i.e., if a 
tester needed 30 clicks above the required minimum, his 
score was set to 0.  The evaluation was carried out by two 
groups of testers. One group contained eight computer 
science students, and the other group contained five experts 
in the field of building energy. Each tester was offered three 
terms to find in the ontology. The surprising result of this 
evaluation was that the average score of these two groups 
did not differ a lot. The intelligibility of the ontology for 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

domain experts was 97.30%, while this metric for computer 
science students achieved the value 91.20%.  
3. Evaluation of ontology application with the focus on 
computational integrity and efficiency: as stated above, in 
an ontology developed on the basis of DL-LiteA, the 
domains and ranges of properties specified using axioms 
can be inferred by reasoners. However, this method does not 
provide a measure for the quality of the ontology. Instead, it 
demonstrates the coding or conceptualization errors which 
have to be treated immediately.  
However, for practical reasons the time required to 
complete the reasoning tasks is an important matter of 
consideration. This time strongly depends on i) the 
expressivity of the DL-Language used to specify the 
ontology; and ii) the number of axioms contained in an 
ontology. Our evaluation has shown that the former factor 
may be crucial for the performance of reasoning, while the 
latter one has only a moderate influence. For instance, an 
attempt to integrate QUDT ontology modules specifying 
units of measure vaulted the time of reasoning carried out 
on a machine equipped with an Intel i7 2600 CPU and 8GB 
RAM to three hours. We believe the explanation for this 
was the highly expressive OWL-profile used for the QUDT 
specification. The reasoning time for RÉPENER global 
ontology using seven selected modules of SUMO upper-
level ontology only (in this case, QUDT part was not 
imported) of a total size of 5.3 MB and containing 100 
axioms as those described in IV.B achieved 1 minute 20 
seconds on the same machine. When the number of axioms 
increased to 1,000 the reasoning time rose to 5 minutes 32 
seconds (these measures are valid for the HermiT reasoner 
version 1.3.5). It should be mentioned that originally SUMO 
is specified using the KIF Knowledge Interchange Format 
(KIF) language, which has a high level of expressivity. 
When translated to OWL, however, SUMO modules lose 
many axioms which cannot be expressed in OWL one to 
one. Hence the translated version is on the EL level [33]. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
This paper has presented a case study on knowledge 
discovery, as was carried out in the context of a particular 
domain (Building Energy Performance) and aiming at the 
fulfilment of a particular task (development of an 
information system for the decision-making process support 
of stakeholders participating at different stages of a 
building's life cycle). Within the case study, we have shown 
several stages of the process of knowledge discovery and 
engineering: 
1) Vocabulary acquisition from different realms 
related to the domain and to the task of interest: 
services exposed by the information system to be 
developed; structure of data sources to be integrated 
and canonical domain knowledge in form of 
standardization documents; 
2) Mapping of terms onto each other for the purpose of 
defining a common vocabulary for all of the realms; 
3) Specification of relationships between terms, which 
is an important step from the definition of a 
vocabulary towards ontological design: in the 
course of a relationship definition, a term became a 
concept.  
4) Building taxonomy of concepts by integration the 
SUMO ontology as the taxonomy’s upper level. At 
this step, the abstract knowledge based on 
philosophic, linguistic and engineering postulates, 
as discovered and constructed by a third party, 
became part of the ontology being constructed; 
5) Formal specification of the discovered knowledge, 
i.e., the elaboration of this knowledge towards a 
formal ontology. This operation makes the new 
knowledge available for exploitation, particularly in 
the context of data management and decision-
making support on which the RÉPENER project has 
its focus; 
6) Knowledge Evaluation, using distinct criterion and 
methods.    
This paper addressed issues related to knowledge 
discovery and ontological design, as were carried out in the 
context of the RÉPENER project aiming at development of 
an information system supporting the stakeholder in all 
phases of a given building's life cycle. Nevertheless, the 
paper did not address the implementation aspect of the 
information system. Neither can we argue if the evaluation 
of the ontology hereby presented can replace the evaluation 
of the information services, to be developed. This is 
specified in a separate paper [2], which presents further 
motivation and the context for the RÉPENER global 
ontology. However, we assume the existence of a strong 
correlation between the quality of the ontology and the 
quality of information services. The demonstration of such 
correlation will be the goal of further work. One of the most 
important tasks in this regard will be computability 
evaluation of the resulting information system using 
benchmarks for conjunctive queries addressing distributed 
data.   
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
RÉPENER is being developed with the support of the 
research program BIA 2009-13365, co-funded by the 
Spanish National R+D+i Plan 2009-2012. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Heath, and C. Bizer, Linked Data: Evolving the Web into a 
Global Data Space (1st ed.), Synthesis Lectures on the 
Semantic Web: Theory and Technology, 1:1, 2011, pp. 1-136. 
Morgan & Claypool. 
[2] L. Madrazo, A. Sicilia, M. Massetti, and F. Galan, “Semantic 
modeling of energy-related information throughout the whole 
building lifecycle,” In Proceedings of the 9th European 
Conference on Product and Process Modelling ECPPM. 
Iceland, 2012. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

[3] T. Gruber, “Towards principles for the design of ontologies 
used for knowledge sharing,” International Journal of Human 
Computer Studies, Vol. 43 (5-6), 1995,  pp. 907-928. 
[4] A. Kiryakov, B. Popov, I. Terziev, D. Manov, and D. 
Ognyanoff: “Semantic Annotation, Indexing, and Retrieval,” 
Journal of Web Semantics, 2(1) 2004, pp. 49-79. 
[5] T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila, “The Semantic 
Web. Scientific American”, 284, 2001, pp. 34-43. 
[6] E. Oren, “Sindice.com: A document-oriented lookup index for 
open linked data,” International Journal of Metadata, 
Semantics and Ontologies, 3(1), 2008, pp.37-52. 
[7] D. Calvanese, G. De Giacomo, M. Lenzerini, D. Nardi, and R. 
Rosati, “Description Logic Framework for Information 
Integration,” 6th International Conference on the Principles of 
Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR-98). Italy, 
1998. 
[8] M. Doerr, J. Hunter, and C. Lagoze, “Towards a Core 
Ontology for Informa-tion Integration,” Journal of Digital 
information, 4(1) 2003. 
[9] M. Uschold, “Creating, Integrating and Maintaining Local 
and Global Ontologies,” Proc. of 14th  European Conf. on 
Artificial Intelligence (ECAI'00), Germany, 2000. 
[10] D. Calvanese, G. De Giacomo, D. Lembo, M .Lenzerini, R. 
Rosati, and M. Ruzzi, Using OWL in Data Integration, R. De 
Virgilio, F. Giunchiglia, and L. Tanca, (Eds.). Semantic Web 
Information Management, 2010 (Chapter 14, pp. 397-424), 
Springe-Verlag, Germany. 
[11] J. Keistead, and K.H. Van Dam, “A Survey on the 
Application of Conceptualisations in Energy Systems 
Modelling,” 
In 
Formal 
Ontologies 
Meet 
Industry: 
Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop. Ed. P.E. 
Vermaas, V. Dignum, IOS Press, 2011, (pp. 50-62) 
[12] N. Shah and K. Chao, “Energy Conservation Recommending 
Semantic Services,” In Alain Zarli (Ed.) conference CIB –
W78, France, 2011. 
[13] M.J. Kofler, Ch. Reinisch, and W. Kastner, A semantic 
representation of energy-related information in future smart 
homes. In Energy and Buildings, 47(0), pp.169 - 179, 2012. 
[14] A. Noguero, N. Arana, and J. Martinez, “Enabling energy 
efficiency through device awareness using ontologies,” In 
Alain Zarli (Ed.) conference CIB –W78, France, 2011.  
[15] K. Kabitzsch and J. Ploennings, “Ontology models and design 
patterns for building automation, ” In Alain Zarli (Ed.) 
conference CIB –W78, France, 2011.  
[16] J. Han, Y. Jeong, and I. Lee, “Efficient Building Energy 
Management System Based on Ontology, Inference Rules, 
and Simulation,” International Conference on Intelligent 
Building and Management. Proc .of CSIT vol.5 IACSIT 
Press, Singapore, 2011. 
[17] A. Wagner, S. Speiser, A. Harth, “Semantic Web 
Technologies for a Smart Energy Grid: Requirements and 
Challenges,” In Proceedings of the 9th International Semantic 
Web Conference (ISWC2010), 2010. 
[18] H.M. Böhms, W. Plokker, B. Charvier, L. Madrazo, and A. 
Sicilia, “IntUBE energy information platform,” in 8TH 
European Conference on Prodcut and Process Modelling 
ECPPM, Ireland: CRC Press, 2010,  pp. 339-344. 
[19] M. Uschold, and M. King, “Towards methodology for 
building ontologies,” Workshop on Basic Ontological Issues 
in Knowledge Sharing, held in conjunction with IJCAI-95, 
Canada, 1995. 
[20] J. Contreras, and J. Martínez-Comeche, “Ontologías: 
ontologías y recuperación de información,” 2008. Retrieved 
March 
9, 
2012, 
from 
http://www.sedic.es/gt_normalizacion_tutorial_ontologias.pdf 
[21] B. Swartout, R. Patil, K. Knight, and T. Russ, “Toward 
distributed use of large-scale ontologies,” In Proceedings of 
the 
10th 
Knowledge 
AcquisitionWorkshop (KAW’96) 
Canada, 1996. 
[22] Y. Sure, M. Erdmann, J. Angele, S. Staab, R. Studer, and D. 
Wenke, “OntoEdit: Collaborative Ontology Development for 
the SemanticWeb,” Horrocks and J. Hendler (Eds.) In Fisrt 
International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2002) (Vol. 
2342 of LNCS, pp. 221–235). Springer-Verlag Berlin, 2002. 
[23] T. Tudorache, N.F. Noy, and M.A. Musen, “Supporting 
collaborative ontology development in Protege,” In 7th Intl. 
Semantic Web Conference, ISWC 2008, Germany,  2008. 
[24] V. Presutti, A. Gangemi, S. David, G. Aguado de Cea, M.C. 
Suarez Figueroa, E. Montiel-Ponsoda, and M. Poveda, 
“Library of design patterns for collaborative development of 
networked ontologies,” Deliverable D1.1.3, NeOn project, 
2008. 
[25] A. Gangemi, and V. Presutti, Handbook on Ontologies, 
chapter Ontology Design Patterns,2009, pp. 221. Springer. 
[26] B. Cuenca Grau, I. Horrocks, Y. Kazakov, and U. Sattler, 
“Modular reuse of ontologies: Theory and practice,” Journal 
of Articial Intelligence Research, 31, 2008, pp. 273-318. 
[27] K. Lomas, T. Oreszcyn, D. Shipworth, A. Wright, and A. 
Summerfield, “Carbon Reduction in Buildings (CaRB) - 
Understanding the Social and Technical Factors that Influence 
Energy Use in UK Homes,” In Proceedings of the RICS 
Annual Conference Cobra, London, UK, 2006. 
[28] D. Calvanese, G. De Giacomo, D. Lembo, M. Lenzerini, and 
R. Rosati, “Tractable reasoning and efficient query answering 
in description logics: The DL-Lite family,” Journal of 
Automated Reasoning, 39(3), 2007, pp. 385–429. 
[29] A. Poggi, D. Lembo, D. Calvanese, G. De Giacomo, M. 
Lenzerini, and R. Rosati, “Linking data to ontologies,” Jounal 
on Data Semantics, 2008, pp.133–173. 
[30] A. Gómez-Pérez, Ontology evaluation, In S. Staab, and R. 
Studer, (Eds.), Handbook on Ontologies (1st ed.), 2004, 
(Chapter 13, pp 251-274). Springer. 
[31] L. Obrst, W. Ceusters, I. Mani, S. Ray, and B. Smith, The 
evaluationof ontologies, In C.J.O. Baker, and K.-H. Cheung, 
(Eds.), Revolutionizing Knowledge Discovery in the Life 
Sciences, 2007, (Chapter 7, pp. 139- 158). Springer. 
[32] A. Gangemi, C. Catenacci, M. Ciaramita, and J. Lehmann, 
“Ontology evaluation and validation: an integrated formal 
model for the quality diagnostic task,” Technical report, 
Laboratory of Applied Ontologies-CNR, Italy, 2005. 
[33] J. Brank, M. Grobelnik, and D. Mladenic, “A survey of 
ontology evaluation techniques,” 8th International Multi-
Conference of the Information Society, 2005, (pp. 166-169). 
[34] V. Corrado, S.P. Corgnati, M. Garbino, “Energy Consumption 
Data Collection with DATAMINE,” Energy, Climate and 
Indoor Comfort in Mediterranean Countries, AICARR (ITA), 
Climamed 2007, 5-7 Settembre 2007, 2007, (pp. 803-816). 
 
 
 
 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

