Knowledge Representation Frameworks for Terminology Management in
Cybersecurity: The OCS Project Use Case
Claudia Lanza∗, Elena Cardillo†, Maria Taverniti†, Roberto Guarasci∗
∗University of Calabria, Rende, Italy
Email: c.lanza@dimes.unical.it; roberto.guarasci@unical.it
†Institute of Informatics and Telematics, National Research Council, Rende, Italy
Email: {elena.cardillo;maria.taverniti}@iit.cnr.it
Abstract—Managing technical terms proper to specialized lan-
guages, represents one of the main tasks of Knowledge Organiza-
tion Systems (KOSs). Cybersercurity domain contains a plethora
of such terms, with a constant growth of new terms , which
still need to be structured and organized from a semantic point
of view. This paper aims at providing a presentation of KOSs
for organizing specialized terminologies, speciﬁcally related to
Cybersecurity, starting from a comparison between semantic
resources presenting a higher level of semantic representation,
i.e., thesauri and ontologies. To show their potentiality in the
management of the Cybersecurity technical terminology, an
outline of their application within a project carried out at the
Institute of Informatics and Telematics of the National Research
Council is described, and the distinction between them detailed
in the conclusive discussion. A speciﬁc focus will be given to the
more accurate description that ontologies are able to provide
due to the way semantic relationships existing among terms and
concepts belonging to a speciﬁc ﬁeld of knowledge are formalized.
Keywords- Cybersecurity; KOS; Thesauri; Ontologies; Special-
ized language; Knowledge Representation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Managing technical terms proper to specialized languages,
represents one of the main tasks of Knowledge Organization
Systems (KOSs). In the context of KOSs, semantic resources,
such as thesauri and ontologies, are useful to index documents
and to help people during the information searching and
retrieval from all types of information resources related to
specialized domains, where semantic ambiguity between terms
should be avoided. In this scenario, the paper is focused
on presenting some of the main differences existing in the
way of organizing and representing the information related to
highly technical domains, in particular that of Cybersecurity.
Amongst the KOSs [1] the comparison will focus on the
two mentioned means of semantic knowledge conﬁguration:
thesauri and ontologies. The reason why these two types
of resources have been selected among the others basically
relies on one of the objectives of the OCS Project Cyber
Security Observatory of the CNR Institute of Informatics and
Telematics (IIT-CNR) [2], that will be presented in detail in
Section IV. The project concerns the development of an Italian
controlled vocabulary, in other words a thesaurus, for the
Cybersecurity domain, and the enhancement of semantic con-
nections and representation by exploiting a more interoperable
and formal language, i.e., the Web Ontology Language (OWL)
[3] the recommended Semantic Web language for authoring
ontologies.
Thesauri’s main scope is that of structuring information and
organizing it in a layered network of semantic connections, and
its management and usability is piloted by KOSs functional-
ities [4][5]. As Soergel afﬁrms in his work, ”A thesaurus is
a structured collection of concepts and terms for the purpose
of improving the retrieval of information.A thesaurus should
help the searcher to ﬁnd good search terms, whether they be
descriptors from a controlled vocabulary or the manifold terms
needed for a comprehensive free-text search
all the various
terms that are used in texts to express the search concept”
[6]. In managing information represented by terms proper to
specialized language, a thesaurus should provide a reliable and
a well structured semantic means to guide the understanding of
technical terms representing concepts belonging to a speciﬁc
ﬁeld of knowledge. Its indexing function proves to be helpful
in the way the users are able to analyze documents according
to an informative organization of descriptors. In other words,
the abstraction of knowledge occurs indirectly by exploiting
terminological units that take on the status of descriptor or
indexing unit. The latter is the element that language uses to
describe, synthesize and extract information from documents
[7].
Another relevant work to understand the aims and the meth-
ods for building a thesaurus is that of Broughton [8]. In
this work, the author gives light to the main guidelines to
develop a semantic tool through which technical concepts
can be organized by means of hierarchical, equivalence and
associative relations between the terms that represent them
[9][10].
The way thesauri are structured follows standardized rules
that should be respected, as the ones included in the ISO
standards [11][12]. The interoperability of semantic resources,
such as thesauri and ontologies, is given by the principle of
linked open data [13][14][15], which guarantees a shareable
knowledge organization system that can facilitate the coordi-
nation among several users for different terminological tasks.
On the basis of the idea of generating a language that can
guarantee a higher form of interaction between informative
systems, without losing the exact meaning of the shared
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-738-2
SEMAPRO 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

information, the ontology seems to route towards a constant
reuse of the managed information by providing conceptual
representations of a domain [16][17]. The methods followed
for building ontologies observe basic principles that can be
found in the guidelines published by Noy and Mcguinness
[18] or Bourigault [19].
The paper is structured as follows: Section II shortly gives
an overview of main existing resources for Cybersecurity
information management, both in English and Italian language.
Section III includes related works focused on the construction
of KOSs and on Cybersecurity. Section IV describes the
construction of the Italian thesaurus for Cybersecurity and its
enhancement through an ontological representation. Section V
will provide a discussion about the main advantages derived
from exploiting thesauri and the ontologies. Finally, Section
VI sums up the key issues underlined in the paper giving some
conclusions and providing some future perspectives.
II. STATE OF THE ART
One of the main purposes of this research activity is related
to the creation of a semantic resource, a thesaurus, that can
be considered as a reliable knowledge organization system
that structures the information related to Cybersecurity in
Italian language. Indeed, the basis from which the activity
has taken inspiration was connected to the absence in Italian
language of a highly semantically structured way to manage
the terminology of this ﬁeld of study. Some of the resources
that have been taken into account to build a source corpus
to be processed in order to obtain a list of representative
terms are hereafter summarized.These terms synthesize the
concepts belonging to a speciﬁc domain and they represented
the starting model to realize the ontology for Cybersecurity
based on the structure created for the Italian thesaurus. The
ontology has been developed with the goal of representing the
classes linked to each other through more precise properties
that could, at times, specify the interconnections between them
better than a ﬂat visualization that belongs to a thesaural
organization of terms.
Among the examples of Cybersecurity glossaries and vocabu-
laries, of great importance are: for English, the ones contained
in the NIST 7298 [20] and ISO 27000:2016 [21] standards for
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) security,
and, for Italian, the Italian book ”Libro Bianco” (White Book
for Cybersecurity) realized by the National Laboratory of
Cybersecurity of the Consorzio Interuniversitario Nazionale
per l’Informatica (CINI) [22], which thoroughly sheds light on
the key issues related to Cybersecurity guidelines and on the
latest related episodes that have changed the mode of conduct
to defend informative systems and to conceive some speciﬁc
concepts proper to Cybersecurity. Another relevant existing
resource for Italian is the Italian ”Glossario Intelligence” [23],
a technical glossary published by the Presidency of the Council
of Ministers, which contains several terms belonging to the
Cybersecurity domain and which has been used as basis for
the creation of the Italian thesaurus and the ontology for
Cybersecurity under investigation.
With respect to ontologies, it is worth mentioning the works
targeted at the creation of ontology models for Cybersecu-
rity, i.e., [24][25][26][27], and the studies focused on the
approaches for developing an architecture for Cybesecurity
standards [28] and enterprise’s Cybersecurity metrics [29]. In
particular, in [25] an ontology has been presented, which has
been designed to integrate data from different heterogeneous
sources, in the absence of a common terminology, offering
a sufﬁciently complete knowledge on the possible threats,
thus allowing Organizations to perform reasoning and support
decision-making processes related to security.
III. RELATED WORKS
Processing the information belonging to speciﬁc domains
of interest involves the analysis of those documents which
semantically tend to represent concepts through a technical
language [30]. The creation of terminological databases [30]
follows some given criteria linked to gathering the related
documents that have to constitute the reference corpus from
which terms can be retrieved. To achieve this ﬁrst informative
structure, the corpus ﬁrstly aims at including documents that
can represent the domain in an ofﬁcial way [31], i.e., the
gold standards, [32] collecting a terminological standardized
repository made up of terms that are meant to be closely
speciﬁc to the technical ﬁeld of knowledge under review [33].
To obtain a matching system between the terminology shared
by a community of experts from a particular domain and
the terms contained in a list derived from the processing
of a reference corpus, the documents gathered in the corpus
undergo a process of terminology extraction, which shall
compare the equivalence between the representative terms of
a domain with the ones of the gold standards [34].
This last step is usually implemented by exploiting semi-
automatic term extraction tools. Nazarenko et al.. [35] and
Loginova [36] gave in their works detailed lists of several tools
for extracting terminologies from texts. With regards to the
Cybersecurity domain and the research activity treated in this
paper, various existing sources, both in English and in Italian,
have been analyzed in order to retrieve an accurate terminolog-
ical basis from which to build a more sophisticated semantic
resource to guide the knowledge representation process. The
intent of this project task, as aforementioned, is to provide an
Italian structure, ﬁrstly conceived as a thesaurus, to conﬁgure
the terminology of Cybersecurity in a network of semantic
relations that can better orientate to a lexical understanding
of specialized concepts represented by terms belonging to this
ﬁeld. The goal of this research activity is also based on the
reuse of the terms contained in the thesaurus to realize in
a consequential way an ontology system that could support
the inclusion of customized properties between classes and
more comprehensively clarify the associative relationships of
the thesaurus. This represents the reason why ontologies can
be usually considered as resources that can provide a more
exhaustive and explicit frame for knowledge representation.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-738-2
SEMAPRO 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

IV. THE OCS PROJECT
In this Section the project case will be presented. The activity
regarded the creation of a thesaurus in Italian language as a
semantic tool to organize the terminology on the Cybersecurity
domain. The thesaurus has been inserted amongst the services
of the online platform Cyber Security Observatory (OCS) [37].
A. The Cybersecurity context
As previously mentioned, the Cybersecurity domain is mainly
characterized by a technical terminology. Given that Cyberse-
curity is a synergy of different sub-ﬁelds, the schematising of
this specialized ﬁeld reﬂected this high level of heterogeneity.
Cybersecurity is permeated by its multidisciplinary nature that
involves Information and Communication Technologies (ICT)
and its sub-areas, such as, audiovisual techniques, computer
software, electronics, by its speciﬁcity with respect to technical
and standardized terms, and by its cross-ﬁelding thematic
coverage, i.e., computer science ﬁeld, legislative systems,
regulations. Given these premises, the treatment of its internal
language, that derives from the textual content extracted from
the source corpus documents, is meant to be managed by for-
mal semantic systems in order to obtain shareable standardized
lists of the domain’s representative terms organized according
to their semantic relations, which, in turn, will orientate the
understanding of the conceptual model of the domain [38].
B. The Italian thesaurus for Cybersecurity
The main focus of this paper is the creation of a semantic tool
for the Italian project Cyber Security Observatory (OCS) [37],
carried out in collaboration with the Institute of Informatics
and Telematics of the National Research Council. During
this task, while seeking a resource that could represent the
Cybersecurity terminological framework and could be used as
a service for experts and common users, some of the key dif-
ferences between thesauri and ontologies in the management
and organization of highly technical information and language
arose.
Firstly, the choice to privilege a thesaurus structure instead
of other semantic resources, such as glossaries or taxonomies,
relies on its peculiarity of managing the representative terms
of a speciﬁc domain as an entangled network of semantic
relations that guide the comprehension of a conceptual model
proper of a ﬁeld of knowledge to be studied [8]. In order
to obtain the knowledge organization with respect to a struc-
turing system as provided by a controlled vocabulary, i.e., a
thesaurus, several guidelines need to be observed [11][12].
These aforementioned standards depict the way the terms, that
represent the concepts of a specialized domain, should indicate
a unique and an unambiguous meaning (through the use of
scope note, SN) and should be connected to each other. As
mentioned in Section I, three main basic forms of connections
are generated for structuring the information under the basis
of thesaurus’s modelling [39]:
1) Equivalence relation, marked with the tags Used (USE)
and Used For (UF)
2) Hierarchical relation, marked with the tags Broader Term
(BT) and Narrower Term (NT);
3) Associative relation, marked with the tag Related Term
(RT).
The methodology followed for the realization of the Italian
thesaurus for Cybersecurity covered classical sequences. As
primary step, the terminology contained in the thesaurus has
been extracted from reliable sources which made up the corpus
characterized by documents distinctively selected for their
content oriented to Cybersecuritity issues [31]. This collection
of texts made the information retrieval highly oriented to the
domain to be represented [40], and covered different types of
documents, such as standards and laws [41], Cybersecurity-
related magazines or guidelines and certiﬁcations. The concep-
tual content of these documents was meant to be processed to
obtain lists of terms (a glossary) sorted according to statistical
measurements able to provide a ﬁrst semantic schematization
[42]. Indeed, the second phase concerned the semi-automatic
processing of the information included in the source corpus by
exploiting a term extractor software [36] (more speciﬁcally
the Italian native tool, Text to Knowledge (T2K)) [43] that
provided, as outputs, lists of terms ranked according to their
occurrence’s value in the texts.
Only once having received the validation by the experts of
the domain, i.e., the third phase of the methodology, the terms
have been selected as candidate terms to be integrated in
the thesaurus and their semantic relations with other terms
belonging to the domain and deriving from the corpus have
been created. The current thesaurus in Italian language con-
tains 245 candidate terms, already validated and mapped to
the taxonomies contained in the main gold standards for
Cybersecurity, i.e., NIST 7298 [20] and ISO 27000:2016 [21]
together with domain experts collaborating on the project. The
alignment with the terms contained in the standards for ICT
security granted a coordination between the knowledge shared
by an international Cybersecurity community of experts and
the one represented in the structured thesaurus, which are pre-
ferred terms selected amongst those extracted by T2K as the
most frequent. In order to carry out a matching conﬁguration
with the standards as predictable and stable as possible, the
terms included in the standards, and selected with the support
of domain experts as key elements representing the domain,
have been translated using the Interactive Terminology for
Europe (IATE) term banks [44]. This is considered an im-
portant step given the instructive purposes of the application
that the thesaurus would have had in the web portal of the
Cybersecurity Observatory. The ﬁrst main entries in the Italian
thesaurus for Cybersecurity are four categories ﬁnely selected
from the glossary including the frequency of terms and from
the mapping with the standards alongside the approval by the
domain experts. These macro categories are:
• Cybersecurity;
• Cyberdefence;
• Cyberbullism;
• Cybercriminality.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-738-2
SEMAPRO 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Almost each of the candidate terms included in the thesaurus
network, generated by the semantic relations among the terms,
are accompanied by their deﬁnitions, i.e., Scope Note (SN),
which helps in understanding the terms in their speciﬁc con-
texts giving their deﬁnition taken from the source documents
[45].
For a better understanding of the terms in the Italian The-
saurus for Cybersecurity, Table I gives a metrics of the
numbers of terms, as well as of the semantic relations:
TABLE I. FEATURES OF THE ITALIAN THESAURUS FOR
CYBESECURITY
Terms
Semantic
Rela-
tions
Non-preferred Terms
Scope
Notes
Total
246
280
33
74
C. Ontology enhancement
Another activity of the OCS project has also been focused
on the migration of the thesaurus into a more formal semantic
resource, i.e., an ontology, to better organize and represent
the information about Cybesecurity and addressed to users
who want to get closer to this ﬁeld of knowledge. The
formalization of a thesaurus into an ontology is a task that
in the last ten years has attracted much interest. In fact, in
the literature different approaches are proposed for reusing
thesaurus semantic content to build ontology meta-models and
to populate knowledge bases in different domains, see for
example [46][47][48].
The need for migrating the content included in the thesaurus
to an ontology lies in the decision to better clarify the
associative relationships between the terms of the thesaurus. In
particular, the ﬂat modality in which associative relationship
between terms is represented in the thesaurus, i.e., via the RT
relation, turned out to be not fully satisfactory in the seek of
getting a complete terminological outline for Cybersecurity.
As shown in Figure 1 and Figure 2, there is a clear distinction
between the two systems used to organize and represent
the terminology belonging to the Cybersecurity domain. The
example taken into account to represent the differences is
referred to the semantic relationship linked to the idea of
opposition, i.e., Spoof and Antispoof: in the thesaurus, even
though a deﬁnition is present (within the black square), which
corresponds to the SN, proper to thesauri, giving many details
on the context from which terms come from, the ”opposition”
is not so well represented because it is only shown through the
associative relation (RT) between these aforementioned terms
without giving other explications on the way the two terms
are related as the OWL language does.
the other hand, in the ontology, these two concepts are
connected through the ObjectProperty ”HasAsContrary” that
helps in considering the Domain and the Range as linked by
a precise relationship. 38304480
Another representative case is depicted by Figure 3 and
Figure 4 that show how a thesaurus sometimes gives a weak
Fig. 1. Thesaurus representation of the semantic relationship that describes
opposition
Fig. 2. Prot´eg´e representation of the semantic relationship that describes
opposition
visualization of some attributes associated to a concept.
In the following case, the relation that had to be provided
was related to several attributes that security properties proper
to informative systems own. For this speciﬁc purpose, the
ontology resource gives more advantages in the visualization
of the informative structure allowing a higher accurate
organization and representation of the attributes related to the
concepts. In detail, the main difference that makes ontologies
a good semantic means to represent the conceptual model
connected to certain semantic classes is related to the fact that,
in this case, the security properties, i.e., integrity, authenticity,
conﬁdentiality, availability, reliability, non-repudiation, and
privacy, are represented as Data Properties and are conceived
as attributes. In the thesaurus, as shown in Figure 4, they are
related to the BT ”Data” and are represented as its speciﬁc
terms, i.e., the NT [11].
To give an idea of the content of the ontology derived from
the Italian Cybersecuirty Thesaurus, Table II above shows
some metrics and highlights the changes in the number of
the relationships and concepts and the number of axioms with
respect to the results shown for the thesaurus in Table I.
V. DISCUSSION
Although thesauri and ontologies belong to the same family
of knowledge organization systems and some of their function-
alities are the same (e.g., their use for improving information
retrieval, indexing, and knowledge organization) they are built
for different purposes. In fact, it has been demonstrated in
this contribution that ontologies allow for a more formal
representation of knowledge for a given domain, by providing
explicit relationships between concepts, disjunctions, applying
data properties for each concept or instance and by providing
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-738-2
SEMAPRO 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Fig. 3. WebVOWL representation of Security properties as Data Properties
Fig. 4. Thesaurus representation of Security properties as hierarchical
relations
restrictions that avoid ambiguity in the representation of the
meaning and the context of use of a concept and their terms
in the domain of reference. Nevertheless, the two semantic
resources can be used together or, as widely demonstrated
both in this paper and in the literature, one can be reused to
build or populate the other, thus they complement each other,
improving the end user’s search experience.
The natural structural rigidity of thesauri, given by the use of
a priori deﬁned semantic relationships (hierarchical, associa-
tive and equivalence), seems to be a point against these type
of controlled vocabularies; by contrast, such weakness seems
to be overcome by the ﬂexibility, scalability and reusability
of ontologies that, as stressed by the semantic staircase of
Blumauer and Pellegrini [49], compared to other KOSs, bring
to a highest level of semantic richness thanks to an internal
formal description of concepts. This latter combines a system
of relations and properties of the concepts themselves.
Despite this, one of the strengths of the thesaurus compared
to the ontology, when used in a specialized domain, is its
greater capacity to eliminate ambiguity between the terms
through the use of synonymy control [1] and the choice of pre-
TABLE II. CYBERSECURITY ONTOLOGY METRICS
Metric
Total
Axiom
640
Logical axiom count
316
Declaration axioms count
233
Class count
157
Object property count
37
Data property count
7
Individual count
31
Annotation Property count
5
CLASS AXIOMS
SubClassOf
58
EquivalentClasses
0
DisjointClasses
24
OBJECT PROPERTY AXIOMS
SubObjectPropertyOf
7
InverseObjectProperties
1
FunctionalObjectProperty
1
TransitiveObjectProperty
0
SymmetricObjectProperty
1
AsymmetricObjectProperty
0
ObjectPropertyDomain
40
ObjectPropertyRange
39
DATA PROPERTY AXIOMS
SubDataPropertyOf
1
DataPropertyDomain
8
DataPropertyRange
5
INDIVIDUAL AND ANNOTATION AXIOMS
ClassAssertion
31
AnnotationAssertion
89
ferred terms, compared to non-preferred terms for representing
the concepts. This guarantees a standardization of technical
terms in specialized domains, which can help in the process
of unifying, and thus sharing, a speciﬁc ﬁeld of knowledge’s
terminology.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper aimed at presenting two different types of KOSs,
i.e., thesauri and ontologies, exploiting their use and feasibility
to organize and manage the specialized terminology proper to
the Cybersecurity domain. Beginning from a general overview
of Knowledge organization and representation systems, the
analysis focused on the way the thesaurus, in particular, has
proved to be a reliable system to structure the information
derived from heterogenous sources belonging to the Cyberse-
curity domain, which is full of technical terms. Concurrently,
attention has also been given to the comparison between
the modality of representing in the thesaurus some of the
relationships existing among terms, that represent the relevant
concepts of the domain, with the ones proper to ontologies
and the OWL language. The perspective has been oriented
to provide a demonstrative outline of ontology peculiarities
and advantages when using an existing thesaurus, like the one
created in the Italian OCS project framework, as a basis for
building the meta-model and populating the knowledge base.
Being the presented activity a work in progress, in the near
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-738-2
SEMAPRO 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

future both the thesaurus and the knowledge base in OWL
will be extended with more terms, relationships and restric-
tions where needed, and a new evaluation will be executed.
Among the future works there will be a translation in another
language (ﬁrstly English) to allow, within the OCS project
team, the recognition of threats even from non-Italian sources
and improve the thesaurus/ontology usability and sharing also
at an international level. Moreover, the remainder of this work
targets also at taking into account the insertion of several
other types of documents to be part of the source corpus. In
particular, following the perspective of getting updated on the
changes related to the Cybersecurity domain, documents shall
be taken from the social media world, adjusting all the analysis
related to the processing of information to the treatment of
texts written in a specialized form.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Zeng, “Knowledge organization systems (kos),” Knowledge Organi-
zation, vol. 35, pp. 160–182, 01 2008.
[2] Cybesecurity
osservatorio.
https://www.cybersecurityosservatorio.it\.
Accessed: 2019-08-08.
[3] W3C Web Ontology Language (OWL). https://www.w3.org/OWL/. Ac-
cessed: 2019-08-08.
[4] R. Davis, H. Shrobe, and P. Szolovits, “What is a knowledge represen-
tation?” AI Magazine, vol. 14, p. 17, 03 2002.
[5] A. Miles and S. Bechhofer, SKOS Simple Knowledge Organization
System Reference, ser. W3C Recommendation.
United States: World
Wide Web Consortium, 8 2009.
[6] D. Soergel, “The art and architecture thesaurus (aat): A critical ap-
praisal,” Visual Resources, vol. 10, pp. 369–400, 01 1995.
[7] M. Taverniti, “Tra terminologia e documentazione: estrazione automatica
di voci indice da corpora documentali della pubblica amministrazione,”
Ainformazioni, vol. 1-2/2018, pp. 227–238, 2008.
[8] V. Broughton, Essential Thesaurus Construction.
Facet, 2006.
[9] E. Morin and C. Jacquemin, “Projecting corpus-based semantic links on
a thesaurus,” in Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Association for Computational
Linguistics, 1999, p. 389396.
[10] J. Morris and G. Hirst, “Lexical cohesion computed by thesaural
relations as an indicator of the structure of text,” Comput. Linguist.,
vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 21–48, Mar. 1991.
[11] ISO , Information and documentation — Thesauri and interoperability
with other vocabularies Part 2: Interoperability with other vocabularies.
[12] ISO, Information and documentation — Thesauri and interoperability
with other vocabularies
Part 1: Thesauri for information retrieval,
International Organization for Standardization, August 2011.
[13] A. A. Shiri and C. Revie, “Thesauri on the web: current developments
and trends,” Online Information Review, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 273–280,
2000.
[14] D. Soergel, “The art and architecture thesaurus (aat): A critical ap-
praisal,” Visual Resources, vol. 10, pp. 369–400, 01 1995.
[15] M. van Assem, V. Malais´e, A. Miles, and G. Schreiber, “A method to
convert thesauri to skos,” 06 2006, pp. 95–109.
[16] N. Guarino, D. Oberle, and S. Staab, “What is an ontology?”
Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 05 2009, pp. 1–17.
[17] D. W. Embley, S. W. Liddle, D. W. Lonsdale, and Y. A. Tijerino,
“Multilingual ontologies for cross-language information extraction and
semantic search,” in ER, 2011.
[18] N. F. Noy and D. L. Mcguinness, “Ontology development 101: A guide
to creating your ﬁrst ontology,” Tech. Rep., 2001.
[19] D. Bourigault and N. Aussenac-Gilles, “Construction d’ontologies ´a
partir de textes,” pp. 11–14, 01 2003.
[20] R. Kisserl, Glossary of Key Information Security Terms, National In-
stitute of Standards and Technology, May 2013, NISTIR 7298 Revision
2.
[21] ISO/IEC 27000, Information technology — Security techniques —
Information security management systems — Overview and vocabulary,
International Standard, February 2016.
[22] R. Baldoni, R. De Nicola, and P. Prinetto, Il Futuro della Cybersecurity
in Italia: Ambiti Progettuali Strategici Progetti e Azioni per difendere
al meglio il Paese dagli attacchi informatici.
Laboratorio Nazionale
di Cybersecurity (CINI) - Consorzio Interuniversitario Nazionale per
lInformatica, 2018.
[23] Presidenza del Consiglio dei Ministri - Sistema di informazione
per la sicurezza della Repubblica, Il linguaggio degli organismi in-
formativi, Glossario intelligence. https://www.sicurezzanazionale.gov.it/
sisr.nsf/quaderni-di-intelligence/glossario-intelligence.html\. Accessed:
2019-08-08.
[24] B. Barnett and A. Crapo, “A semantic model for cyber security,” 2011.
[25] A. Aviad, K. Wcel, and W. Abramowicz, “The semantic approach to
cyber security. towards ontology based body of knowledge,” vol. 2015,
01 2015, pp. 328–336.
[26] L. Obrst, P. Chase, and R. Markeloff, “Developing an ontology of the
cyber security domain,” in STIDS, 2012.
[27] A. Oltramari, L. Cranor, R. Walls, and P. McDaniel, “Building an
ontology of cyber security,” CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 1304,
pp. 54–61, 01 2014.
[28] M. C. Parmelee, “Toward an ontology architecture for cyber-security
standards.”
[29] A. Singhal and D. Wijesekera, “Ontologies for modeling enterprise level
security metrics,” ACM International Conference Proceeding Series, 01
2010.
[30] A. Condamines, “S´emantique et corpus sp´ecialis´es : Constitution
de Bases de Connaissances Terminologiques,” Habilitation `a diriger
des recherches, Universit´e Toulouse Le Mirail, Jun. 2003. [Online].
Available: https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-01321042
[31] G. Leech, The state of the art in corpus linguistics, K. Aijmer and
B. Altenberg, Eds.
London: Longman, 1991.
[32] G. Bernier-Colborne, “Deﬁning a gold standard for the evaluation of
term extractors,” in Proceedings of the Eight International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’12), 2012, pp. 15–18.
[33] J. Pearson, Terms in Context.
John Benjamins, Amsterdam, 1998.
[34] A. Rigouts Terryn, V. Hoste, and E. Lefever, “A gold standard
for multilingual automatic term extraction from comparable corpora
: term structure and translation equivalents,” in Proceedings of the
11th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2018).
European Language Resources Association (ELRA),
2018, pp. 1803–1808. [Online]. Available: http://www.lrec-conf.org/
proceedings/lrec2018/index.html
[35] A. Nazarenko, Zargayouna, O. H.; Hamon, and van Puymbrouck, “Eval-
uation des outils terminologiques : enjeux, difﬁcult´es et propositions,”
Traitement Automatique de la Langue (TAL), vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 257–
281, 2009.
[36] E. L. et al., “Reference Lists for the Evaluation of Term Extraction
Tools,” in Terminology and Knowledge Engineering Conference (TKE),
Madrid, Spain, 2012.
[37] Cybesecurity
Osservatorio
-
Thesaurus.
https://www.
cybersecurityosservatorio.it/it/Services/thesaurus.jspt\.
Accessed:
2019-08-08.
[38] J. E. Rowley, J. E. Rowley, and R. J. Hartley, Organizing knowledge: an
introduction to managing access to information / Jennifer Rowley and
Richard Hartley , 4th ed.
Ashgate Aldershot, England ; Burlington,
VT, 2008.
[39] M. Hudon and D. M´enillet, Guide pratique pour l’´elaboration d’un
th´esaurus documentaire /.
[Montr´eal, QC] :: ´editions ASTED,, 2009.,
publ. ant´erieurement sous le titre: Le th´esaurus. 1995.
[40] C. Barri`ere, “Semi-automatic corpus construction from informative
texts,” in Text-Based Studies in honour of Ingrid Meyer, ser. Lexicog-
raphy, Terminology and Translation, L. Bowkes, Ed.
University of
Ottawa Press, January 2006, ch. 5.
[41] G. Zagrebelsky, Il sistema costituzionale delle fonti del diritto, EGES,
Ed.
Turin: UTET, 1984.
[42] A. Condamines, “L’interpr`etation en s´emantique de corpus : le cas
de la construction de terminologies,” Revue franc¸aise de linguistique
appliqu´ee, vol. Vol. XII, no. 2007/1, pp. 39–52, 2007.
[43] F. Dell’Orletta, G. Venturi, A. Cimino, and S. Montemagni, “T2K: a sys-
tem for automatically extracting and organizing knowledge from texts,”
in Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC’14), N. C. C. Chair), K. Choukri,
T. Declerck, H. Loftsson, B. Maegaard, J. Mariani, A. Moreno, J. Odijk,
and S. Piperidis, Eds.
Reykjavik, Iceland: European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA), may 2014.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-738-2
SEMAPRO 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

[44] IATE European Union Terminology. https://iate.europa.eu/home\. Ac-
cessed: 2019-08-08.
[45] C. Lanza, “Italian domain-speciﬁc thesaurus as a means of semantic
control for cybersecurity terminology,” in The Twelfth International Con-
ference on Advances in Semantic Processing (SEMAPRO 2018), U. o.
A. S. G. P. L. U. o. H. A. F. Michael Spranger, Hochschule Mittweida,
Ed., Athens, Greece, November 2018.
[46] E. Cardillo, A. Folino, R. Trunﬁo, and R. Guarasci, “Towards the reuse
of standardized thesauri into ontologies,” in Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Ontology and Semantic Web Patterns -
Volume 1302, ser. WOP’14, 2014, pp. 26–37.
[47] M. Nowroozi, M. Mirzabeigi, and H. Sotudeh, “The comparison of
thesaurus and ontology: Case of asist web-based thesaurus and designed
ontology,” Library Hi Tech, vol. 36, 01 2018.
[48] J. L. D. Kless, L. Jansen and J. Wiebensohn, “A method for re-
engineering a thesaurus into an ontology,” in Proceedings of Interna-
tional Conference on Formal Ontology in Information Systems (FOIS
2012), 2012, pp. 133–146.
[49] A. Blumauer and T. Pellegrini, Semantic Web und semantische Tech-
nologien: Zentrale Begriffe und Unterscheidungen.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 9–25.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-738-2
SEMAPRO 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

