Use of Negation Markers in German Customer Reviews 
 
 
Amelie I. Metzmachera, Verena Heinrichsa, Björn Falka, Robert H. Schmitta 
a Laboratory for Machine Tools and Production Engineering (WZL), RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany 
E-mail: A.Metzmacher@wzl.rwth-aachen.de, V.Heinrichs@wzl.rwth-aachen.de, B.Falk@wzl.rwth-aachen.de, 
R.Schmitt@wzl.rwth-aachen.de 
Abstract—The research presented examines the use of negation 
markers in German customer reviews. The objective is to 
identify differences, as well as similarities in the use of 
language for reviews rating material products and services. 
Therefore, in an annotation study, negation markers and 
sentiment values of customer reviews rating these product 
categories had to be assigned. The results obtained confirm the 
hypothesis that customer reviews relating to services contain 
more negation markers than customer reviews rating material 
products. However, there exists no significant difference in 
token distances between the negation marker and the 
sentiment decisive part of speech (POS). Finally, the findings 
should be applied in a machine learning algorithm for 
extracting relevant information from German customer 
reviews. 
Keywords-Social Media; Customer Reviews; NLP; Sentiment 
Analysis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
More than 80% of all customers express their 
experiences with products and services in social media [1]. 
Being publicly available, information provided by customer 
reviews in social media is important for both potential 
customers and companies. 80% of all potential customers 
base their purchase decision on the experiences of other 
customers trusting the judgment of strangers more than the 
recommendations of family and friends [1]. For companies, 
customer reviews provide insights with respect to not only 
the product, its functionalities or the service experience but 
also regarding the person who is the customer, his needs, 
wishes and persona. In analyzing customer feedback, 
companies are able to gain up-to-date and authentic 
knowledge about the product, the service and the customer.  
The steadily growing number of customer reviews 
available in social media requires text mining and machine 
learning techniques such as sentiment analysis for a detailed 
understanding of the information provided by customer 
reviews. A major issue in sentiment analysis is the 
identification and handling of negation markers [2] - [6]. 
Negation markers cause valence shifts in customer reviews, 
e.g., shifting a positive statement into a negative statement 
and vice versa [7]. Since the use of negation markers is often 
very language-specific, language dependent approaches and 
algorithms are needed to analyze the sentiment of customer 
reviews correctly. 
The German language shows a strong tendency for 
conventional indirectness by using syntactic downgraders. 
Syntactic downgraders modify the intended illocutionary act, 
i.e., the meaning conveyed, of the speaker towards the 
audience [8]. Examples of syntactic downgraders are modal 
verbs, tense or negation markers [9].  
There exist different types of negation markers relating to 
different language levels. Examples given are firstly listed in 
the English translation and secondly in the German original 
word. On the morphological level, negation is expressed 
using distinct prefixes (e.g., “unhappy”, “unglücklich”) or 
suffixes (e.g., “senseless”, “sinnlos”). Discrete meaning 
bearing units in place of morphemes (e.g., “not”, “nicht”) 
represent the class of syntactic negations. In addition, the use 
of diminishers (e.g., “hardly”, “kaum”) negates the inherent 
polarity of an expression [2] [3] [9]. Negation markers either 
apply to words directly carrying a certain sentiment (local 
negation) or relate to words that do not carry a sentiment 
(long distance negation; indirect) [4]. 
Following Giora et al. [10], negation markers function as 
an instruction from a speaker to an audience to suppress the 
negated information. By using negation markers to suppress 
the negated information for the hearer, the speaker saves his 
face and remains polite when communicating a negative 
statement [11]. Politeness is a distinct feature of civilized 
societies and thus seen as an important social value guiding 
social interactions [12]. 
As opposed to evaluating a material product during 
application, the evaluation of a service includes the 
evaluation of the person of the service provider during 
service provision. The customer’s evaluation then applies 
directly to the professional and personal behavior of the 
service provider throughout social interaction. 
Considering the aspect of politeness and keeping one`s 
face in social interaction, we hypothesize that customer 
reviews relating to services contain more negation markers 
than customer reviews rating material products. Finding 
significant differences might ameliorate algorithms for 
extracting relevant information out of social media content. 
In addition, it could help to identify automatically if a 
customer judges a product or a service. In particular, this 
would be of interest for companies providing both services 
and products.    
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-600-2
SEMAPRO 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

To examine the above stated hypothesis, an annotation 
study was conducted. The database consisted of 3,767 
German customer reviews in total extracted from different 
social media platforms. The customer reviews related to 
material products, as well as services. Three subjects were 
asked to annotate randomly chosen sentences of the reviews. 
The subjects’ task was to annotate the sentiment of each 
given sentence and explicitly reference whether there is a 
negation marker present or not.  
In the following, section 2 deals with related literature 
covering similar topics. In section 3, the annotation study is 
described, whereas in section 4 the results are analyzed and 
discussed. Finally, section 5 finishes this contribution with a 
brief conclusion and information on future working steps.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Related work for the presented approach can be divided 
into at least two research areas: sentiment analysis as part of 
natural language processing and linguistic research analyzing 
customer reviews in social media with respect to material 
products and services. However, there are often overlaps, 
particularly if the objective has a clear focus on negations. 
Moreover, there are only very few contributions dealing with 
German customer reviews in general. 
Wiegand et al. [13] give an overview about the role of 
negations, as well as about different approaches to include 
negations into sentiment analysis. They state that although 
integrating negations is very difficult, contributions dealing 
with this topic generally agreed on its high relevance for 
sentiment analysis. For instance, Kennedy and Inkpen [7] 
point out that considering the effects of valence shifters has a 
generally positive effect on all classification methods for 
reviews.  
Furthermore, Asmi & Ishaya [5] integrate negation 
calculation rules into the general framework of a rule-based 
polarity classification. Therein, they defined these rules 
based on part of speech (POS). One main finding indicates 
that most negation words are classified as adverbs, suffixes, 
prefixes or verbs. Using this information, a dependency tree 
is developed. Its output is the scope of negation, which 
indicates how negation is interacting with other words in the 
sentence. Although, their approach already improved the 
polarity classification as there was a strong correlation 
between the classification results of the algorithm and those 
of humans, the authors point out the importance of 
additionally implementing prepositional negations.  
In a rather current contribution, Diamantini et al. [3] 
apply a dependency-based parse tree to investigate the scope 
of negation. Implementing the negation handling component 
just before the sentiment calculation, meaning after all other 
pre-processing steps have been conducted, increases the 
accuracy from 64.4% to 67%. In their approach, they also 
regard 
a 
three-class-problem 
as 
the 
sentiment 
is 
distinguished between negative, positive and neutral. The 
authors hypothesize that those samples calculated wrong 
imply irony. Thus, as a necessity for future work, they 
suggest to extend their system to consider effects of irony. 
In summary, independently from the chosen method, in 
most cases integrating a negation model should ameliorate 
the accuracy of the sentiment analysis. Concerning the use of 
negations in German, Wiegand et al. [13] point out the 
requirement for more complex processing as the negated 
expression either precedes or follows the actual statement. 
Therefore, not all findings discovered e.g., in English texts, 
can be applied in German texts, at least not without 
adjustments. 
As Wiegand et al. [13] point out, not all negations 
indicate a negative sentiment. Thus, it is important to use 
syntactic knowledge and regard the context. Most 
approaches dealing with sentiment analysis, use reviews, 
which are not domain-independent, e.g., a collection of 
reviews of several products found on google.com or movie 
reviews [14]. Within the group working with corpora built 
from movie reviews, the classification usually follows the 
star ratings of the authors of these reviews [15].  
Although, there are some contributions, which conducted 
annotation studies to produce corpora from German 
customer reviews, they usually aim at sentiment analysis in 
general and do not consider the usage of negation markers. 
Moreover, many do not address different domains, and in 
particular services, as well as material goods. For instance, 
Boland et al. [16] conducted a study, which focuses on 
different domains, but does not address the use of negations.  
In summary, no study has yet been conducted in which a 
text corpus of domain-independent customer reviews in 
German is annotated with regard to sentiment and 
particularly negations.  
A prior study by the authors indicates an influence of 
personal commitment on customers’ writing styles while 
formulating a product review. This is particularly the case 
while rating services. On the one hand, it seems that the 
writing becomes more precise [17]. On the other, one might 
argue that the human interaction required in services leads to 
more polite formulations.  
Thus, based on the literature review and this prior study, 
an investigation of the amount of negations in services 
compared to material products is intended. Thereby, we look 
for hints for the application of a more polite form of criticism 
within German service reviews.  
III. 
ANNOTATION STUDY 
The objective of the study was to examine whether 
customer reviews relating to services contain more negation 
markers than customer reviews rating material products. The 
products selected are accessible to the German end-
consumer. The two classes contain three product types each. 
For products a shoe, a hazelnut spread, and a smartphone 
were chosen, whereas the services contained a hotel, a 
financial service for online businesses, and a car service 
station with several stations across Germany.  
Altogether 38 different social media platforms, including 
German discussion forums and shopping sites with user 
comments, were chosen as data sources. To this end, 3,767 
German customer reviews relating to both, material products 
and services, have been extracted with the open-source Java 
library jsoup [18]. Prior to annotation, the reviews were 
parsed into single sentences using the Stanford Parser [19]. 
The annotation was carried out on sentence level. 1,200 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-600-2
SEMAPRO 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Distribution of Token
 
Figure 1: Distribution of token used as negation markers on sentence level 
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
all sentiment values
positive sentiment
negative sentiment
neutral sentiment
Distribution of  Negation Markers
All
Material Products
Services
 
Figure 2: Distribution of negation markers 
sentences, 600 for products and services each, were 
randomly chosen for annotation and annotated by three 
subjects. The subjects were German native-speakers and 
familiar with the process of annotating. Each subject had to 
annotate 200 sentences, whereby each sentence was 
annotated by three subjects. 
Subjects were asked to identify the sentiment of each 
sentence while assigning the POS, which induces the 
negativity, positivity or neutrality of the given statements, 
i.e., the level of sentiment. Herein, the opinionated words are 
called attributes. Moreover, the subjects were asked to 
determine negation markers if present in the sentence, e.g., 
mark the indefinite pronoun “no” (“kein”) or the particle 
“not” (“nicht”). In addition, the negation markers were 
assigned to the attribute the negation is associated with. For 
instance, the subjects had to indicate that the negation “not” 
(“nicht”) is associated with the attribute “good” (“gut”). 
Thereby, it was possible to mark more than one attribute, 
aspect and/or negation marker per sentence, e.g., if a 
conjunction was present.  
The annotation process was explained to the subjects 
with three exemplary sentences. The sentences were chosen 
to show different characteristics, which influence the grade 
of simplicity or complexity of identifying the sentiment of a 
sentence and its possible negation marker. For instance, one 
sample contained two attributes in one sentences (“The shoe 
looks nice, but is too heavy”) or another one included only 
an implicit product review, meaning an attribute without an 
aspect (“Too heavy.”). The examples ensure that the 
annotation process was carried out consistently.  
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
First, the interrater reliability was investigated. Fleiss’ 
Kappa values for assigning aspects, attributes, sentiment, and 
negation markers between 0.5 and 0.8 are located within a 
moderate level of agreement [20].  
The observed frequencies of the labelled negation 
markers were displayed and analyzed for material products 
and services. The frequencies of negation markers were 
computed based on statements within a sentence, i.e., based 
on attributes within a sentence. 
 
Figure 1 depicts the most used negation markers for both 
categories. The most frequent negation marker is the 
participle “not” (“nicht”). In comparison with the other 
frequently appearing negation markers, the participle “not” 
(“nicht”) is not as harsh as the negation marker “any” 
(“keine”), “nothing” (“nichts”) or “never” (“nie”), for the 
latter have a clear excluding character. The last item “other” 
includes all other negation markers, which only appear 
rarely. However, comparing the distribution of negation 
markers between material products and services, no 
significant differences were found.  
 
TABLE 1: MEAN TOKEN DISTANCE BETWEEN ATTRIBUTE AND 
NEGATION MARKER 
Product Categories 
Mean Token Distance  
Services 
1,7918 
Material Products 
1,9234 
All 
1,8576 
 
In the following, the mean token distance between 
attribute and negation marker was examined (see TABLE 1). 
The results show that the distance between attribute and 
negation marker tends to be shorter within customer reviews 
relating to services than within customer reviews rating 
material 
products. 
However, 
the 
Kruskal-Wallis-Test 
revealed that with a p-value > 0.05 the token distances are 
equally distributed. Therefore, the differences in the token 
distances are not significant. 
Third, the frequency of negation marker use was 
examined between both categories. Figure 2 illustrates the 
percentages of negation markers used within the different 
product categories, as well as negation marker used in total. 
The use of negation markers is displayed with respect to the 
sentiment value of the sentence. On average, each sentence 
contained more than 1.7 marked statements respectively 
attributes evaluating (a part of) a product. Approximately 
52% statements were assigned as positive, 41% as negative, 
and 7% as neutral. The values indicate a difference between 
the use of negation markers in customer reviews for material 
products and services. Regarding the negation markers used 
within all sentiment values, as well as negation markers used 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-600-2
SEMAPRO 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

within negative sentiment, customer reviews relating to 
services contain more negation markers. The results of the 
distributions also reveal that there seem to be differences in 
the use of negation markers between customer reviews about 
services and material products in general. However, a 
significance test was applied to test whether differences 
across sentiment values are significant.  
For applying an appropriate significance test, we assume 
that the decisions, whether to use a negation marker 
associated with an attribute or not, are independent from one 
another and are the result of a Bernoulli distribution as the 
decision is either “yes” or “no”. This includes a distributed 
random variable with success probability p, where p in 
{p_service, p_materialproduct} may or may not be different 
from customer reviews about services and those about 
material products. We test the null hypothesis, that p_service 
= p_materialproduct, with a binomial test using the statistical 
software R.  
For the test, we consider the binomial distributed variable 
X_service that counts the number of negation markers used 
in the attributes in service reviews, and construct a 
confidence interval on a confidence level of 98% based on 
the annotated customer reviews. The confidence interval 
consists of the 0.01- and 0.99-quantiles of the distribution of 
X_service ~ B(p_service, n_materialproduct).  
As a result, we observe, that p_materialproduct*n_ 
materialproduct is not located inside the confidence interval. 
We 
repeat 
the 
test 
for 
X_materialproduct 
~ 
B(p_materialproduct, 
n_service) 
and 
find, 
that 
p_service*n_service is outside the obtained confidence 
interval.  
Therefore, we postulate with a certainty of 98% that 
p_service != p_materialproduct. Concomitantly, the p-value 
<0.05 states that a significant difference between these two 
categories exists. As a consequence, we can confirm our 
hypothesis that customer reviews relating to services contain 
more negation markers than customer reviews rating material 
products. 
Additionally, regarding the distributions of negations 
within neutral sentiment values (see Figure 2), there is a 
rather large difference in frequency recognizable. Although 
only 7% of the statements were marked as neutral, we 
conducted the significance test in the same way as for all 
sentiment values, but only for neutral sentiment. We receive 
a p-value <0.05 stating that there exist a significant 
difference. As an explanation, one might argue that 
customers judge products in a much less euphoric way than 
services. Thus, if the sentiment is neutral, for products, 
people might use formulations like “not so bad”. In contrast, 
for services they preferably use e.g., “okay”. However, as 
these are assumptions, it is necessary to examine these in 
more detail.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION  
The results obtained in our study confirm our hypothesis 
about a difference in the use of negation markers in customer 
reviews rating services compared to customer reviews rating 
material products.  
Human social interaction, as well as the personal 
commitment towards the person providing the service leads 
to a more polite writing style. When rating services 
customers rate the executing individuals and thus, are more 
moderate and polite in their judgement using negation 
markers instead of words containing a negative polarity 
value on a lexical basis. To prove this concept, in our future 
work we aim to investigate this assumption in more detail. 
As our analysis also showed a difference in the use of 
negation markers in neutral sentiment, but with a reverse 
distribution, it would be interesting to examine these findings 
in detail as well. However, as neutral sentiment seems to be 
not that numerous in customer reviews, a special corpus for 
this issue needs to be compiled. 
In addition, we examined the mean token distance 
between the attribute and the associated negation marker 
within the two product categories. In contrast to other 
features of language use, significant differences in the use of 
language could not be proven here. However, the mean token 
distance could still be a useful input variable for sentiment 
analysis of German customer reviews.  
Generally, we strive to use our findings in the analysis of 
complaints from German customer reviews. In our future 
work, we aim to filter relevant information about products or 
services. If a company provides as well services as products, 
it would be very beneficial to identify automatically if 
customers speak about the product or about the service. 
Thus, the information could be allocated directly towards the 
right product type.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The support of the German National Science Foundation 
(DFG) through the funding of the research project 
“Entwicklung eines Sensors für ungerichtete Beschwerden 
aus Online Foren” (SCHM 1856/69-1) is gratefully 
acknowledged. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] HolidayCheck Group, “Psychologie des Bewertens”, 2016. 
[Online] Available from: https://www.holidaycheckgroup. 
com/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/TOMORROW-FOCUS-
AG_Umfrage_Die-Psychologie_des_Bewertens_ 
Pr%C3%A4sentation-1.pdf.  [Retrieved: September, 2017]. 
[2] U. Farooq, H. Mansoor, A. Nongaillard, Y. Ouzrout, and M. 
A. Qadir, 2017, “Negation Handling in Sentiment Analysis at 
Sentence Level”, JCP, 12(5), 2017, pp. 470-478. 
[3] C. Diamantini, A. Mircoli, and D. Potena, “A Negation 
Handling 
Technique 
for 
Sentiment 
Analysis”. 
In 
Collaboration Technologies and Systems (CTS), 2016 
International Conference on,  IEEE, October, 2016, pp. 188-
195. 
[4] A. Hogenboom, P. Van Iterson, B. Heerschop, F. Frasincar, 
and U. Kaymak,, “Determining negation scope and strength in 
sentiment analysis”. In Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 
(SMC), 2011 IEEE International Conference on, October, 
2011, pp. 2589-2594. 
[5] A. Asmi and T. Ishaya, “Negation identification and 
calculation 
in 
sentiment 
analysis”. 
In 
The 
Second 
International Conference on Advances in Information Mining 
and Management, 2012, pp. 1-7. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-600-2
SEMAPRO 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

[6] I.G. Councill, R. McDonald, and L. Velikovich, “What's great 
and what's not: learning to classify the scope of negation for 
improved sentiment analysis”. In Proceedings of the 
workshop on negation and speculation in natural language 
processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, July, 
2010, pp. 51-59. 
[7] A. Kennedy and D. Inkpen, “Sentiment classification of 
movie 
reviews 
using 
contextual 
valence 
shifters”. 
Computational intelligence, 22(2), 2006, pp. 110-125. 
[8] E. Ogiermann, 2009, “Politeness and in-directness across 
cultures: A comparison of English, German, Polish and 
Russian requests.” Journal of Politeness Research, 5, 2009, 
pp. 189-216.  
[9] Stickel, G., “Untersuchungen zur Negation im heutigen 
Deutsch”, Vol. 1, Springer-Verlag, 2013. 
[10] R. Giora, N. Balaban, O. Fein, and I. Alkabets, “Negation as 
positivity in disguise”. Figurative language comprehension: 
Social and cultural influences, 2005, pp. 233-258. 
[11] E. Goffman, “Interaction ritual: Essays in face to face 
behavior.” AldineTransaction, 2005. 
[12] S. Rogatcheva, 2004, “Politeness in English and German: a 
contrastive study” GRIN Verlag.  
[13] M. Wiegand, A. Balahur, B. Roth, D. Klakow, and A. 
Montoyo, “A survey on the role of negation in sentiment 
analysis”. In Proceedings of the workshop on negation and 
speculation in natural language processing, Association for 
Computational Linguistics, July, 2010, pp.60-68. 
[14] G. Vinodhini and R. M. Chandrasekaran, “Sentiment analysis 
and opinion mining: a survey”. International Journal, 2(6), 
2012, pp. 282-292. 
[15] B. Pang and L. Lee, “Seeing stars: Exploiting class 
relationships for sentiment categorization with respect to 
rating scales”. In Proceedings of the 43rd annual meeting on 
association for computational linguistics, Association for 
Computational Linguistics, June, 2005, pp. 115-124. 
[16] K. Boland, A. Wira-Alam, and R. Messerschmidt, “Creating 
an annotated corpus for sentiment analysis of german product 
reviews.” GESIS - Leibniz-Institut für Sozialwissenschaften. 
Mannheim, GESISTechnical Reports 2013/05, May, 2013.  
[17] A. I. Metzmacher, V. Heinrichs, B. Falk, and R. H. Schmitt,  
“Customer Language Processing“. In Proceedings of the 12th 
International Workshop on Semantic and Social Media 
Adaptation and Personalization, IEEE, July, 2017, pp.32-33.  
[18] J. Hedley “jsoup: Java HTML Parser”, 2009. [Online] 
Available from: https://jsoup.org/ [Retrieved: September, 
2017]. 
[19] A. N. Rafferty and C. D. Manning, “Parsing three German 
treebanks: Lexicalized and unlexicalized baselines”. In 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Workshop 
on 
Parsing 
German. 
Association for Computational Linguistics, June 2008, pp.40-
46. 
[20] M. L. McHugh, “Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic”, 
Biochemia medica, 22(3), 2012, pp. 276-282. 
 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-600-2
SEMAPRO 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

