Semantically Augmented Documents for Use in Higher Education Institutions 
Analyzing the Current State in the Digital Transformation of HEI
Karsten Böhm 
FH Kufstein Tirol University of Applied Sciences 
Kufstein, Austria 
email: karsten.boehm@fh-kufstein.ac.at  
 
Abstract—Higher Education Institutions (HEI) are part of the 
Digital Transformation of our societies and a higher level of 
digitization and automatization is already establishing within 
the sector. The Information and Communication Technology 
(ICT) landscapes, the data models and the processes are highly 
individual to the HEI and interoperability and linking of data is 
a challenge and often creates new digital format discontinuities. 
This contribution analyses the support level of recent semantic 
models, namely the European Learning Model and the 
Educational Verifiable Credentials Model for the application in 
an Austrian university with respect to graduation documents. 
The results show the application potential of the new models and 
relates it to current practices in representing data of academic 
programs 
in 
a 
meaningful 
way. 
An 
implementation 
demonstrates use-cases with an immediate effect for HEI and 
focuses on attractive and lightweight User Experience (UX) to 
ensure user adoption. 
Keywords—Digital Transformation; HEI; Linked Data; 
European Learning Model; Verifiable Credentials Model. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Higher Education Institutions (HEI) are offering education 
programs with a more or less planned learning journey to 
reach specified qualification objectives within a qualification 
framework (e.g., the European Qualification Framework [1]). 
As a result of the Bologna process of aligning the national 
education systems in Europe, the education system became 
more transparent and interoperable – on a national, but also on 
an European level. While being a positive development for 
students, this also meant an increasing number of stakeholders 
for the HEI. They need to be integrated in the internal 
processes and information systems, e.g., when Recognizing 
Prior Learning (RPL) for a study program [2] or to include 
student mobility into a course program. Together with the 
development of a digital transformation in many organiza-
tions, this results for HEI in a higher level of digitization and 
automatization that is already establishing within the sector. 
However, the ICT landscapes, the data models and the 
processes are highly individual to the HEI and interoperability 
and linking of data is a challenge. Often, this situation creates 
new digital format discontinuities and requires additional 
efforts for the organizations, staff and students of a HEI. 
At the other hand, there are a number of interesting 
developments at the European level that try to harmonize and 
digitize the information exchange within and among HEI. 
Among the most notable are the new version of the Education 
Learning Model (ELM) [3] and the W3C standard on the 
Verifiable Credential Model (VCM) [4] that recently had been 
extended with a version for the educational sector, the 
Educational Verifiable Credential Model (EVC) [5]. Both 
models address the need to formalize and harmonize the 
unstructured information and document sources that limit the 
automated processing of relevant documents that maybe 
already digital in format but very diverse with respect to the 
semantic representation.  
Common ways to document the achievements of academic 
programs are the two document categories Diploma 
Supplement (DS) and Transcripts of Records (ToR). While a 
DS describes the general program aspects and the individual 
properties of the student, the ToR contains information about 
the subjects taken and the grade for each subject [6], [7].  Both 
documents aim at describing the specific aspects of the 
program and the achieved result of the student in great detail 
and are mandatory to be generated by Austrian universities for 
all graduates. However, currently those documents are using 
a predefined structure, the content is only text based. DS and 
ToR need to be validated and durable, even when the course 
program or even the organization is not operational anymore. 
Therefore, it is important that the document is self-contained 
and independent from an organization or a technical system.  
A ToR is already specifying qualifications, but only as 
textual data. For automated processing and the support of all 
stakeholders in a HEI (student, lecturers, managers) it would 
be useful to have that in a machine-readable way, as the 
information is often generated from ICT-systems anyway. 
This contribution builds on the concept of educational Pre-
built Information Spaces (PreBIS-ED) [8] and is researching 
the current state of the art concerning certification documents 
with a focus on the situation in Austria and a specific 
university as an illustrating example. It aligns the features of 
the aforementioned semantic models with the existing 
specification documents required in Austria and elsewhere in 
Europe. By doing so, it assesses the potential of the semantic 
models to be used in everyday processes within HEI and it 
identifies the gaps that still exist.   
It contributes to the development of the digital excellence 
of HEI by addressing two important needs: 1) For HEI, the 
ability to process existing qualifications, e.g., from a first 
study cycle with the reference to RPL, Recognition of Prior 
Learning and 2) for companies it would be beneficial to have 
an opportunity to match qualifications against their job 
profiles, e.g., when doing a Job Task Analysis (JTA), [9]. 
While addressing a very specific and practical application 
area, PreBIS-ED also tries to find new answers for the more 
general research question on how (existing) semantic models 
can be put in operational practice by different stakeholders 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-108-4
SEMAPRO 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

that are not knowledge engineering experts. The approach 
focuses on two main aspects 1) putting the model to use with 
a clear benefit for the user (increased transparency and 
consistency in this case) and 2) creating an attractive and 
lightweight UX for areas that are manually crafted anyway 
(curricular structures and competences in this case). 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In the 
Section 2, the current situation in an Austrian university with 
respect to the ToR and the DS documents is introduced – a 
situation that is typical for the Austrian sector and very 
common for universities all across Europe. Afterwards the 
predefined structure of the ToR and DS documents is matched 
against the semantic models ELM and EVC to determine the 
usefulness for those document categories. In Section 4, the 
implementation of a technical solution is outlined that brings 
the semantic models together with the existing document 
renderings. The paper concludes in Section 5 with an outlook 
on the next steps within these research activities.  
II. 
THE CASE OF AN AUSTRIAN UNIVERSITY 
The HEI of the author is already using DS and ToR 
documents that are supplied automatically to each student that 
graduates from a bachelor’s program or master’s program. 
The documents are generated by the internal campus 
management system as PDF documents and are digitally 
signed using the electronic signature supplied for all public 
administration services in Austria [10]. The organization 
follows the rules set up by the European Commission and is 
granted the Diploma Supplement Label and the ECTS Label 
(ECTS – European Credit Transfer System) for adhering to 
those standards [11]. 
Figure 2.  Relation of the different specification documents which are 
delivered to the graduating student (DS and ToR) and contain references to 
the module descriptions which are available online at the HEI website.  
The documents contain more detailed information about 
the formal properties of the degree and also overview 
information about the qualification and learning objectives. In 
the case of this HEI the respective Section in the Diploma 
Supplement (Section 4.3) refers to the ToR document that 
contains more detailed information about the subjects in the 
degree program and the individual student results. 
For competences and learning outcomes, it refers to the 
website of the HEI that contains detailed information about 
the curriculum and the learning outcomes in the general 
module description. Figure 1 illustrates the relation between 
the different information sources. 
Currently, the DS/ToR does not contain any information 
about specific learning outcomes (but refers the user to the 
website of the university as an external information source) 
and is not semantically enriched.  Therefore, the documents 
provide the potential for an extension with semantic 
information about specifically acquired competences during 
the program in order to support the role of interfacing between 
different HEI or the Human Resources departments of 
companies. 
The information on the website is representing a static 
version of the program as such as it describes the learning 
outcomes in more general way; its implementation in the 
different semesters can vary in (within the defined scope).  
The current situation with respect to the documentation of 
competences can be summarized in the following way:  
 
(a) Information about the learning outcomes is stored 
distributed in three different locations two of which 
are delivered as documents to the students at the time 
of graduation and the third is stored online at the HEI 
website. 
(b) The information is human readable only and needs 
interpretation and research depending on the level of 
detail needed.  
(c) Due to its distributed nature, it is not self-contained 
and requires the availability of additional online-
services to be used.  
(d) As the documentation references the module 
description of a program and not the yearly made 
syllabus, it might not cover specific details, such as 
the used technology or software system used in the 
execution of a lecture in a certain semester, thus 
lacking some level of detail. 
 
With respect to a more seamless integration of the 
information into other systems or organizations, it would be 
beneficial, if those properties could be improved by helping 
users of this documentation to have a more complete and 
easier to use data collection at their disposal. As the 
documentation is generated by an internal campus manage-
ment system that is being developed by the HEI itself, there is 
the possibility to develop an improved solution to address this 
need.  
III. 
MATCHING THE TOR/DS TO THE SEMANTIC MODELS 
In order to estimate the potential of the concepts of the 
semantic models for improving the expressiveness of the ToR 
and DS document categories, the individual properties of each 
characteristic will be matched against the concepts from the 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-108-4
SEMAPRO 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

semantic models. It should be noted that the attributes of a 
ToR document and a DS document are defined by the 
European 
Commission 
and 
augmented 
by 
National 
Authorities [12], but the values are mostly free-text form, 
individual for each HEI and also subject to change. This 
makes the information less interoperable. 
Using semantic models like the ELM and the EVC provide 
a scaffolding that could be helpful to create more consistent 
and interoperable representations for the values of the 
DS/ToR documents. In order to approve the suitability of this 
approach, the fields of DS and ToR documents are mapped to 
the semantic models in the next Sections. 
A. Analysis of the different features in a DS 
To add semantic information to a DS document, both the 
ELM and the EVC are good candidate models to encode the 
information in the current documents with an explicit 
semantic specification. Table I below provides a mapping of 
the fields defined for a DS document and available in the 
current DS of the author’s HEI with classes (sometimes with 
properties) from the semantic models ELM and EVC.  
 
TABLE I.  ATTRIBUTES OF A DS DOCUMENT (LEFT COLUMN) 
AND APPROPRIATE SEMANTIC CLASSES AND PROPERTIES 
(RIGHT COLUMN). ABBREVIATIONS: EVC – EDUCATIONAL 
VERIFIABLE CREDENTIAL, VC – VERIFIABLE CREDENTIAL, ELM 
– EUROPEAN LEARNING MODEL 
1. INFORMATION IDENTIFYING THE HOLDER OF THE 
QUALIFICATION 
1.1 Last name(s) 
VC: holder 
1.2 First name(s) 
VC: holder 
1.3 Date of Birth 
VC: holder 
1.4 Student identification number 
VC: holder 
2. INFORMATION IDENTIFYING THE QUALIFICATION 
2.1 Name of qualification, title 
conferred 
EVC: Credential 
2.2 Main field(s) of study for the 
qualification 
EVC: Credential Subject 
2.3 Name and status of awarding 
institution 
EVC: Issuer 
2.5 Course languages 
ELM: language, default language 
(properties) 
3. INFORMATION ON THE LEVEL AND DURATION OF THE 
QUALIFICATION 
3.1 Level of the qualification 
ELM: QF level (property)  
3.2 Official duration of program in 
credits and/or years 
ELM: Credit Points 
3.3 Access requirement(s) 
 
4. INFORMATION ON THE PROGRAM COMPLETED AND THE 
RESULTS OBTAINED 
4.1 Mode of study 
 
4.2 Program learning outcomes 
ELM: Learning Outcome 
4.3 Program details, individual 
credits gained and 
grades/marks obtained 
ELM: Learning Achievement 
4.4 Grading scheme, grade 
translation and 
grade distribution guidance 
ELM: Grading Scheme 
4.5 Overall classification of the 
qualification 
ELM: Qualification, Qualification 
Reference 
5. INFORMATION ON THE FUNCTION OF THE QUALIFICATION 
5.1 Access to further study 
ELM: Learning Entitlement 
Specification 
5.2 Access to a regulated profession 
(if applicable) 
ELM: Learning Entitlement, 
Learning Entitlement Specification 
6. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
6.1 Additional information 
(Arbitrary textual information) 
6.2 Further information sources 
(Arbitrary textual information and 
URLs to Web Resources) 
CERTIFICATION OF THE SUPPLEMENT 
7.1 Date 
EVC: Issuance Date 
7.2 Signature 
EVC: Proof (Digital) 
7.3 Capacity 
EVC: Proof 
7.4 Official stamp or seal 
EVC: Credential Proof 
 
It is shown that all the concepts of a DS can be captured in 
the new semantic models and thus provide a good starting 
point for an interoperable implementation. The study also 
shows that EVC focusses more on the administrative inform-
ation of the DS whereas ELM focusses on the expressiveness 
of the education related aspects like qualifications and 
learning outcomes.  
For the use case of understanding the (overall) qualifica-
tion of a DS holder, Sections 3 and 4 of a DS are the most 
interesting parts and the modelling of ELM is more important 
for that field of application. Since ELM is developed by the 
European Commission and the DS document is a mandatory 
document for Austrian (and probably also for most European) 
universities, there is a good chance that the semantic encoding 
of the already defined fields can lead to interoperable and 
machine-readable specifications. Further evidence for this 
assumption was collected with a workshop series with 
members from different European Universities in the 
CloudEarthI-project [13] held in 2022 and 2023. 
Currently, to the best knowledge of the author, no imple-
mentations of semantic information on the DS documents 
have yet been implemented by Austrian universities. This 
might be due to the fact that version 3 of ELM is just about to 
be released in its final version, according to [3]. The 
contribution can be thought as an initial activity to bring the 
emerging semantic models into operational effectiveness. 
Once this is achieved with application cases like augmenting 
the DS and ToR document, additional benefits can be 
addressed like automated status reports on inconsistencies 
with learning outcomes or credit point achievement, missing 
topics and matching qualifications. Machine readable 
semantic representations will also help to automate processes 
of validation and verification in a reliable way as it does not 
depend on ambiguous text representations. This will contri-
bute to accelerate the Digital Transformation of the HEI 
domain.  
B. Analysis of the different features in a ToR 
While the DS only holds the overall qualification 
information, the ToR should document qualifications and 
learning outcomes in a more detailed level. Usually, a ToR 
document contains the information represented in Table II, 
below. This is also the case in the author’s HEI. The usual 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-108-4
SEMAPRO 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

tabular presentation is ordered by the chronological order of 
the study program, e.g., into semesters in the case of the 
author’s HEI. The items in Section 2 of Table II will occur for 
each subject grouped by the semesters in which they are 
positioned. In addition to the values for the lectures there are 
also derived information that are calculated per semester, e.g., 
the amount of credits (usually 30 per semester) and the 
average grade over all subjects studied in one semester. 
TABLE II.  ATTRIBUTES OF A TOR DOCUMENT (LEFT COLUMN) 
AND APPROPRIATE SEMANTIC CLASSES AND PROPERTIES 
(RIGHT COLUMN). ABBREVIATIONS: EVC – EDUCATIONAL VER-
IFIABLE CREDENTIAL, VC – VERIFIABLE CREDENTIAL, ELM – 
EUROPEAN LEARNING MODEL 
1. INFORMATION IDENTIFYING THE HOLDER OF THE 
QUALIFICATION 
Last name(s) 
VC: holder 
First name(s) 
VC: holder 
Date of Birth 
VC: holder 
Student identification number 
VC: holder 
2. INFORMATION ON THE DIFFERENT LECTURES  
(GROUPED INTO SEMESTERS) 
Course Title 
ELM: Identifier 
Course Code 
ELM: Identifier 
Language of lecture 
ELM: language (property) 
Contact Hours of lecture 
ELM: contact hours (property) 
Credit point of lecture 
ELM: credit received (property) 
ELM: volume of learning or 
workload (property) 
Credit points per semester 
ELM: credit points (property) 
Grade (value and per cent)  
(calculated value, information only)  
Average grade per semester 
(calculated value, information only)  
CERTIFICATION OF THE SUPPLEMENT 
Date 
EVC: Issuance Date 
(Digital) Signature 
EVC: Proof 
Capacity 
EVC: Proof 
 
It is interesting that there are expected similarities in the 
Sections of the holder information and the certification 
between DS and ToR, but it is even more noteworthy that the 
ToR does not contain information about detailed qualifica-
tions and learning outcomes in a more specific way.  
The only hint on the content of the respective lectures are 
the names of the lectures that might suggest the content and 
possible learning opportunities. Relevant information should 
be found elsewhere, in the case of the author’s HEI at the 
website of the course program. The link between the ToR and 
the relevant content on the website is made by the name or 
course code of the lecture only.  
This analysis shows that there is a high potential of 
embedding semantic information into the ToR to make 
competence information more visible at the level of individual 
lectures. ELM provides a number of useful classes to model 
and link this information together such as the classes 
“Learning Achievement” and the class “Learning Achieve-
ment Specification” with the properties “learning outcome” 
and “learning outcome summary”.  
Linking could be achieved by using the property “content 
URL” to refer to the website content with deep linking. This, 
however could also create the problem of broken links, if the 
structure of a website changes or if the online resource is not 
available. In the use case of ToR and DS document the 
information also need to remain static in the sense that it needs 
to reflect the information that was current at the time of 
document creation. Changes in the linked resources could 
even introduce semantic errors, if the updates content does not 
fit anymore. It would be better to embed the information into 
the document directly and use the linked information only as 
a secondary or supplemental resource. Since the curricular 
information on the website of the author’s HEI are also 
generated from the same data source as the DS and ToR 
documents, this is technically feasible to implement. 
C. Summary on the potential of semantic models 
After mapping the semantic models to the ToR and DS 
documents it becomes clear that the current application case 
for the EVC is mostly targeted at modelling the outcomes 
(certificates) of the program, while the ELM in its new version 
is more versatile to model important concepts on several 
levels in the HEI. As illustrated in Figure 2, it can be used at 
the academic process level to support the operational 
processes and – most prominently – support the certification 
process by providing documents that are easier to process by 
interfacing stakeholders (e.g., other HEI or companies that are 
Program Level
(single instance, no/few iterations)
Purpose: Specification of an academic program
Output: [unstructured] Documents/Web-Pages
Semantic Support: European Learning Model
Purpose: Organising/supporting academic processes
Output: data artefacts in different ICT-systems
Semantic Support: Educational Verifiable Credentials 
European Learning Model
Purpose: Creating/Maintaining/Using Learning content
Output: wide range of (digital) and often unconnected artefacts 
Semantic Support: European Learning Model
Academic Process Level
(fixed sequences, many iterations)
Lecturing Level
(many instances + iterations)
Figure 2.  Overview on the different levels in the planning and the execution of academic programs with their  
semantic support levels by existing semantic models 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-108-4
SEMAPRO 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

hiring the graduates). Apart from this middle level, the 
semantic model could also support the design process (top-
level) for aligning the learning objectives among the different 
modules and towards the qualification profile. Likewise, the 
operational activities of the lecturers can be supported by 
using the ELM in tools that help them to create course 
structure and materials that are linked to each other using 
learning outcomes.  
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
The implementation of a DS and ToR documents with 
extended semantic information could be provided by different 
means and does also differ depending on the document 
format. The most important formats for this application case 
being HTML for the embedding in web-oriented applications 
(e.g., the HEI website, a web-based e-learning-system) and 
PDF for issuing the documents for students and other 
stakeholders. The use of metadata, microformats and 
embedded JSON-LD data could be a suitable approach for 
HTML, as this information is also recognized by search 
engines as structured markup and can be used to improve the 
search results based on facts and not only on text snippets [14] 
[15]. It seems that JSON-LD will be the preferred structured 
data format in the future by Google, according to the Search-
EngineJournal [16], which is compatible with ELM and EVC, 
since both provide JSON-LD representations. 
Simple meta-data formats (as key-value pairs) are also 
available for PDF, but another promising way is the use of the 
attachment feature of the PDF-format [17]. There are a 
number of different ways to relate existing files to a PDF 
document such as associating or referencing files, but for the 
purpose of this application the embedding of files as a file 
stream into the container PDF is the most suitable way, as it 
provides (a) the property of self-containment and (b) can be 
identified, used and even exported by the user. Using a 
suitable library such as PDFLib [18] makes it possible to 
augment the already generated document with semantic 
information, e.g., using the JSON-LD format [19] that is also 
used with ELM. This way the existing generation process does 
not need to be changed and the augmentation with the 
semantic information can be added as an additional step in the 
process.  
Furthermore, the use of the attachment feature also has the 
benefit that the users can identify the augmented data, if the 
PDF software used, is supporting it (e.g., Adobe Acrobat or 
the PDF-viewer in Mozilla Firefox). This way, it can be 
downloaded and used wherever this might be useful. Since the 
implementation uses a standard functionality of the PDF 
specification it is agnostic to the tools used. Figure 3 shows an 
application in the Adobe Acrobat Reader with embedded 
semantic information as a JSON-LD-file in form of an 
attachment. The use of this approach would be the most 
feasible one for the DS and ToR documents as they are self-
contained and could be easily represented in the document 
without any additional IT-system; they are interoperable and 
preserve the self-containment feature of the document. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Screenshot of Adobe Acrobat as an example PDF application 
showing the embedded semantic information as JSON-LD data in a 
containerized representation. 
While the representation of DS and ToR provide a good 
interfacing to external entities based on the concept of 
verifiable credentials (EVC) and a detailed domain model for 
the education domain (ELM), they are not suitable for a more 
detailed insight into the structure of the learning process that 
links the qualification objectives (c.f. Section 4.2 in the ToR 
document) to the individual learning paths that are usually 
fulfilled by lectures taken by the students. This currently 
hidden path could contribute to the transparency of the 
learning process, both during and after the student has 
completed her study. The ELM could be used to model the 
path and thus support the upper and the lower level of an 
academic program specification, as depicted in Figure 2.  
It should be noted that the curricular structures are already 
crafted manually and usually encoded into a textual represen-
tation. This approach should help users to model the curricular 
structures by using an existing model (ELM) with the 
assistance of an attractive and lightweight user interface that 
hides the complexity of the semantic modelling by focusing 
on the instance level and only the needed concepts and 
properties for the application case. Hence the notion of Pre-
Build Information Models, which remove the task of 
modelling from the user of the implementation. Currently the 
focus on the implementation is therefore on the visualization 
and use of the semantic models and less on automated concept 
extraction from existing textual curricular descriptions using 
text-mining technologies. 
In order to visualize and use such a path though the 
curriculum the implementation provides two views that 
should be easy to understand and to navigate. It builds on the 
concept of Hierarchical Competence Maps (HCM), which are 
described in [20]. Figure 4 shows a detailed view on a single 
modular element (e.g., a module, a lecture or a teaching unit) 
with a few competences and their level of expertise, 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-108-4
SEMAPRO 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

visualizing the hierarchy with the metaphor of stacked cards, 
employing the concept of an HCM and using ELM as a data 
model for the semantic representation. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Screenshot of the detailed view of a modular element  
of an education program, using HCM and ELM.  
The intention here is to focus on the immanent competen-
ces of the current element providing a detailed view on the 
learning outcome. As this view is lacking the overview of the 
connected modular elements this is provided by another view, 
shown in Figure 5 with the thread from the top-layer to the 
bottom layer highlighted. This overview should visualize the 
connection between different elements, helping the user to 
understand the relation and contributions between different 
parts of a curriculum. Two variations of the overview are 
implemented, one that is showing all linked data elements and 
another one that is emphasizing on a specific chain of 
competences from the (top-level) learning objective of the 
program to the learning goals of an individual lecture (at the 
most detailed level), using connected ELM concepts. 
The user can switch between those two visualizations at 
any time and the implementation is carried out as a web-
application that can be embedded in other web-applications, 
such as the website of a HEI or the e-Learning-system as 
needed. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Screenshot of the overview of the connected learning modules.  
Both implementations follow the concept of Semantic 
Specification Documents (SSD) that are self-contained and 
tool-agnostic [8], which are important properties to ensure an 
easy adoption in heterogeneous environments with a high 
variation of tools. PDF and web-based technologies are the 
document representation used, which are widely adopted and 
ELM is the backbone for the semantic representation, carrying 
the meaningful relations among the information elements.  
V. 
CONCLUSION & OUTLOOK 
This contribution analyzed the current situation of the 
digital transformation within HEI with respect to the digital 
documentation and certification of learning outcomes 
(achievements). It demonstrated that a number of European 
standardization activities are already paving the way towards 
machine readable semantically enhanced specification 
documents with the European Learning Model (ELM) 
developed by the European Commission and with the 
Educational Verifiable Certificates (EVC) by the W3C. 
Similar activities can be found in other areas of the world, e.g., 
the Credential Transparency Description Language (CTDL) 
[21] and the OpenBadge Specification [22] in the US.  
In Austria and many other European countries, the 
documentation of learning outcomes is already state of the art 
by supplying a Transcript of Records (ToR) and a Diploma 
Supplement (DS), which are often generated in an automated 
fashion, but still in the format of unstructured text. However, 
the aspect of explicit semantics and precise machine 
readability is not yet being used widely.  
The case analysis and the prototype implementation 
demonstrated that the use of the standards is technically 
feasible without harming existing generation processes and 
that a number of stakeholders could benefit from self-
contained, machine-understandable specification documents. 
The next steps in this research efforts are a more extensive 
implementation for a number of course programs at the HEI 
of the author and the evaluation of the benefits for 
stakeholders for important use cases, such as the Recognition 
of Prior Learning (RPL) with different stakeholders. This will 
be the basis of an ongoing evaluation and improvement 
process that focusses on the ease of use and a beneficial user 
experience to ensure a good adoption rate to accelerate the 
digital transformation of HEI. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author would like to thank the Tyrolean Science Fund 
(“Tiroler Wissenschaftsförderung”), which supported this 
research under grant number F.33280/6-2021 and the detailed 
and helpful comments of the reviewers of this contribution.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
European Commission, “The European Qualifications Framework 
(EQF) 
| 
Europass.” 
https://europa.eu/europass/en/europass-
tools/european-qualifications-framework (accessed Aug. 01, 2023). 
[2] 
S. Bohlinger, “Comparing Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) 
across Countries,” in Competence-based Vocational and Professional 
Education: Bridging the Worlds of Work and Education, M. Mulder, 
Ed., in Technical and Vocational Education and Training: Issues, 
Concerns and Prospects. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 
2017, pp. 589–606. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-41713-4_27. 
[3] 
European Commission, “Upcoming launch of the European Learning 
Model v3 | Europass.” https://europa.eu/europass/en/news/upcoming-
launch-european-learning-model-v3 (accessed Jun. 15, 2023). 
[4] 
“Verifiable Credentials Data Model 1.0.” https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-
data-model/ (accessed Apr. 19, 2021). 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-108-4
SEMAPRO 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

[5] 
“Modeling 
Educational 
Verifiable 
Credentials.” 
https://w3c-
ccg.github.io/vc-ed-models/ (accessed Jun. 15, 2023). 
[6] 
European Commission, “ECTS and Diploma Supplement Labels,” 
EACEA 
- 
European 
Commission, 
Mar. 
13, 
2018. 
https://eacea.ec.europa.eu/sites/2007-2013/lifelong-learning-
programme/ects-and-diploma-supplement-labels_en (accessed Apr. 
09, 2021). 
[7] 
European Commission, “Diploma Supplement | European Education 
Area.” 
https://education.ec.europa.eu/education-levels/higher-
education/inclusive-and-connected-higher-education/diploma-
supplement (accessed Aug. 01, 2023). 
[8] 
K. Böhm, “Towards Semantically Enriched Curricula as pre-built 
Information Spaces in Higher Education Institutions,” in ECKM 2021 
22nd European Conference on Knowledge Management, Academic 
Conferences limited, 2021, p. 71. 
[9] 
“Seven 
Steps 
to 
a 
Solid 
Job 
Task 
Analysis,” 
EDSI. 
https://www.edsi.com/blog/seven-steps-to-a-solid-job-task-analysis 
(accessed Aug. 01, 2023). 
[10] BMBWF, 
“Electronic 
Signature.” 
https://bmf.gv.at/en/topics/digitalisation/Digitised-
Austria/Electronic-Signature.html (accessed Jun. 18, 2023). 
[11] European Commission, “Diploma Supplement for stakeholders | 
Europass.” 
https://europa.eu/europass/en/diploma-supplement-
stakeholders (accessed Apr. 09, 2021). 
[12] BMBWF, 
“Diploma 
Supplement.” 
https://www.bmbwf.gv.at/en/Topics/Higher-education---
universities/Recognition-of-qualifications/Diploma-Supplement.html 
(accessed Aug. 01, 2023). 
[13] K. Böhm, “CloudEARTHi workshop on Agility and Semantic 
Structures for Scaffolding Academic Education, Part I and Part II.” 
https://cloudearthi.com/asss-academic-education/ (accessed Sep. 05, 
2023). 
[14] L. Recalde, R. Navarrete, and L. Correa, A Framework for data 
mining of structured semantic markup extracted from educational 
resources on University websites. 2022. doi: 10.54941/ahfe1001745. 
[15] Google, “Intro to How Structured Data Markup Works | Google 
Search Central | Documentation,” Google for Developers. 
https://developers.google.com/search/docs/appearance/structured-
data/intro-structured-data (accessed Aug. 01, 2023). 
[16] R. Montti, “Google On Which Structured Data it Prefers: JSON-LD 
or Microdata?,” Search Engine Journal, Mar. 11, 2019. 
https://www.searchenginejournal.com/google-structured-data-
preference/297479/ (accessed Aug. 01, 2023). 
[17] P. Wyatt, “PDF 2.0 Application Note 002: Associated Files,” Oct. 26, 
2018. 
https://pdfa.org/resource/pdf-2-0-application-note-002-
associated-files/ (accessed Jun. 22, 2023). 
[18] “PDF-LIB · Create and modify PDF documents in any JavaScript 
environment.” https://Hopding.github.io/ (accessed Jun. 22, 2023). 
[19] W3C, 
“JSON-LD 
1.1,” 
2020. 
https://www.w3.org/TR/json-
ld11/#embedding-json-ld-in-html-documents (accessed Apr. 13, 
2021). 
[20] K. Böhm, Agility and Semantic Structures to Scaffold Modern 
Academic Education Supporting the Digital Transformation in HEI. 
2022. 
[21] “Credential Engine Registry | Credential Transparency Description 
Language Schema Metadata.” https://credreg.net/ctdl/terms (accessed 
Jun. 28, 2023). 
[22] “Open Badges Specification 3.0 Candidate Final Public.” 
https://1edtech.github.io/openbadges-specification/ob_v3p0.html 
(accessed Jun. 19, 2023). 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-108-4
SEMAPRO 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

