Bridging Semantics Through Ontologies 
 
Tameem Chowdhury 
School of Design, Engineering and Technology 
University of South Wales 
Newport, Wales. 
Email: tameem.chowdhury@southwales.ac.uk 
Christopher Tubb 
School of Design, Engineering and Technology 
University of South Wales 
Newport, Wales. 
Email: Christopher.tubb@southwales.ac.uk 
 
Stilianos Vidalis 
Faculty of Computing, Engineering and Technology 
Stafford University 
Stafford, England.  
Email: Stilianos.vidalis@staffs.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— Semantic metadata enables contextual and relevant 
data to be identified for a particular entity. The use of 
ontologies creates a bridging mechanism, whereby semantic 
metadata can be referenced and validated   to ensure that 
relevant and useful information is collected. This also ensures 
trust and logic can be attained in search functionality. The 
paper explores the foundations of the research for the design 
of an Information Gathering tool for the Business Intelligence 
Domain.  The aim of the project is to effectively present next 
to real-time knowledgeable answers to runtime user generated 
queries for extracting business intelligence. The tool will 
collect information from   disparate sources   and requires the 
implementation of semantics to safeguard the future of 
knowledge discovery and reuse. This paper summaries the 
research and conceptualisation for our Information Gathering 
tool using semantic metadata to be utilised in the area of 
Business Intelligence. 
Keywords-Semantics; 
Metadata; 
Ontology; 
Business 
Intelligence. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
“The World Wide Web was originally built for human 
consumption, and although everything on it is machine- 
readable, this data is not machine-understandable.  It is 
very hard to automate anything on the web, and because 
of the volume of information the web contains, it is not 
possible to manage it manually” [1]. 
 
As the technological growth exponentially increases, 
the vastness of data and information available for 
consumption and reuse is equally daunting. Incorporating 
semantics, specifically semantic metadata, into search 
functionality and classification, relevance and precision 
can be enhanced. In order to successfully implement 
semantic metadata, ontologies can be utilised and these 
principles can be applied for conducting knowledge 
extraction for gaining Business Intelligence  (BI).  The 
paper discusses the fundamentals of semantic metadata 
and ontology and how their application will benefit the   
Intelligence Gathering Using Semantic Metadata and 
Ontology (IGUSMON) project, currently work 
in 
progress. The aim of the tool is to provide next to real- 
time knowledgeable answers to runtime user generated 
queries, from disparate sources, in noncritical multimedia 
systems focusing on BI. We present the design, which 
combines ideas discussed in  “The Semantic Web”  [2] 
with theory proposed from the study of nature, most 
notably for our research, Swarm Intelligence [3] and 
proposes how they can be applied to extract knowledge 
for BI. 
 
The outline for the paper is as follows: Section II will 
discuss the fundamentals of semantic metadata and the ad- 
vantages of having well defined concepts for appropriation. 
It further explores Swarm Intelligence and how the theory 
studied and documented from research into particular 
natural systems can help design an efficient computer 
system, with the ability to utilise logic in its decision-
making. Section III presents the design of the IGUSMON 
project algorithm and analyses the benefits and limitations 
that may be encountered during the development phase. 
Related and existing work is also identified. 
II. 
SEMANTIC METADATA AND ONTOLGICAL 
FUNDAMENTALS 
For the design of an Intelligence Gathering tool, the 
difference between simple information, assets and actual 
intelligence 
required 
definition 
and 
identification. 
Information encapsulates a wide range of concepts and 
phenomena. They relate to both the processes and material 
states, which are closely interrelated. Information can be: 
•  “A product, which encompasses information as an 
object, as resource, as commodity. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

• What is carried in a channel, including the medium 
channel itself. 
•  The Contents.” [4][5][6][7] 
Information can be an asset to stakeholders and or a 
particular entity, for example, data companies such as 
Acxiom, TargusInfo and BlueKai [8]. An asset can be 
defined as a single item of ownership having exchange 
value [9][10][11][12][13]. Information assets are physical, 
hardware, software, data, communications, administrative 
and personnel resources of a computing system [14]. Every 
information asset contains some sort of information that 
we can analyse and extract intelligence from. 
Intelligence can be defined as a specialised form of 
knowledge, 
an 
activity, 
and 
an 
organisation. 
As 
knowledge, intelligence informs leaders, stakeholders or 
entities, uniquely aiding their judgment and decision-
making. As an activity, it is the means by which data and 
information are collected, their relevance to an issue 
established, interpreted to determine likely outcomes, and 
disseminated to individuals and organisations who can 
make use of it, otherwise known as consumers of 
intelligence [15]. This becomes more complicated 
depending on the situation and the stimuli that we are 
observing and 
impacts how 
we extract 
different 
intelligence. The application and usability of this 
intelligence simply depends upon the search criteria and 
purpose for the collection. For the objectives of the 
IGUSMON project, 
collected 
information will 
be 
referenced against ontologies, which will be specifically 
created for BI, to filter relevant intelligence according to 
the subjects identified. 
An important factor when collecting information that will 
be classified, as intelligence is the need for accuracy and 
trust, since the World Wide Web or information 
environment, unfortunately and inevitably provides a 
wealth of misinformation. The United States Department 
of 
Defense 
(DoD) 
has 
defined 
the 
Information 
Environment (IE) as: 
“The aggregate of individuals, organisations and 
systems (resources) that collect, process, disseminate, or 
act on information.” [16] 
Akin to reality, the virtual space is the new realm of 
warfare and dissemination of misinformation. Clausewitz 
and Tzu [17][18] theorised about warfare and military 
mentality and strategy in their respective works, and 
although the context is different, the theory can still be 
applied to virtual information warfare. Through the 
implementation of consistent semantic metadata and 
well-defined ontologies, BI will be collected, structured, 
efficiently stored and organised; ensuring they can also 
be easily 
retrieved 
and 
analysed 
when 
required. 
Furthermore the threat of misinformation 
can be 
minimised and or eliminated and trust attributed to the 
extracted 
knowledge. 
Metadata 
is 
structured 
information 
t h a t  
describes, 
explains, 
locates, 
or 
otherwise makes it easier to retrieve, use, or manage an 
information resource. Metadata is often called data about 
data or information about information [19]. It is utilised 
in the classification, archiving and most importantly the 
retrieval of information, data, and resources and assets. 
If the metadata is maintained and organised correctly, the 
availability and retrieval is exponentially increased 
[20][21]. 
Jokela [20] identifies thirteen categorisations of 
metadata, of which we have identified the three main 
types of metadata that will be utilised in the IGUSMON 
project: 
• Descriptive Metadata describes a resource for 
purposes such as discovery and identification. 
•  Structural Metadata indicates how compound objects 
are put together, for example, how pages are ordered 
to form chapters. 
•  Administrative Metadata provides information to help 
manage a resource, such as when and how it was 
created, file type and other technical information and 
who can access it [19][20][21]. 
Metadata is utilised in a variety of different situations 
by varying institutions. The Police Force, Military 
facilities, Governments, Libraries, Museums, Internet 
search engines, Public and Private Sector companies are 
just a few examples of where metadata is applied and 
incorporated into everyday tasks and utilised on a daily 
basis [22]. Foulonneau and Riley [21] add: “Metadata 
allows various functions to be performed on digital 
resources, 
for 
example, 
discovery, 
interpretation, 
preservation, management, representation and the reuse of 
objects.” 
Semantics is the branch of linguistics and logic 
concerned with meaning. The two main areas are logical 
semantics, concerned with matters such as sense, 
reference, presupposition and implication, and lexical 
semantics, concerned with the analysis of word meanings 
and relations between them [23]. Semantic Metadata, or 
meaningful and useful data, are essential in today’s 
information oriented world of discovery and provide the 
foundations for developing our ontologies. 
Simply defining ontology is exigent and requires some 
background into its lexicology and etymology. Originally 
the term is from philosophy and denotes a systematic 
account of existence. In computer science and Artificial 
Intelligence, ontology is an explicit specification of a 
conceptualisation and states what exists can be represented 
[24]. 
Jokela [20] concurs: “Ontologies are conceptual 
models that map the content domain into a limited set of 
meaningful concepts.” Formal ontology aims to provide a 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

specification of the meaning of terms within a vocabulary. 
When conceptualising ontological expressions, the design 
needs to ensure that the continuants and participants are 
not stochastically determined [25]. 
By defining ontologies based on a particular domain 
[26], the algorithm [27][28] within the Intelligence 
Gathering tool will facilitate the return of intelligence in a 
structured manner and only for information predefined 
within our ontologies for BI. Figure 1 presents a 
breakdown of the thinking required behind ontology design 
and will form the foundations for developing our BI 
ontologies. 
 
!
!
!
!
UNICODE!
URI!
XML+NS+XMLSchema!
RDF!+!RDFSchema!
Ontology!Vocabulary!
Logic
Proof!
Trust!
Data!
Data!
Digital!
Signature!
Rules!
Data!
 
 
Fig. 1.    Visualisation of layers for Ontology Creation [2][29] 
 
The combination of utilising the semantic metadata with 
the creation of ontologies focusing on the intelligence 
domain, integrated by an algorithm, will enable the system 
to simulate and implement logic in its decision-making. 
The notions put forth by Dumontier and Hoehndorf [25] 
will also be considered, ensuring that Entities or Subjects 
can be combined with meaningful Continuants or Objects’ 
respectively [22]. The algorithm will utilise web spiders to 
collect the data, and use swarming agents to enable 
communication between the different system components, 
which include the ontologies. 
Swarm intelligence [3][30] theories, developed through 
research and study into natural systems, are often 
implemented and utilised in the design of robotic agents. 
“Theories of Self-Organisation (SO), were originally 
developed for the contextual benefit of physicists and 
chemists to describe the emergence of macroscopic 
patterns” [31][32]. However, SO can be extended to social 
insects and describe how complex collective behaviour 
may emerge from interactions along individuals that 
exhibit simple behaviour but contribute towards the same 
task. Recent research reflects that SO is indeed a major 
component of a wide range of collective phenomena in 
social insects and designers of robotic agents have applied 
this natural inspiration in the realisation of different 
robotic agents and artificial systems [22][33]. Social 
insects have limited cognitive abilities, and therefore the 
simplicity can be applied to the design of robotic agents, 
that mimic their behaviour at some level of description 
[3][31]. 
The systems of nature and their behaviours are theories, 
in the continuous processes of study and research and the 
accuracy of the exact biological science of their physical 
behaviour is not of importance for our purposes. 
“Algorithms do not have to be designed after accurate or 
true models of biological systems; efficiency, robustness 
and flexibility are the driving criteria, not biological 
accuracy” [3]. This is why we often use the term 
biologically inspired. The modelling of social insects by 
means of SO can help design artificial distributed problem 
solving devices- swarm-intelligent systems. Although 
biologically inspired swarm intelligence has an appeal to 
those developing such systems, it is however, fair to say 
that very few applications of swarm intelligence have been 
developed. One of the main reasons for this relative lack of 
success resides in the fact that swarm-intelligent systems 
are hard to ‘program’, because the paths to problem 
solving are not predefined but emergent, resulting from 
interactions among individuals and between individuals 
and their environment, as much as from the behaviours of 
the individuals themselves [3]. There are two types of 
emergence, light and strong. Light emergence, where the 
final behaviour can be deduced from the rules, is in 
contrast to strong emergence. There are philosophical 
arguments regarding this; however it is always easier to 
take a system and analyse how the behaviour results from 
the interacting rules, than it is in all but trivial cases, to 
engineer 
behaviour 
from 
simple 
interacting 
rules. 
Therefore, using a swarm-intelligent system to solve a 
problem requires a thorough knowledge not only of what 
individual’s behaviours must be implemented but also of 
what interactions are needed to produce such or such 
global behaviour [3]. This is where ontologies are 
introduced into the design of our system. 
The reduction of the behaviour of these agents can be 
expressed in equations [3] and have been applied in 
applications in the areas of Robotics, Information 
Operations, Evolutionary Computing, Neural Networks, 
Agent Management and others [30]. Watson adds, “Agent 
properties can be utilised in: Learning; Social Learning; 
Environmental 
Learning; 
Histories; 
Cognition 
and 
Communications” [30]. 
III. 
IMPLEMENTING ONTOLOGIES WITH SEMANTIC 
METADATA WITHIN THE IGUSMON PROJECT 
Web spiders enable the search and retrieval of specific 
information from the contents of a particular webpage or 
website. Furthermore, spiders can be programmed to 
search vast datasets without the need for continuous human 
interaction. Once the spider is deployed it can crawl from 
webpage to webpage, through the extraction of hyper- 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

links and therefore create a list of searchable content. 
Spiders can implement intelligence gathering through the 
collection of specific information from disparate sources, 
relationally stochastic and orthogonal. They can be 
programmed for the required level of independency, and 
will function by examining the semantic metadata of the 
digital resource. The web spiders provide an excellent 
mechanism for gathering the required websites and the 
corresponding semantic metadata for the target search, 
which will then enable the other features of the system 
to mine and structure the data for presentation in the form 
of a knowledgeable answer [22]. 
The research is in its infancy and the following 
architecture 
and 
design 
described 
is 
the 
conceptualisation of our algorithm for intelligence 
gathering using semantic metadata. Figure 2 illustrates the 
conceptual design of the Information Gathering tool, 
which demonstrates how the web spiders will act as a 
mechanism for gathering the raw data, before sending the 
extracted semantic metadata back to the database for 
validation with the predefined ontologies. Once the 
extracted data is verified, a data-mining [34] algorithm 
structures the data into information before returning it as a 
knowledgeable answer to the Query Management System. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.    IGUSMON Project System Architecture [22] 
 
Venturing deeper into the mechanics of the Intelligence 
Gathering tool and specifically to the core elements of the 
design, Figure 3 illustrates the System Architecture and the 
critical elements of the system, as well as how the swarming 
agents communicate. The Query Management System will 
signal the release of the web spiders from the spider 
deployment module via the database and a swarming agent. 
Collected information will be verified for relevant 
intelligence within the Validation Module via ontology 
checks. However, before the semantic metadata reaches the 
Validation Module, a final check will be conducted via a 
worker agent against the Irrelevant Data module, where 
discarded information from previous extractions, that did not 
produce positive intelligence results relating to a query, are 
stored.  
 
!
Entity!
Continuant!
Occurrence!
Universal!
Particular!
Fig. 2.
IGUSMON Project System Architecture [22]
Spider
Deployment
Crawl n
Hyperlink
Extract
links
Extract
Semantic 
Metadata
Check 
robots.txt
Check 
website
list n+1
Database
No
Yes
Call 2nd 
Spider Agent
W.Agent
W.Agent
W.Agent
W.Agent
Add Links to Website List
W.Agent
Validation 
Module
Run 
Ontology 
Checks
Relevant
SM
No
Yes
W.Agent
W.Agent
W.Agent
W.Agent
W.Agent
Data 
Mining 
Algorithm W.Agent
Structure 
Information
W.Agent
Query
Management 
System
User
Interface
W.Agent
Irrelevant
data
W.Agent
Fig. 3.
Implementation of Swarming Intelligence Behaviour within The
IGUSMON Project System Architecture
web spiders will act as a mechanism for gathering the
raw data, before sending the extracted semantic metadata
back to the database for validation with the predeﬁned
ontologies. Once the extracted data is veriﬁed, a data-
mining [34] algorithm structures the data into information
before returning it as a knowledgeable answer to the Query
Management System.
Venturing deeper into the mechanics of the Intelligence
Enviro
Fig. 4.
Gathering t
design, Figu
critical elem
ing agents
will signal
deployment
mation will
Validation
the semant
ﬁnal check
the Irreleva
from previo
intelligence
earlier, all
can be util
query; ther
stored, eithe
The inform
mining [34
Mining Al
matical Th
illustrated i
The arch
work in tha
data for ﬁl
the applica
system ens
rently. The
vast datase
extraction.
with the on
can be ext
 
Fig. 3.    Implementation of Swarming Intelligence Behaviour with the 
IGUSMON Project System Architecture 
 
As stated earlier, all information may prove to be 
intelligence and can be utilised depending upon a particular 
objective or query; therefore all extracted semantic metadata 
will be stored, either in the database or the Irrelevant Data 
module. The information gathered will be filtered through a 
data- mining [34] algorithm and the architecture of the Data 
Mining 
Algorithm 
will 
incorporate 
Floridi’s 
[5] 
Mathematical Theory of Communication (MTC) in the 
design, illustrated in Figure 4. 
The architecture of the algorithm differs from related 
work in that it focuses only on extracting semantic meta- 
data for filtering against our BI ontologies. Furthermore, the 
application of swarming worker agents within the system 
ensures that multiple tasks are conducted concurrently. The 
!
Internet&
!
!
Database!
!
!
Unification/!Fusion!
Operation!
Data&Mining&&
Algorithm&
Spiders&
Query&
Management&
System&
User!
Interface!
System&
Space&
User&
Space&
Virtual&
Space&
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

benefits of this focus are anticipated to ensure vast datasets 
can be quickly referenced and utilised for extraction. The 
direct integration of the semantic metadata with the 
ontologies will ensure that relevant knowledge can be 
extracted. An obvious limitation to this method will be 
determined by how much of the relevant data is attributed 
with semantic metadata. Even though semantic web methods 
have been proposed for over a decade now, data does exist 
that was created before and after, which seldom or 
minimally focuses on semantics. However this does not 
mean that semantic metadata is limited; with the 
technological growth and vast amounts of growing data, this 
limitation is becoming less finite. The other limitation that 
will impact our research will be the reach of the algorithm. 
When the conceptualisation of the algorithm is developed, 
the testing will focus on a finite number of websites for 
extraction, due to available computing power and time 
constraints. As mentioned, the focus of the IGUSMON 
project is currently immersed within this area and 
development is in progression; some of the design elements 
proposed may change as the modules are created and tested 
for feasibility. 
re [22]
dation 
dule
un 
ology 
ecks
vant
M
No
W.Agent
!
!
Untrue!
True!
(Information)!
Intentional!
(Disinformation
)!
Unintentional!
(Misinformation
)!
Information!
Semantic!
(Content)!
Environmental!
Data!
(Well!Formed)!
!
Instructional!
Factual!
Fig. 4.
Mathematical Theory of Communication [5][22]
Gathering tool and speciﬁcally to the core elements of the
design, Figure 3 illustrates the System Architecture and the
critical elements of the system, as well as how the swarm-
ing agents communicate. The Query Management System
will signal the release of the web spiders from the spider
deployment module via a swarming agent. Collected infor-
mation will be veriﬁed for relevant intelligence within the
Validation Module via ontology checks. However, before
the semantic metadata reaches the Validation Module, a
ﬁnal check will be conducted via a worker agent against
the Irrelevant Data module, where discarded information
from previous extractions, that did not produce positive
intelligence results relating to a query, are stored. As stated
earlier, all information may prove to be intelligence and
can be utilised depending upon a particular objective or
query; therefore all extracted semantic metadata will be
 
 
A. Related Work 
 
The foundations of the research are attributed to Berners-
Lee et als. “The Semantic Web” [2], Gruber’s [24] research 
on ontologies and Bonabeau et als. [3] research on Swarm 
Intelligence. Further related work within our research 
focused on where semantic metadata and ontological 
mapping has been incorporated within the design, collection 
and extraction. Jokela [20] implements the use of semantic 
metadata within media content. Whereas, Stefanov and 
Huang’s [35] research focuses on metadata context 
management. Vlachidis et al. [36] attribute and refer to this 
concept of utilising semantic metadata as Semantic 
Annotation within their research. They incorporate Semantic 
Annotation within their mechanism responsible for 
connecting natural language and formal conceptual 
structures, observing that the incorporation of semantic 
metadata could enable new information accessibility and 
enhance existing methods and systems. The IGUSMON 
project focuses on applying these methods in the area of BI. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Implementing ontologies into the design and application 
of the IGUSMON project, enables relevant information to 
be defined within a strict set of requirements, so that precise 
retrieval can be achieved. The sheer volume of information 
assets or intelligence that can be gathered through search 
today is overwhelming; the focus on semantic metadata 
ensures that ontologies can be developed to conceptualise 
subjects and objects and ultimately enable us to simulate 
logic in the search for valuable intelligence. The 
development of the algorithm and the creation of the 
ontologies for BI have begun. The intention for 
demonstrating the successful completion of the algorithm 
and architecture will be through the use of a user interface, 
enabling users to submit runtime generated queries. The 
design of the algorithm and overall architecture of the tool, 
will ensure that if the ontologies are modified, there will be 
minimal disruption and ensures that any expansion of search 
parameters can be integrated. Semantics enable contextual 
and relevant intelligence to be gathered; the extensibility of 
the database storing the ontologies ensures that additional 
information and specifically triplets, can be incorporated 
when a limitation is identified. This is a key factor since the 
web spiders will retrieve information specified by their 
defined semantic metadata, and as linguistics and modern 
languages have taught us throughout history, the semantics 
of words and expressions are always evolving to reflect 
changes in society. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Tameem Chowdhury would like to acknowledge the 
European Social Fund for the funding provided through The 
Knowledge 
Economy 
Social 
Skills 
(KESS) 
Ph.D. 
Scholarship Scheme, enabling the opportunity to conduct 
this research and development for the IGUSMON Project. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] W3C. RDF Syntax. [www] http://www.w3.org/TR/PR-rdf- 
syntax/, 1999. [retrieved: July 2013]. 
[2] T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila. “The semantic 
web.” Scientific American, 284(5): pp. 34–43, 2001. 
[3] E. Bonabeau, M. Dorigo, and G. Theraulaz. “Swarm 
Intelligence From Natural to Artificial Systems.” New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1999. 
[4] M. Menou. “The impact of information ii: Concepts of infor- 
mation and its value.” Information Processing & Management, 
31(4): pp. 479–490, 1995. 
[5] L. Floridi. “Semantic conceptions of information.” In Edward 
N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Spring 
2011 edition, 2011. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

[6] N. Belkin. “Information concepts for information science.” 
Journal of Documentation, 34(1): pp. 55-85, 1978. 
[7] B. Brookes. “The foundations of information science. Part i. 
philosophical aspects.” Journal of Information Science, 2(3-4): pp. 
125–133, 1980. 
[8] E. Pariser. The Filter Bubble. Penguin Group, 2011. 
[9] K. Choong. “Intellectual capital: definitions, categorization and 
reporting models.” Journal of Intellectual Capital, 9(4): pp. 609–
638, 2008. 
[10] P. Kostagiolas and S. Asonitis. “Intangible assets for academic 
libraries: Definitions, categorization and an exploration of 
management issues.” Library Management, 30(6/7): pp. 419–429, 
2009. 
[11] L. Joia. “Measuring intangible corporate assets: Linking 
business strategy with intellectual capital.” Journal of Intellectual 
Capital, 1(1): pp. 68–84, 2000. 
[12] L. Kaufmann and Y. Schneider. “Intangibles: A synthesis of 
current research.” Journal of Intellectual Capital, 5(3):366–388, 
2004. 
[13] M. Harvey and R. Lusch. “Protecting the core competencies of 
a company: Intangible asset security.” European Management 
Journal, 15(4): pp. 370–380, 1997. 
[14] T. Chowdhury, S. Vidalis, and C. Tubb. “Proactively 
defending computing infrastructures through the implementation of 
live forensic capture in corporate network security.” In The 3rd 
International Conference on Cybercrime, Security and Digital 
Forensics. 2013. In press. 
[15] N. Hendrickson. “Critical thinking in intelligence analysis.” 
International Journal of Intelligence and Counter Intelligence, 
21(4): pp. 679–693, 2008. 
[16] S. Vidalis and O. Angelopoulou. “Deception and manoeuvre 
warfare utilising cloud resources.” In The 3rd International 
Conference on Cybercrime, Security and Digital Forensics. 2013. 
In press. 
[17] C. Von Clausewitz. On War. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press. 1976. 
[18] S. Tzu. The Art of War by Sun Tzu Special Edition 
(Translated and annotated by Lionel Giles). El Paso Norte Press, 
1910.  
[19] NISO. Understanding Metadata. National Information 
Standards Organization: Bethesda, 2004.  
[20] S. Jokela. Metadata Enhanced Content Management In Media 
Companies. Acta Polytechnica Scandinavica, Mathematics and 
Computing Series No. 114, Espoo: Finnish Academies of 
Technology, 2001.  
[21] M. Foulonneau and J. Riley. Metadata for Digital Resources. 
Oxford: Chandos Publishing (Oxford) Limited, 2008.  
[22] T. Chowdhury, S. Vidalis, and C. Tubb. “An ontological 
approach to intelligence gathering using semantic metadata.” The 
Journal of Communication and Computer US. 2013. In press.  
[23] Oxford 
University 
Press. 
[www] 
http://oxforddictionaries.com/definition 
/semantics, 
2012. 
[retrieved: January 2012].  
[24] T. Gruber. “A translation approach to portable ontology 
specifications.” Knowledge Creation Diffusion Utilization.”  
5(April): pp.199–220, 1993.  
[25] M. Dumontier and R. Hoehndorf. “Realism for scientific 
ontologies.” 6th International Conference on Formal Ontology in 
Information Systems. volume 209, pp. 387–399. IOS Press, 2010.  
[26] M. 
Oldfield. 
Domain 
Modelling. 
[www] 
http://www.aptprocess.com, 2002. [Retrieved: March 2012].  
[27] S. Dasgupta, C. Papadimitriou and U. Vazirani. Algorithms. 
McGraw-Hill, 2006.  
[28]  T. Cormen, C. Leiserson, R. Rivest and C. Stein. Introduction 
to Algorithms. The MIT Press: Cambridge, Massachusetts and 
London, England. 3rd edition, 2009.  
[29] P. Mankato. The Semantic Web - An Overview. [www] 
www.youtube.com, 2011. [Retrieved: September 2012].  
[30] L. Watson. Swarming In Information Warfare. Edith Cowan 
University, Perth, Western Australia, 2002. [Retrieved: October 
2012].  
[31] H. Haken. Synergetics. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1983. (Cited 
in E. Bonabeau, M. Dorigo, and G. Theraulaz. “Swarm Intelligence 
From Natural to Artificial Systems.” New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1999). 
[32] G. Nicolis and I. Prigogine. “Self-Organiization in Non- 
Equilibrium Systems.” NewYork, NY: Wiley & Sons, 1977. (Cited 
in E. Bonabeau, M. Dorigo, and G. Theraulaz. “Swarm Intelligence 
From Natural to Artificial Systems.” New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1999).  
[33] J. Deneubourg, S. Goss, N. Franks, and J M. Pasteels. “The 
blind leading the blind: Modeling chemically mediated army ant 
raid patterns.” Journal of Insect Behavior, 2(5): pp. 719–725, 1989.  
[34] B. Palace. Data Mining. Technology Note prepared for 
Management 274A, Anderson Graduate School of Management at 
UCLA [www] http://www.anderson.ucla.edu, 1996. [Retrieved: 
May 2012].  
[35] S. Stefanov and V. Huang. “A semantic web based system for 
context metadata management.” Metadata and Semantic Research, 
46: pp. 118–129, 2009.  
[36] A. Vlachidis, C. Binding, D. Tudhope, and K. May. “Auto- 
matic metadata generation in an archaeological digital library: 
Semantic annotation of grey literature.” 2012. [www] hyperme- 
dia.research.glam.ac.uk [Retrieved: October 2012].  
 
 
[1] W3C. RDF Syntax. [www] http://www.w3.org/TR/PR-rdf-
syntax/,1999. (July 2013). 
[2] T.Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila.  “The semantic 
web.” Scientific American, 284(5): pp. 34–43, 2001. 
[3] E.Bonabeau, M.Dorigo, and G.Theraulaz.  “Swarm Intelligence 
From Natural to Artificial Systems.” New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1999. 
[4] M.Menou. “The impact of information ii: Concepts of 
information and its value.” Information Processing & Management, 
31(4): pp. 479–490, 1995. 
[5] L. Floridi. “Semantic conceptions of information.”  In Edward 
N. Zalta, editor,  The Stanford  Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Spring 
2011 edition, 2011. 
[6] N,Belkin. “Information concepts for information science.” 
Journal  of Documentation, 34(1):5585, 1978. 
[7] B, Brookes. “The foundations of information science. part i. 
philosophical aspects.” Journal of Information Science, 2(3-
4):125–133, 1980. 
[8] E Pariser. The Filter Bubble. Penguin Group, 2011. 
[9] K, Choong.    Intellectual  capital:  definitions, catego- rization  
and  reporting models.    Journal  of Intellectual  Capital,9(4):609–
638, 2008.  
[
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-293-6
SEMAPRO 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

