Analyzing the Ontology Approaches and the Formation of Open Ontology Model: A 
Step for Organisational Ontology Employment 
Jawahir Che Mustapha Yusuf1 
Institute of Research and Postgraduate Studies (IRPS) 
UniKL-Malaysian Institute of Information Technology 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
jawahir@miit.unikl.edu.my 
Mazliham Mohd Su’ud 
Universiti Kuala Lumpur (UniKL) 
UniKL-Malaysia France Institute 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
mazliham@unikl.edu.my 
Patrice Boursier1 
Department of Artificial Intelligence, FCSIT 
University of Malaya  
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
patrice@um.edu.my 
 
 
Abstract—Three different ontology-based approaches have 
been used in previous researches to improve the semantic 
interoperability in an integrated information system. The 
approaches can be identified as the single, the multiple and the 
hybrid ontologies. Organisations seeking to improve their 
information system capability realise the benefits of using 
semantic technology based on ontology. However, clear 
guidelines are not available to select the appropriate 
ontological approach. The selection of the approach should be 
according to various organisational needs, contexts and 
management styles. This research is significantly important to 
provide flexible and adaptable way to start employing 
ontology, because semantic information systems are still 
immature in many organisations. In current research the study 
of different ontology-based approaches is presented. The focus 
is on the semantic integration challenge based on multi-sources 
data integration. Viability of all approaches and guides for 
ontology employment are presented in order to provide options 
for the organisations to upgrade their current system to new 
system. There is no specific approach that has been proven to 
be a successful implementation. Therefore, a new general 
reference model is proposed in this research work, which is 
based on the three approaches called Open Ontology Model. 
The proposed model is designed to work in dual directions 
which are top-down and bottom-up implementation to make 
the specification of ontology mappings more flexible and 
usable. This model would be of interest to novice system 
developers who plan to use it as a starting point to develop 
their first semantic information system. Developers might 
decide any single or combination of approaches based on the 
nature of their organisation.  
Keywords-ontology-based 
information 
system; 
semantic 
heterogeneity; data integration. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The needs for knowledge sharing and exchange within 
organisations have become the most significant and 
prominent cause of data integration. Therefore, information 
system interoperability is a key to increase cooperation 
between all data owners to ensure successful data 
integration. At present information systems are increasingly 
large-scale, complex and multi-traits. Information sharing 
and exchange processes are going to be more challenging. 
Data integration procedures must follow good abstraction 
principles to solve interoperability problems concerning on 
the structure, the syntax, the system and the semantic. The 
focus of this research is on semantic integration which is one 
of the main issues in multi-sources data integration. 
According to [1], semantic integration is the task of 
grouping, combining or completing data from different 
sources by considering explicit and precise data semantics. 
Semantic integration has to ensure that only data related to 
the same real-world entity is merged. Ontology is a current 
practice to resolve semantic conflicts in diverse information 
sources. Ontology itself is an enabling technology (a layer of 
the enabling infrastructure) to enforce knowledge sharing 
and manipulation [2].  Any abstract or concealed information 
can be clearly described according to specific concepts by 
using ontology.  
Researches 
to 
employ 
ontology 
approaches 
for 
integration of multiple data sources are still growing and 
more demanding as semantic reconciliation can resolve other 
types of interoperability problems. Three approaches have 
been used in previous researches that can be identified as 
single, multiple and hybrid ontology [9][31]. Large number 
of systems still holds implicit information even though they 
might have well support on technical data interoperability. 
Realizing 
the 
growing 
importance 
of 
semantic 
interoperability, 
organisations 
are 
beginning 
to 
use 
ontologies in their system applications. However, common 
guidelines to find the ontology approaches that are best 
suited for different organisational needs, contexts and 
management styles are still unclear. There are organisations 
that start with complex approach or approach that is not 
suitable to some types of organisations.  In fact, there exists a  
______________________________________ 
1 Author is also associated with Laboratoire L3i Université 
de La Rochelle, La Rochelle, France. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

much simpler,  cost-effective  and  quick  alternative   to   be 
exploited with some improvement. Knowing the advantages 
and disadvantages of different approaches are not enough to 
help choose the right approach for a given application. More 
importantly, there should be a mechanism in place to help 
the organisations decide the necessary information system 
upgrades on the basis of their management structure and 
nature. Furthermore, system developers must deliberately 
choose proper ontological methods at early stages of system 
development. Otherwise, invalid result from queried 
information might yield bogus decision due to poor 
understanding on the knowledge. 
This paper discusses different ontology-based approaches 
for supporting multi-sources data integration. Viability of all 
approaches and guides for ontology employment are 
presented in order to provide options for the organisations to 
upgrade their current system to new system. A new 
ontology-based model that is called Open Ontology Model 
(OOM) is also proposed in this research work. It is intended 
to be used as general reference model to novice system 
developers who plan to use it as a starting point to develop 
their first semantic information system. Developers can take 
advantage of each ontology approach and may build their 
systems by stages depends on organisation system 
requirements and the current resources available. Currently, 
the prototype of this research work based on the OOM is 
under implementation.  
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section II 
elaborates 
related 
researches 
on 
ontological-based 
approaches. Meanwhile, Section III presents the viability of 
ontological approach and guides to ontology employment.  
The formation of OOM is detailed out in Section IV. Section 
V briefs the motivation of this research work. Finally, 
conclusion is added in Section VI. 
II. 
REVISION ON THE ONTOLOGY APPROACHES 
The use of ontologies for data integration is applicable to 
various numbers of applications. This part describes top-
down and bottom-up ontology development. Then, the three 
ontology 
approaches 
based 
on 
previous 
researches 
contribution in [8][9][10][31] are revised. More recent 
researches are added to show some earlier approaches still 
relevant in particular domain background. Indeed, the 
formation of the Open Ontology Model (OOM) is rooted 
from 
the 
three 
approaches. 
The 
advantages 
and 
disadvantages of each approach are not to be emphasized. 
The concern is more with the numerous types of 
organisational environments which need to decide the most 
suitable ontology approaches for their information system 
upgrade. 
A. A Glance on Top-down and Bottom-up Ontology 
In computer science perspective, ontology is important 
for data integration in order to facilitate shared and 
exchanged information. Generally, two popular trends exist 
in the development of ontology approaches; top-down and 
bottom-up designs. In the top-down design, each term in 
source ontologies is created from the primitive term in the set 
of top-level ontology. The set of top-level ontology is 
provided first. Secondly, source ontologies that contain more 
specific terms are extended from the set of top-level 
ontology. Since source ontologies only use the vocabulary of 
a top-level ontology, therefore terms are comparable easily. 
In the top-level ontology, only common terms are described 
at a very abstract level. Therefore, adding up existing 
ontologies should not become a problem as many upper-
ontologies (or upper-domain ontologies) are developed under 
consideration it can be easily reused. The knowledge-base 
CYC [39], SUMO [38], Sowa’s upper ontology [41], 
WordNet [42], DOLCE [40] and UMBEL [43] are the 
examples of top-level ontology.  
On the other hand, the bottom-up ontology design is 
aimed to build shared, global ontology by extracting data 
from source ontologies. Firstly, source ontologies that 
contain specific terms are constructed from data source 
schema (or catalogues, labels etc) to describe the meaning of 
the information.  Secondly, source ontologies of all disparate 
data sources are mapped to construct primitive terms or 
abstract concepts of the top-level ontology (common shared 
vocabulary). This way, the related terms between low-level 
and top-level ontologies are still comparable.   
B. Ontology Approaches Revisiting 
In single ontology approach, a global ontology is derived 
by data interpretation from all connected data sources as 
depicted in Fig. 1a. One common shared vocabulary is 
provided to denote the semantics between data sources. 
Global ontology development efforts primarily focus on the 
formation of general knowledge used in multi-purpose 
applications. A few former systems based on the single 
approach can be located in the Carnot system [12] that 
utilises the global CYC ontology [11], an ontology 
modularization technique in ONTOLINGUA [13], TAMBIS 
for connecting biological data sources [14], and SIMS [15] 
as the tightly-coupled system that is tested in the domains of 
transportation planning and medical trauma. This approach is 
still utilised in recent years with some improvements such as 
for spatial data integration in SPIRIT [5][16], a geo-ontology 
construction for web spatial data query system, three-level 
ontology architecture for geo-information services discovery 
in [17] and OCHRE [36] core ontology for combining 
cultural heritage information from diverse local schemas.  
In most real-time implementation, it is not easy to 
completely achieve mutual agreement within data owners to 
use one common vocabulary. Thus, multiple ontology 
approach is aimed for data integration by mapping different 
ontologies without using global schema. Each data source is 
described by its own disparate ontology (Fig. 1b). Inter-
ontology mapping technique must be used to enable 
association between ontologies. Mapping provide a 
common layer from which several ontologies could be 
accessed, and hence could exchange information in 
semantically sound manners [18]. This approach is 
presented in earlier systems such as OBSERVER system 
[19] for domain of bibliographic references, combination of 
two different geographic ontologies using bi-directional 
integration in [21], MAFRA system [20]  and SEWASIE [6]  
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Different ontology approaches: (a) single ontology approach, 
(b) multiple ontology approach, (c) and (d) two types of hybrid ontology 
approach that are simulated from [9]  
system that use multiple ontologies to provide access to  
heterogeneous  web  data  and  the   ontology  translation 
(bridging   axioms)   to   merge   two  related   ontologies  in 
OntoMerge XML-based system [4]. More recent work on 
the approach can be found in [34], where YAGO ontology 
[33] was automatically derived from Wikipedia and 
WordNet, further work in [32] to combine high-level 
axioms from the SUMO and YAGO, and MEMO [35] an 
automatic merging of two source ontologies, which uses 
clustering techniques in order to help the identification of 
the most similar ontologies. 
Another mode of multiple ontology integration is done 
via one shared-vocabulary to make these ontologies simply 
comparable to each other. This most adopted approach is 
known as the hybrid ontology. Generic ontology and domain 
ontology are the type of shared-vocabulary. Domain shared-
vocabulary can be specified from or without generic shared-
vocabulary (Fig. 1c and Fig. 1d). Generic shared-vocabulary 
usually contains very basic terms in a universe of discourse 
while domain shared-vocabulary models more specific 
concept of the world. In some hybrid ontology approach, 
domain shared-vocabulary is split up into top-domain and 
domain ontologies as described in [22]. Particularly, hybrid 
ontology approach set a global top-level ontology to appear 
as a common reference framework (foundational ontologies) 
for multi-application and/or multi-domain. The aim is to 
encourage 
ontology 
reuse 
to 
facilitate 
semantic 
interoperation between applications [10]. At the low-level, 
all source ontologies that are involved in the integration will 
use 
the 
terms 
specified 
in 
the 
shared-vocabulary. 
Simultaneously, each source ontology does not need to be 
concerned with the context of other source ontologies.  
Wache 
et 
al. 
[9] 
described 
concisely 
on 
the 
implementation of the hybrid ontology approach in former 
systems such as COIN, MECOTA and BUSTER. The same 
approach is used by Elmore et al. [23] to solve a problem of 
losing data when one global ontology is used. They proposed 
computer agents over shared-vocabulary to merge only 
relevant ontologies within participating data sources (USA 
national lab system). In [3], the authors extended a hybrid 
ontology approach by defining the XML schema for each 
data source. The XML schema was then used to create local 
ontologies before abstracting the equivalent concepts in 
global ontology. In order to relate between global and local 
ontology, a mapping rule was applied using path-to-path 
approach with XQuery language for global query. 
Bellatreche et al. [24] attempted to achieve a fully automated 
technique for heterogeneous sources integration of electronic 
catalogues within engineering databases. Their technique 
preserves the autonomy of various data sources in which all 
data sources reference a shared-ontology, and possibly 
extend it by adding their own concept specializations. In 
GeoNis [7], semantic mediator was used to solve semantic 
heterogeneity of geographic data sources. GeoNis provides 
an ontology mapping between local and top-level ontology, 
and software support for semantic mismatches. Another 
related work, GeoMergeP system [25] also created for 
geographic data sources to focus on the improvement of 
semantic matching techniques (semantic enrichment and 
merging).  
III. 
THE VIABILITY OF ONTOLOGY APPROACHES AND 
GUIDELINES FOR ONTOLOGY EMPLOYMENT 
This section justifies the viability of all ontology 
approaches for different types of organisational environment. 
Basic guidelines for selecting the appropriate approach in 
multi-source data integration are also presented. 
A. Viability of the Single, the Multiple and the Hybrid 
Ontology Approaches 
In the early generation of ontology-based information 
systems, data integration adopted the single ontology 
approach. All data sources should abide with the same 
agreement to grant a very similar view on the domain. This 
means all data owners are required to retain and use a single, 
common ontology definition as well as at it local schema. 
Single ontology environment depicts that the newly added 
data source is modelled using terms from general, shared 
domain model only. Furthermore, a global ontology is also 
possible to be extended if the new data source goes beyond 
what is modelled in the current global ontology. Any 
changes such as alteration and deletion in data source will 
also imply the changes in global ontology. However, all the 
tasks are bounded by the size of the required data sources. 
The integrated system based on the single ontology 
approach is applicable to certain environments which comply 
with specific principles. The single ontology mechanism is 
fine if data sources schema have no pre-existing ontologies 
and at once agreeable to use a global vocabulary. Data 
integration could be done if all data sources are able to share 
similar view on a domain of interest. The former mechanism 
 
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

(i.e., SIMS), if changes occur in any data sources, will affect 
current global ontology and their mappings with other data 
sources. In order to resolve this issue, the creation of a 
mapping rule such as in [3] between a global ontology and 
local schema could be applied. Therefore, new sources can 
easily be added without the need to use a global ontology 
modification but only the mapping rule. Integration method 
in [37] is also feasible because the authors created user 
ontology that was independent of databases and similarity 
functions to compare related entities and instances in the 
system. User ontology allows users to express queries in 
their own terms according to their own conceptualizations 
without having to know the underlying modeling and 
representation of data in heterogeneous databases. Any 
updates in both the user ontology and the databases will not 
affect the system.  Another issue of using this approach is the 
possibility to lost a valuable concepts of information could 
happen as described in [23]. If two or more data sources do 
not have a common view on some prospective information, it 
will not be appended in global ontology. This issue can still 
be resolved if some uncommon concepts are critically 
decided upon to be a sharable concepts in global ontology.  
In other perspective, this approach is hard to support due 
to the complexities involved in integrating the ontologies and 
maintaining consistency across concepts from different 
ontologies with only a single shared-vocabulary [19]. On top 
of that, data sources should have full autonomy to sustain its 
own datasets. Thus, this approach is possible to be applied in 
less distributed environments where only fewer data sources 
exist and this situation enables simple ontology mapping 
process to be done. In a less heterogeneous organisational 
model such as in intra-government agencies, this approach 
can also be considered.  Additionally, the frequency of future 
changes also should be nominal to avoid complexities while 
maintaining the integrated system. Overall, when the 
principles in single ontology approaches are difficult to be 
attained an alternative ontology approaches could be 
considered. 
In the multiple ontology approach, the tasks such as 
insertion, exclusion or alteration of data sources are easily 
supported. Each data source has its own autonomy without 
being dependent on a global schema. The correlation 
between pre-existing multiple ontologies is easier than 
creating a global ontology because a smaller community is 
involved in the mapping process [20]. SEWASIE [6] 
developer also claimed that at the local level, things may be 
done more richly than at a wider level. In contrast, to 
compare different ontology sources are more challenging 
without common vocabulary. Furthermore, inter-ontology 
mapping is also prone to the complexities in query process. 
Although the use of inter-ontology mapping in [20] and [6] 
are rational, but system developers must also be concerned 
with the integration of large different ontologies. We might 
involve more complicated tasks of creating multiple mapping 
processes if existing mapping rules cannot be applied 
directly on new local ontology.  Otherwise, this approach is 
simple and feasible. 
Inter-ontology mapping is actually quite challenging to 
define in the environment when more than two information 
sources exist in the domain of interest. Mapping tasks 
become more complex as system developers might discover 
more semantic heterogeneity problems to correlate the 
ontologies between all the multiple sources. Many other 
mapping techniques are not clearly defined [26] and still 
remain as a research attention over recent years. Some 
discussions upon mapping for multiple ontology approaches 
can be referred at [26][27]. In other point of fact, the 
integration of a particular type of information within 
geographic and non-geographic data encompasses excellent 
implementation when using this approach, for instance in the 
domain of disaster management, forestry, land planning, and 
agriculture just to name a few.  These kinds of information 
are typically distinct and independent in nature, and also in 
its description. They usually contain at least one common 
concept that could be related to strengthen the meanings of 
information. Thus, promising for data integration to facilitate 
effective information sharing under specific domain.  
Data sources autonomy is partially vanished in former 
systems, which were based on the hybrid ontology approach. 
The existing ontologies cannot easily be reused and need to 
be redeveloped from scratch [9] by referring to the shared-
vocabulary. Path to path approach and abstraction method as 
used in [3], and Ontology-based Database (OBDB) approach 
introduced in [24] could resolve the problem because the 
newly added data source is still able to maintain the 
autonomy by using its own local concepts. The hybrid 
ontology is a well-known approach that allows new data 
sources to be added easily in the ontology-based system. If 
new data source contains concepts that are not described 
with ontologies, local ontologies will be created for it by 
referring to the general terms established in shared-
vocabulary. The sharable terms which are not specified in 
shared-vocabulary will be added directly in shared-
vocabulary as general terms. Then, the mapping process of 
new terms is created to relate between local and shared-
vocabulary. If new data sources come with pre-existing 
ontologies, system developer should investigate whether 
shared-vocabulary (upper to very upper level) is present or 
not. With the existence of shared-vocabulary, the different 
source ontologies should refer to the upper ontology with 
liberty to preserve its own concepts. The source ontologies 
may extend the upper ontology as much as required. Without 
shared-vocabulary, the different source ontologies could be 
connected using bottom-up direction to produce it common 
terms. The global ontology as in the single and the hybrid 
ontology approaches are actually transfers the burden of 
information correlation and filtering on the query processing 
system [19]. With global shared-vocabulary, the integration 
of pre-existing ontologies using global-local mapping rules 
will lessen the complexities in creating the query process 
compared with inter-ontology mapping.  
B. A Proposed Guidelines for Ontology Employmet 
Ontology-based information system for organisations 
(public and corporate sector) is still an immature field. 
Readiness for change to apply a formal ontological approach 
is a key factor to successful modern application integration 
solution.  The selection  of appropriate ontology approach   is  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Integration of various system’s structure: (a) Less explicit 
systems, (b) less explicit system and ontology-based system,                     
(c) multiple ontology-based systems 
solely depended on the organisational environment. 
Although the hybrid ontology perform well in most 
situations, the single and the multiple ontologies are also 
practical. Both approaches offer fast, economical and can 
possibly to be extended to the hybrid ontology. Once the data 
owners agree to use the ontology, they must properly decide 
on the ontology approach which is suitable for their 
organisation. So, organisational nature, scopes, information 
needs and resources are important in selecting the practical 
approach for ontology-based multi-source data integration.  
Obviously, the majority of the current system holds less 
explicit information system integration (Fig. 2a). Modern 
information system is encouraged to embed more semantics 
in their systems to allow better information integration and 
this could be achieved by using ontology. Based on Section 
III-A, the single ontology approach is recommended if the 
data owners and their system conform to the following 
states: 
1. Each data source contains at least one common concept 
and some uncommon concepts are declared sharable in 
global ontology to avoid data loss. 
2. Each data owners participating in the integration process 
agree to use similar definition of global ontology.  
Small-scale enterprise and intra-agencies usually possess 
common datasets that are maintained in distributed location. 
The single ontology will be practical for them in order to 
achieve low-cost, low-risk and fast deployment of semantic-
based integrated system. The multiple ontology approach 
works very well if only two data sources are involved in the 
integration. Otherwise, hybrid ontology approach is more 
convenient as mapping process beneath global ontology 
simplify the complexities in inter-ontology mapping. In 
order to develop their first ontologies, data heterogeneities 
will be the first problem faced by the developers. Many 
research such as in [3][4][7][17][23][24] gave solutions to 
reconcile the heterogeneities. 
In another situation, a possible integration could occur 
between less explicit data source with an ontology-based 
system (Fig. 2b). The first problem is to match local schema 
with pre-existing ontology. There is a possibility to reuse 
existing ontology as a global ontology (single ontology 
approach) if each data sources is able to share similar 
concepts. Otherwise, new ontology for non-ontology-based 
data source could be developed to enable peer-to-peer or 
hybrid ontology integration.  
More challenges would be face by the system developers 
to integrate multiple ontologies (Fig. 2c). The problem here 
is the ontology heterogeneity. Even if each data source has 
its own ontology, the heterogeneity problems will still not 
resolved. Ontology merging is a common approach to 
combine existing ontology into common vocabulary that 
incorporates possible aspects of participating ontologies [27]. 
Another way to integrate multiple ontologies is thru ontology 
matching in order to define equivalent relation between 
different ontologies. The system developers should be able to 
resolve the inter-ontology integration complexities and 
maintaining consistency across different concepts. Euzenat 
and Shvaiko [28] described in detail how the matching 
technique should work for multiple ontologies. Even though 
having few complexities along with high cost and long-time 
implementation, the hybrid ontology approach could work 
well with pre-existing ontologies. 
With regards to the selection of ontology approaches 
single ontology approaches will never suit with sustained 
and entrenched organisational models due to its costly 
transformation and maintenance process. Multiple ontology 
approaches is feasible if the developer is able to maintain all 
ontologies. They might create inter-ontology mapping 
(traversing 
semantic 
relationship) 
via 
terminological 
relationship. Less complexity in inter-ontology mapping can 
be achieved if ontologies which are to be integrated are 
nominal. Thus, this approach is not recommended for huge 
number of different specific ontologies as it becomes a great 
effort to traverse and understand all the semantic 
relationship. As such, the hybrid ontology approach that is 
supported with broad mapping techniques can almost fit all 
environments.  
A notion that could add little add-ons to the organization 
ontology modelling theory is presented: Even though 
ontology is to describe the explicit meaning of knowledge, 
there is no explicit or better approaches for ontology 
employment since it really depends on the organisational 
structure and its management style, in accord with their 
scopes, the type of external information needs, and also the 
available resources such as personnel, financial, physical and 
their internal information itself.  
IV. 
THE FORMATION OF OPEN ONTOLOGY MODEL 
OOM (Fig. 3) is a general reference model for 
organisations data integration at semantic level. This model 
is meant for various domains of application (i.e., E-
Government, Crisis Management etc.), to interconnect multi-
sources data particularly on database components. Ontology 
building is expected to work in dual directions; top-down 
and bottom-up implementation. The model is aimed to be a 
flexible 
model 
for 
ontology 
employment 
by 
the 
organisations. The ontology-based model should in principle 
adopt  a  general  to   specific  approach. Thus,  the  model  is 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  The Open Ontology Model 
adequately expansive for explicit semantic data integration to 
avoid potential problems of under-specification. Afterward, 
the organisations can legitimately simplify the model 
according to their management needs. Obviously, the OOM 
is designed as the combination of available ontology 
approaches that feasible in most organizations environment.   
In this model, each classes and property is assigned with 
primary identifier as in PLIB ontology [29] to map between 
concepts. The model approach works with or without 
existing source ontologies. It is assumed that generic or 
domain shared-vocabulary exists to be referred by low-level 
ontology (top-down to bottom-up). But it doesn’t mean that 
explicit mapping correlation must be made to refer to the 
upper ontology. This happens when the participating 
organizations decide to use the single ontology approach. 
The single ontology is constructed with consideration on the 
existence of the upper ontology, so that the single ontology 
will be constantly ready for upgrading into hybrid ontology 
for connecting multiple data sources. That is also similar 
with the organisations who decide to use the multiple 
ontology approach. Two participating data sources shall 
contain its own ontology that is created in advance with 
respect that there exist a generic or domain shared-
vocabulary. In future, mapping rules to connect between two 
ontologies may be used to adapt with hybrid ontology 
environment.  
Hybrid ontology approach is anytime viable to associate 
less or more data sources. If the participating data sources in 
the integration process have no pre-existing ontologies, each 
local ontology will be created with reference to shared-
vocabulary. The local ontology possibly will extend its body 
to have more specific entities and properties. In the pre-
existence of ontology, this source still has the autonomy to 
maintain its name concepts. The primary identifier is used to 
indicate the similarity or different concepts between 
participating data sources and it upper-vocabularies. Fig. 4 
depicts the top-down to bottom-up mapping implementation 
with the use of primary identifier. 
Local ontology is defined based on the schema of the 
local database. Data owners will decide their own definition 
of local ontology concepts. Concepts that are rational to be 
disclosed will be pulled out to domain-shared list. Concealed 
concepts (shaded  in Fig. 4)  will  not  be  shared  but  can  be 
 
 
Figure 4.  Top-down to bottom-up mapping 
accessed locally or may be shared (right away or later) in 
different domain. Generic and domain shared-vocabulary are 
the list of shared concepts for all participating data sources. 
In our approach, the design of shared-vocabulary begins with 
inspirational approach [30]. For instance, ‘National Security 
Division’ as the principal initiates the specification of 
generic and domain shared-vocabulary that is substantially 
potential to be shared with the group of the data owners. 
Concerned with the importance of information sharing, the 
data owners may collaboratively [30] use the existing shared-
vocabulary as the anchor and supportively extend it if 
necessary. However, the data source owners will not be 
attentive to each other’s data. This is important for most of 
the intelligence systems that are confidentiality-related. 
Some ontology standards (ISOs, ANSI etc.) and/or other 
common top-level ontologies (WordNet, OpenCyc etc.) may 
be reused during the ontology design time.  
V. 
MOTIVATION OF THE RESEARCH WORK 
The prototype of research work based on the OOM is 
currently under implementation. The attention is given to 
perform an ontology-based integrated system beneath the 
crisis management domain within the Malaysian public 
agencies, particularly amongst local authorities, police, fire 
brigades and medical agencies. An example of study is 
drawn from digitized, multi-format documents that are 
collected before and after disasters.  The data sets are 
typically stored in heterogeneous GIS-based (raster images 
or vector) proprietary or open formats such as Shapefile, 
MapInfo TAB, GML, KML JPEG2000, DEM, GeoTIFF, 
etc. Besides, some photographic images, text-documents, 
video and audio clips which are collected aftermath of a 
disasters allows the decision makers to see the big picture of 
the disaster events.  Even though they are maintained and 
distributed by different information systems, formats, 
organizations and locations, but their contents might carry 
Local 
Authority
Dept 1
Local 
Authority
Dept 2
Authority X
Military
Police
Fire  
Brigade
Medical 1
Medical 2
…. Source n
Generic Shared-
Vocabulary
Tele-Medicine
Shared-Vocabulary
Disaster 
Management 
Shared-Vocabulary
Electronic 
Government 
Shared-Vocabulary
Global 
Ontology
Local 
Ontology
Local 
Ontology
Local 
Ontology
Local 
Ontology
Local 
Ontology
Local 
Ontology
Domain Ontologies
Local 
Authority
Dept 1
Local 
Authority
Dept 2
Authority X
Military
Police
Fire  
Brigade
Medical 1
Medical 2
…. Source n
Generic Shared-
Vocabulary
Tele-Medicine
Shared-Vocabulary
Disaster 
Management 
Shared-Vocabulary
Electronic 
Government 
Shared-Vocabulary
Global 
Ontology
Local 
Ontology
Local 
Ontology
Local 
Ontology
Local 
Ontology
Local 
Ontology
Local 
Ontology
Domain Ontologies
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

one and the same calamity story, situation, related and 
supporting each other. Access to all of this valuable data 
needs high performance of information retrieval and 
integration mechanism that is effective at gathering, 
analyzing and outputting the required information. 
 Malaysia has good mechanism in managing disasters 
and the committee was established at three different levels 
(Federal, State and District under National Security Division 
Secretariat) to coordinate all the activities related to disaster. 
Various agencies perform their own daily work routine and 
maintain their own information either manually or in 
digitized form (flat files, databases and etc.). During disaster 
events, huge amount of information are acquired to be 
disseminated amongst them. However, the required datasets 
are not only difficult to obtain from system network but lack 
of automated data coordination at operational level such as 
during counter-disaster, rescue and relief activities. In 
addition, if information system is utilised, each agency may 
use different terminology to refer to similar data, and 
different document format to store spatially and semantically 
related information. Ontology usage in information system is 
still at infant stage amongst the Malaysian public agencies. 
Furthermore, ontology in this domain is not yet exists in the 
context of Malaysian disaster management. This research 
opens up significant opportunities to achieve more flexible 
and adaptable way to start employing ontology within many 
organisations. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
Various ontology-driven information system approaches 
for multi-sources data integration is presented to provide 
direction for ontology employment among different 
organizations. Based on this study, the organizations should 
not adhere to employ directly specific model approach but 
are given as much autonomy as possible with respect to their 
nature along with their resource allocation and acquisition. 
Both the single and the multiple ontologies have high level 
of implementation feasibility because the approaches provide 
a quick way to develop quick, low risk and low-cost system 
application. Furthermore, the approaches may be extended to 
hybrid ontology when greater integration of heterogeneous 
data sources is required. A hybrid ontology approach can 
almost fit all environments but the challenge of having more 
ontology heterogeneity could delay the development. 
Besides a flexible OOM that is feasible in most organizations 
environment is also proposed. The ontology is designed to 
follow inspirational and collaborative approach with the top-
down to bottom-up implementation. The OOM could be 
replicated in developing the semantic-based application for 
various domains of interest.  
The presented model approach to design an ontology 
provides the basis for developing and implementing the 
ontology-based system. The system is aimed to improve 
multi-source, multi-format document query and integration 
particularly for disaster management domain. Further 
research is focusing to make better the ontology building, 
along with testing and evaluating the concepts in domain and 
application ontology. The ontology matchmaking is 
primarily come into focus to help achieve the goal of 
automatic data search and integration to response a specific 
query. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to express our sincere thanks to IRPS-UniKL 
and Majlis Amanah Rakyat (MARA) for the research 
funding and administrative support, Laboratoire L3i 
Université de La Rochelle for research and administrative 
support, and we are also thankful to Mr. Muhammad Alam 
and Ms. Kim de Silva for advising us on this paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Ziegler and K. R. Dittrich, "Three Decades of Data 
Integration - All Problems Solved?," in 18th IFIP World 
Computer Congress (WCC 2004), Building the Information 
Society, vol. 12, Aug 2004, pp. 3-12. 
[2] T. R. Gruber, "Ontology of Folksonomy: a Mash-up of 
Apples and Oranges," International Journal on Semantic Web 
and Information Systems, vol. 3(1), 2007, pp. 1-11.  
[3] L. Zhang, Y. Ma, and G. Wang, "An Extended Hybrid 
Ontology Approach to Data Integration," in Proceedings  of 
2nd International Conference on Biomedical Engineering and 
Informatics (BMEI '09), Tianjin, China, 2009, pp. 1-4. 
[4] D. Dou, D. McDermott, and P. Qi, "Ontology Translation on 
the Semantic Web," On the Move to Meaningful Internet 
Systems 2003: CoopIS, DOA, and ODBASE, 2003. pp. 952-
969. 
[5] C. B. Jones, A. I. Abdelmoty, D. Finch, G. Fu and S. Vaid, 
"The Spirit Spatial Search Engine: architecture, ontologies 
and spatial indexing," Geographic Information Science, 2004, 
pp. 125-139. 
[6] S. Bergamaschi, F. Guerra, and M. Vincini, "A peer-to-peer 
information system for the Semantic Web," Agents and Peer-
to-Peer Computing, 2005, pp. 161-182. 
[7] L. Stoimenov, A. Stanimirovi, and S. Djordjevic-Kajan, 
"Semantic 
Interoperability 
using 
multiple 
ontologies," 
Proceedings printed as book, Eds. Fred Toppen, Marco 
Painho, AGILE, 2005, pp. 26-35. 
[8] U. 
Visser, 
H. 
Stuckenschmidt, 
and 
C. 
Schlieder, 
"Interoperability 
in 
GIS-enabling 
technologies," 
in 
Proceedings of the 5th AGILE Conference on Geographic 
Information Science, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 2002, pp. 25-
27. 
[9] H. Wache, et al., "Ontology-based integration of information - 
a survey of existing approaches," in Proceedings of IJCAI-01 
Workshop: Ontologies and Information Sharing, Seattle, WA, 
2001, pp. 108-117. 
[10] N. F. Noy, "Semantic integration: a survey of ontology-based 
approaches," ACM Sigmod Record, vol. 33, 2004, pp. 65-70. 
[11] D. Lenat and R. V. Guha, Building Large Knowledge-based 
Systems: Representation and Inference in The Cyc Project: 
Addison-Wesley, 1990. 
[12] C. Collet, M. N. Huhns, and W. M. Shen, "Resource 
integration using a large knowledge base in Carnot," IEEE 
Computer, 1991, pp. 55-62. 
[13] T. R. Gruber, "Ontolingua: a mechanism to support portable 
ontologies," Knowledge Systems Laboratory, Stanford 
University, California, Tech. Rep. Version 3, 1992. 
[14] R. Stevens, et al., "TAMBIS: Transparent Access to Multiple 
Bioinformatics Information Sources," Bioinformatics, Oxford 
Univ. Press, England, vol. 16(2), 2000, pp. 184-185. 
[15] Y. Arens, C. A. Knoblock, and W. M. Shen, "Query 
reformulation for dynamic information integration," Journal 
of Intelligent Information Systems, vol. 6, 1996, pp. 99-130. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

[16] G. Fu, C. B. Jones, and A. I. Abdelmoty, "Building a 
geographical ontology for intelligent spatial search on the 
web," in Proceedings of International Conference on 
Databases and Applications, 2005, pp. 167-172. 
[17] F. Probst and M. Lutz, "Giving meaning to GI web service 
descriptions," in 2nd International Workshop on Web 
Services: 
Modeling, 
Architecture 
and 
Infrastructure 
(WSMAI), Porto, Portugal, INSTICC Press, 2004. 
[18] Y. Kalfoglou and M. Schorlemmer, "Ontology mapping: the 
state of the art," The Knowledge Engineering Review, vol. 18, 
2003, pp. 1-31. 
[19] E. Mena, V. Kashyap, A. Sheth and A. Illarramendi,  
"OBSERVER: an approach for query processing in global 
information systems based on interoperation across pre-
existing ontologies," Distributed and Parallel Databases, vol. 
8(2), 2000, pp. 223-271. 
[20] A. Maedche, B. Motik, N. Silva and R. Volz, "MAFRA - A 
MApping 
FRAmework 
for 
distributed 
ontologies," 
Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management: 
Ontologies and the Semantic Web, 2002, pp. 69-75. 
[21] F. T. Fonseca and M. J. Egenhofer, "Ontology-driven 
Geographic Information Systems," in 7th ACM Symposium 
on Advances in Geographic Information Systems, Kansas 
City, MO, November 1999, pp. 14-19. 
[22] H. Stenzhorn, E. Beisswanger, and S. Schulz, "Towards a top-
domain ontology for linking biomedical ontologies," Studies 
in Health Technology and Informatics, vol. 129(2), 2007, p. 
1225-1229. 
[23] M. Elmore, T. Potok, and F. Sheldon, "Dynamic Data Fusion 
using 
an 
Ontology-based 
Software 
Agent 
System," 
Proceedings of the IIIS Agent Based Computing, Orlando, 
vol. 7, 2003. 
[24] L. Bellatreche, N. X. Dung, G. Pierra and D. Hondjack, 
"Contribution 
of 
Ontology-based 
Data 
Modeling 
to 
Automatic Integration of Electronic Catalogues within 
Engineering Databases," Computers in Industry, vol. 57, 
2006, pp. 711-724. 
[25] A. Buccella, et al., "GeoMergeP: Geographic information 
integration through enriched ontology matching," New 
Generation Computing, vol. 28, 2010, pp. 41-71. 
[26] S. M. Falconer, N. F. Noy, and M. A. Storey, "Ontology 
mapping - A user survey," in Proceedings of The Second 
International Workshop on Ontology Matching, 2007. 
[27] J. de Bruijn, et al., "Ontology mediation, merging and 
aligning," in Semantic Web Technologies: Trends Research 
and Ontology-based Systems, J. Davies, R. Studer and P. 
Warren, Eds. Chichester, UK: John Wiley and Son's, 2006, 
pp. 95-113. 
[28] J. Euzenat and P. Shvaiko, "Ontology matching," Springer-
Verlag, New York Inc., 2007. 
[29] G. Pierra, "The PLIB ontology-based approach to data 
integration," in Proceedings of the 18th IFIP World Computer 
Congress (WCC'2004), Toulouse France, 2004, pp. 13-18. 
[30] C. W. Holsapple and K. D. Joshi, "A collaborative approach 
to ontology design," Communications of the ACM, vol. 45, 
2002, pp. 42-47. 
[31] U. Visser, Intelligent Information Integration for the Semantic 
Web. Springer-Verlag, New York Inc, 2004. 
[32] G. De Melo, F. Suchanek, and A. Pease, "Integrating YAGO 
into the Suggested Upper Merged Ontology," in Proceedings 
of 20th IEEE International Conference on Tools with 
Artificial Intelligence, IEEE Press, 2008, pp. 190-193. 
[33] F. M. Suchanek, G. Kasneci, and G.Weikum. "Yago: A core 
of Semantic Knowledge". in Proceedings of World Wide 
Web, New York, USA, ACM Press, 2007, pp. 697-706. 
[34] F. M. Suchanek, G. Kasneci, and G. Weikum, "Yago: A large 
ontology from Wikipedia and Wordnet," Journal of Web 
Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide 
Web, vol 6(3), 2008, pp. 203-217. 
[35] F. F. de Araújo, F. L. R. Lopes, and B. F. Lóscio, "MeMO: A 
Clustering-based approach for merging multiple ontologies," 
Workshops on Database and Expert Systems Applications, 
Bilbao, Spain, IEEE Press, 2010, pp. 176-180. 
[36] Online  Cultural  Research  Heritage Envirenment. (2011, 
May 
8). 
Core 
Ontology. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://ochre.lib.uchicago.edu/index_files/Page845.htm 
[37] M. Gutiérrez and A. Rodríguez, "Querying heterogeneous 
spatial databases: Combining an ontology with similarity 
functions," in Proceedings of the ER Workshop on 
Conceptual Modeling of GIS, 2004, pp. 160–171. 
[38] A. Pease, I. Niles, and J. Li, "The Suggested Upper Merged 
Ontology: A Large Ontology for the Semantic Web and its 
Applications," in Working Notes of the AAAI-2002 
Workshop on Ontologies and the Semantic Web, Edmonton, 
Canada, 2002. 
[39] C. Matuszek, J. Cabral, M. Witbrock, and J. DeOliveira, "An 
introduction to the syntax and content of Cyc," in Proceedings 
of  the 2006 AAAI Spring Symposium on Formalizing and 
Compiling Background Knowledge and its Applications to 
Knowledge Representation and Question Answering, 2006, 
pp. 44-49. 
[40] A. Gangemi, N. Guarino, C. Masolo, A. Oltramari, and L. 
Schneider, "Sweetening ontologies with DOLCE, Knowledge 
Engineering and Knowledge Management: Ontologies and the 
Semantic Web, 2002, pp. 223-233. 
[41] J. 
F. 
Sowa, 
Knowledge 
Representation 
- 
Logical, 
Philosophical, and Computational Foundations, Pasific Grove, 
California, USA, Brooks Cole Pulishing Co., 2000. 
[42] Princeton University. (2011, June 21), WordNet A Lexical 
Database 
for 
English. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://wordnet.princeton.edu/wordnet/ 
[43] M. K. Bergman, and F. Giasson. (2008, July), Umbel 
Ontology-Subject Concepts and Named Entities Instantiation, 
Technical 
Report, 
vol. 
2. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://fgiasson.com/articles/UMBELOntology_vA2.pdf   
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

