Qualifying Audiovisual Searching Results with Ontologies and Semantic Algorithms 
Luiz Rolim, Ismael Ávila, Alexandre Osorio 
Service Technologies Department  
CPqD R&D Foundation 
Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil 
[lrolim, avila_an, aosorio]@cpqd.com.br 
 
Abstract— Multimedia capabilities in end-user terminals, 
improvements on audiovisual (AV) encoding technologies and 
the ease of handling AV contents in the Internet have all 
contributed to the growing use of this media on the Web. 
Nowadays, searching for videos has become as common as 
searching for documents, news, web pages or other types of 
media, being the amount of non-relevant results returned as 
response to user’s queries a common problem posed by the 
majority of searching engines. Among the myriad of 
approaches under consideration for qualifying the results of 
the queries, the usage of semantic technologies is one of the 
most attracting techniques. In this work, we present how an 
OWL ontology of subjects, or themes, can improve the 
efficiency of searching engines through the adoption of 
semantic algorithms operating over selected contents metadata 
descriptors based on DCMI and MPEG-7 standards. The main 
goal is to develop an algorithm that explores the semantic 
relationships of the supporting ontology and allow searching 
engines to return results that more appropriately match the 
actual interest of the end-users. 
Keywords-ontology; 
metadata; 
audiovisual; 
content 
searching; semantic algorithm. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The advent of the Internet, of the high speed networks 
and multimedia capabilities on personal devices has lead to a 
widespread production of audiovisual (AV) contents by 
companies, institutions and end-users. In addition to text and 
static images, videos are employed pervasively as a way of 
documenting facts and situations of the everyday life, as well 
as a tool to transmit messages, express points of view or for 
artistic purposes. Today’s Web provides various options for 
video search or video sharing, such as YouTube, Mubi and 
Vimeo. A common aspect encountered in these services is 
that the searching options can take advantage of the metadata 
description which generally accompanies the AV contents. 
Since the metadata contain specific information regarding 
the production, context, protagonists, themes and other 
aspects of content, specialized searching engines can provide 
advanced searching and presentation options when compared 
to traditional searching engines based on generic text 
comparisons. However, even on the AV specialized 
searching tools mentioned above, the adopted cataloguing 
and searching models are generally based on plain text 
descriptions and semantic-less keywords or categories, 
returning results that are non-qualified from a semantic 
perspective. As a consequence, in large repositories, many of 
the returned items may not meet the actual interests of the 
user. 
Concurrently with the on-going efforts on improving the 
efficiency of existing searching engines, semantic-based 
technologies could play an important role in video browsing 
and cataloguing as described in [1] and [2], studies based on 
structured sets of metadata descriptors, such as MPEG-7 [3] 
and Dublin Core Metadata Initiative - DCMI [4], and on a 
supporting ontology. The work presented here-in adopts a 
similar approach that aims at developing algorithms capable 
of exploring the semantics of video content metadata. In this 
paper, we present a proposal for a video searching semantic 
algorithm and the structure of the supporting ontology.         
Due to its inherent simplicity and its widespread use as a 
resource description scheme, we selected DCMI as the 
metadata standard for the overall description of the contents. 
For the description of specific AV elements, such as video-
segments, the choice was for MPEG-7, which provides a 
comprehensive descriptor set to represent specific AV 
content structures. Together, the two descriptor sets form an 
application profile similar to the one described in [5]. 
Semantic capabilities are provided through a supporting 
ontology containing structured subject terms which are made 
available to cataloguing and searching tools.  
This research is an activity of the Experimental TV 
project, a part of the GIGA R&D (Research & Development) 
program, consisting of a high speed optical network and 
associated services, currently being developed by the CPqD 
Foundation (www.cpqd.com.br), a Brazilian R&D Center. 
The research comprises the elaboration of the supporting 
OWL (Web Ontology Language) [6] ontology, the semantic 
cataloguing and searching tools, and a field experiment with 
community TVs and independent video producers [7]. The 
goal is to evaluate how semantic enabled searching engines 
can provide more qualified results to end users and make the 
searching process more effective. At the same time, it will be 
observed the influence of semantic enabled cataloguing and 
searching tools in promoting the sharing of video contents 
and the participation of end-users in an established video 
description collaboration process.  
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section II discusses related works on the area of semantic 
video searching. In Section III, the cataloguing process for 
AV contents is presented together with the structure of the 
supporting ontology. Section IV describes the semantic 
algorithm proposed, exemplified with a use case in Section 
V. The paper ends with conclusions and a discussion on 
further work. 
1
Copyright (c) The Government of Brazil, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

II. 
RELATED WORK 
To correctly situate the solution proposed herein in the 
area of semantically enabled search [14] (SES) it is first 
necessary to review some current approaches in SES. An 
SES solution can be aimed to solve different types of search, 
depending on how narrow is the initial target defined by the 
user, or even depending on whether there is a clear target at 
all. In the so-called “navigational searches”, the users know 
precisely what content they are looking for, and the process 
of finding it is navigating (browsing) to that particular 
document. In the “exploratory searches”, on the other hand, 
the users have no precise idea of what will be the outcome of 
the search, probably because they are not familiar with the 
topic being searched, and their interests can change as they 
are presented to new search results. In between these two 
extremes one can distinguish “research searches” [13], where 
the users have some topics in mind, but no particular 
document. 
According to [16], one can consider exploratory searches 
as a specialization of information exploration, and interface 
features such as dynamic queries can help users to see the 
immediate result of their decisions. To evaluate such systems 
it is necessary, for instance, to compare the time spent in 
finding and selecting the information. The solution for 
exploratory video searching described in [14] combines 
results from a specific video index with complementary data 
from DBpedia, which is an initiative to semantically 
structure information from Wikipedia and dispose the results 
on the Web. In order to determine, for the query string, a list 
of related entities, a set of heuristics are applied to the 
entities in DBpedia. The objective is to determine the 
relevance of one property based on the frequency it occurs 
on instances of a category or type in DBpedia. The resources 
suggested to the user are the ones connected to the highest 
frequent properties and that are available in the video index. 
Another approach to the problem is to conceive search 
engines totally based on the Semantic Web, such as the one 
described in [15].  
In this work, our expectation is to contribute to the 
audiovisual searching area with the conception of semantic 
algorithms supported by an OWL ontology containing the 
knowledge to be applied to the searching process. Overall, 
we expect to explore functionalities that provide benefits in 
all the search categories described above.  
III. 
METADATA AND ONTOLOGY  
The infrastructure for the semantic AV content searching 
engine consists of a database containing the metadata 
descriptors and the supporting ontology. The AV contents 
files may be stored in one or more repositories and the access 
to the content is ruled by property rights defined by the 
owner(s). Searching results comprise an URL providing 
either direct access to the content or specific instructions for 
accessing it. 
 As indicated previously, the semantic capabilities will be 
implemented around the topics related to the AV content, 
treated here as a whole, complete entity. The corresponding 
field in the DCMI set is the subject descriptor, a multi-valued 
element that stores the relevant topics associated to the 
content. The role of the ontology will be to function as a 
controlled vocabulary for the terms that potentially can be 
assigned to the DCMI subject descriptor and capture the 
semantics relationships of all defined terms. The general 
architecture is depicted in the figure below: 
 
 
Figure 1.  Semantic Searching Architecture 
As shown in the figure, applicable values to the subject 
field are defined by the supporting ontology, which also 
provides the relationships to be explored by the semantic 
algorithms.  
AV content descriptions are inserted into the repository 
via a cataloguing tool, not depicted in the figure. In general, 
the description process is initiated by the producer or author 
of the content. The process consists of textual annotations 
and requires that all project defined mandatory DCMI fields 
be filled out in order to allow the retrieval of the content and 
support the semantic based queries. Semantically enabled 
fields, such as subject, are manually annotated with the aid of 
specialized end-user interfaces driven by the ontology terms 
and relationships. 
As users access the content descriptions, the catalogued 
information is improved by means of an established 
collaboration 
process. 
The 
ontology 
also 
evolves 
collaboratively by means of a cataloguing tool that allows 
users to suggest new terms and relationships for inclusion in 
the controlled vocabulary. This contribution will then be 
analyzed, refined and eventually incorporated into an 
updated ontology. As a result, the same users that participate 
in the collaborative content description process may also 
participate in the improvement of the supporting ontology. 
For the development of semantic searching algorithms, it 
is necessary the combination of metadata descriptions with 
the supporting ontology [8][9]. Therefore it is important to 
point out what is required from the structure of the proposed 
ontology. For this purpose, we will use as example a 
Brazilian party named Fandango [18], a folkloric event in 
some coastal states, characterized by music and dances that 
honor sailors and fishermen.  
If one catalogs an AV content about Fandango, a natural 
choice would be to set the subject field as Fandango in the 
repository. Thus, a semantic enabled searching engine could 
easily return this item as a response to a query with one of 
the keywords Folklore or Dance, as long as the appropriate 
relationships are present in the ontology. Besides that, if the 
keywords Folklore, Dance and Sailor were part of the query, 
the engine could highlight items catalogued as Fandango as 
the ones with the highest probability of matching the actual 
Dublin Core 
Description 
Repository 
. . . 
Subject  
       = Dance 
Type 
       = Video 
. . . 
Described 
 by 
Defined by 
Link to AV 
Content 
 
D 
C 
is-a 
B 
is-a 
Ontology 
AV  
Content 
Repository 
is-a 
2
Copyright (c) The Government of Brazil, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

interests of the user. Note that non-semantic engines would 
need to rely on the presence of these keywords in one or 
more description fields and perform partial match 
comparisons to get to similar conclusions, thus making the 
overall process less efficient and error prone.  
The question that arises from this example is how the 
engine will get to such conclusion if the desired item is 
marked solely as Fandango. This is the point where the 
ontology makes its contribution by providing relationships 
that make semantic inferences possible. In summary, the 
ontology needs to be structured in a way that facilitates the 
categorization of subjects likely to be associated to AV 
contents [10] and define object properties that establish the 
semantic relationships between them. Another aspect to be 
taken into account is to base the ontology on an already 
established work in order to ease its acceptance by the users. 
These are key points for elaborating a stable structure of an 
ontology which can grow in terms of elements and 
relationships without requiring continuous updates to the 
deployed software engines. In this project, we selected the 
controlled vocabulary of the Brazilian Cinemateca [11], a 
repository of topics for cataloguing contents from 
independent producers, as the basis for our ontology. This 
vocabulary is composed of an extensive list of subjects 
which can have one of the following relationships with other 
subjects of the vocabulary: 
 
Subject_A isA  type of Subject_B 
Subject_A isRelatedTo Subject_C 
 
Mapping these relationships to an OWL ontology is 
straightforward. While isA can be directly mapped to the 
class<–subclass or class<–individuals OWL relationships, 
isRelatedTo is mapped to an object property whose domain 
and range are individuals of the generic class Subject or any 
of its subclasses. Note that for this specific application, 
isRelatedTo is not meant to capture the specific aspects that 
make two given subjects to be related to each other since this 
would require the definition of an extensive set of properties 
far beyond what is necessary to accomplish the goals of this 
work. In our case, the qualified results are obtained by 
exploring the generic isRelatedTo property that may exist 
between subjects defined in the ontology. By applying these 
relationships to the Fandango example mentioned above, we 
can draw the relationship diagram depicted in Figure 2. As 
shown in the figure, subject derived classes are represented 
as non-filled rectangles and correspond to groups or 
categories of topics. Ontology individuals correspond to 
specialized topics and are represented as solid-filled ellipses. 
The relationships isA and isRelatedTo are represented by 
the solid and dashed arrows respectively.  According to the 
figure, a semantic searching engine could use the following 
relationships when processing the queries: 
 
Fandango isA Party, a Brazilian_Party and a Folklore 
Fandango isRelatedTo Sailors and Fishermen 
 
Once the structure of the ontology is defined, we can turn 
our attention to the proposed semantic algorithms and an 
illustrative use-case. 
 
Figure 2.  Ontology Structure 
IV. 
SEMANTIC ALGORITHM 
In this section we describe the semantic searching 
algorithm applied in the experiments. The input is the list of 
query parameters specified by the user for the subject 
descriptor. 
Firstly, the algorithm will expand the list of parameters 
with terms from the ontology having an isA relationship with 
each of the terms entered by the user. This operation expands 
the list with all sub-classes and individuals members of each 
parameter entered by the user, thus making the searching 
process semantically comprehensive. By doing this, any AV 
content eventually catalogued with one of the specialized 
terms will also be considered a potential result of the query. 
The steps of this portion of the algorithm are presented as 
follows: 
 
(1) CTL = Original List of Controlled Terms – user´s input. 
Nc = number of terms in CTL. 
(2) Let i be an integer varying from 1 to Nc. 
 
For each term Ti in CTL, create the set Si defined as: 
 
       Si = {T, (all Ti  sub-classes),  
                 
     (all Ti  type individuals)}. 
(3) Search the AV contents description repository and select 
as a result to the query items whose subject descriptor 
contains values present in all Si sets. 
 
Note that steps (1) through (3) perform a semantically 
extended logic AND over the input parameters and furnish a 
comprehensive list of categories to organize the presentation 
of the results to the user. For simplicity, we omitted the 
handling of terms not present in the ontology, which would 
be treated like any other non-semantic field. 
These steps of the algorithm allow a searching engine to 
return an item marked only as Fandango or Congada [17] as 
a possible result for a generic query on the keyword 
Brazilian-Party. Conversely, if the query parameter is the 
keyword Fandango, the searching tool could be enhanced to 
inform the user that he/she might be also interested in AV 
contents eventually marked as Brazilian-Party. All these 
...
Folklor
Party 
isRelatedT
Professi
...
Religion 
isRelatedT
o 
Subject 
Thing 
Sailor 
Brazilian 
Party 
Fandango 
Congada 
Judaism 
Umband
Catholici
isA 
isA 
Fisherme
3
Copyright (c) The Government of Brazil, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

inferences derive from the isA semantic relationships defined 
in the ontology, which were captured in each of the Si sets 
created at the step 2. Additionally, for presentation purposes 
the returned items can be grouped by the elements of each Si 
seti, offering to the user a friendlier and more organized 
interface to navigate into the results of the query. 
The benefits of the algorithm are even stronger if we 
consider that the ontology and the description itself can be 
evolved as part of a collaborative program. As described in 
[12], new terms and semantic relationships can be added to 
the ontology over time and become available to the searching 
engine by loading the updated ontology into the reasoner. As 
an example, we can take the term Fandango, which 
according to the ontology, is a type of Brazilian Party. 
However, Fandango can also be regarded as a Brazilian 
Dance. As a result of the collaboration process, an updated 
version of the ontology can specify that Fandango is also an 
individual of Brazilian-Dance, a sub-class of Dance. As the 
new ontology is reloaded into the reasoner, Fandango 
annotated items will also be returned for a query on the 
keyword Brazilian-Dance. Note that the results of the query 
are improved without requiring any updates to the metadata 
description repository. 
The next part of the algorithm aims at obtaining results as 
close as possible to the actual interests of the user by 
employing the isRelatedTo relationship, as described in the 
following steps: 
 
(4) Let i be an integer varying from 1 to Nc.  
For each term Ti, create the set Ri defined as: 
              Ri = {Si, (all individuals which are related to Ti)}. 
(5) Let PITL be the list of terms present in all Ri sets  
PITL is defined as: {R1 ∩ R2 ∩ R3 ∩ … ∩ Rn}. 
(6) Include as a qualified result to the query any AV contents 
whose subject descriptor contains at least one of the terms 
present in PITL.  
 
The short list of qualified results, PITL, is represented by 
the intersection of all the Ri sets, as shown in step (5). If not 
null, PITL contains one or more items common to all 
elements of the semantically extended lists of terms, the Ri 
sets, built by exploring the isA and isRelatedTo 
relationships over the input parameters. The algorithm infers 
that PITL contains the terms with the highest probabilities of 
representing the actual intent of the user when submitted the 
query.  
V. 
USE CASE 
The benefits of the semantic algorithm can be better 
visualized through a practical example in which a description 
repository contains a couple of instances referencing the term 
Fandango in their subjects descriptor fields. Then, let’s 
consider that the user submits a query with the following 
terms: Party and Folklore. The execution of steps 1 and 2 
will lead to the following:  
 
(1) CTL = {Party, Folklore} 
Nc =2 
(2) According to CTL in step 1: 
     T1 = Party 
     T2 = Folklore 
Now the Si sets are calculated: 
     S1 = {Party, Brazilian Party, Congada, Fandango} 
     S2 = {Folklore, Congada, Fandango} 
At this point, step (3) will return all AV contents whose 
subject descriptor are marked as Fandango since this term is 
present in both S1 and S2 sets. Note that items marked as 
Congada would also be selected as a result to the query, 
similarly to items marked as {Brazilian Party, Folklore}.  
For illustrating the second part of the algorithm, a slightly 
different example will be used. The query parameters are 
now Party, Folklore and Sailor and the goal of semantic 
query is to obtain AV contents whose associated topics are 
some how related to all these three terms. The execution of 
steps (1) thru (2) would lead to the following Si sets: 
 
S1 = {Party, Brazilian Party, Congada, Fandango} 
S2 = {Folklore, Congada, Fandango} 
S3 = {Sailor} 
 
Following with the execution of the algorithm, steps (4) 
thru (6) would lead to: 
 
(4) 
R1 = {Party, Brazilian Party, Congada, Fandango} 
R2 = {Folklore, Congada, Fandango} 
R3 = {Sailor, Fandango} 
(5) 
The intersection of all all Ri sets will lead to: 
PITL = {Fandango} 
(6) 
Now, the engine will search the repository and select AV 
items marked as Fandango as results to the query. 
 
The intersection operation over the Ri sets in step (5) 
leads to a short list of topics with good probability of 
representing the real interest of the user. Of course, this 
depends on the accuracy of the relationships defined in the 
ontology. In this example, Fandango is a subject related to 
Sailor and also a type of Party and Folklore. Consequently, 
the algorithm infers that AV contents with subject 
descriptors marked as Fandango are the ones with the best 
chances of meeting the expectation of the user.  
It is important to note this conclusion is obtained entirely 
through inferences made over the supporting ontology. 
Another benefit of this approach is that as new relationships 
are added to the ontology, the inference power of the engine 
increases without requiring updates to the searching engine 
software. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FOLLOW-ON WORK 
The expectation of this work is that the conceived 
algorithms and ontology structures can effectively contribute 
for improving the efficiency of searching engines and 
become a valid mechanism for identifying results more 
likely to represent the actual interests of the user. At the 
same time, it is also expected that the algorithms become 
building blocks for the execution of more complex logical 
operations involving the entire set of AV contents descriptors 
fields. At the same time, the availability of semantic enabled 
searching and cataloguing tools can act as a way to promote 
the sharing of AV contents in a distributive and collaborative 
4
Copyright (c) The Government of Brazil, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

environment in which both the description and the ontology 
are continuously improved by the users. 
However, validating all these ideas in a real environment 
is a must. So, the next activities of the project comprise a 
field test with Brazilian community TV stations and 
independent AV producers, connected to the cataloguing and 
searching tools through the GIGA high speed network and 
the Internet. The diversity of end-users and richness of 
subjects that can be assigned to AV contents form the ideal 
combination for establishment of a de facto collaboration 
process where the AV content description and the ontology 
are gradually refined by the participants. 
During the evaluations, we will attempt to test how 
engines enhanced with semantic capabilities can provide 
higher levels of effectiveness, accuracy and ease of use when 
compared to traditional, non-semantic, searching tools. One 
way to evaluate the proposed algorithm is to define a set of 
search tasks to be executed by the users, in which some 
videos must be found. One group of users would then 
execute searches supported by the proposed semantic 
algorithm and another group would perform searches in a 
traditional way. A similar approach, with both quantitative 
and qualitative results, is presented in [14]. 
It will be also an opportunity to evolve the structure of 
the proposed ontology, conceive new algorithms and 
procedures for the cataloguing and searching process. At the 
same time, implementation and deployment aspects, such as 
space-time complexity analysis, scalability issues and 
performance of the ontology queries will deserve special 
attention from our research team in order to make sure that 
the benefits observed in the field experience can be 
replicated in other environments. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been sponsored by the Brazilian Ministry 
of Communications through the FUNTTEL program and 
funded by the FINEP innovation agency.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. Hunter, “Adding Multimedia to the Semantic Web – Building an 
MPEG-7 Ontology”, Proc. of the International Semantic Web 
Working Symposium (SWWS), July 2001, pp. 261–283. 
[2] F. Nack and L. Hardman, “Towards a Syntax for Multimedia 
Semantics”, Technical Report CWI, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 
2002. 
[3] J. M. Martínez, R. Koenen, and F. Pereira, “MPEG-7: The Generic 
Multimedia Content Description Standard”, Multimedia, IEEE, vol. 
9(2), 2002, pp. 78-87. 
[4] Dublin Core Metadata Initiative, “DCMI Metadata Terms”, 
http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-terms, 
<retreived: 
Sept., 
2011>. 
[5] J. Hunter, “An Application Profile which combines Dublin Core and 
MPEG-7 
Metadata 
Terms 
for 
Simple 
Video 
Description”, 
http://metadata.net/harmony/video_appln_profile.html, 
<retreived: 
Sept., 2011>. DSTC- Australia, 2002. 
[6] W3C Recommendation, “OWL Web Ontology Language Overview”, 
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/, 
<retrieved: 
Sept., 
2011>, 
February, 2004. 
[7] L. Rolim, A. Osorio, and I. Ávila, “Collaborative System for 
Semantic Annotation of Audiovisual Contents - Applications in the 
Context of Brazilian Independent Culture” (in portuguese), Proc. of 
SBSC – Brazillian Symposium of Collaborative Systems, IEEE, 
2011, pp. 1-4. 
[8] A. Th. Schreiber, B. Dubbeldam, J. Wielemaker, and B. Wielinga, 
“Ontology-Based Photo Annotation”, University of Amsterdam, 
IEEE Intelligent Systems, 2001, pp. 66-74. 
[9] L. Hollink, S. Little, and J. Hunter, “Evaluating the Application of 
Semantic Inferencing Rules to Image Annotation”, Proc. of the K-
CAP´05 –  3rd International Conference on Knowledge Capture. 
Alberta, Canada, 2005, pp. 91-98. 
[10] A. Isaac and R. Troncy, “Designing and Using an Audio-Visual 
Description Core Ontology”, Institute National de l´Audiovisuel 
(INA),  France, 2004. 
[11] Brazilian 
Cinematheque, 
“Controlled 
Vocabulary”, 
http://www.cinemateca.com.br/, 
<retrieved: 
Sept., 
2011>. 
Audiovisual Department – Brazilian Ministry of Culture, 2011. 
[12] H. Klotz and E. P. Wach, “Collaborative Ontology Building”, 
Seminar Applied Ontology Engineering, STI-Innsbruck – December  
2010. 
[13] R. Guha, R. McCool, and E. Miller. “Semantic search.” In WWW '03: 
Proc. of the 12th Int. Conf. on World Wide Web, New York, NY, 
USA, 2003, pp. 700-709. 
[14] .J. Waitelonis, H. Sack, J. Hercher, and Z. Kramer. “Semantically 
enabled exploratory video search,” Proceedings of the 3rd 
International Semantic Search Workshop (SEMSEARCH '10), ACM, 
New York, USA, 2010, pp. 1-8. 
[15] E. Oren, R. Delbru, M. Catasta, R. Cyganiak, H. Stenzhorn, and G. 
Tummarello, “Sindice.com: a document-oriented lookup index for 
open linked data,” Int. J. Metadata, Semantics and Ontologies. 
IJMSO, vol. 3(1), 2008, pp. 37-52. 
[16] R. W. White, G. Marchionini, and G. Muresan, “Evaluating 
exploratory search systems: Introduction to special topic issue of 
information processing and management,” Information Processing & 
Management, vol. 44 (2), 2008, pp. 433-436. 
[17] L. Glaura, “The Sounds of Rosário” (in portuguese), UFMG, Belo 
Horizonte, 2002. 
[18] Caburé Cultural Society, “Live Museum of Fandango” (in 
portuguese), http://www.museuvivodofandango.com.br/, <retrieved: 
Sept., 2011>. 
 
5
Copyright (c) The Government of Brazil, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

