An Ontology for Cultural Heritage Protection against Climate Change 
Jürgen Moßgraber 
Fraunhofer IOSB 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
juergen.mossgraber@iosb.fraunhofer.de 
Désirée Hilbring 
Fraunhofer IOSB 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
desiree.hilbring@iosb.fraunhofer.de 
Tobias Hellmund 
Fraunhofer IOSB 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
tobias.hellmund@iosb.fraunhofer.de 
Paraskevi Pouli 
Foundation for Research and Technology - Hellas 
Heraklion, Greece 
ppouli@iesl.forth.gr 
Guiseppina Padeletti 
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, ISMN 
Rome, Italy 
pad@mlib.cnr.it 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Environmental factors, worsened by the increasing 
climate change impact, represent significant threats to 
European Cultural Heritage (CH) assets. In Europe, the huge 
number and diversity of CH assets, together with the different 
climatological sub-regions aspects, as well as the different 
adaptation policies to climate change adopted (or to be 
adopted) by the different nations, generate a very complex 
scenario. This 
paper will present a 
multidisciplinary 
methodology that will bridge the gap between two different 
worlds: the CH stakeholders and the scientific/technological 
experts. Since protecting cultural heritage assets and 
increasing their resilience against effects caused by the climate 
change is a multidisciplinary task, experts from many domains 
need to work together to meet their conservation goals. This 
paper discusses a method for facilitating the work for the 
different experts. A new ontology has been designed 
integrating all necessary aspects for improving the resilience of 
cultural heritages on site. This ontology combines the following 
topics: Cultural Heritage Assets, Stakeholders and Roles, 
Climate and Weather Effects, Risk Management, Conservation 
Actions, Materials, Sensors, Models and Observations, 
Standard Operation Procedures/Workflows and Damages. 
Keywords 
- 
Ontology; 
Knowledge 
Base; 
Ontology 
Visualization; Cultural Heritage. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Europe has a significant cultural diversity together with 
exceptional historic architectures and artefact collections that 
attract millions of tourists every year. These incalculable 
values and global assets have to be preserved for future 
generations. Environmental factors, worsened by the 
increasing climate change impact, represent significant 
threats to CH assets such as monuments, historic structures 
and settlements, places of worship, cemeteries and 
archaeological sites. There are almost 400 UNESCO sites in 
Europe, located in different climatic European regions [1][2]. 
Therefore, eco-compatible solutions and materials for the 
long-term sustainable maintenance and preservation of CH in 
response to the events induced by climate changes are a 
necessity. The research and development of these solutions 
will benefit from an Information and Communication 
platform able to provide a timely up-to-date situational 
awareness about the site, thus supporting decision makers to 
plan the actions necessary for long term and short-term 
maintenance, intervention and risk management against the 
threats of the climate change. Life cycle assessment of the 
interventions on CH will be performed as comparative 
methodology supporting the decision making process. 
Section 2, “Related Work” discusses Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT) and existing ontologies 
and vocabularies in the CH domain. Section 3, “The 
HERACLES Project” introduces the project in which the 
ontology is developed and used in a Knowledge Base (KB) 
including two testbed case studies. Section 4 presents the 
creation and content of the HERACLES ontology. Since not 
all aspects can be covered in this paper, the focus lies on risk 
management, sensors, models, assets, materials and response 
actions. Finally Section 5, “Conclusions and Future Work” 
recapitulates our findings and discusses directions for future 
developments.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
During the last 20 years, there has been an increasing 
interest and demand for specialized scientific technologies 
and methodologies in the CH field. An increasing number of 
experts from different scientific disciplines, such as curators, 
archaeologists, conservators, art historians, scientists and 
engineers, are involved in the analysis and study of CH 
assets and monuments, each one of them using his own 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

specialized terminology. To overcome the communication 
gap among the CH experts, it is important to develop tools 
able to solve this issue. Information and Communication 
Technologies can support this interdisciplinary research [3]. 
Firstly, electronic handbooks, web-based knowledge 
platforms together with mobile phone applications, expert 
and decision support systems have been developed to 
improve the handling of the data and to promote the 
dissemination and a better understanding of the scientific 
information from the technical investigations. Above all, 
these ICTs facilitate the cooperation between CH experts. 
Two examples of Web knowledge tools, platforms and 
applications, developed by CH organizations and museums, 
are the following: 
• An interactive website by the TATE Gallery presents 
information about the artworks identity, the materials, the 
structure and the construction technology, the description 
of the conservation steps, the investigation procedures, 
the results and the assessment of their condition state [4]. 
• Diadrasis, a nonprofit organization, has developed an 
online application entitled Viaduct [5], which classifies 
and explains a number of analysis and dating methods 
and provides basic information about the investigation 
methods and the related glossary. 
In parallel, a correct and controlled terminology has 
become 
particularly 
important 
in 
the 
electronic 
documentation and presentation of the assets and of their 
restoration. In this respect, a number of thesauri, terminology 
glossaries, vocabularies and databases have been introduced, 
for example: 
• The Art & Architecture Thesaurus (AAT) is a structured 
vocabulary used to improve the understanding of the 
terms about art, architecture, and material culture [6]. 
• The European illustrated glossary of conservation terms 
for wall paintings and architectural surfaces (EwaGlos) is 
an illustrated glossary of conservation terms translated in 
eleven languages. The core of the glossary includes 
approximately 200 definitions of the terms frequently 
used in the field of the conservation/restoration of the 
wall paintings and of the architectural surfaces [7]. 
• NARCISSE, an European project, has developed a very 
high-resolution image bank, dedicated to the art treasures 
of Europe major museums. A multilingual glossary of 
terms about the conservation of paintings, illustrated with 
various spectral images, was developed [8]. 
• POLYGNOSIS is a web-based knowledge platform, 
designed 
and 
implemented 
with 
an 
educational 
orientation, concerning the optical and laser-based 
investigation methods for the study of CH objects [9]. 
POLYGNOSIS handles information related to the 
analysis of the studied materials and in this respect it 
offers an important background for the HERACLES 
ontology regarding the characterization of materials.  
The design process of the HERACLES ontology 
included the research and analysis of existing ontologies. 
The CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model (CRM) is a 
model, which provides definitions and a formal structure for 
describing the concepts and relationships used in cultural 
heritage documentation [10]. CIDOC CRM can be extended 
with additional models, such as the CRM scientific 
observation model, or the CRM model for archeological 
buildings. 
However, so far, no attempts have been undertaken to 
model the risks and the effects of climate change on CH 
buildings and monuments, the caused damage and the 
materials most suitable for restoration. We fear that the 
inclusion of missing ontological concepts like weather 
phenomena, risk analysis and crisis management into the 
already existing models will result in added levels of 
complexity to the existing ontologies. Therefore, the 
approach followed in HERACLES has been to create a new 
ontological model from scratch trying to keep it as concise as 
possible. The ontology has been developed in a workshop 
with stakeholders of the project with in-depth domain 
knowledge background, as described by Moßgraber et al. 
[11]. Hereby, it incorporates all domains that are relevant for 
the end-users. The following sources have been used as 
reference material for the new ontology: the SWEET 
ontologies developed at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
[12], the materials ontology from Ashino [13] and Open 
Geospatial Consortium (OGC) standards such as the 
SensorThing Application Programming Interface (API) [14] 
and the Internet of Things (IoT) Tasking Capability [15]. 
III. 
THE HERACLES PROJECT 
The main objective of the HERACLES project is to 
design, validate and promote responsive systems and 
solutions for effective resilience of CH against climate 
change effects, considering as mandatory premise a holistic, 
multidisciplinary approach through the involvement of 
different 
expertise 
(end-users, 
industry, 
scientists, 
conservators, restorators and social experts, decision, and 
policy makers) [16]. This will be pursued with the 
development of a system exploiting an ICT platform able to 
collect and integrate multisource information. With the help 
of this platform, complete and updated awareness is 
provided. It will also facilitate the integration of innovative 
measurements improving CH resilience, including new 
solutions for maintenance and conservation [17]. The 
validation is executed in four test sites, namely Heraklion in 
Crete with the Minoan Palace of Knossos and the Venetian 
Sea Fortress of Koules and Gubbio in Italy with Consoli 
Palace and the town walls. These test beds represent key 
study cases for the climate change impact on European CH 
assets. The strength of HERACLES solutions is their 
flexibility in evaluating a large quantity of different pieces of 
information utilized via explicit semantic modelling tailored 
to the specific CH assets needs. In this context, end-users 
play a fundamental role. Through consequent end-user focus, 
we aim to develop a complete, yet flexible system that is able 
to embrace other test-beds as well. End-users have an active 
part in the project activities and have permanent access to the 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

HERACLES KB, which implements the HERACLES 
ontology presented in this paper. Through the ontology, the 
stored and retrieved knowledge from the KB is language 
independent. 
IV. 
DESIGN OF THE HERACLES ONTOLOGY 
As outlined in the section “Related Work” we decided to 
create a new concise ontology model. To identify the 
ontological classes and relations, a workshop was held, 
which brought together all stakeholders of the project with 
their different research and domain knowledge backgrounds. 
This group consisted of about 20 persons. For a workshop, 
this number is considered too large, but was necessary due to 
the different required domains.  
Stakeholders could assist during the design process of the 
ontology through an easy to use online collaboration tool 
with graphical ontology visualization and functions to 
facilitate the creation of instances (Figures 1 and 2).  
 
Figure 1.  Tool with graphical ontology visualisation 
 
Figure 2.  Instance creation 
The following graphical conventions are used for the 
description of the HERACLES ontology: 
• Green boxes represent concepts; grey boxes represent 
instances. 
• Continuous arrows represent semantic relationships 
between concepts or instances. Inverse relationships are 
omitted for better readability. A label next to an arrow 
describes the relationship. 
• Dashed arrows link subclasses to parent classes. 
• Dotted arrows link instances to their concepts. 
Concepts in the ontology are accompanied by attributes 
(datatype properties). For example, an asset can have 
geographical coordinates or a construction period. For the 
sake of brevity, these are omitted in the ontology pictures. 
implements
Site
Asset
contains
Cultural 
Heritage
isSubclassOf
Damage
affected
Economic Value
affected
Action
mitigated
Action Type
Damage Type
Risk
Effect Type
mitigates
isOfDamageType
causesDamage
impacts
resultsFrom
 
Figure 3.  The main concepts and their object properties of the 
HERACLES ontology. 
The central elements in the ontology are the CH assets 
that need to be protected against the effects of climate 
change. As shown in Figure 3, a top-level class is defined to 
refer to any kind of CH. Risks arise from climate change 
effects which can cause damages to CH. As seen in Figure 3, 
a distinction is made between types of potential damage 
(“Damage Type”) and actual damage (“Damage”). The 
system also records potential mitigation actions and actual 
performed actions. 
Structure
Settlement
Town
Site
Asset
Building
Wall
isInhabited
Cultural 
Heritage (CH)
isSubclassOf (isSuperclassOf)
 
Figure 4.  Cultural Heritage Asset 
Damage
Damage Type
isOfDamageType
Effect
isOfEffectType
causedDamage
Effect Type
causesDamage
leadsToEffect
Parameter
causes Effect
 
Figure 5.  From effect to damage, distinction between potential and actual 
fact 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

A. Cultural Heritage Assets 
Assets, which are the focus of the project, are a subclass 
of CH. The Asset concept is further refined with the concept 
Structure and, below that, Monument, Building or Wall (see 
Figure 4). Via these classes, the actual instances of the test 
beds of the HERACLES project, like the “Knossos Palace”, 
the “Palazzo dei Consoli”, the “Venetian Fortification” and 
the “Gubbio Townwall”, can be included.  
Assets are located in Sites, which are classified into more 
specialized classes like a Settlement.  
B. Climate Change Effects 
In Figure 5, the distinction between potential, meaning 
things that may occur and facts, in the sense of actual 
occurrences, is emphasized. This distinction applies to 
effects (“Effect Type” vs. “Effect”) and damage. As an 
example, the ontology may contain flood as a potential effect 
type that may damage an asset. Besides that, the flood 
episodes that occurred in specific years are also registered as 
actual occurrences in the KB. The ontology contains the 
relationships between potential effects (“Effect Type”), 
follow-up potential effects (“leadsToEffect”) and the 
potential damage (“Damage Type”) they may cause. An 
example with instances for the classes shown in Figure 5 is 
given in Figure 6. Heavy Precipitation can lead to a 
Landslide. If such a Landslide hits an asset, it can result in 
Structural Damage. A specific event is shown below these 
generic types: A heavy precipitation episode occurred at a 
specific date and time, which caused a landslide in a specific 
area, which hits a wall and destroys it. 
 
Heavy 
Precipitation
Landslide
leadsToEffect
Structural
Damage
Heavy precipitation
episode occurred on
30/06/17 wIth
100 l./m2 in 1h.
Landslide at location X
with amount of 
displaced Material.
leadToEffect
Collapse of 5 m of wall
at street N.
Precipitation
causesEffect
 
Figure 6.  Example for effects and caused damage and their types. 
Sensor
Location
DataSet
Parameter
Document
hasMeasurementsOf
hasDataSet
Asset
Representation
Asset
FeatureOfInterest
refersTo
TaskingCapability
Task
ParameterValue
InputParameter
hasInputParameter
isTaskOf
hasParameterValue
isValueFor
providesDataAbout
Service Endpoint
Service Protocol
 
Figure 7.  Classes for managing metadata of sensors, models and measurement campaigns. 
Action Type
Response
Asset
Representation
Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP)
Guideline
IsBasedOn
Action
implements
Preventive
Conservation
Remedial
Conservation
Restoration
Conservation
Analysis &
Diagnose
dataOutcomesIn
 
Figure 8.  Maintenance and response actions.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

C. Sensors and Simulation models 
To capture climate change relevant parameters, sensors 
were modelled according to the SensorThings API standard, 
which was presented by the OGC [14]. The SensorThings 
API is a modern standard for providing an open and unified 
way to connect IoT devices, data and applications over the 
Web [15]. Therefore, the initial design of the ontology 
classes for dealing with sensor metadata is based on the data 
model of the SensorThings API standard. It is reasonable to 
follow the same standard for developing the ontology for 
simulation models. In practice, requesting the execution of a 
model is equivalent to tasking an actuator to perform a 
particular task but, since the tasking part of SensorThings 
API was not yet available, it is not considered in the paper. 
For this reason, the adaptation of the ontology is based on the 
“Internet of Things Tasking Capability” [16], in which an 
extension of the SensorThings API for tasking actuators is 
proposed. 
The central concept in the diagram (see Figure 7) is the 
“Asset Representation”. An Asset Representation is an entity 
that provides data about an asset. It can be regarded as a 
proxy that enables access to the available data about an asset, 
for example, temperatures in a building, images and 
measurements of the building obtained in a measurement 
campaign or the results from a structural model. The actual 
sensor measurement is stored in an observation, which is 
connected to a data stream. The four classes on the left in 
Figure 7: TaskingCapability, Task, InputParameter and 
ParameterValue, provide support to store and manage 
metadata about the models. The TaskingCapability provides 
a human-readable description of the model together with 
information regarding the API that the model provides. In the 
HERACLES platform, there is an additional abstraction 
layer, namely the KB, which manages the metadata of the 
available models and sensors.  
D. Maintenance and Response Actions 
Situational awareness is achieved through continuous 
monitoring of the status of the CH assets combined with the 
results provided by the simulation models, which enable risk 
assessment. Evaluation of the information provided by the 
system 
and 
on-the-field 
observations 
enable 
the 
identification of actual or potential problems, for instance, 
when a risk level threshold is trespassed or a damage is 
observed. The modeling of such problems has been included 
in the ontology.  
Maintenance actions not related to an issue also need to 
be documented. In this way, the structure of the ontology can 
serve as a register of past actions that can be used to better 
understand the current situation and support the decision 
making process. Suggested actions are documented in 
formalized guidelines, which are often supported by a 
specific law; these are the Standard Operating Procedures 
(SOPs) (see Figure 8). 
E. Materials 
Since materials have an influence on how an asset is 
affected by climate effects in terms of its resilience to 
weathering and ageing, it is important that the ontology also 
models information about materials and the KB contains 
information about materials and of which materials an asset 
consists of. The material area can be ground for 
experimentation of new solutions to be applied for 
maintenance and restoration/conservation of CH assets. 
The classes to keep materials information in the KB are 
provided in Figure 9. The level of detail regarding the 
information about the composition, structure and properties 
of the materials needs further discussion with both materials 
experts and end users. Nevertheless, it should be noted that 
some ontologies associated with the handling of material 
related information already exist [10]. Whereas the detail of 
such specialized ontologies may be too excessive for its 
application in our use cases, they provide a reference to 
develop a model for the HERACLES platform. At the same 
time, since the aforementioned ontologies are not designed 
with a specific application field in mind, extra classes and 
properties may be necessary in the HERACLES platform for 
its utilization in the context of CH conservation.
 
 
Material
Material Property
Compressive strength
of Travertine_1
Sandstone_1
Travertine_1
materialHasProperty
Material Purpose
Material Use
materialHasUse
Asset
materialUsedIn
materialUsedAs
Hardness of 
Travertine_1
materialHasProperty
materialHasProperty
 
Figure 9.  Classes keeping material information
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

F. Ontology Metrics 
This section provides the metrics of the current state of 
the HERACLES ontology. It includes general metrics like 
the number of classes, data/objects properties and individuals 
and annotation axioms like the numbers of annotation 
property. Inverse properties are excluded in this listing (see 
Table 1). 
TABLE I.  
ONTOLOGY METRICS 
Metric 
Value 
Class count 
109 
Object property count 
102 
Data properties count 
49 
Individual count 
141 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented the design of the HERACLES 
ontology, which aggregates multiple domains and therefore, 
required the interaction of multiple domain experts. Using a 
tool, which supports online collaboration with graphical 
ontology visualization, creation of input forms, etc. speeds 
up this process. The ontology is the basis for further research 
projects, which need to tackle the problems of climate 
change effects and involve a set of heterogeneous sensors 
and processing algorithms. Furthermore, it can be used as 
basis for the suggestion of materials that comply with 
historic building materials and can be used to restore the 
structural health of cultural heritage assets. Apart from future 
possibilities, the ontology offers functionalities that are 
already in use: the consolidation of information describing 
the situation at a cultural heritage site rises situational 
awareness and the graphic display of concepts serves as full-
fletched and navigable glossary for the project partners. 
Besides the various additions to the ontology model 
discussed above, further work will be performed to fill the 
Knowledge 
Base 
using 
the 
developed 
ontology. 
Additionally, research will focus on the reasoning 
techniques, which will be applied to the semantic data to 
automatically 
suggest 
necessary 
preservation 
actions. 
Another imminent step is to have end-users evaluating the 
ontology-based 
decision 
support 
providing 
possible 
recommendations. This assessment will take place in a few 
months’ time, when the first pilot deployments will be 
evaluated in the field. Action will also be taken on mapping 
concepts from the HERACLES ontology to other prominent 
models, like the CIDOC-RM, to guarantee interoperability 
and facilitate the ontology’s reuse. 
The ontology has been published here [18], where the 
interested reader is encouraged to examine the ontology. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program 
under grant agreement No 700395. 
REFERENCES 
[1] UNESCO, Climate Change and World Heritage, world 
heritage 
reports 
22, 
http://whc.unesco.org/documents/publi_wh_papers_22_en.pdf 
last accessed 2018/11/08 
[2] UNESCO, Table Principal Climate Change risks and impacts 
on 
cultural 
heritage, 
WHC-06/30.COM/7.1, 
http://whc.unesco.org/archive/2006/whc06-30com-07.1e.doc, 
last accessed 2018/11/08 
[3] M. Doerr, “Ontologies for Cultural Heritage,” in Handbook 
on Ontologies, International Handbooks on Information 
Systems 19, pp. 463-486, Springer, 2009. 
[4] TATE 
Gallery Homepage, 
http://www.tate.org.uk, last 
accessed 2018/09/21. 
[5] S. Blain, A. Dimitrakopoulou, L. Gomez-Robles and L. 
Tapini, “Viaduct, a communication tool for scientific analysis 
in heritage”, ISBN 978-618-81473-1-7, Diadrasis, 2015. 
[6] AAT (Art & Architecture Thesaurus Online) Homepage, The 
Getty Research Institute, The J. Paul Getty Trust, Los Angeles 
(USA). http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/aat/, 
last accessed 2018/09/21. 
[7] A. Weyer et. al. (eds.), “EwaGlos-European Illustrated 
Glossary of Conservation Terms for Wall Paintings and 
Architectural Surfaces,” ISBN: 978-3-7319-0260-7, Michael 
Imhof Verlag, Petersberg, Germany, 2015. 
[8] C. Lahanier and M. Aubert, “Network of art research 
computer image systems in Europe (NARCISSE),” Museums 
and interactive multimedia: proceedings of an international 
conference, pp. 298-304, Cambridge, England, 1993. 
[9] N. Platia et. al, “POLYGNOSIS: the development of a 
thesaurus in an Educational Web Platform on optical and 
laser-based investigation methods for cultural heritage 
analysis and diagnosis,” Heritage Science, 5 (50), 2017, 
Doi:10.1186/s40494-017-0163-0. 
[10] P. Le Boeuf, M. Doerr, C. E. Ore and S. Stead, “Definition of 
the CIDOC conceptual reference model,” ICOM/CIDOC 
Documentation Standards Group, 1999. www.cidoc-crm.org, 
last accessed 2018/09/21. 
[11] J. Moßgraber, M. Schenk and D. Hilbring, “Modelling of an 
Ontology for a Communication Platform,” Proceedings of 
The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic 
Processing, pp. 97-102, Nice, France, 2015. 
[12] R. G. Raskin and M. J. Pan, “Knowledge representation in the 
semantic web for Earth and environmental terminology 
(SWEET),” Computers & Geosciences, Vol. 31, pp. 1119 – 
1125, 2005. 
[13] T. Ashino, “Materials ontology: An infrastructure for 
exchanging materials information and knowledge,” Data 
Science Journal, Vol. 9, pp. 54-61, 2010. 
[14] S. 
Liang, 
C.-Y. 
Huang 
and 
T. 
Khalafbeigi, 
OGC 
SensorThings API, Open Geospatial Consortium: Wayland, 
MA, USA, 2016. 
[15] C.-Y. Huang and C.-H. Wu, “A Web Service Protocol 
Realizing 
Interoperable 
Internet 
of 
Things 
Tasking 
Capability,” Sensors, Vol. 16(9), 1395, Basel, Switzerland, 
2016. 
[16] HERACLES Homepage, http://www.heracles-project.eu/, last 
accessed 2018/09/21. 
[17] J. Moßgraber, G. Lortal, F. Calabrò and M. Corsi, “An ICT 
Platform to support Decision Makers with Cultural Heritage 
Protection against Climate Events,” Geophysical Research 
Abstracts, Vol. 20, p. 13962, Vienna, Austria, 2018. 
[18] Fraunhofer 
IOSB: 
https://github.com/FraunhoferIOSB/HERACLES, 
last 
accessed 2018/11/08 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

