Knowledge-Enabled Complex Event
Processing-based platform for health monitoring
Francesco Nocera, Tommaso Di Noia, Marina Mongiello, Eugenio Di Sciascio
Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica e dell’Informazione (DEI), Politecnico di Bari, Via Orabona, 4 - 70125 Bari- Italy
email: {ﬁrstname.lastname}@poliba.it
Abstract—An increasing number of applications that require
real-time or near-real time processing of high-volume of data
streams are changing the way that traditional data processing
systems infrastructures operate. Timeliness and ﬂow processing
are crucial for justifying the need for developing a new class of
systems that are capable of processing not only generic data,
but also event notiﬁcations coming from different source to
identify interesting situations, with respect to traditional Database
Management System (DBMS). Accordingly, different systems
emerged and are competing in the last years, namely Information
Flow Processing (IFP) systems. In this paper we discuss how
semantic technologies can contribute to the ﬁeld of complex event
and study their support in health monitoring domain. Complex
Event Processing (CEP) systems associate a precise semantics to
the information items being processing. We propose an approach
that combines Semantic Web methodologies and CEP model in
a health monitoring platform.
Keywords–Complex Event Processing; Semantic Web; knowl-
edge Representation; Health monitoring.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Technological innovation is driving profound changes in
all productive ﬁelds. Consequently it is contributing to a
new deﬁnition of the organizations and processes, which
increasingly require new skills and responsibilities proﬁles.
This path has also involved the health ﬁeld where technologies
have taken a leading role, it is becoming an integral part of
the health service and they are establishing more and more
inseparable interconnections between health and technology.
The progress in medical technology is driving a continuous
improvement of health and predictive diagnostic and ther-
apeutic outcomes. Throughout the industry that deals with
health, but especially in hospitals, the signiﬁcant presence of
technology, must ensure safe and appropriate use in various
phase of prevention, diagnosis and treatment. It is expected
that the Healthcare Industrial IoT (HealthIIoT) will be one
of the main players in the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)-
driven healthcare industry. IIoT has had a remarkable inﬂuence
across many large and small healthcare industries. As a result,
an increasing number of wearable IoT devices, tools, and
apps are being used for different monitoring applications (e.g.,
glucose monitors, ECG monitors, and blood pressure monitors)
[1]. The concept of “Competence”covers a key role in each
phase. Competence is the ability to orient themselves in certain
situations. It does not reside in the resources to be mobilized
but in the same mobilization of knowledge that are known to
select, integrate and combine in a context and for a speciﬁc
purpose. The emergency health situations represent a sudden
event, often unpredictable, which endangers life if the person
concerned is not made, within a few minutes, a rescue action
in a timely and professional manner. There are many medical
professions that are emerging, due to the complexity of the
events, each with their own skills. We can say that Competence
consists of three components: Knowledge, generally the scope
of conceptual knowledge, The ability (or skill): the operational
aspect of competence, the implementation of principles that
belong to the knowledge and the The behavior (or way of
acting): the performing tasks that affect relationships with
others and the effectiveness of the mobilization of the entire
competence itself. These three components are closely linked
to each other and make up the complex areas of knowing
how to act. The aim of this paper is to present an intelligent
system architecture for the management of health data, in
particular a support system in the prevention, diagnosis and
treatment phases. According to G. Cugola and A. Margara
[2] the concepts of timeliness and ﬂow processing are crucial
for justifying the need for a new class of systems. Indeed,
traditional Database Management Systems (DBMSs): (i) re-
quire data to be (persistently) stored and indexed before it
could be processed and (ii) process data only when explicitly
asked by the users, that is, asynchronously with respect to its
arrival. These limitations have led to the design of a number
of systems speciﬁcally designed to process information as a
set of ﬂows according to a set of processing rules. Complex
event Processing (CEP) is one of these emerging models to
monitor and react to continuously arriving events in real-
time or near-real. Critical factors for event-based systems
are event detection and the enormous amount of information
available on the events. The continuous streams of high-
level events require real-time intelligent processors. Human
knowledge domain will greatly affect the decision making
support system. Knowledge Representation is the method used
to encode knowledge in an intelligent systems knowledge base.
Events-based semantic models can improve the quality of event
processing by using metadata in combination with knowledge
bases consisting of ontologies and rules. The proposed solution
is based on the combination of this two discipline: CEP domain
and Knowledge Representation. The remainder of this paper
is structured as follows: Section 2 provides a background
on CEP and ontology Knowledge Representation. Section 3
presents the application domain and Section 4 discusses the
proposed approach and platform. Finally, Section 5 concludes
and discusses future research work.
II.
BACKGROUND
Currently, an increasing number of distributed applications
requires continuous analysis of ﬂows of data and real-time
response to complex queries. Furthermore, it is very important
decide the way data should be stored because this choice will
determine later also the way in which data will be extracted.
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Today ontologies are widely used to model and encode do-
main’s knowledge and allow us to reason about this knowledge.
The fusion of background knowledge with data from an event
stream can help the event processing engine to know more
about incoming events and their relationships to other related
concepts. In this section, we provide a background on CEP
and Knowledge Representation.
A. Complex Event Processing
The concept of CEP was introduced by David Luckham in
his seminal work [3] as a “deﬁned set of tools and techniques
for analyzing and controlling the complex series of interrelated
events that drive modern distributed Information Systems (IS)”.
This emerging technology helps IS and Information Technol-
ogy (IT) professionals understand what is happening within
the system, quickly identify and solve problems, and more
effectively utilize events for enhanced operation, performance,
and security.”CEP systems can be classiﬁed as Advanced
Decision Support Systems (ADSS) [4]. It is part of Event-
Driven Architectures (EDA), which are architectures generally
dealing with the production, detection, consumption of, and
reaction to events [5]. The key characteristic of a CEP system
is its capability to handle complex event situations, detecting
patterns, creating correlations, aggregating events and making
use of time windows. The capability of deﬁning and managing
the relationships between events is an important and integral
part of event processing solutions. The relationship between
events is called correlation and uses a collection of semantic
rules to describe how speciﬁc events are related to each other
[6]. When a problem or opportunity arises, it should be noticed
in real time, to make sure the right action can be taken at
the right moment. Otherwise there will only be historical data
that reveals possible problems, which already have become a
real problem or opportunities which already have vanished.
With CEP it is possible to act in real time and make better
use of the already available events. Speciﬁcation languages
for event patterns are frequently inspired by regular languages
and therefore have automata based semantics [7]. CEP systems
can be classiﬁed on the basis of the architecture of the CEP
engine in centralized, hierarchical, acyclic and peer-to-peer
[8], the forwarding schemes adopted by brokers [9], and the
way processing of event patterns is distributed among brokers
[10]. Several CEP systems have been developed in the last
few years, each one proposing a different processing model.
Currently, the most popular are: Esper [11], Apache YARN
[12], StreamDrill [13].
B. Ontology for Knowledge Representation
The ﬁeld of knowledge Representation tries to deal with
the problems surrounding the incorporation of some body of
knowledge in a computer system, for the purpose of automated,
intelligent reasoning. In this sense, knowledge representation
is the basic research topic in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI).
Knowledge Management (KM) consists of techniques that
use Information Technology tools for the information man-
agement, and its goal is to improve the efﬁciency of work
teams; it studies methods for making knowledge explicit, and
sharing professional expertise and informative resources. In
the scientiﬁc literature, different approaches have emerged to
classiﬁcation of KM issues. Alavi and Leidner [14] group
the problems of Knowledge Management, namely storage,
creation, transfer and retrieval issues into four classes. Verwijs
et al. in [15] analyzed different knowledge approaches in busi-
ness processes, and categorized them as follows: Knowledge
storage approach, Knowledge processes approach, Learning
processes approach, Intellectual capital approach. A generic
Knowledge Management System (KMS), supporting the cre-
ation and storage of knowledge, gives the opportunity to make
data, information and knowledge from different sources readily
available. It contains data and documents, and can also store
tacit knowledge, which is more difﬁcult to express, and in-
cludes peoples experiences, know-how and expertise. The issue
of how to better capitalize and disseminate knowledge is one of
the actual priorities in KM. To realize such goals, a KMS can
make use of different technologies such as: Document based
technologies for the creation, administration and sharing of
different documents (e.g., doc, pdf, html ); Ontology/Taxonomy
based technologies which use ontologies and classiﬁcation for
knowledge representation; Artiﬁcial Intelligence based tech-
nologies which use particular inference engines to solve pecu-
liar domain problems. The main components of a Knowledge-
Based System [16] are the following: (i) the Knowledge Base
is the passive component of a Knowledge-Based System. It
plays a role similar to a database in a traditional informative
system; (ii) the Inference Engine is the core of the system.
It uses the Knowledge Base content to derive new knowledge
using reasoning techniques; (iii)the Knowledge Base Manager
manages coherence and consistency of the information stored
in the Knowledge Base. KMS can represent knowledge in both
human and machine-readable forms. Human-readable knowl-
edge is typically accessed using browsers or intelligent search
engine. Human-readable knowledge is represented using a
wide range of approaches in Knowledge Management Systems.
But in some case, as the development of an expert system
for decision support, knowledge needs to be accessible in
machine-readable forms. Therefore, one of the major questions
of knowledge management is to obtain a method to represent
knowledge in both human and machine-readable forms. To
solve this problem, Ontologies [17] are generally used as
knowledge containers for KMSs.
III.
APPLICATION DOMAIN
The aim of this paper will be the design of an inte-
grated platform consisting of integrated components designed
to remotely manage the paths of prevention, diagnosis and
treatment. With respect to the prevention processes, there are
three levels of prevention: Primary that aims to intervene on
external pathogens and/or the individual’s defenses, prevent a
disease from developing; Secondary that aims to early detect
the disease process already begun before symptoms appears;
Tertiary that seeks to remove or repair the results of a disease
that has already manifested through symptoms. In order to
comply these three levels of prevention, the platform should
provide a monitoring system integrated with a module of
management of clinic compliance (care process), the real time
management of the events by a CEP system and a connection
system to the own caregiver or physician for the management
of teleconsultation (diagnosis process). The diagnostic process
should provide the possibility of a consultation and remote
activation of health facilities in the event of hospitalization or
specialized investigation. We identiﬁed the following function-
alities:
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

•
the use of digital medical record;
•
the connection to the Electronic Health Record;
•
the ability to analyze the patient’s medical history and
retrieve digitally reports;
•
the ability to link the medical plan allows one to
manage the entire cycle in dematerialized form and
to reduce the clinical risk related to patient care with
unsuitable or contradict each other.
The process of care management involves the management of
compliance and must include the link to the medical plan.
Also, it must provide the delivery of care using any devices
in the patient’s home. In particular, all scenarios to the three
health-related processes should include a system of systematic
data collection and their organization in a knowledge base
used by decision makers at all levels and the deﬁnition of
dashboards for the governance of health care. A personal health
monitor is one example application [18]. A health monitor is a
personalized system that allows a person and their caregivers
to monitor the persons health status. Health monitors may be
particularly useful for chronically ill people as well as for
elderly citizens [19]. The data may be captured from sensors
and devices at the person as well as from stationary sensors
in their home or in a speciﬁc clinical area for the atmosphere
data collection. Alarms are set up to alert the person and, if
necessary, doctors or a remote caregiver. Sensors automatically
capture personalized health data such as heart rate, blood
pressure, respiration rate, ECG, oxygen saturation in blood,
the location of the person in reference to a room,. In addition,
speciﬁc regular measurements for particular health conditions
are performed by the person and the results are ﬁltered for
emergency situations, as well as kept for long term observation.
Health monitors offer many challenges derived from the high
volume of low level events and the need to derive higher level
events that must be propagated. This application is particularly
sensitive to false negatives and false positives.
IV.
PROPOSED PLATFORM
Healthcare has many applications for event-based systems.
EDA integrates relational, non-relational and stream data struc-
tures to create a uniﬁed analytics environment. EDA enables
discovery, or exploratory, analytics, which rely on low-latency
continuous processing techniques and high frequency querying
on real-time data. This type of architecture requires a different
class of tools and system interfaces to promote a looser
coupling of applications to streamline data access, integration,
exploration, and analysis. Real-time data allows information
to be disseminated in a timely manner, when and where it is
needed. Real-time capability and related process automation
assist in accessing data to build event-driven applications
enriched with other relevant information and bringing them
together in a scalable platform. This section of the paper
describes the proposed architecture platform depicted in Fig. 1.
The modeled real-time platform is based on CEP and semantic
web technologies and approaches. Together, these components
create an agile, high performance, scalable platform that can
deliver fast insights through real-time queries, pattern match-
ing and anomaly detection, continuous analytics and triggers
notiﬁcations and alerts based on a CEP engine. Detection and
Aggregation- oriented Complex Event Processing focuses on
(i) detecting combinations or patterns of events; (ii) executing
Figure 1. Proposed functional Architecture.
algorithms as a response to system input. Sources includes
real-time data by sensors, medical devices, data stream gen-
erate real-time data that are captured by other systems for
continuous monitoring, together with patient’s historical data
(Digital medical record, Electronic health record). Depending
on the scenario, anomalies may be resolved by automated
responses or alerts for human or machine intervention. CEP
extends this capability by correlating multiple events through
a common interface that invokes an embedded rules engine.
Event ﬁltering evaluates a speciﬁed logical condition based
on event attributes, and, if the condition is true, publishes
the event to the destination stream as a notiﬁcation or alert.
The main challenge is the huge amount of data collection
and their organization in a knowledge base. Ontologies play
an important key role in the knowledge-based CEP. They
cover the conceptualization of the application domain to al-
low reasoning on events and other non-event concepts. We
propose that event processing domain should be described by
a modular and layered ontology model, which can be reused
in different scenario application. Important general concepts,
such as event, action, situation, space/place, time, agent and
process should be deﬁned based on meta-models and pluggable
ontologies which are in a modularized ontological top-level
structure. These general concepts deﬁned in the top-level
ontologies can be further specialized with existing domain
ontologies and ontologies for generic tasks and activities.
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

V.
CONCLUSION
For the healthcare industry, a real-time capability is re-
quired to exceed future standards of care, provider competence
and patient engagement expectations and to accommodate the
currently transformation in the healthcare industry focused
on opening up health data to facilitate exchange between
actors. All the challenges introduced in Section 2 necessitate
next-generation technologies designed to extract value from
very large volumes of disparate, multi-structured data by
enabling high-velocity capture, discovery, and analysis. CEP
systems offer the ability to detect, manage and predict events,
situations, opportunities, rules, conditions and threats in very
complex networks. The presented platform based on CEP and
Semantic Web technologies, providers will be able to process
high volumes of underlying technical events to derive clinical
decision support. The modeled real-time platform is based on
requirements for providing minimally acceptable timeliness
of information based on feasibility and clinical necessity. In
collecting, processing and analyzing real-time data, there is
inherent latency depending on data rates, volume, aggregation
method, processing power, embedded analytics and through-
put. The presented platform is work in progress. We are
currently preparing different case studies for the management
of all different health data.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author Francesco Nocera acknowledges support of
Exprivia S.p.A Ph.D grant 2016.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. S. Hossain and G. Muhammad, “Cloud-assisted industrial internet
of things (iiot) enabled framework for health monitoring,” Computer
Networks, vol. 101, 2016, pp. 192 – 202, industrial Technologies
and Applications for the Internet of Things. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389128616300019
[2]
G. Cugola and A. Margara, “Processing ﬂows of information: From
data stream to complex event processing,” ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), vol. 44, no. 3, 2012, p. 15.
[3]
D. Luckham, The power of events.
Addison-Wesley Reading, 2002,
vol. 204.
[4]
R. Rupnik, “Decision support system to support the solving of classiﬁ-
cation problems in telecommunications,” Informacije Midem - Journal
of microelectronic electronic component and materials, vol. 39, no. 3,
2009, pp. 168–177.
[5]
D. Robins, “Complex event processing,” in Second International Work-
shop on Education Technology and Computer Science. Wuhan, 2010.
[6]
T. Moser, H. Roth, S. Rozsnyai, R. Mordinyi, and S. Bifﬂ, “Semantic
event correlation using ontologies,” in On the Move to Meaningful
Internet Systems: OTM 2009.
Springer, 2009, pp. 1087–1094.
[7]
J. E. Hopcroft, R. Motwani, and J. D. Ullman, “Introduction to automata
theory, languages, and computation,” ACM SIGACT News, vol. 32,
no. 1, 2001, pp. 60–65.
[8]
P. T. Eugster, P. A. Felber, R. Guerraoui, and A.-M. Kermarrec, “The
many faces of publish/subscribe,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR),
vol. 35, no. 2, 2003, pp. 114–131.
[9]
A. Carzaniga and A. L. Wolf, “Content-based networking: A new
communication infrastructure,” in Workshop on Infrastruture for Mobile
and Wireless Systems.
Springer, 2001, pp. 59–68.
[10]
L. Amini, N. Jain, A. Sehgal, J. Silber, and O. Verscheure, “Adaptive
control of extreme-scale stream processing systems,” in 26th IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS’06).
IEEE, 2006, pp. 71–71.
[11]
“Esper,” 2016, URL: http://www.espertech.com/esper/ [accessed: 2016-
10-03].
[12]
“Apache Hadoop,” 2016, URL: http://hadoop.apache.org/ [accessed:
2016-10-03].
[13]
“Streamdill,” 2016, URL: https://streamdrill.com/ [accessed: 2016-10-
03].
[14]
M. Alavi and D. E. Leidner, “Knowledge management and knowledge
management systems - conceptual foundations and research issues,”
MIS Quarterly, vol. 25, no. 1, 2001.
[15]
M. Alvarez, J. Arana, I. Pradales, and J. Santos, “Review: Knowledge
management in the extended enterprise.” Fuzzy Sets, 2003.
[16]
K. M. Hangos, R. Lakner, and M. Gerzson, Intelligent Control Systems:
An Introduction with Examples.
Springer Science & Business Media,
2001.
[17]
N. Guarino and P. Giaretta, “Ontologies and knowledge bases: Towards
a terminological clariﬁcation,” in Towards very Large Knowledge bases:
Knowledge Building and Knowledge sharing.
IOS Press, 1995, pp.
25–32.
[18]
W. B. Heinzelman, A. L. Murphy, H. S. Carvalho, and M. A. Perillo,
“Middleware to support sensor network applications,” Network, IEEE,
vol. 18, no. 1, 2004, pp. 6–14.
[19]
D. Jung and A. Hinze, “A mobile alerting system for the support of
patients with chronic conditions,” in First European Conference on
Mobile Government (EURO mGOV), Brighton, UK, 2005, pp. 264–
274.
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-507-4
SEMAPRO 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

