Semantic Location Models for Bioenergy and Biofuel Projects
Krishna Sapkota, Pathmeswaran Raju,
Will Byrne, Craig Chapman,
Centre for Knowledge Based Engineering,
Birmingham City University
Birmingham, UK
e-mail: {krishna.sapkota, path.raju, william.byrne,
craig.chapman}@bcu.ac.uk
Lynsey Melville
Centre for Low Carbon Research
Birmingham City University
Birmingham, UK
e-mail: {lynsey.melville}@bcu.ac.uk
Abstract — The five fundamentals for a successful bioenergy
project are feedstock, technology, off-take, finance and help
from experts. In order to realize the essence of these
fundamentals, recently, many governments and organizations
are providing Decision Support Tools (DST) to the experts and
project developers. One of such tools is Location Model, which
helps the developers to identify the prime location for a
project. The model comprises the concepts, relations, logics,
constants and equations related to bioenergy and location. The
model is currently represented in non-semantic means, such as
spreadsheets
and
programming
code.
Representing
the
knowledge in non-semantic format will make the model less
reusable and extendable. In order to alleviate the issues, in this
paper, we present semantic location models. In particular, we
have leveraged the Semantic Web technologies to represent the
knowledge about the bioenergy and biofuel plant location and
inferred the equations and other values required for location
related calculations. The results, observed in two INTERREG
IVB projects, have been found encouraging.
Keywords- bioenergy ontology; location model; semantic
location
model;
ontology-based
location
model;
biomass;
bioenergy; renewable energy
I.
INTRODUCTION
Bioenergy is one of the most dynamic and the fastest
growing
renewable
energy
and
promises
sustainable
solutions to the depleting fossils fuels. Biomass, the solar
energy stored in the materials derived from biological
sources, is treated with some conversion technologies, and
bioenergy is generated. Some examples of biomass are wood
fuel, waste wood, energy crops, straw, waste and agricultural
waste. Biomass is used as an input while generating
bioenergy; therefore, in this paper, biomass is also called
feedstock.
Many governments and organizations have recently
shown efforts to realize the principle of five fundamentals in
bioenergy projects.
An example of such efforts is the
development of Decision Support Tools (DST), which
provides essential information to plant developers efficiently.
One of such organizations is INTERREG IVB, which has
funded two projects: BioenNW and EnAlgae.
The ongoing North West European projects: BioenNW
[1] and EnAlgae [2] aim to facilitate the project developers
to start a new bioenergy plant in the region and develop
sustainable
technologies
for
algal
biomass
production
respectively. These projects aspire to increase the global
share of renewable energy sources by 20% within the EU by
2020. In order to achieve this, they have to consider the steps
towards the five fundamentals. One of the crucial step is to
provide the farmers in the region with DSTs, which will help
them make
decisions [3]–[11]. The DSTs provide the
answers to various decision-making queries, such as:
1.
What is the best place to start a new bioenergy
plant?
2.
What kind and how much amount of biomass are
available in a region?
3.
What kind of technology is suitable for a plant in a
region?
4.
How much investment is needed and how long will
it take to return the investment?
5.
What are the logistic and other related costs
involved?
Location Model is one of the DSTs in these two projects,
which helps the developers to identify the prime location for
a project. It is represented by considering various factors,
such as the concepts, relations, logics, constants, and
equations. It helps project developers to analyze the viability
of a project by providing them with location information. In
particular, it will provide a mechanism to calculate the
equations related to the costs, incentives and distance
associated with a project or a cultivation technology in a
location. The equations and the calculations (evaluation of
the equations) in the model are affected by various attributes,
such as capacity of the project, incentives in the region,
bioenergy conversion technologies used and the quality of
the biomass. Providing the necessary information regarding a
location to developers prior to the start of a project will help
them to make an informed and confident decision about
starting the project.
Previous
studies
have
primarily
concentrated
on
implementing non-semantic models, such as hard-coded
programming languages or Excel spreadsheets. That is to
say,
the
concepts, relationships, logics, constants
and
equations are all embedded in some native programming
language. For example, in the BioenNW project, the model
was
represented
in
MATLAB
functions;
whereas,
in
EnAlgae, the spreadsheets have been equally used to
represent the model. Representing the model in such a way
poses some issues, such as the model being less shareable,
less reusable and less extendable, and the data being
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

inconsistent. To alleviate the issues, we propose semantic
models for the location determination.
The semantic location model exploits Semantic Web
technologies. Ontology can be used to represent the domain
knowledge and check the consistency of the model. Since the
vocabularies in the ontologies are reusable, and they are
explicitly defined, this approach makes the model extensible.
In other words, the ontology not only holds the data but also
explicitly defines the concepts used for a particular purpose
[12]. Using the existing definition of the concept in an
ontology, engineers can extend the ontology by creating new
concepts that conform to the existing knowledge. In the
proposed approach, the ontological axioms and rules are
used to define the entities, such as biomass, technology,
incentive, tariff, capacity and project. The following are the
key benefits of using the proposed approach:
1. Explicit concept definition: It defines the key
concepts used in the economic model explicitly,
which will make the ontology re-useable and
extensible.
2.
Consistent data: It provides a mechanism to check
the consistency of the data in the model.
3.
Inference: It identifies the implicit knowledge in the
model by means of ontological inference
mechanism.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
provides the detailed description of the ontology-based
location model in a case study. Section III and IV provide the
ontology based calculation and discussion respectively. The
finding of this research is concluded in Section V.
II. THE ONTLOGY-BASED LOCATION MODEL
One of the objectives of the INTERREG IVB supported
two projects BioenNW and EnAlgae is to provide DSTs to
the developers in the North West of Europe. The BioenNW
project aims to facilitate the farmers in the selected regions
to start a new bioenergy plant. The regions have been
selected
in
five
countries:
the
United
Kingdom,
the
Netherlands, Germany, Belgium and France. It has Business
Support Centers (BSC) in each country for the regions in the
country, where farmers get advice from bioenergy experts.
These regions contain a unit of area called a cell, which is a
square area, for example, 1KM square area is a cell. The
DSTs provide the information about each cell, such as
1.
how much it yields in a year,
2.
what kind of biomass is available,
3.
what regulatory guidelines are applicable in the
region,
4.
what incentives are being offered in the region.
The
EnAlgae
project
aims
to
develop
sustainable
technologies for algal biomass production. The microalgae
economic models are developed for various cultivation
technologies, such as open pond, flat panel and tubular
reactors while the economics of downstream processing is
calculated for biodiesel, bioethanol dry milling and methane
production.
The DSTs are Web-based tools, which can be accessed
remotely by farmers, and encourage them to start a new
plant. The DSTs in EnAlgae helps in making decisions about
algae biomass production, from understanding the algae
growth, cultivation, economics and life-cycle analysis to
setting up plants and operating procedures. Some of the
DSTs are map-based information tools, while others are
dashboards
and
conversion
pathways.
Map-based
information tools allow users to click on a map to see
whether a location is suitable for a particular type of the
bioenergy or algae plant. Dashboards provide calculations
related costs and economics, such as how much investment
is needed and how long it will take to return the investment
back. One of the DSTs is the locations model.
The location model either identifies a best location for a
plant (location unknown) or provides information about a
selected location (location known). The model is presented
in a map based web interface, where users interact with
various input variables and analyze the output. The input
variables in the interface are longitude and latitude of a
geographic location, region in a country, amount of biomass
needed in tons per annum, biomass type and biomass
scenario. Based on these variables, the user is able to see
whether there is sufficient biomass around the location. The
biomass availability is displayed in a list of cells around the
location with different density of the colors. A snapshot and
description of the webpage is provided in Figure 7 in a latter
section.
The
location
model
is
now
represented
in
SW
technologies. There are axioms and SWRL rules that define
and infer various knowledge about the model. In particular,
the reusable knowledge is separated from the calculations
and queried with DL-Query and SPARQL in order to make
the implicit facts explicit. Figure 1 shows an overall idea of
the ontology based location model. The ontology represents
the knowledge of the model; the axioms define the concepts
and assert constraints; SWRL rules assert new knowledge in
the ontology. The reasoners, such as Pellet help to deduce the
implicit knowledge and make them explicit. The query
engine with the DL-Query and SPARQL will identify the
entities required for the location related calculations.
Figure 1. Semantic Web technologies used in the location model
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Figure 2. The classes in the location model ontology
Various tools and technologies have been deployed in
order to realize the location model. Some of them are
Protégé 4, Pellet [17], OWLAPI [18] with Pellet, and Jena
[19]with Pellet. Protégé 4 is an ontology editor, and Pellet is
a reasoner and is used as a plug-in in Protégé. OWL API
with Pellet helps us to run DL-Queries in Java. In addition,
Jena API with Pellet reasoner has also been used to run
SPARQL queries.
Some classes of the location model ontology are depicted
in Figure 2. The important constituents of the ontology are
described in the following sections.
A. The Ontology
The location model ontology is created in Protégé 4 and
OWL-DL. The experts in the domain have been consulted in
order to understand the concepts and the relations. The
consultation went through several iteration in order to verify
the
understanding
and
representation.
The
classes,
properties, axioms, rule and
queries involved
in the
ontology are described separately in the following sections.
1)
Classes
The
key
classes
of
the
ontology
are
Feedstock,
BioenergyPlant, Technology, Country, Tariff, and Incentive. The
Feedstock is a biomass that will be used as an input for heat
and power generation. Technology is a process through which
a
Feedstock is treated in order to generate bioenergy.
Depending upon BiomassContent, a feedstock can be treated
with different technologies in order to generate energy
efficiently. The Incentive and Tariff in a project are affected
by other concepts, such as Technology, Country and Capacity
of a BioenergyPlant. The other concepts are BiomassContent,
Capacity,
Coefficient,
Function,
HourRemains,
and
OperationHours.
2)
Properties
The model exploits the properties and the values for the
representation
and
inference.
The
important
object
properties are relate the classes mentioned above, such as
BioenergyPlant, Capacity, Country and Technology with each
other. For example, a BioenergyPlant is related with Country,
Technology
and
Feedstock
with
properties
locatedIn,
hasTechnology
and
hasFeedstock
respectfully.
Figure
3
displays some properties in the ontology for the location
model.
The values of the data-type properties are mostly double
and play the key role in defining concepts and computing
simple equations. One of the important data-type properties
is hasDataValue, which is associated with many concepts,
such as Capacity, BiomassContent and Coefficient. Some data-
type
properties
are
used
to
hold
the
results of
the
calculations. For example, hasQaQiValue holds the computed
value of the quality assurance calculation.
Figure 3. Snapshot showing properties in the location model ontology
3)
Axioms
The axioms in the ontology are essential to define the
concepts and constraints. In the ontology, most of the
axioms
contain
data-type
properties,
particularly
with
double. For example, small medium and large capacity are
defined as follows:
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

SmallCapacity:
Capacity and hasDataValue some double[<200]
MediumCapacity:
Capacity and hasDataValue some double[>=200.0, <1000.0]
LargeCapacity:
Capacity and hasDataValue some double[>= 1000.0]
In these axioms, the small capacity is defined as a
capacity with value less than 200, the medium capacity is a
capacity with value greater than equal to 200 and less than
1000, and the large capacity is a capacity with value 1000
and more.
4)
Rules
In location model ontology, the SWRL rules are used to
assert more knowledge. There are some caveats using the
rules. Since OWL and SWRL both do not support non-
monotonicity, we cannot change the existing value in the
ontology. However, if the value of a property is empty or
not filled, it can assert a new value. If we add a new value to
a property, it will not replace the existing one, but the
property will have two values instead.
In this ontology,
most of the data-type properties are functional; therefore,
any attempt to add a new value to a property that already
has a value, will make the ontology inconsistent. Some rules
used in the ontology are depicted in Figure 4.
Figure 4. Some SWRL rules in Protégé to assert new knowledge and
calculate the quality assurance
5)
SPARQL Queries
One of the query languages used to query the knowledge
represented in the ontology is SPARQL. It will provide a
mechanism to answer the queries related to the location
calculations. For example, provided a set of conditions, such
as technology and country, we can search for the suitable
incentives applicable in a country. Figure 5 illustrates a
SPARQL query for applicable incentives for AD plants in
the UK. The result of this query will be RHI, LEC and FIT.
Figure 5. A SPARQL query in the location model ontology to find the
applicable incentives for a bioenergy plant in the UK
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

6)
DL – Queries
The DL-Queries identify the appropriate category of
biomass content, tariff and incentives. For example, in
Figure 6, the query asks, “what kind of biomass content is it
if it has biomass content value 0.9?”, and the query returns
LargeBiomassContent as the answer.
In another example, the query asks, “What kind of tariff is
applicable to a bioenergy plant if it has a capacity of
150.00?”, and MediumTariff is returned as the answer.
Likewise, SmallCapacity is the answer to the query “what
category of capacity does my bioenergy plant have if the
capacity value is 150.00?”.
Figure 6. Three DL-Queries in the location model ontology to determine
small, medium and large biomass content
III. ONTOLOGY BASED CALCULATION
The idea of ontology based location model is to separate
the domain knowledge of the model from the programing
code and calculations. The knowledge is represented in the
ontology for the model, and the ontology will provide the
crucial information to carry out the actual calculations. Once
the answers or values are obtained, there will be further
queries to obtain detailed information; in particular, many
numerical
values,
required
for
the
calculations,
are
generated by the ontology. Hence, it will allow separating
the logics from calculations, and the calculations will be the
only tasks carried out in the programming code.
In the ontology, we can apply sequential inference rules
to deduce the values required for the calculation. For
example, in the rules in Figure 4, identify the QaQi values
are identified by using a sequence of inferences. The values
obtained from the ontology are computed in Java methods,
and the values are sent to clients as RESTful services. The
clients request the output, in this case in JSON format, to the
server, and when they receive the output, they imbibe it in
their implementation and provide the information – the
output variables, in particular – to the users in a web page.
Figure 7 shows the map of Cologne region in Germany.
The polygons around the pin in the region represent the cells
containing the required biomass for the following requested
input variables:

Latitude = 6.336535

Longitude = 51.056189

Region Name = Cologne

Needed Biomass = 1000 tons per annum

Biomass Type = Root crops residue

Biomass Scenario = Basis
The system also provides a mechanism to store the
consultation containing the input and output variables under
a client’s name. The users, then, retrieve the saved results,
compare and analyze them in order to get a better view of the
potential project.
If a client chooses a place and places the pointer where
there is not enough biomass of the requested type and
amount, the system will suggest the client that there is not
enough biomass available and displays the nearest places
where the client might be interested to choose instead.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Figure 7. Google map showing 1000 tons of root crop residue around a point in Cologne region
IV. DISCUSSION
The results from the ontology-based location model have
shown that the approach has a promising solution. The
model is one of the DSTs for the bioenergy and algae plants,
which helps the plant developers or the farmers to identify
appropriate location for their projects. In the model, there are
various incentives and tariffs based on various factors, such
as location, feedstock and technology. The model needs to
execute
a
series
of
calculations
integrating
all
the
information.
Currently,
the domain
knowledge of the
location model is hard coded with programming code, which
entails the model with some limitations, for example the
model being less explicit, less reusable, less sharable and less
extendable. An alternative to these limitations is to separate
the knowledge from the code and represent it in a logic based
explicit format. One of such representations format is
Ontology. Ontology is a part of SW technologies.
In this paper, we explained how the concepts, relations
and logic behind the calculations could be represented
semantically. SW technologies allow us to define the
concepts, relations and their constraints, thus making the
knowledge explicit, sharable, reusable and extendable.
V. CONCLUSION
In
this
paper,
we
described
how
the
concepts,
relationships and logics could be separated from the location
model for bioenergy and biofuel projects, and represented
them in an ontology, which made the model more shareable,
reusable and extendible. Ontology allows an efficient
mechanism to specify formal concepts with axioms and
rules. Since the information in ontology is represented in
description logic, there are well-known inference engines
available to infer new knowledge from existing knowledge.
By inferring the knowledge in the ontology for the location
model,
we
generated
the
required
information
for
calculations, such as the variables: incentives, tariffs and
other attributes. This approach is useful for extending the
model and checking whether the knowledge in the model is
consistent.
In future work, we aim to integrate the bioenergy
ontology, which is developed as part of the BioenNW
project, into the ontology for the location model. If the time
permits, we will also integrate MathML into our system, and
infer the equations relevant to a particular scenario in such a
way that they will be executed in a correct sequence.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was undertaken as part of the bioenergy
project BioenNW (http://bioenergy-nw.eu) and algae project
EnAlgae (http://enalgae.eu). These projects are funded by
the European Union INTERREG IVB program. The data
needed for the location model is provided by the European
Bioenergy Research Institute (EBRI), UK and Karlsruhe
Institute of Technology (KIT), Institute for Technology
Assessment and Systems Analysis (ITAS), Germany. The
data for EnAlgae are provided by ACRRES, the Application
Centre for Renewable Resources from Wageningen UR.
REFERENCES
[1]
Bioenergy Website, “About BioenNW,” About BioenNW, 2015.
[Online].
Available:
http://bioenergy-nw.eu/about-bioennw/.
[Accessed: 23-May-2015].
[2]
EnAlgae
Website,
“About
EnAlgae,”
About
Enalgae,
2015.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.enalgae.eu/about-us.htm.
[Accessed: 23-May-2015].
[3]
C. P. Mitchell, “Development of decision support systems for
bioenergy applications,” in Biomass and Bioenergy, 2000, vol. 18,
pp. 265–278.
[4]
T. Buchholz, E. Rametsteiner, T. A. Volk, and V. A. Luzadis, “Multi
Criteria Analysis for bioenergy systems assessments,” Energy
Policy, vol. 37, pp. 484–495, 2009.
[5]
K. Sternberg, M.-M. Brinker, P. Raju, K. Sapkota, C. Chapman, and
L. Melville, “Who Does What ? The Enalgae Map on Algae 
Activities in North West Europe,” BE Sustainable, The magazine of
bioenergy and the bioeconomy, pp. 23–25, Jun-2014.
[6]
Food and Agriculture Organisation, “A Decision Support Tool for
Sustainable
Bioenergy,”
Energy,
2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/am237e/am237e00.pdf.
[Accessed:
31-Oct-2014].
[7]
K. Sapkota, W. Byrne, L. Melville, and C. Chapman, “An Ontology-
Based Model of the Bioenergy Project Development Domain,” in
International Bio-Energy Conference, 2014, pp. 1–2.
[8]
K. Sapkota, W. Byrne, P. Raju, C. Chapman, L. Melville, D. Wright,
and J. Scott, “Ontology-Based Pathways Generation for Biomass to
Bioenergy Conversion,” in The 10th IEEE International Conference
on e-Business Engineering (ICEBE 2014), Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, China, November 5 - 7 , 2014, 2014, pp. 213–219.
[9]
K. Sapkota, P. Raju, C. Chapman, W. Byrne, and L. Melville,
“Bioenergy
Ontology
for
Automatic
Bioenergy
Pathway
Generation,”
in
International
Conference
on
Knowledge
Engineering (ICKE 2014), Singapore, February 2 - 3, 2015, 2015,
pp. 1–7.
[10]
K. Sapkota, P. Raju, W. Byrne, and C. Chapman, “Ontology-Based
Economic Models for Bioenergy and Biofuel Projects,” in Ninth
IEEE International Conference on Semantic Computing (IEEE-ICSC
2015) February 7 – 9, 2015 Anaheim, CA, USA, 2015, pp. 397–404.
[11]
K. Sapkota, A. Aldea, M. Younas, D. A. Duce, and R. Banares-
Alcantara,
“Semantic
Knowledge
Mapping: An
Extension
of
Compendium with Semantic Knowledge Representation,” Int. J.
Artif. Intell. Appl., vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 1–12, 2012.
[12]
T. R. Gruber, “A Translation Approach to Portable Ontology
Specifications by A Translation Approach to Portable Ontology
Specifications,” Knowl. Creat. Diffus. Util., vol. 5, no. April, pp.
199–220, 1993.
[13]
I. Niles and A. Pease, “Towards a standard upper ontology,” in In
The
2nd
International
Conference
on
Formal
Ontology
in
Information Systems (FOIS-2001), 2001.
[14]
I. Horrocks, P. F. Patel-schneider, H. Boley, S. Tabet, B. Grosof, and
M. Dean, “SWRL : A Semantic Web Rule Language Combining 
OWL and RuleML,” W3C Member submission 21. 2004.
[15]
E. Prud’hommeaux and A. Seaborne, “SPARQL Query Language
for RDF,” W3C Recomm., vol. 2009, pp. 1–106, 2008.
[16]
Protege Website, “DL Query Tab,” DL Query Tab, 2015. [Online].
Available:
http://protegewiki.stanford.edu/wiki/DLQueryTab.
[Accessed: 23-May-2015].
[17]
E. Sirin, “Pellet Reasoner,” Clark Parsia LLC. pp. 1–11, 2008.
[18]
M. Horridge and S. Bechhofer, “The OWL API: A Java API for
OWL ontologies,” Semant. Web, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 11–21, 2011.
[19]
M. Grobe, “RDF, Jena, SparQL and the ‘Semantic Web,’” in
Proceedings of the ACM SIGUCCS Fall Conference on User
Services Conference (SIGUCCS ’09), 2009, p. 131.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-420-6
SEMAPRO 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

