Ontology-based Modeling and Inference for Occupational Risk Prevention 
 
Alexandra Galatescu, Adriana Alexandru  
National Institute for R&D in Informatics, 
 8-10 Averescu Avenue, Bucharest,  011455, Romania 
 e-mail: {agal, adriana}@ ici.ro  
 
   
 
 
 
Corneliu Zaharia 
Stefan Nicolau Institute of Virology 
285 Mihai Bravu Avenue, 030304, Bucharest, Romania 
e-mail: corneliu.zaharia@virology.ro 
Stefan Kovacs 
National Research Institute for Occupational Safety 
35A Ghencea Avenue, 061695, Bucharest, Romania 
e-mail: stefan_agk@yahoo.com
 
 
Abstract— The paper describes and motivates the use of 
ontologies and of an ontology-based model in a training system 
(under development) for the occupational risks prevention. 
The personalized training (for a specified context, e.g., a given 
activity, workplace, operator type, work machine, etc.) will be 
the result of the automatic discovery of the prevention 
documents and actions that fit the training request. The paper 
also sketches the basic components of the training system for 
risk prevention, adapted to the proposed semantic view. 
Keywords- 
ontologies; 
ontology-based 
modeling 
and 
inference; occupational risk prevention; e-training 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The paper gives an approach based on ontologies for a 
web system (under development) aiming at the online, fast 
and personalized training for occupational risks prevention. 
Risk prevention is a combination of disciplines necessary to 
reduce the risk of injuries and fatalities in any work 
environment. A proactive approach is the early recognition 
and prevention of the risk factors 
Occupational risks are a category of risks that appear in 
work environments with a high probability of harming 
people or machines. Occupational risk prevention and 
management comply with the principles and methodology of 
the risk management (RM) process, a key process within 
both private and public organizations [1].  
The training for occupational risk prevention should 
advise the operator on the health, safety, security and 
environmental issues related to his work. He can ask for 
training before or during the execution of an activity or 
before the use of a certain machine.  
The system presented in this paper is general and 
adaptable to any domain with major occupational risks 
(industry, biology, construction, transportation, environment, 
agriculture, health etc.). It unifies existing methodological 
rules and standards for risk prevention and provides tools for 
the personalized training and consulting, by the dynamic and 
multi-criteria selection of the prevention documents and 
actions. It will eliminate the need for a periodical training of 
the employees and will diminish the costs from the poor 
information on the risks. 
Terminology and guidelines for risk prevention. The 
system relies on the standard terminology proposed with ISO 
CD31000 [2], combined with the terminology common to 
several upper-level ontologies and process models.  
There are several risk-related standards published by ISO 
and other standards bodies, as well as many proposals and 
principles that refer to risk management. In 2005, ISO has 
initiated a working group to develop a guidance standard on 
RM, ISO CD31000. In conjunction with this standard, the 
group has updated the ISO/IEC Guide 73-Risk Management 
– Vocabulary [3] that gives the basic vocabulary and the 
definitions of RM generic terms.  It encourages a mutual and 
consistent understanding and a coherent approach to the 
description of the RM activities.   
In Europe, the risk prevention is subject of two directives 
Seveso I and Seveso II [4] that establish the domain 
terminology, the obligations and normative documents to be 
elaborated regarding the large scale industrial hazards.  
State of the art in software for risk prevention. There 
are products for the risk control in industrial environments, 
and domain-specific standards and software tools for RM in 
health, environment, insurance, finances, construction, 
transportation, etc. Risk prevention is automated for the 
security of computers, Web, networks. Security components 
are integrated lately with the operating systems. Ontologies 
are also used mainly for the security management (of assets, 
networks, information systems, databases, etc.). Some 
examples are in [5]-[9]. There is no system based on 
knowledge and semantics for occupational risk prevention 
and for training and dynamic discovery of prevention 
information, documents and actions.  
However, [10] proposes the risk evaluation and analysis 
along the life cycle of the construction projects, based on 
ontologies and a conceptual model. They rely on a simpler 
reference ontology and model and have a different inference 
goal. Also, [11] gives an example of Web Ontology 
Language (OWL) [12] ontology for occupational health. 
And, [13] confirms the idea that a model of occupational 
risks is important because it describes relevant data in the 
context of event occurring and this data can be transformed 
205
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

into knowledge navigated using an intelligent search engine 
(similarly to the goal of the system presented in this paper). 
A semantics-based approach for risk prevention. In 
order to benefit from semantics, the system relies on: 
• 
A reference ontology that gives the basic types of 
taxonomies and structures for the classification and 
description of the risk factors, of the relationships 
among them, of the consequences and actions for their 
prevention, etc. This ontology represents the background 
of a reference model for occupational risk prevention 
(represented in Fig. 2 and detailed in Section 3). 
• 
Domain-specific ontologies and knowledge bases, built 
by the specialization of the generic concepts and 
relationships in the reference ontology and model.  
• 
A query language and editor for risk prevention based 
on the domain ontologies and reference model. The 
framework for the query composition based on 
ontologies is given in Fig. 3.   
• 
Automatic and semantics-based inference for search and 
discovery of prevention documents and actions based on 
the risk context and requestor's preferences. 
The semantics will support the interoperability of the 
organizations with respect to risk prevention, by common 
vocabularies and model.  The ontology-based inference will 
increase the precision of the search algorithm. Also, the 
vocabularies and model can be dynamically extended and 
used in further inferences or they can be reused in other 
applications. 
The constructs in the reference and domain ontologies 
comply with a subset of the constructs proposed for OWL  in 
[12]. The constructs in the reference model comply with the 
basic constructs in the entity-relationship model, adapted to 
the use of ontologies instead of entities. 
Structure of the paper. Section 2 sketches the basic 
components of the training system. Section 3 describes the 
semantic and modeling layers for the representation of the 
occupational risks and of the context for their occurrence. It 
also enumerates the basic types of inferences that will be 
implemented in the system and exemplifies the composition 
of a training query based on ontologies. 
II. 
COMPONENTS OF THE ONTOLOGY-BASED TRAINING 
SYSTEM FOR OCCUPATIONAL RISK PREVENTION 
 
The intended system will have components distributed on 
two platforms (see Fig. 1): 
• 
Platform for the risk design, i.e., for the risk 
identification, description and analysis (Fig. 1, left); 
• 
Platform for the risk evaluation and decision-making on 
the prevention documents and actions (Fig. 1, right).  
The two platforms share the repository composed of 
ontologies, rules, queries and documents.  
The components of the platform for the risk design are:  
• 
Ontology Editor to build (specialization or composition)  
ontologies or list structures in the model given in Fig. 2;  
• 
Rule Editor to define or customize rules for risk 
prevention in the designer's organization; 
• 
Query Editor to predefine or customize queries for risk 
prevention training.  
The components of the platform for the risk evaluation 
and decision-making are: 
• 
Query 
Composition 
and 
Submission 
Engine 
to 
dynamically compose the training queries.   
• 
Model Navigator to navigate the ontologies in the 
reference model in order to compose the query, as 
exemplified in Fig. 3. 
• 
Inference Engine, called automatically after the 
submission of the query, in order to perform the 
automatic discovery of the training documents registered 
in the system and of the appropriate prevention actions. 
Besides the conditions and constraints in the query, the 
discovery will also rely on rules previously defined by 
the risk designer. 
• 
Query Result Generator, called automatically by the 
Inference Engine, after the document discovery, in order 
to arrange the results. 
Discovered documents can be stored either in the system 
repository or in the repositories/ Web servers of the 
organizations registered in the system. The documents can be 
in different formats: Web pages, Word, .pdf, .xls, etc. 
The system is developed using Microsoft Visual Studio 
2008 and obout Suite for ASP.Net [14]. It integrates the 
expression evaluator given in [15] and the interface for the 
rule and query editors is inspired from [16]. 
III. 
AN ONTOLOGY-BASED MODEL FOR RISK 
PREVENTION 
The system integrates three layers representing the 
occupational risks and the context for their occurrence and 
prevention: semantic, modeling and execution layers. 
The semantic layer is composed of the reference 
ontology and the domain ontologies that give the basic 
vocabularies for domains with potential risks. The domain 
ontologies are populated by domain experts (risk designers) 
using the ontology editor. They are represented by: 
• 
domain-specific taxonomies, i.e., hierarchies composed 
of concepts connected, in this system, by relationships 
like: specialization or synonymy or composition (part-
of) or list-like relationships;  
• 
attributes of and constraints upon the concepts and 
relationships in each ontology. 
The concept attributes in any ontology can refer to 
external ontologies. For example, the "domain" attribute of 
an "activity" in Activity ontology can be selected from 
Domain ontology.   
 
 
 
 
 
206
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Components of the training system for occupational risk prevention 
In this system, the ontology editor treats separately the 
specialization, composition and list-like ontologies, because 
each type of ontology has its specific features. For example, 
the attribute inheritance is implicitly implemented only in 
the specialization ontologies. For the composition ontologies, 
it can be requested by the user for attributes of the ontology 
or of certain concepts. For list-like ontologies it is useless. 
The modeling layer is needed in addition to the semantic 
layer in order to represent the application-specific 
relationships and constraints between concepts in different 
ontologies. In this system, the inter-ontology relationships 
are defined according to the reference model represented in 
Fig. 2. An ontology-based model is seen as a union of 
relationships between concepts in different ontologies, along 
with their attributes and constraints.  
The execution (technological) layer represents the 
ontologies and models, the documents, rules, constraints and 
queries in a format interpretable by the software.  
A. Semantic Layer for Occupational Risk Prevention  
The concept types connected as in Fig. 2 and described 
below root ontologies based on specialization, composition 
or list relationships.These ontologies have been proposed to 
help for the identification and classification of the risk 
factors, of the consequences and preventive measures, of the 
dangerous activities and of the processes they compose, etc.  
Risk: combination of an event probability and its 
consequences [3]. The event can take place in a certain 
workplace, during a certain activity/ task or resulting from a 
material source action (e.g., water, a substance, gas, etc.).  
Executant (or Starter or Operator): the (human or 
material) agent that, during an activity, can cause unexpected 
events and also can be injured by them or can get 
professional diseases. 
Process: a sequence of activities/ operations/ tasks in a 
certain domain and workplace. The activities in a process can 
be executed by different executants, at different moments 
and in different places. 
Activity (operation/ task): atomic operation executed 
independently or during a process inside the organization. 
Event: occurrence or existence of a particular set of 
circumstances. An unpredictable event is called "incident" 
[3]. It can be the consequence of the executants’ action using 
a certain instrument and acting on a certain object.  
Workplace: 
location 
in 
the 
organization 
where 
unexpected events can occur and affect/ destroy it. 
Consequence: outcome of an event or change in 
circumstances affecting the achievement of objectives [3]. 
An event may lead to a range of consequences. A 
consequence can have positive or negative effects. For the 
occupational risks, only the negative effects are considered.  
Work_Instrument: tool/ machine/ substance/ etc., used 
by the operator during an activity/ task. It can determine an 
event or be damaged by it. 
Work_Object: object existing at a workplace. It can 
determine an event or an event may impact on it. It can be 
material (e.g., a substance) or human (e.g., an infected 
patient in a hospital). 
Document: 
a 
document 
containing 
prevention/ 
protection/ control instructions, regulations, rules or 
measures for risk prevention.  
Prevention_Action: management action preventing the 
unexpected events or diseases. An example is the training of 
the operators in workplaces with potential risks. 
B. Modeling Layer for Occupational Risk Prevention 
Figure 2 shows how the semantic and modeling layers for 
risk prevention are integrated from the conceptual point of 
view. The modeling layer represents the relationships 
between the ontologies defined on the semantic layer. These 
relationships have been selected depending on the needed 
reasoning on them and on the context for the risk 
identification, analysis, evaluation and prevention, identified 
at this moment. The model can be dynamically enhanced 
with new ontologies, relationships, attributes and constraints 
that will be used in future rules, queries and inferences.   
Risk modeling for their prevention and control is today 
mainly a mathematical modeling complemented with formal 
methods to assess or measure the risks and to help the 
PORTAL  for Occupational  Risk Prevention 
Risk Designer 
Training Requestor 
Ontology 
Editor  
Rule 
Editor  
Query 
Editor  
Inference Engine 
Model 
Navigator  
Query 
Composition 
Engine 
Reference Ontology for 
Risk Prevention 
 
Domain Ontologies for 
Risk Prevention 
 
Ontologies, Rules, Queries, 
Document Database 
Query 
Result 
Generator 
207
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

decision-making for their prevention. Also, this modeling is 
usually a domain-specific one for health/ financial/ 
insurance/ economic/ business/ etc. risks. 
The benefits from an ontology-based model in general 
and, in particular, for risk prevention are: 
• 
The types of concepts and the relationships between 
them in the model, as well as the reasoning on them, are 
explicit (external to the application code) and 
independent of the application tools; 
• 
The ontologies can be shared by different diagrams or 
models (e.g., for risk monitoring and control, in addition 
to risk prevention). 
• 
The separation of the ontology-based model from the 
representation of the ontology content (the domain-
specific hierarchies) makes it flexible, adaptable and 
extensible. The tools for ontology editing and navigation 
may differ from the tools for the model editing and 
navigation. Also, the reasoning on the model can be 
separately 
implemented 
from 
the 
reasoning 
on 
ontologies. 
 
The basic relationships in the reference model are 
enumerated below. 
Activity->Process relationship is a “part-of” relationship 
between the component activities and the process they 
belong to.  In a process, the activities might be executed by 
operators in different departments and even in different 
organizations. The risks should be tracked for each activity, 
but also for each process in/ cross organizations. 
Process->Process relationship is a “part-of” relationship 
between a process and its sub-processes with potential risks 
that should be tracked. 
Activity->Workplace 
and 
Process->Workplace 
relationship “executed_IN” are necessary to track the risks 
per activity, process and workplace at the same time.  
Executant->Activity relationship “is_agent_of”  and also 
Activity->Work_Instrument 
and 
Executant-
>Work_Instrument relationship “acts_WITH” are necessary 
for reasoning on an operator-activity-machine sub-model. 
Executant->Event relationship “causes” helps for the 
identification of the events that an operator might determine 
by his work. Inverse relationship “acts_ON” between Event-
>Executant helps for the identification of the executants that 
can be injured after certain events.  
Work_Instrument->Event 
relationship 
“causes” 
is 
necessary to identify the events determined by the 
inappropriate use of a certain instrument. The inverse 
relationship “acts_ON” between Event->Work_Instrument 
is necessary to identify the instruments that can be damaged 
after certain events. 
Besides the executants and the work instruments, the 
unexpected events or diseases might be caused by other 
objects existing at the workplace. These events can be found 
by the relationship “causes” between Work_Object->Event. 
Also, the objects damaged by certain events can be found by 
the relationship “acts_ON” between Event->Work_Object.  
Event->Workplace are correlated by the relationship 
“acts_ON” in order to associate the events to the workplaces 
they can damage.   
Risk->Event relationship “has_effect” associates the 
identified risks to the events they may produce.  
Event->Consequence 
relationship 
“has_effect” 
associates the events with their consequences.  
Document->Risk relationship “describes” associates to 
the identified risks the documents and the actions necessary 
for their prevention. 
The reference model in Fig. 2 also associates the 
elements with potential risks that should be tracked (types of 
concepts 
like 
Activity, 
Executant, 
Workplace, 
Work_Instrument, Work_Object) with their specific risks (in 
Risk ontology), by the relationship “has_risk”. 
 
has_risk 
EXECUTANT 
acts_ON 
PROCESS 
ACTIVITY 
(OPERATION/ TASK) 
 
part-of 
is_agent_of
causes 
EVENT 
RISK 
executed_IN 
acts_WITH 
has_risk 
has_risk 
acts_ON 
WORK_OBJECT 
WORKPLACE 
has_effect 
CONSEQUENCE 
has_effect 
describes 
DOCUMENT 
PREVENTION
_ACTION 
acts_ON 
acts_ON 
has_risk 
causes 
causes 
WORK_INSTRUMENT 
STATISTICAL_ 
INDICATOR 
security level_for 
includes 
describes 
describes 
succeeds 
 
Figure 2.  Basic ontologies and the relationships between them in the reference model for occupational risk prevention
208
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

The generic concepts above, their attributes, relationships 
and constraints in the reference model are specialized and 
instantiated by the risk designers, resulting in domain models 
(e.g., for biological or industrial risks). For any domain 
concept, the designer instantiates the concept attributes 
defined in the reference or domain ontology (either implicit, 
for the concept unique identification, or inherited or concept 
specific attributes). By their instantiation, the generic 
relationships and constraints in the reference model become 
domain-specific relationships between concrete concepts in 
ontologies. 
 
C. Ontology-based Inference and Query Composition for 
Risk Prevention 
The basic knowledge and inference for risk prevention 
will include (see details in the case study given in [17]): 
• 
Rules for query formulation and for the verification of 
its syntactic and semantic correctness; 
• 
Rules for the semantic completion of the search query: 
for each concept in a specialization ontology, its 
subtypes and synonyms are added in the query, as search 
alternatives;  
• 
Rules for navigation on domain ontologies and models; 
• 
Rules for risk evaluation and for search and discovery of 
documents and actions for risk prevention; 
• 
Inheritance rules for both concept attributes and attribute 
values. In this system, for the specialization ontologies, 
the values of certain attributes can be inherited by 
concepts from their parents, at the designer's request. 
But, in the concept description, there are identification 
attributes with concept-specific values that cannot be 
inherited (e.g., ID, concept author, creation date). 
• 
Inheritance rules for concept relationships. For instance, 
the relationship between a risk and a certain activity or 
workplace can be inherited by the subtypes of the 
respective risk. 
• 
Rules for ordering the query results, depending on the 
conditions and constraints on the involved concepts. 
The query semantic completion for a concept C is 
performed by the navigation in the ontology the concept C 
belongs to and by the extraction of its subtypes and 
synonyms. They are correlated with the initial concept C by 
the logical operator OR. Hence, the search algorithm does 
not use the concept C and its subtypes/ synonyms 
simultaneously, but successively, even if the search with the 
initial concept C is successful. The benefit is that more 
appropriate results are obtained than using only the initial 
concepts. 
Regarding the inference for the verification of the query 
semantic correctness, the system will achieve: 
• 
Verification of the semantic compatibility between each 
concept type C and its concept-like instance (value) 
specified in the query (when the value is a concept, not 
numeric). This verification is fully automated only when 
the value concept belongs to the same ontology as the 
concept type C. Otherwise, the system involves the 
requestor to confirm their semantic compatibility. For 
instance, 
the 
concept 
'Laboratory_Procedure' 
is 
compatible with its instance 'p1' only whether p1 is a 
laboratory procedure as well, not a concept with another 
meaning. 
• 
Verification of the semantic relationships between the 
concepts in the query. Suppose that the query includes 
two concepts Ci and Cj that belong to the ontologies Oi 
and Oj. Also, suppose that, previously, the designer has 
defined a generic relationship R between the ontologies 
Oi and Oj. The system checks if the designer has also 
instantiated the relationship R for the concepts Ci and 
Cj. If he did not, the occurrence of both concepts in the 
query might be a semantic contradiction. 
For instance, suppose that the query includes the 
activity A and the work instrument I. Also, suppose that 
between the ontologies Activity and Work_Instrument 
there is a generic relationship executed_WITH. If there is 
no concrete instance of this relationship between A and I 
(A executed_WITH I), it is possible that the instrument I 
is incorrectly associated with the activity A in the same 
query. The requestor will be notified before the request 
execution in order to review his request. Otherwise, he 
can receive results about the instrument I that are not 
correlated with the results regarding the activity A. 
Figure 3 gives an example of query composition based on 
ontologies. The query has three parts:  
• 
Search query: a Boolean expression with concepts as 
operands. For example, the user asks for the prevention 
rules and the prevention measures to be selected from 
the ontology Document and for the physical risks at the 
workplace to be selected from the Risk ontology); 
• 
Search condition: an expression with known concepts as 
operands. They indicate the work context where the 
risks and events can occur (e.g., the activity 
“Laboratory_Procedure” 
selected 
from 
Activity 
ontology 
and 
the 
work 
instrument 
“Substance_with_microorganisms” 
selected 
from  
Work_Instrument ontology). 
• 
Concept restrictions: expressions with concept attributes 
as operands. For example, the search should find the 
physical risks with high gravity and that can occur 
frequently. 
After the query submission, it is analyzed and 
semantically completed, the conditions and constraints are 
syntactically and semantically analyzed and, then, the search 
algorithm is executed. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The paper has described the conceptual and semantic 
framework of a system for training on occupational risks. It 
relies on a dedicated reference ontology and model, on 
domain specific ontologies and on reasoning on them, 
basically, for the search and discovery of registered 
prevention documents and actions.  
Although the importance of the ontologies and of a 
model for risk prevention has already been revealed in the 
209
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

literature, there is no general software for on-line training, 
the goal of the system presented in this paper. 
The system architecture was adapted to a semantics-
based view on the risk prevention. Its interface dedicated to 
the domain experts moves the work for ontology editing and 
risk design, from IT experts to the domain experts. The 
system and its portal will contribute to a knowledge 
repository for risk prevention inside and cross organizations. 
It will be accessible from Web and will gradually replace the 
periodical training in organizations.  
The risk prevention model described in this paper can be 
dynamically extended with new ontologies, relationships, 
constraints and rules, when necessary. They will be 
automatically considered in future inferences on the model. 
The main benefits in this system from ontologies and 
from the ontology-based model for risk prevention are:  
• 
organization interoperability, by common vocabularies 
and models on risk prevention represented in the 
reference ontology and model and in the domain 
ontologies and rules. They can be reused in other 
applications. 
• 
semantics-based inference, by ontology and model-
based verifications and executions of the rules and 
queries. 
They 
increase 
the 
search 
precision, 
completeness and correctness; 
• 
personalized queries for training, dedicated to domain 
experts. 
The system is partly implemented, as follows: 
• 
The platform for the risk design is already implemented. 
Besides the rule editor and query editor, the designer 
can use general tools for:  
o 
ontology editing (for specialization, composition 
and list-like ontologies), with automatic inheritance 
of the attributes only for the specialization 
ontologies; and, for  
o 
reference 
and 
domain 
model 
editing 
and 
instantiation. These tools help the designers to add 
to the reference model: new ontologies, new inter-
ontology relationships, new attributes for ontologies 
and relationships. And, to add to the domain model 
and ontologies: new concepts, new concept 
instances, new relationship instances. They also 
provide the graphical view of the models. 
• 
The platform for risk evaluation and decision-making is 
partly implemented: the query composition engine and 
model navigator are finished; but, the inference engine 
and query result generator are under development. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] MethodWare, "ISO 31000: Risk Management Standard,"  2009, 
http://www.methodware.com/iso-31000-risk-management-
standard-published [visited, May 14, 2010] 
[2] ISO, "ISO 31000: 2009 Risk management —principles and 
implementation 
of 
risk 
management," 
2009, 
http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=43170 
[visited, May 10, 2010] 
[3] ISO/ TMB/ WG, "ISO/ IEC Guide 73:2002 “Risk management —
Vocabulary 
Guidelines 
for 
use 
in 
Standards,” 
2009, 
http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnumber=34998 [visited, 
May 10, 2010] 
[4] MAHB (Major Accident Hazards Bureau ), "Safety Management 
Systems - Seveso II," Official Publications of European 
Communities, 
Luxembourg, 
1998, 
http://mahbsrv.jrc.it/ 
GuidanceDocs-SafetyManagementSystems.html [visited, May 11, 
2010] 
[5] S.-W. Lee, R. Gandhi, D. Muthurajan, D. Yavagal, and G.-J. Ahn, 
“Building problem domain ontology from security requirements in 
regulatory documents,” Proc. Intl. WS on Software Engineering 
for Secure Systems. ACM Press, 2006 
[6] B. Tsoumas and D. Gritzalisi, “Towards an ontology-based 
security management,” Proc. Intl. Conf. on Advanced Information 
Networking and Applications (AINA), Vienna, Austria, 2006  
[7] M. Klemen, E. Weippl, A. Ekelhart, and S. Fenz, “Security 
ontology: Simulating threats to corporate assets,” Proc. 2nd Intl. 
Conf. on Information Systems Security (ICISS), Springer, 2006 
[8] A. Simmonds, P. Sandilands, and L. van Ekert, “An ontology for 
network security attacks,” Proc. Asian Applied Computing 
Conference (AACC), LNCS, vol. 3285, Springer, 2004 
[9] P. Mitra, C. Pan, P. Liu, and V. Atluri, “Privacy-preserving 
semantic interoperation and access control of heterogeneous 
databases,” Proc. Symposium on Information, computer and 
communications security, ACM Press, 2006 
[10] N. Forcada, M. Casals and A. Fuertes, "The Basis of a Decision 
Making Tool for Risks’ Evaluation Based on Ontologies," Proc. 
Intl. Conf. on Information and Knowledge Management - Helping 
the Practitioner in Planning and Building (CIB), Stuttgart, 2007, 
http://www.baufachinformation.de/aufsatz.jsp?ul=2008031001259  
[visited, April 12, 2010] 
[11] J. Kola, B.Wheeldin and A. Rector, "Lessons in building OWL 
Ontology driven applications: OCHWIZ – an Occupational Health 
Application," 
National 
e-Science 
Centre, 
2007, 
http://www.allhands.org.uk/2007/programme/download490f.html?i
d=849&p=paper [visited, April 12, 2010] 
[12] W3C, 
"OWL 
2 
Web 
Ontology 
Language  
Structural Specification and Functional-Style Syntax Oct. 2009," 
http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/REC-owl2-syntax-20091027/ 
[visited, May12, 2010] 
[13] P. Swuste, "Qualitative Methods for Occupational Risk Prevention 
Strategies in Safety or Control Banding safety," Safety Science 
Monitor, Issue 3, vol. 11, 2007 
[14] obout,"obout Suite for ASP.Net", www.obout.com, 2010 [visited, 
May 20, 2010] 
[15] P. Ganaye, "An expression evaluator written in VB.NET," 
http://www.codeproject.com/KB/vb/expression_evaluator.aspx 
[visited, April 2, 2010] 
[16] V. Abilov, "WYSIWYG rule editor: create and test rules for any 
.NET 
type," 
http://bloggingabout.net/blogs/vagif/archive/ 
2009/04/13/wysiwyg-rule-editor-create-and-test-rules-for-any-net-
type.aspx [visited, Jan. 15, 2010] 
[17] A. Alexandru, F. Filip, A. Galatescu and E. Jitaru. "Using 
Ontologies in eHealth and Biomedicine", in book A. Shukla and R. 
Tiwari (Eds) "Intelligent Medical Technologies and Biomedical 
Engineering: Tools and Applications", IGP Global, May, 2010 
 
210
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  An example for the composition, based on ontologies, of a query for training in risk prevention  
 
 
 
 
 
 
211
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

