Towards an Agile E-Commerce
Daniela Wolff, Marc Schaaf, Stella Gatziu Grivas
School of Business, Institute of Business Information Technology
University of Applied Sciences Northwestern Switzerland
Olten, Switzerland
{daniela.wolff, marc.schaaf, stella.gatziugrivas}@fhnw.ch
Abstract—Creating an agile e-commerce is still a challenging
issue. The alignment between business and IT plays a key role as
changing business demands must be implemented immediately.
To avoid misunderstandings and to lead to a better business-IT
alignment we provide an ontology model, describing enterprise
objects and their relations. As business rules guide or inﬂuence
business behaviour, we use business rules which can be easily
created and changed by business people. A system works directly
with the ontology and the business rules. So, if changes occur,
the business can express their changes and the IT system can
react accordingly. As it easier for business people to express their
knowledge and needs in a semi-formal way, we present a 3-phase
procedure which helps to transform the semi-formal expressed
knowledge into the formal representation needed for IT systems.
Keywords-context-awareness; rule based; complex event pro-
cessing.
I. INTRODUCTION
Continuously changing challenges, like shorter product cy-
cles, increasing customer expectations, changing regulations,
forces today’s enterprises to be more agile [1][20]. Henbury
regards agile enterprises as capable of rapid adaptations in
response to unexpected and unpredicted changes and events,
market opportunities and customer requirements [14]. As e-
commerce becomes the preferred way of doing business [10],
an enterprise must be able to adapt its e-commerce immedi-
ately when changes occur.
The adaptation of the e-commerce requires the
1) deﬁnition of the business model, i.e., knowledge about
users, products and business rules
2) dynamic adaption of the business model according to
happenings in the environment (events). The dynamic
adaptation of this business model leads to the adaption of
the Information Technology (IT) to match new business
strategies, goals and needs, the so-called business-IT
alignment.
3) personalization, for example the analysis of the user
behavior. While the user is navigating through the web
site his clickstream is observed and according to his
interest and behaviour the web pages are personalized
[3].
For the deﬁnition of the business model, a common approach
is the use of adaptive hypermedia and adaptive Web systems.
Adaptive software systems are based on a business model
representing user knowledge, goals, interests and other features
to distinguish among different users. The challenge for the
adaption of the business model is the use of different languages
by different actors in the alignment process. For instance, IT
managers can read and understand UML but such languages
may not provide adequate information for business people
[15].
As ontologies promote a common understanding among
people [19], we present an ontology describing business ob-
jects and rules. This ontology is used as the knowledge base
for the e-commerce and web site adaptation. If changes occur,
the business user can express his changes in the ontology and
the system uses the updated knowledge base. This approach
supports enterprises, especially e-commerce, to be more agile
and to be able to react to changing environments immediately.
This paper is structured as follows. First, we introduce a
simpliﬁed scenario, which is used in this paper to show our
approach. Then we describe the knowledge base. As business
users can express their needs better in a semi-formal way we
propose a method which enables users to express their needs
using a structured template which can easily transformed into
the formal representation. Finally, we show the beneﬁt of the
model-based approach for the business-IT alignment.
II. SCENARIO
To explain our approach, we use a simpliﬁed scenario of a
book store. The book store provides information about books,
authors, and search functionality. A customer can register
himself and can enter further information.
The store distinguishes between the four browsing strategies
proposed by [18]: direct buying, search/deliberation, Hedonic
browsing and knowledge building. A visitor using the direct
buying strategy has a speciﬁc product in mind which he wants
to buy. His browsing pattern is therefore very focused and
targeted. Visitors using the search and deliberation strategy are
also focused with a future purchase in mind. Their objective is
to acquire relevant information to help make a better choice.
The hedonic browsing is dominated by exploratory search
behaviour and therefore more sessions are spent viewing the
broader product category level pages than product information.
The visitor using the knowledge building strategy is acquiring
relevant product information potentially useful in the future.
They tend to focus more on information pages.
The strategy of the book store could for example be to
help the users following the direct buying strategy by the
providing of relevant information related to the content they
have already visited. For instance, if a user searches for a
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Figure 1.
3-Phase-Procedure.
speciﬁc criminal story set in Cologne from Frank Schätzing,
the users navigates to the web page containing a list of all
books of Frank Schätzing and then he starts looking for the
criminal story. To reduce the list of results he enters into a
search ﬁeld Cologne. The System recognizes from his click
path that he is interested in criminal stories of Frank Schätzing
and Cologne. The system retrieves that Frank Schätzing has
written the criminal story “Tod und Teufel” playing in Cologne
and provide the user a link to this book. With this also, people
who do have a speciﬁc book in mind can be inspired. The
click stream is analysed and interpreted and related books
are given as links on the web page. To stay agile, the book
store does not want to ﬁx business objects, like products, for
instance in a database, and the link between these objects.
Additionally, coding the business rules, expressing actions
which should be triggered depending on speciﬁc conditions,
like sending an E-Mail when a user gets often to restricted
web pages, in java or other programming languages leads to
inﬂexible enterprises as IT experts are required to implement
changing rules. The bookstore must have the freedom to
change the product catalogue according to the customers’
needs and also have the ability to change the user groups
and the actions which should be triggered according to their
behaviour and interests. Additionally, a business user should
have the freedom to express changing business rules in an easy
way.
In the next section, we present an ontology with which an
enterprise can be described. To make it easier for business
people, we propose a 3-phase-procedure where business peo-
ple can express their knowledge in a semi-formal way, which
can be transformed into a formal and afterwards if necessary
into an executable form.
III. PERSONALIZATION ONTOLOGY
In [8], we described a method for ontology development
in the e-government ﬁeld, which we have adapted for the e-
commerce area. The method comprises four levels of formal-
isation: informal (knowledge captured in natural language),
semi-formal (knowledge represented in a semi-formal way
in structured templates), formal (knowledge formalized in
OWL [5] and SWRL [6]) and executable form (knowledge
formalized in e.g., Esper-Rules [9] and Java).
The method consists of three phases (Figure 1):
Phase 1 – Deﬁning the business model: capturing user
groups, product catalogue and business rules in a
semi-formal way.
Phase 2 – Deﬁning the interchange model: transform the
semi-formal expressed terms, facts and rules into
OWL and SWRL.
Phase 3 – Deﬁning the execution model: transform the
formal model into a machine executable form.
These phases are described in more detail in the next sections.
A. Business Model
Writing down the terms, facts and rules (all together called
‘business rules’) in a semi-formal way so that business people
can easily understand them because they are close to ‘normal
English’ and IT people can understand them as well as they are
clearly structured. We use the templates provided by Barbara
von Halle [23]. The ﬁrst step is about deﬁning the user groups.
As an example, we use the browsing strategies introduced in
the last section. Using the template a user group can be deﬁned
as follows:
Behavior
IS
DEFINED
AS
Deﬁnition
Search/
Deliberation
a strategy which intends to acquire
relevant information to help make a
more optimal choice.
Secondly, as the various user groups provide different
navigation patterns, the measures for how to recognize the user
groups have to be also speciﬁed. For instance to recognize
a hedonic browser, the page types must be analysed. A
person who uses the hedonic browsing strategy focuses on
category pages. So, the number of category pages is very high.
Additionally, he visits a lot of product pages. However, he does
not repeat visiting a web page very often. So, ﬁrst of all these
page types must be deﬁned.
Parameter
IS
DEFINED
AS
Deﬁnition
Product page
As a page describing a speciﬁc
product
After expressing these parameters the conditions by which
a user can be assigned to a speciﬁc user group can be deﬁned.
For the hedonic browsing strategy it might look like the
following template.
IF
Condition
THEN
Consequence
The focus of a session is on
requesting category pages, the
category variety is high and
the product variety is high,
repeat viewing is low
Hedonic browsing
Thirdly, to ﬁnd out in which products a person is interested
in, the product catalogue must be described. With this infor-
mation the user behaviour and his interests are expressed. For
this the IS DEFINED AS template can be used. As products
are related somehow to other produces another template is
necessary expressing those relations.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Term
Relation
(IS A / VERB)
Term
a criminal book
Is A
book
As actions should be triggered if a user is interested in a
speciﬁc product and shows a speciﬁc behaviour, these actions
must be deﬁned. For this reason we use also the templates.
We reuse the deﬁnition templates to deﬁne the action.
IF
Interest
Behavior
THEN
Actions
Book, Author
and other
speciﬁc
attributes
Direct
buying
Show list of related
books, related to the
author and the other
speciﬁc attributes
B. Interchange Model
The second phase of designing the personalisation ontology
is focussed on the transformation of the models into a precise,
machine understandable form. The purpose of this formal
model derived in this phase is twofold: First, the semi-formal
representation chosen in the ﬁrst step can be easily understood
by business people but has the disadvantage that it cannot be
executed by a computer because the rules can be ambiguous.
In order to be validated and executed, the user groups, product
catalogue and the business rules have to be represented in a
language with well- deﬁned semantics. Second, there can be
different run-time environments for the execution of business
processes. The interchange format shall serve as a common
language from which the execution formats can be derived
unambiguously, if possible even automatic.
To fulﬁl these purposes the interchange format must have
a clear and precise semantics. The enterprise objects and the
business rules are represented in OWL and SWRL. Because
of the partially ambiguous business models the transformation
is not automated: the business objects (user groups, product
catalogue) have to be transferred into OWL and the rules into
SWRL manually. However, the development of a semantic
representation from the semi- structured representation of the
business models is straightforward. The interchange model
consists of two main ontologies (Figure 2): the enterprise
ontology and the context ontology. The enterprise ontology
describes the enterprise itself, the product catalogue, the user
groups, the actions. The context ontology provides information
about the users’ session, like navigation path, historical events,
current behaviour and interest.
This interchange model is used as the knowledge base to
retrieve information about the user and his interests and to
provide him with relevant information. For instance, if the
system notices that a visitor has visited web pages about Frank
Schätzing, criminal story and Cologne, he can retrieve from the
database through the relations between the different topics, that
the visitor might be interested in the book “Tod und Teufel”.
If another person visits the web page about “Tod und Teufel”
and “Mordshunger” the system can assume that the person is
interested about criminal stories from Frank Schätzing and can
provide him with a proper list.
1) Enterprise Ontology: Enterprise ontologies have been
developed also with the intention “to assist the acquisition,
representation, and manipulation of enterprise knowledge;
Figure 2.
Interchange model. This ﬁgure shows the main concepts of the
ontologies.
structuring and organizing libraries of knowledge [...]” [21].
Usually, enterprise ontologies are created to deﬁne and orga-
nize relevant enterprise knowledge like processes, organization
structure and strategy [13].
Ushold et al. designed a particular ontology, the “Enterprise
Ontology”, which aims to provide “a collection of terms and
deﬁnitions relevant to business enterprise to enable coping
with a fast changing environment [...]” [21]. The TOVE
(Toronto Virtual Enterprise) project is being carried out by
the Enterprise Integration Laboratory (EIL) at the University
of Toronto. It provides a generic, reusable knowledge model
providing a shared terminology for the enterprise. While both
ontologies focus on business processes, there are common
semantic concepts in both projects [11].
We use the enterprise ontology as a basis, but extend it by
some sub classes. As the business rules implement the business
strategy, trigger various events and are one of the main drivers
of an enterprise the business rules must be made explicit. This
allows changing the rules immediately. Therefore, we add a
concept business rules to the strategy part of the enterprise
ontology. The rules themselves are expressed using SWRL,
which combines OWL and RuleML [12].
Another important part of the enterprise are the products.
Semantically enriched and precise product information can en-
hance the offering of information. Product information consists
of product properties and the relationship between products.
For the description of the product catalogue existing domain
ontologies, like wine or pizza, can be taken. A meta level
for a product ontology can be found in [16]. This meta level
helps to create a product ontology for each enterprise. Figure
3 illustrates a simpliﬁed ontology describing books for our
book store scenario.
To express the various behaviour patterns of a user, we use
the organisation part of the enterprise ontology and added user
to the existing concept “Stakeholder”. For the analysis of the
behaviour, in particular the shopping strategies, we rely on the
different shopping strategies as proposed by [18]. They can
be recognized by using different browsing patterns. To ﬁnd
the different page types Moe categorizes pages as category
pages, product pages, home page or information pages. During
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Figure 3.
Simpliﬁed product description.
Figure 4.
Relation context and organization ontology.
the user’s visit the percentage is identiﬁed, how often he/she
visits an information page, category page or product page. If
the user visits informational pages more often, the shopping
strategy is more likely to be a knowledge building. Whereas, a
visitor who visits a lot of category pages, seems to follow the
hedonic browsing strategy. These user categories are added to
the enterprise ontology as sub classes of user.
There exist two main parts of adaptation: internal adapta-
tion, and external adaptation. Internal adaptation supports the
usability. Usability can be associated with the aspects: content,
ease of use, promotion, made-for-the-medium, and emotion
[2]. [4] identiﬁed the following internal adaptations: adaptation
of content and services delivered by accessed pages, adap-
tation of navigation, adaptation of whole hypertext structure
and adaptation of presentation properties. External adaptation
means the context is used to adapt external applications, like
newsletter or e-mail services. For the external adaptation, we
use web services which are described using OWL-S [17].
2) Context Ontology: The behaviour and the user’s interests
can be analyzed while a visitor is navigating through a web
site. This represents the situation of a visitor. According to Dey
and Abowd [7], context is all information, which can be used
to characterize the situation of an entity. Therefore, we use a
context ontology which helps to interpret the users’ current
situations. This ontology consists of three main concepts:
session, interest and behaviour.
As shown in Figure 4, the concepts interests and behaviour
Figure 5.
Business rules combining context and actions.
are linked to the organization ontology: the behaviour is
related to the Stakeholder-concept and the interests concept
relates to the product concept. During a session the links are
continuously updated.
The ontology is split into two parts to distinguish between
the static and dynamic parts. Whereas, the information pro-
vided in the enterprise ontology is more or less static, the
context ontology provides dynamic and user speciﬁc informa-
tion.
As business rules trigger events when a speciﬁc condition
is met, rules combine both the context ontology and the
enterprise ontology. So, rules use the whole knowledgebase.
We use rules to combine the context and the (re)actions.
On the condition part of the rules the context is deﬁned. This
context is analyzed during run time by a rule engine. If a
speciﬁc context is kept the rules trigger the appropriate actions.
Figure 5 shows a simpliﬁed rule, combining the context with
a service. In this case the rule expresses that if a visitor uses
the direct buying strategy and is interested in a speciﬁc book,
the visitor should get a list of concluded interests (in our case
the book “Tod und Teufel”).
If changes in the enterprise environment occur the business
user is able to adapt the product catalogue and the business
rules immediately (directly in the ontology or using the
intermediate step of the semi-formal language).
C. Execution Model
In phase 3, parts of the interchange model created in phase
2 will be migrated into machine executable forms if necessary.
As already described the interchange model can be used
as a knowledge base, because the model helps to recognise
the users’ behaviour and interests and a system can retrieve
relevant information in the knowledge base.
However, some parts of the model must be transformed
into another executable representation. The interchange model
contains information speciﬁed by the business people. But,
it does not contain information about technical details, like
cookie or session ids, what actions a user performed or which
agent a user uses. This information must be expressed in a
machine executable form.
In our system, we consider each request (action) that is sent
by the visitor’s browser to the content management system as
an event. Each of those events is linked to a certain visitor and
contains annotations that describe the requested content or the
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Figure 6.
The used processing system with its components and the different processing steps.
requested action. The content annotation is stored in the CMS
as meta information for the available content and is based on
the concepts of the enterprise ontology. An event thus has the
following simpliﬁed structure:
UserCookieID
e . g .
156978GH
PageTags
e . g .
author : FrankSchaetzing
PageType
e . g .
p r o d u c t D e t a i l
RequestAction
e . g .
addToShoppingCart
UserAgent
e . g .
F i r e f o x
SessionID
e . g .
S47111147
These events are processed in three steps (Figure 6) where
the ﬁrst step ﬁlters the requests to remove requests that are
for example generated by search engine bots. In the second
step the requests are analyzed with the help of a set of rules
that extend the context ontology of the corresponding user as
needed. For example, for the event shown above, a rule would
detect the adding of the particular wine to the shopping cart
and would thus add a concept to the context ontology that
represents the interest of this user in the given wine. The third
processing step allows the rule based triggering of external
action like sending an email to a customer. However, this part
will not be discussed in further detail in this paper.
IV. STATUS OF THE IMPLEMENTATION
We use the presented combination of semantic technologies
with event processing systems in a dynamic website person-
alization engine which we are currently developing in a joint
research project with the Wyona AG (www.wyona.com). The
aim of this engine is to build up a context ontology for a
website visitor while he/she is browsing through a website like
for example an online shop. The generated context ontology
is used to support the user in his search for products that
suite his interests and to generate personalized advertisement
campaigns.
Due to this outlined process, a context ontology is built for
each user while she/he is still browsing through the website.
To allow the CMS to utilize the gathered information, a proﬁle
manager provides a simple query interface. The CMS can
use this interface to retrieve related content to the current
users’ request. For such a query, the CMS speciﬁes the current
visitors ID together with the tags that annotate the page
that the user currently requests. The proﬁle manager uses
this information to deduct tags from the context ontology
together with the enterprise ontology as discussed in Section
3.2.2. The results are handed back to the CMS which in turn
uses those tags to select content that might be interesting
for the current visitor. Thus, our current realization approach
follows the concept of event-driven architectures to realize a
rapid processing of the visitors requests. With the help of the
aforementioned process for the ontology and rule deﬁnition
based on a simple table based schema, we aim to allow non-
IT specialists to change and optimize the behavior of the fairly
complex processing system.
V. CONCLUSION
As e-commerce becomes the preferred way of doing busi-
ness an enterprise must be able to adapt their e-commerce
immediately when changes occur. We provide an ontology
model which enables business users to express their knowledge
about their products, user groups, actions and business rules.
If changes occur the business user can adapt the business rules
and the business objects immediately (directly in the ontology
or using the intermediate step of the semi-formal language).
The 3-phase procedure is currently done manually however
we are going to develop a system, with which an automatic
transformation is possible. We intend to use the resulting
descriptions as the knowledge base for a self adapting web
shop system to verify the usefulness of the generated infor-
mation. Furthermore it is planned to evaluate the usability of
the presented concepts together with business users.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This project was funded by the CTI under the project
number 11628.1 PFES-ES (Semantic OBDE).
REFERENCES
[1] T. Allweyer, “Die Organisation des Wissens, Wie japanische Un-
ternehmen eine brachliegende Ressource nutzbar machen.” Witten, W3L
GmbH, 2. Nachdruck, 2007.
[2] R. Agarwal and V. Venkatesh, “Assessing a Firm’s Web Presence:
A Heuristic Evaluation Procedure for the Measurement of Usability”,
Information Systems Research, vol. 13, No. 2, 2002, pp. 168 - 186.
[3] P. Brusilovsky and M. T. Maybury, “From Adaptive Hypermedia to the
Adaptive Web”, In Communications of the ACM, 45(5), 2002, pp. 31-
33.
[4] S. Ceri, F. Daniel, M. Matera, and F. M. Facca, “Model-driven de-
velopment of context-aware Web applications”, ACM Trans. Internet
Technology, 7(2), 2007.
[5] F. van Harmelen and D. L. McGuinness, Editors, “OWL Web On-
tology Language Overview”, W3C Recommendation, Available at:
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/, 2004, Retrieved: 26.08.2012.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

[6] I. Horrocks, P. F. Patel-Scheider, H. Boley, S. Tabet, B. Grosof,
and M. Dean, ”SWRL: A Semantic Web Rule Language Combin-
ing OWL and RuleML”, W3C Member Submission, Available at:
http://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/, 2004, Retrieved: 26.08.2012.
[7] A. K. Dey and G. Abowd, “Towards a Better Understanding of Context
and Context-Awareness”, In Proceedings of CHI2000: Conference on
Human Factors in Computing, The Hague, The Netherlands, 2000.
[8] D. Feldkamp, K. Hinkelmann, and B. Thönssen, “Kiss-Knowledge-
Intensive Service Support: An Approach for Agile Process Manage-
ment”, Proceedings of RuleML 2007, 2007, pp. 25-38.
[9] “Esper - Complex Event Processing”, Product Web Page, Available at:
http://esper.codehaus.org, Retrieved: 26.08.2012.
[10] P. Fingar, “Component-based Frameworks for E-Commerce”, Commu-
nications of the ACM, Vol. 43(10), 2000, pp. 61-66.
[11] C. Sechlenoff, R. Ivester, and A. Knutilla, “A Robust Process Ontology
For Manufacturing Systems Integration”, In Proceedings of 2nd Interna-
tional Conference on Engineering Design and Automation, Maui, 1998.
[12] “The Rule Markup Initiative”, Available at: http://ruleml.org, Retrieved:
26.08.2012.
[13] A. Gomez-Perez, M. Fernandez-Lopez, and O. Corcho, “Ontological
Engineering, with examples from the areas of knowledge management,
e-commerce and the Semantic”, Springer, London, 2004.
[14] C.
Henbury,
“Two
deﬁnitions
of
agility”,
Available
at:
http://www.cheshirehenbury.com/agility/twodeﬁnitions.html,
2006,
Retrieved 26.08.2012.
[15] V. Hrgovcic, W. Utz, and R. Woitsch, “Knowledge Engineering in
Future Internet”, In D. Karagiannis, Z. Jin (Eds.) Knowledge Science,
Engineering and Management, Springer, Vienna, 2009.
[16] T. Lee, I. Lee, S. Lee, S. Lee, and D. Kim, “Building an operational
product ontology system”, Electronic Commerce Research and Appli-
cations 5, 2006, pp. 16-28.
[17] D. Martin, M. Burstein, J. Hobbs, O. Lassila, et al., ”OWL-S: Semantic
Markup for Web Services”, W3C Member Submission, Available at:
http://www.w3.org/Submission/OWL-S/, 2004, Retrieved: 26.08.2012.
[18] W. M. Moe, “Buying, Searching, or Browsing: Differentiating Between
Online Shoppers Using In-Store Navigational Clickstream”, Journal of
Consumer Psychology, 13(1&2), 2003, pp. 29-39.
[19] N. F. Noy and D.L. McGuinness, “Ontology Development 101: A Guide
to Creating Your First Ontology”, Stanford Knowledge Systems Labo-
ratory Technical Report KSL-01-05 and Stanford Medical Informatics
Technical Report SMI-2001- 0880, 2001.
[20] A. W. Scheer, O. Adam, A. Hofer, and F. Zangl, “Nach Cost Cutting,
Aufbruch durch Innovation”, In IM Fachzeitschrift für Information
Management and Consulting, vol. 18, Sonderausgabe, 2003.
[21] M. Ushold, M. King, S. Moralee, and Y. Zorgios, “The Enterprise
Ontology”, The Knowledge Engineering Review, Vol. 13, Special Issue
on Putting Ontologies to Use, 1998.
[22] R. Woitsch, D. Karagiannis, D. Plexousakis, and K. Hinkelmann , “Plug
your Business into IT: Business and IT-Alignment using a Model-Based
IT-Socket”, eChallenges e-2009 Conference (eChallenges 09), Istanbul,
IOS Press, 2009.
[23] B. Von Halle, “Business Rules Applied, Building Better Systems Using
the Business Rules Approach”, Wiley and Sons, New York, 2002.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

