DYNAMO: Dynamic Ontology Extension for
Augmenting Chatbot Intelligence through BabelNet
Amalia Georgoudi
Information Technologies Institute
Centre for Research and Technology Hellas
Thessaloniki, Greece
ageorgoudi@iti.gr
Georgios Meditskos
School of Informatics
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
Thessaloniki, Greece
gmeditsk@csd.auth.gr
Thanassis Mavropoulos
Information Technologies Institute
Centre for Research and Technology Hellas
Thessaloniki, Greece
mavrathan@iti.gr
Stefanos Vrochidis
Information Technologies Institute
Centre for Research and Technology Hellas
Thessaloniki, Greece
stefanos@iti.gr
Ioannis Kompatsiaris
Information Technologies Institute
Centre for Research and Technology Hellas
Thessaloniki, Greece
ikom@iti.gr
Abstract—Dynamic ontology extension, a real-time ontology
extension process, facilitates continuous learning and adapta-
tion to new knowledge and evolving domains. The ability to
dynamically add concepts, relationships, and axioms allows
intelligent agents and knowledge-based systems to stay up-to-
date and responsive. This paper presents a novel approach to
dynamically extend the ontology of a chatbot’s Knowledge Base
by leveraging BabelNet, a multilingual encyclopedic dictionary
and semantic network. Using BabelNet’s semantic relations, such
as hyperonyms, hyponyms, and holonyms, we focus on enriching
the ontology with user profile information, enabling knowledge
inference and personalized interactions. Through repeated inter-
actions, the chatbot increases its level of intelligence, inferring
new knowledge and asking targeted questions to users, resulting
in effective interactions and increased user satisfaction.
Index Terms—Dynamic Ontology Extension; Ontology; Chat-
bot.
I. INTRODUCTION
Ontologies play a vital role in improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of retrieving information and representing
knowledge online. Ontologies serve as organized structures
for capturing knowledge and establishing a shared language to
describe concepts, relationships, and properties within specific
domains. Through explicit definitions of terms and their rela-
tionships, ontologies enable seamless integration, searching,
and reasoning of information. They facilitate the creation
of machine-readable and machine-understandable represen-
tations, fostering interoperability and data exchange across
diverse systems and domains.
A chatbot is an Artificial Intelligence (AI) program specif-
ically created to mimic human conversation and engage with
users through interfaces that use text or voice. By incor-
porating ontologies into a Chatbot’s Knowledge Base (KB),
the chatbot would have access to a rich semantic network
of concepts, relationships, and properties within a specific
domain. Ontologies define the vocabulary and the meaning
of terms, enabling the chatbot to understand user input and
generate relevant and accurate responses.
Dynamic ontology extension is the process of extending
or updating an existing ontology in real-time, depending on
new information or shifting requirements. In order to enable
the ontology to change and adapt to new knowledge or
evolving domains, it entails dynamically adding new concepts,
relationships, attributes, or axioms to it. Intelligent agents,
semantic web applications, and knowledge-based systems all
heavily depend on dynamic ontology extension in order to
continuously learn, adapt, and incorporate new information.
Through the dynamic extension of the chatbot’s KB ontol-
ogy, based on user inputs, the chatbot gradually enhances its
intelligence with each interaction. With the ability to expand
its ontology in real-time, the chatbot becomes increasingly
proficient at understanding user needs and providing tailored
responses, leading to a more natural and effective user expe-
rience.
In this paper, we present our method for the dynamic
ontology extension of a chatbot’s KB ontology by utilizing
BabelNet [11]. BabelNet is a public multilingual encyclopedic
dictionary and a semantic network, in which every entity is
connected with other entities through semantic relations, such
as hypernyms, hyponyms and holonyms. We utilized those
relations and we created a pattern, in order to automatically
extend the ontology with more information regarding the users
profiles, enabling inferencing knowledge, enhancing their un-
derstanding, and drawing conclusions. The goal is to enrich
the situational awareness of the chatbot every time it interacts
with the user, reducing the time required for the interaction
and increasing user satisfaction. The proposed method extends
the schema of the ontology with new classes and properties
and also populates the ontology by adding new instances and
forming semantic relationships and links between them.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II presents the related work. In Section III the proposed
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-108-4
SEMAPRO 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

method is introduced, while in Section IV a simulation ex-
ample is presented. In Section V the evaluation procedure is
presented. Section VI concludes and gives directions for future
work.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
The following subsections provide a brief overview of
Knowledge Representation frameworks, Ontology-based Chat-
bots and existing Dynamic Ontology Extension approaches.
A. Knowledge Representation
An ontology is a structured framework for organizing in-
formation that provides a formal and explicit specification
of a commonly recognized formulation of a field of inter-
est. The representation of knowledge as a set of concepts,
relationships, and properties is part of this formatting. A
straightforward knowledge representation language known as
the Resource Description Framework (RDF) [1] intends to
standardize metadata and usage descriptions for Web-based
resources. A group of subject-predicate-object triples serve
as the fundamental building unit of RDF. To display richer
and more complicated information about objects, groups of
things, and relationships between them, the Web Ontology
Language (OWL) [2], a collection of knowledge representation
languages, was developed. OWL now extends previous Web
standards for describing knowledge and is the official World
Wide Web Consortium (W3C) recommendation for creating
and sharing ontologies. An OWL ontology consists of: classes,
properties and restrictions. Classes are the main element of an
ontology and are used to describe a field’s concepts. Properties
are used to describe feature attributes, while restrictions are de-
termining properties’ confinement. Furthermore, an ontology
has instances of classes and relationships between those.
B. Ontology-based Chatbots
Utilizing ontologies is a potential strategy that enables
chatbots and conversational agents to comprehend and produce
contextually relevant responses. In this section, many studies
that present ontology-based chatbots and conversational agents
are examined, highlighting their contributions and outlining
their ramifications.
The SynchroBot [3] is a dialog system that can be connected
to reliable and adaptable KBs and KGs for information extrac-
tion and that can use NLP tools to analyze user questions and
NLG techniques to deliver appropriate answers. A previous
ontology-based chatbot called OntBot used Hallili’s method as
its foundation. OntBot [4] uses a suitable mapping approach
to convert ontologies and other knowledge into relational
databases with a set of mapping rules.
The recent bibliography includes numerous proposed meth-
ods for introducing KGs to QA and AI chatbots in different
domains, such as E-commerce [5], museums [6], healthcare
systems [7]. A working model of Ontology based chatbot
that handles queries from users for an E-commerce website,
is proposed in [5]. This chatbot helps the user by mapping
relationships of the various entities required by the user,
thus providing detailed and accurate information there by
overcoming the drawbacks of traditional chatbots. The author
in [6] summarizes recent research on Knowledge Graph (KG)-
based AI chatbot design and development for museums. The
suggested MuBot approach gave museums the chance to
develop chatbots for their visitors. The use of KGs for chatbot
implementation raises issues with translating natural language
dialogues
In [7], the suggested conversation agent, is built on
an ontology-based knowledge model that enables flexible
reasoning-driven dialogue planning as opposed to the use of
predetermined dialogue scripts. Another comparable strategy
was used to the healthcare industry with the intention of
creating a framework that may help patients by giving them
access to an AI chatbot with good conversational abilities and a
substantial KB [9] [8]. MediBot [10] is another ontology-based
chatbot created to facilitate access to information on drugs and
their risks easily and directly to Portuguese speakers.
C. Dynamic Ontology Extension Frameworks
Ontology evolution is a subfield of ontology change which
refers to the problem of transforming an ontology in response
to a certain need [12]. Specifically, ontology evolution consists
of transforming an ontology or incorporating new information
in an existing ontology, in a way that it satisfies the users
and describes the knowledge domain, while maintaining its
consistency.
In survey [13], the authors outline the process of ontology
learning and categorizes ontology learning techniques into
three classes: linguistics [14], statistical [19] [16], and logical
[19] that are based on reasoning rules. It examines the ad-
vantages and disadvantages of ontology evaluation techniques
and it explores the applications and significance of ontology
learning in different industries.
Linguistic-based approaches for ontology extension utilize
NLP tasks, such as Named Entity Recognition, Part-Of-Speech
Tagging and Dependency Parsing and they have been proposed
for many different languages and domains. For instance, there
are approaches for Spanish legal texts [15], French [17] and
Chinese [18] documents.
A statistical and logical system, known as CRCTOL is
proposed in [19]. CRCTOL is a system designed to automate
the extraction of ontologies from domain-specific documents.
The proposed system, CRCTOL, utilizes a comprehensive text
parsing technique and incorporates a combination of statistical
and lexico-syntactic methods and includes a a statistical, a
word sense disambiguation and a rule-based algorithm.
In addition, some proposed methods utilize Deep Learning
models, such as [20] [22]. In [20], a novel approach to
automatically expand ontologies, specifically focusing on the
ChEBI ontology, a well-established reference in the field of
chemistry within life sciences, is presented. To achieve this,
the authors utilized a deep learning model called ChemBERTa
[21], which is built upon the Transformer architecture. The
model was trained using the leaf node structures found in
the ChEBI ontology along with their corresponding classes.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-108-4
SEMAPRO 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

In [22], a bi-LSTM-based word extraction model based on
character embedding is presented to extract the terms from a
phrase for automatic ontology population.
Our approach distinguishes itself by leveraging publicly
available resources, such as BabelNet and Wikidata. These
resources play a vital role in shaping the classes and their
hierarchical relationships within the ontology, employing se-
mantic relations like hyponyms and holonyms. Furthermore,
our approach utilizes dependency parsing, a process to gram-
matically analyze sentences, to establish direct and indirect
data and object properties. Our methodology ensures that
multilingual information is preserved, thereby enabling multi-
lingual interactions. By incorporating these distinct elements,
our approach presents a novel and robust framework for
ontology development and facilitates enhanced linguistic and
semantic interoperability.
III. DYNAMIC ONTOLOGY EXTENSION APPROACH
This section provides a high level overview of the archi-
tectural design of the dynamic ontology extension approach.
Our approach extends the schema of the ontology with new
classes and properties and also populates the ontology by
adding new instances and forming semantic relationships and
links between them.
The method is built upon a language analysis task that
specifically targets named entity recognition. The solution has
been implemented utilizing the Python programming language,
harnessing a range of libraries, including Owlready2, Babelnet,
SPARQLWrapper, among others. Through this solution, the
ontology is augmented by incorporating entities identified as
persons, organizations, or geopolitical locations. This enriched
information plays a pivotal role in enabling a chatbot to
draw accurate conclusions and gain a deeper understanding
of the users’ background, thereby facilitating more effective
interactions.
The approach encompasses four distinct phases, each serv-
ing a specific purpose in the overall ontology extension pro-
cess. These phases are: the Disambiguation, the Formulation of
Classes’ Hierarchy, the Population of the Ontology and finally
the Generation of Data and Object Properties.
A. Disambiguation
When an entity, mentioned in the speaker’s utterances, is
classified as a Named Entity, and contains a Babelnet id, the
service will be enabled. The entity tag will constitute the
classes, while the entities will constitute the instances. Three
different cases are supported:
1) The class does not exist in the ontology.
2) The class already exists, but the specific instance does
not exit.
3) Both the class and the specific instance already exist in
the ontology.
The first case is when the class does not exist in the ontol-
ogy. Our service creates the class, the necessary properties, and
adds the new instance. In case that the class already exists, our
service creates only the new instance of this class. Otherwise,
if both the class and the specific instance exist, our service
will not extend further by adding duplicates into the ontology.
Moreover, an additional disambiguation phase is conducted
for entities categorized as geopolitical locations or organiza-
tions, utilizing BabelNet relations. Within the disambiguation
phase for geopolitical location entities, the primary objective
is to ascertain whether the entity represents a country or a city.
In the case of a city, a further check is performed to determine
if it serves as a capital. Additionally, for every entity that is
tagged as an organization, the goal is to understand the type
of the organization. For instance an organization may be a
university, a hospital, a bank, etc. This disambiguation process
relies on BabelNet synsets and ISA relationships to accomplish
the aforementioned tasks.
B. Formulation of Classes’ Hierarchy
During the second phase, the algorithm proceeds with
the creation of classes and subclasses, following a hierarchy
derived from BabelNet relationships. This process leverages
the information acquired during the disambiguation phase,
wherein hypernyms, hyponyms, and holonyms associated with
each entity tag are utilized to effectively structure the classes
within the ontology.
A hypernym relation refers to a hierarchical relationship
where one entity is more general or broader in meaning than
another entity. It signifies that the first entity encompasses
or includes the second entity within its scope. Holonyms in
BabelNet denote the connection between a complete entity and
its component parts. A holonym represents the entirety of the
entity, whereas its parts are identified as meronyms.
By utilizing these semantic relationships, the algorithm
ensures a coherent and organized representation of the entities
within the ontology, facilitating better categorization and clas-
sification. Figure 1 illustrates an example of the classes that
were created form the Geopolitical Entities (GPE) instances
“Greece” and “Sweden”, by iteratively exploiting BabelNet
relationships.
Fig. 1. Hierarchy of classes example.
C. Population of the Ontology
Following the successful construction of the ontology’s
classes, the third phase involves the population of the ontology.
Within this phase, the entities will undergo classification as
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-108-4
SEMAPRO 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

instances of specific classes, determined by their assigned
named entity tags. Subsequently, the formation of links and
connections between distinct entities will take place.
To avoid duplicate elements within the ontology, the service
incorporates a mechanism that checks for the existence of
classes and properties before creating new ones. For instance,
if an entity is associated with the ”person” tag, a new class
named ”person” will only be generated if it does not already
exist in the ontology. Similarly, each time an entity is tagged
as ”person,” a new instance will be added to the corresponding
class, ensuring that instances are not duplicated. This approach
maintains the integrity and coherence of the ontology by
preventing redundant class and instance creation.
D. Generation of Data and Object Properties
For the data properties, we retrieve important informa-
tion from the BabelNet in order to form the triples. First
of all, each entity is associated with a data property that
stores its unique BabelNet ID. Furthermore, we store the
information in multiple languages, allowing the chatbot to
engage in multilingual conversations effectively. Additionally,
we enhance the data by incorporating supplementary details
from Wikidata, utilizing SPARQL queries specifically tailored
for each geopolitical location. This comprehensive approach
ensures that the ontology encompasses diverse and enriched
data, enabling the chatbot to provide accurate and contextually
relevant information during interactions. Table I shows some
examples of data properties.
TABLE I
DATA PROPERTIES
Data Property
Description
Range
official languages
The official languages of a country are
the languages that are recognized and used
by the government for official business and communication
string
babelnet id
The unique babelnet if of every entity
string
has value
Gives the name in different languages
string
geo lat
Geographical coordinates: Latitude
float
geo long
Geographical coordinates: Longitude
float
Relations between entities in the ontology are also created.
Also, inverse properties and transitive properties are created
between two entities. Table II represents some object prop-
erties that can be created between different entities, such as
cities and countries.
TABLE II
OBJECT PROPERTIES
Object Property
Description
Domain
Range
is city of
A city is in a country
City
Country
has city
A country has a city
Country
City
is in city
An organization is in a city
Organization
City
Has organization
A city has an organization
City
Organization
Furthermore, the ontology is extended with direct and indi-
rect relations between the speaker and the entities, depending
on what the user said. Figure 2 represents the created direct
and indirect relationships between the speaker and the entities,
based on the user’s utterance ”I live in Thessaloniki with my
friend Maria.”. In order to achieve this, we parse relations in
the dependency tree to connect indirect entities.
Fig. 2. Direct and indirect relations with the speaker.
IV. EXAMPLE USE CASES
Below, we will describe two simulation examples of the dy-
namic ontology extension task. In the first example, the initial
ontology is empty. Assuming the following user response:
User: ”I would like to ask how to go to the National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens”
In this example, the module generates four object properties,
five datatype properties, eight new classes, and four instances.
Regarding the second example, the input ontology is the one
previously created. Assuming the user utterance is as follows:
User: “I live in Thessaloniki with my friend Maria.”
In this case, two new instances, “Thessaloniki” and “Maria”,
are added to the “Person” and “City” classes, respectively.
Additionally, two new object properties, named “live” and
“friend”, are added to establish relationships between the
speaker and the new instances.
In the ontology extension process, when an entity is labeled
as “PERSON,” a new class named “Person” is created if it
does not already exist. Subsequently, for each entity labeled
as “PERSON,” a new instance is added to the corresponding
“Person” class. Similarly, if an entity is classified as “GPE”,
after the disambiguation phase, a new class named “City” or
“Country” is created if it is not already present. If a class
named “City” is created and the entity’s status as a capital
is verified using ISA relations from BabelNet, a subclass
named “Capital” is established under the “City” class. Then, to
further expand the ontology dynamically, a new class named
”Country” is introduced along with subclasses indicating the
continent to which the country belongs.
In the case where the language analysis tool identifies an
entity as an organization, a new class named “Organization”
is generated. Moreover, a subclass is created to indicate the
organization’s type, which is retrieved from hypernym rela-
tions from BabelNet. Finally, the new instance, representing
the organization, is added. Furthermore, the city and country
names associated with the organization are included in the
ontology, and the relevant classes are created accordingly, if
do not already exist.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-108-4
SEMAPRO 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

V. EVALUATION
A. Ontology Evaluation
1) Debugging: In order to ensure thorough evaluation, we
executed the debugger for every extended ontology. This com-
prehensive approach allowed us to assess the output ontology
and its extensions with greater scrutiny. The employment of
Prot´eg´e as the initial development tool, coupled with the
utilization of the ’Pellet’ reasoner and the ’Debugger’ plug-in,
enabled us to search for any potential faults in the ontologies.
Remarkably, the debugging process confirmed the absence of
faults during the validation process for all extended ontologies.
2) Ontology Metrics: The structure of the output ontology,
that was presented in Section IV was evaluated using Onto-
Metrics, an online framework designed to validate ontologies
based on established metrics. The findings obtained from the
analysis conducted by OntoMetrics are provided in Table III.
The metrics presented in Table III encompass both simple
metrics, such as the count of classes, axioms, and objects,
as well as schema metrics. The simple metrics, categorized as
Base Metrics, provide insights into the number of ontology
elements. On the other hand, schema metrics focus on the
design aspects of the ontology, reflecting its richness, width,
depth, and inheritance.
TABLE III
ONTOLOGY METRICS GENERATED BY ONTOMETRICS.
Category
Metric
Value
Basic
Axioms
108
Basic
Class Count
10
Basic
Object Property Count
7
Basic
Data Property Count
6
Basic
Individual Count
6
Basic
Description Logic Expressivity
ALI(D)
Schema
Attribute richness
0.6
Schema
Inheritance richness
0.9
Schema
Relationship richness
0.4375
Schema
Axiom/class ratio
10.8
Schema
Inverse relations ratio
0.285714
Schema
Class/relation ratio
0.625
B. Application-based evaluation
It is important to acknowledge that the proposed method
achieves around 98% accuracy rate in expanding the ontology
for entities categorized as locations, persons, or organizations.
This achievement highlights the efficacy and robustness of the
proposed approach, establishing its potential as a valuable tool
for ontology expansion and enhancement in domains where
locations, persons, and organizations play a significant role.
Furthermore, the proposed approach successfully fulfills its
objective of enhancing the agent’s intelligence and signifi-
cantly reducing the time required for information retrieval.
This efficiency is achieved through the generation of new
knowledge autonomously, eliminating the need to ask certain
questions. Consequently, this reduction in interaction time
not only enhances user satisfaction but also reinforces the
perception of the agent’s advanced intelligence. Moreover,
the approach enables seamless multilingual interactions by
comprehending entity names in various languages. This feature
proves particularly beneficial for individuals who may lack
fluency in verbal communication, thus promoting inclusivity
and accessibility in human-agent interactions. By encompass-
ing these capabilities, the proposed approach demonstrates
its potential to improve user experience and facilitate ef-
fective communication across diverse linguistic backgrounds.
Leveraging the geographical coordinates, the chatbot possesses
the capability to determine the migrant’s location accurately.
Consequently, it can provide tailored recommendations of
nearby places, organizations, and public sectors based on the
user’s specific inquiries.
In the rest of this Section, we will present a compilation of
competency questions alongside the corresponding SPARQL
queries and their exceptionally satisfactory outcomes.
CQ1: Given a specific city, determine the corresponding
country and identify the official language spoken within
that locality.
The following SPARQL query returns the country that has
a city named “Thessaloniki” and the official languages of the
specific country.
SELECT ?country ?language
WHERE {
?country rdf:type ex:country.
?country ex:has_city ex:Thessaloniki.
?country ex:official_languages ?language
.}
Listing 1. SPARQL Query CQ1
The output (Table IV) encompasses the country names along
with their corresponding official languages.
TABLE IV
RESULTS CQ1
a/a
Country
official languages
1
Greece
“Greek”
2
Greece
“Demotic Greek”
CQ2: Given a specific organization, determine the type
of the organization in order to understand a user’s
background and work experience.
The following SPARQL query returns the type of a given
organization.
SELECT ?class
WHERE {
ex:UBS a ?class .}
Listing 2. SPARQL Query CQ2
Table V displays the outcomes obtained from CQ2.
CQ3: Given a specific city name in German, return the
name of the city in French.
The next SPARQL query yields the French translation of the
city name “Thessaloniki,” despite it being stored in German.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-108-4
SEMAPRO 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

TABLE V
RESULTS CQ2
a/a
Classes
1
owl:Thing
2
Organization
3
Bank
SELECT ?frenchName
WHERE {
?city rdf:type ex:City;
ex:has_value "Thessaloniki"@de;
ex:has_value ?frenchName.
FILTER (LANG(?frenchName) = "fr")}
Listing 3. SPARQL Query CQ3
Table VI illustrates the output of the SPARQL query CQ3,
which is the French translation of the city “Thessaloniki”.
TABLE VI
RESULTS CQ3
a/a
French Name
1
“Thessalonique”@fr
VI. CONCLUSION
In summary, this research paper presented a dynamic on-
tology extension approach that leverages relationships from
BabelNet. The approach was implemented within an ontology-
based chatbot system. The results demonstrate that with each
user interaction, the chatbot continually enhances its intel-
ligence by integrating new information into the ontology.
This progressive intelligence augmentation leads to significant
reductions in interaction time and heightened user satisfaction,
as users perceive the chatbot’s increasing inteligence. Addi-
tionally, the proposed method enables the chatbot to engage
in multilingual conversations, effectively bridging language
barriers and accommodating users with diverse backgrounds.
Overall, this research highlights the potential of the dynamic
ontology extension approach in creating more intelligent and
adaptable chatbot systems. Future investigations could explore
further advancements in utilizing BabelNet relationships and
extend the multilingual capabilities to enhance user experience
in a broader range of linguistic contexts.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work has received funding by the European Com-
mission as part of its H2020 Programme under the con-
tract number 870930-IA (WELCOME), grant agreement
No. GA101017558 (ALAMEDA), and grant agreement No.
GA101049294 (LEAGUE).
REFERENCES
[1] S. Decker et al., “The semantic web: The roles of XML and RDF,” IEEE
Internet Computing, 4, 63-73, 2000.
[2] L. Ma et al., “Towards a complete OWL ontology benchmark,” 3rd
European Semantic Web Conference, ESWC 2006 Budva, Montenegro,
June 11-14, 2006, pp. 125-139, 2006.
[3] A. Hallili, “Toward an ontology-based chatbot endowed with natural
language processing and generation,” 26th European Summer School In
Logic, Language and Information, 2014.
[4] H. Al-Zubaide and A. Issa, “Ontbot: Ontology based chatbot,” Interna-
tional Symposium On Innovations In Information And Communications
Technology, pp. 7-12, 2011.
[5] A. Vegesna, P. Jain, and D. Porwal, “Ontology based chatbot (for e-
commerce website),” International Journal Of Computer Applications,
179, 51-55, 2018.
[6] S. Varitimiadis, K. Kotis, D. Spiliotopoulos, C. Vassilakis, and D. Mar-
garis, “Talking triples to museum chatbots,” Culture And Computing: 8th
International Conference, Held As Part Of The 22nd HCI International
Conference, 2020, pp. 281-299, 2020.
[7] L. Wanner et al., “Kristina: A knowledge-based virtual conversation
agent,” Advances In Practical Applications Of Cyber-Physical Multi-
Agent Systems: The PAAMS Collection: 15th International Conference,
Porto, Portugal, 2017, pp. 284-295, 2017.
[8] E. Kamateri et al., “Knowledge-based intelligence and strategy learning
for personalised virtual assistance in the healthcare domain,” Pro-
ceedings Of Semantic Technologies For Healthcare And Accessibility
Applications (SyMpATHY), 2019.
[9] G. Meditskos et al., “Towards an ontology-driven adaptive dialogue
framework, Proceedings of The 1st International Workshop On Mul-
timedia Analysis And Retrieval For Multimodal Interaction, pp. 15-20,
2016.
[10] C. Avila et al., “MediBot: an ontology based chatbot for Portuguese
speakers drug’s users,” International Conference On Enterprise Infor-
mation Systems, 1 pp. 25-36, 2019.
[11] R. Navigli and S. Ponzetto, “BabelNet: Building a very large multilin-
gual semantic network,” Proceedings Of The 48th Annual Meeting Of
The Association For Computational Linguistics, pp. 216-225, 2010.
[12] G. Flouris, D. Manakanatas, H. Kondylakis, D. Plexousakis, and G.
Antoniou, “Ontology change: classification and survey,” The Knowledge
Engineering Review, 23, 117-152, 2008.
[13] M. Asim, M. Wasim, M. Khan, W. Mahmood, and H. Abbasi, “A survey
of ontology learning techniques and applications, Database, 2018.
[14] P. Cimiano and J. V¨olker, “A framework for ontology learning and
data-driven change discovery,” Proceedings Of The 10th International
Conference On Applications Of Natural Language To Information
Systems (NLDB), 3513, pp. 227-238, 2005.
[15] J. V¨olker, S. Langa, and Y. Sure, “Supporting the Construction of
Spanish Legal Ontologies with Text2Onto,” Springer, 2008
[16] E. Drymonas, K. Zervanou, and E. Petrakis, “Unsupervised ontology
acquisition from plain texts: the OntoGain system,” 15th International
Conference on Applications of Natural Language To Information Sys-
tems, NLDB 2010, June 23-25, 2010, pp. 277-287, 2010.
[17] M. Hajji, M. Qbadou, and K. Mansouri, “An adaptation of Text2Onto
for supporting the French language,” International Journal Of Electrical
and Computer Engineering (2088-8708), 10, 2020.
[18] X. Jing, G. Yan-Qiang, S. Ai-Ju, and X. Jian-Liang, “Chinese ontol-
ogy learning technology based on Text2Onto,” 2012 7th International
Conference On System Of Systems Engineering (SoSE).
[19] X. Jiang and A. Tan, “CRCTOL: A semantic-based domain ontology
learning system,” Journal Of The American Society For Information
Science And Technology, vol. 61, pp. 150-168, 2010.
[20] A. Memariani, M. Glauer, F. Neuhaus, T. Mossakowski, and J. Hast-
ings, “Automated and explainable ontology extension based on deep
learning: A case study in the chemical domain,” ArXiv Preprint
ArXiv:2109.09202, 2021.
[21] S. Chithrananda, G. Grand, and B. Ramsundar, “Chemberta: Large-scale
self-supervised pretraining for molecular property prediction,” ArXiv
Preprint ArXiv:2010.09885, 2020.
[22] M. Su, C. Wu, and P. Shih, “Automatic ontology population using
deep learning for triple extraction,” 2019 Asia-Pacific Signal And
Information Processing Association Annual Summit And Conference
(APSIPA ASC), pp. 262-267, 2019.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-108-4
SEMAPRO 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

