Higher Education Qualification Evaluation 
 
Ildikó Szabó 
Department of Information Systems 
Corvinus University of Budapest 
1093 Budapest, Fővám tér 13-15., HUNGARY 
iszabo@informatika.uni-corvinus.hu 
 
 
Abstract— Qualification developed by the requirements of 
labor market is more competitive than the other ones. In 
Hungary, this issue constitutes one of the central elements of 
the higher education reform taking place nowadays. In this 
paper, a system in progress is presented, which aims at 
evaluating the learning outcomes of Business Informatics 
Bachelor’s degree program at Corvinus University of Budapest 
versus the competences needed by the labor market, as 
appeared on a job recruitment portal. Ontology-based learning 
and matching domains are touched in the course of the 
development, so it is necessary to choose their appropriate 
tools to integrate them into a system. The tools written in Java 
constitute the base of the development. 
Keywords-competence; ontology learning; ontology matching 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The higher education reform is a long-term process in 
Hungary. One of the objectives of the government is to 
rationalize qualification obtained in the higher education in 
the light of requirements of the world of labor [10]. The 
research focus of the Ph.D. thesis is to examine in what 
measure the learning outcomes of Business Informatics 
Bachelor’s degree program at Corvinus University of 
Budapest are matched to the requirements given by ICT job 
roles (job requirements). 
 The competences are the descriptors of learning 
outcomes and they serve as an appropriate tool to describe a 
job role, so the question is what the missing and surplus 
competences of this training program are. But, this concept 
has no universal definition, so the ontology approach serves 
as an appropriate method by providing an explicit, formal 
specification about this domain and it is capable of 
comparing the competences semantically and by considering 
the structure of related concepts too. The ontology learning 
approach is an appropriate method to build ontology 
dynamically and the ontology matching approach provides 
this semantic and structural comparison.  
Two projects – OntoHR [12] and SAKE [13] – have 
already dealt with this problem. They aimed to identify the 
shortcomings of higher and vocational education learning 
outcome through matching a job role ontology based on 
competences retrieved from job role descriptions and a 
learning outcome ontology based on competences claimed 
and/or extracted from descriptions of a given training 
program. SAKE project concerned several ICT job profiles 
and Business Informatics degree program, whilst the goal of 
OntoHR was to build an ontology-based selection and 
training system based on Information System Analyst (ISA) 
job role. One module of this system deals with the evaluation 
of the ICT degree programs. In these projects, the job role 
ontology reflected only a static moment of requirements of 
the labor market. In SAKE project, the job advertising 
documents were downloaded and tagged manually. In 
OntoHR, the ontology elements were extracted from the 
detailed descriptions of ISA job profile given by public 
organizations (e.g., O*Net) or by projects concerned job 
analysis (e.g., EUQuaSIT). In the current research, a system 
is under development, which aims at formalizing the job 
requirements derived from IT/Telecommunication category 
of a popular job recruitment portal (Profession.hu) into the 
Job Role Ontology and matching this ontology to the 
Learning Outcome Ontology, which is created by the 
learning outcomes, and materials of Business Informatics 
Bachelor’s degree program [17]. 
In Section 2, it is presented why the competence as a 
phenomenon gives the basis of this comparison. In Section 3, 
an incremental software development process is depicted, 
creating a prototype because there are not enough resources 
to implement all learning materials. Finally, conclusion and 
future work are shown.  
II. 
COMPARISON THROUGH COMPETENCES 
In the previous work [17], it was shown that competence 
concept has several definitions in the literature due to 
contextual discrepancies of its usage, cultural traditions of 
the authors, and different epistemological foundations [19]; 
but, according to the presented definitions, common content 
elements (skills, knowledge and attitudes) were revealed.  On 
the demand side of labor market (job demand), the 
importance of this concept was shown by the advantages of 
switching 
from 
job-based 
to 
competency-based 
organizational approach [8], by its strategic importance 
presented by Schoonover and Andersen [14], and  by the role 
of updating competency models and job descriptions in 
talent specific succession planning [4].  
On the supply side of labor market (education side), 
qualification frameworks based on competences (like 
European Qualifications Framework [5], Framework for 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Qualifications of the European Higher Education Area [2]) 
give a guideline to develop the national framework like 
OKKR in Hungary [20]. 
Therefore, competence seems to be an appropriate base 
to achieve the comparison between the two sides of the 
labor market. (In English the competence and competency 
concept are distinguished. This paper follows the guideline 
of Hungarian public education that uses the first 
interpretation.) 
 
III. 
THE SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT 
The learning outcomes of the above-mentioned degree 
program have not been changed since 2005, so the 
fundamental requirements related to the system are to adopt 
the changes occurred in job demand and to achieve the 
matching process with minimal human intervention. The 
system is capable of: 
 
collecting job requirements from the Internet in an 
automatic manner, extracting knowledge elements of 
them and forming these elements into the Job Role 
Ontology in a semi-automatic manner; formalizing 
the actual status into the Learning Outcome 
Ontology; 
 
achieving 
the 
matching 
process 
between 
Competence classes or its subclasses of both 
ontologies and evaluating the results.  
We state that these requirements delineate into two 
development phases, the incremental system development 
methodology seems to be usable.  Ontology learning is 
touched in the first stage and ontology matching in the 
second stage.  
A. First development phase: Ontology building and 
learning 
The objective of ontology learning is ―to generate 
domain ontologies from various kinds of resources by  
applying natural language processing and machine learning 
techniques‖ [6]. The input of this phase is a collection of job 
requirements from the above-mentioned portal. A crawler 
was written in Java, to be responsible for ensuring this input 
- at given intervals.  
Having examined the resulted collection, some problems 
were revealed. These problems and the related solutions are 
depicted in the next table: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
PROBLEMS WITH THE JOB ADVERTISING COLLECTION 
Problem 
Solution 
In one month approximately 
500 advertisements usually 
bear. Among them, there are 
several identical documents 
or documents showing few 
discrepancies (for example 
the contact person’s name). 
DOS Batch program find 
the same files, leave one file 
of them and delete the 
others.  
HTML tags do not refer to 
its content.  (For example: 
<h3>Requirement(s):</h3>) 
Searching another patterns. 
For 
example: 
blocks 
assigned by colon. 
The ―requirement:‖ block is 
missing 
of 
certain 
job 
advertisements. If they exist, 
they 
contain 
only 
little 
information 
about 
competences. 
The most job advertisements 
contain 
task 
description 
block, so competences have 
to be assigned to tasks (e.g. 
based on the knowledge 
elements 
of 
The 
Open 
Group 
Architecture 
Framework [18], an Open 
Group standard). 
The 
documents 
are 
in 
XHTML formats, which are 
unstructured and customized 
by 
advertisers. 
It 
is 
ambiguous to process them.  
After identifying the task: 
block it is necessary to 
create 
XML 
files 
from 
simple 
text. 
Java 
SAXparser() 
and 
DefaultHandler() classes can 
process XML files. 
 
After these steps, a bouquet of XML files is created. 
The first version of the Job Role Ontology is built on a 
collection derived from the first quarter of 2011. The meta-
model of the ontologies is presented by Figure 1.   
 
Figure 1. The meta-model of the Job Role Ontology and the Learning 
Outcome Ontology 
 
In the meta-model of the Job Role Ontology, the 
Industry, Organization, Department and Position classes put 
the competences into an organizational context. Within an 
organization, the business processes consist of tasks that 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

roles and responsibilities belong to. In the backward 
direction, the Role as the parts of the Position class 
determines the entities of the Task and the Responsibility 
class. Competence(s) are required to execute a Task. The 
attitudes of the Competence class facilitate to execute the 
comparison at the appropriate Level, in the Period of 
Validity and in a given Region. 
The meta-model of the Learning Outcome Ontology is an 
extended version of the OntoHR project’s Educational 
Ontology [7] by the Description of the Degree Program, as 
sources of the competences, and by the attitudes of the 
Competence class. 
The elements of competences mentioned in Section 2 
(like Skill, Attitude and Knowledge) represent the basis of the 
comparison, but in the prototype we use only the Knowledge 
class to execute the comparison as we will see in the next 
section. 
The Task class plays an important role in the construction 
of the Job Role Ontology. But too many positions and related 
tasks appear in the job advertisement collection, so we had to 
choose a position (like Software Developer position), its 
roles (Developer role and Contact Person role) and its related 
tasks (Designing the software development process, 
Preparing specification, Program coding,  Program testing, 
Bug fixing and Communicating) to create the first version of 
the ontology. The knowledge extraction algorithm collects 
the concrete appearance of these tasks from the appropriate 
job advertisements and fitting them into this ontology. The 
steps of this algorithm are the following ones: 
 
 
To define a process whose tasks will be in the center 
of interest and formalize them into a first version of 
the ontology; 
 
To filter the job advertisements by their relevancy 
related to this process and the existence of tasks: 
block in order to cut this text block from the 
advertisements; 
 
To search expressions as patterns to describe a task 
(for example task – Communicating, expression: 
relation with customers or task – Designing the 
software development process, expression: design of 
an embedded software); 
 
To use these expressions like open sentences (for 
example (relation with; who) or (design of, 
something)); 
 
To search the given words of the open sentences 
(e.g. relation, design) in the job advertisements and 
the nouns forming an expression with its preposition 
(e.g., with or of). Based on the position of these 
words in the text, we decide about that these nouns 
may be appropriate or not; 
 
To put the found expressions (e.g. relation with 
customers, or design of application), as subclass of 
the Task subclass related to the given expression, 
and its original texts, as comments, into the 
ontology. 
Having executed this algorithm, the first version of the 
Job Role Ontology is implemented in Protégé 4.2 [16] 
ontology development tool by a Protégé API written in 
JAVA. It is presented by Figure 2.  
 
Figure 2. The implementation of the first version of the Job Role 
Ontology 
 
As this figure illustrates, the first ontology version 
contains the main tasks of the determined process (software 
development process) that are expanded by the results of its 
open sentences. For example, the task is ―communicating‖, 
and it is expanded by  the expression ―relation with 
customer‖ or ―relation with development‖ etc. due to the 
indirect object found  in the open sentence (relation with; 
who).  
After this step, the competence elements (mainly the 
knowledge elements) of TOGAF will be assigned to the 
appropriate Task subclasses in manual or semi-automatic 
manner. Based on the requirements appeared in the job 
advertisements (for example Generic knowledge in Unix / 
Linux, AIX or Windows), an algorithm will validate or 
complete these competence elements and determines the 
attitudes of the competences. The development of these 
algorithms is under way.  
In this phase, we plan to evaluate the results given by 
these algorithms by the measure of needed human 
intervention. 
Having constructed the Job Role Ontology by this 
approach and formalized the actual knowledge elements into 
the Learning Outcome Ontology, we can pass into the next 
stage.  
B. Second development phase: Ontology matching 
Alasoud, Haarslev and Shiri [1] define Ontology 
matching problem as follows: ―given ontologies O1 and O2, 
each describing a collection of discrete entities such as 
classes, properties, individuals, etc., we want to identify 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

semantic correspondences between the components of these 
entities.‖  
In the first version of the prototype, the comparison 
between both sides will be executed through the Knowledge 
class, because the knowledge elements can be measured and 
can be assigned to the tasks more unambiguously than the 
other elements. This research concerns on finding the 
semantic and/or structural correspondences between the 
individuals of the Knowledge class of both ontologies.  
In the research, ontology matching systems proposed by 
Choi [3] (Glue, Mafra, Lom, Qom, Onion, Omen) and 
offered by Noy [11] (Prompt, IF-Map) were investigated 
according to the following features: 
 
ontology matching is achieved in dynamic manner: 
o 
automatic, 
semi-automatic 
or 
non 
automatic working 
o 
the handling of changes occurred in the 
ontology 
 
 
reusability: 
o 
usage of different ontology format in 
matching process 
o 
type of matching method 
o 
modularity, integration with other systems 
o 
adaptability 
in 
Hungarian 
language 
environment. 
Based on these characteristics MAFRA [9] and 
PROMPT [15] (or its built-in version into Protégé 4.2) 
ontology matching tools seem to be most suitable to achieve 
matching process. They are free downloadable, to execute 
from command prompt or a Java program automatically, to 
support RDF(S) or OWL languages and to handle changes 
occurred in the ontology through the usage of a semantic 
bridge or Protégé ontology editor. These are the most 
advantages of these programs compared to the others. 
However, they need human intervention as against IF-MAP.  
Nevertheless, the usage of algorithms from other systems 
(e.g., the one developed in OntoHR) can be taken into 
consideration.  
In this phase, we plan to evaluate the results versus the 
results given by a human comparison.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
 This two-phased incremental software development 
process creates a prototype, which is capable of building the 
Job Role Ontology from the actual job requirements and 
executing a matching algorithm to reveal same and different 
elements between this ontology and the Learning Outcome 
Ontology. In this prototype, only one position is 
implemented but it is extendable with others in same way.  
Considering carefully the system’s requirements, detailed 
in the previous section, programming in Java seemed to be 
the most appropriate tool to develop the system. The main 
arguments are, that it provides a simply way to download 
contents from websites, it can be capable of running external 
commands (batch files) to create XML files, in order to put 
knowledge elements extracted from these files into ontology 
format (like RDF or OWL 2.0 format in Protégé). MAFRA, 
PROMPT and Protégé 4.2 open source programs are written 
in Java, too.   
The XML creator program, the Learning Outcome 
Ontology, the algorithm for extracting tasks from the job 
requirements and putting them into the first version of the 
Job Role Ontology are ready to use. The future work is to 
develop an algorithm to assign the TOGAF knowledge 
elements to the relevant tasks and to find an appropriate tool 
or algorithm to achieve the matching process. These features 
must be integrated into one system in order to achieve the 
same-time process execution. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
The author wishes to express her gratitude to her 
supervisor Dr. Andras Gabor for the great topic and the 
powerful help provided during the development process. 
V. 
REFERENCES 
 
 [1] A. Alasoud, V. Haarslev, and N. Shiri, ―An Effective Ontology 
Matching Technique,‖ in Foundations of Intelligent Systems, vol. 
4994, A. An, S. Matwin, Z. Ras, and D. Slezak, Eds. Springer 
Berlin / Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 585–590. 
[2] Bologna Working Group on Qualifications Frameworks, ―A 
framework for qualifications of the European Higher Education 
Area.‖ 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.bologna-
bergen2005.no/Docs/00-Main_doc/050218_QF_EHEA.pdf. 
[Accessed: 05.09.2012]  
[3] N. Choi, I.-Y. Song, and H. Han, ―A survey on ontology 
mapping,‖ SIGMOD Rec., vol. 35, pp. 34–41, Sep. 2006. 
[4] L. Egodigwe, ―Pipeline to success,‖ Black Enterprise, vol. 36, 
no. 10, 2006. 
[5] 
European 
Commission, 
―The 
European 
Qualifications 
Framework 
(EQF).‖ 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://ec.europa.eu/education/lifelong-learning-policy/eqf_en.htm. 
[Accessed: 05.09.2012]. 
[6] P. Haase and J. Völker, ―Ontology Learning and Reasoning — 
Dealing with Uncertainty and Inconsistency,‖ in Uncertainty 
Reasoning for the Semantic Web I, vol. 5327, P . da Costa, C. d’ 
Amato, N. Fanizzi, K. Laskey, K. Laskey, T. Lukasiewicz, M. 
Nickles, and M. Pool, Eds. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 
366–384. 
[7] G. Kismihók, I. Szabó, and R. Vas, ―Six Scenarios of Exploiting 
an 
Ontology 
Based, 
Mobilized 
Learning 
Environment,‖ 
International Journal of Mobile and Blended Learning, vol. 4, no. 1, 
pp. 45–60, 2012. 
[8] E. E. Lawler, ―From job-based to competency-based 
organizations,‖ J. Organiz. Behav., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 3–15, Jan. 
1994. 
[9] MAFRA, ―Ontology Mapping FRAmework Toolkit‖. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://mafra-toolkit.sourceforge.net/). 
[Accessed: 
05.09.2012]  
[10] Ministry for National Economy, ―Hungary’s Structural Reform 
Programme 
2011-2014.‖ 
Mar-2011. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.kormany.hu/download/b/23/20000/Hungary%27s%20S
tructural%20Reform.pdf. [Accessed: 05.09.2012]. 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

[11] N. F. Noy, ―Semantic integration: a survey of ontology-based 
approaches,‖ SIGMOD Rec., vol. 33, pp. 65–70, Dec. 2004. 
[12] OntoHR, ―Ontology based competency matching‖, 504151 - 
LLP -1 - 2009-1-HU-LEONARDO-LMP. [Online]. Available: 
http://ontohr.eu. [Accessed: 05.09.2012].  
[13] SAKE, ―Semantic enabled Agile Knowledge-based E-
government‖, 
FP6 
IST 
027128. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.sake-project.org/. [Accessed: 05.09.2012]  
[14] S. C. Schoonover, H. Schoonover, D. Nemerov, and C. Ehly, 
―Competency-based HR applications: Results of a comprehensive 
survey,‖ Arthur Andersen/Schoonover/SHRM, 2000. 
[15] Stanford University, ―PROMPT‖. [Online]. Available: 
http://protege.stanford.edu/plugins/prompt/prompt.html. [Accessed: 
05.09.2012] 
[16] Stanford University, ―Protégé 4.2 Beta‖. [Online]. Available: 
http://protegewiki.stanford.edu/wiki/Protege_4.2_Beta_Release_No
tes. [Accessed: 05.09.2012] 
[17] I. Szabó, ―Comparing the competence contents of demand and 
supply sides on the labour market,‖ in Information Technology 
Interfaces (ITI), Proceedings of the ITI 2011 33rd International 
Conference on, 2011, pp. 345–350. 
[18] TOGAF, ―The Open Group Architecture Framework‖. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.opengroup.org/togaf/. [Accessed: 
05.09.2012]  
[19] J. Winterton, F. Delamare - Le Deist, and E. Stringfellow, 
―Typology of knowledge, skills and competences Clarification of 
the concept and prototype.‖ Cedefop Reference series, 2006. 
[20] J. Temesi, Ed., Az Országos képesítési keretrendszer 
kialakítása Magyarországon. Budapest: Oktatáskutató és Fejlesztő 
Intézet, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-240-0
SEMAPRO 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

