SIGA3D: A Semantic BIM Extension to Represent Urban Environnement   
An ontology-based management of level of details 
Clément Mignard1, Gilles Gesquière2, Christophe Nicolle3 
1Active3D, 2 rue René Char, BP 66 606 21066 Dijon Cedex, France 
2 Aix-Marseille Université, LSIS - UMR 6168, IUT BP 90178 - 13637 ARLES, France 
3 LE2I – UMR 5158, IUT Dijon-Auxerre, Université de Bourgogne, BP 47870, 21078 Dijon Cedex, France 
1c.mignard@active3d.net, 2gilles.gesquiere@lsis.org, 3cnicolle@u-bourgogne.fr 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a new architecture dedicated to 
the management of buildings and urban objects through a 3D 
digital mockup. We focus on the ontology-based framework of 
this architecture, and the semantic LoD (Level of Detail) 
mechanism defined to build dynamically the 3D scene from a 
set of heterogeneous information systems. This project is 
developed into an industrial web platform which manages 
more than 100 million square meters of buildings. 
Keywords- 
Interoperability; 
Semantic 
Heteogeneity; 
ontology; used profil;  Building Information Modelling; 
Geographic Information Systems 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Today, at a time when environmental issues are 
becoming more insistent, ways to control costs in the 
management and development of a territory are increasingly 
sought. This may involve the facility management of a set of 
buildings that one wishes to identify and observe to limit the 
costs of maintenance or the creation of new entities to 
anticipate the ecological and economic impacts. These goals 
require a lot of heterogeneous information on assets to 
manage, at several moments of their life cycle. This 
unification is an expensive process which is not always 
adapted to the trends of the trade or the market. The global 
information system becomes quickly obsolete and unsuited 
regarding the data model evolutions and improvements. In 
order to unify and centralize the management of real estate, 
urban and extra urban, it is necessary to develop a new form 
of collaborative architecture. This architecture makes it 
possible to combine in a homogeneous environment a set of 
heterogeneous information from diverse information 
systems such as those from the Building Information 
Modeling (BIM) domain and the Geographical Information 
Systems (GIS) domain.  
The term BIM has been coined recently to demarcate the 
next generation of Information Technologies (IT) and 
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) for buildings, which focus 
on drawing production. BIM is the process of generating, 
storing, managing, exchanging and sharing building 
information in an interoperable and reusable way. A BIM 
system is a tool that enables users to integrate and reuse 
building information and domain knowledge throughout the 
building life cycle [2]. 
GIS are becoming a part of mainstream business and 
management operations around the world in organizations 
both in public and private sectors. The term GIS refers to 
any system that captures, stores, analyzes, manages, and 
presents data that are linked to at least one location. 
Since 2008, we develop a collaborative web platform 
dedicated to urban facility management. This approach is 
based on a semantic architecture using ontology evolution 
mechanisms. The content of this ontology can be displayed 
in a real time 3D viewer we have developed. This one 
allows the management of a large number of objects in 
scenes and the management of geocoding objects by 
implementing a mechanism of geometric Levels of Details 
(LoD). In our architecture, we introduced also a semantic 
multi-representation mechanism (i.e. several semantic 
definitions of a concept depending of local contexts).  
This approach of multi-representation adds to the 
traditional principle of LoD the notion of Contextual LoD 
(C-LoD). A C-LoD is a geometric representation of an 
object which is selected according to semantic criteria and 
not only displayed depending on the distance between the 
view point and the object as it is usually the case for LoD. 
The criteria may depend on user (we defined a profile in 
which we can find various information like the business 
process to which he is attached), external criteria as 
day/night or weather, or even of the object itself (intrinsic 
properties such as material, temperature, etc.). The semantic 
management drives streaming processes, which extract the 
knowledge and 3D representation of urban objects from a 
relational database. Moreover, all the technologies used to 
build our framework architecture attempt to be as 
compatible as possible with the standards in use in the 
semantic, geospatial and BIM worlds. This allows us to 
bridge the gap of interoperability meet at different levels 
when working with several data sources coming from 
several domains. 
II. 
SEMANTIC REPRESENTATION OF URBAN 
ENVIRONMENT 
Our proposal is based on a semantic architecture 
articulated in 6 levels (Fig. 1). The import/export level is 
dedicated to the parsing of various file formats required to 
model a complete urban environment from different sources 
(GIS/BIM). This can be done from local files or Web 
Services. The Data Model Framework (DMF) level makes it 
possible the combination of geometrical data and semantics. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

The level "Contextual View" associates user profiles and 
business rules to build C-LoDs. The connection level is 
mainly dedicated to the streaming process between the 
databases and the interface. The interface level displays the 
urban environment into a 3D digital mockup coupled with a 
semantic tree of urban elements. 
3D Engine
Data Layer
Semantic Layer
Geometric Layer
Semantic Viewer
SIGA3D Interface
SIGA3D Connexion
Streaming
SIGA3D 
ContextualViews
View Management Tool
Profil Management Tool
SIGA3D  Data 
Model Framework
SIGA3D
Import/Export
IFC 
DWG / DXF / DGN / GML
 
 
Fig. 1. SIGA3D Architecture. 
 
The innovative feature of this architecture is mainly 
contained in the DMF level and Contextual Views level. 
These levels are the base of our semantic C-LoD proposal. 
The DMF level is made of graphs representing the ontology, 
allowing the context management and versioning of the data 
(through CMF for Context Model Framework which 
matches with the Contextual Views layer of the Figure 1). 
Graphs 
operators 
are 
defined 
to 
facilitate 
the 
implementation 
of 
changes 
in 
conceptualization. 
Information about reference systems for space and time 
(Coordinate Reference System (CRS) and TimeZone) are 
also managed in this part. The other part, DMF, defines a 
unified syntax-based knowledge representation based on the 
languages OWL, RDFS, and rules RuleML, SWRL and 
described in this document in an expressive way with 
description logic. DMF also contains operators for the 
management of space and time and the definition of local 
contexts that allow us to conduct a multi-representation of 
data. The goal of this part is to provide models used in an 
inference engine to infer and to check the data modeled by 
the C-DMF (Context-Data Model Framework which include 
CMF and DMF) modeling operators.  
  
III. SIGA3D DATA MODEL FRAMEWORK 
The Data Model Framework is made of operators to 
construct urban data models. These operators allow the 
description of classes and properties that can be used to 
define complex concepts using operators of intersection, 
union, involvement, etc. 
 
dmf:Class defines a class. 
dmf:Property defines a property. 
dmf:Var defines variables used in the logical formulas. 
dmf:Predu defines unary predicates. 
dmf:Predb defines binary predicates. 
dmf:Equiv defines two predicates as equivalent. 
dmf:And  defines the intersection. 
dmf:Not defines the negation. 
dmf:Or defines the union. 
dmf:OrX defines the exclusive disjunction. 
dmf:Diff defines the difference.  
dmf:Imp defines the implication. It is used to represent 
various operators like sub-property, restriction, transitivity, 
symmetry, functional property, etc.  
dmf:spatialEntity  defines a geometric representation. This 
operator refers to a geometrical representation of the object 
with IFC or CityGML standard. 
dmf:temporalEntity defines an instant or an interval of time. 
 
The 
spatial 
data 
and 
especially 
georeferenced 
coordinates do not make sense without the knowledge of the 
coordinate reference system. This information appears in the 
upper layer of our architecture that manages the context of 
model graph, to unify the management of coordinates. The 
same kind of information is provided for time, with the 
management of Time zones.  
The management of local contexts, which allows multi-
representation, is done in this part by defining new stamped 
operators (based on the mechanism described in the part V 
of this article), corresponding to the DMF operators defined 
above. For example, the script 1 defines three local contexts, 
designer, structureEngineer and March.  
 
<dmf:Class rdf:ID=’Profession’/> 
  <Profession rdf:ID=’designer’/> 
  <Profession rdf:ID=’structureEngineer’/> 
<dmf:temporalEntity rdf:ID=’achievementDate’/> 
<dmf:property rdf:ID=’unitType’/> 
  <Day rdf:ID=’March’> 
    <unitType rdf:resource=’#unitMonth/> 
   </Day> 
Script 1. Definition of local contexts. 
 
We can then define several properties and a spatial 
representation for a class ‘buildingPlan’ which depends of 
the user. In the script 2, the contextual operators dmf:[c1, 
…,cn ]Class, dmf:[c1, …,cn ]property and dmf:[ c1, …,cn] 
spatialEntity are used.  
 
<dmf:Class rdf:ID=’BuildingPlan’/> 
<dmf:[designer]property rdf:ID=’line_thick’/> 
<dmf:[structureEngineer]property                 
rdf:ID=’wall_material’/> 
<dmf:[designer]property rdf:ID=’contains_plan’/> 
<dmf:[designer,structureEngineer]property 
rdf:ID=’contains_plan’/> 
<dmf:spatialEntity rdf:ID=’the_plan’/> 
<dmf:[designer]property rdf:ID=’3D_plan’/> 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

<dmf:[designer,structureEngineer]property 
rdf:ID=’2D_plan’/> 
  <the_plan rdf:ID=’plan_of_building_1’> 
   <url_2D_plan 
      rdf:resource=’/building/1/plan/plan2D.dwg’/> 
   <url_3D_plan  
      rdf:resource=’/building/1/plan/plan3D.ifc’/> 
  </the_plan> 
<dmf:[designer,March]Class  
rdf:ID=’Plan_availability’/> 
    <BuildingPlan rdf:ID=’building_plan_1’> 
    <line_thick rdf:dataType=’&xsd;float’>10 
    </line_thick> 
    <wall_material rdf:dataType=’&xsd;float’>wood 
    </wall_material> 
    <contains_plan rdf:resource=’the_plan’/> 
  </BuildingPlan> 
Script 2. Use of contextual operators. 
 
This example describes an object, BuildingPlan, which 
has several properties. For a designer, the BuildingPlan is 
defined with a line_thick and a plan contains two 
representations. The same object is defined differently for a 
structure engineer, with the material of walls, wall_material, 
and an attached plan with only one 2D representation. The 
figure 2 shows another example of multi-representation on a 
building storey. On the left part we have a structural view of 
the building according to the bricklayer context, and on the 
other side we can see a woodwork view (flooring, windows, 
doors and stairs) according to the joiner context (right part). 
 
 
Fig. 2. Example of semantic multi-representation of a 
building.  
IV. SIGA3D CONTEXT MODEL FRAMEWORK 
This part of our architecture is composed of three main 
blocks. The first block sets the context for each graph of 
DMF. The second block defines a set of graph operators to 
facilitate the writing of information and limit the 
redundancy of data in the context management. Then the 
third block defines a set of operators on graphs to describe 
more accurately the geographical information by defining 
spatio-temporal relations between different data models of 
DMF. Context management in this architecture is done by 
defining 
a 
special 
graph 
called 
SystemGraph. 
A 
SystemGraph defined the context for a graph or a set of 
graphs using operators. These operators can be applied on 
graphs defined in the second block of the CMF. The use of 
these operators can simplify the management of the 
evolution of knowledge of the model. Indeed, rather than 
storing for each modification of the model a new version of 
the complete graph, the CMF layer stores the modification 
as operations on graphs. The SystemGraph can be described 
using the following operators: 
 
 
cdmf:graph connects graph and data. These data are 
described according to the data model. They can be a 
combination between other graphs using the CMF 
graph 
operators 
AddGraph 
(union 
of 
graphs), 
RemoveGraph, 
InterGraph, 
CompInterGraph 
and 
MapGraph. These operators allow us to improve the 
modification tracking of the ontology by limiting the 
size of the graphs and their reusability. 
 
cdmf:of 
represents the context. This property 
defines a list of resources representing the access 
context. 
 
cdmf:model refers to the data model which is used. This 
data model defines elements which will appear in the 
graph. 
 
cdmf:action defines user’s rights to access the data 
(read/write/remove). If no action is defined in the 
system Graph, which means that only the visualization 
of the data is allowed.  
 
cdmf:synchronizationGraph defines a list of graphs 
linked with the element cdmf:graph by all kind of 
spatial and temporal relationship.  
 
cdmf:reference_frame defines the TimeZone and the 
CRS used for the data model associated to the 
SystemGraph. These values are valid for all data of 
associated graphs. This means that if original data 
sources are not defined in the same CRS, a 
transformation of coordinates has to be done before 
using the data.   
 
The spatio-temporal synchronization is not a common graph 
operator and is very specific to the description of 
geographical information. It allows defining the validity of a 
model by describing relationships with other models. It can 
be used in case of model evolution to assure the consistency 
of the global model. For instance, if we define a building 
model and an electric power network model, it is possible to 
describe a topological relation between the two models to 
say they are spatially connected. Then, if one of the models 
is modified, for example, to move the building in the case of 
a bad georeferencing, the other model has to be modified to 
keep the spatial connection relation consistent. 
V. PRINCIPLE OF SEMANTIC MULTI-REPRESENTATION 
The principle of multi-representation can consist to 
display different maps of different scales for a same place, 
or to simplify the geometry of an object depending of 
geometric criteria such as distance or size. This is the well-
known mechanism of LoD in GIS. To this geometric 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

definition of multi-representation, we propose to add a 
semantic dimension. This semantic multi-representation 
allows a user to display information in a form that suit him 
(contextual view), or to make a control on access of the 
modeling data.  The combination of these two types of 
multi-representation is an innovative aspect of our approach. 
It gives the new concept of C-LoD, representations that 
would be displayed according to semantic criteria.   
To implement this new mechanism, it is needed to have 
a formalization of the multi-representation system in a 
semantic way.  The works based on the MADS approach by 
[8] and later by [1] define a multi-representation formalism 
in ontologies. This approach is based on a stamping 
mechanism of the representations. In our architecture, 
stamps can be defined with any element of the DMF layer 
and especially spatial and temporal elements. Moreover, 
stamps can be applied on every element and operators of the 
DMF layer, such as data, instance of types and values of 
attributes, meta-data, and definition of a type or an attribute 
of the schema. The local context mechanism of the building 
and urban modeling architecture is based on this formal 
approach. Associating to the concept of local context, it is 
used to define contextual operators to model these contexts. 
A part of these operators is already defined in the BIM part 
with the possibility to build contextual view.   
The next step required is the definition of operators for 
GIS domain. Thus, the local context can be also defined 
with spatiotemporal operators to describe the objects 
depending on space and time, an important dimension of 
GIS. 
VI. DISCUSSION 
Interoperability may be defined as “the ability of two or 
more systems or components to exchange information and 
to use the information that has been exchanged” [4]. 
Systems that can exchange data are syntactically 
interoperable: they share a common structure, with agreed-
upon data formats and communication protocol. Syntactical 
interoperability is a prerequisite for further interoperability. 
The ability for systems to interpret automatically the 
exchanged 
information 
is 
known 
as 
semantic 
interoperability. The same meaning can be derived from the 
data at both ends. This implies that the systems share a 
common information model, where each element of the 
model is precisely defined. In a world where software 
vendors have implemented products tailored to the needs of 
specific communities and/or customers, standardization is 
the most efficient and global solution to interoperability 
problems [10]. Several organizations, industry consortiums 
and communities are involved in standards development 
activities related to urban matters:  
 
- ISO/TC 
211 
(International 
Organisation 
for 
Standardization 
/ 
Technical 
Committee 
211, 
http://www.isotc211.org/)  - Geographic Information and 
Geomatics is responsible of standards for geospatial 
information; 
- Open 
Geospatial 
Consortium 
(OGC, 
http://opengeospatial.org/) focuses on standards for 
geospatial services;  
- The buildingSMART alliance (formerly IAI for 
International 
Alliance 
for 
Interoperability, 
http://www.buildingsmartalliance.org) 
focuses 
on 
developing standards for the construction and facility 
management industries; 
- Web3D 
Consortium 
(http://www.web3d.org/) 
is 
concerned with standards for 3D data exchanged over 
the Internet; 
- Khronos Group (http://www.khronos.org/) creates open 
standards for the authoring and acceleration of parallel 
computing and graphics media; 
- ISO/TC 204 – Intelligent transport systems standardizes 
information, communication and control systems in the 
field of surface transportation. 
 
The use of standards that allow joint exploitation and 
combination of various geospatial and CAD data is a 
requirement for developing interoperable systems and is an 
increasing demand from user communities. In our case, to 
build the Contextual LoD, we have to share 3D models and 
its relationship with semantics. User communities can take 
advantage of this framework of standards to develop 
application schemas that follow the rules and reuse the 
components defined in the abstract standards. An XML 
Schema encoding following the GML grammar can then be 
derived from the application schema and serve as the basis 
for data exchange. This approach was followed during the 
development 
of 
CityGML 
and 
INSPIRES 
data 
specifications. 
 
ISO/TC 211 has started to standardize different thematic 
aspects of geospatial information. Several standardized 
conceptual schemas have been defined, in accordance with 
ISO 19109. The following standards are relevant to urban 
space modelling: 
 
- ISO 19144-2 - Classification systems - Part 2: Land 
Cover Meta Language (LCML) defines a meta language 
for expressing land cover classifications. Land cover 
classifications can be used to distinguish built-up areas 
from non-urban zones. 
- ISO 19152 – Land Administration Domain Model 
(LADM) is a standardized conceptual schema for 
cadastre data. Land administration data can also play an 
important role in urban models. 
- ISO/TC 204 has developed ISO 14825 - Geographic 
Data Files (GDF) as a conceptual and logical data model 
and exchange format for geographic databases for 
transportation applications. GDF has a strong focus on 
road transportation information. 
 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Other organizations have developed and maintain standards 
for urban and building models. The Industry Foundation 
Classes (IFC), defined by buildingSMART, is a BIM data 
schema covering a wide range of information elements 
required by software applications throughout the life cycle 
of a building. IFC now contains more than 700 classes 
enabling the exchange of building design, construction and 
maintenance data [7]. IFC 2.3 was adopted as ISO/PAS 
16739 in 2005. The next release of IFC, IFC4, will be 
published as the ISO standard ISO/IS16739 at the end of 
year 2011 and will feature an improved modeling of 
external spaces and better support for geographic coordinate 
reference systems. 
 
OGC published CityGML 1.0 in 2008. CityGML 
specifies a standardized application schema for 3D city 
models, from which a GML 3.1.1 encoding is derived. 
CityGML is therefore, both a conceptual model and an 
encoding, enabling syntactic and semantic interoperability. 
Its key features [5] are: 
1. Thematic modeling: the model covers a wide range of 
city objects, including but not limited to buildings, 
transportation facilities, water bodies, vegetation… 
2. Modularization: each thematic model is packaged in a 
separate UML module. 
3. Multi-scale modeling: CityGML supports five levels of 
details 
(LoD). 
This mechanism 
facilitates 
the 
integration of 2D (at LoD0) and 3D datasets at distinct 
scales representing the same real-world entities. The 
same feature can be represented with different 
geometries at each scale. CityGML also provides an 
aggregation and decomposition association between 
objects that can be used to indicate that an object at a 
lower LoD has been decomposed into two or more 
objects at a higher LoD. They are  defined as follows: 
 
LoD0: regional view. An ortho-image or a map 
may be draped over a Digital Terrain Model, 
together with regional LandUse, water bodies and 
transportation information;  
 
LoD1: city view. Buildings are modeled as flat-
roofed blocks; 
 
LoD2: city district, project view. Buildings are 
modeled 
with 
distinct 
roof 
structures 
and 
semantically-classified 
boundary 
surfaces. 
Vegetation objects, city furniture and more detailed 
transportation objects may also be modeled. 
 
 
LoD3: architectural models (outside), landmark. 
Detailed wall and roof structures, balconies, bay 
and projection structures are modeled, as well as 
high-resolution textures, complex vegetation and 
transportation objects. 
 
LoD4: architectural models (inside). Interior 
structures are modeled. 
4. External references: objects in external databases may 
be referenced from the building or city object to which 
they correspond. They can be used to propagate 
updates from the source database to the 3D city object. 
They also help in linking different information models, 
while keeping them separate, as each has its own 
purpose.  
5. Application Domain Extension (ADE) is a key 
mechanism of CityGML. Users can formally extend 
the 
base 
UML 
model 
with 
domain-specific 
information, e.g. an extension for utility networks or 
describing noise rates on city objects, and encode it in 
a XML Schema. Several ADEs have been developed 
for topics such as Noise (in relation with the European 
Noise Directive), Tunnels or Bridges. An ADE 
extending CityGML with more detailed semantics 
from the IFC standard is also being developed as the 
GeoBIM ADE [3].   
 
CityGML’s modularity, thematic structure, extensibility and 
external referencing mechanism sustain richer urban models 
integrating data from a variety of sources and enabling links 
with other application domains. 
 
Semantic information must be taken into account 
according to 3D models. Transferring only geometry with 
the scene graph is not sufficient [6]. Transferring 
information between a server and a client application is not 
so easy. Using standards would be a good way. However, in 
our project, interactive exchange is needed and requires a 
semantic modeling of heterogeneous information using 
ontology [9].     
 
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presents an ongoing research on the 
definition of an Urban and Building Modeling Architecture. 
This paper focus on a new mechanism of LoD called 
Contextual LoD. It is the merge of classical geometric 
approach to define LoDs and two semantic multi-
representations formalisms: the first part is based on 
contextual trees to define user profiles and business rules at 
the DMF level. The second part defines local contexts to 
allow multi-representation at a lower level, i.e. for each 
object of the model.  The concept of C-LoD is designed to 
be integrated in an Urban Facilities Management (UFM) 
platform. It is an extension of the BIM concept for the 
management of urban objects. Our framework facilitates 
data maintenance (data migration, model evolution) during 
the life cycle of an urban environment and reduces the 
volume of data with specific graph operators. The urban 
approach also implies to manage precisely the spatial and 
temporal dimensions that have been considered in the 
definition of the C-LoD part. This approach is based on the 
CityGML 1.0 and IFC 2x3 standards. The implementation 
of the BIM part, including the making of data model and 
contextual views and profiles, as well as the 3D 
representation of building and urban objects with a LoD 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

management is already done. Our future works will be to 
achieve the implementation of our framework for the UFM 
platform, including the C-LoD management. These works 
are based on our previous works on Active3d and designed 
to be fully compatible with both standards: the one for 
geographic information (e.g. ISO/TC 211) and the second 
for the construction world (e.g. ISO16739).  
 
 
REFERENCES 
1. 
Benslimane D., Vangenot C., Roussey C.: A. Arara. Multi-
representation in ontologies. Proceedings of 7th East-European 
Conference on Advances in Databases and Information Systems, 
ADBIS 2003, Dresden, Germany, September 3-6, (2003) 
2. 
Campbell D. A.:Building Information Modeling: The Web3D 
Application for AEC, ACM Web3D, Perugia, Italy, (2007). 
3. 
Döllner J., Hagedorn B: Integrating Urban GIS, CAD, and BIM Data 
By Service-Based Virtual 3D City Models. 26th Urban Data 
Management Symp., Stuttgart, Germany, (2007) 
4. 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. IEEE Standard 
Computer Dictionary: A Compilation of IEEE Standard Computer 
Glossaries. New York, NY: 1990 
5. 
Kolbe T. H., Gröger G., Plümer L.: Citygml – interoperable access to 
3d city models, In proceedings of the Int. Symposium on Geo-
information for Disaster Management, pages 21–23, Delft, march 
2005. Springer verlag (2005) 
6. 
Kolbe, T. H.: Representing and Exchanging 3D City Models with 
CityGML, Lee, Jiyeong / Zlatanova, Sisi (Eds.), Proceedings of the 
3rd Int.Workshop on 3D Geo-Information, Seoul, Korea. Lecture 
Notes in Geoinformation & Cartography, Springer Verlag, (2009) 
7. 
Kuzminykh A., Ho_mann C: On validating STEP product data 
exchange, Computer-Aided Design, 40(2) :133- 138, (2008). 
8. 
Parent C., Spaccapietra S., Zimanyi E. The MurMur project: 
Modeling 
and 
querying 
multi-representation 
spatio-temporal 
databases, Information Systems, 31 (8) (2006) 
9. 
Vanlande, R., Cruz C., Nicolle, C.: IFC and Buildings Lifecycle 
Management",Journal of Automation in Construction, Elsevier, 
(2008) 
10. Zhao P. and Di L., Geospatial Web Services : Advances in 
Information Interoperability, IGI Global, (2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-175-5
SEMAPRO 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

