Semantic Web GIS Services for Cultural Heritage Domain 
 
Caner Güney 
Geomatic Engineering 
Istanbul Technical University 
İstanbul, Turkey 
guneycan@itu.edu.tr 
 
 
Abstract—World is a collection of objects of cultural and 
natural heritage resources. Every human activity happens 
somewhere and sometimes. Each application projected in the 
Cultural Heritage sector takes a different view of the time 
period of the Cultural Heritage resource. In other words, 
projects belonging to the same time period but different 
geographical locations could be correlated with each other. 
However, users from all over the world are still faced with the 
perennial problem of finding those resources that will be most 
relevant to any particular research project. Cultural Heritage 
documentation is definitely going digital, but this trend may 
not be able to solve the problems arising when it is desired to 
perform e-heritage solutions in order to share Cultural 
Heritage knowledge. On the other hand, Cultural Heritage is a 
promising application domain for semantic web technologies 
due to the semantic richness and heterogeneity of cultural 
content. In this study, a coherent and standardized 
architectural framework -‘GeoGCHEAF- has been designed as 
a “Semantic Geospatial Information System (GIS) Services” 
and proposed to the Cultural Heritage domain.  
Keywords-cultural heritage; geospatial informatics; semantic 
web technologies; ontologies. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Clues from the past life styles and habits of the mankind 
have always been interesting and valuable to people who are 
living on the same land at different time. Documentation and 
protection of the historical places and structures is not only a 
local or national issue, but also a global interest to keep the 
memory of the past of the mankind. Discovering and 
comprehending habitats and creations of mankind in the past, 
not only adds to knowledge, but also unfold rich heritage 
setting conservation responsibilities for societies. The 
expectations from the local, national and international 
authorities are highly increased to protect the historical areas 
for the next generations. Currently, numerous Cultural 
Heritage (CH) recording, documentation, conservation, 
restoration, reconstruction, renewal, rehabilitation, digital 
preservation projects, etc., are in progress [1]. 
Archaeologists may be committed to studying the past, 
but their use of technology is quite up-to-date so that digital 
heritage, e-heritage, digital archaeology, virtual archaeology 
and open archaeology are fast-moving fields. In the digital 
age with ever-increasing quantities of CH data being 
collected, stored, and distributed in computer-readable 
forms, interconnection of information is becoming essential. 
Organizations from across the CH sector have been able 
to take advantage of Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) to offer new forms of access to their 
resources for users. They are creating geoservices, moving 
from data sharing to sharing resources, such as maps, 
models, data, content, knowledge. Many web-based GIS 
applications of CH resources are being designed and 
implemented all over the world. However, users from all 
over the world are still faced with the perennial problem of 
finding those resources that will be most relevant to any 
particular research project. Furthermore, it is difficult for the 
data/information/content/application/service to be integrated 
because it is stored in stove-piped systems or because two 
CH communities use different terminology to describe the 
data/information. 
To conclude this, the “Geo-enable Global Cultural 
Heritage 
Enterprise 
Architecture 
Framework 
(GeoGCHEAF)”, a global internet-connected spatially-
enabled CH sharing network based upon the open standards 
and semantic technologies, has been specifically designed to 
expand communication and dissemination of the CH data, 
information, knowledge, content, applications and services to 
the different levels of users and the public. 
The aim of this study is to promote the digital 
preservation, integrate the heterogeneous sources using 
semantic web technologies and make them available 
primarily to a wider audience of researchers, specialists and 
decision makers but also to the general public in order to 
foster wider understanding of the past. 
The rest of this article is structured as follows: Section II 
discusses why Semantic Web technologies are needed in the 
CH domain. Section III explains the use of ontologies in the 
CH field. The article concludes by presenting conclusions 
and recommendations. 
II. 
MOTIVATION 
CH data, information, knowledge, content management 
and research are inherently distributed among many users, 
projects, organizations, systems, enterprises, applications and 
services. Each CH organization develops some, but not all, 
of its data/information content. At least some of the 
resources come from outside the organization. Moreover, 
many of today’s CH organizations rely on digital ICT to 
gather, organize, interpret, and disseminate data, information 
and knowledge relating to their various projects. In many 
cases, this involves applications and services that were 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-355-1
SEMAPRO 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

created at different times and designed for heterogeneous 
hardware and software platforms. The challenge now faced 
by these organizations is not only data, information, content 
distributed management, but also the CH organizations 
increasingly face the challenge of providing efficient and 
effective methods, such as integrating various distributed 
open 
web 
services, 
loosely-coupled 
applications, 
geoinformation technologies and infrastructures for CH 
resources into a single semantic interoperable framework, by 
which these disparate technologies can work together to 
achieve academic and/or commercial objectives that are 
constantly evolving [2].  
Not only spatial data/information sets, topographic and 
thematic maps, vector and raster layers but also demographic 
data, geo-demographic data, census data, archaeological, 
architectural, historical information (including date of 
recording, recording by, structural changes (e.g., shape, size, 
width, length, height), construction date-material, technique, 
archaeological finds (e.g., ceramic, lithic, metal, textiles, 
bone) 
and 
other 
geodata/geoscience 
data 
(e.g., 
geomorphological information, earthquakes, fault zone 
maps, climate change information), and GIS files/contents 
are shared via open standard data and information formats, 
such as Extensible Markup Language (XML), Geographic 
Markup Language (GML), compact GML (cGML), 
CityGML, Keyhole Markup Language (KML), Geospatial 
JavaScript Object Notation (GeoJSON), Web Ontology 
Language (OWL) and services on the web through a geoweb 
portal among CH scientific community, decision-makers, 
NGOs, field teams, authorities and public. This is because 
long-term conservation depends on the involvement of 
people from all levels, from government structures to experts 
to public.  
III. 
SEMANTIC ARCHITECTURE 
A. Semantic Approach 
The key to faster, better, discovery of CH information is 
metadata, which can be quickly and thoroughly searched by 
computers and presented in an understandable form to users. 
Therefore, the CH domain needs standardized metadata 
entries (e.g., Resource Description Framework, RDF) and a 
standard metadata framework or frameworks (e.g., RDF 
Schema, RDF-S). CH spatiotemporal data, information, 
content and application are encoded and presented with a 
structured XML document along with its standard CH-
specific & CH community-wide defined schema, such as 
XML CIDOC-CRM, MidasXML, OCHRE (formerly 
XSTAR), ArchML, Dublin Core or combinations of these, 
rather than a common XML schema, that can be validated to 
ensure data integrity and coherence without the need for 
human interaction. The benefits of an ontology-driven 
database search are potentially enormous. Effective XML-
based data/information integration among the distributed 
heterogeneous 
systems, 
applications, 
databases, 
web 
portals/portlets, data providers and CH specialists are 
performed through ontologies (e.g., OWL). 
When 
conducting 
online 
portlet-based 
research, 
aggregating information from these searches across the 
different datasets, and making data available from different 
sites in different locations for different user groups need 
dynamic interoperable data sharing on a global scale for the 
CH domain via XML-formatted datasets. Whichever method 
is used to support technical interoperability, including data, 
information, application, services, process, policy and rules 
interoperability, 
web-portals 
with 
portlet 
specifications/protocols (e.g., Java Specification Request 
(JSR), Web Services for Remote Portlets (WSRP)) also need 
to achieve semantic interoperability between databases to 
return useful sets of results to its users to share information 
on the semantic web. 
Ontologies play a critical role in associating meaning 
with data such that computers can understand enough to 
meaningfully process data automatically. Compared to 
syntactic means, the semantic approach leads to high quality 
and more relevant information for improved decision-
making. Equally important is the use of ontologies to achieve 
shared understanding. Ontologies are also evolving as the 
basis for improving data usage, achieving semantic 
interoperability, 
developing 
advanced 
methods 
for 
representing and using complex metadata, correlating and 
integrating information, knowledge sharing and discovery. 
Ultimately, ontologies can be an important tool in 
expediting the advancement of related sciences, and they can 
reduce the cost by improving sharing of information and 
knowledge. In such an architecture, distributed repositories 
can be searched and relevant information according to user 
specified criteria are found and merged by means of an 
intelligent web agent or web services through the semantic 
web. For instance, a sort of specific artifact in the Ottoman 
fortresses of “Seddülbahir” and “Kumkale” belongs to 17th 
century can be searched in different CH projects’ databases 
and portals, digital archives, museum collections and old 
antiquarian reports [3].  
The goal of the semantic architecture of “GeoGCHEAF” 
is to develop a semantic solution for providing a great level 
of geospatial semantic interoperability, enabling knowledge 
sharing and geospatial information integration at different 
levels of granularity. This open and interoperable semantic 
solution based on the explicit use of geo-ontologies through 
geospatial semantic web also provides a cooperative human-
computer environment for the composition of spatial- and 
context-aware semantic web applications in a dynamic and 
flexible manner within the Internet-connected CH domain. 
While such a semantic approach facilitates geospatial 
information storage, search processes, query formulations 
and retrieval models on the heterogeneous distributed 
repositories, the ultimate goal of this architecture is to 
develop knowledge-based spatial information web services 
for the CH domain [3]. 
If different web sites that contain CH information share 
and publish the same underlying ontology of the terms they 
all use, then computer agents can extract and aggregate 
information from these different sites. The agents can use 
this aggregated information to answer user queries or as 
input data to other applications. This enables the 
communication and collaboration inside the CH domain and 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-355-1
SEMAPRO 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

among the domains and improves understanding of how 
different CH enterprises exchange geospatial information.  
B. Ontology Design Methodology 
There is no single correct way or methodology for 
designing ontologies. Ontology design is a creative process 
of modeling the given domain, by choosing the most 
important concepts and identifying the most relevant 
relations between them. Hence, no two ontologies designed 
by different modelers would be the same. The potential 
applications 
of 
the 
ontology 
and 
the 
designer’s 
understanding and view of the domain will undoubtedly 
affect ontology design choices. The quality of the ontology 
can be assessed only by using it in applications for which it 
was designed. Thus, an iterative process has been addressed 
to ontology design methodology in this research. It is started 
with a rough first pass at the ontology. Then, the evolving 
ontology is revised and refined, and filled in the details. 
Along the way, the modeling decisions that a designer needs 
to make, as well as the pros, cons, and implications of 
different solutions are discussed. That is, deciding what the 
ontology is going to use for, and how detailed or general the 
ontology is going to be will guide many of the modeling 
decisions down the road. Among several viable alternatives, 
it is needed to determine which one would work better for 
the projected task, be more intuitive, more extensible, and 
more maintainable. It is also needed to remember that an 
ontology is a model of reality of the world and the concepts 
in the ontology must reflect this reality. After the initial 
version of the ontology is defined, users can evaluate and 
debug it by using it in applications or problem-solving 
methods or by discussing it with experts in the field, or both. 
As a result, it is almost certainly needed to revise the initial 
ontology. This process of iterative design will likely continue 
through the entire lifecycle of the ontology [4].  
For the purposes of this research an ontology that helps 
to present objectivity as agreement about subjectivity is a 
formal explicit semantic definition of set of concepts and 
relations in the CH domain. The methodology for designing 
ontologies attempts to establish the types of objects (e.g., 
fortress, mosque, tower); relations (e.g., Hadice Turhan 
Sultan built the fortress, commander managed the fortress); 
events (e.g., World War I, repairment of the structures); and 
processes (e.g., deterioration, architectural changes) at 
different levels of scale and granularity, from out of which 
the geospatial domain is constituted. In order to resolve the 
conceptual and terminological incompatibilities on case-by-
case basis, developing such an ontology, once and for all, 
includes: 
• 
Underlying 
conceptualization 
(conceptual 
ontologies): Determination of what is wanted to model, 
checking whether existing ontologies can be reused, if there 
is, drafting the ontology by making use of existing one. 
Embracing conceptual issues concerning what would be 
required to establish an exhaustive ontology of the geospatial 
and CH domains. Establishment of explicit formal and 
consensual specification of the concepts with their 
definitions and the relations among them populating in the 
CH domain. Underlying conceptualization can be performed 
by interacting with the specialists in the area of the 
application, such as scientists/researchers/ontologists from 
CH domain. 
• 
Ontological commitment to this conceptualization 
(CH domain-specific logical ontologies): Determination of 
what certain terms mean in the CH domain and what terms 
the CH community uses for certain concepts. Preparation of 
the robust, comprehensive and shared taxonomies (canonical 
reference taxonomy) of the terms exisiting in the CH 
domain, which are sufficiently detailed to capture the 
semantics of the CH domain, and definition of classes and 
properties. 
• 
Geo-ontological commitment to the abstraction 
(Geospatial 
domain-specific 
logical 
ontologies): 
Representations of classification of geospatial entities of real 
world/spatial phenomena (canonical formalization), their 
properties and relations within geospatial domain.  
• 
Logical statements (semantic relations): Generation 
of the rich (thematic-spatial-temporal) relationships among 
the classes within the CH domain and between geographic 
entities/features within the geospatial domain.  
• 
Associative 
relations: 
Synonymy, 
hyponymy, 
hypernymy, and antonymy are semantic relations defined 
between related words and word senses. Synonymy (syn 
same, onyma name) is a symmetric relation between word 
forms. Hyponymy (sub-name) and its inverse, hypernymy 
(super-name), are transitive relations between sets of 
synonyms. Antonymy (opposite name) is synonymous with 
opposite. 
• 
Hierarchical 
relations 
(subclass–superclass 
relations) 
• 
Inheritance 
or 
generalization/specialization 
or 
taxonomic 
relationships 
(superordinate-subordinate 
relationships): “is-a-kind-of” and “has-kinds” relationships 
• 
Aggregation or partonomic relationships (part-
whole relations): “is-a-part-of” and “has-parts” relationships 
• 
Quantitative spatial relations 
• 
Distance: quantitative distance relations (within a 
specified distance), for instance, space distance, such as 
“withinMetersOf”, 
or 
time 
distance, 
such 
as 
“withinMinutesOf.” 
• 
Qualitative 
spatial 
relations 
(vague 
spatial 
relationships): includes relative locational properties of 
objects, such as containment, distance and directions, (near, 
north, between, inside, outside, in front of (a mosque), along 
(a street)) 
• 
Distance: qualitative distance relations 
• 
Direction: the 8-sector model to express the cardinal 
directions North, NorthEast East, SouthEast, South, 
SouthWest, West, NorthWest, or isNorthOf, isLeftOf, 
isBehindOf 
• 
Topological relationships: the OpenGIS Simple 
Features Specification of topological relations based on the 
Dimensionally Extended 9-Intersection Model Based on 
Components (DE-9IMBC), the ontology includes the 
following eight relations: equals, disjoint, intersects, touches, 
crosses, within, contains, and overlaps.  
• 
Mereological relationships: Parthood relations, e.g., 
“isWholeOf”, “isPartOf”. Region Connection Calculus 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-355-1
SEMAPRO 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

(RCC-8) abstractly describes regions by their 8 basic 
relations: disconnected, externally connected, equal, partially 
overlapping, tangential proper part, tangential proper part 
inverse, non-tangential proper part, non-tangential proper 
part inverse. 
• 
Semantic 
mediators 
(semantic 
translators): 
Connection between CH domain ontologies and geo-
ontologies is made by semantic mediators. 
• 
Formalizing ontologies (translating ontologies into 
ontology-derived classes): An object-oriented mapping of 
multiple ontologies to the system classes. Translation of the 
ontologies specified in a standard, system-independent form 
into 
classes 
that 
are 
specific 
computer 
language 
representations, that is, machine-interpretable definitions of 
the concepts. Ontology-derived classes are software 
components that can be used to develop applications and 
they are fully functional classes with all the operations that 
can be applied to entities.  
• 
Defining slots and describing allowed values for 
these slots: Each class describes various features and 
attributes of the classes and instances.  
• 
Implementation: Establishment of the mapping 
between information sources and the common ontology. 
Mapping the ontology into the basic data models and 
representations necessary for scientific computing about CH 
domain 
and 
geospatial 
phenomena, 
and 
semantic 
associations in applications that integrate data, metadata, and 
knowledge queries. 
• 
Creating 
a 
knowledgebase: 
Creating 
a 
knowledgebase by defining individual instances of these 
classes. Filling in specific slot value information and 
additional slot restrictions for instances.  
• 
Validation: Definition of test cases in the CH 
domain to validate the ontology being developed. 
C. Implementation Methodology for Building Ontologies 
Protégé [5] has been chosen to use as an ontology-
development environment to specify the ontologies since it is 
free, open source, and supports a wide variety of plugin and 
import formats, such as Web Ontology Language (OWL) [6] 
and RDF-S [7]. In addition, OWL has been adopted as a 
web-based ontology language to present ontologies and 
represent knowledge. Semantic web contents and declarative 
frame-based ontologies in this research are being currently 
developed using the Protégé-OWL plugin. Protégé-OWL 
editor is able to present conceptual modeling of the CH 
domain, edit ontologies developed, create classes, slots, 
facets, and instances. 
The Geographic Markup Language (GML) provides a 
syntactic approach to encoding geospatial information 
through a language in which symbols need to be interpreted 
by users, because associated behavior is not accounted for 
[8]. GML can be viewed as an alternative not just to 
geography in RDF, but to RDF itself. These are the 
differences, data model and type system. GML is built on the 
XML data model and the XML Schema type system. 
RDFMap and RDFGeom are built on the RDF data model, 
and RDF Schema or OWL can be used to express typing 
information. OWL is the appropriate choice for this job, 
since its expressiveness corresponds more closely to that of 
XML Schema. The application of RDF to geography is at an 
early stage, whereas GML is a mature effort. RDFMap 
combined with the companion RDFGeom language cover 
only a fraction of the ground covered by GML3 [9]. In this 
research, the GML of geospatial instances obtained from the 
spatial datasets has been translated into OWL using XSLT 
style sheet. 
Fortress is a term in the CH domain ontology and 
“Seddülbahir Fortress” is an instance of the fortress that is-a-
kind-of a CH site. The renovation project directors consider 
the fortress as a high-level ontology that a consensus can be 
reached about which are the basic properties of the fortress. 
From the point of view of this ontology, the fortress is an 
Ottoman architectural monument belongs to 17th century 
and built by Hadice Turhan Sultan at the entrance of the 
Dardanelles. The fortress can be seen differently by different 
systems, such as architecture sub-domain, archaeology sub-
domain, art-historian sub-domain, etc. For the architecture 
sub-domain the fortress can be building. For the archaeology 
sub-domain it is an excavation site. For the art history sub-
domain it is a recreation site. Although the conceptualization 
of the architectural sub-domain of the fortress is derived 
from higher level, architecture sub-domain has a view 
(building concept of the fortress, e.g., the structural 
characteristics of the buildings of the fortress) that is more 
detailed than the previous higher level. This is done using 
inheritance. Architecture sub-domain will have all the basic 
properties defined in the higher level ontology plus the add-
ons that the architects think are relevant to their concept of 
fortress. The same happens with the other sub-domains. 
Inside the archaeology sub-domain, the section in charge of 
the excavation will have an even more detailed view of the 
fortress. If all sub-domains inherit from higher level 
ontology, they will be able to share complete information at 
this level only, although they can share partial information at 
lower levels. The users have the means to share information 
through the use of common classes derived from ontologies. 
The level of detail of the information is related to the level of 
detail of the ontology.  
The semantic architecture of “GeoCHEAF” stores 
entities 
and 
their 
associated 
relationships 
in 
the 
knowledgebase, classifying them according to a hierarchical 
entity class tree. A given entity can belong to multiple entity 
classes, that is, there are classes of concepts, which constitute 
a hierarchy with multiple inheritances. Figure 1 shows an 
example of a graph representing the ontology of buildings of 
a fortress as an OWL. The class ‘building’ is a subclass of 
the class ‘fortress’, and the class ‘tower’ is subclass of the 
class ‘building’. Other branches of the class tree contain 
buildings with subclasses Turkish bath, wall, mosque, and 
military barrack. Classes typically have instances, for 
instance, a specific tower is an instance of the ‘tower’ class, 
such as Algerian Tower, Cannon Tower, South Tower, 
Poyraz Limanı, Lodos, Tophane of the “Seddülbahir 
Fortress”. A ‘tower’ class/entity must have a geometric 
shape, for example, the round or polygonal plan of the tower. 
Conceptually, a tower can be placed on both types of tower 
figure; however, a specific tower can only reside on either. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-355-1
SEMAPRO 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

For example, the instance of Algerian Tower is-a prominent 
rounded seaside tower or South tower is-a hexagonal tower- 
hexagonal tower ako tower. 
The use of multiple inheritances allows an application 
developer to make use of the existing ontologies to build 
new classes. The application developer can combine classes 
from diverse ontologies and create new classes that represent 
user needs. These new classes represent objects that have 
diverse characteristics [10][11][12].  
For instance, towers have geometric characteristics along 
with alphanumeric attributes. Instead of having a single class 
that needs to include information on the geometric shape of 
the tower, as well as associated information about 
construction 
date, 
construction 
material, 
construction 
techniques, and so on, multiple inheritance is utilized in this 
research by inheriting geometric characteristics and methods 
from a geometric/spatial class of spatial ontology, such as 
polygon, and inheriting/descending application-specific 
characteristics and methods from a more generic Tower class 
(parent class) of CH domain ontology. In the first group, all 
necessary representational and locational data can be handled 
by inherited methods, while in the other information on the 
semantics and behavior of the tower are inherited from CH 
specific ontology-derived classes. The views can be 
combined 
enabling 
the 
user 
to 
have 
a 
geometric/alphanumeric view. An example of the use of this 
combined view is a “point-and-click” operation over a tower 
that highlights its shape and shows its alphanumeric data. 
In the knowledge generation phase of the semantic 
architecture of “GeoCHEAF”, the ontology editor stores a 
formal representation of the ontologies and provides a 
translation of the ontologies from multiple independent data 
sources into software components (e.g., Java classes) to be 
used in a semantic web applications, such as information 
retrieval, web mining. These classes are linked to geospatial 
information sources through the use of mediators. The 
application developer can combine classes from diverse 
ontologies and create new classes that represent the user 
needs. For the knowledge use phase, the ontologies are 
available to be browsed by the end user using ontology 
browser at different levels of detail depending on the 
ontology level used, and they provide semantic metadata on 
the available information. The ontology browser can be used 
during ontology specification by users who wish to 
collaborate in composing a shared ontology. Once the 
ontology has been specified, the ontology browser is used to 
show the available geospatial entities to the users. Hence, the 
user can query and update the ontologies using remote 
applications on the Internet. The query processor matches the 
terms in the user ontology to the system component 
ontologies. The information about ontologies is provided by 
the ontology server that holds a standard catalog of 
ontologies for the user to search and browse, using mappings 
between ontologies and the structures in data repositories. 
The connection with the information sources is done through 
mediators that are pieces of software with embedded 
knowledge. Mediators connect instances of the entities 
available in the ontology server to features in spatial 
databases and translate them into a format understandable for 
the end user. Figure 2 shows the proposed framework, in 
terms of its components and their intuitive relations. 
For instance, a researcher wants to make cross-archive 
searches on distributed digital archives encoded in 
RDF/OWL using the CIDOC-CRM ontology in order to 
retrieve information, or execute a complex query about the 
CH data/information on the web. First, the researcher 
browses the ontology server looking for the related classes. 
After that, the ontology server starts the mediators that look 
for the information and return a set of objects of the specified 
class. The results can be displayed or can undergo any valid 
operation, such as CH analysis. This ontology-based 
approach allows CH researchers to associate geospatially 
referenced data to any other non-spatial information related 
to the geospatial feature that is expressed on the semantic 
web. 
Existing web service technologies (Remote Procedure 
Call (RPC) or Representational State Transfer (REST)) are 
only at the syntactic level and fail to capture enough 
semantic data, there are semantic gaps in cross-domain 
resource discovery, heterogeneous resource query, resource 
translation from one domain to another at the semantic level 
[13]. Semantic web technology can alleviate this limitation 
and Semantic Web technologies have been widely used to 
support automatic service composition. Semantic Web 
Services deal with such limitation by augmenting the service 
description with a semantic layer in order to achieve 
automated 
discovery, 
composition, 
monitoring, 
and 
execution, which are all highly desirable processes [14].  
The concrete GI services which meet those conceptual 
needed GIS data and function can be automatically 
discovered in the semantic repository. Discovered GI 
services can also be automatically composed as a workflow 
(service chain) to generate an initial result for users to 
evaluate. Ontology Web Language for Services (OWL-S) 
was chosen as a proper workflow description language to 
enable automatic web service discovery, invocation, 
composition into a workflow, and interoperation. Automatic 
workflow chaining utilizes business logic in integrating 
applications to construct a new application and executes an 
OWL-S composite process with service groundings. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The geo-ontologies embodied in the geospatial semantic 
web approach provide a shared understanding and 
conceptualization of relevant aspects of the CH domain 
applications. Independent applications that interpret and 
process CH data with respect to these ontologies can achieve 
a 
much 
higher 
level 
of 
interoperability 
and 
information/knowledge sharing. This proposed Knowledge-
based Spatial Information Systems and Services and services 
can play an important role in enabling geospatial-based 
information and knowledge sharing in the world of 
interoperable knowledge-based distributed environments. 
As ontology development technology evolves, the 
benefits of ontology use will outweigh the costs of 
developing them. With the success of this technology, large-
scale repositories of ontologies will be available in diverse 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-355-1
SEMAPRO 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

disciplines, and this work has been developed based upon 
this assumption. 
To share and integrate data, information, and knowledge 
among the constituents of the CH domain, standardized 
communication protocols, standardized metadata contents, 
and interoperable programming interfaces are essential for 
the success of ‘the future of the past’. 
In addition to developing technical solutions, a series of 
recommendations and effective management are required for 
the frictionless workflow of adaptive information, from local 
fieldworker to regional heritage curator to national agencies 
and the public, such as how fieldworkers could report 
surveys, excavations. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. O. Kıvılcım, “Architectural Survey for Documentation of 
Cultural Heritage with New Sensor Technologies”, Master 
Thesis, Istanbul Technical University, Turkey, 2006. 
[2] C. 
Guney, 
2007. 
“Towards 
Conceptual 
Design 
Of 
‘GeoHistory’”, EPOCH Publications. 
[3] C. Güney, “A conceptual design for the development of a 
customizable framework for the cultural heritage domain,” 
Ph.D. thesis, Istanbul Technical University, Turkey, 2006. 
[4] N. F. Noy and D. L. McGuinnes, “Ontology Development 
101: A Guide to Creating Your First Ontology, Technical 
Report,” 
Knowledge 
Systems 
Laboratory, 
Stanford 
University, 
2001. 
Available 
online 
at: 
www.ksl.stanford.edu/people/dlm/papers/ontology-tutorial-
noy-mcguinness-abstract.html, June 30th, 2014 
[5] Protege, http://protege.stanford.edu/  
[6] OWL, http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/wiki/OWL  
[7] RDF-S, http://www.w3.org/wiki/RDFS 
[8] M. J. Egenhofer, “Toward the Semantic Geospatial Web,” 
10th ACM International Symposium on Advances in 
Geographic Information Systems, 8-9 November 2002, 
Virginia, USA (New York: ACM), pp. 1-4. 
[9] C. Goad, 2004, RDF versus GML. Available online at: 
www.mapbureau.com/gml, June 30th, 2014 
[10] F. T. Fonseca and M. J. Egenhofer, “Ontology-Driven 
Geographic Information Systems,” 7th ACM Symposium on 
Advances in Geographic Information Systems, 2-6 November 
1999, Kansas City, USA (ACM), pp. 14-19. 
[11] F. T. Fonseca, M. J. Egenhofer, and C. Davis, “Ontology-
Driven Information Integration,” AAAI-2000 Workshop on 
Spatial and Temporal Granularity, August 2000, Austin, 
USA. 
[12] F. T. Fonseca, M. J. Egenhofer, C. A. Davis, and K. A. V. 
Borges, “Ontologies and Knowledge Sharing in Urban GIS”, 
Computer, Environment and Urban Systems, vol. 24, no. 3, 
2000, pp. 232-251. 
[13] Y. Gang, “A Research on Semantic Geospatial Web Service 
Based 
REST”, 
International 
Forum 
on 
Computer 
ScienceTechnology and Applications, 5-27 December 2009 
China, pp. 208-210. 
[14] G. Antoniou and F. Harmelen, “A Semantic Web Primer,” 
Cambridge: The MIH Press, 2008.  
 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-355-1
SEMAPRO 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

 
Figure 1. Screen shots of the Protégé-OWL ontology development environment. 
 
Figure 2. Semantic Architecture of “GeoGCHEAF”. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-355-1
SEMAPRO 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

