Enriching Videos with Light Semantics 
 
Smitashree Choudhury 
Digital Enterprise Research Institute 
National University of Ireland, Galway 
Galway, Ireland 
smitashree.choudhury@deri.org 
John G. Breslin 
School of Engineering and Informatics 
National University of Ireland, Galway 
Galway, Ireland 
john.breslin@nuigalway.ie
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes an ongoing prototypical 
framework to annotate and retrieve web videos with light 
semantics. The proposed framework reuses many existing 
vocabularies along with a video model. The knowledge is 
captured from three different information spaces (media 
content, context, document). We also describe ways to extract 
the semantic content descriptions from the existing user-
generated content using multiple approaches of linguistic 
processing and Named Entity Recognition, which are later 
identified with DBpedia resources to establish meanings for the 
tags. Finally, the implemented prototype is described with 
multiple search interfaces and retrieval processes. Evaluation 
on semantic enrichment shows a considerable (50% of videos) 
improvement in content description. 
Keywords - social media; multimedia semantics; semantic 
web; linked open data; semantic search 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the huge increase of user videos on the Web, the 
traditional search paradigm is proving to be ineffective in 
discovering and browsing interesting videos. Moreover, due 
to the complex nature of multimedia, reusability of video 
documents is very low, and as a result, almost every time a 
user has to create their video from scratch. We need better 
mechanisms to organise and represent the video data in order 
to address the above issues. Meaningful organisation and 
metadata representation is one of the concerns, but is as yet 
largely overlooked for multimedia. At present, user videos 
may come with certain embedded metadata, either created by 
users while publishing or during the production workflow, 
such as camera settings (though these are still not easily 
accessible in the case of web video). Some of the useful meta 
information is also created in the course of usage and sharing 
amongst users after publishing. Information such as free 
labels as tags, descriptions, user responses to the video, 
location information, membership in various groups, 
captions inside the video are immensely useful. The problem 
with the existing situation is that even if we collect and 
process this information, reusability (the data integration 
problem) remains elusive because of the lack of any formal 
semantics attached to the videos. Tags are freeform words 
with implicit meaning and relations known to the creator or 
publisher. The problems of user tagging have been explored 
well in many research studies. The major challenges are as 
follows. (1) Tag variation: different tags are used for the 
same kind of resources, e.g., “New York City”, “NYC”. 
There is no explicit way to express that these two tags are 
indeed meant to be the same. (2) Polysemy tags: a single tag 
used for different meanings. This problem occurs due to a 
difference in understanding of a user about the resource he or 
she is tagging, and may also depend on sociocultural 
differences among users. (3) Lack of formal structure among 
tags makes it difficult to understand, classify and recommend 
tags automatically. Besides these issues, we have problems 
with misspelling, compound tags such as “globalwarming”, 
multiword tags expressed as multiple tags, and tags used out 
of a community consensus such as “SEMAPRO2010”. 
This plethora of information can be harnessed to add an 
extra layer of machine-readable metadata that will help to 
understand the opaque media data a little better. There are 
many well-defined and comprehensive formal ontologies 
available to describe media structures and content. The 
earliest such effort was made by the MPEG (Motion Picture 
Expert Group) community in developing MPEG-7 [7], a 
standard for describing media, but it failed to take hold 
significantly due to its lack of formal semantics and 
interoperability issues. The Semantic Web community made 
efforts [5] to convert MPEG-7 to RDFS (Resource 
Description Framework Schema) representations, in order to 
avail of the benefits offered by Semantic Web technologies 
such as RDF (the Resource Description Framework). 
However, the complexities of MPEG-7 prevented it from 
being fully converted and many data type issues remain 
unresolved. Media ontologies such as COMM [4] took a 
pure Semantic Web approach to describe and represent 
media with its different granularities. Many ontologies were 
developed to address domain-specific media such as museum 
collections, the football domain, etc. 
Recently, the W3C Media Annotation Working Group 
has made an effort to devise a comprehensive media 
ontology to describe video on the Web, which may become a 
recommended standard in the near future. In spite of many 
concerted efforts, it is hard to see any widespread usage of 
these vocabularies. The reasons are not well studied, but on 
the other side we can see that there are some vocabularies 
such as FOAF (Friend of a Friend) [14], [20], SIOC 
(Semantically-Interlinked Online Communities) [13], which 
have been adopted quite well and quickly. We assume that 
the reasons for such adaptability may be due to their inherent 
simplicity and easy-to-understand characteristics. Keeping in 
mind the above challenges, we adopted the principle of 
keeping it short and simple (KISS), yet fulfilling the basic 
126
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

requirements of ontology engineering, and proposed a 
lightweight framework to describe web videos. The approach 
makes use of many existing vocabularies such as Dublin 
Core, FOAF and SIOC wherever possible along with our 
own model. In spite of a very small and light framework, it 
covers almost every aspect of a media description. The 
description is broadly categorised under three sub modules: 
(a) document and media properties; (b) semantic content 
description; and (3) social context descriptions. Fig. 1 shows 
a subset of attributes from each of the three contributing 
information spaces. The details of the proposed model are in 
[12]. One of the focal points of the framework is its easy 
computability in the sense that most of the classes can be 
automatically populated with instances with little processing 
rules and heuristics. We have kept in mind the fact that in the 
future we may have to devise ways to map with the standard 
media ontology recommended by the W3C.  
We also aim to link identified concepts to those of the 
Linked Open Data initiative (LOD), which was started in 
2007 with the objective of creating a Web of Data connected 
to each other following four basic principles [11]. The hub of 
the Linked Open Data cloud is DBpedia, which is the RDF 
representation of Wikipedia [22] articles, categories and info 
boxes. Wikipedia is the largest user-generated multi-lingual 
encyclopedia in the world, maintained by tens of thousands 
of users since 2001. Other domain specific data sources such 
as book data, scientific publication data, life science data, 
geographical data are all connected to DBpedia [26] in the 
cloud. The present size of the LOD is more than 8 billion 
triples and is constantly increasing in size. More details of 
the LOD initiative can be found in [11]. 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: in Section 
2, we describe the related work. Section 3 describes the 
implementation flow including modeling, populating the 
model integration with linked data. Section 4 shows our 
semantic search prototype. Section 5 concludes this paper. 
II. 
RELATED STUDIES 
This section describes various studies related to semantic 
media modeling and semantic search of media data focusing 
on video search. It will also describe some efforts towards 
ontology learning from folksonomies. Ontology learning 
from 
folksonomies 
follows 
different 
approaches. 
Researchers in [6] suggested lightweight ontology learning 
from a folksonomy based on broader and narrower semantic 
relations. Passant [8] exploited folksonomies to populate a 
corporate ontology. Specia and Motta [10] used methods to 
cluster similar tags and find a match in an existing ontology. 
Other studies proposed data mining technologies to mine 
the structural information from user tags. Schmitz et al. [9] 
used association rule mining techniques to recommend tags. 
Regarding semantic search, not much work has been carried 
out in the domain of multimedia data. A comprehensive 
study of semantic search is described in [1] while [2] 
describes an ontology-based search engine. A semantic video 
search system is described in [18]. Swoogle [17] and Sindice 
[3] are two major search engines focused on existing 
Semantic Web data. 
 
Figure 1. A subset of the video model. 
 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION ARCHITECTURE 
  This section describes various aspects of the prototypes 
including the instance creation, video annotation and 
retrieval modules. Fig. 2 shows the architectural flow of the 
prototype. 
A. Data Collection 
We used APIs and RSS feeds for different video sharing 
sites such as YouTube [23] and Vimeo [24] to collect the 
video metadata. Metadata includes title, description, tags, 
date, number of views, ratings, groups, duration, location 
data, etc. We have collected 10,000 video items for the 
prototype in the domain of science and technology. 
B. Modelling Web Video 
Our model for video description (Fig. 1) covers three 
major areas such as video document and media properties, 
social context attributes and depicted semantic content. The 
above proposed modeling approach not only satisfies the 
general ontological requirements such as modularity, 
interoperability and extensibility, but also separation of 
concern specifically aimed for media semantics. The 
uniqueness of the proposed approach for describing video is 
its simplicity and ease of use. Regarding the document level 
description, it is a widely-accepted practice to use Dublin 
Core terms such as title (dc:title) and creation date (dc:date), 
but media documents also carry some media-specific 
technical attributes such as format (sva:format), duration 
(sva:duration), etc., which are described using the video 
model described in [12]. Regarding the content description, 
video content can be described with different granularities 
starting with a global description (dc:description) to 
segments created by temporal and spatial decomposition. 
Segment content can be captured through the sva:depicts 
attribute whose range may be topic, event, geo-location, 
foaf:Person or skos:Concept as per requirements. The recent 
growth of social media interaction on the Web has made all 
objects on the Web somewhat social, thus we can embed 
some emerging properties such as comments, ratings, group 
membership, etc. For describing social contextual properties, 
the best-suited vocabulary is SIOC ontology. Its goal is to 
127
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

describe objects and interactions in online communities. We 
consider the publisher of a video as an instance of 
sioc:UserAccount which belongs to a foaf:Peson. Video is an 
item in a sva:Channel which is a subclass of sioc:Container. 
C. Content Processing for Concept Learning 
Any 
ontology-based 
knowledgebase 
requires 
the 
instances to be populated manually, semi-automatically or by 
automatic means. Since manual annotation is not feasible 
and scalable, we tried to accomplish this semi-automatically 
by exploiting the existing information and getting user 
feedback in case of higher uncertainties such as the absence 
of any user data. APIs and RSS feeds offer an easy-to-go 
solution for many of the document level properties such as 
title, description, duration, categories, etc. which can be 
directly transformed to the Dublin Core properties or other 
global properties, but the real challenges come while creating 
the content description instances. The user-generated content 
is free text, devoid of any formal structure. In order to 
achieve the implicit formal structure, the content needed to 
be processed and normalised with various approaches before 
being mapped to any kind of ontological concepts. 
Pre-processing of textual data involves: 
o 
removing stop words 
o 
removing tags with less than two characters 
o 
removing username tags 
After basic pre-processing we followed a few more 
intensive cleaning tasks in order to get some sensible tags 
from the data. 
 
Multi-Term Tags: Tags with multiple words are one of the 
other major problems while identifying semantic entities. 
Mostly users enter multiple words as part of a single tag, 
and each of the tags are supposed to be separated by a 
comma delimiter, but the API gives a single word as a 
single tag. Taking the same example used previously, in 
many cases the YouTube API gives “global” and 
“warming” as two different tags while a single tag of 
“global warming” is more descriptive and accurate. In order 
to clean the tag space further and in the hope of getting 
some phrase tags, we followed a few simple syntactic rules 
(shown below) to parse the tag space. Examples of such 
rules are widely used in natural language processing 
research. After identifying the patterns, we check the 
resulting phrase with Wikipedia concepts, and if a match is 
found we keep the phrase as a possible candidate for a tag. 
 
((Noun)+(Noun)*) or (Noun-Prep)?+(Adj|Noun)* 
TABLE I.  
EXAMPLE OF MULTI TERM TAG IDENTIFICATION 
Original tag space 
Identified multi-term tags 
sequencing, dna, rna, 
sanger, gilbert, big, dyes, 
terminators, molecular, 
biology, genomics, 
secuenciacin, adn, cidos, 
nucleicos 
sequencing, dna, rna, sanger, 
gilbert, big, dyes, terminators, 
molecular biology, genomics 
Entity Recognition (NER) with Open Calais: Open Calais 
[27] is a free non-commercial web service from Thomson 
Reuters for identifying various semantic entities such as 
person, event, location, company, dates, organisations, 
concepts, etc. Though its application is aimed at well-
formed textual documents, we have tried it on tag spaces 
and description content as an experiment. The effectiveness 
of NER in tag spaces is expected to be lower because tags 
are independent words without any syntactic structure and 
grammar rules, but we assume that with careful cleaning 
and normalisation, we may be able to identify some entities. 
At present, entities identified from the tag space are only 
accepted if they are supported from other sources. When the 
video has more description content, use of Open Calais 
improves the result. Table II below shows five different 
identified entities from a video description. 
TABLE II.  
EXAMPLE OF ENTITY IDENTIFICATION 
Description content 
Identified entities 
Thus far, most DNA 
sequencing has been 
performed using the chain 
termination method 
developed by Frederick 
Sanger. This technique was 
also used to sequence the 
genome of James Watson 
recently. Pathogens may lead 
to treatments for contagious 
diseases. Biotechnology is a 
burgeoning discipline… 
Contagious diseases 
Frederick Sanger (Person) 
James Watson (Person) 
Biotechnology (tech) 
DNA sequencing (tech) 
 
Compound Tags: Users create tags with no white space, 
e.g., “globalwarming” which is a concatenation of two 
words “global” and warming”. These tags are useful, but not 
in their original form, so we need to process them in order to 
separate the words with a whitespace and form a proper tag. 
We followed a few simple heuristics to identify meaningful 
words from a tag. The pseudo code is given below. 
 
• 
Divide the tag (Ti) into two sub tags (t1, t2) where length of t1 
is length((Ti)/2)+1 and t2 is length((Ti)/2)-1 
• 
Check if t1  exists in the dictionary 
• 
If(t1 exists) = true 
o 
Check if t2 exists 
o 
Form tag with t1+WS+t2 (equation 1) 
• 
Else 
o 
Offset t1 or t2 with one character and check 
o 
If (one exists) then concatenate the offset and check 
if the other exists 
 
Form the tag with t1+WS+t2 (equation 2) 
o 
Else (follow equation 3) 
Equation 3 
If equation 2 fails, then we divide and create a third term t3 with 
the offset characters and check iteratively. When two are found in 
the dictionary, we add the third by default and form the tag by 
adding a WS in between the terms. Though this is a brute force 
method it gives a satisfactory result for improving the tag quality 
128
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

We restricted compound tags to a maximum of three 
terms. An example of the above algorithm is given below in 
Table III. 
TABLE III.  
EXAMPLE OF COMPOUND TAG DECOMPOSITION 
Original tag (“globalwarming”) 
Step 1.  globalw (= t1) and arming (= t2) 
 
Step 2. If (globalw is present in dictionary) = no 
 
Step 3. Offset by 1 from t1 (globalw-w = global) 
and add to t2 (w+arming=warming) 
 
Step 4. Check if t1 and t2 exists in dictionary = yes 
 
Step 5. Form tag Ti = t1+WS+t2= global warming 
 
 
D. Integrating with the Linked Open Data (LOD) Cloud 
A video can be interlinked with multiple data sources 
such as geographical data, a foaf:Person or DBpedia 
concepts. Instances of concept, person, event, location are 
mapped with the property owl:sameAs or rdfs:seeAlso. 
The focus here will be on content linking, from a tag to a 
Wikipedia concept to a DBpedia resource, e.g., the tag 
“E.coli” is mapped to a Wikipedia concept “Escherichia 
coli” 
and 
subsequently 
to 
the 
DBpedia 
resource 
“http://dbpedia.org/resource/Escherichia_coli”. DBpedia is 
the hub of the LOD cloud, so any mapping to DBpedia will 
ultimately lead to other domain-specific data such as life 
science data or movie data. 
Since there may not always be a one-to-one mapping 
between a user tag and an ontological concept, we need some 
kind of entity resolution mechanism. Here we computed a 
similarity between user tags and wiki concepts (from wiki 
articles) and redirect concepts, and derive the top match as 
the identified concept. This particular similarity is computed 
with a Lucene index of Wikipedia articles, redirects and 
categories. 
E. Semantic Relation Extraction 
Once we get a list of probable tags from all of the above 
steps, we need to formally ground them with some 
ontological concepts with relations between them. Since at 
all stages in the above processing we verified the possible tag 
against an index of Wikipedia articles, categories and 
redirect concepts, they are more or less considered 
ontological concepts though the relationship between them is 
still unclear and vague. 
To extract the relationship between tags we need to 
compute the similarity between tags. Many studies explored 
tag similarity using various approaches and distributional 
measures such as co-occurrence similarity [16], Folkrank 
[15], etc. At the time of writing, this similarity module has 
not been implemented, but we plan to exploit the link 
structure of Wikipedia articles to estimate the semantic 
distance between tags. 
Instance Extraction
Retrieval Engine
Semantic Publishing
APIs
RSS
Preprocessing
Tag Consolidation
NER
Concept 
Matching
RDF 
Annotation
RDF and 
Text
Keyword
SPARQL
Query 
Disambiguation 
and Mapping
 
Figure 2. System architecture modules. 
 
IV. 
SEARCH MODULE 
Machine-readable data will facilitate complex query 
answering which was not possible before. It will also help to 
infer some unseen relations existing between various data 
pieces within the knowledgebase (KB) itself, but it still 
remains insulated from the huge amount of data lying outside 
the KB which may hold much more relevant and useful 
information both known and unknown. 
Here come the benefits of linked data: by following some 
simple principles we can make our data accessible to other 
datasets and vice versa. The benefits of linked data can only 
be realised with practical applications, so we have decided to 
enable our semantic search module to explore the linked data 
to facilitate navigational search, where the user can explore 
and discover much related information and therefore 
reformulate their queries. Fig. 3 shows an interface for the 
query “Albert Einstein”, and its related information as 
aggregated from the DBpedia source. 
A. User Interface  
The role of good user interfaces for Semantic Web data 
has largely been overlooked. To our understanding, it is one 
of the major contributing factors to the slow adoption of 
Semantic Web technologies. Although recently some efforts 
have been made to address the issue, such as faceted 
browsers like mSpace [19] and Sigma [21], the problem is 
far from over. 
The ideal solution should not reflect underlying data 
complexities but still give the benefits of semantic search. 
[22] is a standard recommendation for querying Semantic 
Web data, but exposing a SPARQL interface as the primary 
query interface will be riskier as learning a complex query 
language will hardly be welcomed by users other than 
concerned geeks. A simple keyword-based interface may 
suffice for most users, but will lose the complex query 
answering mechanisms possible with semantic data. 
Therefore we have planned to expose different levels for 
a query interface in order to facilitate complex queries by 
exposing underlying data properties with each querying 
stage. We move from keyword search to faceted search, 
where the major facets are dynamically constrained for each 
iteration, and finally to navigational search. Navigational 
search enables the user to access an integrated view of the 
query term. Fig. 3 shows the incremental query interface of 
the system. The first point of entry is a dual interface of 
keyword search and SPARQL end point. The result of the 
first query is deployed in a faceted interface. Details of the 
video are exposed in a navigational space where related facts 
are connected DBpedia resources. 
129
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

 
Figure 3. Three different interfaces. 
B. Retrieval Engine Architecture 
Since semantic search is defined as the matching between 
query semantics and content semantics, we need to capture 
the query semantics before the actual search process. User 
query intention can be captured in different ways starting 
from interacting with query reformulation to automatic 
disambiguation of a query. 
 
• 
For the keyword search interface, we have adopted a 
simple approach to disambiguate the user queries by 
mapping the query term(s) to the best possible semantic 
entity that exists in the knowledgebase. In the case of 
more than one semantic entity, entity resolution is 
performed in favour of the most popular one, followed 
by the rest. However, in such cases, precision goes 
down. We need to adopt a more robust entity resolution 
mechanism in order to improve the search quality. 
• 
At the second stage, the query is sent to the Lucene 
index for retrieval. The results are clustered with 
various facets such as top-related tags in the result set, 
top categories, top users for the query, dominant 
timeline, etc. 
• 
On the faceted interface, the user can get a glimpse of 
the underlying data attributes and can filter the result 
with each iteration. 
• 
Clicking on a single thumbnail will lead to a video 
detail page (navigational search) where the video is 
displayed not only with the original descriptions, but 
also with some extra resources related to the user query 
concept. 
• 
These resources are connected to the user query 
concept. There may be too many resources in one 
DBpedia page and all are not of equal relevance. In 
future, we need to figure out how to rank the connected 
resources in relation to the query concept. One heuristic 
may be to rank the resources of a similar type higher 
compared to the others, or we can compute a resource 
distance based on mutual information sharing such as 
categories, property values, etc. This part of the work is 
still ongoing.	  
V. 
EVALUATION 
  Since the evaluation is still ongoing at the time of writing, 
we report a part of the evaluation. The objective here is to 
evaluate the effectiveness of the automatic augmentation of 
light semantics from various sources and its impact on 
retrieval in terms of user satisfaction. 
 
Figure 4. Evaluation of task 1 (content enrichment). 
 
Effectiveness and user satisfaction are both measured 
qualitatively based on user ratings. Five users evaluated 20 
random videos for their content description sufficiency. 
Each user was presented with a list of inferred keywords for 
describing the video content and were asked to rate the list 
for degree of sufficiency on a three-point scale of 1 to 3, 
after watching the video. The average video duration in the 
evaluation was 3.25 minutes. 
A rating of 1 is the least descriptive (insufficient or 
irrelevant), while 3 is rated as a sufficient description of the 
depicted content, and a rating of 2 is considered as 
representing that there are some descriptions but more are 
needed. The result is based on inter-user agreement of ratings 
(a minimum of 3 out of 5 users agreed for a score). 
Figure 4 shows the results of the evaluation of task 1, 
where the number of sufficient content descriptions increases 
to 13 videos from only 3 videos, whereas 5 videos are still 
considered to be in need of more descriptive keywords. The 
average rating per video increased from 1.65 to 2.5. In the 
evaluation of task 2, we have started to measure the level of 
user satisfaction for search results after enrichment. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
We have discussed a lightweight framework to provide 
metadata for user videos on the Web using several existing 
ontologies. We discussed an approach to create instance data 
based on our models from user-generated content using both 
statistical and linguistic approaches. 
We also described our approach to integrate the 
structured video data into the Linked Open Data cloud for 
greater integration and interoperability. Finally, the paper 
details an implemented prototype for the semantic search of 
web videos with three different modes of user interface. 
Our future work involves robust evaluation of the 
instance-learning module and the creation of a fully-fledged 
integrated semantic annotation and search system. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Science Foundation Ireland 
under grant number SFI/08/CE/I1380 (Líon 2). 
 
 
130
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

REFERENCES 
[1] C. Mangold, “A survey and classification of semantic search 
approaches”, Int. J. Metadata, Semantics and Ontology, vol. 
2, pp. 23-34, 2007.  
[2] D. T. Tran, S. Bloehdorn, P. Cimiano, and P. Haase. 
“Expressive 
resource 
descriptions 
for 
ontology-based 
information retrieval”, Proc. of the 1st Int. Conf. on the 
Theory of Information Retrieval (ICTIR ‘07), October 2007. 
[3] E. Oren, R. Delbru, M. Catasta, R. Cyganiak, H. Stenzhorn, 
and G. Tummarello, “Sindice.com: a document-oriented 
lookup index for open linked data”, IJMSO, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 
37-52, 2008. 
[4] R. Arndt, R. Troncy, S. Staab, L. Hardman, and M. Vacura, 
“COMM: Designing a Well-Founded Multimedia Ontology 
for the Web”, Proc. of the 6th International Semantic Web 
Conference (ISWC 2007), Busan, Korea, November 11-15, 
2007. 
[5] J. Hunter, “Adding multimedia to the Semantic Web – 
Building an MPEG-7 ontology”, 1st International Semantic 
Web Working Symposium (SWWS ’01). California, USA, 
pp. 261–281, 2001. 
[6] P. Mika, “Ontologies are us: a unified model of social 
networks and semantics”, ISWC 2005, LNCS vol. 3729, pp. 
522–536, Springer, 2005. 
[7] MPEG-7: Multimedia Content Description Interface, ISO/IEC 
15938, 2001. 
[8] A. Passant, “Using ontologies to strengthen folksonomies and 
enrich information retrieval in weblogs”, International 
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 2007. 
[9] C. Schmitz, A. Hotho, R. Jäschke, and G. Stumme, “Mining 
association rules in folksonomies”, Data Science and 
Classification, pp. 261–270, 2006. 
[10] L. Specia, E. Motta, “Integrating folksonomies with the 
semantic web”, Proc. of the 4th European Conference on the 
Semantic Web: Research and Applications, Innsbruck, 
Austria, 2007. 
[11] C. Bizer, T. Heath, K. Idehen, and T. Berners-Lee, “Linked 
data on the Web,” Proc. of the 17th Int. Conf. on World Wide 
Web, ACM, 2008, pp. 1265–1266. 
[12] S. Choudhury, J. Breslin, and S. Decker, “A lightweight web 
video model with content and context descriptions for 
integration with linked data”, Proc. of Semantic Authoring, 
Annotation and Knowledge Markup Workshop, 2009. 
[13] J.G. Breslin, A. Harth, U. Bojars, and S. Decker, “Towards 
semantically-interlinked online communities”, Proc. of the 2nd 
European Semantic Web Conference (ESWC ‘05), LNCS vol. 
3532, pp. 500-514, Heraklion, Greece, 2005. 
[14] D. Brickley, L. Miller, “The Friend Of A Friend (FOAF) 
vocabulary specification”, http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/, 2005. 
[15] C. Cattuto, D. Benz, A. Hotho, and G. Stumme, “Semantic 
grounding of tag relatedness in social bookmarking systems”, 
Proc. of the 7th International Semantic Web Conference, 2008. 
[16] H. Halpin, V. Robu, and H. Shepherd, “The complex 
dynamics of collaborative tagging”, WWW 2007, ACM 
Press, 2007. 
[17] L. Ding, T. Finin, A. Joshi, R. Pan, R.S. Cost, Y. Peng, P. 
Reddivari, V.C. Doshi, and J. Sachs, “Swoogle: A search and 
metadata engine for the semantic web”, Proc. of the 13th 
ACM 
Conference 
on 
Information 
and 
Knowledge 
Management, 2004. 
[18] J. Waitelonis, H. Sack, “Augmenting video search with linked 
open data”, Proc. of Int. Conf. on Semantic Systems, 2009. 
[19] M. Schraefel, A. Wilson, A. Russell, and D. A. Smith, 
“mSpace: improving information access to multimedia 
domains with multimodal exploratory search”, Commun. 
ACM, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 47–49, 2006. 
[20] E. Prud’hommeaux, A. Seaborne, “SPARQL query language 
for RDF”, W3C, 2008. 
[21] Sigma: Available online at http://sig.ma 
[22] Wikipedia: Available online at http://www.wikipedia.org 
[23] YouTube: Available online at http://www.youtube.com 
[24] Vimeo: Available online at http://www.vimeo.com 
[25] W3C Media Annotation Group: Available online at 
http://www.w3.org/2008/WebVideo/Annotations/ 
[26] DBpedia: Available online at http://dbpedia.org 
[27] OpenCalais: Available online at http://www.opencalais.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
131
SEMAPRO 2010 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-104-5

