A State of the Art Survey: Business Cases Based on Semantic Web 
Technologies in Healthcare 
 
Vivi Ntrigkogia, Thanos G. Stavropoulos,  
Ioannis Kompatsiaris 
email: {vividrig, athstavr, ikom}@iti.gr 
Centre for Research & Technology Hellas,  
Information Technologies Institute 
Thessaloniki, Greece 
Maro Vlachopoulou 
email: mavla@uom.gr  
University of Macedonia,  
Department of Applied Informatics 
Thessaloniki, Greece 
 
 
Abstract— Semantic web technologies promise to facilitate a 
long-awaited paradigm shift in the healthcare industry 
towards more efficiency, extended interoperability and 
intelligent analysis capabilities. This paper presents a critical 
review of current healthcare businesses incorporating semantic 
web technologies. Initially, it presents the potential of semantic 
web technologies in general and the challenges to apply them 
in business. State of the art businesses that use semantics to 
provide innovative healthcare services are pinpointed and 
critically reviewed. Through an analysis of their aspects, their 
semantic component, business models, target audience and 
value propositions, the competitive advantage and tangible 
business value of semantics in healthcare is revealed, serving as 
a reference for the growing number of emerging solutions in 
the near future. 
Keywords-semantics; semantic web; ontologies; eHealth; 
healthtech; business models; healthcare;  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Healthcare 
can 
largely 
benefit 
from 
technology 
throughout its lifecycle: from diagnosis, to hospitalization, 
prescription, treatment and prevention. However, complex 
governance 
structures, 
heterogeneity 
and 
lack 
of 
convergence in the healthcare industry are few of the 
reasons that such benefits of technological applications are 
slowly emerging. While data mining techniques can aid in 
certain sectors, such as diagnosis and prevention, it is the 
semantic web technologies that show great potential to 
resolve the interoperability problem, which, in turn, would 
benefit healthcare throughout its lifecycle.  
The semantic web technologies [1] provide methods and 
tools to define the semantics, i.e., hierarchical models and 
relations between data of any particular domain in an 
interoperable, machine-interpretable format. The former 
property, interoperability, allows communications between 
disperse and vendor-agnostic systems on the basis of 
commonly established and agreed upon models, referred to 
as ontologies. Interoperability use case scenarios include 
patient data exchange between hospital and medical practice 
systems, exchange of clinical trial data and much more. The 
latter property, machine-interpretability, gives intelligent 
software applications the potential not only to read, but also 
to understand information in a way that humans do. The so-
called reasoning process can utilize ontologies to deduce 
new information. The technology can be applied to any 
sector by domain experts designing a domain ontology, i.e., 
the taxonomy particular to the problems, peculiarities and 
terminology of the pertinent domain. This includes 
healthcare [2], where semantic web technologies have the 
potential to lift ailments in data sharing, Electronic Health 
Record exchange [3], reasoning on epidemic and patient 
record and drug database information [4] for prescription, 
prevention, care, etc. achieving cross-provider and even 
cross-border healthcare. 
This paper presents an overview of semantic web 
technology applications in the healthcare industry so far, 
giving valuable insights, highlighting the benefits and 
paving the way to future achievements towards more 
interoperable healthcare with great clinical, economical and 
societal impact. 
The next Section presents technological challenges and 
trends of semantic web technologies in several applications, 
including healthcare. Section 3 presents current business 
challenges for tech innovation and their relation to 
semantics. Section 4 presents a critical analysis of several 
concurrent businesses that offer healthcare services based on 
semantics. Section 5 presents conclusions from this analysis 
and future work. 
II. 
TECHNOLOGICAL CHALLENGES AND TRENDS 
A recent report by Gartner [5] highlights how semantic-
based technologies add critical context to data. According to 
it, the proliferation of data poses huge challenges for 
businesses that want to leverage their data assets. Data 
scientists and business managers are advised to opt for a 
semantic approach in order to gain competitive advantage. 
Semantic technologies and knowledge graphs provide (a) 
the toolbox to facilitate decision making by actually making 
sense of rapidly growing pools of data, (b) the basis for 
artificial intelligence and machine learning applications (c) 
the possibility to make relationships and interconnections of 
this data with evident benefits on developing new tools and 
synergies [6]. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-738-2
SEMAPRO 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Thus, Knowledge Management and semantic web 
technologies can be greatly beneficial to the knowledge 
society, i.e., a society in which the creation, dissemination, 
and utilization of information and knowledge has become 
the most important factor of production. In such an 
environment, knowledge assets are the most powerful 
producer of wealth, sidelining the importance of land, the 
volume of labour, and physical or financial capital. This 
vision requires an extensive analysis of factors and actions 
that promote the value of knowledge and specify critical 
prerequisites for the design and implementation of human 
centric information systems and services. However, this still 
pertains several challenges. Lytras et al. [5] state that as 
extensive communication and networking infrastructures are 
now implemented, a critical shift is required from the 
relevant verbalism to applied strategies and technologies. As 
literature supports “a key question within the context of the 
knowledge society is how we can redesign the basic 
structural models of the information provision to target 
effective models of support. Personalisation and Adaptation 
are only a few terms aiming to promote the need of 
multidimensional and non-monolithic approaches” [7]. 
Several trends emerge around technology to represent 
the semantics of data. Knowledge Graphs have gotten a lot 
of attention as a backbone for Machine Learning, Deep 
Learning, and AI business use cases a trend that is expected 
to evolve. From a business perspective, it looks like more 
and more industries (agriculture, healthcare, smart cities, 
finance, etc.) are pursuing Semantic Technologies, often 
relying on Knowledge Graphs. Among the semantic-driven 
AI ventures those related to the healthcare space are 
forecasted to blossom. Using semantics to drive chatbots is 
also emerging [8]. Nature Language Processing (NLP) is 
increasingly based on ontologies to represent the semantics 
and understanding of speech and dialogue [9]. Data 
governance procedures, finally, also pertain ontologies and 
structured semantics. 
The digitisation of many industry sectors requires 
information models describing assets and information 
sources to enable the semantic integration and interoperable 
exchange of data. Although this vision has gained much 
traction lately in many sectors, e.g., creative industry, 
healthcare industry, manufacturing, etc., it is still not clear 
how it can actually be implemented in an interoperable way 
using concrete standards and technologies. 
Initiatives for content representation and linking can be 
exploited in various domains where there is a need to 
aggregate and fuse information in different levels of 
abstraction.  
A prominent example is the Healthcare domain, where 
there is a need to coupling profile, behavioural and health 
knowledge to achieve human awareness and assist clinical 
experts in assessing the health condition of patients and help 
adjust and update the care plan and interventions. Another 
example are intelligent virtual agents, where there is a need 
to fuse verbal and non-verbal information, e.g., utterances, 
gestures and emotions, to achieve conversational awareness 
and provide meaningful responses to the users.  
Pervasive environments, often met in healthcare-at-
home technological solutions, such as Active and Healthy 
Ageing (AHA) and Ambient Assisted Living (AAL), 
present the need to deploy, manage, collect and analyse 
multimodal sensor observations from the Internet of Things 
(IoT) [10]. Semantic integration and reasoning solutions 
have been implemented in home care, in systems such as the 
AAL solutions of Dem@Care [11], i-PROGNOSIS in 
occupational health, such as in Healthy@Work [12] 
Active@Work [13] and Fit4Work [14] smart environments, 
such as MARIO [15] and the AHA solutions of 
ACTIVAGE [16]. 
III. 
BUSINESS CHALLENGES AND SEMANTICS 
Marketing technology-based, innovative products and 
services is a far more complicated and challenging task 
compared to more conventional business cases. Even the 
launch of new high-tech products is challenging, as usually 
consumers are more skeptical. Moreover, high tech startups 
often find it very difficult to define target market and often 
focus solely on R&D and expect that their super product 
will sell by itself. To be a successful global brand in the 21st 
century, a hi-tech firm needs to be market oriented, agile 
and locally relevant. The proliferation of smart mobile 
devices and the mass adoption of social media have created 
an utterly new marketplace where a new consumer has 
emerged. Spurring innovation adoption can be hard. The 
high tech sector that is constantly evolving and rapidly 
changing may cause a multitude of complications. 
The central benefit of the semantic web is that it enables 
the extraction of knowledge patterns and useful information 
from 
unstructured 
content. 
It 
further 
empowers 
interoperability, integration of multiple and differentiated 
data sources. It appears that by integrating semantic 
technologies in the business pipeline, business performance 
is likely to be improved while new business models emerge. 
Literature suggests that the impact of semantic web on 
business performance is related to: a) Less labour hours (20-
80%); b) Less cycle time (20-90%); c) Less set up (25-
80%); d) Quality gain (50-500%); e) Productivity gain (2-
50X; f) Increased return of assets (2-25X; g) Revenue 
growth (2-30X); h) Reduction of total cost of ownership 
(20-80%); and i) positive ROI (Return On Investment) over 
3 Year (2-300X) [17] [18]. 
Although the benefits are clear, creating business value 
using semantic technology is in many ways no different 
from creating business value with any type of new 
technology. Literature suggests that there are three 
important aspects to take into account [19]: 
Customers: companies need to understand their 
customers, their target group and their specific needs. In 
today’s knowledge based economies, corporations cannot 
rely only on themselves to deliver innovation. Co-creation is 
the tool to open innovation.      An emerging cross-sector 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-738-2
SEMAPRO 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

model is to bring the outside in and bridge the gap between 
the consumers and the brand. If not the most, it is definitely 
one of the best ways to engage consumers in the company, 
increase brand recognition and have tangible results: an 
increase in sales. Co–creation is the path to have increased 
flow of quality ideas and concepts into a firm’s 
development pipeline.  
Business models: High-Tech organizations should 
carefully consider business models. Companies that succeed 
in coupling cost-reducing technologies with innovative 
business models to deliver increasingly affordable and 
accessible products and services will gain competitive 
advantage [17] [18]. 
Technology: it is important to have a differentiated 
product or service that actually adds value to the end 
consumer. To this end, the product offering must not be 
easily replicated and IPR (Intellectual Property Rights) 
should be carefully managed. 
There are, however, additional challenges to the market 
adoption of semantic technologies. Although significant 
amounts of money have been invested in the development of 
novel semantic technologies, industry uptake appears to 
have not reached its full potential. This is partly due to the 
fact that enterprises are unaware of the benefits that 
semantics can bring about to their offerings. There are 
specific aspects of Semantic Technologies that may explain 
why it is hard for these technologies to be adopted by 
enterprises in the mainstream market [2]:  
(1) Semantic technologies are hard to explain  
(2) It is not easy to describe how Semantic 
Technologies might fit within a business  
(3) There is a lack of innovation in semantic business 
models. These challenges impose obstacles to the 
market adoption of semantic technologies.  
The next Section presents instances of how those 
challenges are met in real applications of semantic web 
technologies for healthcare technology. 
IV. 
BUSINESS CASES BASED ON SEMANTIC WEB 
TECHNOLOGIES FOR HEALTHCARE 
Recent advances in pervasive computing and sensor 
technologies have enabled the contextualised enrichment of 
business processes capitalising on the ability to sense, 
process, combine and interpret data of different modalities. 
Nowadays, it is getting harder to extract useful information 
from the enormous amount of data that is being collected in 
the medical information systems or eHealth systems due to 
the distributed and very complex nature of this data [20].  
A common question is why - given the advent of IoT, AI 
and multiple sophisticated medical technologies introduced 
each year - healthcare has not been disrupted to a significant 
degree up to now. A reason is that healthcare remains 
expensive and inaccessible to many because of the lack of 
business 
model 
innovation. 
In 
healthcare, 
most 
technological enablers have failed to bring about lower 
costs, higher quality and greater accessibility. It is believed 
that semantic technologies can play a pivotal role in guiding 
growth among healthcare businesses [19]. 
This Section initially presents prominent examples of 
semantic web technology applications in the healthcare 
industry, along with their pertinent value propositions, 
business models and target audience. It then presents an 
analysis over them, regarding the competitive advantage and 
tangible business value of semantics for a healthcare 
business. 
A. Healthcare Businesses using Semantics 
This Section presents companies or startups whose core 
component and business model relies on semantic 
technologies. These business cases, prominent to the best of 
our knowledge, have been identified via searching the web 
and specialized startup databases. Our objective is to create 
a listing of existing “semantic” healthtech companies and 
identify their value proposition, their business model, as 
well as the means of how semantic technologies add value 
to the corporation and the end consumer. Table 1 provides 
an overview of the aforementioned listing, while each 
business case is examined in detail below. 
In-JeT [21] is a research company and service provider 
in the area of internet-based healthcare services such as 
telemedicine. The company offers LinkSmart® a set of 
middleware 
telemonitoring 
applications 
able 
to 
interconnect devices, people, terminals, buildings, etc. The 
Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) and its related 
standards provide interoperability at a syntactic level. On 
top 
of 
it, 
the 
LinkSmart® 
middleware 
provides 
interoperability also at the semantic level. This is achieved 
through a semantic model-driven infrastructure, whereby 
services exposed by devices can be described and consumed 
by various applications in Ambient Intelligence, Pervasive 
Computing, Ubiquitous Computing, Mobile Computing and 
Cloud Technologies. The company’s various software and 
hardware assets are sold together with consultancy services. 
Life Semantics Corp [22], a Korean health-tech startup, 
has developed a platform that integrates health record data 
scattered among hospitals, governments, and corporations 
to create a Personalized Health Management (PHM) 
platform that can prepare itself for the upcoming diseases 
based on a disease prognosis prediction algorithm. Life 
Semantics developed the first commercial PHR-based data 
platform 
called 
LifeRecord. 
It 
develops 
Hospital 
Information Systems (HIS) and semantic web technology 
for application in the area of life sciences. 
Hi3 Solutions [23] provides HIT products, education, 
and consulting services that enable clients to engage 
effectively in health information exchange, health data 
integration, and health care quality measurement required 
to establish and comply with evidence-based best practices 
in health care. The mission of Hi3 Solutions is to accelerate 
widespread adoption and compliance with emerging HIT 
standards 
by 
offering 
the 
information 
integration 
infrastructure necessary to enable the use of health 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-738-2
SEMAPRO 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

information exchange standards, meaningful health care 
quality and performance measures, and standardized clinical 
decision support capabilities.  
Intrepid Analytics [24] is using text analytics and 
custom medical ontologies, to be able to analyze online 
posts and reports to anonymously track disease spread in 
near real-time, as well as attributes, such as the medicines 
reported to be taken and subsequent reactions. This helps 
healthcare and regulatory bodies to stay on top of the 
quickly changing healthcare landscape. 
Ontoforce [25] developed Disqover, a semantic search 
platform that integrates various life-sciences data. The 
platform uses semantic web technologies including 
ontologies in RDF and LinkedData, additionally supported 
by an indexing engine. The platform integrates private, 
public, and third-party data resources, all searchable via a 
single interface. Search results are enhanced by predefined 
data types. Ontoforce provides an integrated search of 80+ 
databases. The company also provides customizable 
visualizations: graphics, plots, tables, charts and maps. 
Mendelian’s [26] online technology addresses the needs 
of patients, physicians, providers, payers, and pharma. They 
provide for the best tools to get the right diagnosis with 
speed and accuracy. By continuously adding, curating and 
analysing conditions, symptoms, and genes along with 
clinical tests they aim to build the most comprehensive Rare 
Disease Knowledge Base. The patient can fill in a 
questionnaire with their signs and symptoms via an online 
form. The Mendelian engine processes then the information 
and provides a link to a detailed report to share with the 
doctor. The process is similar for physicians. Doctors enter 
patient’s symptoms and clinical features. The input is 
processed semantically and provides an output with likely 
causative diseases genes and mutations. 
SemanticMD [27] enables customers to find, connect 
and license medical imaging data with expert annotations. 
Customers can automate their data collection as well as use 
NLP to annotate radiological and clinical reports for search 
and analysis. SemanticMD Annotate enables teams to 
organize medical image annotation projects in a fun, flexible 
way and output the results for easy analysis by machine 
learning algorithms. 
Teamarrayo [28] leverages the value of existing data 
sources, both internal and external, to transform them into 
ontologies and appropriate data models. In turn, it enables 
data management and added value from data processing 
tools. They provide bioinformatics services that include data 
curation, informatics ontologies (i.e., Gene Ontology, 
ChEBI, etc.). Their know-how also pertains to loading and 
utilizing large public data sources such as 1000 Genomes, 
TCGA, CCLE, and others. 
Ontotext [29] is a company that utilizes semantic 
medical coding of patient records to help transform the raw 
patient data into structured knowledge. Its pipelines are 
designed to process large volumes of patient records and to 
extract and semantically index data about patient 
diagnoses, treatments, medications and events timing. All 
extracted medical data is normalized to resolvable instances 
from the medical Knowledge Graph. Thus, the extracted 
information is ready to be semantically fused with the 
LinkedData generated from multiple references public 
dataset (covering disease and symptoms, anatomical 
structures, generic drugs and products and much more). 
Pangaea [30] is a domain expert in bioinformatics, 
molecular biology, data engineering and machine learning. 
The company aspires to help life science companies 
determine 'what data exists' and organize it in specific 
scientific or clinical contexts. Thereby, they are able to 
analyze and interpret it effectively, making the most from 
their investment in such data. 
Seminte [31] provides assistance in preparing products 
for new markets by the use of international terminologies. 
SemInte assists in mapping an existing product's interface 
language to international terminology or in the development 
of a new product. The process ensures that products are 
compliant to standards, data can be reused, compared and 
exchanged across third-party systems, e.g., for EHR. 
SemInte identifies data required in specific documentation, 
creating datasets based on terminology e.g., SNOMED-CT, 
ICD-10, etc. needed, facilitates quality review process and 
helps with the technical dialogue with the vendors who shall 
implement the exchange standards (HL7-CDA and IHE-
XDS) and data sets.  
Healx [31] is a biotechnology company integrating 
artificial intelligence with expert pharmacology to discover 
treatments for rare diseases, to share assets and to 
accelerate their uptake by clinical trials [32] within as soon 
as two-years time. To achieve this, Healx has developed a 
comprehensive AI-based drug discovery platform for rare 
diseases, named HealNet. Their revenue model is asset 
sharing (e.g., clinical trial databases) across individuals and 
groups. 
B. Discussion 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-738-2
SEMAPRO 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

After examining real-world business cases of healthcare 
and technology, the benefits of semantic web technologies 
to them are clear. We may conclude that the findings from 
this state-of-the-art survey regarding those benefits are in 
line with previous studies in literature [17] [20], outlining 
the advantages and performance boosts in business due to 
semantic web technologies. Specifically, our review 
pinpoints the following benefits and advantages to the 
respective business cases examined: 
● 
The maximization of the value of information: 
data online and offline is in abundance. As proved 
by the cases of Interpid Analytics, Teamarrayo, 
Mendelian, 
Pangaea 
and 
Healx 
semantic 
technologies can assist in making sense of these 
data, extracting knowledge patterns or detecting 
TABLE I.  
HEALTHCAE AND TECHNOLOGY COMPANIES BASED IN SEMANTIC WEB TECHNOLOGIES AND THEIR PERTAINING ATTRIBUTES. 
Company 
BUSINESS MODEL 
Semantic Component 
Value Proposition 
Domain 
Revenue 
Model 
Target 
Customer 
In-JeT 
Ontologies, 
Semantic Annotation, 
Semantic Middleware 
Support patients in managing their chronic diseases 
efficiently and help healthcare professionals provide 
better care with more frequent, reliable and relevant 
data about health status.  
Health Management, 
Telemedicine/AAL 
Asset Sale, 
Consultancy  
B2C, 
B2B 
Life 
Semantics 
Corp 
HL7 FHIR 
Offer a total health management solution through a 
platform by utilising collaboration models with 
various healthcare related industries like insurance, 
finance, food and fitness. 
Health Management, 
EHR 
Asset Sale 
B2B 
Hi3 
Solutions 
HL7/v2/CDA/FHIR,  
HIT Standards 
Health Information Technology vendor. They provide 
HIT products, education, and consulting services that 
enable their clients to engage effectively in health 
information exchange, health data integration, and 
health care quality measurement 
Health Information 
Exchange, 
Healthcare Quality 
Measurement 
Asset Sale, 
Consultancy  
B2B 
Intrepid 
Analytics 
Data Mining, 
Medical Ontologies 
Offer an AI platform focused on the healthcare 
industry- specifically for the biotech industry and 
patients. The platform supports the ingestion and 
organization of molecular and drug information. 
Home-grown medical ontologies support the 
integration and classification of data sets.  
Health Information 
Exchange, 
Disease Tracking 
Asset Sale, 
Consultancy 
 
Ontoforce 
Semantic Search, 
Ongologies, 
LinkedData 
Effortlessly extract “information” from public, third 
party and private big data and present them in a way 
they can be easily interpreted and used to support 
smart decisions. 
Health Data 
Discovery, Health 
Data Visualization 
License-
based 
B2B 
Mendelian 
Rare Disease 
Knowledge Base 
Rare Disease Diagnosis, Faster - A 
search engine for rare diseases. 
Health Data 
Discovery, Rare 
Disease Diagnosis  
Freemium 
B2B, 
B2C 
Semantic 
MD 
Semantic Annotation, 
Semantic Search, NLP, 
Ontologies (SNOMED, 
ICD-9/10) 
SemanticMD provides a SaaS-based platform that 
enables the rapid training of medical image analysis 
applications and classifiers.  
Health Data 
Discovery, EHR 
SaaS 
B2B 
Teamarrayo 
Data Mining, 
Ontologies (Gene 
Ontology, ChEBI)  
Accelerate scientific research by providing solutions 
for data consolidation, management and visualization 
to scientists and clinicians. 
Health Data 
Discovery, Health 
Data Visualization 
Data as a 
Service 
B2B 
Ontotext 
Data Mining, Semantic 
Annotation, 
LinkedData 
To transform how organizations identify meaning 
across diverse databases and massive amounts of 
unstructured data by combining a semantic graph 
database with text mining, and machine learning. 
Health Data 
Discovery, EHR 
License-
based  
B2B 
Pangaea 
Data Mining, 
Ontologies 
  
Pangaea’s value proposition is that it helps end users 
such as scientists, clinicians and researchers with little 
or no IT experience to find 'what data exists' and 
execute their analysis from a single web portal 
regardless of underlying tools and applications.   
Health Data 
Discovery 
Asset Sale 
B2B 
Seminte 
Ontologies (SNOMED-
CT, ICD-10), HL7-
CDA, IHE-XDS 
Making Healthdata sharable and compareable 
Health Information 
Exchange, 
EHR 
Asset Sale, 
Consultancy 
B2B, 
B2G 
Healx 
Data Mining, 
Ontologies 
Healx’s value proposition is about asset sharing (for 
example, making available clinical-trial databases that 
record the effectiveness of most drugs across 
therapeutic areas and diseases, including rare ones). 
Healx promises more personalization by revealing 
drugs with high potential for treating the rare diseases 
covered.  
Health Data 
Discovery, Rare 
Disease Diagnosis  
Asset 
Sharing 
B2B  
  
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-738-2
SEMAPRO 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

previously unknown trends or details, that could be 
leveraged for disease management, new clinical 
trials 
and 
rare 
disease 
diagnosis. 
Health 
management solutions like In-Jet and Life 
Semantics Corp further prove how a researcher, 
medical practitioner or patient can maximize the 
value of information (for example coming from a 
variety of sensors that monitor activity, bio-signals 
etc) for effective self-monitoring. 
● 
Facilitated 
information 
diffusion: 
Semantic 
search bridges the gap between humans and 
machines, and takes us further on a quest for 
meaningful information and knowledge discovery. 
The business cases of Hi3 Solutions, Ontoforce, 
SemanticMD, 
Ontotext 
that 
all 
constitute 
successful corporate examples that add value 
through 
knowledge 
modeling 
and 
flexible 
information sharing. When data is released from 
individual applications the diffusion of knowledge 
is empowered. 
● 
Greater level of future-proofing and re-use: to 
illustrate how business performance is strengthened 
by utilizing semantics for future-proofing and re-
use, we will utilize the example of rare diseases. 
Rare diseases can take many years to diagnose. 
This represents an odyssey for patients, a challenge 
for physicians, a headache for care providers, a 
waste of resources for payers and missed 
opportunities 
for 
pharma. 
Diagnosing 
Rare 
Diseases is no small feat. Indeed, according to 
Mendelian, it takes on average 8 years and 4 
specialists, often involving misdiagnoses. The fact 
is that there are over 8,000 rare conditions, the 
information on them is scattered across multiple 
sources and new research is published every day. 
By leveraging knowledge graphs and proprietary 
semantic web technologies, healthcare technology 
providers like Mendelian and Healx have the 
opportunity to extract new phenotypes from recent 
publications, access results from past studies so as 
to guide clinical investigations and assist in 
diagnosis. Such a knowledge structure can have 
another side effect. It is not rare in clinical trials 
that researchers discover that a drug is more 
effective on treating a completely different 
symptom (the case of Viagra constitutes a well-
known example in this respect). Providing medical 
researchers and clinicians the ability to search and 
identify such cases easily and in a meaningful 
context by leveraging knowledge graphs and 
ontologies can evidently facilitate decision support, 
re-use of knowledge and clinical interventions. 
From a business perspective, semantic adoption is still in 
its infancy, though the potential is huge. Most of the 
companies in our study are startups, which means that they 
are still developing their business models and their viability 
depends on funding. However, the fact that many of them, 
such as Healx, have raised millions of euros to scale up 
shows that investors and industry experts are eager to invest 
in such initiatives and believe in their sustainability.  
As in healthcare technology knowledge extraction and 
information integration is pivotal for success, startups 
should consider adding a semantic component to their 
product suite and develop a business model based on a 
strong competitive advantage. Business models from the 
domain of e-retailers and electronic stores are the most 
common among high tech market providers. However, new 
semantic business models need to be different so as to 
address new customer needs and add value across the 
buyer’s journey. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
To meet the challenge for high quality and efficient care, 
highly specialized and distributed healthcare establishments 
have to communicate and co-operate in a semantically 
interoperable way. Despite the complexity of current 
semantic web technologies, several businesses have realized 
the vision of bringing research to the industry and applied 
these technologies for profit. After examining real business 
cases and their pertaining technological and business aspects 
the benefits of this practice are clear. Technologies such as 
Data Mining, Semantic Annotation and Search, Ontologies 
and LinkedData already provide tangible solutions to 
problems such as Health Management, Telemedicine, 
Health Information Exchange, EHR and Health Data 
Discovery, servicing not only healthcare but also the life 
science research. 
As for future research directions, we consider expanding 
the survey but also diving deeper into categorizations and 
analysis of criteria. Many more business cases are emerging 
and have to be added to future more in-depth reviews. In 
parallel, this review has only scratched the surface it terms 
of criteria, categories and clustering of the various semantic 
components and domains, i.e., problems the companies 
solve, from a technological perspective, as well as the value 
propositions, revenue models and customer bases from a 
business perspective. Finding the pertaining groups and 
strategies of companies in a more in-depth analysis survey 
can reveal significant trends and methods for applied 
semantic web technologies in healthcare in the coming 
future, with real, tangible business value. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been co-financed by the European Union 
and Greek national funds through the Operational Program 
Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, under 
the call RESEARCH-CREATE-INNOVATE (project code: 
T1EDK-02668, support2LIVE - ypostiriZO), RADAR-AD - 
IMI2 - Grant Agreement No. 806999 and H2020-IOT-
732679 ACTIVAGE. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-738-2
SEMAPRO 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

REFERENCES 
1.  
Berners-Lee T, et al., (2001) The semantic web. Sci Am 
284:28–37 
2.  
Natoli J., Kermanshahche K. and Painter J. (2014) 
Healthcare semantic interoperability platform. US Pat 
App 14/ 
3.  
Garde S., et al (2007) Towards Semantic Interoperability 
for Electronic Health Records. Methods Inf Med 46:332–
343. https://doi.org/10.1160/ME5001 
4.  
Wild D., et al Systems chemical biology and the Semantic 
Web: what they mean for the future of drug discovery 
research. Elsevier 
5.  
How to Use Semantics to Drive the Business Value of 
Your 
Data. 
https://www.gartner.com/en/documents/3894095/how-to-
use-semantics-to-drive-the-business-value-of-your. 
Accessed 15 Jul 2019 
6.  
7 Ways Semantic Technologies Make Data Make Sense - 
InformationWeek. 
https://www.informationweek.com/big-data/big-data-
analytics/7-ways-semantic-technologies-make-data-make-
sense/d/d-id/1323580. Accessed 18 Jul 2019 
7.  
Lytras M.D., Sakkopoulos E. and De Pablos P.O. (2009) 
Semantic web and knowledge management for the health 
domain: State of the art and challenges for the seventh 
framework programme (FP7) of the European Union 
(2007-2013). Int J Technol Manag 47:239–249 
8.  
Semantic Web and Semantic Technology Trends in 2019 - 
DATAVERSITY 
9.  
Zhang J. and El-Gohary N.M. (2017) Integrating semantic 
NLP and logic reasoning into a unified system for fully-
automated code checking. Autom Constr 73:45–57. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2016.08.027 
10.  
Stavropoulos T.G., Meditskos G. and Kompatsiaris I. 
(2017) DemaWare2: Integrating sensors, multimedia and 
semantic analysis for the ambient care of dementia. 
Pervasive 
Mob 
Comput 
34:. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmcj.2016.06.006 
11.  
The 
Dem@Care 
Project. 
http://www.demcare.eu/. 
Accessed 25 Jul 2019 
12.  
healthy@Work 
AAL 
Programme. 
http://www.aal-
europe.eu/projects/healthywork/. Accessed 20 Jul 2019 
13.  
Active@Work 
AAL 
programme. 
http://www.aal-
europe.eu/projects/activework/. Accessed 21 Jul 2019 
14.  
Fit4Work AAL 
15.  
The Mario Project. http://www.mario-project.eu/portal/. 
Accessed 21 Jul 2019 
16.  
ACTIVAGE 
project. 
https://www.activageproject.eu/. 
Accessed 21 Jul 2019 
17.  
Benjamins VR, Radoff M. and Davis M, et al (2011) 
Semantic Technology Adoption: A Business Perspective. 
In: Handbook of Semantic Web Technologies. pp 619–
657 
18.  
Cifliganec Dimitar and Trajanov B. (2011), Semantic 
Web Business Models, The 8th International Conference 
for Informatics and Information Technology (CIIT 2011)  
19.  
Hwang J. and Christensen C.M. (2008) Disruptive 
innovation in health care delivery: A framework for 
business-model innovation. Health Aff. 
20.  
Dogdu E. (2009) Semantic web in eHealth. In: 
Proceedings of the 47th Annual Southeast Regional 
Conference, ACM-SE 47 
21.  
In-JeT ApS. https://www.in-jet.dk. Accessed 15 Jul 2019 
22.  
Life 
Semantics 
Corp. 
https://www.lifesemantics.kr. 
Accessed 15 Jul 2019 
23.  
hi3Solutions. http://www.hi3solutions.com. Accessed 15 
Jul 2019 
24.  
Intrepid Analytics. https://www.intrepid-analytics.com/. 
Accessed 15 Jul 2019 
25.  
Ontoforce. https://www.ontoforce.com. Accessed 15 Jul 
2019 
26.  
Mendelian. https://www.mendelian.co/. Accessed 15 Jul 
2019 
27.  
Semantic MD. https://semantic.md/nlp.html. Accessed 15 
Jul 2019 
28.  
Arrayo. https://www.teamarrayo.com. Accessed 15 Jul 
2019 
29.  
Ontotext. https://www.ontotext.com. Accessed 15 Jul 
2019 
30.  
Pangaea 
Entreprises. 
https://www.pangaeaenterprises.co.uk. Accessed 15 Jul 
2019 
31.  
Seminte. http://www.seminte.dk. Accessed 15 Jul 2019 
32.  
The 6 Elements of Truly Transformative Business 
Models. 
https://hbr.org/2016/10/the-transformative-
business-model. Accessed 25 Jul 2019 
 
 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-738-2
SEMAPRO 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

