Italian Domain-specific Thesaurus as a Means of Semantic Control for 
Cybersecurity Terminology  
Claudia Lanza 
Department of Computer Engineering, Modelling, Electronics and Systems Engineering (DIMES) 
University of Calabria 
Arcavacata di Rende, Italy 
e-mail: c.lanza@dimes.unical.it 
 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents an ongoing PhD research 
project aimed at realizing a tool for semantic control - an 
Italian thesaurus - that could represent a repository of the 
Cybersecurity field of knowledge and a means starting from 
which the representativeness of this domain can be enhanced 
by increasing the terminological coverage threshold. The paper 
starts with a description of the methodology followed by the 
creation of an authoritative corpus. This latter is meant to be 
the source of the information retrieval for the terms that 
should be inserted in the Italian controlled vocabulary of 
Cybersecurity. Afterwards, an overall summary of the semi-
automatic terminological extraction will be provided. The 
paper focuses on the terminological process of mapping the 
selected terms from the authoritative corpus to the existent 
standards of Information and Communications Technology 
Security glossaries and vocabularies by using Python scripts.  
The paper also focuses on the perspective of how the 
relationships built in a thesaurus could be migrated to an 
ontology as a better form of knowledge representation. 
Keywords-Cybersecurity; 
knowledge 
representation; 
information retrieval; ontologies; thesauri. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The underlying idea of this PhD research project is to 
develop a model that is meant to guarantee the 
terminological coverage of a semantic resource, such as a 
thesaurus, and its representativeness threshold with 
reference to semantic variation during time. By building an 
Italian thesaurus related to the Cybersecurity domain, this 
project relies on the perspective of providing organizations 
with a complete knowledge representation of the field of 
study on Information and Communications Technology 
(ICT) security. The thesaurus can represent a valid support 
tool for information access, treatment of data and 
information retrieval tasks in order to improve the security 
decision making processes. This research project is included 
in one of the activities carried out in collaboration with the 
Informatics and Telematics Institute (IIT) [26] – National 
Research Council (CNR) institute located in Pisa.  
This paper analyses the steps needed to construct the 
thesaurus related to this particular domain beginning with 
the selection of the sources, which have been taken into 
consideration in order to have an authoritative corpus from 
which the information of the domain can be retrieved. The 
goal of the research project is, therefore, to provide a solid 
tool in which the information on Cybersecurity could help 
in reaching as complete a terminological coverage as 
possible. To reach this latter perspective, the project aims at 
enhancing the terminological set of data by taking into 
account not only legislative documents but also social media 
infrastructures and, doing so, achieves a heterogeneous 
information repository.  
The main intention of the research project is to create an 
Italian thesaurus on Cybersecurity, currently not existing, 
that can help organizations to better frame the information 
on Cybersecurity and provide a terminological means of 
support that could be useful to broadly understand the 
domain from a semantic point of view. Even though there 
are taxonomies and glossaries on Cybersecurity in Italian 
language, such as, for example [15], a thesaurus can be 
considered a service that could give a more detailed 
overview on this domain thanks to the possibility of creating 
relationships between the terms that are meant to be 
representative of this area of study. The semantic tangle that 
comes out by the creation of a thesaurus is a starting point 
that can facilitate the process of migrating the knowledge 
organization within it into an ontology system. 
The purpose of this paper is threefold: (1) providing an 
overall presentation of how to build a semantic tool, such as 
a thesaurus, as a means of semantic control for a specific 
domain by describing the steps which characterize the 
corpus creation and the terminological extraction; (2) 
presenting a model of mapping the existent standards on 
Cybersecurity to all the head terms contained in the initial 
corpus through Python scripts in order to evaluate which 
candidate terms should be chosen to be part of the 
thesaurus; (3) opening up the perspective of migrating the 
terms and their relationships of the Italian thesaurus on 
Cybersecurity in an ontology system. 
The paper is structured into five sections. Section II 
contains a brief presentation of the state of the art consulted 
for the creation of the Italian thesaurus on Cybersecurity. 
The studies taken into consideration in Section II 
specifically refer to strategies able to establish the 
terminological coverage threshold of a semantic resource. 
Section III goes deeper into the methodological approach 
undertaken towards the realization of the semantic means of 
control on this particular domain. It describes the phases 
related to the information retrieval, starting with the 
authoritative set of documents that make up the source 
corpus. Section IV describes the way in which the 
terminological extraction has been executed from these texts 
by using the Text to Knowledge (T2K software). Section V 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

outlines the methods employed to select the head-based 
terms with a particular overview on a mapping system 
between the glossary derived from the terminological 
extraction and the major standards vocabularies on the 
Cybersecurity domain, i.e., this section ends with a 
description of a Python script used to automatize the process 
of aligning the terms contained in the standards and the 
terms obtained by the terminological extraction. Finally, 
Section VI concludes the paper with the proposal of 
converting the semantic structure of the thesaurus into an 
ontology system by migrating not only the terms, but also 
the relationships. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Many studies on the issue of evaluating the qualitative 
strength of a thesaurus have been carried out, like [23], 
which gives practical suggestions on how to create a reliable 
semantic resource. Other works have focused their attention 
on the importance of having a group of people with a high 
expertise in the domain that has to be analysed for the 
purposes of realizing a semantic tool for information 
retrieval. For example, [16] deals with the advantage of 
getting helped by domain experts who can increase the 
value of a thesaurus especially for what concerns the 
selection of terms and their relationships. Another study that 
is worth mentioning for its important description of a way 
by which corpus representativeness can be measured is [22]. 
The authors provide statistical formulas to calculate the size 
threshold of corpora in terms of linguistic coverage of a 
particular domain of interest. To calculate the ideal situation 
in which a semantic tool like a thesaurus can continue to be 
representative with respect to a particular domain, the 
terminological update within it is an unavoidable aspect to 
take into account, and [17] addresses this issue in greater 
detail. 
One of the difficulties faced to set up the construction of 
the Italian controlled vocabulary, that aims at including as 
much information about Cybersecurity as possible, is that 
the available Italian sources on this subject seem to be quite 
few. A list of some Italian resources that have been used to 
extract information is given in Section III, Corpus Creation. 
The challenge, therefore, is to map the English concepts 
inside 
various 
terminological 
repositories 
on 
the 
Cybersecurity field to the Italian language and, by doing so, 
to align the description of these terms with the Italian law 
systems and ICT shared knowledge. There are many studies 
which have been carried out to develop reliable 
terminological sources that could guide the understanding of 
the Cybersecurity domain and help with the information 
retrieval on this subject for the creation of the Italian 
Cybersecurity thesaurus. Among these aforementioned 
studies, [8] contains one well-defined example of a helpful 
ontology on this subject displaying various ways of 
correlating Cybersecurity concepts in a semantic network 
process. [9] also gives light to some of the most common 
terms used in Cybersecurity, and [10] collects the 
terminology referred to the cyber-threats accompanied by 
the descriptions of all the terms of this repository. The latter 
has been helpful in placing the relationships inside the 
Italian 
thesaurus. 
Other 
important 
repositories 
that 
contributed to the population of terms referred to 
Cybersecurity vulnerabilities and threats or attacks, are the 
ones collected in the MITRE Corporation systems [13][14]. 
 
III. METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH 
The first step of the project is based on the retrieval of 
the terminological authoritative sources that are going to be 
the documentary corpus of the domain that has to be 
analysed. Subsequently, a terminological extraction from 
the selected documents is carried out through specific 
programs that are meant to execute text-processing tasks. 
Next, the paper describes the steps according to which a 
thesaurus is going to be realized starting from a validation 
of terms by experts belonging to the domain of interest. 
With the output given by the terminological extraction, that 
is the controlled terminological list of terms sorted by the 
Term Frequency–Inverse Document Frequency (TF/IDF) 
measurement, a process of selection of the head-based terms 
begins by mapping the terms of the source corpus with the 
existent standards of ICT Security. Head-based terms are 
single terms that appear with highest frequency in the texts 
and that bring together other terms with which they are 
frequently 
accompanied, 
i.e., 
if 
“access” 
appears 
accompanied with many other lexical units, thus it will be 
the head-based term that will help in positioning its 
qualifiers and other terms with which occurs in the 
thesaurus.  
For a better understanding of the system that has driven 
towards construction of a semantic means of control on 
Cybersecurity, the following Unified Modelling Language 
(UML) activity diagram [11] depicts the steps taken for the 
realization of the Italian thesaurus on this field of 
knowledge (Fig. 1). 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

Figure. 1 Process for thesaurus construction. 
 
 
The first phase of the ongoing project has dealt with the 
identification, the retrieval and the analysis of the existing 
Italian authoritative terminological sources referring to the 
domain of Cybersecurity. The material collected represents 
the reference context of ICT security and contains, as well, 
an important dataset both from a quantitative and qualitative 
point of view. 
 In terms of the quantitative evaluation of the documents 
which a corpus is supposed to contain, an established 
estimate does not exist in the literature. However, it is 
recommended to have a sizeable set of data that belong to the 
specific domain of Cybersecurity and consequently have a 
terminological 
coverage 
that 
could 
make 
its 
representativeness strong enough; a highly reliable dataset 
should also be present from a qualitative point of view so 
that the construction of a thesaurus could be as accurate as 
possible. The sources consulted must be considered 
authoritative in order for the thesaurus to become a guide 
that pilots the correct management of the sector-specific 
language. This  process of gathering authoritative sources in 
order to make the semantic tool wide ranging is based on the 
principle of the hierarchy of the sources that in law  
considers three levels: constitutional sources (Constitution, 
constitutional laws and constitutional revision); legislative 
sources, also called primary sources (laws, decree law and 
legislative decree, regional laws) [7]; regulatory laws, also 
called 
secondary 
sources 
(Government 
Laws, 
local 
authoritative) – books, magazines and specialized articles, 
field specialized user profiles (experts of Cybersecurity) or 
social media users. One of the future prospects that will be 
considered for the development of this proposal is the 
attention to the social media world, referring to the wisdom 
of the crowds [2] according to which the implementation of 
new terms that, over time, become much more common in 
media jargon, should be considered in detail to understand 
the necessity of inserting them into the controlled 
vocabulary.   
It goes without saying that this heterogeneity of 
documents that marks the source corpus from which the 
information about the domain is going to be studied is a 
remarkable advantage to reach a higher level of 
representativeness threshold. To give an example, in the 
source corpus, various documents deriving from different 
format and typologies have been taken into consideration, 
among these:  
- 
Decree Laws; 
- 
Parliamentary legislation; 
- 
Penal/Administrative/Civil Code; 
- 
Rules (GDPR); 
- 
CERT guidelines; 
- 
Government documents; 
- 
Magazines that deal with the domain topics and 
could give another terminological output to enhance the 
thesaurus coverage (i.e., “Gnosis”, “Hacker Journal”). 
- 
Glossaries (i.e., “Intelligence Glossary” [15]) 
 Having to do with a domain under development, the 
hope is to run with the terminological evolution within the 
corpora so as to test through time the structure of the 
persistent value of the semantic relationships inside the 
thesaurus with the emergence of new terms and with the 
updating of the existing ones.  
The constructed corpus will be the starting point from 
where a thesaurus will be realized and it will be 
characterized by a flexible set of documents that are going to 
vary over the years and that will be a very important aspect 
in order to enhance the terminological coverage level of a 
given domain of study.  
The representativeness of a thesaurus is the key to 
determine its authoritativeness with respect to certain 
domains and geographic positioning areas. After completing 
the construction of the thesaurus structure, reaching what is 
considered to be the “gold standard” is the first purpose that 
the research activity aims at. It is unquestionable that this 
purpose could be reached only after the candidate terms have 
passed through a validation process by specific field experts. 
The latter, thanks to their level of authoritativeness in the 
areas of competence, represents a key step that cannot be 
avoided to have the approval of terms and of their semantic 
associations in the systems of knowledge management and 
organization. The international standards of reference, such 
as the 25964-1 of 2011 [3] and ISO 2564-2 of 2013 [4] 
regulations, will be followed: they will provide a 
standardization of the terms contained in the thesaurus that 
can guarantee the interoperability between various systems 
of knowledge management. 
IV. 
TERMINOLOGICAL EXTRACTION 
The terminological extraction is carried out once the 
corpus has been defined by the selection of documents which 
come from the authoritative legislative sources and 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

informative channels, such as the official magazines that 
contain information about the domain taken into account. 
Before beginning with a semi-automatic processing of 
the information contained in the source corpus, the digital 
native documents, downloaded from the websites of the 
authoritative sources or Web portals, have been converted 
into txt format, which is the format required by the textual 
analysis software.  
Native paper documents have been firstly scanned and 
saved as PDF files and have then undergone an optical 
character recognition process and finally transformed into txt 
documents. 
Among the pieces of software that have been chosen for 
the terminological extraction, the Text To Knowledge (T2K) 
[25] tool has been preferred for the purposes of detecting, in 
further analysis, head terms that can become part of the 
controlled vocabulary.  
T2K is a software developed by the Institute for 
Computational Linguistics (ILC – CNR) in Pisa (Italy) by a 
group of computational linguists and it is a powerful Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) tool that can provide, through 
semi-automatic text processing tasks, different forms of 
wordlists which include candidate terms used to populate the 
thesaurus. T2K allows to extrapolate the most relevant terms 
of the corpus on Cloud systems or by virtualization 
techniques, according to variables, such as accuracy – 
obtained by the algorithm ULISSE [18] – occurrence, 
frequency and disambiguation. 
The first steps of this project have dealt with the lexical 
configuration in T2K of the desired semantic chains as 
output from the documents that make up the imported 
corpus. What has been obtained by the semi-automatic 
processing of T2K is a glossary of terms that refer to the 
domain of study which is meant to be used for the semantic 
analysis of the candidate terms derived from this set of 
authoritative digital and paper sources. The statistical 
measurement 
that 
characterized 
the 
basis 
of 
the 
terminological representation of the candidate terms in the 
T2K wordlist is the TF/IDF formula. According to this 
statistical measurement, the lexical units with the highest 
frequency are considered less important – such as, adverbs, 
or articles and prepositions, in brief the stopwords – and the 
output underlines the words that occur in the documents that 
in general are less frequent. 
Only after having set the semantic configuration of the 
lexical units of the output given by the NLP text processing, 
T2K provides different ways to visualize the terms that are 
meant to be part of the controlled vocabulary. One of these, 
the so-called Broader Term (BT/NT), that corresponds to the 
ISO [3][4] tag standard, has been selected in order to help 
with the decision of inserting preferred candidate terms in 
the thesaurus. For a better understanding of the results of 
terms from the authoritative corpus, the following figures 
show the table given by the extraction (Fig. 2), and the 
knowledge graph derived from the occurrences of these 
terms with others inside the corpus (Fig 3). Both of these 
processes have been developed by using the semi-automatic 
terminological extraction of T2K NLP Tool. The knowledge 
graph is a representation of terms that are connected 
together, and this is the way followed for the selection of the 
most pertinent head-based terms. 
Figure. 2 Example of terms extracted with T2K. 
 
 
Figure. 3 Knowledge Graph in T2K. 
 
V. 
HEAD-BASED TERMS 
 
A semantic tool, such as a thesaurus, should represent a 
reliable source of information that can support the operations 
of information retrieval and the access to documents related 
to a specific domain of study. For this reason, the first phase 
that follows up on the creation of a corpus and the 
terminological extraction from these authoritative documents 
is strictly connected to the selection of which candidate 
terms should be considered as preferred terms that are to be 
imported in the controlled vocabulary and starting from 
 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

which the basic relationships proper of a thesaurus can be 
inserted.  
Typically, in a thesaurus, the classical kinds of 
relationships that characterize the network of connections 
between terms are of three types, as [1][3][4] better explain: 
1. 
Equivalent relationship characterizes the synonymy 
or quasi-synonymy between different terms; in a thesaurus 
there is one term that is going to be considered as the 
preferred one to which the other kind of relationships can be 
developed and it is marked by a tag USE, and its synonym, 
or the other way by which it can be seen in the domain 
documents, is marked by the tag UF that stands for Used 
For, e.g., VAPT UF Vulnerability Assessment and 
Penetration Testing; 
2. 
Hierarchical relationship is marked by two tags: BT 
that stands for Broader Term and represents the more general 
concept with reference to its more specific one which is, on 
the other hand, marked as NT, i.e., Narrower Term, e.g., 
Cyber Attacks NT Brute force attacks, or Cyber Threats NT 
Hacker; 
3. 
Associative relationship defined by the standard tag 
RT that stands for Related Term: it represents a concept that 
is associated to another one, e.g., Hacker RT Cyber 
criminality, or Spam RT Virus; as [3] stated, “the associative 
relationship covers associations between pairs of concepts 
that are not related hierarchically, but are semantically or 
conceptually associated to such an extent that the link 
between them needs to be made explicit in the thesaurus, on 
the grounds that it may suggest additional or alternative 
terms for use in indexing or retrieval. The relationship is 
indicated by the tag ‘RT’ (related term) and it should be 
applied reciprocally”. 
In order to make the Italian thesaurus on Cybersecurity a 
highly representative source, this paper describes a project 
phase that has covered the retrieval of terms contained in the 
NIST Glossary of Key Information Security Terms 7298 [5] 
and in the ISO-IEC 27000/2016 [6] standard. The purpose 
was that of checking if those terminological assets were 
present in the source corpus that has created the basis for the 
terminological extraction.  
Since the source corpus is made up of documents written 
in Italian language, in order to create a semantic tool for 
Cybersecurity in Italian, which does not currently exist, the 
contrastive analysis with the glossaries in the aforementioned 
standards is useful for three main reasons: (1) because 
mapping the standard terms can prove, by verifying their 
presence in the source corpus, if the latter, built for the 
construction of an Italian thesaurus of Cybersecurity, can be 
conveyed as a reliable resource; (2) because matching them 
with the BT/NT structure of the terminological controlled list 
obtained through text processing software operations is a 
way of detecting which can be the preferred terms in the 
thesaurus; (3) starting from the scope notes contained in 
these standards, the network of the relationships that will 
characterize the thesaurus can comply as much as possible 
with the domain language usage. 
The steps undertaken to analyse the standard terms list 
with the terms contained in the source corpus are the 
following: 
1. 
After having downloaded the NIST 7298 [5] and 
ISO-IEC 27000/2016 [6], they have been semi-manually 
translated into Italian language in order to better suit the 
purposes of the project research of creating an Italian 
resource for Cybersecurity terminology retrieval; the tool 
that has been employed to proceed with the translation of the 
terms present in the ICT standards and their definitions, is 
TRADOS [12]. This service provides a memory repository 
that can catch all the translations that have been made on a 
document which can be used whenever, in another 
document, there is a term that can be translated exactly the 
same as in previous texts; this is highly useful in order to 
achieve coherence in the translation process of many texts; 
2. 
The list of terms contained in the aforementioned 
standards have been assessed by a group of experts who have 
played an essential role in the validation of the authoritative 
source terms to start the cross mapping in the source corpus; 
3. 
A Python script has been realized in order to check 
if all the words present in the standards were also included in 
the list obtained by the terminological extraction under the 
hierarchical form BT/NT. This script takes into account the 
terminological list from the whole corpus and, through a 
reading of its lines, the content of the file becomes 
analysable. Subsequently, an automatic generation of an 
output file text gives a list of all the occurrences (terms 
contained in the standards that are present in the controlled 
list) all at once, facilitating a screening process of the 
mapping system; 
4. 
Once verified the presence or the absence of 
determined terms that are inserted in the standards taken into 
consideration, a process of selection among the head-based 
terms resulted from the extraction with T2K has been started 
with the help of the domain experts. Collaboration with the 
domain experts continues in order to face the challenge of 
deciding which terms can be considered as the best head 
terms that can connect the others inside the list and the 
standards; 
5. 
After having chosen which terms could be 
considered as the preferred entries in the future Italian 
thesaurus, the process of building the network of the 
relationships has begun starting from the term definitions in 
the standards, and that helped in positioning the terms 
connected with each other in the thesaurus; 
6. 
A draft prototype of an Italian thesaurus for 
Cybersecurity has been realized equipped with the Scope 
Notes derived from the definitions in the standards. 
 
VI. 
 CONCLUSION 
This paper aimed at presenting an ongoing work based 
on a PhD research project that refers to the construction of an 
Italian Cybersecurity thesaurus, whose terminological 
coverage is going to be semi-automatically enhanced. 
The goal set out in this PhD path is that of migrating all 
the relationships that will be created in the thesaurus into 
relationships inside a different structure, i.e., an ontology 
system.  
A large number of studies on the possibility of 
reengineering a thesaurus into an ontology have proved that 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

this conversion is possible through the migration of the 
typologies of relationships in the basic ones of the ontology. 
In [24], the authors have developed a methodology able to 
convert the basic relationships proper of the thesaurus to 
Web Ontology Language (OWL) language. In [19], for the 
AGROVOC domain, the study converged on a set of 
relationships the replacement of those used in a thesaurus 
making them more specific.  Indeed, the objective behind the 
need of converting the thesaurus into an ontology is based 
mainly on the principle that the latter provides a deeper 
knowledge representation.  
One of the most evident differences that occur between a 
thesaurus and an ontology is that the associative relationship 
in the former, RT, can be clarified by customized form of 
related connections which can be themselves split in 
different hierarchical and more specific subclasses of 
relationships.   As [21] demonstrates with their experiment of 
migrating the MeSH thesaurus with OWL language, one of 
the limits of a thesaurus is that of providing a flattened base 
of knowledge in terms of RT connections among terms. 
Although a thesaurus can be a reliable form of domain-
specific information retrieval, and can create a dense net of 
connections which can generate a cross-reference system 
able to gather all the terminology in a determined field of 
study, the associative relationship does not suffice to 
formalize the conceptual links between terms. For this 
reason, also [20] offers a wide perspective on this issue with 
its Hasti project, an ontology is able to detect a more 
specialized kind of relationship customizing, by Universal 
Resource Identifier (URI) names, the typology of every one 
of these relationships that have to be different in order to 
handle a deeper form of knowledge organization of the 
domain that has to be represented.  
The purpose of the conversion from a thesaurus to an 
ontology is to make information readable through languages 
that are proper to the ontologies: Resource Description 
Framework (RDF), Resource Description Framework 
Schema (RDFs), OWL. The transposition of the concepts 
represented through an abstract level by terms into an 
ontology should work to provide a better semantic 
representation system of the network of relationships. 
Thanks to OWL, it is possible to have extra semantic 
properties, such as the disjunction between two sets, so a 
complex of concepts can be separately analysed, the 
functional association of a property to a class and 
consequently the establishment of unique identifiers; the 
transitive property between classes useful for the creation of 
a much more articulate and descriptive semantic network. 
The efficiency of OWL relies on its formalism of language 
and in the possibility of applying automatic reasoning 
systems and developing inference on the described 
knowledge. 
Even converting terms inside the controlled vocabulary 
into a class, entity and property scheme that belongs to a 
conceptual ontological modelling, the presence of a group of 
experts who will validate the associative network obtained 
by the reconstruction of the thesaurus in an ontology will be 
necessary. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has received the support of the [26] at the 
National Research Council in Pisa, especially by the 
emerging Cybersecurity group. 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. Broughton, “Building thesauri”, Milan, 2006. 
[2] J. Surowiecki, Wisdom of crowds, Anchor Books, 2004. 
[3] International Standard ISO 25964-1, “Information and documentation 
— Thesauri and interoperability with other vocabularies — Part 1: 
Thesauri for information retrieval”, First edition 2011-08-15. 
[4] International Standard ISO 25964-2, “Information and documentation 
— Thesauri and interoperability with other vocabularies — Part 2: 
Interoperability with other vocabularies”, First edition 2013-03-15. 
[5] R. Kisserl, NISTIR 7298 Revision 2 “Glossary of Key Information 
Security Terms” National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Interagency or Internal Report 7298r2, May 2013. 
[6] International Standard ISO/IEC 27000:2016 (E)  Information 
technology – Security techniques – Information security management 
systems – Overview and vocabulary, Fourth edition 2016-02-05. 
[7] V. Crisafulli , “Hierarchy and competence in the constitutional 
system of law sources” in “Studies in the memory of Guido 
Zanobini”. Milan: Giuffrè, 1965, vol. III, p. 183.; G. Zagrebelsky, 
The constitutional system of law sources. Turin: EGES 1984, p. 67;  
[8] Z. Syed, A. Padia, T. Finin, L. Mathews and A. Joshi, “UCO: Unified 
Cybersecurity Ontology, AAAI Workshop on Artificial Intelligence 
for Cyber Security”, February 2016.   
[9] 
NICCS National Initiative for Cybersecurity Careers and Studies – 
Glossary,  https://niccs.us-cert.gov/about-niccs/glossary [accessed 
October 2018] . 
[10] Sophos “Threatsaurus The A-Z of Computer and data security 
threats”, 
https://www.sophos.com/en-
us/medialibrary/PDFs/other/sophosthreatsaurusaz.pdf?la=en 
[accessed September 2018] 
[11] Argo 
Uml, 
https://argouml.it.uptodown.com/windows 
[accessed 
October 2018] 
[12] SDL Trados Studio, https://www.sdltrados.com/it/ [accessed October 
2018] 
[13] “The Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) Initiative”, 
MITRE Corporation, https://cve.mitre.org/ [accessed September 
2018] 
[14] “The Common Attack Pattern Enumeration and Classification 
(CAPEC) Initiative”, MITRE Corporation, https://capec.mitre.org/ 
[accessed September 2018] 
[15] Presidenza del Consiglio dei Ministri – Sistema di informazione per 
la sicurezza della Repubblica, “Il linguaggio degli Organismi 
Informativi”, 
Glossario 
Intelligence, 
https://www.sicurezzanazionale.gov.it/sisr.nsf/quaderni-di-
intelligence/glossario-intelligence.html. [accessed October 2018] 
[16] Claire K. Shultz, Wallace L. Schultz, and Richard H. Orr,  
“Evaluation of Indexing by Group Consensum” (Final Report, 
Contract No OEC 1-7-070622-3890), Bureau of Research Office of 
Education, U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, 
August 30, 1968, 40 pp.  
[17] A. Kennedy and S. Szpakowicz, “Evaluation of automatic updates of 
Roget's Thesaurus” J. Language Modelling, 2014, volume 2, pp.1-49 . 
[18] F. Dell’Orletta, G. Venturi, and S. Montemagni, “ULISSE: An 
Unsupervised Algorithm for Detecting Reliable Dependency Parser”, 
Conference: 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Fifteenth 
Conference 
on 
Computational Natural Language Learning, 2011, pp. 115-124. 
[19] D. Sorgel et al., “Reeingeenering Thesauri for New Applications: the 
AGROVOC Example”, J. Dig. Inf. 4(4), 2004, pp. 1-19. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

[20] M. Shamsfard and A. Abdollahzadeh Barforoush, “Learning 
Ontologies from Natural Language Texts” International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies archive Volume 60 Issue 1, January 2004 
Article in a conference proceedings: 
[21] L.F. Soualmia, C. Golbreich, and S.J. Darmoni, “Representing the 
MeSH in OWL: Towards a Semi-Automatic Migration” Conference: 
KR-MED 2004, First International Workshop on Formal Biomedical 
Knowledge Representation, Proceedings of the KR 2004 Workshop 
on Formal Biomedical Knowledge Representation, Whistler, BC, 
Canada, 1 June 2004, p. 9. 
[22] A. Caruso, A. Folino, F. Parisi and R. Trunfio, “A statistical method 
for minimum corpus size determination” Proceedings  of  the  12es  
Journées  internationales  d'Analyse  statistique  des Données 
Textuelles (JADT 2014), pp. 135-146. 
[23] D. Kless and S. Milton, “Towards Quality Measures for Evaluating 
thesauri” Metadata and semantic research. 4th international 
conference, MTSR 2010, Alcalá de Henares, Spain, October 20–22, 
2010, pp. 312-319. 
[24] E. Cardillo, A. Folino, R. Trunfio, and R. Guarasci, “Towards the 
reuse of standardized thesauri into ontologies”, in Proceeding 
WOP'14 Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Ontology 
and Semantic Web Patterns - Volume 1302, 2014, pp.26-37.  
[25] F. Dell’Orletta, G. Venturi, A. Cimino and S. Montemagni, “T2K²: a 
System for Automatically Extracting and Organizing Knowledge 
from Texts“. In Proceedings of 9th Edition of International 
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2014), 
26-31 May, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2014. 
[26] Informatics and Telematics Institute – National Council of Research, 
IIT – CNR, https://www.iit.cnr.it [accessed October 2018] 
 
 
 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-678-1
SEMAPRO 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing

