Investigations on aluminum nitride thin film properties and design considerations 
for smart high frequency ultrasound sensors 
 
Susan Walter, Thomas Herzog, Henning Heuer,  
Fraunhofer Institute for Non-Destructive Testing,  
IZFP Dresden Branch,  
Dresden, Germany 
 Thomas.Herzog@izfp-d.fraunhofer.de 
 
 
Abstract— Basic investigations were carried out on the 
usability of aluminum nitride thin films for the manufacturing 
of ultrasound transducers. Some design considerations were 
performed for different sensor designs, electrode sizes and 
substrate materials in this work. It could be shown that the 
electrode size can be smaller than 1 mm square for use as high 
frequency sensors. Different substrate materials are principle 
usable, like e.g. silicone, aluminum oxide or quartz. Additional 
tests showed that these sensors can also be used for high 
temperature application up to 200 °C. The reason is the very 
good temperature resistance of the AlN thin films. The sensor 
design was varied for these investigations and simulations 
based on a MASON model assisted the material considerations.  
Keywords: ultrasonic high frequency sensor; Aluminium 
nitride thin film; 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Ultrasonic microscopes are frequently used for the non-
destructive evaluation of micro-technical components and 
structures; because of their versatility and efficiency. The 
frequency of an ultrasonic test system defines the attainable 
resolution and the penetration depth into a material. The 
higher the frequency is, the better is the resolution and the 
smaller is the penetration depth. The efficiency of 
conventional microscopes can be enhanced by a combination 
with high frequency phased array (PA) techniques. With the 
use of segmented transducers (~ into pixels divided sensors), 
it is possible to evaluate the whole volumes of specimen in 3 
dimensions. The advantage is that the ultrasonic transducer 
does not need to be manipulated mechanically by a scanner. 
The shape and the sound beam direction can be controlled on 
a large scale since each of the array elements can be pulsed 
with appropriate time delays. At present PA ultrasonic 
sensors with working frequencies up to 20 MHz are 
available, but frequencies above 50 MHz are necessary for 
the applications that require a high resolution. Therefore new 
high frequency PA sensors need to be developed.  
A promising alternative piezoelectric material is 
aluminum nitride (AlN). Aluminum nitride is a piezoelectric 
but not ferroelectric material with a Wurtzite crystal 
structure. Compared to the widely used ferroelectric 
materials like PZT, AlN can not be electrically poled. 
Therefore piezoelectric activity can only be achieved with 
single crystals or with a polycrystalline structure with a 
strong crystal orientation. To achieve a thickness vibration of 
the sensor, a crystalline orientation in (001) direction is 
necessary (c-axis of the AlN crystalline structure being 
oriented perpendicular to the substrate surface). AlN in this 
condition exhibits several attractive properties that were 
verified in various publications (e.g. [1]) and in our own 
experimental work: 
− 
Piezoelectric coupling coefficient of 20 % 
− 
Piezoelectric constant d33 of about 8 pm/V 
− 
Piezoelectric constant g33 of about 100 mVm/N 
− 
High sound velocity for longitudinal waves 10700 
m/s 
− 
High dielectric strength of up to 20 MV/cm 
− 
Low dielectric constant of 8,6 
− 
High electrical resistivity of more than 1011 Ωcm 
− 
High temperature stability (up to 1000°C) 
 
Additionally the AlN thin film technology is compatible 
to CMOS technology and therefore interesting in MEMS 
(Microelectromechnical 
Systems) 
and 
MOEMS 
(Microoptomechanical 
Systems) 
fabrication. 
Recent 
publications show, that for these applications very thin films 
(below 1µm, e.g. [2]) were deposited with deposition rates 
between 5 nm/min [3] and 100 nm/min [4]. But until now 
AlN is seldom used for ultrasonic transducers, only a few 
groups are working on single element ultrasonic transducers 
for low frequencies based on membrane vibration [5] or 
based on thickness vibration to reach a high resonance 
frequency of 100 MHz [6]. Further investigation on the 
behaviour of thin film AlN piezoelectric sensors and design 
consideration need to be performed. 
 
II. 
TEST SETUP AND MEASUREMENT METHODS 
A simple layout was used for optimization of deposition 
process in previous investigations [7]. Here additionally 
sensor investigations were carried out for high temperature 
storage; and design considerations performed for different 
substrate materials with the same test layout. An electrode 
structure with 10 mm diameter was deposited on an isolated 
silicon wafer. An aluminium nitride film in a circle structure 
with a diameter of 13 mm was deposited, followed by a 
second aluminium electrode to fabricate the sensor and the 
interconnection pad on the top side as shown in Fig. 1. The 
aluminum electrodes all have a thickness of 150 nm. These 
deposition processes were carried out at Fraunhofer Institute 
for Electron Beam and Plasma Technology - FEP in 
Dresden.  
 
129
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
Figure 1.  Ultrasonic sensors on silicon wafer 
Additionally design considerations were carried out with 
different electrode sizes. The layer thicknesses and sequence 
are same as we used in the first experiments. Only the layout 
was changed as can be seen in fig. 2. The bottom electrode is 
a square shaped aluminum electrode with a large ground area 
around for a better electromagnetic shielding. On top of the 
bottom electrode a square shaped AlN Layer with a thickness 
of 10 µm and an edge length of 5 mm follows. The top 
electrode is also square shaped with the same edge length as 
the bottom electrode and a short track for the connection of 
the measurement tips. Sensors with edge lengths of 5 mm, 
1 mm, 0.5 mm and 0.3 mm were manufactured with the 
optimized sputtering parameter sets on a 6” silicon wafer. 
The bottom electrode for the smallest electrode size of 0.3 
mm was 0.5 mm to reduce effects caused by a misalignment 
of the masks. The optimized unipolar and bipolar deposition 
parameters were used for the deposition of 6” isolated silicon 
wafers with 17 pieces of the same geometry on each 
substrate. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Layout for electrode size variation experiments with coaxial 
bottom electrode (full line), AlN layer (grey) and top electrode (dashed 
line), exemplarily for 1 mm² (left) and 25 mm² (right). 
 
A. Pulse Echo Measurements 
The sensor tests were performed with the pulse echo 
measurements too [7]. The AlN sensor served as an acoustic 
transmitter and receiver. The pulser and receiver DPR 500 
(JSR Ultrasonics) was used to excite an acoustic sound wave. 
The ultrasound wave propagates through the substrate, is 
reflected at the interface substrate-air and travels back to the 
AlN layer. There the ultrasound wave excites a voltage 
signal which can be measured and evaluated. 
The maximum amplitude of the received voltage signal 
was used to evaluate the AlN film quality depending on the 
deposition parameters. The measured voltage values were 
calculated to absolute voltage values without gain for a better 
comparability. The fig. 3 shows a typical time response with 
multiple back wall echoes. To avoid an influence of the 
sending signal, we did not evaluate the first back wall echo 
but the fourth. 
 
Figure 3.  Echo pulse signal from silicon back wall reflection 
 
B. Measurements of piezoelectric constant d33 
The piezoelectric charge constant d33 was determined 
with a conventional Berlincourt-Meter (Piezotest PM300). 
The samples were clamped and loaded with an alternating 
force. The generated electric charge was compared to the 
value of a reference sample to obtain the piezoelectric charge 
constant. The measurements were carried out by applying an 
alternating force of 0.25 N and a frequency of 110 Hz; see 
[7]. Additional test specimen with new substrate materials 
were created after the optimization of the AlN thin film 
deposition process. Different substrate materials, like 
aluminium oxide, glass, quartz and aluminium were 
investigated. This is important for the sensor design 
considerations, because different substrate materials have 
different mechanical and acoustic properties, which have an 
influence on the thin film ultrasonic transducers. The 
mechanical clamping of the thin film to the substrate plays 
an important role as well as the geometry dimensions. The 
relative big thin film sensor area in versus to the thin film 
thickness has a second influence on the d33 measurement 
with this method. This takes effect as a second clamping. 
 
C. Modelling of sensor design for single element 
transducer 
The basis for the simulation of different thin film sensor 
designs and substrate materials was a MASON model. This 
model was created by electrical engineering values for the 
piezo-effect. The Model in these investigations was build in 
PSpice and consists of a transmission line driven by an ideal 
transformer (fig. 4). The single element transducer in this 
-0,4
-0,2
0
0,2
0,4
time in ns [100ns/DIV]
voltage in V
 
 
 
130
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

transmission line was described by modelling of all layer 
materials, and therefore the material properties needed to be 
known.  
  
 
Figure 4.  PSpice-Model of a AlN single element transducer 
 
D. Measurements of warping with Laser vibrometer 
The warping vibration of the sensor thin films of the 
single transducer was determined with an ultra high 
frequency Laser vibrometer UHF-120. The investigation 
took part at Polytec laboratories. This measurement system is 
able to detect mechanical vibration up to 1.2 GHz. Other 
conventional Laser vibrometers are only working in the 
frequency range of 20 MHz and couldn’t be used here.   
 
A sinusoidal voltage with an amplitude of +/- 3 V was 
applied to the single element transducers to realize a 
continuously excitation and vibration. The mechanical 
warping of the thin film elements was measured in z- 
direction in a range of some 10 pm. Afterwards the exciting 
frequency was raised continuously to detect the resonance 
frequencies of the thin film sensors. Additionally the laser 
worked in a scanning mode to evaluate the vibration pattern 
of the complete sensor surface. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Principle of Laser vibrometer 
 
III. 
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
A. Substrate variation and temperature storage 
An acceptable piezoelectric activity could be proofed on 
a variety of substrate materials, which are common in 
electronics manufacturing, using sputtering parameter sets 
found in earlier investigations [7]. The d33-meter can be used 
for a very fast estimation of the thin film quality for AlN 
sensors with the same substrate material and film thickness 
(see Fig.). 
 
The measured value d33 is not the actual d33 value. This 
follows from the mentioned clamping of the thin film 
transducer on the substrate. During the testing with the d33-
meter the sample should only be loaded by the force head 
with a stress in thickness direction, which means parallel to 
the crystal orientation to obtain an unaffected d33 value. 
 
3
5
7
9
11
d33 [pC/N]
bipol.
unipol.
Al2O3
Quartz
Silicon
Glass
Aluminium
Deposition 
pulse mode
 
Figure 6.  Results of d33 constants for AlN sensors deposited on different 
substrates  
 In this case an additional stress in planar direction is 
induced, because of the clamping of the thin film on the 
substrate and because of the very low ratio of film thickness 
to diameter. Therefore the measured d33 value is lower than 
the true value and depends on the Poisson ratio of the 
substrate material. The lower the Poison ratio of the substrate 
is, the lower is the measured d33 value. The rather hard 
materials which have a lower Poisson ratio and a lower 
elongation coefficient (e.g. 2.0 for silicon and 23.0 for 
aluminium α in [10-6/K]), show also lower d33 measurement 
results. This relationship can be seen in fig.6. These results 
are similar for both deposition processes. 
Additionally the sensors were stored at high temperatures 
to evaluate the influence on the piezoelectric properties of 
the AlN and the substrate. The maximum signal voltages of 
the pulse echo measurements of all sensors were obtained, 
but a direct comparison was not possible because of the 
different substrate thicknesses and acoustical damping 
coefficients. Monocrystalline silicon has a much lower 
damping coefficient compared to the other substrate 
materials and therefore the maximum voltage received is 
much higher. For all materials it is obvious, that the 
temperature storage at 200°C had no significant influence.  
 
Beam splitter 1 
Beam splitter 2 
Beam splitter 3 
Beam splitter 4 
HeNe Laser 
Bragg cell 
Optical lens 
Specimen 
  
131
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
Figure 7.   Piezoelectric charge constant of AlN thin film before and after 
temperature storage 
 
For aluminium, aluminium oxide and silicon no change 
in the d33 value could be observed, but the d33 value of glass 
seemed to be much higher. Due to the fact, that there was no 
change in the measured back wall echo amplitude, it can be 
assumed that this effect is not caused by a change of the AlN 
properties, but by a change of the glass structure.  
 
B. Laser vibration measurements 
 
Figure 8.  Vibration style of a thin film sensor at 128 MHz with max. z- 
warping of 11 pm 
 
The figure 8 shows an example of the resonance 
behaviour of a thin film sensor at 128 MHz, which is nearly 
the lambda/4 vibration. A mechanical z-warping of the AlN 
thin film sensors by exciting with an electrical voltage could 
be detected with these Laser measurements.  
The result shows a small displacement of the centre of 
warping vibrations from the sensor midpoint. The reason of 
this behaviour can be explained by the sensor geometry and 
the additional warping of the silicon substrate. This was an 
excellent test for investigating different sensor electrode 
designs and substrate materials in the future. 
 
C. Simulation results 
The influence of typical materials parameters can be 
calculated and the results compared to the pulse-echo 
measurements with the simulation of thin film layers by the 
MASON model. Therefore it is necessary to use the exact 
geometries, density, acoustic wave velocity and piezoelectric 
charge constants, e.g. to compare the real measurements with 
the simulation results. In the fig. below can be seen a 
simulated back wall echo signal with a silicon substrate of 
500 micron thickness and a transducer geometry like 
mentioned above.  
 
 
Figure 9.  Simulated back wall echo from silicon substrate 
 
D. Electrode Size Variation 
The variation showed a detectable reflected ultrasound 
wave for all electrode sizes. Sensors with the smallest 
electrode size and deposited with the bipolar mode could not 
be used for measurements. For these sensors a misalignment 
of the masks caused short circuits between top electrode and 
ground layer. 
The overview of the measured maximum signal 
amplitudes is shown in fig. 10. For both parameter sets the 
electrodes with 1 mm² showed the highest signal amplitude. 
All measurements were done with a conventional pulser-
receiver with an input impedance of 50 Ω without additional 
impedance matching of the sensors. The impedance of the 
sensors with an electrode area of 1 mm² fits best to the 
characteristic impedance of the measurement cables used and 
the input impedance of the hardware. The reflection 
coefficient for these sensors is much lower than for the 
sensors with other geometries. The matching of the electric 
impedances, the sensor size and the film properties influence 
the maximum signal amplitude. Therefore there is no direct 
dependency visible between the maximum signal amplitude 
and the electrode area. But we could prove that it is possible 
to send and receive ultrasound waves with very small 
electrodes, which is important for an application of these 
films in phased array ultrasound transducers. 
 
 
 
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
0
50
100
150
Zeit in ns
Spannung in V
Voltage in V 
Time in ns 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
d 33 in  p C/N
Al, bipolar
Al, unipolar
Al2O3, bipolar
Al2O3, unipolar
Glas, bipolar
Glas, unipolar
Si, bipolar
Si, unipolar
20°C
4h at 200°C
132
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
 
Figure 10.  Maximum amplitude |Vmax| of the 4th back wall echo without 
additional gain for square shaped electrodes with edge lengths of 0.3mm, 
0.5 mm, 1 mm and 5 mm. 
 
The variation of the mean values for the unipolar mode is 
between 7.5 % for the 1 mm² electrodes and 15.6 % for the 
25 mm² electrodes. The variation of the values for the bipolar 
mode is higher. It varies between 15.7 % for the 0.25 mm² 
electrodes and 21.5 % for the 25 mm² electrodes. 
Fig. 11 shows the single values for the measured 
maximum amplitude of the different sensors for both 
deposition parameter sets. A dependency between maximum 
amplitude and sensor position on the substrate could not be 
found. Therefore a misalignment of the masks (e.g. offset or 
rotation) could not be the main reason for the higher 
scattering with the bipolar deposition mode.  
Further there was no connection between a low 
amplitude and the position of the sensor that was similar on 
all substrates. Thus a systematic variation of the film 
properties or crystal structure caused by the deposition 
process could be excluded. 
 
 
Figure 11.  Maximum amplitude |Vmax| of the 4th back wall echo without 
additional gain for square shaped electrodes against sensor position on the 
silicon substrate. Each electrode area was sputtered with unipolar (top) and 
bipolar (bottom) deposition mode. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND VISION 
Basic investigations were carried out for different 
ultrasonic thin film AlN sensor designs, electrode sizes and 
substrate materials. It could be shown that the electrode size 
can be smaller than 1 mm square for use as high frequency 
sensors. Additionally test of different substrate materials 
have shown, that this sensor substrates can also be use in 
higher temperature application up to 200 °C. The reason is 
the very good temperature resistance of the AlN thin film 
transducers. The sensor design was varied for these 
investigations and simulations of layer thicknesses based on 
a MASON model have assisted the material considerations. 
Different substrate materials are principle usable, like e.g. 
silicone, aluminum oxide or quartz.  
  
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
5
10
15
position
|Vmax| [mV]
0,25 mm²
0,09 mm²
1 mm²
25 mm²
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
5
10
15
position
|Vmax| [mV]
   
0
10
20
30
0,09
0,25
1
25
electrode area [mm²]
|Vmax| [mV]
bipolar
unipolar
133
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

The development of thin film based ultrasonic sensors 
should enhance the application range of ultrasonic 
microscopes. Especially the non-destructive evaluation 
becomes more and more important for micro-technical 
components, heterogeneous structures, new materials like 
reinforced 
carbon 
fiber 
composites 
and 
thin 
film 
components in the flat screens or solar cells. Today these 
components 
were 
investigated 
with 
the 
ultrasonic 
microscope and mechanical scanning of single transducer 
during the components are placed in a liquid bath. The 
ultrasonic microscope is therefore very sensitive in case of 
delaminations, flaws, pores, cracks and gives important 
information about the consistence and quality of a product. 
The evaluations were carried out with single element 
transducer and frequencies from 5 MHz up to 200 MHz. 
The measurement time is relative long caused by the 
necessary mechanical scanning and the lateral resolution 
limited by the scanner precision. For the scanning in z-
direction also a parallel use of 2 to 4 single transducers 
focusing in different depth are necessary. With the use of 
phased array sensors working in higher frequency range 
then today available, this technique will become more 
effective. The vision of the project idea is the development 
and demonstration of a new ultrasonic sensor test system 
with high frequency phased array transducer for the 
evaluation of complex three-dimensional components, 
structures or medical Applications. Therefore a new phased 
array sensor has to be developed on the basis of 
piezoelectric thin films. A demonstrator working in a 
frequency range above 50 MHz in phased array technique 
with multi-channel electronic will be created in further 
investigations. 
  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work has been partially supported by a Grant-in-Aid 
for Technology Funding by the European Regional 
Development Fund (ERDF) 2007-2013 and the State of 
Saxony as well as by Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft. Many thanks 
also to Fraunhofer Institute for Electron Beam and Plasma 
Technology FEP in Dresden for the deposition processes and 
micro analyses by SEM and XRD, also to Polytec GmbH for 
the Laser vibrometer measurements.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Patel, N.D., Nicholson, P.S., “High Frequency, High 
Temperature Ultrasonic Transducers”, NDT International, 
Volume 23, Number 5, 262-266 (1990) 
[2] Conrad, H., Schmid, J. U., Pufe, W., Zimmer, F., Sandner, T., 
Schenk, H., Lakner H., “Aluminum Nitride – A promising 
and Full CMOS Compatible Piezoelectric Material for 
MOEMS Applications”, Smart Sensors and Actuators, Proc. 
of SPIE, Vol. 7362, (2009) 
[3] Akiyama, M., Nagao, K., Ueno, N., Tateyama, H., Yamada, 
T., “Influence of Metal Electrodes on Crystal Orientation of 
Aluminum Nitride Thin Films”, Vacuum, Vol. 47, 699-708 
(2004) 
[4] Iborra, E., Clement, M., Olivares, J., González-Castilla, S., 
Sangrador, J., Rimmer, N., Rastogi, A., Ivira, B., Reinhardt, 
A., “BAW Resonators Based on AlN with Ir Electrodes for 
Digital Wireless Transmissions”, 2008 IEEE International 
Ultrasonics Symposium Proceedings, 2189-2192 (2008) 
[5] Valbin, L., Sevely, L., “Piezoelectric Aluminum Nitride Thin 
Film for Ultrasonic Transducers”, MEMS Components and 
Applications for Industry, Automobiles, Aerospace and 
Communication, Proceedings of SPIE, Vol. 4559, 95-102 
(2001) 
[6] Martin, P..M., Good, M.S., Johnston, J.W., Posakony, G.J., 
Bond, L.J., Crawford, S.L., “Piezoelectric Films for 100MHz 
Ultrasonic Transducers”, Thin Solid Films, Vol. 379, 253-258 
(2000) 
[7] Bartzsch, H, Gittner, M., Gloess, D., Frach, P., Herzog, T., 
Walter, S., Heuer, H., “Properties of piezoelectric AlN layers 
deposited 
by 
reactive 
pulse 
magnetron 
sputtering”, 
Proceedings of the 2011 Technical Conference of the Society 
of Vacuum Coaters, 16-31 April 2011 (to be published) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
134
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

