Colorimetric Sensor Array based on Ink-jet Printing Method for
Gas Detection System
Jeong Ho An
Department of Polymer Science & Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University
Suwon-Si, Republic of Korea
jhahn1us@skku.edu
Dami Kim and Sanghyo Kim
Department of Bionanotechnology
Gachon University
Seongnam-Si, Republic of Korea
rlaeka41@gmail.com and samkim@gachon.ac.kr
Do Young Lee and Inkyun Jeon
Optolane Inc.,
Seongnam-Si, Republic of Korea
doyoung@optolane.com and andyjeon@optolane.com
Abstract—Hazardous gas detection is one of the important
issues in the industry dealing with the toxic chemicals. The
colorimetric sensor array has been developed for detection of
the Toxic Industrial Chemicals (TICs). This study describes a
colorimetric sensor array by using printing method and
Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) image
sensor for highly sensitive gas detection system. The sensor
array is produced by the piezo inkjet-printer in order to
achieve array uniformity, cost efficiency and ability to adjust
the array thickness. The initial colors of sensor array are
changed by chemical gases within 10 seconds of exposure to
Time Weighted Average (TWA) concentration. Detection of
the color change was performed before and after a gas
exposure. This printing method of sensor array demonstrates
the potential for sensing application of sensitivity, rapidity and
it is a simple method to use.
Keywords - Hazardous Gas sensing, Inkjet printing, CMOS Image
sensor, Colorimetric sensor.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Gas detection system is the most important one in
industries and recently colorimetric array of gas detection is
identified as the dominant method of application. Usually,
chemical and pH indicators are applied to configure the
array. But the array composed of a variety of dyes in a tool
can selectively determine the hazardous gas. A colorimetric
method of detecting a hazardous gas by color change has the
advantage of low cost, simplicity and can be made as a
portable device [1]. The printing method of making array is
an effective way to create the array spot on gas detection
chip and to create an accurately depositing spot with a small
amount of dye on the surface of a wide range of substrate.
Piezo inkjet technology is a versatile tool for various
fabrication processes of the substrate [2] and has advantages
of no risk of substrate damage, low cost and ease for parallel
mass production. Furthermore, printing method can take
place as an alternative method to the application of analytical
chemistry,
biological
sample
array
and
the
various
fabrication areas. Chip array is analyzed by the CMOS
image sensor and various chemical indicators for specific
detection of toxic gases are used to make the sensor array.
That array shows the colors that composed of red, green and
blue (RGB) and the CMOS image sensor can absorb RGB
value. The RGB value can be converted to various color
spaces that allow for quantification of color change of the
gas concentration on the linear relationship of the component
consisting of various color spaces. The hazardous gas
detection system for performing chip fabrication with
printing method, detection using CMOS image sensor and
analysis can provide great application for gas sensors in the
industry.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL
A.
Inkjet-printed sensor arrays
An Epson Stylus T10 is used as an inkjet printer. All
array spots are fabricated by printing method on the
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film with four types of
chemicals or pH indicator dyes which are Methyl Red (MR),
Nitrazine Yellow (NY), Bromo Phenol Blue (BPB), and
Bromo Cresol Green (BCG). Printing of dyes prepared to use
water and ethanol based solvent for inkjet-print. Dissolved
dyes were filtered by syringe filter with 0.1 ㎛ pore size of
PVDF membrane. Each array is printed as spots of 2.4mm
diameter with 800nm thickness and then dried at room
temperature for 3 days to make them stable of initial color of
the array.
B.
CMOS image sensor
A CMOS image sensor is a device that can absorb
photons which constitute a color or image. CMOS image
sensor converts the color to a digital value of RGB by using
analog to digital converter (ADC). The experiment was
carried out using CMOS image sensor that contains 376 x
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

314 pixel array of 10 bit ADC [3]. Color detection based on
the CMOS image sensor was performed before and after gas
exposure. The overall test scheme is shown in Fig. 1.
C.
Gas exposure test
Hydrochloric acid and ammonia gas were used in this
experiment and the standard of exposure limits is given as
the TWA concentration of each gas. TWA concentration of
hydrochloric acid was 5ppm and that of ammonia was
20ppm. The gas concentrations of the exposure test were
allowable to the level of TWA. Each of the gases used in this
study was prepared in 1 liter hermetic chamber and
vaporized from liquid phase of chemical at 60°C. After
complete vaporization, a gas was exposed to the array chips
for 10 seconds.
D.
Data processing and converting of color space
The color value of RGB was measured by CMOS image
sensor after the exposure and compared with the initial color.
The average color value of 120 pixels in the center of a
2.4mm spot is converted into a digital RGB value. RGB
value
is
directly
converted
using
CIELAB-CIEXYZ
conversions which allow all components of that color space
to have full 8-bit range of RGB.
III.
RESULT
The sensor arrays produced by printing method were
exposed to ammonia and hydrochloric acid gases at three
different concentrations (ammonia; 5ppm, 10ppm, and
20ppm, hydrochloric acid; 1.25ppm, 2.5ppm, and 5ppm).
The color changes of an array under hydrochloric acid show
a significant change in MR and NY spots whereas BPB and
BCG spots are more sensitive to ammonia gas as shown in
Fig 2. The color changes were detected using CMOS image
sensor after gas exposure and RGB value were directly
converted to the CIE-Lab color space to calculate the color
differentiation value, as shown in Fig. 3. The color
differentiation values depend on the concentration of each
gas. Fig. 4 shows the luminance values of BCG and BPB.
Luminance values are gradually reduced as the concentration
of ammonia gas increases. This suggests that it is possible to
quantify the gas concentration based on the color change
comparison. The uniform spot array of chemical indicator is
manageable by using printing method. It is possible to
quantify a gas concentration by optimizing dye array state,
including uniformity, a suitable concentration condition, and
the thickness.
IV.
CONCLUSION
Various
industries,
factories,
and
laboratories
are
amongst the major places requiring the use of toxic gases
that may lead to serious problems if released, and can be
dangerous to human life. We have carried out a series of
trials to standardize the colorimetric toxic gas detection
system. In addition, further studies are underway regarding
the use of the same technology to detect 10 toxic gases and
to test the detection system under various conditions. We
believe that the toxic gas detection system will be a suitable
and sensitive device.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the R&D Program for
Society of the National Research Foundation (NRF) funded
by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning
(2013M3C8A3078806 and 2015M3A9E2031372).
REFERENCES
[1]
Abe K, Suzuki K, Citterio D., Inkjet-printed microfluidic multianalyte
chemical sensing paper, Anal. Chem. 13, 80(Aug. 2008)
[2]
Soga T, Jimbo Y, Suzuki K, Citterio D,. Inkjet-printed paper-based
colorimetric sensor array for the discrimination of volatile primary
amines. Anal. Chem. 17, 85(Sep. 2013)
[3]
Devadhasan JP, Shao M, Kim S., CMOS Image Sensor for Rapid
Chemical Detection. JOLST 2, 1(June 2014).
.
Figure 1. Gas detection system based on the piezo inkjet printing method.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 2. The colorimetric sensor array and color difference of dyes.
Figure 3. Color differentiation value of CIE-Lab color space.
Figure 4. Luminance value gradient of BCG and BPB at ammonia gas.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

