Flexible All-organic Highly Tenzo-resistive bi Layer Films as Weightless Strain and 
Pressure Sensors for Medical Devices  
 
Vladimir Laukhin  
dept. name: NANOMOL 
Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, 
ICMAB-CSIC, CIBER-BBN  
Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain 
e-mail: vladimir@icmab.es  
Elena Laukhina 
dept. name: NANOMOL  
CIBER de Bioingeniería, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina 
(CIBER-BBN) at ICMAB-CSIC 
Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain 
 e-mail: laukhina@icmab.es
Victor Lebedev, Raphael Pfattner, Concepció Rovira, Jaume Veciana  
dept. name: NANOMOL  
Institut de Ciencia de Materials de Barcelona (ICMAB) -CSIC, CIBER-BBN 
Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain 
e-mail:  vlebedev@icmab.es; rpfattner@icmab.es, cun@icmab.es; vecianaj@icmab.es  
 
 
Abstract—The article is addressed to the development of 
flexible lightweight strain and pressure sensors capable of 
monitoring blood pulsing, breathing, and body movements. 
The prototypes of body sensing devices equipped with sensors 
based on all-organic highly tenzo-resistive bi layer films are 
described. The electrical resistance of the flexible sensors 
linearly and reversibly depends on deformation resulted from 
body movements. Sensors electrical responses suffice to 
measure very small pressure changes as well as delicate 
elongations in a wide deformation range.   
 
Keywords- piezoresistive covering; flexible, biocompatible 
pressure and strain sensors; organic molecular metal 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The development of flexible, lightweight, conducting 
materials, whose electrical transport properties strongly 
respond to delicate strain, brings great opportunities in the 
field of strain, pressure or bending sensors for their 
applications in intelligent textiles, robotic interfaces and 
body sensing devices [1-3]. Recently, we reported ultra-
sensitive tenzo-resistive bi layer (BL) films composed of a 
polycarbonate (PC) matrix surfaced with crystallites of 
organic molecular metal β-(ET)2I3, were ET=bis(ethylene-
dithio)tetrathiafulvalene (Fig. 1) [4, 5]. These BL films show 
ability to sense the uniaxial deformations given by the 
minimum value of a 10-3 % of relative strain that is well 
below those of many conventional strain gages [4]. The 
processing characteristics of polycarbonate films, “self-
metallized" with the highly tenzo-resistive β-(ET)2I3-based 
layer, 
make them potentially useful for electronic 
applications where conductivity, lightweight, large or small  
area coverage and flexibility are required [4]. Moreover, it 
has been shown that BL films can be successfully integrate 
in textiles [6]. The BL film-based strain gages can be 
engineered with gage factors (S) up to 20 and different 
temperature resistance coefficients [4, 5]. The tests have 
shown that BL film-based pressure sensors, being 
biocompatible, are able to control intraocular pressure 
changes [7]. The contact IOP sensing lens with a membrane 
pressure sensor based on the above mentioned BL film is 
already under development [7, 8]. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Top: Skeletal formula of bis(ethylenedithio)tetrathiafulvalene 
(ET); bottom: schematic view of the orientation of (ET)+0.5 radical cations 
and [I-I-I]- anions in a metallic covering layer of β-(ET)2I3 formed at the 
surface of a polycarbonate film. 
151
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

In order that a tenso-resistive BL film can sense pressure 
changes, it should be located in devices as a membrane. In 
this case the electrical resistance of a BL film will respond to 
its bending deformation resulted from a pressure change. We 
used this engineering approach to fabricating the set of 
medical sensing prototypes.  
Here we report a promising approach to engineering 
biocompatible and highly tenzo -resistive membranes for 
their applications to monitoring medical parameters. The 
prototypes of medical devices capable of controlling the 
body movements are presented 
II. 
FABRICATING FLEXIBLE  SENSING MEMBRANES   
In line with the early reported method [9] we first 
prepared a 25 μm thick polycarbonate film spiced up with an 
2 wt. % of ET that is a precursor for organic molecular metal 
(ET)2I3. The film was cast on a glass support at 130 oC from 
a 1,2-dichlorobenzene solution of PC and ET. In order to 
cover the film with a layer of (ET)2I3, we exposed the film 
surface to the vapors of a saturated solution of iodine in 
dichloromethane. The covering mechanism is following: the 
surface of a polycarbonate film easily swells under its 
exposure to dichloromethane vapors; this swelling facilitates 
a migration of ET molecules from the film bulk to the 
swollen film surface where the part of ET molecules are 
oxidized to radical cations ET+• by iodine, which penetrates 
in the film surface together with dichloromethane vapors. 
This redox process induces the rapid nucleation of highly 
insoluble [(ET)0(ET)+•](I3)- species and a facing layer of 
molecular metal α-(ET)2I3 is formed. Electrical resistance of 
the 25 µm thick BL film with the covering layer of α-(ET)2I3 
responded to strain with a gage factor being 10, whereas the 
polycarbonate film with the same thickness but surfaced with 
β-(ET)2I3 has a gage factor being 20 [4]. The BL film 
covered with a highly piezoresistive layer of β-(ET)2I3 was 
formed  via a thermo-activated α→β phase transition that 
occurs at T>100 oC [9]. For this purpose the BL film covered 
with the layer of α-(ET)2I3 was annealed at 150oC during 30 
min. The formation of the covering layer of β-(ET)2I3 was 
confirmed by its X-ray diffraction pattern that shows only 
one line at 2θ=5.8o and its higher order reflections, that 
corresponds to “c”-oriented crystallites of organic metal β-
(ET)2I3 (Fig. 1, bottom) [9].  The surface analysis on a micro 
scale, performed using “Quanta FEI 200 FEG-ESEM” 
scanning electron microscope (SEM), showed that the 
crystallites of the covering layer of β-(ET)2I3 are of nano or 
submicro sizes (Fig. 2). The calculated possible maximal 
thickness of the piezoresistive covering layer is around 250 
nm. 
 
As a final remark to this part we would like to add that 
the BL film temperature resistance coefficient (TRC) and its 
gage factor were found as 0.3 %/oC and 20, respectively. 
These values are in excellent agreement with the early 
reported data [4]. The TRC was calculated as a relative 
resistance change per grade and gage factor was calculated 
as the ratio between the relative resistance change and the 
relative strain value.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  SEM image of the piezoresistive covering layer of β-(ET)2I3;  
III. 
PROTOTYPES OF BODY SENSING DEVICES   
The simple sensing prototype devices for monitoring the 
body movements breathing rhythms [4] blood pulse, 
intraocular pressure [7, 8]  finger movement are already 
under development. Below we present some of them. 
 
Blood pulse sensor (Fig. 3). The BL film-based 
membrane with sensing layer of β-(ET)2I3 was equipped with 
electrical contacts and fixed between two rigid plastic rings. 
To measure pulse the device was fixed on the carpus of a 
volunteer (Fig. 3 bottom). The resistance response of the 
sensor to strain provoked by pulse movement was measured 
by a four probes dc method. Data were gathered for different 
persons and time periods. As seen in the Fig. 4, the pulse 
movement resulted in an oscillated resistance curve that can 
be easily recorded and analyzed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Photo images of the blood-pulse sensor (Top) and sensor 
location on the carpus of a volunteer under pulse testing (Bottom).  
152
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Resistance response to the blood-pulse movement. 
Breathing sensor. This prototype contains the BL film 
as a tenzo-resistive diaphragm on springy plastic U-shape 
plate, which was attached to an elastic-textile belt (Fig. 5). 
The resistance response of sensors to strain provoked by the 
breathing was measured by a four probes dc method. Data 
were gathered for a different persons and time periods. As 
seen in the Fig. 6 the breathing movement resulted in an 
oscillated resistance curve that can be easily recorded and 
analysed. A relatively long time periods between the 
oscillations, observed in Fig. 6, correspond to holding up 
breathing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Photo images of the breathing sensor (Top) and sensor location 
on the breast of a volunteer for monitoring his breathing (Bottom). 
Devices for monitoring finger movement.  The first 
prototype of such type of medical devices is now under 
development. The prototype uses the BL-film as a tenzo-
resistive diaphragm. The fabricated prototype is capable of 
measuring a very delicate finger movement as an easily 
controlled electrical signal. Its design also permits tracking 
of the large-scale finger movement.  
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
5,6
5,7
5,8
5,9
6,0
 
 
Resistance (kΩ)
Time (sec)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
1
0
4
8
12
4
 
 
Resistance variations (Ω)
Time (sec)
F = 62 pulses/min
 
Figure 6.  Resistance response to the breathing of a volunteer; red arrows 
correspond to holding up breathing. 
IV. 
SUMMARY 
It was shown that electrical resistance of flexible sensors 
with the active layer of tenzo-resistive organic metal (ET)2I3 
linearly and reversibly depends on deformation resulted from 
the body movements. 
The preliminary data display that the polycarbonate films 
metallized with β-(ET)2I3 show considerable promise as 
flexible strain/pressure gages for use in detecting body 
movements. Therefore this type of lightweight sensors is 
able to take the place of conventional metal-based strain and 
pressure gages in monitoring biomedical high-tech.  
 
Tenzo-resistive  
BL-film  
Plastic U-shape 
plate 
Electrical 
connections 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We 
acknowledge 
the 
support 
from 
European 
Community's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-
2013) under grant agreement n° 212311 of the ONE-P 
project, DGI, Spain (contracts CTQ2006-06333/BQU and 
CTQ2010-195011/BQU), DGR, Catalunya (grant 2009SGR-
00516). Authors thank the CIBER-BBN, an initiative funded 
by the VI National R&D&i Plan 2008-2011, Iniciativa 
Ingenio 2010, Consolider Program, CIBER Actions and 
financed by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III with assistance 
from the European Regional Development Fund. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Y. Yurish, N. V. Kirinaki, and I. L. Myshkin, “World 
Sensors and MEMS Markets: Analysis and Trends”, Sensors 
& Traducers Magazine (S&T e-Digest), vol. 62, Issue 12, pp. 
456-461, 2005.  
[2] F. Axisa, P. M. Schmitt, C. Gehin, G. Delhomme, E. 
McAdams and A. Dittmar, “Flexible technologies and smart 
clothing for citizen medicine, home healthcare and disease 
prevention”, IEEE Transactions on Information Technology 
in Biomedicine,  vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 325-336, 2005.  
[3] B. Adhikari, S. Majumdar, “Polymers in sensor applications”, 
Progress in Polymer Science, vol. 29, pp. 699-766, 2004. 
[4] E. Laukhina, R. Pfattner, L. R. Ferreras, S. Galli, M. Mas-
Torrent, N. Masciocchi, V. Laukhin, C. Rovira, and J. 
Veciana, “Ultrasensitive Piezoresistive All-Organic Flexible 
Thin films”, Adv. Mater., vol. 22, pp. 977-991, 2010. 
[5] E. Laukhina,  R. Pfattner,  M. Mas-Torrent, C. Rovira, J. 
Veciana,  Vladimir Laukhin, “Film-based Sensors with 
Elastic-textile 
belt 
153
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

Piezoresistive Molecular Conductors as Active Components: 
Strain Damage and Thermal Regeneration”, Sensors & 
Transducers Journal, , vol. 10, Special Issue, February, pp. 1-
12, 2011.  
[6] L. R. Ferreras, R. Pfattner, M. Mas-Torrent, E. Laukhina, L. 
López, V. Laukhin, C. Rovira, J. Veciana J. “Highly 
piezoresistive textiles based on a soft conducting charge 
transfer salt”, Mater. Chem., vol. 21, pp. 637- 641, 2011. 
[7] V. Laukhin, I. Sánchez, A. Moya, E. Laukhina, R. Martin, F. 
Ussa, C. Rovira, A. Guimera, R. Villa,  J. Aguiló, J.-C. Pastor, 
J. Veciana, “Prototype for Noninvasive IOP Monitoring with 
a Nanostructured Polymeric Sensor Embeded in a Contact 
Lens”, Transducers & Sensors, 2010, to be published. 
[8] V. Laukhin, C. Rovira, E. Laukhina, J. Veciana, M. Mas-
Torrent, A. Quimera Brunet, J. Aguiló Llobet, R. Villa Sanz,  
J. C. Pastor, and F. Ussa, Truncated contact lens for use in 
telemetry system, has truncation plane provided parallel to 
base of lens, and centrally placed polymer nanocomposite 
material joined to perimeter of truncated zone, Patent: 
ES2330405-A1; WO2009147277-A1.   
[9] E. E. Laukhina, V. A. Merzhanov, S. I. Pesotskii, A. G. 
Khomenko, E. B. Yagubskii, J. Ulanski, M. Krysezewski, J. 
and K. Jeszke, “Superconductivity in reticulate doped 
polycarbonate films containing (BEDT-TTF)2I3”, Synth. Met., 
vol 70, pp. 797-800, 1995. 
 
 
 
154
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

