Spatially-Resolved Determination of Transverse Wave Speed in Tissue Phantoms
Using High-Frequent Ultrasound
Lukas Timmermann, Mario Wolf, Andr´e Juhrig,
Carmen Wolf, Katharina Rath and Elfgard K¨uhnicke
Technical University Dresden
Solid State Electronics Laboratories
Mommsenstr. 15, 01069 Dresden
Email: lukas.timmermann@tu-dresden.de
Felix Krujatz
Technical University Dresden
Institute of Natural Materials Technology
Bergstr. 120, 01069 Dresden
Email: felix.krujatz@tu-dresden.de
Abstract—Online temperature measurement in biological tissue
would improve the hyperthermia therapy. This contribution
presents a novel method for measuring the shear wave speed
in biological tissue with very small echo signal amplitudes from
scattering particles. Since the tissue’s properties change during
heating, it is not possible to average measures taken over a long
time period to improve Signal-to-Noise-Ratio (SNR). The novel
method relies on evaluating the signal’s energy as a function of
time shifted signals instead of using a cross correlation. For repro-
ducible experiments, a tissue phantom made of polyacrylamide
and algae is used.
Keywords–Ultrasound; Shear Wave Velocity; Scattering Parti-
cles; Tissue Phantom.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In cancer therapy, malicious tissue can be destructed non-
invasively using hyperthermia treatment. To be sure that the
destruction is complete, it is important that the whole cancer as
well as a security zone reaches a temperature of at least 56 ◦C
[1]. Due to the lack of non-invasive temperature monitoring,
the used power and duration of heating is currently selected
by the doctor based on his knowledge and experience. Though
this method works pretty well, it is very fault-prone if there is
a large blood vessel located near the tissue to be destructed.
In this case, the vessel may transfer the induced heat away
from the tumor, which makes it very difﬁcult to have a good
balance between complete destruction of malicious tissue and
unintended impairment of surrounding tissue.
Non-invasive, locally resolved online monitoring of the
tissue temperature would improve the success of the hy-
perthermia therapy. Since tissue has very similar acoustic
properties compared to water, its longitudinal sound speed cL
is strongly dependent on temperature [2]. The locally resolved
temperature measurement is introduced in [3]. However, the
investigations in [4] showed that cL does not only depend
on temperature, but also on the tissue’s denaturation state.
Contrary, the shear wave speed cS has low sensitivity on
temperature, but is sensitive to tissue modiﬁcation. To be able
to measure temperature change and denaturation separately, it
is necessary to know both cL and cS, spatially and temporally
resolved.
This contribution deals with robust measurement of cS in
tissue. Section II describes the experimental setup and used
materials. The experimental results are presented in Section
III. Since the ultrasound signals backscattered by the tissue’s
structure are very small, it is indispensable to improve the
SNR, which is described in Section IV. Finally, Section V
provides a conclusion and an outlook of future research.
II.
DESCRIPTION OF EXPERIMENTS
A. Tissue phantoms
To ensure reproducibility, instead of real biological tis-
sue we are using tissue phantoms made of 5 % polyacry-
lamide gel (26.9 % acrylamide, 1.4 % bisacrylamide, 71.7 %
water as well as ammonium persulfate and N,N,N’,N’-tetra-
methylethylenediamine to start polymerization). The gel is
doped with Chlorella Vulgaris, single-celled green algae that
act as scatter particles. This green alga is a good choice,
because it behaves like a real cell, but also is very robust and
easy to grow.
B. Measurement setup
Transducer
Tissue phantom
Shaker
Water
z
Figure 1. Setup for measuring shear wave speed cS.
The measurement setup consists of the tissue phantom
described in Section II-A, an ultrasound transducer and a
shaker, which is in contact with the phantom (Figure 1). For
better wave propagation, the transducer and the tissue phantom
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

are stored in water. The oscillation generated by the shaker
is coupled into the phantom, where a shear wave starts to
propagate. This leads to a movement of scattering particles,
such as algae cells, inside the phantom. Since the shear wave
velocity is in the range of a few meter per second only, it
is possible to observe the cells’ movement using longitudinal
ultrasound waves with a velocity of cL ≈ 1500 m/s and high
pulse repetition rates. The shear wave speed cS is calculated
from the observed cell movement in various depths inside the
phantom. The positions are selected windowing the ultrasound
signal.
To investigate shear wave propagation at different tempera-
tures and degrees of denaturation, the water may be heated by a
thermostat. Due to the outgasing of the water, and thus rising
air bubbles, the transducer is located beneath the phantom.
This ensures that no gas bubbles accumulate in front of the
transducer, which would disturb the measurement.
III.
MEASUREMENT RESULTS
Using several A-scans, it is possible to observe the shear
wave. Figure 2 shows a M-Mode scan of the tissue’s move-
ment. It can be clearly seen that the echoes from the tissue
phantom’s surface show the movement induced by the shear
wave. Using the time difference of two matching oscillation
states from top and bottom surface (vertical lines in Figure
2) and the sample’s thickness, the shear wave speed can be
calculated. In the presented experiment, this yields to a mean
speed of cS ≈ 7.8 m/s. This value also matches values from
literature, as shown in [5].
Figure 2. M-Mode image of ultrasound signals reﬂected by the tissue
phantom.
The oscillation of the surfaces can be recovered using a
correlation analysis. The maxima of the windowed signal’s
cross correlation give the surface’s position at the arrival time
of the signal. This is shown in Figure 3. Fitting a sinus to
these data gives information about the current oscillation state,
especially the phase.
Figure 3. Positions of the cross correlation’s maxima of echoes from tissue’s
bottom surface (solid line) and sinus ﬁt to the data (dotted line).
Unfortunately, this method is only applicable for signals
with a good SNR. As shown in Figure 2, this condition is only
met on large interfaces with sufﬁcient impedance difference.
Since the cell’s echo amplitude is only a little bit bigger as
the noise amplitude, the cross correlation function is not able
to distinguish between signal part and noise and thus provides
wrong results. The SNR may be improved by increasing the
number of measured cycles with at least one shear wave period
and then averaging over these signals. However, the measure
time would then increase, which in practice is not acceptable.
IV.
EVALUATION OF SIGNALS WITH LOW SNR
In contrast to the cross correlation of the signals, in this
section, the signal’s energy as a function of time shifted signals
will be evaluated. If several similar signals are superimposed,
the resulting signal energy will increase while the resulting
noise energy decreases. However, this will only work, if both
transducer and reﬂector stay at a constant position over time.
Figure 4. M-Mode picture of ultrasound signals reﬂected from the phantom’s
bottom surface.
The signals shown in Figure 4, which is a detail of
Figure 2, will not sum up constructively on superimposing
along measure duration, because the surface’s position does
change. To improve SNR as described above, the signals will
need to be time-shifted with a time resulting from the shaker’s
oscillation yS. The oscillation can be expressed by
yS(t, ϕ) = aSsin(ωSt + ϕ)
(1)
where ωS is the known shaker’s angular frequency. The am-
plitude aS depends on the phantom’s damping and the travel
time of the shear wave, however, it may be estimated using the
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

surface’s echoes. The time-shift tsh used to align the signals
is described in (2).
tsh(ta, ϕ) = aS
cL
sin(ωSta + ϕ)
(2)
The time ta is the arrival time of the ultrasound pulse. So, the
single parameter left to determine is ϕ, which may be varied.
Figure 5. Signal energy as a function of phase shift ϕ. The maximum marks
the current phase ϕm at time ta. For this example the best phase is
ϕm = 1.413 rad
Figure 5 shows the calculated phase dependent signal
energy using (2) for the signals shown in Figure 4. The
maximum in the signal energy indicates the phase ϕm, where
the model described by (1) maps the oscillation in the chosen
window best.
Figure 6. Time-shifted signals from Figure 4 using the phase determined
with signal energy method.
The presented method can be tested by shifting the echo
signals with the determined phase. This in done in Figure 6.
If the model and the determined phase are correct, the ﬁgure
should show all echo signals at the same travel time displaying
horizontal lines. Apparently, this works pretty well in the
presented example, although the form of the echo signals varies
depending on oscillation state.
Figure 7. Time-shifted signals from Figure 4 using phase from cross
correlation.
For veriﬁcation, the signal shift shown in Figure 6 is
also done with the phase determined by the cross correlation
method introduced in Section III and is shown in Figure 7.
Since the determined phases (ϕc = 1.411 rad and ϕm =
1.413 rad from cross correlation method and signal energy
method, respectively) are almost equal, it is consistent that
Figures 6 and 7 almost show the same pattern.
When windowing the ultrasound signals, it is possible to
determine the shear wave’s phase at different depths z. This
allows a spatially resolved identiﬁcation of the shear wave’s
speed cS with both methods, but for a low SNR the cross
correlation method is not applicable.
V.
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
The knowledge of the shear wave’s speed may allow to
distinguish between the effects of denaturation and temperature
change on the longitudinal wave speed cL. This would improve
the non-invasive temperature monitoring and thus enhance
quality of hyperthermia therapy.
Due to its slow propagation speed in tissue, shear waves
may be observed using high frequent longitudinal ultrasound
waves. This contribution proposes a method to determine the
shear wave’s propagation speed spatially resolved in biological
tissue. For better reproducibility, we use a tissue phantom made
of polyacrylamide and algae. The shear waves are generated
using an external shaker.
Since the shear wave causes moving reﬂectors, it is not
possible to improve the signal quality by recording the same
scene multiple times and then averaging to reduce noise. The
presented novel method evaluates the energy of superimposed
time-shifted signals and is capable to deal with signals that
have a low SNR. A comparison with a method using the
cross correlation of signals from a big interface conﬁrmed
the functionality and accuracy of the presented approach.
Currently, we are improving the novel method’s robustness to
work with signals that have a very poor SNR, such as echoes
from moving scattering particles.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Deutsche For-
schungsgemeinschaft (DFG) for ﬁnancial support in project
260366138.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Kormann, D. Ockert, and A. Bunk, “Hochfrequenz-Thermoablation
bei Lebertumoren,” Zentralblatt f¨ur Chirurgie, vol. 126, no. 8, 2001, pp.
576–585.
[2]
W. Marczak, “Water as a standard in the measurements of speed of sound
in liquids,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 102,
no. 5, Nov. 1997, pp. 2776–2779.
[3]
M. Wolf et al., “Temperature monitoring in tissue phantoms via spatially
resolved measurement of longitudinal wave speed,” SENSORDEVICES,
2018.
[4]
G. Shin and J. Helfmann, “Die Temperaturabh¨anginkeit der Ultra-
schallgeschwingdigkeit in biologischen Medien,” Shaker-Verlag, 1997.
[5]
L. Sandrin et al., “Shear elasticity probe for soft tissues with 1-d
transient elastography,” IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics
and Frequency Control, vol. 49, no. 4, Apr. 2002, pp. 436–446.
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

