Modeling and Simulation of Various kinds of Blockage in Carotid Artery 
 
Kshitij Shakya , Shubhajit  Roy Chowdhury 
Biomedical Systems Laboratory, MANAS Group 
School of Computing and Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Mandi, 
Mandi, India 
Email: d17016@students.iitmandi.ac.in, src@iitmandi.ac.in 
 
 
 
Abstract — This paper focuses on the blood flow in blood 
vessels and the obstruction faced by it due to plaque which gets 
accumulated due to deposition of fat and cholesterol on the side 
walls of the blood vessels. The current research analyses the 
blood velocity profile and the changes in pressure. The 
deposition of plaque from initial level to complete blockage of 
the artery and its consequence on blood flow is also presented 
in this article. A three dimensional model of a blood vessel 
along with the deposition of plaque on it has been developed 
and simulated in Comsol Multiphysics 5.3. This study assumes 
that the fluid is non-Newtonian, viscous and compressible. 
Fluid flow is laminar and the arterial wall is elastic. Properties 
of blood vessel, fat and blood were assigned to the materials of 
geometry used for simulation. The simulation studies show the 
hemispherical blockages of carotid artery are really dangerous 
and may be a cause of concern for imminent ischemic 
cerebrovascular accident or stroke. 
Keywords- COMSOL Multiphysics; blood vessel; Spherical 
and 
hemispherical 
blockages; 
carotid 
 
arterydisease, 
computational fluid dynamics. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
      Analysis of flow conditions in the blood vessel is very 
important to avoid various cardiovascular and cerebrovascular 
diseases. One of the major arteries, named carotid artery, is 
often studied for prognosticating imminent cardiovascular and 
cerebrovascular disorders. The carotid artery disease (CAD) is 
characterized by the deposition of fat and cholesterol which 
takes the form of a plaque. It keeps on depositing on the walls 
of blood vessel until it completely blocks the blood vessel. 
The severe cases result in heart attacks or even cardiac arrest 
or cerebral ischemic attack. Early detection of this disease is 
very important. 
      Clinical symptoms of carotid artery disease may manifest 
themselves as stroke or transient ischemic attack [1]. Most 
cases of carotid artery stenosis are caused by atherosclerotic 
plaque as part of generalized atherosclerotic disease. Carotid 
artery stenting (CAS) has been initially used as an alternative 
treatment option in patients not eligible for surgery [6]. 
Numerous non-randomized and some randomized studies 
have assessed the safety and efficacy of CAS in so-called high 
risk patients. It is hard to reconcile the modest number of 
patients who are at increased 10-year risk by the Framingham 
cardio-vascular (CV) risk model with the observation that the 
lifetime risk of coronary artery disease (CAD) starting at age 
40 years is 49% for men and 32% for women [3]. Several 
studies have shown that plaque presence is associated with 
systolic blood pressure, use of tobacco, the total to high-
density lipoprotein cholesterol ratio, and body-mass index or 
weight [4]. Carotid plaque is associated with traditional and 
non-traditional CV risk factors. Several studies have shown 
that carotid plaque, either alone or combined with other 
screening tests and information from the patient’s history, 
predicts the presence of cardiac ischemia and angiographic 
CAD [2]. 
      The current research analyses the various blood flow 
velocities, lateral minimum and maximum velocity and also 
the pressure experienced by the arterial wall and the structure 
of plaque causing obstruction. Our aim is to compare the 
scenarios between a healthy artery and the artery with disease 
describing the changes in the blood flow, plaque formation, 
blood flow velocity and pressure. This computer simulated 
model is helpful in analysing the possibility of occurrence of 
CAD and learning the behaviour and consequences of the 
plaque getting deposited regularly. The model also simulates 
the formation and growth of the plaque and observes the 
changes in blood flow which is faster, simpler and safer 
before doing the treatment. 
      This paper is organized as follows: Section II focuses on 
the modeling of the carotid artery, Section III is about results 
and their discussion and, lastly, Section IV concludes the 
paper. 
II. 
MODELING OF CAROTID ARTERY 
      In the current work Comsol Multiphysics® has been 
used to model the geometry of the artery and do the desired 
simulations. A cylindrical shaped structure of 6 mm radius 
and 50 mm length has been taken to model the artery. To 
design two different types of blockages, a sphere with 3 mm 
radius was embedded on the upper wall of the artery and, in 
the second case, two hemispherical chords like structure 
were embedded on the upper and lower wall of the artery. 
For simulation of the blood flow inside the artery, it was 
assumed to have a3D laminar flow. For studying the effect 
of blood flow on the walls of the carotid artery, solid 
mechanics accompanied by a stationary study solver have 
been used. The material for the blood has been assumed to 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

be non-Newtonian, viscous, and compressible and 
walls have been assumed to be elastic. The blood flow is 
governed by the continuity equation and Navier
equation. 
      The model contains three domains, one form
cylinder containing the walls of the artery, 
the space where blood flows and the third is for the fat or 
cholesterol structure forming the plaque.
TABLE I.  
MATERIAL PROPERTIES USED FOR SIMULATION
Properties 
Blood  
Artery 
Density (Kg/m3) 
1060 
1.06e3
Dynamic Viscosity(Pa.s) 
0.005 
- 
Young’s modulas (MPa) 
- 
2 
Poisson’s ratio 
- 
0.49 
 
      The flow under laminar flow physics 
blood as a non-Newtonian fluid with no slip boundary 
condition. Two boundaries for inlet and outlet flow have 
been selected with inlet velocity of 0.15m/s and outlet 
pressure of 0 atm. 
     Two types of cholesterol deposits are modelled against 
the artery wall: one is sphere shaped and 
hemispherical type whose parameters used for simulations
are shown in Table I. A 3D shape of a cylindrical 
vessel is shown in Figure 1 with cross section and 
longitudinal view.  
Figure 1. Cross section and longitudinal view of two different types of 
blockage 
      The outer cylinder in the above images can be viewed as 
blood vessel, the spherical and two hemispherical 
geometries as the fat deposit and the space inside the 
cylinder as the channel for blood flow. The initial radi
sphere and hemispheres were 3 mm and 5
and this was incremented to increase the range of blockage.
      The thickness of the artery has been taken as
8 mm radius and 60 mm length. The inlet blood flow 
velocity has been taken as 0.15 m/s throughout the 
simulation. A parametric sweep has been
viscous, and compressible and the artery 
walls have been assumed to be elastic. The blood flow is 
governed by the continuity equation and Navier-Stokes 
The model contains three domains, one forms the 
tery, the second forms 
the space where blood flows and the third is for the fat or 
cholesterol structure forming the plaque. 
SED FOR SIMULATION 
Artery  
Fat deposit 
1.06e3 
1050 
 
- 
20 
0.11 
The flow under laminar flow physics was modelled for 
Newtonian fluid with no slip boundary 
condition. Two boundaries for inlet and outlet flow have 
ted with inlet velocity of 0.15m/s and outlet 
Two types of cholesterol deposits are modelled against 
one is sphere shaped and the other is 
parameters used for simulations 
A 3D shape of a cylindrical blood 
with cross section and 
 
 
Cross section and longitudinal view of two different types of 
e images can be viewed as 
blood vessel, the spherical and two hemispherical 
geometries as the fat deposit and the space inside the 
cylinder as the channel for blood flow. The initial radius or 
mm and 5 mm, respectively 
was incremented to increase the range of blockage. 
the artery has been taken as 1 mm with 
mm radius and 60 mm length. The inlet blood flow 
velocity has been taken as 0.15 m/s throughout the 
simulation. A parametric sweep has been applied to the 
radius of the sphere and hemisphere to model the variations 
in fat deposit and hence finding the changes in the blood 
flow and pressure. 
      A finite element mesh has been created for the described 
geometry with free tetrahedral and fluid
for the blood flow channel and free tetrahedral and general 
physics for the remaining geometry with 
vertex elements being 29, 
being 572, the number of boundary elements being 7042 
and number of elements being 49038
 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIO
      The artery with no blockage is modeled first and it
velocity profile is shown in F
spherical blockage is modeled next and shown in Figure 3. 
In Figure 3, the initial blockage sp
been shown. Figure 4 depicts spherical blockage of artery of 
6 mm radius.  
 
Figure 2. Artery with no blockage
Figure 3. Spherical blockage of 3mm radius
    
    In Figures 2, 3 and 4, the velocity
points is indicated by the colour code with red having the 
highest value and blue having the lowest.
 
Figure 4. Sphere blockage of 6mm radius
radius of the sphere and hemisphere to model the variations 
in fat deposit and hence finding the changes in the blood 
A finite element mesh has been created for the described 
geometry with free tetrahedral and fluid dynamics physics 
for the blood flow channel and free tetrahedral and general 
physics for the remaining geometry with the number of 
 the number of edge elements 
number of boundary elements being 7042 
ements being 49038. 
ESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The artery with no blockage is modeled first and its 
velocity profile is shown in Figure 2. The artery with the 
e is modeled next and shown in Figure 3. 
igure 3, the initial blockage sphere of 3 mm radius has 
been shown. Figure 4 depicts spherical blockage of artery of 
 
. Artery with no blockage  
 
. Spherical blockage of 3mm radius 
the velocity of blood at different 
indicated by the colour code with red having the 
highest value and blue having the lowest. 
 
. Sphere blockage of 6mm radius 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure 5.Cross section view of 3mm spherical blockage
      The pressure experienced by the blockage in both 
above are shown in Figures 6 and 7 below.
 
Figure 6. Pressure experienced by blockage due 3mm to blood flow
 
Figure 7. Pressure experienced by the 6mm spherical blockage
      Figures 6 and 7 show the pressure distribution on the 
spherical blockage and the colour pattern shows that
smaller sphere experiences less pressure than the bigger one 
having 9.35 Pa and 427.5 Pa, respectively.
      Next, simulations are repeated for the he
blockage. The radii of the blockages have also been varied 
to study the velocity profile of the blood.
has been taken as 5 mm and the final 9 mm. Fi
velocity profiles of the carotid artery with hemispherical 
blockages of radius 5 mm. Figure 9 shows the velocity 
profile of carotid artery with hemispherical blockages of 
radius 9mm. Figures 10 and 11 show 
profiles of carotid artery with hemispherical blockages 
radius 5 mm and 9 mm, respectively.  
 
Figure 8.Artery with two hemispherical blockages with big gap
 
tion view of 3mm spherical blockage 
the blockage in both cases 
igures 6 and 7 below. 
 
Pressure experienced by blockage due 3mm to blood flow 
 
Pressure experienced by the 6mm spherical blockage 
the pressure distribution on the 
and the colour pattern shows that the 
less pressure than the bigger one 
respectively. 
Next, simulations are repeated for the hemispherical 
of the blockages have also been varied 
to study the velocity profile of the blood. The initial radius 
the final 9 mm. Figure 8 depicts 
carotid artery with hemispherical 
mm. Figure 9 shows the velocity 
profile of carotid artery with hemispherical blockages of 
 the blood pressure 
tid artery with hemispherical blockages 
 
.Artery with two hemispherical blockages with big gap 
Figure 9. Artery with two hemispherical blockages with narrow 
Figure 10.Pressure profiles of hemispherical blockage with narrow gap
      In the previous paragraph
through the carotid artery under various conditions. Starting 
from the point where there is no bl
velocity is uniform throughout the artery. In the midway
is highest and at the walls it is lowest. This profile signifies 
a healthy artery. 
      Moving to the spherical blockage artery
velocity just beneath the 
decreases. The artery with bigger sphere blockage in F
4 can be clearly seen to have decrease
density of red color.  Looking
fat content, it shows the increased pressure in
of flow and decreased on the other side.
      The comparison between the healthy artery
spherical blockage artery and two hemispherical blockage 
artery is done below on the basis of pressure experienced
the side walls and velocity. 
the side wall of the artery to measure pressure for every 
increment in the blockage. For measuring velocity
at the bottom of the artery has been marked.  
shows the velocity measured for different radii of t
spherical blockage. Table 2 shows the velocity of blood 
flow against changing different radii of 
 
TABLE II.  
VELOCITY MEASURED FOR
Radius of sphere (mm) 
3 
3.5 
4 
4.5 
5 
5.5 
 
. Artery with two hemispherical blockages with narrow gap 
 
 
.Pressure profiles of hemispherical blockage with narrow gap 
us paragraph, we have seen blood flow 
the carotid artery under various conditions. Starting 
from the point where there is no blockage, we see that the 
velocity is uniform throughout the artery. In the midway, it 
is highest and at the walls it is lowest. This profile signifies 
Moving to the spherical blockage artery, we see that the 
 sphere increases and then 
with bigger sphere blockage in Figure 
4 can be clearly seen to have decreased its velocity by the 
density of red color.  Looking at the pressure profile of the 
it shows the increased pressure in the direction 
of flow and decreased on the other side. 
ison between the healthy artery, the 
spherical blockage artery and two hemispherical blockage 
artery is done below on the basis of pressure experienced at 
 For this, a point is marked on 
the side wall of the artery to measure pressure for every 
increment in the blockage. For measuring velocity, a point 
at the bottom of the artery has been marked.  Figure 13 
shows the velocity measured for different radii of the 
Table 2 shows the velocity of blood 
flow against changing different radii of the sphere. 
ELOCITY MEASURED FOR SPHERICAL BLOCKAGE 
Velocity of blood(m/s) 
0.182 
0.256 
0.393 
0.802 
1.521 
3.868 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 11.Velocity changes for spherical blockage 
 
      Figure 12 depicts the velocity measured at different radii 
of two hemispherical blockages. Table 3 depicts the velocity 
of blood flow in the artery for different radii of hemisphere 
in hemispherical blockage. 
 
TABLE III.  
VELOCITY MEASUREMENT FOR HEMISPHERICAL 
BLOCKAGES 
Radius of hemisphere(mm) 
Velocity of blood(m/s) 
4 
0.35 
5 
0.39 
6 
0.47 
7 
0.57 
8 
0.63 
9 
0 
 
 
 
Figure 12.Velocity changes for hemispherical blockage 
 
      The graph is plotted next to visualize the above table 
values and shows one peculiar thing, after raising, this graph 
suddenly drops to zero. It is due to the fact that here both the 
hemispheres have touched each other and at that point blood 
doesn’t flow anymore but from the side ways. This sets up a 
perfect condition for ischemic cerebrovascular accident or 
stroke. Table 4 shows the pressure experienced by the artery 
wall due to spherical blockage. Given below is the table for 
pressure on side walls against radius of sphere (Table 4). 
 
TABLE IV.  
PRESSURE ON ARTERY WALL DUE TO SPHERICAL BLOCKAGE 
Radius of sphere(mm) 
Pressure(Pa) 
3 
3.58 
3.5 
3.90 
4 
4.39 
4.5 
5.10 
5 
6.36 
5.5 
8.71 
6 
13.09 
 
 
 
Figure 13. Pressure on artery wall due to spherical blockage 
 
      Figure 13 shows the variation of pressure on the arterial 
wall due to spherical blockage. The graph indicates an   
exponential rise of the pressure on the side walls. Table 5 
shows the pressure experienced by the artery wall due to 
hemispherical blockage. 
 
TABLE V.  
PRESSURE ON ARTERY WALL DUE TO HEMISPHERICAL 
BLOCKAGE 
Radius of sphere(mm) 
Pressure(Pa) 
4 
3.74 
5 
4.04 
6 
4.82 
7 
7.29 
8 
17.59 
9 
96.91 
 
      Figure 14 shows the variation of pressure on the atrial 
wall due to the hemispherical blockage. Again, we find an 
exponential increase of pressure on the side wall of the 
artery. This graph shows an abrupt reading when the radius 
of hemispheres reaches 9 mm. This is the point where both 
hemispheres almost touch each other, as shown in Figure 9. 
The side wall pressure of the healthy artery is found to be 
3.13 Pa. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 14. Pressure experienced by artery wall due to hemispherical 
blockage 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
      In this paper, the blood flow in the blood vessels with 
different shapes and sizes of blockages in the carotid artery 
has been studies. The velocity and pressure of blood have 
been studied in each case. While comparing the two types of 
blockages, we see that one with spherical blockage rises 
exponentially and the other one shows an abrupt rise when 
the fat covers most of the cross section of the artery. 
Clearly, this gives us the intuitive idea that the 
hemispherical blockage from both walls is very dangerous. 
Also, another point that can be learned is that when the 
blockage is small there is not much pressure on the walls, 
but since it increases exponentially it should be detected at 
early stage, because as it keeps on accumulating it can be 
proved fatal and might even lead to burst of the artery. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. 
Blazek, 
“Computational 
fluid 
dynamics: 
Principles 
and 
applications”, Elsevier, ISBN 0 08 04 3009 0, 2001. 
[2] B. Radic, “Diagnosis and Treatment of Carotid Artery Stenosis”, J 
Neurol Stroke 7(3): 00238, 2017. DOI: 10.15406/jnsk.2017.07.00238. 
[3] J.T. Salonen, R. Salonen, “Ultrasonographically assessed carotid 
morphology and the risk of coronary heart disease. Arterioscler”, 
Thromb 1991; 11:1245-49. 
[4] G.B. Mancini, B. Dahlof, J.  Diez, “Surrogate markers for 
cardiovascular disease: structural markers”, Circulation 2004; 109: 
IV22–IV30. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

