Tactile Handle for an Instrumented Cane
Andr´es Trujillo-Le´on, Fernando Vidal-Verd´u
Departamento de Electr´onica, Universidad de M´alaga
Instituto de Investigaci´on Biom´edica de M´alaga (IBIMA)
M´alaga, Spain
{atrujilloleon,fvidal}@uma.es
Ragou Ady, Wael Bachta
Sorbonne Universit´es, UPMC Univ. Paris 06
CNRS UMR7222, INSERM U1150
Paris, France
{ragou.ady,wael.bachta}@upmc.fr
Abstract—Tactile sensors are useful input devices to implement
human machine interfaces in areas such as rehabilitation or
assistance. They can prevent damage from accidents or bad usage,
and also provide rich information to infer human behavior from
the pressure distribution at the contact interface. This paper
introduces an instrumented cane handle equipped with a tactile
sensor. The electronics devoted to data acquisition, pre-processing
and communication is described. Furthermore, results from tests
with different users are shown to illustrate how the information
provided by the tactile sensor is related to the gait and can be
exploited for research or as control input in an active cane.
Keywords–tactile sensors; rehabilitation; gait assistance.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Population aging is a major concern in Western Societies.
The increase in life expectancy and the low birth rate make that
average age increases. Societies get older and this is changing
the way of living [1]. Moreover, challenges arise to extend the
autonomy of people as much as possible. This is mandatory
since there will not be enough young people to take care of the
elder, and it is obviously desirable to increase the quality of life
and self-esteem. Besides of progresses in medicine that will
heal and preserve our bodies, robotics and smart systems can
be a great source of assistive devices that provide solutions to
the new needs. Assistive robots or devices should be designed
with a ﬁrst restriction in mind: safety. Human robot interaction
is a broader ﬁeld of interest and research that shares this
concern.
Tactile sensors or artiﬁcial skins have implemented a
way to protect humans against accidental damage caused by
machines, and they are also a mean to implement interaction
between robots and humans. However, tactile sensors can
play a more advanced role in implementing a human-assistive
device interface. This can be done by taking advantage of the
fact that tactile sensors are arrays and they provide information
not only from the aggregated output but also from its spatial
distribution [2]. This is done in manipulation with robotic
hands or grippers, where the tactile moments are computed
to obtain information like contact size and shape, or contact
location [3]. Similar information from the contact between the
human and the machine can be exploited to build the interface.
For instance, tactile information is used in [4] to implement a
device that aims a natural and intuitive driving of a wheelchair
or trolley. Another assistive device that targets the issue of
mobility in old populations is an active or smart cane [5]. It is
preferable to a wheelchair as long as possible, since the user
keeps more active. Tactile sensors can be used in this context
in two senses. First, they are a mean to obtain knowledge
about the force distribution on the handle, so they can provide
information about how the cane contributes to the balance in
the gait process. Second, similarly to the usage pointed out in
[4], they can work as an interface to infer the user intention
and help to design intuitive and friendly assistive canes.
This paper intends to show that it is certainly possible to
get useful information for these purposes from a tactile sensor.
Speciﬁcally, a simple tactile sensor was built with an array of
commercial force sensing resistors [6]. Then, it is exploited
to ﬁnd which relevant data can be extracted during its use as
a cane handle. The obtained results conﬁrm that the sensor
provides information about two basic parameters involved in
the gait process: the load force on the cane when the user
leans on it and the orientation of the cane shaft. Therefore, the
potential use of tactile sensors in these assistive devices, as for
example the instrumented cane shown in [7], is proved.
The structure of this paper is the following. In Section II,
the developed device is introduced. Firstly, the tactile handle
is described. Then the electronics conditioning for the latter is
covered. In Section III, the experiments, the materials involved
in them as well as the analysis of the extracted data are
detailed. Section IV is dedicated to present and discuss the
obtained results. Finally, the paper is closed with Section V in
which the conclusions of this work are exposed.
II.
DEVELOPED DEVICE
This section describes the device this document focuses
on. Firstly, an introduction of the design of the tactile handle
is given. Secondly, the hardware in charge of the sensor
acquisition is described in detail.
A. Tactile handle
The shape of the developed handle intends to emulate a
’T’ cane handgrip. This kind of handles is specially suitable
for people who have suffered a loss of strength in their
hand. Figure 1 shows the physical implementation of the
handle. Commercial force sensing resistor (FSR) sensors from
Interlink Electronics [6] have been chosen as tactile sensing
units. Their output is less linear and sensitive if the sensors are
placed on a rough surface. Therefore, in order to have a good
performance, they must lie on a ﬂat surface [8]. This constraint
explains the square proﬁle of the handle. Five FSR sensors
have been placed on the upper, left and right faces of the
handle. Only three sensors have ﬁtted in the lower side since it
is where the cane shaft and the handle join. The eighteen tactels
have been interconnected forming a matrix of four rows by ﬁve
columns (Figure 2). Note that in the lower face, the number
of columns is reduced to three. The matrix conﬁguration is
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. Tactile handle implementation.
optimal since it minimizes the resources needed to address
and digitize the tactels.
Moreover, soft pads have been placed on the active area of
the FSR sensors to enhance the response by concentrating the
force. Finally, the whole structure is covered with a layer of
foam to make the grasp more comfortable.
Row 1
Row 2
Row 3
Row 4
Col. 1
Col. 2
Col. 3
Col. 4
Col. 5
Left 
side
Right 
side
Upper 
side
Lower 
side
Figure 2. Matrix of FSR sensors schematics.
B. Conditioning electronics
The acquisition board (Figure 4) is based on a PIC18F4680
from Microchip Electronics. This microcontroller possesses a
wide range of input/output interfaces and a considerable num-
ber of Analog-to-Digital (A/D) channels at an affordable price.
Figure 3 shows the circuit scheme. The columns of the FSR
matrix are wired to the A/D channels of the microcontroller
through a trans-impedance stage. On the other hand, the rows
are connected to analog switches controlled by generic digital
input/output ports of the PIC. These activate the switches in
order to ground the row that is going to be read and to connect
the others to a reference voltage (Vref). Note that the output of
the ampliﬁer for the chosen tactel can be calculated as shown:
Vouti,j = Vref

to the tactile handle, two more sensor are used. Firstly, an
inertial module unit (IMU) measures the yaw angle in the
walking direction, that is to say, the angle with respect to the
vertical in the sagittal plane. An Arduino Due board gathers the
data from the IMU. Secondly, a Mini45 Force/Torque sensor,
from ATI Industrial Automation, obtains the load force in the
cane shaft axis (Fz). The acquisition card that processes the
data from the Mini45 is the National Instruments USB-6211.
Fz
Yaw
Pressure
Figure 5. Parameters captured during the experiments.
The tactile handle acquisition board, the Arduino Due
and the USB-6211 are connected to a computer through an
USB hub. The computer synchronizes the capture of the three
sensors at a rate of 40Hz.
Tactile handle
Arduino Due
IMU
USB Hub
Mini45
Tactile handle 
conditioning
electronics
Figure 6. Experimental setup.
B. Experiments and analysis
Ten healthy subjects aged between 21 and 32 took part in
the tests. They wore a brace in one of their legs and a modiﬁed
sole in order to simulate walking impairment [9]. They were
naive about the experiment purpose. They were asked to use
the cane walking straight for 5.5m. Every subject repeated the
test four times.
As it was introduced in the previous section, the parameters
from the external sensors that have been analyzed are Fz and
the yaw angle (Figure 5). With respect to the tactile handle,
the pressure map (Figure 7) can be processed in several ways.
One of them consist in obtaining the center of mass (CoM)
of the tactile image. This parameter can be calculated either
taking into account the whole FSR matrix or just considering
the rows one by one. In the latter case, the CoM of one side
of the tactile handle is determined by (2).
CoMside =
P5
i=1 p

shifted vertically to ease the visual comparison. This way,
CoMu unit (mm) and scale must be ignored since they have
been altered. In addition, computing the tests mean requires
that all of them have the same number of samples. Thus,
they have been interpolated and, consequently, the time scale
deformed. That is the reason why there are no values in the
time axis. Lastly, the ﬁrst and last step have been removed
since they are a transient component and are not relevant in
the analysis of the steady gait.
−20
−10
0
10
20
time(s)
Yaw(º)
 
 
CoMu
Yaw
Figure 8. Yaw and CoMu for a representative subject.
The same happens if we look at the pair formed by Fz
and ¯Pu. Figure 9 shows the mean of these parameters for all
the tests carried out by the same subject as before. ¯Pu has been
pre-processed in the same way as CoMu to make the graphic
comparison easier.
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
10
time(s)
Fz(N)
 
 
Fz
MeanPressureu
Figure 9. Fz and ¯Pu for a representative subject. Note that the same as in
Figure 8 happens with time axis and, in this occasion, with the ¯Pu unit (V)
and scale.
The pattern in the latter ﬁgures repeats for every subject
in the experiments to a greater or lesser extent. Therefore, it
is certainly feasible to reach an estimation of the angle of the
orientation of the cane and the load force exerted on it based
on the data acquired by the tactile handle presented in Section
II.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
A device composed of a tactile handle and its conditioning
electronics has been presented. Experiments have been realized
in order to test it. According to the results analyzed in Section
IV, a tight coupling between two parameters involved in the
gait process and two parameters extracted from the tactile
handle has been found. These are, on the one hand, the load
force applied on the cane and the mean pressure on the upper
part of the handle and, on the other hand, the angle of the
orientation of the cane shaft and the center of mass of the
upper side of the handle.
The preliminary results show the operation and viability of
the tactile handle as a tool to monitor the assisted gait as well
as a sensor device in a smart or robotic active cane.
Future work could involve the implementation of a second
prototype with a miniaturised conditioning electronics. In it,
the data could be either transmitted by a wireless protocol as
Bluetooth or stored locally. Thus, wires would no longer be
necessary and the system would be more comfortable to use.
Another possible point to address could be the realization of
a more ergonomic handle. Finally, apart from the variables
shown in this work, the coupling between other parameters
could be studied.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partly accomplished within the laboratory of
excellence SMART supported by French state funds managed
by the ANR within the Investissements d’Avenir programme
ANR-11-IDEX-0004-02. It has been also partially funded by
the Spanish Government under contract TEC2012-38653, FPU
Program and European ERDF funds.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Demographic
change
and
work
in
Europe
,”
2010,
URL:
http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/sites/default/ﬁles/ef ﬁles/ewco/
surveyreports/EU0902019D/EU0902019D.pdf [accessed: MAY, 2015].
[2]
R. Dahiya, P. Mittendorfer, M. Valle, G. Cheng, and V. Lumelsky,
“Directions Toward Effective Utilization of Tactile Skin: A Review,”
Sensors Journal, IEEE, vol. 13, 2013, pp. 4121–4138, ISSN: 1530-437X.
[3]
A. Schmid, N. Gorges, D. Goger, and H. Worn, “Opening a door with
a humanoid robot using multi-sensory tactile feedback,” in Robotics and
Automation, 2008. ICRA 2008. IEEE International Conference on, May
2008, pp. 285–291.
[4]
A. Trujillo-Le´on and F. Vidal-Verd´u, “Driving Interface Based on Tactile
Sensors for Electric Wheelchairs or Trolleys,” Sensors, vol. 14(2), 2014,
pp. 2644–2662, ISSN: 1424-8220.
[5]
R. Ady, W. Bachta, and P. Bidaud, “Development and control of a one-
wheel telescopic active cane,” in Biomedical Robotics and Biomecha-
tronics (2014 5th IEEE RAS EMBS International Conference on, Aug.
2014, pp. 461–466.
[6]
“Interlink
Electronics.
FSR402 R⃝,”
2011,
URL:
http://www.
interlinkelectronics.com/FSR402.php [accessed: JUNE, 2015].
[7]
C. Perez, A. Oates, L. Hughey, and J. Fung, “Development of a
force-sensing cane instrumented within a treadmill-based virtual reality
locomotor system,” in Virtual Rehabilitation International Conference,
2009, June 2009, pp. 154–159.
[8]
F. Vidal-Verd´u, M. Barquero, J. Castellanos-Ramos, R. Navas-Gonz´alez,
J. S´anchez, J. Ser´on, and A. Garc´ıa-Cerezo, “Large Area Tactile Sensor
Patch Based on Commercial Force Sensors,” Sensors, vol. 11(5), 2011,
pp. 5489–5507, ISSN: 1424-8220.
[9]
M. Ackermann and W. Schiehlen, “Dynamic Analysis of Human Gait
Disorder and Metabolical Cost Estimation,” Archive of Applied Mechan-
ics, vol. 75, 2006, pp. 569–594, ISSN: 0939-1533.
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

