Collaborative Approach for Secure Packet Transfer in Wireless Sensor Networks 
 
Yenumula B. Reddy and Sanjeeve Kafley 
Grambling State University 
Grambling, LA 71245, USA 
ybreddy@gram.edu 
 
Rastko Selmic 
Louisiana Tech University 
Ruston, LA 71270, USA 
rselmic@latech.edu 
 
Abstract- Secure data transfer (SDT) in wireless networks is 
required with minimum overhead. The SDT was done 
historically through cryptography, authentication, and 
probability based approaches. Collaborative approach for 
trust-based packet transfer is new to the wireless sensor 
network research. In the proposed research, trust value of a 
node is continuously updated using Sporas formula and 
repeated trust calculations. The average of these two 
provides the trust value of a node. The suspicious node will 
be informed to the neighbor nodes. Further, the neighbor 
nodes calculate their own trust of a suspicious node using its 
trust value plus trust factor received from their neighbor. 
The cooperative and collaborative approaches eliminate the 
suspicious node from the path quickly and confidently. The 
results show that the new approach is better than simply 
using the cooperative way or collaborative approach using 
Sporas formula.  
Keywords: packet transfer, wireless sensor networks, 
collaborative approach, protocols, trust-based approach, 
resource. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Massive deployment of sensors in hostile areas 
including forests, biological and chemical fields is very 
common and requires secure communication. Replacement 
of failing sensors or adding sensors to cover the black 
holes is very common in such dangerous places. Since 
they are organized in an open environment, injecting of 
bad nodes to corrupt the transmission is possible. 
Therefore, a secure transmission model is required to 
avoid the transmission through corrupted node. Further, 
design of secure communication model between sensor 
nodes is very difficult. The traditional protocols use 
exchange and distribute the keys through cryptographic 
tools for trust evidence. The resource limitations in sensor 
networks obstruct the use of traditional tools including 
cryptographic 
models 
and 
protocols 
for 
secure 
communications. 
In sensor networks, the topology changes dynamically 
due to failure of sensors nodes. Further, sensing data and 
reporting data with limited communication distance 
requires cooperation of nodes to complete the task. The 
cooperation happens between the nodes only if they trust 
their neighbor to transfer the data. The trust management 
system helps to detect the node that is not behaving as 
expected in the path.  
The trust depends upon the predictable behavior of 
other nodes in the network and builds upon continuous 
positive behavior. Further, trust depends upon the degree 
of belief based upon the experience. Trust is subjective, 
non-transferable, 
time 
dependent, 
contextual, 
and 
unidirectional. Due to the simplicity and effectiveness of 
the trust and reputation based models researchers’ 
attention is diverted towards these models. 
The trust starts with sensing the behavior of the 
neighbor node. The misbehavior is dropping the packets. 
The packet dropping may be due to malicious attacks 
(influence of bad nodes or intruders) on the node or the 
node is a sink hole. The trust can be measured through 
repeated positive behavior of the node. Reputation is a tool 
to detect the good behavior of the neighboring node [1]. 
The node could be assigned a reputation value to detect the 
behavior and keep track of the next node (forward path) in 
the path. To prove the successive node in the path is 
trustworthy, the current node should maintain a table. The 
table must contain the number of packets received and 
transmitted from the successive node. Further, it matches 
the table by overhearing from the next node, which 
transmits the packets to its neighbor. All nodes in the path 
will follow this process. The table includes the number of 
transmitted packets and will be initialized to zero after a 
set time. The method is simple with minimum resource 
utilization and easy to maintain. The design of such simple 
and low cost secure model is very important and an open 
research area. 
Routing the packets in wireless sensor networks 
(WSN) is done by routing protocols. The routing 
procedure 
uses 
encryption, 
digital 
signature, 
and 
authentication. Further encryption and authentication 
limits the performance of nodes in WSNs. Encryption and 
authentication 
cannot 
prevent 
the 
malicious 
or 
misbehavior of the sensor nodes. After reviewing relevant 
sensor network models, we found that the trust-based 
model is a better model than the existing models. Since 
trust cannot be generated automatically, we use the 
verification of repeated data transfer in the successive 
node. The trust model detects the sinkholes, selective 
packet dropping, and malfunction of the node. 
Once the trust is established, it cannot be taken for 
granted for the rest of the sensor lifetime without repeated 
reevaluations. The trust relationship changes continuously 
due to sensor failures and malfunctions. Therefore, the 
328
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

trust relationships among the neighboring nodes are very 
important to keep track of the uncertainties. 
The remaining part of the paper discusses the recent 
developments, 
collaborative 
reputation 
activity, 
simulations using Sporas formula, reputation-based trust 
formulation, trust cluster approach and conclusion of 
results. 
2. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS 
If a user is given the work repeatedly and the user 
completes to the level of satisfaction, we say the user will 
be trusted. The same concept is used in credit cards, bank 
loans, and at work places. Sensor networks are not 
different when we consider the trust. The Figure 1 shows 
the scenario of a senor network. The nodes A, B, C are 
transferring the data to their successive node D, where D 
transfers to its next successive node E. The level of trust of 
a node D depends upon the percentage of packets 
successfully transferred to its next successive node E. The 
trust of node D depends upon the behavior of node D at a 
given time. The trust evaluation of node D also monitored 
through the neighboring nodes (node B and node C within 
communication distance) of A. 
Trust values are derived in [2] by evaluating risk and 
reputation. In [3] the authors developed an algorithm to 
calculate trust using the complaints of another agent. 
Reputation-based framework using Bayesian formulation 
was developed by Generiwal et al. [4]. The proposed 
system uses community trustworthy behavior of the sensor 
nodes. The trust calculation in WSN using a bio-inspired 
algorithm (BTRM-WSN) based on ant colony systems was 
presented in [5]. The system uses similarity of how the 
ants’ deposited pheromone helps to trace the path and 
quality of path by trusting the deposited pheromone. 
Momani et Al. [6], explained the difference between 
trust, security, and reputation. Further, authors introduced 
the WSN security issues and innovative approaches to 
solve these problems. The authors concluded that the 
future research follows the innovative approach to model 
trust-based approach in WSN. 
Task-based trust management, event-based trust 
management and an agent-based trust management was 
studied in [7-11]. In [7], a general approach for task-based 
trust management is used similar to economics to detect 
the malicious node. The event-based approach [8] uses 
several trust ratings to enforce the security in WSN. The 
agent-based trust models in [8-11] discuss the attacks on 
WSN, packet dropping, and local storage management 
using the trust policy. The models can further discusses the 
trust aggregation, Hello flood attack, and detect the 
malicious nodes.  
Zhang et al. [12] presented a trust-based approach to 
distinguish illegal nodes from legal nodes. They claim that 
their approach detects insider attacks and uses trust 
evaluation model. The trust management model in [13] 
uses the Bayesian probabilistic approach. The current 
model calculates the trust factor by using the current trust 
factor plus the second hand information received from its 
neighboring nodes. 
3. COLLABORATIVE REPUTATION ACTIVITY 
Reputation builds the trust in a specific domain. 
Reputation-based trust was discussed in [14] and defined 
as the amount of trust influenced by a person or node in a 
specific domain. Like with human relationships, reputation 
values associated with a node may change over a time. 
Therefore, it is advised to update the node ratings using 
current ratings. This procedure helps to calculate better 
trust factor. The reason for changing the trust rates 
overtime is that the node may get corrupt due to malicious 
activity.  
Assume that each node entering in the sensor network 
has a minimum reputation value, i.e., initially every node 
transfers packets correctly. The node value will be updated 
after a set time period. A threshold value (trust value) will 
be set to decide either the node will continue in the 
communication path or discord at the end of each set 
period. In a sensor network, a new node can join the 
existing set of sensors or a malicious sensor will be 
discarded from communicating path (Similar to an 
electronic market, a new user may join in the group or 
untrusted member may discontinue). The reputation value 
of a current node should not fall below the newly joined 
node. A node can rate the neighboring node more than 
once, but the current rating will be taken. A higher rated 
node will have smaller change after each rating (unless the 
node is corrupted). 
The sample rating of a neighboring node is done 
depending upon the trust. Trust of each node depends 
upon the opinion of other nodes, particularly neighboring 
nodes. Trust of a node is continuous updating through 
rating. The current reputation of a node (trust level) is 
updated using the following Sporas formula [15].  
)
).(
. (
1
1
1
1
i
i
i
i
i
R
W
R
R
R
 
 
(1) 
/)
(
1
1
1
1
1
)
(
D
R
i
i
e
R
 
 
(2) 
where: 
 -  effective number of ratings taken into account 
(
1). The change in rating should not be very 
large. 
  -  helps to slow down the incremental change 
Wi - represents the rating given by the node i  
D -  range or maximum reputation value 
-  the acceleration factor to keep the  above certain 
value (> threshold). 
If the node is compromised, the rating will be smaller and 
(Wi
Ri 1) become negative. Therefore the current 
329
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

reputation slowly crosses below threshold and node 
declared as malicious. 
In the Figure 1, the opinion poll on node D will be 
done by nodes A, B, C, and P, because these nodes 
communicates the packets through D to the base station. 
The node E cannot poll on D, since it receives the packets 
from D. Assume that there is a node Z between E and base 
station, then E can poll on D, because if Z becomes 
malicious then E may need to transfer the data through D 
to reach the base station. In the opinion poll, the node A 
may poll 70% and node B may poll 80%. Sporas formula 
updates the rating (helps to build the trust) on node D 
using the rates polled by the connected nodes. 
4. SIMULATIONS USING SPORAS FORMULA 
Suppose the node A makes 50 transactions and each 
time the node A give its own rating depends upon the 
number of packets transmits by the node D. Figure 2 
provides the ratings on node D obtained by node A. 
Similarly, the ratings at B and C were found. The random 
values selected to calculate the ratings are as below: 
>10;    
0.5<Wi<1;  
0.6<D<0.99 
0<
<0.5;   
0.5< Ri 1<1;   
Table I provides the ratings after 50 samples. Each 
time the rate was updated with the current value. At 50th 
time (current ratings at A, B, and C are 0.8001, 0.85, and 
0.90. Suppose the threshold value is set at 0.85, then the 
node A requests the neighbor nodes C and D about the 
trust of node D. The nodes B and C give their trust value 
0.85 and 0.9. The node A cannot discard the node D from 
its communication path, but it uses the reputation based 
trust calculation as given in the next section and will come 
to a conclusion. 
Table I: Ratings of node D at Nodes A, B, and C 
 
 
 
5. REPUTATION-BASED TRUST FORMULATION 
The Sporas formula updates the node reputation to 
current status. The reputation status value of each node is 
stored by its neighboring nodes. Therefore, each node 
maintains a table and stores the reputation status of its 
neighboring node or nodes. If any node gets malicious, 
then the connected nodes change the reputation value in 
their table. If the value of a node drops below the 
threshold, then the node will be declared as malicious. The 
declared malicious node will be disconnected from the 
network.  
The reputation of a node is calculated average of two 
methods. First, reputation value is calculated through 
Sporas formula using equation (1) basing on opinion poll. 
Second, reputation of a neighboring node is calculated 
using the ratio of the number of packets sent to the node (
Sm) to the number of packets forwarded ( Fn) by the node.  
Rnm = Fn
Sm
 
 
 
 
(3) 
The ratio Fn /Sm
1 and n /m
1 must be true all 
time. Unlike in Sporas formula, whenever a node is added 
to the network, it is given a reputation value equals to 1, 
means the reputation value is 100%. The reputation R 
must be calculated in fixed intervals. After few intervals, 
the average reputation value will be generated (includes 
the initial value). The average reputation value Rav should 
not fall below the threshold T . Therefore, it follows that 
Rav
T , otherwise the node is treated as malicious. 
Consider an arbitrary variable x that has a maximum 
value 1 and minimum 0. The current reputation value of a 
node is calculated as: 
1
)
.
).
((1
c
p
r
x R
x R
R
 
(4) 
where, Rr is the calculated reputation calculated, Rp  is 
the previous reputation value, and Rc  is the current 
reputation value. The value of x will be above 0.5 and 
closely the threshold value (0.95). The new updates must 
be small enough to be comparable with Sporas formula. 
The equation (4) will be compared to the equation (1), 
where the reputation in both cases provides the current 
trust status of the node. The average of these two values 
will provide best possible trust value R. Therefore, 
330
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

1
/) 2
(
r
i
R
R
R
 
 
 
(5) 
If the node A observes that the node D is suspicious, 
Figure 1, then it broadcasts to its neighbor nodes C and B. 
The node C and node B calculates the trust value of node 
D using the broadcasted value and determines the node 
A’s claim of suspiciousness. The node B calculates the 
trust of node D as below: 
BD
BA
BA
ND
R
R
R R
T
).
1(
.
 
(6) 
where 
TND is the new trust value of D at B 
R is the trust value received from A 
RBA is the trust value of B on A 
RBD is the trust value of B on D 
If A broadcasts that D is suspicious, B should not 
believe immediately. It should use the trust on A and trust 
on D and calculate the combined trust. If the calculated 
value is below the threshold then B believes that D is 
suspicious otherwise it broadcasts that D is not suspicious. 
Similarly the node C calculates its own trust on D. 
Discussion of Results 
We assume that the current trust value of node D is 
known by nodes A, B, and C. Suppose the current trust 
values of node D at nodes A, B, and C are 0.8, 0.85, and 
0.92 respectively. Let x=0.8, and let Rr, R, and TND be 
given by equations (5) and (6). The value of Rr, R, and 
TND with respect to node C and node B decides that either 
node D will be trusted or not.  
It is a known fact that sensors have limited resources 
including battery, computational, and communication 
resources. Therefore, it is suggested to use either Sporas 
formula or reputation-based trust model. It is further 
suggested using average of both formulas depending upon 
the sensitivity of the problem. If the data sensitivity is low 
and data need to be transferred securely then use either one 
of the formulas.  
6. SIMULATIONS ON REPUTATION-BASED TRUST 
CALCULATION  
The simulation uses the Dynamic Source Routing 
(DSR) protocol of wireless sensor network. The simulation 
is written in the Java language. The idea of the simulation 
is based on the popular simulation software NS-2 
(Network Simulator 2). We created a 500 x 500 field and 
randomly distributed 20, 50 and 100 nodes in the network. 
The simulation detected all misbehaving (nodes which did 
not forward data properly) nodes such as a sink hole and 
selective forwarding nodes. We calculated the trust ratio 
using promiscuous mode overhearing the packets 
forwarded by the successive node. The node swaps from 
promiscuous mode to normal mode as soon as it overhears 
the packet to save battery life. If it does not overhear 
packet for a given time frame, it automatically comes back 
to normal mode. The trust ratio was calculated using the 
number of packets received by successive node and 
transferred from it.  
The sample simulations are given in Figure 3. We 
assumed node 2, node 3, and node 4 are neighbors of node 
1. These four nodes transfer the data from the same node 
and calculate the reputation value. If the reputation value 
of node 1 drops below the threshold, then node 1 verifies 
the data from its neighboring nodes (nodes 2 – 4).  For 
example, node 2 is a neighbor of node 1 and sent 50 
packets and the successive node forwards 50 packets. That 
is 90% success. Similarly, the calculations follow from 
other nodes. Each node calculates its trustworthiness using 
equation (6) and send to node 1. The node 1 decides the 
trustworthiness of its successive after receiving data from 
its neighboring nodes.  
7. TRUST CLUSTER APPROACH 
Trust clusters are very useful in the collaborative 
approach. The nodes within communication distance 
forms a cluster, and conduct collaborative activity in 
calculating the trust of any successive node. For example, 
if n j  is a neighbor of node ni  then we represent the 
neighbors (ni,n j)
true. Suppose, if ni  has more than 
one neighbor then we write 
(ni,nj) j = true.    
 
 
(7) 
j  are the 
j  nodes which are within the 
communication distance of node i . That is, i  has the 
collaborative relation to the j  nodes. Similarly, we form 
the neighboring nodes to each node in the network. 
Suppose 
i, j  is the trust factor of each of j  node close i th 
node, then most dependable node in the neighborhood of a 
node i  is the highest reputation value calculated through 
equation (5).  
It is always necessary to keep track of the most trusted 
nodes within the communication distance and most 
inferior nodes within the communication distance. The 
inferior nodes will be eliminated to calculate the trust 
factor and if the trust factor of any inferior node is below 
the threshold, then all neighbors must discord the 
suspected node from the network. The inferior node is 
denoted as 
threshold
j
i
j
n n
)
,
(
inf
 
(8) 
Therefore, the node i  must depend upon the trusted 
neighbor nodes for the future path selection.  
8. CONCLUSIONS 
Sensors are organized in an open environment and 
injecting of bad nodes to corrupt the transmission is 
possible. Therefore, a secure transmission model is 
required to avoid the transmission through corrupted node. 
The traditional protocols use exchange and distribute the 
331
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

keys for trust evidence. The resource limitations in sensor 
networks obstruct the use of traditional tools including 
cryptographic models and intrusion detection packages for 
secure communications. Encryption, intrusion detection 
models, 
and 
authentication 
techniques 
limits 
the 
performance of nodes in WSNs. Encryption and 
authentication 
cannot 
prevent 
the 
malicious 
or 
misbehavior of the sensor nodes. After reviewing relevant 
sensor network models, we believed that proposed 
collaborative trust-based model will overcome the 
shortcomings in the current models.  
In the proposed collaborative model, each node is each 
node is updated through ratings. The ratings are provided 
by the nodes transfer the packets through that node. The 
update of node ratings is done through Sporas formula. If 
the node rate is below the threshold, the previous node 
uses the cooperative effort through neighboring nodes. By 
using the cooperative and collaborative effort, we 
eliminate the suspicious node from the communication 
path. Preliminary results are presented using the rating of a 
node through Sporas formula. 
The future work includes the agent-based trust model. 
Each cluster has an agent and agent relieves the 
computations of the nodes. All decisions will be taken at 
the agent. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The research work was supported by the ONR with award 
No. N00014-08-1-0856. The first author wishes to express 
appreciation to Dr. Connie Walton, Grambling State 
University and Dr. S. S. Iyengar, LSU Baton Rouge for 
their continuous support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Reddy, Y. and Selmic, R., “Secure Packet Transfer in 
Wireless Sensor Networks – A Trust-based Approach”, 
IARIA- ICN 2011, January 23-28, 2011 - St. Maarten, pp. 
218-223. 
[2] Liang, Z. and Shi, W., “PET: A Personalized Trust Model 
with Reputation and Risk Evaluation for P2P Resource 
Sharing”, 38 Hawaii Int. conf. on Systems Sciences, 2005, 
pp. 201-210. 
[3] Aberer, A. and Despotovic, Z., “Managing trust in a Peer-
2-Peer information system”, 10th International Conference 
on Information and Knowledge management, 2001, pp. 
310-317. 
[4] Generowal, S. and Srivastava, M., “Reputation-based 
Framework for high Integrity Sensor Networks”, 2nd ACM 
workshop on Security of ad hoc and sensor networks, 2004, 
pp. 1-36. 
[5] Marmol, F. and Perez, M., “Providing Trust in Wireless 
Sensor Networks using a Bio-Inspired Technique”, 
Networking 
and 
Electronic 
Commerce 
Research 
Conference (NAEC), 2008, pp. 1-16. 
[6] Momani, M. and Challa, S., “Survey of Trust Models in 
different Network Domains”, International Journal of Ad 
hoc, Sensor & Ubiquitous Computing (IJASUC) Vol.1, 
No.3, September 2010, pp. 1-19. 
[7] Chen, H., “Task-based Trust Management for Wireless 
Sensor Networks”, International Journal of Security and its 
applications, vol 3, 2009 (last accessed: May 24, 2011), 
URL: http://earticle.net/article.aspx?sn=105974) 
[8] Chen, H., Wu, H., Hu, J. and Gao, C., “Event-based Trust 
Framework Model in Wireless Sensor Networks”, IEEE 
International Conference on Networking, Agriculture, and 
Storage, 2008, pp. 359-364. 
[9] Chen, H., Wu, H., Hu, J. and Gao, C., “Agent-Based Trust 
Management Model for Wireless Sensor Networks”, 2008 
International Conference on Multimedia and Ubiquitous 
Engineering, 2008, pp. 150-154. 
[10] Boukerche, A. and Xu, L., “An agent-based trust and 
reputation management scheme for wireless sensor 
networks”, Global Telecommunications Conference, 2005. 
GLOBECOM '05. IEEE, 28 Nov.-2 Dec. 2005, pp.1857-
1861. 
[11] Chen, H., Wu, H., Zhou, X. and Gao, C., “Agent-based 
Trust Model in Wireless Sensor Networks”, Eighth ACIS 
International 
Conference 
on 
Software 
Engineering, 
Artificial Intelligence, Networking, and Parallel/Distributed 
Computing, 2007, pp. 119-124. 
[12] Zhang, W., Das, S. K., and Liu, Y., “A Trust Based 
Framework for Secure Data Aggregation in Wireless 
Sensor Networks”, 3rd annual IEEE communications on 
sensor and ad hoc communications and networks (SECON 
06), 2006, pp. 60-69. 
[13] Momani, M. and Challa, S., "Probabilistic Modelling and 
Recursive Bayesian Estimation of Trust in Wireless Sensor 
Networks," submitted to Ad Hoc Networks, 2007, pp. 381-
403. 
[14] Marsh, S. P., “Formalising Trust as a Computational 
Concept,” PhD Thesis, University of Stirling, 1994. 
[15] Zacharia, G., Moukas, A., and Maes, P., “Collaborative 
Reputation Mechanisms for Electronic Marketplaces”, 
Decision Support Systems, Volume 29, Issue 4, December 
2000, pp. 7-29. 
[16] Josang, A. and Ismail, R., “The Beta Reputation System”, 
15th Bled Electronic Commerce Conference, 2002, pp. 1-
14. 
Graphs 
 
Figure 1.  Wireless sensor network communication 
topology. 
332
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

 
Figure 2.  The rating of node A on node D. 
 
Figure 3: Simulation Of Wireless Sensor Networks using DSR 
Protocol 
 
 
 
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0.8
0.8
0.8001
0.8001
0.8001
0.8001
0.8001
0.8002
0.8002
Number of times A gave the good ratings
Current rating of Node D at A
333
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

