Towards Tactical Military Software Defined Radio 
 
 
Major Tapio Saarelainen, PhD, IARIA Fellow 
Research and Development Division 
Army Academy 
Lappeenranta, Finland 
tapio.saarelainen@mil.fi 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents an idea-phase introduction of a 
tactical level communication system (battalion and below), 
which enables utilizing different waveforms and frequencies 
when communicating by using Software Defined Radio. The 
discussed idea-stage solution relies on using Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicles 
as 
hub-stations 
in 
order 
to 
ensure 
secure 
communication and reliable data transmission as regards wide 
bandwidth transmission to base-stations. The need for timely 
and accurate analyzing of the increasing amount of Situational 
Awareness and Common Operational Picture –related data 
collected keeps looming large in the battlespace. Similarly, the 
type and amount of different waveforms and frequencies also 
keep increasing. Software Defined Radio with its Graphic User 
Interface application, as discussed in the Results section, may 
offer one way of freeing the hands of a warrior to handle his or 
her firearm instead of a myriad of communication devices 
while in combat. This paper briefly looks at communication 
enabled by using swarms of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle and Self 
Organizing Networks in a military context and provisionally 
examines what testing and creating such a system would 
require and does so only at an early idea phase of a concept 
development process. 
Keywords- Unmanned Aerial Vehicle, Self-Organizing 
Networks, Software Defined Radio/Graphic User Interface. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper presents an idea-phase introduction of a 
tactical level (battalion and below) communication system to 
be used by a tactical end-user performing in a battlespace. As 
this paper’s contents represent an early idea stage of concept 
development, the system drafted and its features described 
have neither been operationalized nor field-tested. When 
creating any new functional system, the first step of the 
development process concerns outlining an idea of what a 
functioning system necessarily needs to comprise. This idea 
phase of a concept development process turns into a fully- 
fledged concept with operationalized features to be tested 
once the end-user devices discussed in this paper have first 
been brought into being. Testing the devices described in an 
environment similar to what the paper outlines requires 
resources, i.e., political decisions allowing funding, 
personnel, and time. Any testing in lab conditions becomes 
impossible as no 
combat settings 
can be neither 
operationalized nor modelled in laboratories.  
The key issue in modern warfare continues to be 
communication. Without communication there are neither 
coordinated operations nor success. High Data Rates (HDR) 
are needed for the type of data necessary in Battle 
Management Systems (BMS) and in Command Posts (CP) 
where operations are commanded and controlled and orders 
issued onwards for tasks to be executed by lower echelons. 
Military environment is challenging also from the 
perspective 
of 
communications. 
Hostile 
military 
environment possesses challenges of several types for the 
need to communicate. First of all, the communication 
environment, a battle zone, is hostile. An adversary party 
tries to deny the free use of the frequency spectrum. 
Similarly, 
attempts 
of 
jamming 
the 
adversary’s 
communication devices are typical of military actions 
executed in different frequencies and waveforms in the 
battlespace. Secondly, the soldier operating in a hostile 
territory using Cognitive Radios (CR) needs to establish 
mutual contact by using CR equipment to forming an ad hoc 
network. The challenge to create a functioning network in 
this case is exacerbated by the likely lack of accurate 
knowledge of the usage patterns of a radio spectrum in the 
hostile territory. If we compare this situation with a civilian 
case, where the frequencies and platforms are known in 
advance, the challenge in the military case has to be solved 
somehow in order to create a functioning communication 
network. 
This paper introduces the challenges of the Future Force 
Warrior 
from 
the 
perspective 
of 
a 
consumer 
of 
communication services. This issue is essential for both the 
research community and the relevant industry. Once 
problems are pointed out, the process of finding solutions is 
easier. This paper presents one solution for how to facilitate 
fighters’ need for constant capability to communicate in the 
battlespace. 
This paper examines tactical level military operating 
referring to commanded tasks being executed at the level of 
company and below. Both soldiers and commanders of any 
kind are dependent on radios to execute missions. A single 
soldier relies on radio communication in order to be 
commanded. This asks for a reliable communication tool and 
a robust ubiquitous network system that allows for precision 
and minimized collateral damage. A battlespace can be 
understood as an environment, where operations are being 
executed including land, sea, air, underwater and cyber 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

operational environments. Warriors, sensors and Unmanned 
Vehicles (UVs) of several types operate and communicate in 
the versatile, constantly changing battlespace. As indicated 
in [1], militaries are using sensors as part of their battlefield 
strategy. As mentioned in [1], the integration of data 
collecting capabilities is in an essential role in expanding the 
communication platform capabilities. The key issues involve 
collecting the data, analyzing these data, and forwarding the 
analyzed data reliably and in an intact form to the end-user, a 
Future Force Warrior (FFW). Networks have to be organized 
to cover the needs of the end-user at all levels, as explained 
in [2]. Issues such as Quality of Service (QoS) and Speed of 
Service (SoS) are seminal in tactical communications [2]. 
Militaries concentrate on sustaining and developing their 
capability to communicate in a battlespace. To optimize 
performance, a Future Force Warrior needs only one 
communication device, which can be Software Defined 
Radio (SDR) for the reasons listed. First, one communication 
device covers all the communication needs of an FFW 
instead of him or her needing to use several communication 
devices. The focus of the FFW has to be in fighting. This 
means that an FFW keeps his or hands around the weapon, 
monitors the threats in the battlespace and fights. Secondly, 
mobility- and action-critical matters from the perspective of 
an FFW, such as size, weight, and power and cost (SWAP-
C), are relevant. Thirdly, one power source should cover the 
need of communication devices instead of several sources 
(i.e., power source for radio and Personal Digital Assistant). 
Lastly, 
one 
communication 
device 
will 
ease 
the 
communication burden of an FFW and he or she can focus 
on the main functions: to monitor the environment and fight 
to survive. Present military communications are based on 
combat net radios (CNR), dominated by the enhanced 
position location reporting system and the single channel 
ground and airborne radio systems. This means that the 
varying levels of tactical communication can comprise 
several actuators. The distances between the communicating 
elements can vary from only a few meters to tens of 
kilometers and more. Tactical communication utilizes 
unmanned vehicles, drones and satellites acting as hubs or 
relay stations. The term tactical refers to the operative 
capabilities of a given military force. For example, a 
maneuver, which is tactical for the U.S. Army with its 
special forces, can be an operative maneuvre for an army 
smaller in size and its operative capability. 
The basic problem in communication is that the High 
Data Rate gives shorter range in communication (e.g., 4 x 
rate = ½ range). Therefore we have to solve this problem 
with different means than just increasing the data range with 
increased 
transmission 
power. 
Despite 
the 
system 
characteristics, the communication system for military use in 
lower echelons (i.e., companies and below) has to fulfil the 
requirements of operational security, coverage, connectivity 
and Low Probability of Detection (LPD) and Low 
Probability of Identification (LPI). Military operations are 
dependent on covert high-speed networks, which also 
represent functional requirement of modern infantry and 
special operations warfare [3]. 
This paper introduces a solution utilizing a swarm of 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and SDRs. The swarm 
of UAVs is seen as a platform for a communications system, 
in which the distances between the UAVs must be short to 
ensure the message throughput in a hostile communication 
environment. This aims at ensuring a reliable data exchange 
process and fulfilling the requirements of LPD and LPI. 
SDRs are used by FFWs performing at the tactical level and 
also embedded into each UAV to ensure a reliable data 
exchange process. The swarms of UAVs in this system are in 
a central role to ensure the message throughput in a case 
when one or several UAVs are destroyed. Once a UAV 
becomes incompetent to act as a relay-station, a neighboring 
UAV takes over its functions and, with the assistance of 
Self-Organizing 
Networks 
(SON), 
the 
routing 
of 
communication can be reorganized and ensured.  
This paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses 
Military Communication Environment, Section III focuses 
on the Challenges of FFW, Section IV introduces SDR, 
Section V introduces Universal Software Radio Peripheral 
(USRP). Section VI concentrates on explaining the idea of 
Cognitive Radio (CR). Section VII discusses the significance 
of a Graphic User Interface, and Section VIII introduces the 
new system. Section IX examines the strengths and 
weaknesses of the introduced system and Section X 
concludes the paper with Section XI describing the demands 
for future work. 
II. 
MILITARY COMMUNICATION ENVIRONMENT 
Military communication environment differs from its 
civilian 
counterpart. 
Any 
civilian 
communication 
environment tends to be non-hostile and its features 
thoroughly known in that the transmission distances, 
frequencies and waveforms used are common knowledge. In 
contrast, the military communication environments are part 
of a battlespace and abound in uncertainties in connectivity 
and latency may vary uncontrollably due to incessant hostile 
electronic warfare attempts. Communication break-down in a 
battlespace typically results in compromising someone’s life. 
A given battlespace comprehends also the communication 
environment, in which war is waged. Military frequencies 
tend to be mandatory and always commanded from higher 
echelons in order to control the electromagnetic spectrum 
most effectively from the execution perspective of own 
military operations. 
Military troops equipped with varying end-user devices 
transform the battlespace of 21st century into network-
centric warfare with Network Centric Operations in a central 
role. SDRs will provide a flexible tool suited for the 
changing military environments in that they allow versatile 
communication in the battlespace [4]. In a constantly 
changing battlespace the commanded troops can be mobile 
or static. Often the communication tools, end-user devices, 
are handheld and lightweight. A ground level military 
performer, soldier, has to be able to communicate also via 
satellites in order to contact higher echelons, for example, 
when executing special operations in rocky terrain. The size 
of the used system, together with its weight, power and cost 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

(SWAP-C) become vital from the perspective of the system 
user and provider. 
For the end-user, to be able to cover multiple battlespace 
scenarios, the simultaneous requirement of communication 
requirements such as voice, video and data together with the 
capabilities and megabit bandwidths set design challenges. 
Moreover, to sustain secure communication by means of the 
end-user devices, new military waveforms have been 
designed to fulfil the requirements of the end-user, a soldier. 
An example of such waveforms suitable for an SDR-based 
system implementation is WiMAX 802.16e, which has been 
modified to operate in the military frequency range of the 
NATO UHF band of 225 – 400 MHz [5]. 
A future military SDR-platform should support multiple 
radio frequency frontends. Depending on the available and 
sufficient frequency bands, different frontends could be 
installed. The flexible use of different frontends and 
waveforms enable finding a suitable system configuration for 
all the planned operational scenarios. The next generation 
SDR-based platform should enable at least the following 
benefits for tactical networking: First, mobility support for 
mobile ad hoc network (MANET). Second, sufficient 
communication capacity must be guaranteed at the tactical 
level, this is a minimum throughput of 1 Mbps to support 
mobile user. Third, from a perspective of life cycle 
management, a SDR platform must be independent from the 
waveforms and frequencies used. Fourth, communication 
flexibility has to be ensured with radio frequencies in SDR 
frontends and with used waveforms. Fifth, interoperability 
with national and coalition waveforms has to be granted [5]. 
In a civilian communication environment an end-user can 
benefit from reliable and fast communication, high 
throughput of messages, issues of low latency, the constant 
capability to communicate, adequate bandwidth, good 
Quality of Service (QoS), and Speed of Service (SoS). 
Civilian communication systems offer the possibility to 
benefit from constant power supply or the capability to 
recharge the battery of the used communication device when 
necessary. The communication process usually suffers from 
only slight if any hostile interference or jamming. 
Communication 
systems 
utilized 
in 
a 
military 
environment can confront all types of interferences. These 
include jamming and all means electronic warfare with a 
constant threat of becoming annihilated by the adversary if a 
communication tool has been detected, pinpointed, and 
placed in the targeting process to be destroyed. Table I lists 
the differences between civilian and military communication 
environments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
 DIFFERENCES BETWEEN CIVILIAN AND 
MILITARY COMMUNICATION ENVIRONMENT 
Characteristic
s of 
Communicati
on 
Military 
communication 
environment 
Civilian 
communicatio
n environment 
Free  use of 
spectrum 
Restricted 
More 
possibilities 
Latency 
Varying, 
sometimes 
high 
Typically low 
Energy 
Limited, hard 
to recharge 
Possibility to 
recharge fast 
Hostility 
High 
Low 
Jamming 
Possible 
Low 
Adequate 
bandwidth 
Limited, 
altering 
Typically high 
Limitations in 
use 
Often restricted 
No limitations 
 
As Table I indicates, in a military communication 
environment the characteristics of communication involve 
restrictions and constant uncertainty due to hostility in the 
battlespace. 
III. 
CHALLENGES OF FFW 
The following overview lists six challenges which have 
been identified within the military community. The writer 
has encountered these challenges while conducting research 
on related issues, such as a nationwide Company Attack 
Study performed during 2004 – 2007 in Finland. The first 
challenge is related to the main task of a fighter: the main 
task of an FFW is to fight in performing the given mission. 
This means he or she has to monitor the environment to stay 
alive and to be able to execute the commanded tasks. He or 
she engages the enemy with all the weaponry available. This 
also means that the FFW relies on connectivity and 
capability to communicate at all times. The constant 
connectivity poses the second challenge. Mission success 
requires the capability to transmit and receive data and 
commands. The constant communicating ability requires that 
a single warrior be capable of acting as an executor of an 
operation, or a military commander at some level. 
Connectivity remains the key. Some sort of a network must 
be available at all times. Location data and commands can be 
forwarded only by means of a functioning network and a 
reliable hand-held or soldier-mounted communication 
device. 
The third challenge is linked to the usage of warrior 
platforms. A warrior platform consists of several subsystems 
and their control units. For example, the systems can be 
controlled via a wrist-worn user-interface presented here. All 
the communication controls can be easily and rapidly found 
from the wrist-held device which is embedded onto the arm 
and acts as a supporting hand when using a personal firearm. 
Contrary to a visor-embedded system, this wrist-held device 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

does not hamper viewing the environment with a constant 
data flow. Figure 1 features a wrist-held device. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  A wrist-worn control system into which SDR can be embedded. 
The fourth challenge involves the number of networks 
and data sources on which an FFW relies. If the 
communication network or operating unit malfunctions, 
FFWs get in trouble because they lack the necessary 
resources either because of the different frequency of 
waveform used or the network becoming out of coverage. 
This slows down a single FFW and usually harms the whole 
military operation. 
The fifth challenge equals the access to different types of 
Battle Management Systems (BMSs). BMSs support the 
efficient utilization of military units at all levels. The access 
process into a BMS requires more bandwidth than using 
voice and text messaging when issuing commands. Figure 2 
features BMS. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Soldier Systems linkage into Battle Management Systems. 
This sets more bandwidth demands for SDRs used. The 
data may surface in varying waveforms and frequencies. In 
order to benefit from BMSs, the location and identification 
of friend or foe are relevant. These data are needed from the 
battlespace to ensure the effective use of different weapon 
systems. 
Systems related to location data and identification 
systems keep improving. The command and control 
capabilities necessary for units serving at battalion level and 
below are provided by means of BMS. Present combat net 
radios can only be seen as beneficial tools in supporting 
geographical based situational awareness. When several 
operational BMSs are integrated, it is possible to maximize 
the amount quantitative and qualitative data for analysis 
purposes. This involves applying the concept of System of 
Systems (SOS) and utilizing robotic platforms. The sixth 
challenge is the type of a Graphic User Interface (GUI) of a 
communication device, which can be used for various 
purposes. GUIs can be utilized in creating the Situational 
Awareness and Common Operational Picture as well as for 
location services and for weapon selection process. Although 
one of the challenges is the variety of used waveforms and 
the bandwidths, they fall outside of the scope of this study. 
This paper discusses a possible solution for the listed 
challenges. 
IV. 
SOFTWARE DEFINED RADIO 
SDR is a radio communication system in which 
components that have typically been implemented in 
hardware, 
for 
example, 
mixers, 
filters, 
amplifiers, 
modulators/demodulators, 
and 
detectors, 
are 
instead 
implemented by means of software on a personal computer 
or embedded system. Usually SDR can be programmed to 
support frequencies from 100 MHz to 6 GHz with using 130 
nm Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) 
technology [6]. Depending on the system configuration, 
typically supported signal bandwidths can vary between 700 
kHz and 40 MHz or 200 kHz and 40 MHz, depending on the 
CMOS used [6]. In other words, SDR is a wireless 
communications system where the traditional hardware is 
replaced by software modules [7]. While the concept of SDR 
is not new, the rapidly evolving capabilities of digital 
electronics enable executing many such processes which 
earlier used to be only theoretically possible. 
Currently, most SDR related products and studies focus 
on analog communication and voice transmission. The SDR 
platform consists of Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) 
-based radio hardware and open source SDR software 
module [7]. 
The main features of SDR include: 1) radio spectrum 
sensing; 2) reconfigurable radio modules and 3) link for 
digital data communication. These features form an 
important basis to accomplish Cognitive Radio technologies. 
The mobile devices can afford the high speed and 
complex computation owing to the advance in computing 
ability of the processor, such as Personal Digital Assistant 
(PDA), Smart Phone, or Ultra-Mobile PC (UMPC). 
Most of these mobile devices equipped with Wi-Fi, 
WiMAX or other wireless modules enable end-users to 
access services anywhere. The traditional hardware radio 
system comprises a variety of analogy elements such as 
filters, converters, modulators and demodulators. The 
hardware is expensive and has low compatibility with other 
components. 
The reason why SDR becomes increasingly popular is 
that it allows using SDR technology for realizing many 
applications relatively effortlessly in the integration of 
different components. The most used software architecture 
for SDR is the Software Communications Architecture 
(SCA), which is considered as the standard for military 
domain [4]. The novelty of SCA lies in the availability of 
SCA-based tools to allow designers to create component-
based SDR-applications as assemblies of components and 
logical devices. When these types of systems are being 
created, the communication between the components and 
devices must be carefully orchestrated. In this process it is 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

possible to benefit from the use of Common Object Request 
Broker Architecture (CORBA) [4]. 
When discussing SDRs, security issues must be 
considered. When new Software (SW) is being loaded, the 
consequent threat of having unauthorized and potentially 
malicious SW installed on the platform becomes possible, if 
security precautions have not been taken, by, for example, 
adding a digital and verified signature in the code before the 
new software is being transmitted. 
In order to successfully benefit from the products and 
performance of SDR, we have to focus only the performance 
produced via SDR. The added value from SDR can be seen 
via tactical communication requirements for the FFFW 
operating in Battlespace which are: Situational Awareness 
(SA), Common Operational Picture (COP), Command and 
Control systems, identification friend or foe (cf. Figure 3. 
below), (IFF)/Blue Force Tracking, capability to co-operate 
with UAVs and Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGVs) and 
robots, data from sensor to shooter, Voice, Navigation, 
messaging, Imaging, Video, Security. 
One interesting possibility is to embed Radio Frequency 
Identification (RFID) system into SDR by using Quadrature 
Amplitude Modulation (QAM). The system has been 
explained in [8]. The identification friend or foe (IFF) 
process can be embedded as part of SDR functions. Figure 
features 3 an IFF process. 
 
Figure 3.  Identification process Friend or Foe (IFF) in progress. 
By simply downloading a new program, a SDR is able to 
interoperate with different wireless protocols, incorporate 
new services, and upgrade to new standards. One solution is 
depicted below above while the process is introduced in 
Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4.  RFID system with SDR [8]. 
As Figure 4 indicate, by combining the Radio Frequency 
Identification tags and IFF –process it is possible to decrease 
the total mass of the gear a FFW carries. Similarly, this 
enables 
simultaneously 
decreasing 
the 
amount 
of 
transmission energy necessary for identification purposes. 
RFIDs can be sensitive to electromagnetic interrogation 
signal by nature and need little energy when responding once 
only a slight transmission signal focuses on them. Thereby 
the amount of response energy transmitted towards of the 
interrogator can be significantly small. This means Low 
Probability of Detection as regards the surveillance tools 
spread in the battlespace. Relevant for operational security 
purposes, the interrogation process remains undetected and 
discreet. 
V. 
UNIVERSAL SOFTWARE PERIPHERAL RADIO 
In Universal Software Peripheral Radio, we examine 
only the functionality of USRP. In doing so, we notice it 
offers more performance than its predecessor SDR. The 
technology used in USRP is located in the hardware 
implemented in frontend for sending and receiving 
waveforms. USRP offers different frequencies, bandwidths 
and frequencies for specific purposes. The USRP can be 
fixed to respond to the end-users’ requirements by selecting 
appropriate motherboards for controlling the frequencies and 
waveforms [7]. 
USRP can be divided into two parts based on the 
transmission path. These are the transmitting signal path and 
receiving signal path. For example, on transmit signal path, 
users can define the setting parameters by software on 
personal computer such as radio protocols, modulation types, 
frequency of spectrum modulation. 
Then the USRP receives the parameters, and FPGA 
executes Intermediate Frequency (IF) processing on Digital 
Up Converter (DUC) and Digital Down Converter (DDC). 
After the Intermediate Frequency process, users adjust the 
baseband to the frequency band selected before. 
The last step on USRP motherboard is that digital to 
analog (DAC) converts the digital signal into analog signal. 
Finally, the analog signal is transmitted to the antenna 
through the interface side on the daughterboard, as illustrated 
in USRP block diagram in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5.  Composition of USRP [7]. 
As Figure 5 demonstrates, the composition of the 
introduced USRP system offers flexibility in using different 
waveforms and frequencies. The flexibility can be offered by 
different daughterboards which can be tailored to meet the 
requirements of different frequencies and waveforms. By 
changing and tuning the performances of daughterboards, the 
FFWs 
have 
improved 
communication 
devices 
as 
communication tools in a constantly altering battlespace and 
varying missions. 
VI. 
COGNITIVE RADIO 
When moving on towards the communication device 
suitable for an FFW, we have to take a quick glance at 
Cognitive Radio (CR). As widely known, Software defined 
Radio is a platform for Cognitive Radio [9]. Without going 
into the details of the technical structure or composition of 
CR, we focus on the listed and wanted end-products and 
functionalities of the CR from an FFW perspective.   
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Cognitive Radio capabilities and functionalities include the 
following features. First, Spectrum Awareness (SAw), which 
means being able to detect quickly and robustly the presence 
of incumbent (preemptive) users to avoid causing 
interference. Second, Dynamic Spectrum Access (DSA), 
which means CRs will access the spectrum on an 
opportunistic basis. Third, Dynamic Spectrum Sharing 
(DSS), which means CRs must be aware of other CRs’ 
coexistence. Lastly, CRs are Spectrum Agile (SAg), which 
means that CRs should provide seamless operation over 
multiple channels. Also challenges related to adaptive 
coding, modulation and multi-access have to be solved as 
indicated in [9]. 
There is a long way towards CR, which meets the listed 
requirements. From the perspective of an end-user, a 
consumer, an FFW, it is essential to meet the requirements 
listed. This also applies as regards the scientific community 
and the industrial community. The necessary requirements 
have to be identified prior to being able to produce a wanted 
end-product. 
One solution for designing the suitable architecture and 
configurations for the future force radio communication 
device could be Software Communications architecture. 
SCA has been created to assist in the development process of 
SDR communication systems. SCA allows for waveform 
application software to be more easily ported across radio 
platforms. At the moment publicly available specifications 
can be found for SCA 2.2.2 and 4.0, as well as for SCA 
Appendices and SCA APIs. As a matter of fact, it is possible 
in next generation products to take full advantage of the 
following: First, SCA 4.0, which is to empower more 
freedom 
to 
do 
the 
SDR 
implementation. 
Second, 
Programmable SDR chip sets. Third, offering more efficient 
SDR development tools and use of more efficient higher 
level modelling methods. Fourth, adding a new approach to 
waveform portability and full utilization of SDR work done 
in commercial domain. Lastly, designers are focusing on 
developing of sophisticated RF front-end technologies. 
SOA -technology involves assisting processes performed 
in military operations. As indicated in [10], the SOA has 
been used to design and construct the CR systems. When an 
FFW can benefit from the possibilities offered by a 
successful adoption SOA, also in communication services, 
the result can be improved overall performance in military 
operations. 
Figure 6 features how the data are gathered, processed, 
analyzed and then transmitted as commands to an FFW. If 
the data are correctly collected, analyzed and successfully 
transmitted to the performer, an FFW, the process of waging 
war can be improved and collateral damage minimized. 
Various battlespace sensors transmit data to a context-aware 
reasoning layer. In this layer, data are converted to context 
and an inference engine transmits the data to a ubiquitous 
main layer for analyzing purposes. The data are verified, 
analyzed and transmitted as information for the execution of 
the operation [11]. This process is depicted in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6.  Increased FFW performance can be gained via successful data 
utilization and analyzing process [11]. 
Once the collected data have been analyzed, they can be 
forwarded to the military performers who need these data 
most. The transmission process has to be automated to 
ensure sustaining soverall performance. 
VII. GRAPHIC USER INTERFACE 
A new type of communication device for an FFW has to 
fulfil the specific communication needs of an FFW. The 
communication system and the GUIs have to be defined to 
fulfil the needs. Figure 7 features the actuators affecting the 
system definition process. 
 
Figure 7.  The idea of configuration of the future communication device 
from a perspective of a consumer, an FFW. 
According to results presented in [12], the visualization 
of events can improve the human capability to accelerate the 
Military Decision Making Process (MDMP) by offering 
necessary information in required time and understandable 
form.  From the perspective of a consumer, an important role 
is set for the type of a GUI. A functional GUI is a means to 
present collected data, a control panel to access networks and 
guide UVs, a tool for a weapon selection process, and, of 
course, a communication tool for the entities of higher and 
lower echelons. Figure 8 features one possible figure caption 
of a functional GUI. 
 
Figure 8.  A wiev of a Graphic User Interface. 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Apart from the mentioned facts, an FFW has to be able to 
access BMSs of various types and different databases with a 
new type of communication tool. Figure 9 features one type 
of BMS where an FFW can be constantly connected to 
optimize the performance while executing tasks. 
 
Figure 9.  A wiev of a BMS. 
Lastly, an FFW has to be able to control the systems 
embedded on his Battle Dress Uniform (BDU). Figure 10 
below features the FFW’s electronic skeleton and its 
functions [13]. 
 
Figure 10.  A composition of a FFW’s electronic skeleton [13]. 
An FFW uses the control unit embedded into his BDU as 
an essential tool to control and monitor the functions of own 
gear. In Figure 11 below, the controlling system is wrist-
worn. 
 
Figure 11.  An example of an FFW as a platform with selected gear [14]. 
By embedding all the control units of the FFW’s 
electronic gear into one wrist-worn controller, the number of 
controlling units can be decreased. This may increase the 
overall performance of the FFW as the FFW can find all the 
control units in one location instead of needing to separately 
control each different embedded system listed in Figure 11. 
VIII. A NEW COMMUNICATION SYSTEM FOR THE FFW 
As noted in [3], mobile ad-hoc networking of dismounted 
combatants is necessary as regards the future involving net-
centric operations. The amount and variety of data 
transmitted in the battlespace keep increasing. Issues such as 
bandwidth, type of waveform, frequency and security are 
only a few of the issues that have to be accounted for. Low 
Probability 
of 
Detection 
and 
Low 
probability 
of 
Identification remain critical in covert operations, as 
mentioned in [3]. Single UAVs are utilized as tools tailored 
for Special Forces and a system relying on Advanced 
Encryption System (AES) encrypted network with a range of 
3 kilometers [12]. 
A new communication system is possible to create if we 
utilize the capabilities of SDR, swarms of UAVs, SDR and 
Self-Organizing Networks (SON) implemented in 4G 
networks. It has to be highlighted that in this system, SDRs 
are implemented in FFW gear and inside an UAV. As noted, 
SON aims to configure and optimize the network 
automatically, in a manner that the interaction of human can 
be reduced and the capacity of the network can be increased. 
The main functionality of SON includes the following: 
self-configuration, self-optimization and self-healing. SON is 
described as a part of 3GPP LTE and it is a key feature for 
effective and automatic operation and maintenance (O&M) 
of 4G networks. Besides that, SON maximizes overall 
performance of network and reduces the cost of installation 
and need of management by simplifying operation and 
maintenance through self-configuration, self-optimization 
and self-healing. SON also reduces the power consumption 
and results in reduced operational expenses and produces an 
environmentally friendly approach. Figure 12 features the 
SON as seen in [16]. 
 
Figure 12.  A composition of a SON implementation in 4G as seen in  [16]. 
When a swarm of UAVs is utilized, the distances needed 
to communicate with an FFW-worn SDR must be minimal in 
order to ensure the message throughput in this system. 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Different types of data can be transmitted from a soldier to a 
higher echelon via an UAV. Security issues remain essential 
when dealing with UAVs utilized in Network Centric 
Warfare at a tactical level. This means opting for low 
transmission power and thus minimizing the chances of the 
UAV becoming detected, targeted, and destroyed. 
When transmission distances remain short between the 
ground (FFW) and aerial stations (UAV), the accrued and 
transmitted data can be better secured and requirements of 
LPD and LPI can achieved. When SON utilizes all the 
SDRs, those embedded into the UAVs and those embedded 
into soldier worn systems, this data exchange can be 
executed successfully and thus ensure that the data remain 
intact and coherent. Figure 13 features the data-exchange 
process via a command post and UAVs with the assistance 
of embedded SDRs into the mentioned entities. 
 
Figure 13.  A data exchange process with the swarm of UAVs. 
The swarms of UAVs will forward the data automatically 
via the network system created by UAVs. Demands of LPD 
and LPI can be fulfilled, because the transmitting energy 
used via the transmission protocols by means of UAVs 
remains low. 
IX. 
DISCUSSION 
A military environment, battlespace, differs from a 
civilian environment. In battlespace both constant stress and 
uncertainty continue to dominate. The fear of losing one’s 
life prevails. An FFW has to monitor his or her environment 
when fulfilling the commanded mission and stay alive. The 
mental capacity of an FFW must be focused on the matters at 
hand. The lower the number of gadgets an FFW has to 
monitor, the longer his or her life with an increased 
possibility to continue performing. 
Militaries aim at developing SDR into a communication 
tool for all the troops at the tactical level. The process of 
embedding a functional SDR as part of military troops’ 
communication devices is still globally ongoing in militaries, 
with no existing, operationally fully functional end-user 
devices anywhere in combat use able to transmit large 
amounts of data in various waveforms and frequencies. 
Meeting the requirements of mobile users in a battlespace 
remains challenging. Issues related to SWAP-C have to be 
solved. One critical challenge related to military SDR use 
involves achieving sufficient computational capacity. This is 
a problem when processing wide-band high-bit rate 
waveforms consisting large amounts of data. In terms of 
SWAP-C, an FFW needs the selected communication end-
user device to be reasonably tailored with optimally minimal 
total mass of a device, its batteries and recharging units. This 
means that Data Processing Units (DPUs) and Event Driven 
Administrative and Control Components (EDACCs) have to 
be carefully selected and orchestrated to meet the operational 
requirements of the end-user [7]. 
The issues related to energy cannot be over emphasized. 
The energy requirement of a typical handheld device can be 
between a few hundred milliwatts [15] to few Watts [8]. The 
system specifications of the SDR are significant in defining 
the energy needed as well as the amount of data transmitted. 
Challenges related to operational security are essential in 
reconfiguring the SDR-systems, especially as regards 
software. While loading a new program, new waveform or 
new hopping sequence, issues of transmission security 
during the different uploading processes have to be 
guaranteed. If this part becomes neglected, the SDR will not 
act as a useful tool in own hands in net-centric operations but 
rather becomes a novel tool to be exploited by the adversary. 
A communication system that serves fighters’ needs is 
creatable if we utilize the capabilities of SDR, swarms of 
UAVs, SDR and SON implemented in 4G networks and 
combine them as depicted in Figure 13. This means that an 
FFW’s end-user device, SDR, is connected with a swarm of 
UAVs via SON. The swarms of UAVs form an own data 
communication system in which the data transmission 
distances between UAVs are short and operationally secure. 
This in turn will fulfill the requirements of LPD and LPI. 
The described delicate system introduced is a new one and 
based on ideas that can be executed by utilizing existing 
Commercially Off-the-Shelf (COTS) technology.  The 
system is not yet bullet-proof and can malfunction for a 
number of reasons. Challenges related to creating the 
described system have to be solved to enable the function of 
different processes. The orchestration of the system can also 
fail because of intentional enemy action (jamming, a virus, a 
worm). The system needs to be equipped with an analyzing 
program, which indicates when the system functions 
properly before using the system. This asks for an easily 
replaceable and fault-tolerant system with inbuilt check-in 
routines. Otherwise, traditional methods in orchestrating 
services need to be adopted. 
The 
introduced 
system 
offers 
an 
access 
to 
communication processes, which are created to support 
command and control systems. An FFW relies on 
communication services. To enhance SA and COP, it is 
essential to have user-friendly GUIs of some kind for 
presenting data. As noted, time remains a critical factor in 
tactical-level operations and the main function of an FFW is 
to fight, not to spend time browsing different databases in 
search for vital data. 
Creating a new communication tool requires resources, 
such as personnel, time, money, troops and space to execute 
the use of the tailored device in pre-defined drills. The 
vendors and the end-users have to co-operate to create a 
functioning communication and control tool for the use of an 
FFW. In the development process, the use-cases and usage 
methods of SDRs have to be defined. This includes defining 
use-cases of operations, training-scenarios, types and timing 
of operations, training practices, data gathering during the 
exercises, and After Action Reviews (AARs) together with 
debriefing-sessions for system designers and troops after 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

implementing the training-scenarios. The system-creation 
process requires strict timing in a well-orchestrated series of 
field testing in which the system users and system developers 
have to attend the tests at the same time. The time required 
for field testing equals approximately a decade, the number 
of training drills necessary a hundred, and the number of 
military personnel committed to executing the drills a 
hundred. The complexity of the SDR system requires that a 
handsome number of designers and engineers from the 
vendor’s attend the drills, ideally one on one. The estimated 
funding requirements equal at least a 100 M€. However, only 
average ballpark figures can be estimated as the actual 
realized costs and their approximations would by default 
value be labelled classified. The number of personnel and 
funding required described in this paper rely on the 
experience accumulated over twenty years on active duty as 
a field-test participant.  The military personnel, designers and 
engineers have to be fully committed to this work in order to 
achieve results. Table II below lists the identified resources 
needed for the described study. In order to create a feasible 
testing system, an amount of work equal to producing a 
dissertation is required. 
TABLE II.  
ESTIMATED RESOURCES TEQUIRED FOR FIELD-TESTING 
Types of 
resources 
required 
Vendor 
side 
Military 
side 
Money 
30 M€ 
70 M€ 
Personnel 
100 
100 
Time for 
planning 
2 years 
2 year 
Time for testing 
the system 
5 years 
5 years 
Time for 
evaluating the 
results and the 
system 
2 years 
2 years 
Reserve time 
1 year 
1 year 
Total resources 
10 years 
and 
30 M€ 
10 years 
and 
70 M€ 
 
Table II features only a rough estimate. More precise 
data requires pre-planning for a period of twelve months. 
Different sources of funding, such as industrial and / or 
academic contributions of personnel and / or equipment, 
need to be estimated before any final estimation is doable. 
X. 
RESULTS 
The main result is an idea-phase introduction of a tactical 
level (battalion and below) communication system to be used 
by a tactical end-user performing in a battlespace. As this 
paper’s contents represent an early idea stage of concept 
development, the system drafted and its features described 
can neither be operationalized nor field-tested. 
An FFW performs in a battlespace filled with ubiquitous 
networks and communication systems. He or she has to cope 
with actions involving humans and machines, such as 
databases and UVs. Equipped with a reliable communication 
tool, an FFW can perform tasks with improved speed and 
efficiency. Bespoke SDR can enhance the performance of an 
FFW by answering the defined challenges listed in Section 
III. 
To sustain optimal performance, an FFW has to be able 
to use only one single device for command and control. This 
device can be an SDR with a GUI. This way there is only 
one single device, Software Defined Radio/Graphic User 
Interface (SDR/GUI), for an FFW to communicate and use 
controls with instead of being exposed to several 
communication tools. Compared to a stable civilian 
environment, a military environment equals a constantly 
altering battlespace. An FFW has to be able to monitor the 
events in the prevailing environment instead of needing to 
update the status and monitor his or her command and 
communication tool.  An FFW has to have hands on a 
weapon and be ready to act when necessary. If unable to do 
so, the FFW will become incapacitated by a splinter or a 
bullet. It is essential to enable an FFW to receive and 
transmit data with the assistance of SDR/GUI, into which 
SDR can be embedded. 
First, an improved SDR/GUI can act as a control-station 
for all of the digital systems. This allows an FFW to focus on 
his or her main task, to fight. He or she can monitor the 
prevailing environment and use his or her weaponry in a 
time-critical environment. Second, an FFW can concentrate 
on one device, SDR/GUI, instead of monitoring several 
screens and displays. He or she saves time and can focus on 
the task commanded. Third, the control units of his or her 
own warrior skeleton and communication controls can be 
found from one communication device, SDR/GUI. The 
fourth challenge can also be solved by adopting SDR/GUI 
which will take care of the various networks and waveforms 
and switch automatically to the free and appropriate channel 
to transmit or receive data. 
The fifth challenge was a problem concerning the access 
to BMS via different communication tools. The problem is 
linked to the issues of bandwidth, frequency and waveform. 
The accessing process into BMS involves utilizing the 
performance provided by the SDR and SON. This means 
offering the frequencies, bandwidths and waveforms 
required from the fighters’ perspective. The swarm of UAVs 
serves as a secure and replaceable communication gateway 
for the data exchange process. This allows for keeping the 
transmission power low and transmission ranges relatively 
short. The Sixth challenge was linked to the GUIs. To 
comprehend the prevailing operational situation and a 
holistic list of events at a tactical level, an informative 
presentation of SA and COP is in an essential role. The 
presented system together with improved SDR/GUI can be 
seen as a feasible solution to solve all the listed challenges. 
Figure 14 features a possible view of a functional SDR/GUI 
for the FFW operating at low level (company and below) 
tactical operations. 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 14.  An example of tactical SDR/GUI. 
Tactical SDR/GUIs can serve as command and control 
tools offered for the FFWs. SDR/GUIs can be utilized as 
tools for possibly enhancing the overall performance of the 
soldier. An FFW needs only a short period of time to take a 
look at the SDR/GUI and notice if something significant has 
changed in the overview. An FFW can concentrate on his or 
her main mission, which is to fight instead of constantly 
monitoring all the controlling units of his or her gear. 
XI. 
FURTHER WORK 
When moving towards tactical military SDR/GUI, the 
system presented requires funding and field testing to be able 
to create a functional end-product. The rough estimate of the 
resources required is evaluated above in Section IX and in 
Table II based on the experience gained in twenty years 
spent as a participant in different military tests. Automated 
systems and allocation of diminishing resources force 
militaries to consider the facilitated performance offered by 
means of exploiting SDR/GUI. The result could be an agile 
and modular military performer with ever-improved 
capabilities and SA completed with the capability to utilize 
the diminishing resources more optimally with decreased 
instances of collateral damage. 
Further work related to creating a functional system 
based on the idea-phase description outlined in this paper 
needs to pay attention to operational security issues of using 
software and hardware in a digitized battlespace. Issues such 
as adequate level of constant energy flow and protection 
against violations caused by electronic warfare must be 
studied, tested and solved before the adoption of the system 
in any type of operational use. 
The 
introduced 
idea-phase 
description 
of 
a 
communication system aims at being battle-proof from the 
perspective of using a swarms of UAVs in particular in that 
it guarantees the usability of the system functionality as the 
swarms of UAVs can automatically recreate a functional 
communication network and maintain an adequate distance 
between each UAV in all the circumstances and situations: 
once a UAV is destroyed or shot down, it has been 
programmed 
to 
destroy 
itself 
mechanically 
and 
electronically. The remaining fleets of UAVs corrects the 
formation of flying UAVs automated, to maintain a 
functioning and reliable communication system to ensure the 
communication system remains intact. SON supports the 
communication system formed by the swarms of UAVs 
together with SDRs. Unfortunately, when resources have 
been invested in further researching, developing, and, finally, 
implementing the system introduced here, the follow-up 
papers cannot any longer be accessed in any public domain 
data sources. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] K. A. Hempenius, A. R. Wilson, M. J. Kumar, N. Hosseini, 
M. E. Cordovez, and M. S. Sherriff, “A More Cost-Effective 
Unattended Ground Sensor Using Commercial Off-the-Shelf 
Products”, Proc. of 2012 IEEE Systems and Information 
Engineering Design Symposium, pp. 62 – 67, ISBN: 978-1-
4673-1286-8/12. 
[2] R. A. Syed and R.S. Wexler, “Army Warfighter Information 
Network-Tactical (WIN-T) Theory of Operation”, Military 
Communications Conference, MILCOM2013, 18–20 Nov. 
2013, 
San 
Diego 
CA, 
pp. 
1453 
– 
1461, 
doi: 
10.1109/MILCOM.2013.246.  
[3] S. L. Cotton and W.G. Scanlon, “Millimeter-Wave Soldier-to-
Soldier Communications for Covert Battlefield Operations”, 
IEEE 
Communications 
Magazine, 
pp.72 
– 
81, 
doi:10.1109/MCOM.2009.5273811, ISSN 0163-6804/09. 
[4] T. Ulversøy, Software Defined Radio: “Challenges and 
Opportunities”, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 
Vol. 12, Issue: 4, Fourth Quarter 2010, pp. 531 – 550, 
doi:10.1109/SURV.2010.032910.00019. 
[5] J. Mölsä, J. Karsikas, A. Kärkkäinen, R. Kettunen, and P. 
Huttunen, ” Field test results and use scenarios for a WiMAX 
based Finnish broadband tactical backbone network” The 
2010 Military Communications Conference, San Jose, CA, 
Oct. 
31–Nov. 
3, 
2010, 
pp. 
2014 
– 
2019. 
doi:10.1109/MILCOM.2010.5680446, ISSN 2155-7578. 
[6] Scaldio, 
Reconfigurable 
Radio 
Transceiver 
IP, 
www2.imec.be/content/user/File/Brochures/GR2010_Leaflet 
Scaldio.pdf, accessed on 10th September 2014. 
[7] C-Y. Chen, F-H. Tseng, K-D. Chang, H-C. Chao, and J-L. 
Chen, “Reconfigurable Software Defined Radio and Its 
Applications”, Tamkang Journal of Science and Engineering, 
Vol. 13, No. 1, 2010, pp. 29 – 38.  
[8] M. Islam, M.A. Hannan, S.A Samad, and A. Hussain, 
“Software Defined Radio for RFID Application”, Proc. of the 
World Congress on Engineering and Computer Science 2009 
Vol I WCECS 2009, October 20–22, 2009, San Francisco, 
USA, pp. 415 – 418, ISBN:978-988-17012-6-8. 
[9] G. Thomas, “Situation Awareness Issues in Tactical 
Cognitive Radio”, Proc. of 2012 IEEE International Multi-
Diciplinary Conference on Cognitive Methods in Situational 
Awareness and Decision Support, 6–8 March 2012, pp. 287 – 
293, ISBN 978-1-4673-0345-3/12. 
[10] X. Dong, S. Wei, Y. Li, L. Wang, and L. Bai, “Service-
Oriented Radio Architecture: A Novel M2M Network 
Architecture for Cognitive Radio Systems”, Hindawi 
Publishing Corporation International Journal of Distributed 
Sensor Networks Volume 2012, Article ID 762953, 8 pages,  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2012/762953. 
[11] T. Saarelainen, “Modeling War as a Business Process with the 
Assistance of Service Oriented Architecture”, ICDT 2014 The 
Ninth International Conference on Digital Communications, 
Feb. 23–27, 2014 Nice, France, pp. 1 – 7, ISSN: 2308-3964, 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-316-2. 
[12] R. Adams, “Special Operations Forces Skills”, Military 
Technology, Vol. XXXVIII, Issue 5/2014, p. 38 – 42, ISSN 
0722-3226. 
[13] T. Saarelainen and J. Jormakka, “Computer-Aided Warriors 
for Future Battlefields”, The 9th European Conference on 
Information Warfare and Security ECIW2009, Lisbon, 6–7 
July, 2009, Portugal, pp. 224 – 233, ISBN: 9781906638337. 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[14] T. Saarelainen, “Improving the Performance of a Dismounted 
Future Force Warrior by Means of C4I2SR”, Doctoral 
Dissertation, 212 pages, ISSN: 1796-4059, ISBN 978-951-25-
2457-0, 2013. 
[15] Y. Lin, H. Lee, M. Who, Y. Harel, S. Mahlke, and T. Mudge, 
“SODA: A Low-Power Architecture for Software Radio”, 
Proc. of 33rd annual international Symposium on Computer 
Architecture, pp. 89 – 101, doi: 10.1109/ISCA.2006.37, 0-
7695-2608-X,ISBN: 0-7695-2608-X. 
[16] P. Pancholy, J. Kushwaha, and R. Chitranshi, “Smart 4G 
network:-Implementation of SDR & SON with Automatic 
EM Radiation control”, International Journal of Engineering 
Science and Innovative Technology (IJESIT) Volume 1, Issue 
2, November 2012, pp.14 – 18, ISSN:2319-5967. 
 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

