Rehabilitation Robot Based on  Three-axis Force/Torque Sensor 
 
Han-Sol Kim and Jae-Hyun Jung 
Department of Control & Instrumentation Engineering 
Gyeongsang National University 
501 Jinjudae-ro, Jinju, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: geck@gnu.ac.kr/ replayonion@gnu.ac.kr 
Gab-Soon Kim 
Department of Control & Instrumentation Engineering/ERI 
Gyeongsang National University 
501 Jinjudae-ro, Jinju, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: gskim@gsnu.ac.kr
 
 
Abstract—We describe the ankle rehabilitation robot using a 
three-axis force/torque sensor. The manufactured three-axis 
force/torque sensor which can detect two directional force Fx, 
Fz and one directional torque Tz, was fabricated, and it was 
attached to an ankle rehabilitation robot. The robot was 
designed and manufactured to perform a ankle bending 
flexibility 
rehabilitation 
exercise. 
The 
results 
of 
a 
characteristics test for the developed ankle rehabilitation robot 
showed that it was safely operated while the ankle bending 
flexibility rehabilitation exercise was performed. 
Keywords-component; 
ankle 
rehabilitation 
robo;, 
rehabilitation exercise; three-axis force/torque sensor; rated 
output; interference error. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The feet of severe stroke patients are generally not so 
available as that of normal. In order to use their feet in 
everyday life, their feet must receive rehabilitation exercises. 
An ankle-bending flexibility rehabilitation exercise is 
performed to make the patient's ankle flexible. The ankle-
bending flexibility rehabilitation exercise rotates the ankle in 
a clockwise direction or counter-clockwise direction. It is 
very difficult to deal with a number of severe stroke patients 
and because of it, some of the severe stroke patients can’t 
receive adequate rehabilitation exercise.  
Developed ankle rehabilitation robot [1] was designed 
and manufactured for the unique neuromuscular facilitation 
of stroke patients. An ankle-bending rehabilitation exercise 
of patient’s ankle was performed, and the results were good. 
A torque sensor was attached to the footrest and the main 
body of the robot to measure the rotational force  of the ankle. 
Ankle rehabilitation robots [2] has been designed and 
manufactured to perform a virtual walking exercise using the 
haptic technology, and the ankle of the subject (normal) was 
tested by using the robot. The robot was operated smoothly, 
but the rotational force exerted on the ankle could not be 
measured. So, the robot can’t get the same effect as a 
rehabilitation 
exercise 
conducted 
by 
specialized 
rehabilitation therapists. The ankle rehabilitation robots 
developed so far can’t exert the same effect as a therapist, 
and can’t detect the emergency signal and return to initial 
state during the emergency situation because the robots have 
not had the multi-axis force/torque sensor. Multi-axis 
force/torque sensor for ankle rehabilitation robots must 
measure the torque of the ankle and the forces or torques 
during the emergency situation. Previously developed multi-
axis force/torque sensors are from two-axis to six-axis 
force/torque sensors [3][4], but their price are expensive, and 
they are not appropriate to adhere to the developed 
rehabilitation robot, and the rated capacity of each sensor is 
not fit. So the sensor should be newly designed and 
manufactured. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the design and manufacture of three-axis 
force/torque sensor. Section III describes the design of ankle 
rehabilitation robot. The acknowledgement and conclusions 
close the article. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Manufactured three-axis force/torque sensor. 
II. 
DESIGN AND MANUFACTURE OF THREE-AXIS 
FORCE/TORQUE SENSOR 
The three-axis force/torque sensor was designed using by 
the finite element method (FEM). The rated outputs of the 
variables for designing the three-axis force/torque sensor are 
determined by the rated force and torque of each sensor of 
the three-axis force/torque sensor are Fx=300N, Fz=100N, 
Tz=15Nm, the size of the sensor is 136mm74mm17mm, 
and the rated strain at the attaching location of strain-gage is 
about 250
m/ m
. The lengths l1', l1 and l2 are 5mm, 5mm 
and 10mm respectively, the widths b1 and b2 are 74mm and 
14mm, and the thicknesses t1', t1 and t2 are 1.3mm, 0.7mm 
and 1.4mm respectively. 
The three-axis force/torque sensor was fabricated by 
using the bond (M-200) and the strain gauges (N2A-13-
S1452-350, made in Micro-Measurement Company, gauge 
constant 2.03, size 35.2mm), and constructed by 
Wheatstone bridge. Figure 1 shows the photograph of the 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

manufactured 
three-axis 
force/torque 
sensor. 
The 
characteristics experiment of the three-axis force/torque sensor 
was performed with the multi-axis force/moment sensor 
calibration system developed by Kim [5] and the measuring 
device (DMP40). The maximum interference error of the 
three-axis force/torque sensor was less than 1.24%. And the 
maximum repeatability error and the maximum non-linearity 
error of each sensor were less than 0.03% and 0.02% 
respectively.  
 
 
Figure 2.  The manufactured ankle rehabilitation robot for the ankle-
bending flexibility rehabilitation exercise. 
III. 
DESIGN OF THE ANKLE REHABILITATION ROBOT 
Figure 2 shows the manufactured ankle rehabilitation 
robot for the ankle-bending flexibility rehabilitation exercise. 
The developed ankle rehabilitation robot is composed of a 
body, a support block, a three-axis force/torque sensor, a 
rotation motor, a motor drive, a high-speed controller, a 
battery, and so on. The Fx force sensor of the three-axis 
force/torque sensor measures the rotational force of the 
ankle. Fz force sensor and Tz torque sensor detect the force 
and torque when the emergency state is generated during the 
ankle rehabilitation exercise. Figure 3 (a) shows the graphs 
of emergency characteristic experiment of the manufactured 
ankle rehabilitation robot. Fx is the graph measuring the 
rotational force of the ankle when the ankle rehabilitation 
robot rotates, and Fz is the force that occurs because of the 
soles of wheat up, and Tz is the torque generated in the case 
that a force applied on the sole of the big toe part. The 
emergency situation is generated that more than 10 Nm 
torque or more than 10N is changed suddenly, and the 
program was designed after emergency. The ankle 
rehabilitation robot developed in this paper can securely 
carry out the ankle-bending flexibility rehabilitation of the 
patient, because the robot has the ability to stop and return to 
the initial state when an emergency situation occurs. 
Figure 3 (b) shows the graph of the characteristic 
experiment for the ankle-bending flexibility rehabilitation 
exercise using the ankle rehabilitation robot. The rotational 
force (force Fx) in the bending direction was -52.3N, and 
that in the spreading out direction was 12.1N. The force 
control in each reference rotational force was carried out 
with PI control (Kp: 0.79, Ki: 0.04), and the values of the 
reference rotational forces -52.3N and 12.1N in the bending 
direction and the spreading out direction were shaken, 
because the foot moves in each applied reference force status 
in the bending direction and the spreading out direction.  
 
 
           (a) emergency 
 
 
 (b) ankle-bending exercise 
Figure 3.  Graphs of the characteristic experiment for the emergency and 
the ankle-bending flexibility rehabilitation exercise using the robot. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The three-axis force/torque sensor was designed and 
fabricated for the ankle rehabilitation robot, and its 
interference error, a non-linear error and a repeatability error 
were less than 1.24%, 0.04% and 0.04% respectively. It was 
confirmed that the developed ankle rehabilitation robot was 
operated properly in the characteristic experiment for the 
ankle-bending flexibility rehabilitation exercise. Therefore, it 
is thought that the developed ankle rehabilitation robot can 
be applied to severe stroke patient for the ankle-bending 
flexibility rehabilitation exercise.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by Basic Science Research 
Program through the National Research Foundation of 
Korea(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and 
Future Planning(No. 2015R1A2A2A01002952) 
REFERENCES 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[1] Z. Zhoua, Y. Zhou, N. Wang, F. Gao, K. Wei, and Q. Wang, 
"A proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation integrated 
robotic ankle-foot system for post stroke rehabilitation", 
Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 73, 2015, pp. 111-
122. 
[2] K. J. Chisholm, K. Klumper, A. Mullins, and M. Ahmadi, "A 
task oriented haptic gait rehabilitation robot", Mechatronics, 
vol. 24, no. 8, 2014, pp. 1083-1091. 
[3] G. S. Kim, “Development of a Six-Axis Force/Moment 
Sensor with Rectangular Taper Beams for an Intelligent 
Robot,” International Journal of Control, Automation, and 
Systems, vol. 5, no. 4, 2007, pp. 419-428. 
[4] K. J. Lee, and G. S. Kim, “Design of Structure of Four-Axis 
Force/Torque Sensor with Parallel Step Plate Beams,” Journal 
of Institute of Control, Robotics and Systems, vol. 20 no. 11, 
2014, pp. 1147-1152. 
[5] G. S. Kim, and J. W. Yoon, “Development of calibration 
system for multi-axis force/moment sensor and its uncertainty 
evaluation,” Korean Society Precision Engineering, vol. 24, 
no. 10, 2007, pp. 91-98. 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

