Π-shaped Coiled Stator Ultrasound Motor for Rotating Ultrasound Sensor in 
Intravascular Ultrasound Imaging
Toshinobu Abe, Shinichi Takeuchi
Graduate School of Engineering
Toin University of Yokohama
Yokohama-shi, Japan
b22c003n@ust.toin.ac.jp
Tadashi Moriya
Professor Emeritus
Tokyo Metropolitan University
Hino-shi, Japan
Takasuke Irie, Masakazu Satou
Microsonic Co., Ltd.
Kokubunji-shi, Japan
Abstract—The primary focus of this paper is the development 
of an ultra-miniature ultrasound motor for rotating the
ultrasound sensor in an intravascular ultrasonography (IVUS) 
system for use in
the human blood vessel. Recently, 
intravascular diagnosis by IVUS has become widely used in 
medicine. IVUS is minimally invasive and can reduce pain felt 
by the patient, and is mainly used for examination of coronary 
artery disease. Since the size of the drive source for rotating 
the ultrasound sensor is large in the IVUS systems currently in 
practical use, it is installed outside the body, and the rotational 
power for the ultrasound sensor is transmitted through the 
long tortuous blood vessel. Such systems suffer from the 
problem that the rotation becomes non-uniform due to 
overloading of the wire transmitting the rotational power, and 
the problem that the available time is limited in order to 
prevent the wire from being damaged by overloading. We have 
therefore developed a Π-shaped coiled stator ultrasound motor 
(CS-USM) as a miniature ultrasound motor for rotating the 
ultrasound sensor for use in blood vessels in order to solve 
these problems. The CS-USM will achieve stable rotation of the 
ultrasound sensor in the blood vessel, since there is no need to 
transfer the rotational power though the long tortuous blood 
vessel. Furthermore, damage to the wire due to overloading is 
expected to be prevented. In this paper, we describe 
measurement of the torque, revolution speed, output power, 
and efficiency of the Π-shaped CS-USM.
Keywords-CS-USM; Coiled stator;
Ultrasound; Motor; 
Closed-loop waveguide; Revolution speed; Torque
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, intravascular surgery and diagnosis have been 
used in medicine, for example, in atherectomy and IVUS. 
Intravascular surgery is a minimally invasive surgical 
method. 
Atherectomy 
is 
a 
method 
for
removing 
atherosclerosis from blood vessels [1]. IVUS is mainly used 
to observe the luminal area and to confirm coronary stent
expansion. IVUS visualizes the tissue beneath the surface,
which is not possible by optical angiography [2] [3]. These 
devices need to perform rotational movement within the 
vessel.
The device that drives the revolution, such as a motor, is 
located outside the body in the IVUS systems currently in 
practical use. Non-uniform rotation and breakage of the shaft 
that transmits the rotational motion can occur due to 
undesired mechanical loading in long tortuous blood vessels.
A small motor that can be used within the blood vessels is 
therefore needed in order to overcome these problems. A 
small motor can be installed as the driving source inside the 
blood vessel, removing the need to transmit rotational 
motion through a long tortuous blood vessel. This would 
improve the rotational stability and prevent the shaft of the 
rotating device from breaking.
Various types of ultrasound motors, including ring
motors, linear motors, levitated-rotor motors, and coiled-
stator motors have been actively investigated [4] [5] [6] [7].
We have been developing a CS-USM to construct a 
micromotor [8] [9] [10]. Since the CS-USM has a simple 
structure compared to other types of ultrasound motors, it is 
suitable for miniaturization. Ultrasound micromotors with 
outer circumferences of less than 1 mm have been fabricated 
using the coiled-stator structure by some groups [8] [11]. The 
main problem in terms of practical use is its low efficiency.
A quadratic driving method using a closed-loop waveguide 
has been proposed for improving the efficiency [12].
However, the piezoelectric transducers need to be attached to 
the waveguide, and the acoustic impedances of a closed-loop 
waveguide are non-uniform at the attachment points. We 
thus think that these attachment points may cause the low 
efficiency. Further improvement may therefore be required.
We previously proposed a new CS-USM structure that had 
an ultrasound power circulation-type acoustic waveguide and
employed the quadratic excitation method [10]. Furthermore, 
a connection method between the piezoelectric transducer 
and acoustic waveguide was proposed to minimize the effect 
of acoustic propagation characteristics on the acoustic 
waveguide. in the previous paper [10]. Also, we previously 
reported a
method for measuring the torque of the 
micromotor and the torque-revolution speed characteristics 
of the CS-USM [9]. These papers did not deal with the 
relationship 
between 
torque 
and 
revolution 
speed 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

characteristics and the relationships among torque, output 
power, and efficiency of a Π-shaped CS-USM. These 
relationships are described in the present paper.
The remainder of this paper is organized into the 
following five sections. Section II presents the concept of the 
CS-USM for IVUS. Section III describes the driving 
principle of our CS-USM. Section IV shows the fabrication 
of
the Π-shaped CS-USM. Section V describes
the 
measurements of the characteristics of the Π-shaped CS-
USM. Finally, Section VI gives our conclusions.
II.
CONCEPT OF CS-USM FOR IVUS
Recently, intravascular diagnosis by using IVUS has 
become widely used in medicine [1]. IVUS is minimally 
invasive and can reduce pain felt by the patient, and is
mainly used for examination of coronary artery disease.
Since the size of the drive source for rotating the ultrasound 
sensor is large in the IVUS systems currently in practical 
use, it is installed outside the body, and the rotational power
for the ultrasound sensor is transmitted through the long
tortuous blood vessel. Such systems suffer from the problem 
that the rotation becomes non-uniform due to overloading of 
the wire transmitting the rotational power, and the problem 
that the available time is limited in order to prevent the wire 
from being damaged due to overload. We thus developed
the CS-USM as a miniature ultrasound motor that can be 
used inside the blood vessels in order to solve these 
problems. Figure 1 shows a conceptual diagram of the 
structure of an IVUS system using a small CS-USM for 
rotating the ultrasound sensor.
Figure 1. Conceptual diagram showing the structure of an IVUS system 
using a CS-USM small motor for rotating the ultrasound sensor.
If an ultra-miniature CS-USM can be developed for use 
inside blood vessels, it is expected that the CS-USM will be 
able to rotate stably in the blood vessel since there is no 
need to transfer the rotational power though the long
tortuous blood vessel. Furthermore, damage to the wire due 
to overloading is expected to be prevented.
III.
DRIVING PRINCIPLE
In this section, we describe the driving principle of the 
CS-USM and Π-shaped CS-USM. The driving principle of 
the CS-USM is described in Subsection A. The driving 
principle of
the
Π-shaped CS-USM is detailed in
Subsection B.
A. Driving Principle of CS-USM
The CS-USM is a traveling-wave ultrasound motor that 
uses a coiled stator. When a flexural wave propagates along 
the coiled stator, particles on the surface of the coiled stator 
are displaced along an elliptical locus due to the coupling of 
longitudinal and transverse waves. A rotor arranged inside of
the coiled stator is driven in the opposite direction to the 
particle movement by the frictional force as shown in
Figure 2. 
Figure 2. Rotor rotating in the opposite direction to the propagation of the 
flexural wave in the coiled stator [10].
The CS-USM consists of piezoelectric transducers, an 
acoustic waveguide, and a rotor. Since it has such a simple
structure, it is expected to be able to be miniaturized as an 
ultrasound motor. Since a coiled acoustic waveguide is used 
as the stator, driving force is imparted to the rotor along a 
large part of the interface between the rotor and the stator. 
That is, even if the stator has a small driving force per unit
length, a large drive force can be imparted to the rotor by 
using a coiled stator [13].
B. Driving Principle of Π-shaped CS-USM
Figure 3 shows the structure of the Π-shaped CS-USM. 
The motor consists of a rotor, a coiled stator, and two lead 
zirconate 
titanate 
ceramic 
(PZT)-based
piezoelectric 
transducers. The stator forms a closed acoustic waveguide 
loop with the coiled waveguide and straight waveguide 
connected at connection points A and B. The length of the 
closed-loop waveguide is an integer multiple of the 
wavelength of the ultrasound wave.
Figure 3. Configuration of our Π-shaped CS-USM [10].
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The traveling wave for rotating the rotor can be generated by 
superposing two standing waves of phases that differ by 90 
degrees with respect to both position and time [14]. In the 
following equations, standing wave (1) is induced at point A 
by PZT 1, standing wave (2) is induced at point A by PZT 2, 
and traveling wave (3) is then generated from the two 
standing waves.

u1 (x, t) = A sin kx sin ωt,


u2 (x, t) = A cos kx cos ωt,

ut (x, t) = u1 (x, t) + u2 (x, t)


= A sin kx sin ωt + A cos kx cos ωt


= A cos (kx - ωt),

where, A, k, x, ω, and t are the flexural wave amplitude, 
wavenumber, position, angular frequency, and time, 
respectively. It is easy to change the rotation direction by 
switching the phase difference from 90 to -90.
IV.
FABRICATION OF Π-SHAPED CS-USM
The fabrication of the CS-USM is described in this 
section. The structure and design of the Π-shaped CS-USM 
are described in Subsections A and B, respectively.
A. Structure of Π-shaped CS-USM
As shown in Figure 3, the length of the straight section 
from point A to point B is λ/4. The length of the closed-loop 
waveguide including coiled stator from point B to point A in 
a counterclockwise direction is (n + 3/4)λ, where n is an 
arbitrary integer. Source waveguides 1 and 2 are connected 
to the closed-loop waveguide at connecting points A and B 
by electric spot welds. The two PZT transducers are attached 
by soldering to source waveguides 1 and 2, respectively.
B. Design of Π-shaped CS-USM
Figure 4 shows a photograph of the fabricated Π-shaped 
CS-USM.
Figure 4. Fabricated Π-shaped CS-USM [9].
The thickness and width of the acoustic waveguides are 0.1 
and 0.3 mm, respectively. The material of the acoustic 
waveguide is SUS 304. The coiled stator is wound 5 turns
around the rotor. The thickness, width, and length of the PZT 
transducer (C-213, Fuji Ceramics) are 0.25, 1.0, and 5 mm, 
respectively. The rotor is a steel wire with a diameter of 0.56 
mm. The inner diameter of the coiled stator is 0.6 mm. The 
length of the straight waveguide from point A to point B is 
1.5 mm. The length of the closed waveguide from point B to 
point A in a counterclockwise direction is 10.5 mm.
V. MEASUREMENT OF CHARACTERISTICS OF Π-SHAPED 
CS-USM
We measured the characteristics of the Π-shaped CS-
USM. Subsections A, B, and C, respectively, describe the 
following relationships for the Π-shaped CS-USM: the 
relationship between applied voltage and revolution speed; 
the relationship between torque and revolution speed; and 
the relationships among
torque, output
power,
and 
efficiency.
A. Measurement of Revolution Speed
We measured the revolution speed of the Π-shaped CS-
USM by using a laser Doppler velocimeter. The laser beam 
is reflected by reflective tape attached to the rotor, and the 
revolution speed is determined from the reflected beam. The 
Π-shaped CS-USM is held in a CS-USM holder for 
characteristics measurement as shown in Figure 5. The CS-
USM holder is able to hold the rotor, keeping constant 
contact between the rotor and the coiled stator.
Figure 5. CS-USM holder for measuring characteristics [9].
First, the resonance frequency of the piezoelectric 
transducers was measured with a fixed voltage applied to the 
piezoelectric transducers. The resonance frequency of the Π-
shaped CS-USM was estimated to be 311 kHz from the 
results. Next, the revolution speed was measured by 
sweeping the applied voltage from 2 to 32 Vpp at the 
resonance frequency. Furthermore, the revolution speed and 
direction of revolution were measured at the resonance 
frequency after switching the phase difference of the driving 
signal from 90 to -90. A continuous sinusoidal wave was 
used for the driving signal in this experiment.
Figure 6 shows revolution speed as a function of applied 
voltage. We repeated the measurement of rotational speed 10 
times. Mean values with error bars indicating the standard 
deviation are plotted in Fig. 6. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 6. Revolution speed as a function of applied voltage.
It was found that the revolution speed was about 3500 rpm, 
but it differed between the forward and reverse directions.
The forward direction is defined as the direction in which the 
traveling wave propagates along the coiled stator.
B. Measurement of Torque-Revolution Speed
We next measured the relationship between torque and 
revolution speed. Figure 7 shows a schematic diagram of the 
measurement of the torque-revolution speed characteristics, 
where R, T, Wtr, Wap, Mtr, Map, and g are the radius of the 
rotor, tensile force, true weight, apparent weight, true mass, 
apparent mass, and gravitational acceleration, respectively. A 
weight was suspended from the Z stage using a string, and 
was wound once around the rotor.
Figure 7. Schematic diagram of measuring torque-revolution speed
characteristics [9].
This structure provides a load on the rotor by the movement 
of the Z stage. At the same time, the revolution speed of the 
motor was measured using a laser Doppler velocimeter. As 
in the measurement of the revolution speed, the Π-shaped 
CS-USM was held by the CS-USM holder while measuring
the characteristics as shown in Figure 5. Torque τ is given by 
(4) as follows:

τ = R × T.

In addition, A and B can be obtained by (5) and (6) as 
follows:

Wtr – Wap,


Wap  Map × g.

The drive conditions were the same as those in the 
revolution speed measurement. Drive frequency, applied 
voltage, and drive signal were 311 kHz, 30 V, and 
continuous wave, respectively. We measured the torque 
while changing the load on the rotor by moving the Z stage.
Figure 8 shows the system for measuring the torque-
revolution speed
characteristics.
Figure 9 shows the 
revolution speed as a function of torque. 
Figure 8. System for measuring torque-revolution speed characteristics [9].
Figure 9. Torque-revolution speed characteristics [9].
It was confirmed that the torque of the Π-shaped CS-USM
was about 3.4 μNm and 0.9 μNm in the forward and reverse 
rotation directions, respectively.
The revolution speed 
decreased with increasing torque. The torque in the forward 
direction was different from that in the reverse direction.
String
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

C. Estimation of Output Power and Efficiency of Π-shaped 
CS-USM
We calculated the output power of the Π-shaped CS-
USM from the torque and rotational speed. We also 
calculated the efficiency from the torque and rotational speed. 
In addition, we calculated the efficiency from the output 
power of the Π-shaped CS-USM and the input power of the 
PZT transducers. The input power to the PZT transducers
taking into account the power factor was 21.6 mW at 30 Vpp.
The input power required to drive the motor was 43.2 mW. 
Figure 10 shows the output power and efficiency as a 
function of torque for forward rotation. Figure 11 shows the 
output power and efficiency as a function of torque for 
reverse rotation.
Figure 10. Output power and efficiency as a function of torque for forward 
rotation
Figure 11. Output power and efficiency as a function of torque for reverse 
rotation.
The maximum efficiency was thus found to be about 0.8% 
and 0.2% in the forward and reverse rotation directions, 
respectively.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We fabricated a Π-shaped CS-USM to improve the 
driving efficiency of CS-USMs for driving IVUS ultrasound 
sensors. The relationship between the revolution speed and 
torque of the fabricated Π-shaped CS-USM was measured. 
The 
driving 
efficiencies were 
calculated 
from 
the 
measurement data. The maximum driving efficiency was 
confirmed to be about 0.8%. In previous research, the 
maximum driving efficiency of a large single-transducer CS-
USM was found to be about 0.1%. The observed 
improvement in driving efficiency shows the superiority of 
the closed-loop acoustic waveguide for Π-shaped CS-USM. 
However, the fabricated CS-USMs exhibited individual 
differences in driving frequency, revolution speed, and 
torque performance. These individual differences may be 
caused by poor fabrication accuracy and experimental 
conditions. Therefore, improvement in the manufacturing 
accuracy of the CS-USM is desired. To use the CS-USM in 
medicine, miniaturization and biocompatibility are required. 
Therefore, it is necessary to give sufficient consideration to
the components and structure of the CS-USM. Optimization 
of the thickness and width of the closed acoustic waveguide 
is a problem for the future.
REFERENCES
[1]
W. B. Keeling, et al, “Plaque excision with the Silverhawk 
catheter: Early results in patients with claudication or critical 
limb ischemia,” J. Vasc. Surg., Vol. 45, Jan. 2007, pp. 25-31.
[2]
Y. Saijo, A. Tanaka, N. Owada, and S. Nitta, “Tissue velocity 
imaging of coronary artery by rotating-type intravascular 
ultrasound,” Ultrasonics, Vol. 42, Apr. 2004, pp. 753-757.
[3]
Y. Saijo and A. F. W. van der Steen Eds., “Vascular 
Ultrasound,” Tokyo: Springer-Verlag, Jul. 2003, p. 57.
[4]
T. Maeno, T. Tsukimoto, and A. Miyake, “Finite-element 
analysis of the rotor/stator contact in a ring-type ultrasonic 
motor." IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control., Vol. 
39, Nov. 1992. pp. 668-674.
[5]
C. H. Yun, T. Ishii, K. Nakamura, S. Ueha, and K. Akashi, “A 
high power ultrasonic linear motor using a longitudinal and 
bending hybrid bolt-clamped Langevin type transducer,” Jpn. 
J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 40, May 2001, pp. 3773-3776.
[6]
T. Yamazaki, J. Hu, K. Nakamura, and S. Ueha, “Trial 
construction of a noncontact ultrasonic motor with an 
ultrasonically levitated rotor.” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 35,
May 1996, pp. 3286-3288.
[7]
T. Moriya and Y. Furukawa “Ultrasonic motor.” U.S. Patent 
No. 7,602,103., Oct. 2009.
[8]
T. Abe, T. Moriya, T. Irie, and S. Takeuchi, “Development of 
Hydrothermally Synthesized PZT Polycrystalline Film 
Transducers for CS-USM (Coiled Stator Ultrasound Motor),” 
Res. Bull. TOIN Univ. Yokohama, Dec. 2013, pp. 13-17. (In 
Japanese)
[9]
T. Abe, T. Moriya, T. Irie, and S. Takeuchi, “Characteristic of 
Π-Shaped Coiled Stator Ultrasound Motor (CS-USM),”
ICICE tech. rep, Vol. 114, May 2014, pp. 13-17. (In 
Japanese)
[10] T. Abe, T. Moriya, T. Irie, M. Sato, and S. Takeuchi, 
“Experimental study of the Π-shaped coiled stator ultrasound 
motor,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 53, Jun. 2014, pp. 07KE15-
1-07KE15-5.
[11] A. Nakajima, Y. Furukawa, and T. Moriya, “Development of 
a New Traveling Wave Ultrasonic Micro Motor : Application 
to Catheter in Micro Blood Vessels(Nano/micro measurement 
and intelligent instrument),” Proc. Int. Conf. LEM21, Oct. 
2005, pp. 371-374.
[12] K. Youhei, M. Yoshizawa, N. Tagawa, T. Irie, and T. Moriya,
“Ultrasonic Power Circulation-type Quadratic Excitation 
Method for improvement in torque of Coiled Stator Ultrasonic 
Motor,” Proc. Symp. Ultrason. Electron., Nov. 2012, pp. 475-
476.
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[13] M. Tanabe, S Xie, N. Tagawa, T. Moriya, and Y. Furukawa,
“Development of a Mechanical Scanning-type Intravascular 
Ultrasound System Using a Miniature Ultrasound Motor,” Jpn. 
J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 46, Jul. 2007, pp. 4805-4808.
[14] K. Uchino and J. R. Giniewicz, “Micromectronics” New 
York: Marcel Dekker, Apr. 2003, p. 423.
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

