On Wafer Characterisation of the Analog Anisotropic Magnetoresistance Sensor  
Janez Trontelj ml.  
University of Ljubljana,  
Faculty of Electrical Engineering 
Trzaska 25, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia 
e-mail: janez.trontelj2@guest.arnes.si
 
Abstract - This article presents the solution for a fast evaluation 
tool of an analog integrated Anisotropic Magnetoresistance 
Sensor (AMR) on a silicon wafer. It was necessary to evaluate a 
selected prototype development phase of a custom analog AMR 
sensor. This approach significantly shortened the development 
time as no dicing and packaging was required. We will also use 
this solution later for a final volume production wafer sorting. 
The biggest challenge was to quickly generate and release an 
accurate, sufficiently strong magnetic field that is as parallel as 
possible to the wafer surface. Such a field is needed to measure 
the peak values of the sine and cosine output signals of the 
analog AMR sensor.  
Keywords - analog AMR sensor; wafer sort; AMR sensitivity. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Magnetoresistance (MR) is the tendency of selected 
material to change its electrical resistance value when an 
external magnetic field is present. Several effects are known 
[1], such as Anisotropic Magnetoresistance (AMR), Giant 
Magnetoresistance 
(GMR), 
Tunnel 
Magnetoresistance 
(TMR), 
Colossal 
Magnetoresistance 
(CMR) 
and 
Extraordinary Magnetoresistance (EMR). In contrast to 
isotropic MR materials, anisotropic MR materials [2] have a 
different resistance depending on the material’s orientation 
in a magnetic field. 
We can purchase several inexpensive MR and AMR 
sensors available on the market today. They are produced by 
manufacturers like Sensitec GmbH, STMicroelectronics, 
Honeywell, iC-Haus and many others. They are intended for 
measuring electric current, for the electronic compass, for 
the acquisition of linear position, speed or angle in technical 
equipment and similar [3]. The MR sensors are known for 
their reliability, accuracy, low cost and extreme resistance to 
environmental influences [4][5]. 
In our case, a local company has developed its version of 
the analog AMR sensor based on their specific needs. Our 
task was to produce this application-specific sensor. It was 
also necessary to quickly verify such analog AMR sensor 
components on silicon wafers to facilitate this task. 
Although there is a lot of literature about different AMR 
sensors, we could not find any good literature about the test 
implementation (including a sensitivity measurement) of an 
analog AMR sensor on a wafer. Therefore, we describe our 
solution to this problem in this article.  
The ideal analog, variable resistance AMR sensor 
output, which corresponds to the changing magnetic field of 
the magnetic tape, shows Figure 1, and Figure 2 shows the 
equivalent circuit of the AMR sensor. It consists of two 
Wheatstone bridges. The first has four equal resistors R1, 
R2, R3 and R4 and the second also has four equal resistors 
R5, R6, R7 and R8. They are made of a thin tantalum layer. 
The upper Wheatstone bridge covers one half of the 
magnetic field period, and the lower Wheatstone bridge 
covers a second half of the magnetic field period.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The problem here was to generate an appropriate 
magnetic field while probing a Device Under Test (DUT) on 
the wafer prober. The requirement was to immediately 
obtain a peak value of the sensor sensitivity of the sine and 
cosine curve. The direction of the magnetic field must be as 
 
 
Figure 1.  Ideal analog AMR sensor output of ncos, pcos, nsin and 
psin signals. 
 
 
Figure 2.  AMR equivalent circuit. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

parallel as possible to the silicon wafer’s surface. An 
additional limiting factor is a small opening in the test probe 
card (Figure 3) and the fragile contact probes’ proximity. 
The magnet’s free space in the middle of the probe-card 
with six test probes is magnified for better presentation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The test sample’s sensitivity level should be as close as 
possible to the sensitivity level measured near the magnetic 
tape (Figure 4). The device’s most relevant parameters are 
the signal amplitudes at terminals “ncos-nsin” and “pcos-
psin”. In addition to the sensitivity, we must also measure 
each resistance in a double Wheatstone bridge.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other important parameters are the offset voltages at 
“ncos-nsin” and “pcos-psin” when no magnetic field is 
present. The current consumption is also a part of the 
characterization, which is monitored during development 
and production. A small hysteresis of the outputs we 
consider, at this stage, is guaranteed “by design” itself. At 
the moment, the hysteresis can only be measured by using a 
magnetic tape when we change the direction of tape travel 
according to the AMR sensor. 
Section 2 describes a precise mechanism that allows a 
magnetic field generation near a silicon wafer’s surface and 
in proximity to the test needles without damaging them. 
Section 3 describes some AMR sensitivity results, and 
section 4 describes some ideas for further improvement of 
the AMR sensor on the silicon wafer characterization 
procedure. 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
To develop the analog AMR sensor’s optimal resistor 
geometry and layer structure, it was necessary to cut a 
silicon wafer, place the sensor device into a test package, 
and then measure all the sensor’s critical parameters, 
including the sensitivity. These measurements were 
performed with specially designed hardware and an 
alternating 
magnetized 
magnetic 
tape 
(Figure 
4) 
perpendicular to the AMR sensor. We are talking about a 
magnetic field with a typical strength of 30mT. Figure 4 
shows the top view of the AMR sensor with pads and 
resistor array. The distance from the 1mm thick tape to the 
sensor is adjustable from 0.5 to 1.5mm, and the dimension 
of the sensor is about 1 x 4mm. 
To avoid this time-consuming step, we decided to use a 
small neodymium magnet to create a permanent magnetic 
field and a special structure to transfer this field close to the 
silicon wafer’s surface. The magnetic field direction should 
be as parallel as possible to the surface of the silicon wafer. 
This structure was custom made from a soft ferromagnetic 
material [6]. After performing some simulations and 
experimenting with different shapes and materials, we 
selected a final form shown in Figure 5.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During wafer sorting, it is essential to perform some 
measurements with and without a magnetic field. It was 
necessary to develop a precision mechanism (Figure 6) with 
an actuator.  
This mechanism allows us to position the magnetic field 
with a small joystick within a few micrometer range. The 
hinge is made of a thin steel sheet. The entire mechanism is 
screwed onto the test probe card and later adjusted under a 
microscope. 
III. 
RESULTS 
The repeatability of measurements in the magnetic field 
is in the range of 1.6% of the measured value. By accurately 
adjusting the magnetic field near the DUT, we can measure 
the maximum amplitude of the sine and cosine signals. The 
measured values are almost identical to the values measured 
 
Figure 5.  Structure from neodymium magnet and ferromagnetic 
material. Distance "d" is 2mm 
 
 
Figure 3.  AMR test probe card with twelve test probes in the middle. 
We need two probes per pad for four-wire measurement. 
 
 
Figure 4.  AMR sensor with six pads and resistor array near the 
magnetic tape. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

later on packaged parts near the magnetic tape. We have the 
best matching score at the one mm sensor-tape gap. Figure 7  
shows a graph of the differences between two sequentially 
repeated sensitivity measurements for 100 devices. The 
typical peak amplitude of the sensitivity amplitude is 50 to 
60 millivolts and the standard deviation of the difference in 
repeated measurements is 0.9 mV. Blue colored values in 
Figure 7 present differences between cosine amplitude and 
red values present differences between sine amplitude. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During wafer sort, the magnetic field generation and 
settling time is approximately twenty-five milliseconds, and 
the total test time per DUT is about 40 milliseconds. The 
magnetic field is reset to zero as the wafer prober moves the 
probes to the next device. At this point, the magnetic field 
actuator increases the distance between the wafer surface 
and the magnet structure in Figure 4. The gap rises from a 
few micrometers to about ten millimeters. No magnetic 
influence on the AMR sensor can then be detected. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Some additional parameters for the optimal exploitation 
of one device are presented in Table 1. There are some 
characteristics concerning three different distances of the 
test AMR sensor sample from the magnetic tape.  The 
typical space in the final application is 0.5 mm.  
The sensor’s resistance does not change significantly 
with the magnetic field distance, as shown in the table’s 
second line. The sensitivity at the magnetic field change is 
also within the required range, and we can also expect some 
offset values. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
With this method we have tested several thousand 
analog AMR sensors so far. This approach significantly 
shortened the development time for a customer-specific, 
analog AMR sensor. Further development in this area is in 
replacing the mechanical actuator and permanent magnet 
with a microfine coil with permalloy or soft magnetic 
composite materials [6] core for even faster magnetic field 
generation. We have already carried out some experiments 
in this direction but had problems with the field strength and 
the limited space near the test probes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Probe card with fine adjustable magnetic field actuator. 
TABLE 1.  AMR SENSOR TEST SAMPLE RESULTS. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  AMR sensitivity repeating measurement difference graph in volts for 100 devices with standard deviation of 0.9mV. 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The data in Table 1 were obtained from the described 
test procedure on the wafer. Measurements were averaged 
with a 16-bit analog to digital conversion and with hi gain. 
Accuracy and repeatability were also verified with a 
calibrated, professional voltmeter.   
The hysteresis cannot be measured with the described 
method. It can only be determined by moving a sensor or 
magnetic field in both directions (Figure 4). However, our 
solution to this problem is currently patent pending and will 
be published shortly. 
Additionally, we also see the upgrade of the overall 
process in the improvement of the AMR sensor geometry 
and its performance [7][8]. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Wikipedia contributors. “Magnetoresistance,” Wikipedia, The 
Free Encyclopedia. Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, 10 
Sep. 2020. Web. 20 Sep. 2020. 
[2] Wikipedia contributors. “Magnetic anisotropy,” Wikipedia, 
The Free Encyclopedia. Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, 
27 May. 2020. Web. 20 Sep. 2020. 
[3] R. Slatter, “Magnetoresistive (MR) Sensors for Angle-, Path- 
and Current Measurement in Harsh Environments,” Proc. 
AMA Conference Sensor 2015 and IRS2, Nuremberg, pp. 228-
233, 2015. 
[4]  J. Fraden, “Handbook of Modern Sensors: Physics, Designs, 
and Applications, 5th ed.,” Springer International Publishing 
Switzerland,  2016. 
[5] S. A. C. Harmon, M. J. Hall, S. Turner, and N. Hillier, 
“Characterization of magnetic sensors at the operational 
temperatures of industrial applications,” in IEEE Transactions 
on Magnetics., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 1-4, Jan. 2015. 
[6] F. Fiorillo, G. Bertotti, C. Appino, and M. Pasquale, “Soft 
Magnetic Materials,” Wiley Encyclopedia of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineering 1999, John Wiley&Sons, Inc., 
Hoboken, NJ, USA, 1999. 
[7] C. Wang, W. Su, J. Pu, Z. Hu, and M. Liu, “A Self-biased 
Anisotropic Magnetoresistive (AMR) Magnetic Field Sensor 
on Flexible Kapton.,” 2018 IEEE International Magnetics 
Conference (INTERMAG), Singapore,  pp. 1-1,  2018 
[8] N. G. Hadjigeorgiou and P. P. Sotiriadis, “Parasitic 
Capacitances, Inductive Coupling, and High-Frequency 
Behavior of AMR Sensors,” in IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 
20, no. 5, pp. 2339-2347,  March, 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

