Enhanced Sensitivity in the VIS-NIR Range Under UV Light in a-SiC Pinpin Device 
 
V. Silva, P. Louro, M.A. Vieira, I. Rodrigues, 
M. Vieira  
Electronics Telecommunication and Computer Dept. 
ISEL – Instituto Superior de Engenharia de Lisboa 
Lisboa, Portugal 
vsilva@deetc.isel.ipl.pt, plouro@deetc.isel.ipl.pt, 
mvieira@deetc.isel.pt irodrigues@deetc.isel.ipl.pt, 
mv@isel.pt 
V. Silva, P. Louro, M. A. Vieira, M. Vieira  
 
CTS-UNINOVA, 
UNL - Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 
Caparica, Portugal. 
vvd.silva@campus.fct.unl.pt, plouro@deetc.isel.ipl.pt, 
mvieira@deetc.isel.pt, mv@isel.pt 
 
 
Abstract—The use of ultra-violet (UV) steady state illumination 
increases the spectral sensitivity of a pi’npin photodiode 
beyond the visible spectrum. Increased sensitivity in the range 
of 400-850 nm is experimentally demonstrated. The pi’npin 
photodiode can be illuminated back and front sides. Under 
front irradiation and low power intensity the gain is high and 
presents a well defined peak at 750 nm and strongly quenches 
in the visible range. As the power irradiation increases the 
peak shifts to the visible range and can be deconvoluted into 
two peaks, one in the red range and another in the green range. 
Under back irradiation the gain is high in the violet/blue 
ranges and strongly quenches for wavelengths higher than 550 
nm, whatever the intensity of the background. Results show 
that, front background UV illumination enhances the light-to-
dark sensitivity of the medium, opening a window in the visible 
and near infrared range (VIS-NIR). Background illumination 
with UV at the back enhances only the magnitude in short 
wavelength range opening a window in the UV and blue 
ranges. 
Keywords-UV; VIS-NIR; Visible Light Communication; SiC 
technology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Light-emitting Diode (LED) is a very effective lighting 
technology due to its high brightness, long life, energy 
efficiency, durability, affordable cost, optical spectrum and 
its colour range for creative use. Their use as communication 
devices with a photo-diode as receptor, has been used for 
many years in hand held devices, to control televisions and 
other media equipment, and with higher rates, between 
computational devices [1]. This communication path has 
been used in the near infra-red (NIR) range, but due to the 
increasing LED lighting in homes and offices, the idea to use 
them for visible light communications (VLC) is present in 
many working groups. The Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers  (IEEE) task group 7 has come up with 
the IEEE 802.15.7 VLC PHY/MAC standard proposal for 
the physical (PHY) and medium access control (MAC) for 
VLC communications [2]. The Internet use and its most 
popular protocols also have been studied for their 
performance over VLC [3]. Economic issues that will 
eventually guide the VLC outcome are also on the run [4]. 
The sensor presented in this paper, is based on amorphous 
silicon carbon technology (a-SiC:H) [5], it consists of a 
pi’npin structure. The front pi’n is thinner and has carbon a-
SiC:H in the intrinsic layer while the back pin is based on a-
Si:H. Two electrical optically transparent contacts interface 
the sensor at the front and back. Due to the asymmetric 
lengths of each pin structure and to their difference in 
materials, the sensor has interesting properties, namely a 
light selective filter [6]. The sensor is capable of 
discriminating different wavelength signals and with 
convenient signal modulation has the capability of logic 
transformations (AND, OR, NOT and XOR) over the input 
signals [7], which may play an important function in specific 
VLC applications. A multiplexing / demultiplexing function 
has been identified using the sensor with 4 different channels 
allowing WDM applications [8]. The study of UV and IR 
response of the sensor is important for the possible use of 
these wavelengths as communication channels for out-of 
visible band information interchange. In this paper, we 
demonstrate the use of near-UV steady state illumination to 
increase the spectral sensitivity of the a-SiC/Si pi’npin 
photodiode beyond the visible spectrum. Section II describes 
the pi’npin structure. Section III presents the theoretical 
optoelectronic model and linear state equations. Section IV 
shows in graphical plots the experimental spectrum of the 
pi’npin photocurrent, and the photocurrent output for input 
signals in the visible and NIR spectrum ranges. Section V 
presents the results and their discussion. The conclusions and 
acknowledgement close the article. 
II. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
The sensor is composed by two stacked p-i-n structures 
(p(a-SiC:H)- i’(a-SiC:H)-n(a-SiC:H)-p(a-SiC:H)-i(a-Si:H)-
n(a-Si:H)) sandwiched between two transparent contacts at 
each end. The thicknesses and optical gap of the i’- (200 
nm; 2.1 eV) and i- (1000 nm; 1.8 eV) layers are optimized 
for light absorption in the blue and red ranges [9]. The 
working range of the sensor is in the visible spectrum, 
although light sources within the ultra-violet (350-400nm) 
and near infra-red (700-880nm) ranges are also used.  
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

This 1cm2 structure can be seen in Figure 1, where the 
wavelength arrows indicate the absorption depths during 
operation [10] and the digital light signals λV, λB, λG, λR, λIR, 
where the V index is in the UV range, R,G,B in the Visible 
and IR in the NIR range. 
 
Figure 1. Device structure and operation. 
General purposes LEDs are used as light sources. These 
light sources are used as digital signals and background 
lighting. The signals are impinged on the front side of the 
sensor. The background lighting is either at the back or at 
the front side. The intensity of the signal sources is very low 
when compared to the background intensity. The LEDs that 
shine on the front surface, signal and background, are set at 
a distance of 3cm, while the back led is almost touching the 
surface. Different wavelength signal sources are used: violet 
(400 nm), blue (470 nm), green (524 nm), red (626 nm) and 
infra-red (850 nm). For background lighting a 390 nm violet 
wavelength is applied. The signals are thus subject to 
constant background lighting and sampled at the midpoint 
of each bit. To change the background intensity different 
currents were used to drive the LED (0 < ILED < 30 mA). 
The sensor working point is set at -8 V. 
III. 
THEORY 
Based on the device configuration and experimental 
results an optoelectronic model was developed [11] and 
upgraded to include several inputs. The model is shown in 
Figure 2 as an ac equivalent circuit. 
 
Figure 2. ac equivalent circuit of the pi’npin photodiode. 
The corresponding block diagram of the ac equivalent 
circuit of the pi’npin photodiode, and the linear state 
equations, are displayed in Figure 3. Input signals, λIR,R,G,B,V 
model the input channels, and i(t) the output signal. The 
amplifying elements, α1 and α2 are linear combinations of the 
optical gains of each impinging channel, respectively into the 
front and back phototransistors, and provide gain (α>1) or 
attenuation (α<1) depending on the background effect.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Block diagram and linear state equations. 
The control matrix takes into account the enhancement or 
reduction of the channels, due to the steady state irradiation: 
front irradiation α2>>α1 and back irradiation α1>>α2. This 
affects the reverse photo capacitances, (α1,2 /C1,2) that 
determines the influence of the system input on the state 
change (control matrix). 
 
Figure 4. Simulation example of the MUX signal with and without front 
=390 nm irradiation. 
A graphics user interface (GUI) computer program was 
designed and programmed with MATLAB® to ease the task 
of numerical simulation. This interface allows the selection 
of model parameters, and plots the photocurrent results of the 
simulated and experimental data. The simulation uses as a 
solver, one of two alternative algorithms: a one-step solver 
based on an explicit Runge-Kutta formula and an 
implementation of the trapezoidal rule using a "free" 
interpolant. An example is presented in Figure 4. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
A. Spectral measurement  
Using a monochromator with 1mm slits and a chopper 
frequency of 3500 Hz, the spectrum measurements were 
made from 400 to 800 nm in 10 nm steps in three 
conditions: dark, front, and back. In the dark condition, the 
sensor is only subjected to the monochromator’s light 
source.  
a)
 
b) 
 
Figure 5. Photocurrent spectrum with different background lighting 
intensities at the a) front and b) back side of the device. 
These measurements (dark) are considered as a reference. 
The back or front conditions refer to a steady illumination of 
the back or front side of the sensor.  
a)
 
b) 
 
Figure 6. Photocurrent gain with a) front and b) back illumination 
Several measurements were made with different 
background illumination intensities by applying currents in 
the 0.25 mA to 30 mA range, to the background LEDs with a 
wavelength of 400 nm. The results are presented in Figure 5. 
Experimental output plotted in Figure 5a), shows that 
with increasing front illumination (see arrow) by the violet 
LED there is an increase in the gain, from 470 to 750 nm. 
This increase is very effective, as a current of 0.5 mA is 
enough to produce an output 5 times higher than the dark 
level, which is represented in both Figure 5a) and b) by a 
thick black curve. The influence of the back lighting in 
Figure 5b) with the same violet wavelength reduces the 470-
750 
nm 
bandwidth 
with 
increasing 
LED 
current. 
Photocurrent gain is defined as the ratio of the output in 
relation to the dark curve. The spectral gain for the different 
LED currents is shown in Figure 6. 
B. Visible / Infrared tuning 
Several monochromatic (850 nm, 697 nm, 626 nm, 524 
nm, 470 nm, 400 nm) individually pulsed lights (input 
channels) at 12000 bps, and then combined (MUX signal), 
illuminated the device while steady state 390 nm bias at 
different intensities (0 < ILED < 30 mA) were superimposed 
separately, from either side of the sensor, and the 
photocurrent was measured. 
a)
 
b) 
 
Figure 7. a) Front and b) back optical gain at =390 nm irradiation and 
different input wavelengths. 
For each individual channel the photocurrent was 
normalized to its value without irradiation (dark), and the 
photocurrent gain determined. Figure 7 displays the 
different gain as a function of the drive currents of the 
lighting LED under front and back irradiation. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

a)
 
b)
 
Figure 8. a) Optical gain at 390 nm front irradiation with different 
intensities. b) Combined polychromatic signal with and without 390 nm 
front irradiation and different bit sequences. 
To exemplify, in Figure 8a), the gain of the 850 nm input 
channel, under front irradiation at different intensities, is 
displayed. In Figure 8b), the MUX signal due to the 
combination of the 850 nm, 697 nm, 626 nm and 524 nm 
input channels, is presented. At the top of the figure, there 
are the signals used to drive the input channels, and are 
shown to guide the eyes into the on/off states. 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Results show, that background illumination of the front 
side, Figure 3a), reduces the 400-470 nm spectral range 
while it augments the 470-800 nm range. It acts as a 
selective filter for the long pass wavelengths. Background 
illumination of the back, Figure 3b), enhances the 400-470 
nm range and reduces the 470-800 nm wavelengths. It also 
acts as a selective filter but for the short pass wavelengths. 
This fundamental behaviour is the basis of the other 
possible functions that can be derived from it, besides a low 
pass or a long pass filter. Observing the gain values of the 
850 nm IR wavelength presented in Figure 7a) and b), there 
is a significant difference that distinguishes the background 
lighting at the back or front side of the device by a 
wavelength of 390 nm. This allows for the recovery of a 
NIR channel by a UV background illumination which 
permits a communication channel outside the visible range. 
The individual magnitude of each input channel without 
background lighting (ILED=0 in Figure 7), was used to 
simulate the input channels, and for each bit sequence 
shown in Figure 8b), the corresponding gain at the 
simulated background intensity is presented in Figure 7. The 
results of the numerical simulation and the experimental 
results for the same sequence are presented in Figure 4, and 
show that a good fitting between experimental and 
simulated results was achieved, showing the robustness of 
the proposed optoelectronic model. 
CONCLUSIONS 
An increased sensitivity in a SiC pi’npin device in the 
VIS-NIR range under UV light was experimentally and 
theoretically demonstrated. Results show that under front 
390 nm irradiation the sensor sensitivity was enhanced in 
the red/infrared ranges, leading to linearly profiled 
collection areas that allow the incoming wavelength 
recognition. An optoelectronic model was presented to 
explain the observed data, and allow decoding of 
multiplexed data in the visible/infrared range. The results of 
the numerical simulation are coherent with the experimental 
results for the same input sequence. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by FCT (CTS multi annual 
funding) through PIDDAC Program funds and PTDC/EEA-
ELC/111854/2009 and PTDC/EEA-ELC/120539/2010. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Komiyama, K. Kobayashi, K. Watanabe, T. Ohkubo, and 
Y. Kurihara, “Study of visible light communication system 
using RGB LED lights,” in Proceedings of SICE Annual 
Conference, IEEE, 2011, pp. 1926–1928. 
[2] S. Rajagopal et al, “IEEE 802.15 Wireless Personal Area 
Networks,” , 2009, pp. 1–121. 
[3] V. Mai, N. Tran, T. Thang, and A. Pham, “Performance 
analysis of TCP over visible light communication networks 
with ARQ-SR protocol,” 2014, pp. 1–9. 
[4] H. Chowdhury, H. Bagheri, I. Ashraf, S. Tamoor-ul-hassan, 
and M. Katz, “Techno-Economic analysis of Visible Light 
Communications,” Proc. Tenth Int. Symp. Wirel. Commun. 
Syst. (ISWCS 2013), 2013, vol. 9, pp. 96–100. 
[5] G. De Cesare, F. Irrera, F. Lemmi, F. Palma, and M. Tucci, 
“a-Si:H/a-SiC:H 
Heterostructure 
for 
Bias-Controlled 
Photodetectors,” MRS Proc., Feb. 2011, vol. 336, p. 885. 
[6] M. A. Vieira, “Three Transducers for One Photodetector : 
essays for optical communications,” 2012, p. 222. 
[7] V. Silva et al, “Logic functions based on optical bias 
controlled SiC tandem devices,” Phys. Status Solidi, vol. 11, 
no. 2, Feb. 2014, pp. 211–216. 
[8] M. A. Vieira, M. Vieira, P. Louro, A. Fantoni, and A. Garção, 
“Demux operation in tandem amorphous Si-C devices,” i-
ETCISEL Acad. J. Elect. Comput., vol. 2-1, 2013, p. ID–13. 
[9] M. A. Vieira et al, “Double Pin Photodiodes with Two 
Optical Gate Connections for Light Triggering.,” Sensors & 
Transducers, vol. 10, no. Special issue, 2011, pp. 96–120. 
[10] A. Fantoni, M. Vieira, and R. Martins, “Simulation of 
hydrogenated 
amorphous 
and 
microcrystalline 
silicon 
optoelectronic devices,” Math. Comput. Simul., vol. 49, no. 
4–5, Sep. 1999, pp. 381–401. 
[11] M. Vieira, P. Louro, M. Fernandes, and M. A. Vieira, “Three 
Transducers Embedded into One Single SiC Photodetector,” 
in Advances in Photodiodes, vol. March Ch19, G. F. D. Betta, 
Ed. Intech, 2011, pp. 403–426. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

