A Mobile Beacon Based Localization Approach for
Wireless Sensor Network Applications
Yifeng Zhou and Louise Lamont
Communications Research Centre Canada
Email: yifeng.zhou, louise.lamont@crc.gc.ca
Abstract—In this paper, a novel localization approach based
on the use of a mobile beacon is proposed for wireless sensor
networks. The localization system consists of a mobile beacon
and beacon receiving modules on each sensor node for mea-
suring distance. The localization is based on the application of
multidimensional scaling technique and a local map registration
approach. The approach is designed to operate without requiring
path planning for the mobile beacon. It estimates the relative
coordinates of the sensor nodes, and does not require the location
information of the mobile beacon, making them attractive for
applications where access to GPS signals is not available. Finally,
computer simulations are used to evaluate the localization per-
formance of the proposed approaches under different scenarios.
Index Terms—wireless sensor network, sensor localization,
mobile beacon, multilateration, MDS, map registration, path
planning, GPS, least squares
I. INTRODUCTION
Sensor node localization is a highly desirable capability for
wireless sensor network applications. Localization refers to
the process of estimating the coordinates of the sensor nodes
in a network based on various types of measurements and
with the aid of a number of beacon or anchor nodes that
know their locations. A beacon node broadcasts beacon signals
with limited information content. Anchors are required for
sensor localization in a global coordinate system. The location
information of an anchor or beacon node can be hard-coded
or acquired by using localization systems such as a Global
Positioning System (GPS) receiver. There are a number of
reasons why sensor localization is important. For example,
sensor location information can be used for tagging sensory
data, which is important for environmental monitoring and
military surveillance applications. The operation of a sensor
network relies on sensor location information for uncovering
and healing coverage holes in the network. Sensor location
information can also be used to perform efﬁcient spatial
querying or tasking, e.g., scoping the query or task propagation
to sensor nodes in speciﬁc locations or geographic regions
without the need to ﬂood the whole network, signiﬁcantly
reducing the network overhead and minimize consumption of
energy and resources in the network.
Recently, many sensor localization techniques have been
developed for wireless sensor network applications [1][2]. In
this paper, we focus on mobile beacon-based sensor local-
ization approaches. Localization using mobile beacons has
many advantages over those that use static beacons. The
use of mobile beacons pushes the hardware complexity and
power consumption requirement on the mobile beacon, which
is less resource constrained and has access to the required
power for repetitive message transmission to sensor nodes
to be localized. In addition, the use of mobile beacons can
signiﬁcantly reduce the cost of sensor deployment. A mobile
beacon transmitting at different locations can be considered
equivalent of multiple static beacon deployment. Mobile bea-
cons can move and easily avoid environmental obstructions.
Using mobile beacons can also avoid the problem of inter-
ference and collision of beacon signals due to uncoordinated
beacon transmissions of static beacons. In [3], Sichitiu et al.
proposed a mobile beacon based localization method, in which
the received signal strength indicator (RSSI) was used for
ranging. A mobile beacon traverses the deployment area while
broadcasting beacon signals. Sensor nodes that receive beacon
signals infer proximity constraints to the mobile beacon, and
their positions are estimated using a Bayesian approach. In
[4], a solution called the Walking GPS was proposed. In this
approach, a mote equipped with a GPS receiver (mobile bea-
con) is carried by a sensor deployment person and periodically
broadcasts its location. A sensor node being deployed infers
its position from the location broadcast by the GPS mote.
This approach is simple and cost effective. Its disadvantage is
also obvious: the localization results are directly determined
by GPS accuracy. Galstyan et al. [5] proposed a distributed
online localization algorithm based on a moving beacon, in
which sensor nodes use geometric constraints induced by both
radio connectivity and sensing to reduce the uncertainty of
their positions. The authors then generalized the approach to
use a moving target with a priori unknown coordinates. In
[6], a reﬁned approach is proposed, which uses mobile an-
chor scenarios for anchor information distribution. Statistical
techniques are adopted for localization with inaccurate range
data. In [7], a walking beacon-assisted localization is discussed
and two distributed localization methods are proposed where
sensor nodes compute their position estimates based on the
range-free technique. The ﬁrst method uses the arrival and
departure information of a walking beacon and the second
method exploits the variance of the RSS measurements from
the beacon.
In this paper, we propose a novel localization approach,
referred to as the MAP approach, based on the use of a
mobile beacon for wireless sensor network applications. The
localization hardware includes a mobile beacon and a beacon
243
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Comm 
Module
RF 
Transmitter 
Module
Processor
Ultrasound 
Transmitter 
Module
mobile beacon 
RF
ultrasound 
transmitter
GPS
Comm 
Module
RF Receiver 
Module
Processor
Ultrasound 
Receiver 
Module
sensor node
ultrasound 
transmitter
RF
Fig. 1.
Block diagram of the mobile beacon and sensor node.
receiving module on each sensor node. The mobile beacon
moves in the sensor deployment area while broadcasting
beacon signals to the network of sensor nodes. When a sensor
node receives a beacon signal, it can estimate its distance to
the mobile beacon at the time of beacon transmission. In the
proposed approach, the user carries the mobile beacon and
deploys sensor nodes. When a sensor node is deployed, the
user turns on its power and set the mobile beacon to transmit
a set of beacon signals. Any previously deployed nodes that are
within the transmission range of the mobile beacon will receive
the beacon signals and estimate their distances to the sensor
node being placed. The inter-node distance measurements are
obtained by using the mobile beacon, and the mobile beacon
does not need a pre-planned path. All sensor nodes then
pass the data back to a central node for localization using a
map registration algorithm developed by Zhou et al. [10][11].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, the mobile beacon system is discussed with a detailed
description of the hardware systems on both the mobile beacon
and the sensor nodes. The ranging mechanism of the mobile
beacon is also discussed. The proposed MAP localization
approach is also presented in Section III. In Section IV,
computer simulations are used to demonstrate and compare the
performance of the proposed mobile beacon based localization
approaches. Finally, the simulation results are analyzed and
conclusions are presented.
II. SYSTEM HARDWARE AND RANGING
Fig. 1 is the the block diagram for the mobile beacon and
sensor node. The mobile beacon consists of a GPS receiver and
an RF/ultrasound transmitter in addition to a processor and a
communication module. All sensor nodes in the network are
equipped with an RF/ultrasound receiver module. Note that the
GPS receiver is required for the mobile beacon when global
coordinates of sensor nodes are required. A beacon signal
contains an RF message followed by an ultrasound pulse that
is synchronized in time. The RF message contains the beacon
sequence number, time stamp and the current location of the
mobile beacon (optional and obtained through the onboard
GPS receiver).
When a sensor node receives a beacon signal, it can estimate
its distance to the mobile location at the time of beacon
transmission based on the TDOA between the RF signal and
the ultrasound pulses. There are different ranging techniques
including those based on time-of-ﬂight (TOF), TDOA, and
RSSI etc. [2]. They typically use either RF, acoustic or optical
signals. The extreme fast propagation speed of RF signals
makes them impractical for TOF ranging due to the tight
time synchronization requirements for sensor nodes that often
operate at a low clock frequency. The relatively inexpensive
and simple RSSI based ranging tends to be highly susceptible
to environmental interference and is known to be unpredictable
for distance estimation. The ranging approach used in this
study is similar to the one used by the Cricket system [12]. The
underlying principle of RF/ultrasound ranging is to use their
different propagation speeds in the air. The fact that ultrasound
waves propagate at a much slower speed than RF in the air
makes it possible for low cost implementation of accurate
ranging. The TOA of the RF signal is used as a reference
assuming that it is negligible. Then, the TDOA between the RF
and the ultrasound represents the TOF of the ultrasound signal
traveling from the mobile becon to the sensor node. Ranging
based on RF and ultrasound signals can achieve an accuracy of
a few centimeters over a short distance [12][13]. It is also able
to eliminate the requirement for tight time synchronization
between the mobile beacon and deployed nodes. However,
it should be noted that since the speed of ultrasound in air
varies with ambient temperature, humidity and atmospheric
pressure, the impact of these factors on the speed of ultrasound
should be accounted for in practice. This is typically done
by installing temperature and humidity sensors on the sensor
nodes.
III. MOBILE BEACON BASED LOCALIZATION
The proposed localization approach starts from the stage of
sensor node deployment. After the sensor deployment planning
process, the user that carries the mobile beacon starts to
deploy sensor nodes. When a sensor node is placed, the user
turns its power on, and sets the mobile beacon to transmit
a set of beacon signals. Any previously deployed nodes that
are within the transmission range of the mobile beacon will
receive the beacon signals and estimate their distances to the
current mobile beacon location (or the location of the sensor
node under deployment). The user then moves to deploy the
rest of the sensor nodes and repeats the same procedures
until all sensor nodes are deployed. After all sensor nodes
are deployed, each sensor node will have a set of distance
measurements to its neighbors, which are then passed to
a central node for localization using the MAP localization
algorithm.
The MAP localization algorithm is proposed to overcome
the problem of mismatching of the shortest distances in the
MDS method. The MDS localization method requires that the
full Euclidean matrix be known. In practice, due to power
constraint, the mobile beacon may have a limited transmission
range. When two nodes are out of the transmission range of the
mobile beacon, the distance measurement between them be-
comes unavailable and needs to be estimated or approximated
244
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

[8]. A common approach is to replace the unavailable inter-
node distances by their shortest path distances. In a network of
regular topology, a shortest path distance is found to match its
corresponding Euclidean distance well. However, in a sparse
network or a network of irregular topology, a shortest path
distance may not match its Euclidean distance, and the use
of the approximated distance matrix will result in localization
errors [10][8]. In MAP, the network is divided into many small
sub-groups of nodes, where adjacent groups share common
sensor nodes. A commonly used approach is to form a sub-
group for each sensor node, which involves the node and its
neighbors with a given number of hops (e.g., one or two
hops). One hop is determined by the transmission range of
the mobile beacon rather than the radio range of the sensor
nodes. A local map is built for each sub-group of sensor nodes
using the MDS method [8]. The local maps are then merged
into a global map based on the common sensor nodes shared
by different groups. In [8], an incremental greedy algorithm
was proposed for merging the local maps in a sequential
manner. One local map is randomly selected as the core
map, which is grown by merging the local maps one by one.
During the merging process, an optimal rigid transformation
is determined, which minimizes the conformation difference
between the locations of the common nodes in the core map
and those of the local map subject to the rigid transformation.
The incremental greedy algorithm is seen to be locally optimal
since it only explores the commonalities of the shared sensor
nodes in two maps. In practice, the common sensor nodes
are often shared by more than two local maps. The sequential
merging process can also lead to error propagation and perhaps
unacceptable errors as the network grows. In [10], the MAP
approach was introduced to counter the problems of the
incremental greedy approach. In MAP, instead of using a
sequential pairwise approach for merging local maps, the
construction of the global map is considered at a global level.
An afﬁne transformation is deﬁned for each local map. The set
of optimal afﬁne transformations are obtained simultaneously
by considering all available nodes that are shared by various
local maps. The set of optimal afﬁne transformations are
found, which minimize the location discrepancies of sensor
nodes subject to their corresponding afﬁne transforms in the
global map. The discrepancy is represented by the sum of the
squared distances of all nodes to their respective geometric
centers in the global map. The resulting coordinates of the
sensor nodes in the global map are relative coordinates. If
desired, they can be transformed into their global coordinates
based on the use of a few selected beacon nodes.
Since the proposed local map registration algorithm mini-
mizes the overall discrepancies of the locations of all sensor
nodes, it is able to counter the problems associated with
approaches based on pairwise map merging, and achieve
the global optimal performance. The problem of ﬁnding the
optimal rigid transformation for two maps based on common
nodes has closed-form solutions [14]. The approach by Arun
et al. [15] is shown to have provable optimality and the
advantage of computational efﬁciency over other methods.
Arun’s approach minimizes the squares error between two
sets of matched points under rotation and translation, and
the optimal transformation is obtained using a singular value
decomposition (SVD). The problem of ﬁnding a set of optimal
transforms for multiple local maps, however, is not trivial, and
analytic solutions do not exist due to the highly nonlinear opti-
mization criterion involved. In this study, a gradient projection
algorithm is developed for ﬁnding the optimal transforms for
transforming local maps to a global map [10]. The algorithm
is developed based on the general idea by Jennrich in [16][17]
and is suitable to the constrained optimization problem of
coordinate transformation. In spite of the iterative nature of
the algorithm, it has faster convergence and is computation-
ally more efﬁcient than many general numerical optimization
techniques [19][18] for nonlinear programming.
The proposed localization approach does not rely on the
knowledge of the mobile beacon locations, which is important
for applications where access to GPS satellites is not available.
However, it is necessary to point out that the localization
results from MAP are relative sensor locations, i.e., the es-
timated sensor locations are given in an arbitrary coordinate
system. In many applications, relative location information
is sufﬁcient. For example, in applications such as detecting
and tracking an intruder, the user is concerned about the
location of a target relative to the network rather than its
global coordinates. Relative locations of the sensor nodes
will sufﬁce for wireless network functions such as routing
for communications and tasking. If global coordinates of the
sensor nodes are desired, then, a number of anchors are needed
to determine a rigid transformation of the relative coordinates
into global coordinates.
IV. COMPUTER SIMULATIONS AND PERFORMANCE
ANALYSIS
In this section, we use computer simulations to demonstrate
the performance of the proposed mobile beacon based local-
ization techniques. Four types of network shapes and sensor
deployment scenarios are used in the simulation: rectangular
random network, rectangular grid network, C-shape random
network, and C-shape grid network. A C-shape area is deﬁned
as a rectangle that contains a concave on one side. In this study,
the concave is located at the center of the rectangle’s bottom
line.
The mobile beacon is simulated to have a transmission range
of 25 meters. The user moves at a speed of 0.694 meters per
second and spends 4 seconds to place a sensor node. When
in periodic broadcasting mode, the mobile beacon broadcasts
beacons to the network regularly every 10 seconds. For a grid
network, the deploying person starts from the left-most column
of the sensors, and places the sensor nodes from bottom to
top. The next column of sensor nodes are placed from top
to bottom along the y-axis. This process continues until all
sensor nodes are placed. For a random network, the sensor
deployment area is divided into multiple segment of equal
length on the x-axis. In the ﬁrst (left-most) segment, sensor
nodes are placed from bottom to top along the y-axis. In the
245
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

next segment, the sensor nodes are placed from top to bottom
along the negative direction of the y-axis. This process repeats
itself until all sensor nodes are placed.
The distance estimates computed by a sensor node from
receiving the mobile beacon signals is assumed to contain
additive errors, which are modeled as a random variable that
follows a uniform distribution with boundaries (both positively
and negatively) proportional to the actual distance. For an ac-
tual distance d between the mobile beacon and sensor node, the
distance estimate error is uniformly distributed in the interval
[−κd, κd], where κ is the proportionality constant. The mobile
beacon is assumed to carry a GPS receiver to acquire its own
coordinates (this information is only needed for multilateration
based approaches). The mobile beacon location errors are
simulated to be additive Gaussian distributed with zero mean
in both x and y coordinates. The errors in x and y coordinates
are assumed to be statistically independent and have a same
standard deviation of 1/
√
2 meters. For each scenario, we
vary the constant of proportionality κ and use Monte-Carlo
simulations to compute the root mean squares errors (RMSE)
of the sensor location estimates. In the simulation, κ varies
from 0 to 0.1 with a step size of 0.01. For each value of κ, 100
tests are repeated to obtain the RMSEs of the location estimate
of each sensor node. An averaged RMSE is then computed by
averaging the RMSEs of all nodes.
Five other localization approaches, referred to as MLE,
LLS, MDS PATH-MLE and PATH-LLS, respectively, are
included for comparisons. MLE and LLS are based on the
use of multilateration. The user carries the mobile beacon and
deploys sensor nodes. The mobile beacon broadcasts beacon
signals periodically. If a sensor node receives beacon signals
from more than three locations, it can apply multilateration
to ﬁnd its coordinates. The only difference between MLE and
LLS is that MLE uses a nonlinear least squares formulation of
multilateration while LLS is formulated as a linear solution.
MDS uses the same deployment strategy as the proposed MAP
approach. PATH-MLE and PATH-LLS are the nonlinear and
linear least squares solutions of multilateration, respectively.
They differ from MLE and LLS in that the mobile beacon
moves along a planned path around or in the sensor deploy-
ment area. In this study, simple paths are used in evaluating
PATH-MLE and PATH-LLS, which are along the perimeter of
the sensor deployment area.
A. Rectangular random network
30 sensor nodes are deployed in a rectangular area of 100
meters by 20 meters. The mobile beacon moves on a Z-
shape path in the deployment area. Four anchor nodes are
selected. The anchor nodes are required by MAP and MDS to
transform the resulting relative coordinates of the sensor nodes
into global coordinates for comparison. For PATH-MLE and
PATH-LLS, the mobile beacon moves on a Z-shape path in
the deployment area.
Fig. 2 shows the RMSEs of the location estimates versus
κ. Among all the approaches, the MDS approach performs
the worst in terms of RMSEs for all κ. Even when κ = 0,
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Beacon range measurement errors (%)
RMSE
 
 
PATH−MLE
PATH−LLS
MLE
LLS
MDS
MAP
Fig. 2.
RMSEs of location estimates via κ: rectangular random network.
i.e., there are no ranging errors at all, MDS still shows an
RMSE of 1 meter. This phenomenon is due to the use of
approximated distances in the Euclidean matrix in MDS. As
discussed before, due to the limited transmission of the mobile
beacon, all inter-node distance estimates are not available.
For node pairs that have separation distances greater than
the mobile beacon transmission range, the distance estimates
will be approximated by their shortest path distances. As the
number of unavailable distance estimates increases, the lo-
calization performance deteriorates. We use connectivity level
to characterize the availability of inter-node distances, which
is deﬁned as the averaged number of nodes that a node can
receive mobile beacon signals from. Note that this connectivity
is deﬁned based on the mobile beacon transmission range
instead of the radio range of the sensor nodes. In Fig. 2, the
connectivity level is computed as 11.2, which means that each
node can directly measure its distances to about 11 nodes
instead of the 29 nodes in the ideal case. In general, the
connectivity level increases with node density of a network
and the mobile beacon transmission range. PATH-MLE, Path-
LLS and MLE outperform the others. The LLS approach
outperforms MAP only for low values of κ (κ < 0.06). It is
interesting to note that, for relatively small κ (κ < 0.06), the
RMSEs for PATH-MLE, PATH-LLS, MLE, LLS, and MAP,
are all smaller than 1 meter, which is the simulated RMSE for
GPS location errors. This indicates that these approaches are
able to suppress errors in the mobile beacon locations, and
provide better localization performance than by using GPS
alone.
B. Rectangular grid network
In this scenario, 30 sensor nodes are placed on a rectangular
grid with 20% placement errors. The unit length of the grid is
r = 8 meters. The placement errors are simulated as additive
and uniformly distributed in the interval [−0.2r, 0.2r] in both
the x and y coordinates of the node’s original grid position.
For PATH-MLE and PATH-LLS, the mobile beacon moves on
246
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Beacon range measurement errors (%)
RMSE
 
 
PATH−MLE
PATH−LLS
MLE
LLS
MDS
MAP
Fig. 3.
RMSEs of location estimates via κ: rectangular grid network.
a Z-shape path in the deployment area. Four anchor nodes are
selected.
Fig. 3 shows the RMSEs of the location estimates versus the
beacon ranging errors (κ). The MAP approach performs better
than PATH-LLS and LLS when κ < 0.06. The performance
of MDS lags behind the other approaches. All the approaches
have better localization performance in the rectangular grid
network than in the rectangular random network. In particular,
MDS sees signiﬁcant improvement in the rectangular grid
network, which may partially be attributed to the increased
connectivity level of the grid network and its relatively uniform
node density. The simulated grid network has a connectivity
level of 14.1. For a rectangular grid network, the shortest path
between a pair of nodes corresponds well with their Euclidean
distance.
C. C-shape random network
The C-shape random network is simulated by randomly
placing 45 sensor nodes in a C-shape area. The rectangle size
is 100 meters by 40 meters, and the concave size is 60 meters
by 20 meters. The placement of the sensor nodes follows
a uniform distribution. Five anchor nodes are selected. For
PATH-MLE and PATH-LLS, the mobile beacon moves along
the perimeter of the C-shape area.
Fig. 4 shows the RMSEs of location estimates versus κ.
PATH-MLE and MLE have similar performance and perform
best among all approaches for all κ. PATH-LLS and LLS
are close in their RMSEs for all κ, and they are slightly
outperformed by PATH-MLE and MLE. The MAP approach
performs reasonably well and has RMSE values that are less
than 1 meter when κ < 0.07. On the other hand, the MDS
performs poorly and fails to provide satisfactory localization
performance. The RMSE values for MDS are larger than 3.5
meters for all κ. The failure may be due to the irregular
shape of the C-shape network as well as the low connectivity
level of the network. As discussed in [10], for a sensor
network of irregular shape, the shortest paths between pairs
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Beacon range measurement errors (%)
RMSE
 
 
PATH−MLE
PATH−LLS
MLE
LLS
MDS
MAP
Fig. 4.
RMSEs of location estimates via κ: C-shape random network.
of sensor nodes usually do not correlate well with their
Euclidean distances. The simulated C-shape random network
has a connectivity level of 13.5.
D. C-shape grid network
In the simulation of the C-shape grid network, 38 sensor
nodes are placed on a C-shape grid with 20% placement
errors. The gird has 10 sensor nodes in the x direction and
5 sensor nodes in the y direction. The concave contains 4
and 2 sensor nodes in the x and y directions, respectively.
The unit length of the grid is 8 meters. Five anchor nodes are
selected. The anchor nodes are selected by dividing the sensor
deployment area into ﬁve sub-areas and randomly selecting
one sensor node from each area. The mobile beacon moves
along the perimeter of the C-shape area.
Fig. 5 shows the RMSEs of location estimates versus κ.
The RMSE curves for the C-shape grid network are similar
to those for the C-shape random network. The RMSEs for all
six approaches increase as κ increases. PATH-MLE and MLE
perform best and have close RMSE for all κ. PATH-LLS and
LLS are slightly outperformed by PATH-MLE and MLE, but
have close RMSE values for all κ. The MAP approach outper-
forms PATH-LLS and LLS for κ < 0.4. The MDS approach
fails to produce satisfactory results with RMSE values larger
than 3 meters for all κ. Note that MDS has slightly smaller
RMSE values than in the C-shape random network. As the
simulated C-shape grid network has a connectivity level of
16, which is larger than the connectivity level for the C-shape
random network, this may explain the improved RMSEs of
the sensor location estimates for the MDS approach.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, the MAP localization approach based on the
use of a mobile beacon has been presented for wireless sensor
network applications. The use of a mobile beacon has the
advantage of ﬂexibility and can greatly simplify the process of
sensor localization. In addition, it is able to overcome many of
247
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Beacon range measurement errors (%)
RMSE
 
 
PATH−MLE
PATH−LLS
MLE
LLS
MDS
MAP
Fig. 5.
The RMSE of location estimates versus κ: C-shape grid network.
the difﬁculties that would be encountered by using static bea-
cons or localization approaches based on inter-node ranging.
The performance of the MAP approaches was evaluated using
computer simulations and compared with other approaches
that are also based on the use of mobile beacons. Four
types of network topology and sensor node placement were
simulated. The simulation results show that the MAP approach
has signiﬁcant improvement in terms of RMSEs of sensor
location estimates in comparison with the MDS approach. It
outperforms or performs as well as LLS for low κ values. In
the case of rectangular grid network, MAP outperforms LLS
for all κ. It is observed that MAP performs better for grid
networks than for random networks partly due to the relatively
large and more balanced connectivity levels of grid networks.
In general, MAP is a practical sensor localization techniques
that can provide satisfactory localization results. Although
the simulation results showed that maximum likelihood based
approaches (e.g., MLE and PATH-MLE) are able to provide
the best localization performance, they are not considered
practical due to the nonlinear optimization procedures. MAP
is a GPS-less approach, i.e., it does not need to know its own
location coordinates. However, if global coordinates of the
sensor nodes are desired, then a sufﬁcient number of anchor
nodes with known global coordinates is required.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work described herein was funded by Defence Research
and Development Canada (DRDC).
REFERENCES
[1] J. Bachrach and C. Taylor, Localization in Sensor Networks, Chapt.
2, Handbook of Sensor Networks: Algorithms and Architectures, ed. I.
Stojmenovi´c, Wiley Interscience, 2005.
[2] G. Mao, B. Fidan and B. D. O. Anderson, “Wireless sensor network
localization techniques,” Computer Networks, vol. 51, issue 10, pp.
2529-2553, July 2007.
[3] L. Sichitiu and V. Ramadurai, “Localization of wireless sensor networks
with a mobile beacon,” Proc. the First IEEE Conference on Mobile Ad-
hoc and Sensor Systems (MASS 2004), pp. 174-183, Fort Lauderdale,
FL, USA, October 2004.
[4] R. Stoleru, T. He, and J. A. Stankovic, “Walking GPS: a practical
solution for localization in manually deployed wireless sensor networks,”
Proc. the First IEEE Workshop on Embedded Networked Sensors
(EmNetS-I), pp. 480-489, Tampa, FL, USA, November 2004.
[5] A. Galstyan1, B. Krishnamachari, K. Lerman, and S. Pattem, “Dis-
tributed online localization in sensor networks using a moving target,”
Proc. the 3rd International Symposium on Information Processing in
Sensor Networks (IPSN 2003), pp. 61-70, Berkeley, California, USA,
April 2003.
[6] T. Parker and K. Langendoen, “Localisation in mobile anchor networks,”
Delft University of Technology Parallel and Distributed Systems Report
Series, PDS-2005-001, Delft University of Technology, Delft, Nether-
lands, February 2005.
[7] B. Xiao, H. Chen, and S. Zhou, “Distributed localization using a
moving beacon in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Parallel and
Distributed Systems, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 587-600, May 2008.
[8] Y. Shang and W. Ruml, “Improved MDS-based localization,” Proc. IEEE
INFOCOM 2004, The 23rd Annu. Joint Conf. of the IEEE Computer and
Communications Societies, Hong Kong, China, March 2004.
[9] Y. Shang, W. Ruml, Y, Zhang, and M. Fromherz, “Localization from
connectivity in sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distri. Sys., vol.
15, no. 11, pp. 961-974, November 2004.
[10] Y. Zhou and L. Lamont, “An optimal local map registration technique for
wireless sensor network localization problems,” Proc. 11th International
Conference on Information Fusion (FUSION08), Cologne, Germany,
June 30-July 03, 2008.
[11] Y. Zhou and L. Lamont, “Optimal local map registration technique for
wireless sensor network localization problems,” in Advances in Wireless
Sensors and Sensors Networks, ed. S. C. Mukhopadhyay and H. Leung,
Springer Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering, 2010.
[12] N. B. Priyantha, The Cricket Indoor Location Systems, PhD Thesis,
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, June 2005.
[13] A. Savvides, C. C. Han, and M. B. Srivastava, “Dynamic ﬁne-grained
localization in ad hoc networks of sensors,” Proc. the 7th Annual
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Mobile Computing and Net-
working (MobiCom’01), pp. 166-179, Rome, Italy, July, 2001.
[14] D. W. Eggert, A. Lorusso, and R. B. Fisher, “Estimating 3-D rigid body
transformations: a comparison of four major algorithms,” Machine Vision
and Applications, vol. 9, pp. 272-290, 1997.
[15] K. S. Arun, T. S. Huang, and S. D. Blostein, “Least-squares ﬁtting of two
3-d points sets,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 698-700, September 1987.
[16] R. I. Jennrich, “A simple general procedure for orthogonal rotation,”
Psychometrika, vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 289-306, June 2001.
[17] R. I. Jennrich, “A simple general method for oblique rotation,” Psy-
chometrika, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 7-19, March 2002.
[18] D. P. Bertsekas, Nonlinear programming, Athena Scientiﬁc, 2nd ed.,
1999.
[19] J. E. Dennisand and R. B. Schnabel, Numerical Methods for Uncon-
strained Optimization and Nonlinear Equations, Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1983.
248
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

