The Impact of Link Lengths on Energy Consumption in Wireless Sensor Networks
Knut Øvsthus1, Espen Nilsen1 
1. Dep. Electrical Engineering 
Bergen University College 
Bergen, Norway 
kovs@hib.no, espen.nilsen.no@gmail.com 
Anne-Lena Kampen1,2, Øivind Kure2 
2. ITEM, NTNU 
Trondheim, Norway 
alk@hib.no, okure@item.ntnu.no 
 
Abstract— Conservation of energy is one of the main 
challenges in designing a wireless sensor network (WSN). The 
reason is that these large scaled networks cannot be arranged, 
configured, or 
maintained manually. Thus, automated 
deployment and configuration are required. One important 
factor determining the total energy consumption is the network 
topology. This article evaluates the relation between the 
maximum distance (link lengths) between the nodes in a WSN 
and the total energy consumed. The optimal topology for the 
two most commonly used medium access control (MAC) 
protocols were found. A WSN based on a Time Division 
Multiple Access (TDMA) protocol is limited by the maximum 
available or allowed emitted radio power. Thus, the criterion 
for optimal link lengths is related to the expected number of 
transmissions over the links. By including the retransmissions 
over the links we found an optimal internode distance. A 
Carrier Sense Multiple Access (CSMA) based WSN, on the 
other hand, is limited by the consumed energy of the 
overhearing nodes. In an analysis including only the 
overhearing nodes, the link lengths should be as short as 
possible and the connectivity of the network limits the link 
length used. However, we found that in a sparsely populated 
WSN, the total energy consumption increased for shorter link 
lengths as they were decreased from the optimal link length. 
Keywords; WSN; Energy Efficiency; Multi-Hop Routing; 
Hop Length; Network’s Life Time. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A typical wireless sensor network (WSN) consists of 
several battery powered autonomous devices. The devices 
are equipped with a unit for sensing targeted environmental 
attributes 
and 
a 
communication 
unit 
that 
enables 
communication with a designated node, that provide data 
collection (sink). The communication capability of a sensor 
node mainly serves two tasks: transmitting the sensor data 
generated by the node and relaying packets on behalf of 
other nodes. This article focuses on the transmission and 
transport of data packets through the WSN.  
The characteristics of radio units in a WSN differ from 
traditional radios. Many find it strange that the receiver 
consumes approximately the same amount of energy 
receiving (RX) a packet as the sender consumes in 
transmitting (TX) the packet. The reason is the low power 
emitted from the sender, as explained in [1][2].  The 
datasheet of the RF Transceiver CC2420 [3] verifies the 
statement. Due to the equality in energy consumption, it is 
very important to reduce the number of overhearing nodes. 
Overhearing nodes are in the reception range of the sender, 
but they are not the destination or next hop node. However, 
they learn this after receiving the packet and analyzing the 
packet’s Medium Access Protocol (MAC) address. The 
conclusion in [4] was that for a WSN using a Carrier Sense 
Multiple Access (CSMA) protocol the energy consumption 
is dominated by the overhearing nodes. In a WSN using the 
time division multiple access (TDMA) protocol it was found 
[4] that the distance between two communicating nodes (the 
terms internode distance and link lengths are also used) 
should be as long as feasible. Alternative solution would 
include for example a relay node. It would consume much 
energy during reception and retransmission. 
Based on published data, this article first proposes a 
function that relates the packet delivery ratio (PDR) and the 
distance between two communicating nodes. Next, an 
expression is derived for the expected number of 
transmissions required along a path. Simulations are used 
for validating and comparing the statistical result. Finally, 
we analyzed a 2-D WSN. Following the randomly node 
deployment, a routing protocol defines the topology. The 
routing protocol had the core functionality of RPL [5] with 
an object function [6] that limited the candidate link 
according to a link quality requirement. We used the 
expected number of transmissions as requirement. Finally, 
the energy consumption in a WSN with different link 
lengths is found for WSN using CSMA and TDMA. We 
found that both protocols have an optimum internode 
distance. 
The novelty of the article is a more realistic function 
relating the packet loss probability and the node distance. 
Currently, most publications are based on a model where the 
packet loss probability is zero if the node distance is less 
than the transmission range, and if the mode distance is 
greater the losses are 100%. Although this is not a good 
model, it is used mainly due to a lack of alternatives. The 
second contribution is that the model is applied for 
determine the optimum link distance in WSNs using TDMA 
and CSMA. 
The paper first presents related works, and then the 
model for packet losses is introduced and applied for 
assessing packet losses over a single path. Next, the model 
is applied for a real WSN, where energy optimum link 
lengths are found for a WSN using TDMA and a WSM 
using CSMA. Finally, the paper presents the conclusion.  
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

II. 
RELATED WORK 
Energy saving in WSN is vital for the operation of the 
network and many publications have assessed this issue. This 
article revisits the challenges addressed in [4]. In [4], no 
lower optimum transmission range was found for a WSN 
using a CSMA MAC protocol. Another result was that in a 
WSN using a TDMA MAC protocol, the transmission 
should be as long as possible and no upper limit was found. 
In addition to the related publications presented in [4], this 
section supplements related works.  
Several publications have addressed the topic of 
transmission power in WSN. The conclusion found in the 
survey [7] was that the transmission power should be as low 
as possible to reduce the energy consumption in overhearing 
nodes. This conclusion has been the starting point of several 
publications on transmission power control. Several earlier 
publications have stated the opposite conclusion, as in [8]. It 
lists twelve reasons for having long internode distances 
(using high transmission power). One reason is that longer 
hops are more efficient as they are closer to the Euclidean 
distance between source node and sink. The same results are 
found in [9][10], where sparsely populated random networks 
were shown to cause long paths. Our simulation confirms 
these results. A general observation regarding transmission 
power is that the conclusion depends on whether the 
assessment has included all effects that determine the total 
energy consumption. The effects are the physical radio, the 
link quality, the MAC layer, and the routing layer. 
Furthermore, the conclusion depends on the technology used, 
for example which MAC technology that is used. The 
conclusion of [8] is valid for a TDMA, but as the MAC layer 
is not included in the assessment the conclusion is not valid 
for a CSMA. However, the conclusion found in [7] is valid 
for CSMA as the overhearing nodes dominate the total 
energy consumption. 
Statistical analyses of WSN paths are presented in several 
publications [11]-[14]. Several of these articles consider path 
reliability under high traffic loads where the queuing of 
packets is included in the intermediate nodes. Our analysis is 
of WSNs with low traffic load, which is a valid assumption 
for many WSN that reports data at a low duty cycle.  
Another contribution of this article is the proposal of 
applying a Fermi-Dirac function for expressing the relation 
between PDR and distance between the two communicating 
nodes. Based on this model we derive an expression for the 
losses along a path in a WSN. The model for the link 
properties was also used in assessing an ordinary randomly 
deployed WSN. We found that the Fermi-Dirac function was 
proposed as a function relating the packet losses and 
Receiver Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) in [15]. Our 
proposal is to use this function for relating distance and 
PDR. 
III. 
PACKET LOSS RATE FOR A LINK 
The performance of the individual radio links determines 
much of the overall network performance in a WSN. This 
section presents the fundamental performance issues related 
to a single radio link. The radio used follows the 
characteristics of the RF Transceiver CC2420 [3].  
Some publications present measured performance of 
sensor nodes [15]-[18], like the PDR as a function of 
distance. The observed relation between packet loss and 
RSSI are presented in [15]. In [15], the Fermi-Dirac 
function is proposed as a function relating the packet losses 
and RSSI. Here, we propose to use the same function for 
relating the 
PDR and the distance between two 
communicating nodes:  

 ( )  
 
   
    
  


Figure 1 show data extracted form [17] and the 
approximated function. The internode distance is x, and x0 
and x1 are fitting parameters. The PDR1, for a single trial of 
transmitting a packet between two nodes is: PDR1(x) = f(x). 
The packet loss rate (PLR) is PLR1(x) = 1 – f(x).  
Radio links are made more robust by retransmitting 
packets that are not acknowledged. However, the number of 
retransmissions has to be limited. Without an upper limit, a 
high number of retransmissions depletes the node’s energy 
and causes large, unpredictable delays over the links.  
Therefore, a maximum number, m, of transmission trials are 
permitted each packet before the sender discards it. This 
means that the sender tries to retransmit the packet a 
maximum of (m-1) times. Based on the PDR1 for a single 
packet, it is possible to estimate the PDR(m) of a link: 
PDR(m) = p1*Sum[ (1-p1)i,{i, 0, m-1}] = 1- (1- p1)m 
(2) 
where p1 = PDR1 and the summation of the series is written 
using the notation:  Sum[ai,,{i, 1,m-1}] = a1 + a2 + …+ am-1. 
Solving for the packet loss rate, PLR(m), over the link:  
PLR(m) = (1- p1)m 
IV. 
PACKET ERROR RATE FOR A PATH 
A WSN is a two dimensional (2-D) network as shown in 
the example in Figure 2. Each node, depicted as blue dots, 
may produce data destined for the sink located in the lower 
left corner. As can be seen in this example WSN, not all 
nodes were directly connected to the sink and they required 
 
Figure 1. Packet delivery ratio (PDR) as a function of distance between 
sender and receiver. The red dots are measured data adopted from [17]. 
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

help of neighboring nodes to relay their packets. The pattern 
of arrows was found by a routing protocol. Each link was 
chosen among a set of candidate links. Routing is explained 
in the next section.  
In this section, we present the results of data packet 
transmission along a single path. This one-dimensional 
network (1-D network) of N nodes is illustrated in Figure 3.  
In our assessment, the data-producing node, Node1, was to 
the left and the sink (the destination) was to the right. 
Between these two nodes were a number of relaying nodes. 
Their only task was to relay the data packet produced by 
Node1.  
Our goal was to forward a data packet using as little 
energy as possible. The comparison was between different 
node arrangements using different link lengths. We sought 
the node arrangement that consumed least energy. The only 
energy consumption that differed between the node 
arrangements was due to the difference in the number of 
packet transmitted and received (TX/RX). The network was 
designed according to common WSN principles where only 
the communicating nodes (that is the current sender and 
receiver) were consuming TX or RX energy. Nodes not 
participating in the communication were in sleep mode. The 
number of packet TX/RX for a given node arrangement was 
proportional to the energy difference between the node 
arrangements, this comparison is commonly used [11]. The 
MAC protocol used in the 1-D WSN was TDMA. In 
TDMA, each pair of communicating nodes was assigned a 
time slot. The optimal node arrangement was found as the 
configuration that required least packet treatments. The 
assessment of the 1-D network was based on a statistical 
description of the link performance and simulated 
performance.  
The statistical analysis was based on the performance of 
the individual links. The distance from the source node 
(Node1) to the sink was Ltot. Ltot was a fixed parameter in 
our assessment. The distance between the nodes was Llink. 
Llink was assumed to apply for all inter node distances, 
except the last link to the sink, which may be shorter, as 
explained below. Given the distance between nodes (Llink), 
the number of nodes required to connect the source and sink 
was found as Ceiling[Ltot/Llink]. The Ceiling[x] operator 
returns the smallest integer greater than or equal to x.  
The expected performance of the 1-D network 
depending on Llink is: Short internode distances will have 
few retransmissions at each link, but the path will consists 
of a higher number of links compared to a path of longer 
internode distances. However, as the link distances 
approaches the zone of less quality, retransmission over the 
individual links starts to limit the gained benefit of reduced 
hop counts. In the end no packets get through, when the link 
distance causes disconnected links. Then the sender at 
Node1 only transmits the packet m times over the first link, 
before discarding the packet. The description given above is 
supported in the following statistical derivation of the 
expected performance.  
 
1) Number of transmissions along a path 
The expected number of transmission (ETX) over a 
single link, allowing maximum m transmissions is: 
ETX(m)  = (1-q1) Sum[{n  q1
n-1}, {n, 1, m}] + m q1
m, 
 using the notation q1 = PLR1. The summation gives the 
following result: 
 
ETX(m) = (1- q1
m )/(1- q1) 
(3) 
Along the path shown in Figure 3, the probability of 
reaching node number z (Nodez) is: 
 
P[Packet reaching Nodez] =  (1- q1
m)(z-1) 
(4) 
We assume statistically independent links. Thus, the 
expected number of transmissions along the path is: 
ETXpath(N) = ETX(m)*Sum[(1- q1
m)(i-1),{i, 1,N-1}] 
 
ETXpath(N) = {1- q1
m – (1- q1
m )N}/{q1
m (1- q1)} (5) 
The performance of a 1-D network can be derived from 
(5). If only high quality links are used, PDR1 approaches 
one (q1 approaches zero). Then the number of transmissions 
required is N-1, which equals the hop count. However, if 
disconnected links are used, PDR1 approaches zero (q1 
approaches one). Then it is found from (5) that the number 
of transmissions equals the maximum transmissions of the 
first link, which is m.   
Figure 4 illustrates the average number of transmissions 
required to reach the sink from a node located 500 meters 
away. The parameter that was changed was the distance 
between the nodes. Both theoretical and simulated results 
are presented. The effect of discontinuous changes in the 
 
Figure 2. A WSN with 100 nodes (blue dots), including the sink in the  
lower left corner. The paths are show as arrows. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. A path from source node to the sink represented as a 1-D 
network. 
 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

number of links appears as discontinuous changes in the 
number of transmissions. Fewer transmissions are needed 
when longer link lengths are permitted since fewer hops are 
required. However, poor link quality caused retransmission. 
This can be seen by the increase in number of transmission 
at link lengths above 70 meters. The theoretical results are 
given by (5) while the simulation results were produced 
using the OMNeT++ [20] simulation framework and 
simulation models available in the MiXiM simulator [21].  
To mimic a real world sensor node the theoretical and 
simulation were according to the CC2420 datasheet [3] and 
the IEEE802.15.4 standard [19].  
V. 
OPTIMAL TOPOLOGY IN A WSN 
The previous analyses established some fundamental 
understanding of the performance of packet transfer along a 
path subjected to packet errors. In this section, the 
performance of the individual links are used to find the 
optimal network configuration in terms of link length that 
minimize the total energy consumption in a two-
dimensional (2-D) WSN. The comparison follows the 
method presented earlier where the performance is 
according to the energy consumption for different network 
configurations. The difference is presented in number of 
times packets transmitted and received (TX/RX). Here, all 
nodes, except the sink, generate data. This implies that the 
nodes are both data generators and some are also relay 
nodes.  
The simulation was done by randomly deploying the 
nodes in a 400x400m2 area, establish routing based on link 
criteria, and then count the number of times each packet had 
to be transmitted and received in order to get to the sink. 
The sink was placed, as shown in Figure 2, in the lower left 
corner. The motivation was that we wanted to investigate 
the consequences of long paths. For a given maximum 
internode distance, each node arrangement was repeated at 
least 200 times in order to gain statistical confidence. The 
nodes were interconnected as the routing protocol 
determined which links each node should use to forward 
their data. However, not all node configurations produced a 
connected graph. These arrangements were not included in 
our results. Especially for the short maximum internode 
distances (producing sparsely WSN), it was difficult to 
produce a fully connected WSN.  
The number of transmission permitted at each link was 
introduced above as the number m. In our analyses of a 
single path, it was also pointed out that when link lengths 
become 
too 
large 
the 
end-to-end 
performance 
is 
compromised, as the packets do not get through to the sink. 
A low value for m would produce an optimum network with 
disconnected links. Therefore we used m=100 in our 
simulations. 
Before the number of TX and RX was found the nodes 
had to be arranged and interconnected. The nodes were 
arranged by randomly positioning them in the area. The next 
step was to interconnect the nodes using a routing protocol. 
Here, we used the selection criteria of the RPL routing 
protocol [5], with an object function that selected only links 
fulfilling the defined EXT requirement [6]. The requirement 
is given in the following text. The ETX was found from the 
proposed function relating PDR and internode distances and 
the ETX of the individual links derived above. Thus, this 
selection criteria and the random node positioning produced 
links with different lengths, but with an upper limit with 
respect to internode distance. This means there was a 
maximum link length (or internode distance).  
Different MAC protocols produce different results. 
Therefore, the two most popular MAC protocols were 
evaluated according to their characteristic performance as 
presented below. In the 1-D network, it was assumed that 
only the communicating nodes were active. In our analyses 
of the 2-D WSN we used the same assumption. The first 
MAC protocol analyzed was a TDMA protocol, where the 
two communicating nodes were assigned a time slot. Time 
slots were assumed allocated during network establishment 
(as in, e.g., WirelessHART™ [22]). The overhead due to 
network configuration is not included in our assessment. 
The motivation for omitting this is that the total energy 
consumption is determined by the long-term operation. 
Furthermore, several assumptions would have had to be 
made regarding signaling and initial connections. The 
second MAC protocol analyzed was a CSMA MAC 
protocol. In CSMA, all nodes in the reception area of the 
sender decoded the packet in order to determine if the 
packet was destined to them. Since all nodes in the sensing 
range overheard the messages, it was concluded in [4] that 
the transmission range (link length) should be as short as 
possible.  
Before the energy consumption results are presented, 
some observations are given regarding paths length in WSN. 
      
 
Figure 5. Maximal hop count (left) as a function of maximal permitted 
node distance. The figure to the right shows the estimated probability 
distribution function (pdf) of maximal hop for a node distance of 45m 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Number of transmission as a function of node separation. 
 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The reason for this discussion is that the characteristics of 
the paths in WSN determine the performance of the 
network. It was pointed out in [9][10] that short link length 
in randomly deployed networks results in long paths. This 
was clearly observed in our simulations. In Figure 5, the 
maximum number of hops is presented for a network of 200 
nodes. The figure shows that the variation in maximum hop 
count is larger for networks using short link lengths. In 
addition, as illustrated in the graph on the right side in 
Figure  5, the distribution of maximum length has a tail 
towards long paths. These long paths demand many 
transmissions in order to forward packets to the sink. 
Clearly this is negative as they consume much energy, and 
in a CSMA based WSN the long paths will have many 
overhearing nodes along the paths. 
A. Optimal topology for TDMA 
The TDMA simulations are based on a radio with a 
fixed transmission power. The motivation was that in 
TDMA, the link length should be as large as possible, 
following the conclusion in [4]. However, the emitted power 
cannot be increased beyond a limit. The limit is determined 
by the design of the radio and/or the regulations.  
In the TDMA simulations, we 
sought optimal 
performance with respect to optimum internode distance. 
The limitation on the distance was the ETX of the individual 
links. ETX is proposed as an alternative metric to filter out 
only links fulfilling a defined quality determined by the 
object function [6]. In our model there is a direct relation 
between ETX and the distance between the nodes, as 
presented above. The challenge of estimating the ETX was 
thus avoided, and the routing protocol did not have to 
establish this information based on over the air 
communications. The assumption was according to the 
assumption stated earlier that the management traffic was 
not included. 
In Figure 6, a typical result is presented. Starting with 
the shortest allowed link length, it can be seen that by 
allowing longer links the total energy is reduced as the paths 
get shorter. However, the reduced energy consumption 
reaches a minimum, in the figure at approximately 60m. 
Further increase in allowed hop length causes increased 
total energy consumption. The reason is that longer 
internode distance causes higher ETX. The probability of 
retransmission 
over 
the 
links 
increases 
and 
this 
retransmission consumes energy.  
B. Optimal topology for CSMA 
The CSMA simulations were performed differently from 
the TDMA simulations. Here, the emitted power of the 
sender is changed. The reason is that for a CSMA WSN, we 
seek the optimal link lengths for the radio as in [4]. Change 
in the TX power causes changes in the parameters x0 and x1, 
in (1). In our simulation, x0 was increased and the original 
ratio between x1 and x0 determined the new x1. Thus, the 
grey zone increased with increasing TX power according to 
observations [17]. 
The ETX was used as a criterion for link selection in the 
CSMA simulations. Only links having a PDR1 equal to or 
better than 90% were considered candidates for routing. The 
derived relations above defined the relation between ETX 
and PDR1. Clearly, nodes outside the link length overheard 
the transmission. These nodes were in the sensing range 
(gray zone), where they received packets, but most often 
with bit error. However, the nodes consumed energy in 
receiving the packets and this energy was included in our 
analyses. The node’s sensing range was set equal to x0. It 
might be argued that this is too short, but here we used this 
as a first approximation.   
Figure 7 presents the results for a WSN based on 
CSMA. In the figure, the left graph shows all data points in 
addition to the average result of number of TX/RX. The 
curve to the right shows only the average number of TX/RX 
required (it is similar curve as the line in the left graph). The 
interesting observation is that there is a point where the 
number of required TX/RX starts to increase if the 
transmission range is decreased beyond an optimal hop 
length. The reason for this increase is the long paths that are 
likely to occur as the network is operated close to its 
connections limits. A second, interesting observation is the 
variation in number of TX/RX that is shown for the short 
internode distances. From the figure, it can be seen that for a 
maximum link length of 45m, there are some very low 
values and some very high values for the maximum hop 
count. From these results it can be concluded that it is 
advantageous to use long-hop also for CSMA. 
   
 
Figure 7. Total number of TX and RX packets handling as function of 
maximum link distance. The figure to the left shows both average and all 
simulated results while the figure on the right, average numbers are given. 
 
 
 
Internode distance [m] 
Figure 6. Number of packets transmitted as a function of maximum 
allowed link length through a TDMA WSN.  
Total TX packets  
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

VI. 
CONCLUSION 
A Fermi-Dirac function was suggested for relating the 
packet delivery ration (PDR) and the distance between the 
nodes. The function enables analytical evaluation of WSN. 
The parameters of the function were found by curve-fitting 
to published results. Next, the Fermi-Dirac function was 
applied in estimating the total number of transmissions 
along a path. The estimated number of transmissions 
showed good correlation to simulated results.  
In a WSN with randomly deployed nodes, the link 
quality of candidate links available for routing was 
evaluated for a TDMA based WSN. The consequences of 
having too strict requirement on the links caused higher 
energy consumption due to the long paths. However, 
beyond an optimal point the total energy consumption 
increased rapidly as each link had to retransmit the packet 
due to the reduced link quality.  Thus, it was found that 
TDMA based WSN has an optimal internode distance.  
An optimal node distance was also found for a CSMA 
based WSN. This is contrary to an intuitive conclusion, 
where the maximum link length should be as short as 
possible in order to reduce the unnecessary energy 
consumption in the overhearing nodes. The increasing total 
energy consumption for short link lengths was found to be 
due to the long, none optimal paths that occurred when short 
link lengths were used. 
Our findings can be used as a tool for designing a WSN 
as a more realistic description of the relation between the 
link quality and node distance is found. It was found that an 
optimum node distance exist for WSN based on both CSMA 
and TDMA.  
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Min and A. Chandrakasan, "Top Five Myths about the 
Energy Consumption of Wireless Communication", ACM 
Mobile Computing and Communication Reviews, vol. 7, No 
1, Jan. 2003, poster 
[2] H. Karl and A. Willig, "Protocols and Architectures for 
Wireless Sensor Networks", ISBN: 978-0-470-51923-3,John 
Wiley & Sons, 2007 
[3] CC2420, 
Chipcon Products from 
Texas Instruments,  
http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/cc2420.pdf, 
visited 
July 
2014 
[4] A-L. Kampen, K. Ovsthus, L. Landmark, and O. Kure, 
“Energy Reduction in Wireless Sensor Networks by 
Switching Nodes to Sleep During Packet Forwarding” , The 
Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and 
Applications, SENSORCOMM 2012, Italy, 2012, ISBN 978-
1-61208-207-3. s. 189-195 
[5] T. Winter, et al., “RPL: IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low-
Power and Lossy Networks”, RFC 6550, Internet Engineering 
Task Force (IETF), 2012 
[6] JP. Vasseur, M. Kim, K. Pister, N. Dejean, and D. Barthel, 
"Routing Metrics Used for Path Calculation in Low-Power 
and Lossy Networks", RFC6551, Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF), 2012 
[7] I. Khemapech, A. Miller, and I. Duncan, "A Survey of 
Transmission Power Control in Wireless Sensor Networks", 
The 8th Annual Postgraduate Symposium The Convergence 
of Telecommunications, Liverpool John Moores University, 
28th-29th June 2007 
[8] M. Haenggi, "Twelve reasons not to route over many short 
hops", VTC2004-Fall. 2004 IEEE 60th Vehicular Technology 
Conference , Vol. 5, 2004, pp. 3130 – 3134. 
[9] P. Szczytowski, A. Khelil, A. Ali, and N. Suri, "TOM: 
Topology oriented maintenance in sparse Wireless Sensor 
Networks",  8th Annual IEEE Communications Society 
Conference on Sensor, Mesh and Ad Hoc Communications 
and Networks (SECON), 2011, pp. 548 – 556. 
[10] S. Vural and E. Ekici, "On Multihop Distances in Wireless 
Sensor Networks with Random Node Locations", IEEE 
TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 9, 
NO. 4, 2010, pp. 540 – 552. 
[11] Z. Rosberg, R.P. Liu, T. L. Dinh, Y. F. Dong, and S. Jha, 
"Statistical reliability for energy efficient data transport in 
wireless sensor networks", Wireless Netw, 16, 2010, pp. 
1913-1927. 
[12] R P. Liu, Z. Rosberg, I. B. Collings., C. Wilson, A. Y  Dong, 
and S. Jha, "Energy Efficient Reliable Data Collection in 
Wireless Sensor Networks with Asymmetric Links", Int J 
Wireless Inf Networks, 16, 2009, pp- 131-141- 
[13] T. Zheng, E. Kamel, and S. Wang, "Node performance model 
of wireless sensor networks", 2013 9th Asian Control 
Conference (ASCC), 2013, pp. 1 – 6. 
[14] N. Farzaneh and M. H. Yaghmaee, "Probability based hop 
selection approach for resource control in Wireless Sensor 
Network", 
2012 
Sixth 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Telecommunications (IST), 2012, pp. 703 – 708. 
[15] A. Bildea, O. Alphand, F. Rousseau, and A. Duda, "Link 
quality metrics in large scale indoor wireless sensor 
networks", IEEE 24th International Symposium on Personal 
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2013, 
pp. 1888 – 1892. 
[16] J. Zhao and R. Govindan, "Understanding Packet Delivery 
Performance 
In 
Dense 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks", 
Proceedings of the 1st international conference on Embedded 
networked sensor systems, SenSys '03,  Pages 1 - 13, ACM 
New York, USA 2003, pp. 1 – 13. 
[17] Y-D. Lee, D-U. Jeong, and H-J. Lee, "Performance analysis 
of wireless link quality in wireless sensor networks", 5th Int. 
Conf. on Computer Sciences and Convergence Information 
Technology (ICCIT),  2010, pp. 1006 – 1010. 
[18] L. Siyu and G. Hongju, "Propagation characteristics of 
2.4GHz wireless channel in cornfields", IEEE 13th 
International Conference on Communication Technology 
(ICCT),  2011, pp. 136 – 140. 
[19] Available at http://www.ieee802.org/15/pub/TG4.html  
[20] OMNeT++,  http://www.omnetpp.org/, visited July, 2014 
[21] MiXiM, http://mixim.sourceforge.net/, visited July 2014 
[22] WirelessHART™, 
IEC 
62591 
ed1.0, 
http://webstore.iec.ch/webstore/webstore.nsf/ArtNum_PK/43
964, visited July 2014 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

