Intelligent Monitoring of Subjects with Severe Disorder of Consciousness 
 
Luigi Flotta, Francesco Riganello 
Istituto S. Anna – Research in Advanced Rehabilitation 
Crotone, Italy 
l.flotta@istitutosantanna.it  
 f.riganello@istitutosantanna.it 
Walter G Sannita 
Dept. of Neuroscience, Ophthalmology and Genetics 
University of Genova, Genova, Italy 
Dept. of Psychiatry 
State University of New York, Stony Brook , NY, USA   
wgs@dism.unige.it                     
 
 
Abstract — We describe an integrated system for continuous 
acquisition, storage, handling and analysis of clinical and 
functional data from subjects in the vegetative or minimally 
conscious states. Data from different sources are stored in a 
centralized database and analyzed off-line by commercial or 
open source tools. Custom modules have been developed in 
order to convert proprietary data formats to the standard SQL 
data format. The centralized database is directly accessible 
when the patient’s clinical record and data are needed to 
support 
decision 
(diagnosis, 
prognosis, 
selection 
of 
rehabilitation protocols)  as well as in the patients’ monitoring 
or for research purposes. The system is supported by web and 
open source technologies and interfaced with advanced 
support systems; it allows an integrated view of clinical and 
functional data flows. 
Keywords-severe disorder of consciousness; autonomic nervous 
system; intelligent monitoring; decision support system. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Patients in vegetative or minimally conscious states need 
constant 
monitoring 
and 
a 
continuous 
stream 
of 
clinical/neurobiological 
information 
is 
required 
for 
appropriate healthcare by the medical and nursing staff and 
to optimize the rehabilitation therapy [1,2]. In the framework 
of the rehabilitation protocol, patients are also given sensory 
stimuli in order to improve their responsiveness to the 
environment and reduce isolation; responses to stimuli can 
vary and depend on the ortho/parasymphatetic functional 
balance in the autonomic system [3].  
A. Structure of the article 
The article includes the following sections: Acquisition 
and integration systems summarizing the system and its use, 
The decision support system, describing the main tools for 
analysis, Summary. 
 
II. 
ACQUISITION AND INTEGRATION SYSTEM 
The data acquisition and integration system (Figure 1) is 
implemented to record:  
• 
Biometric and biological functional data and 
environmental information; 
• 
Heart Rate and measures of Heart Rate Variability 
(HRV) in the time and frequency domains; 
• 
Information about the individual neurorehabilitation 
program and training protocols. 
 
Data collected by automated sensors are numerical 
measurements represented in ASCII (American Standard 
Code for Information Interchange) format that have minimal 
memory footprint and impact on the network requirements, 
so to make a standard 100 Mb LAN sufficient to sustain the 
system efficience. 
The system is deployed on a LAN environment not 
accessible via web from unauthorized users. The chances of 
the patient’s data leaking are, therefore, limited and the 
system complies with the modern standards of information 
security. 
The system is neither a remote health monitoring system,  
nor a telemedicine system; it is intended to support the daily 
work and research activities of the specialized public/private 
institutions dedicated to the treatment of subjects with severe 
Disorder Of Consciousness (DOC). One main goal is to 
collect over time a very large dataset of biological data from 
patients with severe DOC and their (statistical) correlations 
with environmental data and clinical condition. Purpose is to 
use these data and their relations to obtain objective 
diagnostic criteria, predict early and accurate prognosis of 
patients and define therapeutic pathways. 
The centralized database is hosted on a PostgreSQL [22] 
instance, version 9.2, and its main tables, namely: 
• 
Gateway – wireless access point that collects and 
forward to the database the data from sensors; 
• 
Sensors – collecting information from environment 
and  patients; 
• 
BiologicalMeasurements – storing biological data; 
• 
EnvMeasuremtes – storing environmental data. 
 
For security reasons, the centralized database is installed 
on a server different than the web-server. 
A. Biogical and environmental data 
A hard/software system with Hx24 high-availability 
acquires biometric and environmental raw data measured by 
a series of traditional or innovative wireless sensors. The 
system includes a gateway connected to the LAN (Local 
Area Network) to detect environmental data (ambient 
temperature, environmental humidity, light intensity, noise, 
etc.). Wireless sensors are positioned at proper locations on 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

the patients and measure biometric parameters such as body 
temperature, heart rate and systolic/diastolic blood pressure, 
breathing, pO2, pCO2, spontaneous movements, voice, eye 
movements and blinking, to be transferred to the gateway. 
All data are forwarded to a server that collects the byte 
stream and stores it, after appropriate transformations, in the 
centralized data base for further processing or sends data to 
user interface software (example in Figure 2). The system is 
operative and already collected about 1GB of data. 
Measures 
are 
from 
sensors 
detecting/quantifying: 
Environmental Temperature, Light, Humidity, Noise, Body 
Temperature, Heart Rate, Oximetry and Eyes blinking. 
 
B. Heart Rate Variability 
Heart Rate Variability (HRV), i.e., the heart rate 
fluctuations around the mean value over the time sample, 
mirrors to a substantial extent the cardiorespiratory control 
system and is regarded as a reliable index of the 
sympathetic/parasympathetic functional interplay [4] and 
intrinsic influence on heart rate. HRV is also thought to 
provide independent information on the autonomic nervous 
system and its functional integration with the brain, to reflect 
the action of physiological factors modulating the heart 
rhythm and homeostatic adaptation to the changing 
conditions, and to describe modulation by Central 
Autonomic Nervous network (CAN) [5]. CAN influences 
heart rate adaptation through multiple connections (inputs 
from sensory and baroreceptors within the heart and great 
vessels, 
respiratory 
changes, 
vasomotor 
regulation, 
thermoregulatory system and changes in endocrine function 
and neuroendocrine interaction) [6]. There is indication that 
the autonomic system may also mediate patterns of brain 
activation of varying complexity. HRV is thought to reflect 
the organization of affective, physiological, cognitive, and 
behavioral elements and is emerging as a possible descriptor 
of the brain functional organization contributing to 
homeostasis and homeostatic responses [6]. The basic 
objective of the survey is to identify patterns of correlation 
between the HRV data and functional models available today 
for the CAN.  
Heart signals (EKG) can be recorded continuously by 
non-invasive techniques and analyses in the time or 
frequency domains can extract HRV information; the method 
is now established in the functional investigation of the CAN 
and has proved reliable in the study of subjects with severe 
DOC. Records of responses are obtained either from a Nexus 
10 or from a Nexus 32 (Mind Media, NL). Nexus systems 
provide outputs in .edf file format that are transferred 
through web application to the server for storage in the 
central database and retrieval off-line for further processing. 
 
C. Rehabilitation data 
These data are obtained by clinical observation according 
to established rating scales filled by the medical and nursing 
staff. The scales now in use are: 
• 
The Coma Recovery Scale Revisited – CRS [7]; 
• 
The Wessex Head Injury Matrix – WHIM [8]; 
• 
The Levels of Cognitive Functions – LCF [9]; 
• 
The Nociception Coma Scale – NCF [10]. 
Dedicated web applications have been developed to 
enable medical and nursing staff to fill in each scale item 
with the appropriate values. Data are stored in the central 
database and integrated with the information for further 
processing and correlative studies. 
 
III. 
THE DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM 
The Decision Support System is composed mainly of  R, 
an Open Source statistical package, extended with custom 
modules [12].  Classical techniques of statistical analysis are 
used, such as the  Bayesian Statistics, Data Mining, Neural 
Network, Linear Regression, etc [12].  
In the following sections, we briefly describe the main 
objectives of our statistical analysis. 
A. Ambient Intelligence 
Analyses of information from environmental and 
biometric sensors follow a straightforward strategy, with 
major focus on spontaneous variability or in response to 
changes in the environment [13-15]. Sources of variation are 
manifold and can reflect changes in the functional status or 
in responsiveness as well as the existence of residual 
endogenous 
mechanisms 
of 
self-regulation 
or 
circadian/ultradian cycles. For patients in vegetative or 
minimally conscious state, changes can also depend on 
interaction with the staff or relatives and effects of the 
procedures of nursing and rehabilitation services, or reflect 
endogenous mechanisms [16]. The rationale for the analysis 
of each vital parameter aims at assessing the existence of 
cyclic or non-cyclic changes and at correlating each 
parameter or pattern of variation with environmental changes 
[17]. 
Investigation in this field has several goals: 
• 
To verify whether circadian/ultradian pattern of 
change are partially preserved or have recovered to a 
significant extent in individual subjects; 
• 
To recognize processes to be relied on as prognostic 
indicators; 
• 
To identify changes in the vital parameters related to 
contingent 
events 
and 
indicative 
of 
residual/recovered responsiveness or of use when 
customizing the rehabilitation treatments according 
to tolerability; 
• 
To to achieve an integrated model of analysis and 
prediction. 
The regression analysis (to identify relationships among 
variables), the Neural Network (a sophisticated pattern 
detection algorithm using machine learning techniques to 
generate 
predictions), 
the 
Clustering/Segmentation 
processes (to create groups for applications), the 
Association Rules techniques  (to detect related items in a 
dataset) are widely used for performing above 
investigations [18]. 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

B. Parameters and Analysis 
Two main lines of analysis were identified: 
 
1) Stimuli Response Distribution Analysis 
The stimulus conditions to be administered to patients 
with severe DOC (Disorder Of Consciousness) can be 
characterized in order to activate simple or complex 
functions of the auditory or visual sensory channels 
(including highly integrated extrinsic eye mobility, e.g., the 
visual pursuit response) or the somatosensory system. 
Analyses are purported to distribute the recorded HRV 
descriptor values vs. the response, by selecting at pre-
determined conditions and time points the parameters 
qualifying as possible biomarkers. The obtained distribution 
is classified by Data Mining techniques and/or Linear 
Regression and/or Sequence Association tools (to detect 
causality and association between time-ordered events) in 
order to assess the subject’s state of consciousness (e.g., 
vegetative vs. minimally conscious states) or identify and 
monitor stimulus- or environment-related changes or 
spontaneous fluctuations over time.  
Statistical techniques used include: the regression 
analysis, the Neural Network, the Clustering/Segmentation 
processes, the Association Rules techniques. 
 
2) Central Autonomic Nervous System  (CAN) 
HRV provides independent information on the CAN and 
its functional integration with the brain [19-21]. The basic 
objective of the survey is to identify patterns of correlation 
between the HRV data and functional models available today 
for the CAN. Parameters “representing” CAN are reported in 
table 1. 
Statistical techniques used include: the regression 
analysis, the Neural Network, the Clustering/Segmentation 
processes, the Association Rules techniques. 
 
IV. 
SUMMARY 
The functional state/recovery of CAN recovery, the 
impact of ambient condition and/or changes, sleep quality, 
circadian symphato/vagal alternance, organization of the 
brain electrophysiological activities, infra-ultra/circadian 
rhythms, and responsiveness to stimuli are fundamentals in 
the rehabilitation project of patients with severe DOC. 
The development of acquisition and integration systems 
will provide the information needed to design effecient tive 
plain of protocol for the observation, rehabilitation and 
monitoring of patients with severe DOC. The approach will 
contribute in the process of acquiring new knowledge on the 
neural mechanism underlining recovery in these patients and 
help planning better rehabilitative routines. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Royal College of Physicians, The vegetative state: guidance on 
diagnosis and management.  Royal College of Physicians (Ed.). RCP 
Publications Department , 2003. 
[2] The Multi-Society Task Force on PVS, “Medical aspects of the 
persistent vegetative state”, New England Journal of Medicine vol. 
330, pp.1499-1508, 1994. 
[3] F. Riganello, A. Candelieri, M. Quintieri, D. Conforti, and G. Dolce,  
“Heart rate variability: an index of brain processing in vegetative 
state? An artificial intelligence, data mining study”, Clinical 
Neurophysiology, vol. 121, pp. 2024-2034, 2010. 
[4] Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North 
American Society of Pacing and electrophysiology of Circulation, 
“Heart rate variability: standard of measurement, physiological 
interpretation, and clinical use”, Circulation, vol. 93, pp. 1043-1065, 
1996. 
[5] F. Riganello, G. Dolce, and W. G. Sannita, “Heart rate variability and 
the central autonomic network in the severe disorder of 
consciousness”, Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine, vol. 44(5), pp. 
495-501, 2012. 
[6] F. Riganello, S. Garbarino, and W. G. Sannita, “Heart rate variability, 
homeostasis, and brain function: a tutorial and review of application”, 
Journal of Psychophysiology, vol. 26(4), pp. 178-203, 2012. 
[7] J.T. Giacino, K. Kalmar, and J. Whyte, “The jfk coma recovery scale-
revised: measurement characteristics and diagnostic utility”, Arch. 
Phys. Med .Rehabil., vol. 85(12), pp. 2020-2029, 2004. 
[8] S. Majerus, M. Van der Linden, and A. Shiel, “Wessex head injury 
matrix and glasgow/glasgow-liège coma scale: a validation and 
comparison study”, Neuropsychol. Rehabil., vol. 10, pp. 167-184, 
2000. 
[9] C. Hagen, D. Malkmus, and P. Durham, “Levels of cognitive 
functioning”, Ranchos Los Amigos Hospital (Ed.). Ranchos Los 
Amigos Hospital, Downey, CA, 1972. 
[10] C. Schnakers, C. Chatelle, A. Vanhaudenhuyse, S. Majerus, D. 
Ledoux, M. Boly et al., “The nociception coma scale: a new tool to 
assess nociception in disorders of consciousness”, Pain, vol.  148(2), 
pp. 215-219, 2010. 
[11] S. Tufféry, Data mining and statistics for decision making. Wiley, 
2011. 
[12] J.P. Marques de Sa. Applied statistics using SPSS, Statistica, Matlab 
and R.  Springer, 2007. 
[13] A. Candelieri, D. Conforti, F. Riganello, and W. G. Sannita, “Data 
mining for the analysis of psychophysiologica variation to stimuli in 
vegetative state patients”, Proc. of airo 2010, xli giornate di lavoro 
airo 2010, Villa S. Giovanni (RC), September 2010. 
[14] A. Candelieri, G. Dolce, F. Riganello, and W. G. Sannita, “Data 
mining in neurology”, In Knowledge-oriented application in data 
mining, Funatsu K & Hasegawa K (Eds.), pp. 264-276, 2011. 
[15] A. Candelieri, M. D. Cortese, F. Riganello, and W.G. Sannita, 
“Functional status and the eye-tracking response. A data mining 
classification study in the vegetative and minimaly conscious states”, 
Proc.  Heathinf Rome, pp. 138-141, 2011. 
[16] F. Riganello, G. Dolce, M. D. Cortese, and W. G. Sannita, 
“Responsiveness and prognosis in the  severe disorder of 
consciousness”, In Brain damage: causes, management  and 
prognosis,  Schäffer AJ & Müller J (Eds.) pp. 117-135, 2010. 
[17] L. Pignolo, F. Riganello, G. Dolce, and W. G. Sannita, “Ambient 
intelligence for monitoring and research in clinical neurophysiology 
and medicine: the Mimerica* project and prototype”, Clinical EEG 
and Neuroscience, in press: [Epub ahead of print], 2013. 
[18] M. F. Hornick, H. Marcadé, and S. Venkayala, Java data mining. 
Morgan Kaufmann, 2007. 
[19] M. L. Ryan, C. M. Thorson, C. A. Otero, T. Vu, and K. G. Proctor, 
“Clinical applications of heart rate variability in the triage and 
assessment of traumatically injured patients”, Anesthesiology 
Research and Practice, 2011, doi:10.1155/2011/416590. 
[20] J. J. Sollers, T. A. Sanford, R. Nabors-Oberg, C. A. Anderson, and J. 
F. Thayer, “Examining changes in hrv in response to varying ambient 
temperature”, IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology, May 2002, 
vol. 21, pp. 30-34. 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[21] A. L. Hansen, B. H. Johnsen, J. F. Thayer, “Relationship between 
heart rate variability and cognitive function during threat of shock”,  
Anxiety Stress Coping, vol. 22, pp. 77-89, 2009. 
[22] PostgreSQL 
DBMS, 
version 
9.2, 
http://www.postgresql.org/, 
[retrieved: April, 2013]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The architecture of the acquisition and integration system. 
 
Figure 2.  Some biological data acquired by the system. 
Statistical 
Parameters 
 
 
Mean RR interval (Mean RR [ms] ); Standard deviation of RR values  (STD RR [1/min] ); Mean Heart Rate 
(Mean HR[1/min] ); Standard deviation of heart rate values  (STD HR [1/min]); Square root of the mean squared 
differences between successive RR intervals (RMSSD) [ms]); Number of successive RR interval pairs that differ 
more than 50 ms(NN50); NN50 divided by the total number of RR intervals(pNN50 [%]); The integral of the RR 
interval histogram divided by the height of the histogram (HRV triangular index); Baseline width of the RR 
interval histogram  Frequency-Domain (TINN [ms]); 
Spectral 
Parameters 
Peak frequency  in FFT and autoregressive spectra of  Very Low Frequency (VLF), Low Frequency (LF) and 
High Frequency (HF) band  [Hz]; Power Spectrum of VLF, LF, HF and Total in FFT and autoregressive spectra 
[ms2]; % of VLF, LF, HF in FFT and autoregressive spectra [Spectral band [ms2]/total power [ms2] × 100%]; 
Ratio between LF and HF band powers (Ratio LF/HF); normalized unit of LF (nu LF) and normalized unit of HF 
(nu HF), in FFT and autoregressive Spectra, [Spectral band [ms2]/(total power [ms2] − VLF [ms2]]; 
Nonlinear 
The standard deviation of the Poincarè plot perpendicular to (SD1) and along (SD2) the line-of-identity, [ms]; 
Approximate entropy ApEn;Sample entropy SampEn;Correlation dimension;Detrended fluctuation analysis DFA  
(ά1Short term fluctuation slope and ά2 Long term fluctuation slope); 
Galvanik Skin 
Responce 
Measure of the electrical conductance of the skin. It’s is used as an indication of psychological or physiological 
arousal. 
Actigraphy 
Monitoring of rest/activity cycles. 
Blood Volume 
Pulse 
Measured by a process called photoplethysmography, which produces a graph indicating blood flow through 
the extremities. 
Table1: Principal parameters extracted for the ANS analysis 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

