Mobility Model for Self-Conﬁguring Mobile Sensor Network
Andrzej Sikora∗†, Ewa Niewiadomska-Szynkiewicz∗†
∗ Institute of Control and Computation Engineering, Warsaw University of Technology
ul. Nowowiejska 15/19, 00-665 Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: asikora@elka.pw.edu.pl, ens@ia.pw.edu.pl
† Research and Academic Computer Network (NASK)
ul. Wawozowa 18, 02-796 Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: andrzej.sikora@nask.pl, ewan@nask.pl
Abstract—A self-conﬁguring sensor network is a collection
of wireless devices that collaborate with each other to form a
network system that adapts to achieve a goal or goals. Such
network is often built from mobile sensors that may sponta-
neously create a network and dynamically adopt to changes in
the unknown environment and network requirements. Mobility
pattern is a critical element that inﬂuences the performance
characteristics of mobile sensor networks (MSN). In this paper,
we discuss main directions to mobility modeling and present a
systematic taxonomy of the mobility models that is provided in
literature. Finally, we describe a novel algorithm for calculating
mobility patterns for mobile devices that is based on a cluster
formation and an artiﬁcial potential function. Our model can be
used both to a simulation-based design of MSN, and to a motion
planning for real, physical MSN. The presented simulation
study for a rescue mission planning illustrates the possible
application of our model.
Keywords-self-conﬁguring network; mobile sensor network;
mobility models; potential ﬁeld;
I. INTRODUCTION
In the last years, wireless sensor networks (WSN) have
gained increasing attention from both the research commu-
nity and users [3], [11]. WSN are distributed architectures
formed by a set of wireless devices that can freely and
dynamically organize themselves into temporary network
topologies. Typical WSN usually consists of stationary de-
vices. In many real life applications networks formed by
stationary nodes suffer insufﬁciency. Therefore, there is a
need for mobile sensor network (MSN) that is capable to
change its layout and position. Such a network is formed by
mobile sensor devices.
This paper considers issues concerning self-conﬁguring
MSN design and development. We focus on network systems
formed by mobile, wireless devices that may spontaneously
create a network, manage movement of sensor nodes, assem-
ble the network themselves, dynamically react to changes
in the domain and network requirements. There are many
beneﬁts of these features, and many potential applications.
Examples include an optimal coverage for monitoring of an
unknown environment, producing a well connected network
despite the limited resources, providing a connection be-
tween data sources and data sinks, which are not necessarily
uniformly distributed across the network, and others. It is
obvious that the mobility of MSN can be used to improve
its performance characteristics, such as sensing coverage
or network connectivity. The question is how the mobility
can efﬁciently be managed toward a better network system
performance. We present and describe a novel approach to
design MSN. The proposed concept of mobility patterns
calculation is based on a cluster formation and an idea of
potential function commonly used in robots navigation.
II. MOBILITY MODELING IN MSN
Modeling of node mobility plays the crucial role in
design and development of MSN systems. Simulation results
show that the communication protocols performance may
vary drastically across mobility models and performance
rankings of protocols may vary with the mobility models
used [1], [7]. Therefore, studying the performance of ad
hoc networking protocols and application services in the
presence of mobility is an important stage of the design
process. It implies that the characteristics of mobility models
of mobile nodes need to be analyzed and studied very
carefully. It is obvious that real-life movement patterns are
very difﬁcult to obtain, and realistic models are usually very
complicated. Many less and more detailed mobility models
have been introduced, and are described in literature. The
survey can be found in [7].
In this paper, we present the mobility models taxonomies
provided in [1] and [7]. In general, we can distinguish two
approaches for mobility patterns modeling [2], [7], [8]:
• Motion traces models (TM). The deterministic models,
that require the accurate information about mobility
patters (i.e., positions of nodes in time).
• Syntactic models (SM). The analytical random-motion
models, that uses randomness in calculation of travers-
ing patterns from one place to another. They can be
classiﬁed based on the description of the mobility
patterns into: individual mobile movements and group
mobile movements, and based on the degree of ran-
domness into: constrained topology-based models and
statistical models. In constrained topology-based mod-
els the movement is restricted by various constraints:
97
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

pathways, speed limits, obstacles, etc. In statistical
model the node is allowed to move anywhere in the
domain, hence the model is based on total randomness.
Bai et al. [1] classify the mobility models based on their
basic mobility characteristics:
• Random models. As in statistical models, nodes move
randomly, and can be classiﬁed further based on the
degree of randomness. A Random Mobility model
(RM) that implements Brownian-like motion, and a
Random Waypoint model (RWP) with randomly gener-
ated destination point and velocity are popular models
from this group.
• Models with temporal dependency. The mobility pat-
terns are inﬂuenced by the previously generated move-
ment patterns. A Gauss-Markov and smooth random
mobility model fall into this category.
• Models with spatial dependency. The nodes tend to
move in a correlated manner. A reference point group
mobility model belongs to this category.
• Models with geographical restrictions. The movements
of all nodes are constrained by streets, roads, obstacles,
etc. Path-based and obstacle mobility models fall into
this category.
Roy [7] provides the alternative classiﬁcation. He divides
the models into seven groups:
• Individual mobility models. The mobility pattern for the
individual node is calculated.
• Group mobility models. The mobility pattern for a
group of cooperative nodes is calculated.
• Autoregressive mobility models. The mobility patterns
are correlated with the mobility states (i.e.: position,
velocity, acceleration at consecutive time instants).
• Flocking and swarm mobility models. The mobil-
ity patterns imitate the trajectories performed by dy-
namic nodes of self-organizing networks in nature (like
swarms).
• Virtual game-driven mobility models. The mobility pat-
tern calculation takes into account the interactions with
all other nodes in a network or with groups of nodes.
• Non-recurrent mobility models. It is assumed that a
network permanently changes its topology in time. A
node moves in a totally unknown way, and previous
patterns are not repeated.
• Social-based mobility models. The family of the mobil-
ity models that are associated as a community of groups
within a society. The models describe non-homogenous
behaviors in both space and time.
The mobility models that are examples of above-quoted
categories of models are collected in Table I.
III. MOBILITY MODEL FOR SELF-CONFIGURING MSN
We consider a problem of design a self-conﬁguring net-
work of mobile nodes, connected by wireless links. We
Table I
MOBILITY MODELS.
Group of models
Models
Individual
Random walk mobility
mobility models
Random waypoint mobility
Smooth random mobility
Geographic constraint mobility
Realistic random direction mobility
Deterministic mobility
Partially deterministic mobility
Random Gauss-Markov mobility
Semi-Markov smooth mobility
Steady-state generic mobility
Graph-based mobility
Hierarchical inﬂuence mobility
Boundless simulation area mobility
Behavioral mobility
Fluid-ﬂow mobility
Potential ﬁeld mobility
Correlated diffusion mobility
Particle-based mobility
Group
Reference point mobility
mobility models
Reference velocity mobility
Reference velocity
& acceleration mobility
Structured mobility
Virtual track-based mobility
Drift mobility
Group force mobility
Autoregressive
Autoregressive individual mobility
models
Autoregressive group mobility
Flocking
Flocking mobility
and swarm models
Swarm group mobility
Virtual game-driven
Virtual game-driven mobility
models
Virtual game-driven mobility
Non-recurrent models
Non-recurrent mobility
Social-based models
Time-variant mobility
Community-based mobility
Orbit-based mobility
Entropy-based mobility
Knowledge-driven mobility
assume that to achieve a goal network nodes should col-
laborate, and a whole network should enable continuous
communication with the base station, hence the network
must be connected. Collective motion is often required in
mobile sensing networks. It involves communication among
and between individual nodes or clusters of nodes to coor-
dinate their movement. We assume that the network system
should change its topology to achieve a goal. The objective
is to calculate mobility patterns for all network nodes. The
use of relatively simple random mobility models did not give
satisfactory results in our experiments. Therefore, we have
developed a novel algorithm to calculate mobility patterns
for a mobile sensor network. Our mobility model resembles
a collision-free movement of a group of mobile devices. It
can be used in ad hoc networks simulation for design of
98
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

network scenarios or for motion planning for real MSN.
In our research we have focused on the individual mobility
where the mobility pattern of an individual node is consid-
ered. Our model combines two approaches – potential ﬁeld
and particle-based mobility modeling. The concept to build
an artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld where the mobile devices move
from a high-value state to a low-value state, and deﬁne an
associated potential function that captures both operational
goals and the environment of a network is a popular direction
in motion planning in mobile robotics [4], and mobile sensor
networks [5]. Due to such model, the determined mobility
pattern of each node includes attraction to the destination
and repulsion from each obstacle. In these approaches sensor
nodes not only receive forces from the surrounding environ-
ment, but also receive forces from one another. The particle-
based mobility modeling [7] that considers each mobile
node as a ”self-driven” moving particle in the physics of
Newtonian mechanics or quantum mechanics is the other
popular technique in management of mobile devices. Each
node is characterized by a sum of forces, describing its desire
to move to the direction, avoiding collisions with other nodes
and obstacles. The driving force is associated with each
node, and is self-produced.
A. Problem Formulation and Network System Description
Let us consider a set of mobile wireless devices that
compose MSN, and are assumed to operate in a three-
dimensional ﬁeld ﬁlled with obstacles. Each node navi-
gates itself to a particular location to achieve the goal.
The objective is to calculate the optimal motion trajectory
from one conﬁguration to another that meets the following
requirements:
1) the mobility should be managed toward a better
coverage and well connected network that enables a
continuous communication with a base station,
2) the traversing pattern from one place to another has to
be collision free and should allow to push the network
node through the narrow passage,
3) the traversing pattern has to capture the environment
requirements (the signal propagation can change in
time).
We propose the scheme for management of nodes’ move-
ment based on a cluster formation and application of an
artiﬁcial potential function that captures the above-quoted
requirements. In our formulation all network nodes and
obstacles form a set S of N entities; Oi, i = 1, . . . , N. We
assume that our obstacles can move as well (nodes can be
obstacles for other nodes in the network), hence the obstacles
are the same type of entities as the network nodes. We deﬁne
each entity Oi as a solid body, which position is described
by three Cartesian coordinates [xi, yi, zi] and orientation is
given by a quaternion [4]: Qi = qi
0 + qi
1i + qi
2j + qi
3k. We
consider objects that are of different shapes. To simplify
the calculation we made an assumption that the interactions
c1
c2
p1
p2
F(p1,p2)
F(c1,c2)
Figure 1.
The node description.
Figure 2.
The rotation of the mobile device.
between each pair of entities (Oi and Oj) are described by
the interactions between points selected from Oi and Oj (see
Fig. 1). Hence, in case of Oi the set of selected points is as
follows: P i = p1
i , ..., pi
M, P i ∈ Oi, with pi
1 = ci, where
ci is the central point, and Mi - 1 other points are selected
by the user. Such a representation of a node allows us to
implement translation and rotation, hence it is easy to rotate
the network node and push through the narrow passage, Fig.
2. The rotation is given by a quaternion product.
Obviously, it is possible to simplify the description, – each
object Oi can be described by a single point ci (similarly
to commonly used mobility models). In such an approach
the mobility pattern calculation simpliﬁes, but the generated
trajectory is less realistic.
99
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

B
d
Ud
20
40
60
80
100
-20
20
40
60
80
100
Figure 3.
The artiﬁcial potential function.
B. Potential Field Mobility Model
Inspired by classical dynamics that study the motion of
objects in the concept of an artiﬁcial potential ﬁelds, and
particle-based modeling we propose the model in which the
mobility of each node in the network is governed by the
description of an artiﬁcial potential function. The potential
function U is a differentiable real valued function, which
value can be viewed as an energy, and hence the gradient
of the potential is a force. The gradient is a vector, which
points in the direction that locally maximally increases
U. The potential function can be constructed as a sum
of attractive and repulsive potentials. The meaning of the
attractive/repulsive is straightforward: the goal attracts the
mobile device while the obstacle repels it. Therefore, the
sum of attractive and repulsive inﬂuences draws the mobile
device to the goal while deﬂecting it from obstacles. The
gravity mobility model, which is based on the use of New-
ton’s gravitational law of motion in classical dynamics to
calculate a mobility pattern is the example of this approach.
Unfortunately, it is insufﬁcient in many applications. The
model often introduces oscillations into the movement of
nodes. The oscillations are hard to eliminate. To address
this problem, we constructed a simple potential function
that captures all the requirements for calculated mobility
pattern mentioned in the previous paragraph. The inspiration
came from classical mechanics and liquid crystals where it
is popular to model the interactions between a pair of neutral
atoms or molecules via Lennard-Jones potential function
(see [10] for details). We propose the simpler function with
similar characteristics:
U ij
ab( ˆdij
ab) =



ϵmi
amj
b
 ¯dij
ab
ˆdij
ab − 1
2
| ¯dij
ab − ˆdij
ab| > τ ij
ab
0
| ¯dij
ab − ˆdij
ab| ≤ τ ij
ab (1)
where ˆdij
ab denotes the estimated distance between points
pi
a and pj
b, ¯dij
ab the reference inter-node distance (calculated
due to maximal radio range), ϵ, mi
a, mj
b and τ ij
ab are
parameters. The point reaches an unstable equilibrium for
ˆdij
ab ∈ [ ¯dij
ab − τ ij
ab, ¯dij
ab + τ ij
ab], as depicted in Fig. 3. Similarly
to the Lennard-Jones potential the form of U ij
ab has no
theoretical justiﬁcation. In the reference position of our node
ˆdij
ab = ¯dij
ab we obtain U ij
ab ≈ 0; it means the best coverage on
condition of full connected network. However, in unknown
environment with obstacles it is usually impossible to move
a node to an optimal position. Hence, we can calculate the
estimated distance ˆdij
ab solving the optimization problem
min
ˆdij
ab
U ij
ab( ˆdij
ab)
(2)
It is obvious that the calculation of the whole trajectory
since the node reaches the equilibrium point is not an
easy task because of the numerous actors operating in the
scene. However, we can describe our mobile network as
a physical system consisting of objects that are forced to
move in the advisable direction with the adequate speed.
The algorithm 1 for traversing pattern calculation at time
instants t0 + ∆t, t0 + 2∆t, . . . for i-th node is as follows:
• Step 1. Calculate the reference inter-node distances
due to current maximal radio range and environment
characteristics (for all points of Oi).
• Step 2. Calculate the values of ˆdij
ab for all points of Oi
using the formula (1).
• Step 3. Calculate the displacement for the whole object
Oi (the i-th node) for results of Step 2.
• Step 4. Move the i-th node to the new position in the
domain.
• Step 5. Rotate the i-th node (if necessary).
• Step 6. Calculate and broadcast to the network the new
positions of all points of Oi. Return to Step 1.
C. Reference distances calculation
In the ﬁrst step of our algorithm we have to calculate
the reference distances for all points selected from a given
node, due to the current maximal radio range, and assumed
probability of connection between nodes in a network. To
solve this problem we can use Q-function deﬁned in [6].
Unfortunately, Q-function depends on two parameters: n
called ”distance-power gradient” that indicates the rate at
which a signal strength decreases with a distance, and
the signal disturbance Xσ that is a zero-mean Gaussian
distributed random variable with standard deviation σ. To
estimate both these parameters we apply the commonly used
radio signal propagation model that indicates that received
signal power decreases with a distance, both in outdoor
and indoor environments. Therefore, the power of the signal
received by a receiver P r at a distance d is deﬁned as
P r(d)[dBm] = P t[dBm] − PL(d)[dB],
(3)
where P t denotes power used by a sender to transmit the
signal and PL(d) the average signal degradation (path loss)
with a distance d. A path loss PL(d) is modeled as follows:
PL(d)[dB] = PL(d0)[dB]+10nlog
 d
d0

+Xσ+
X
i
PAFi
(4)
100
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Figure 4.
Two steps in formation of a mobile sensor network.
where d0 is a close-in reference distance (for IEEE 802.15.4
usually d0=1m), PAFi is a partition attenuation factor for
i-th wall (experimentaly determined).
We calculate n and Xσ using formulas (3) and (4),
assuming d = dij
c
(dij
c
is a real distance between nodes
i and j calculated for known nodes locations) and measured
P r. We assume that all nodes are equipped in any location
system and are aware of their own location. The detailed
description of n and Xσ computing can be found in [6].
D. Self-conﬁgured MSN Design
Consider a situation where the task is to create a network
that enables the continuous communication with a base
station to achieve a given goal or goals. We can form a
cluster structured MSN that covers the area between the base
station and the cell containing a goal or a set of goals. The
cluster formation is based on the following characteristics:
1) all nodes are grouped into overlapping clusters with two,
three or four elements, Fig. 4, 2) nodes in a cell must be
able to communicate with each other, 3) each cluster can
communicate with all neighboring clusters.
The design of a self-conﬁguring network is performed
in two steps. We can distinguish two groups of calculation
units: the central unit (the base station) and the set of local
units – the mobile nodes (see Fig. 4).
Central unit: The central unit task is to determine the
initial location of nodes and the clustering scheme i.e., the
number of cells and the assignment of nodes to clusters.
Decomposition of a network into clusters may be predeﬁned
or calculated by the dedicated clustering algorithm.
Network nodes:
Each node sends at time instants
t0 + ∆t, t0 + 2∆t, . . . broadcast messages with its location,
transmitted signal power P t, cluster (or clusters) identiﬁer
(id), data about neighbors. We use MAC protocol with
beacon synchronization. Next, the node calculates its dis-
placement using the algorithm 1 presented in Subsection
III-B. The calculations are performed based on current
distances between nodes and the measured signal power
strength. We assume that for reference distances ¯dij
ab in the
formula (1) the probability of connection between nodes in
cluster has to be equal to 99 percent or higher. Finally,
the network consisting of calculated clusters is formed. It
should be pointed that the value of the reference distance is
adaptively modiﬁed due to the dynamic changes both in the
deployment area and the set of network devices (decreased
energy resources).
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In order to evaluate the performance of our mobility
model simulations of various ad hoc network topologies
and tasks have been performed. In this paper, we present
the example application of our model to support the design
of a self-conﬁguring, well-connected network that enables a
continuous connection between a goal and a base station.
Consider a situation where the ﬁxed network infrastruc-
ture in a disaster area is damaged due to an explosion at a
chemical plant. We plan to send several rescue teams to work
on the disaster scene (0.36km2). A rescue mission requires
that new communication channels be quickly established.
MSN can be successfully used to solve this problem. It
can enable communications with an adequate quality and
can adapt to changing conditions and requirements in the
danger zone. In case when we plan a rescue action it is useful
to check various possible scenarios taking into account all
constraints concerned with the environmental conditions.
In presented problem the developed MSN should provide
the continuous communication with all rescuers during the
rescue action. Simulations were performed in our software
platform for parallel ad hoc networks simulation, called
MobASim, and described in [9]. The goal of the experiments
was to create a network topology with minimal number of
nodes that ensures the connection between all rescuers and
the base station. We present the simulation of 180 seconds of
given ad hoc network operation. The network was composed
of 4 rescuers and 10 mobile devices used for re-establishing
the communication infrastructure. The mixed outdoor and
indoor environment was considered (see Fig. 5).
As a ﬁnal result of our simulations we have obtained the
network consisting of eight clusters with irregular shapes,
as presented in Fig. 6. The estimated values of calculated
distances ˆd between nodes in clusters 0, 1, 5 and 6 calculated
at given time instants are presented in Table II.
V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have described the novel approach to
managing the mobility of a mobile sensor network that
combines potential ﬁeld and particle-based schemes for
calculating the mobility patterns. We have deﬁned the suit-
able artiﬁcial potential function for the optimal inter-node
distances calculation that captures the task and environment
of MSN requirements. In our opinion the proposed mobility
model is a good compromise between representativeness
101
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Figure 5.
The disaster scene.
Figure 6.
The ﬁnal topology formed after 180 seconds of wireless devices
operation - eight clusters with irregular shapes.
and simplicity. The presented case study showed that by
employing a multihop wireless communication and mobile
nodes acting as communication relay stations, with move-
ment calculated due to our model even relatively distant
points in the deployment area will be able to communicate
with the base station. In future research we plan to compare
our scheme with other existing models, and test its utility to
other ad hoc systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by National Science
Centre grant NN514 672940.
REFERENCES
[1] Bai F., Sadagopan N., and A. Helmy, ”IMPORTANT: A
Framework of Systematically Analyze the Impact of Mobility
Table II
THE TEMPORAL INTERNODE DISTANCES ˆd (CLUSTERS: 0, 1, 5, 6).
Cluster 0
Cluster 1
Cluster 5
Cluster 6
T[s]
ˆd[m]
T[s]
ˆd[m]
T[s]
ˆd[m]
T[s]
ˆd[m]
101
80.754
101
82.438
101
6.608
101
17.781
102
82.914
102
83.124
102
6.688
102
17.926
106
83.164
103
84.108
103
6.999
103
18.081
107
83.555
104
85.824
105
7.284
107
20.034
108
84.577
105
86.740
106
7.629
108
20.866
109
85.399
132
87.150
110
86.674
133
87.874
111
87.629
139
88.175
117
89.152
142
89.094
118
89.747
143
88.668
122
90.016
144
89.094
139
90.359
147
88.783
174
89.403
on Performance of Routing Protocols for Ad Hoc Networs”,
Proc. of INFOCOM, Vol. 2, pp. 825-835, San Francisco, USA,
2003.
[2] Basagni, S., Conti, M., Giordano, S., and I. Stojmenovic,
Mobile Ad Hoc Networking, Wiley-Interscience, IEEE Press,
2004.
[3] Bauer, P.H., ”New Challenges in Dynamical Systems: The Net-
worked Case”, International Journal of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, University of Zielona Gora Press, Vol.
18, No 3, pp. 271-278, 2008.
[4] Choset, H., Lynch, K.M., Hutchinson, S., Kantor, G., Burgard,
W., Kavraki, L.E., and S. Thrun, Principles of Robot Motion,
The MIT Press, Cambridge, 2005.
[5] Ma K., Zhang Y., and W. Trappe, ”Managing the Mobility of
a Mobile Sensor Network Using Network Dynamics”, IEEE
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 19, No.
2, pp.106-120, 2008.
[6] Rappaport, T.S., Wireless Communications. Principles and
Practice, Prentice Hall, USA, 2009.
[7] Roy, R.R., Hanbook of Mobile Ad Hoc Networks for Mobility
MOdels, Springer, USA, 2010.
[8] Santi, P., Topology Control in Wireless Ad Hoc and Sensor
Networks, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, UK, 2006.
[9] Sikora, A. and E. Niewiadomska-Szynkiewicz, ”A Parallel
and Distributed Simulation of Ad Hoc Networks”, Journal of
Telecommunications and Information Technology, vol. 3, pp.
76-84, 2009.
[10] Singh, S., Liquid Crystals. Fundamentals, World Scientiﬁc
Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., Singapore, 2002.
[11] Verdone, R., Dardari, D., Mazzini, G., and A. Conti, Wireless
Sensors and Actuator Networks. Technologies, Analysis and
Design, Elsevier, 2008.
102
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

