Multi-Sensor Data Fusion and Artificial Neural Network to Estimate the Velocity of 
Sportive Turfgrass in Putting Green Areas 
 
Lorena Parra1, 2, Pedro V. Mauri1, Jaime Lloret2, Salima Yousfi1 and José F. Marín3 
1Instituto Madrileño de Investigación y Desarrollo Rural, Agrario y Alimentario (IMIDRA), Finca “El Encin”, A-2, Km 38, 
2, 28800 Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain 
2 Instituto de Investigación para la Gestión Integrada de Zonas Costeras Universitat Politècnica de València, Valencia, Spain 
3 Area verde MG Projects SL. C/ Oña, 43 28933 Madrid, Spain 
Email: pedro.mauri@madrid.org, loparbo@doctor.upv.es, jlloret@dcom.upv.es, salima.yousfi@madrid.org, 
jmarin@areaverde.es 
 
 
Abstract—Although the use of sensors is extended in the 
environmental monitoring, there are some variables which 
cannot be directly measured and must be estimated. The 
velocity of sportive turfgrass is one of them. In this paper, we 
attempt to estimate the velocity in two putting greens of a golf 
course, before and after a maintenance action, by the 
measurement of agronomic variables with digital devices. We 
measure the soil moisture and temperature, the canopy 
temperature and the Normalised Difference Vegetation Index. 
The measurements are performed during five months in two 
putting greens of Agrostis stolonifera.  The results indicated that 
the monitoring of a single agronomic parameter is not useful to 
evaluate the recovery of the putting green. The agronomic 
variables showed a total recovery 22 after the maintenance 
action. Meanwhile, the data of velocity indicates that full 
recovery was not achieved after 124 days. Finally, we use the 
agronomic variables to estimate the velocity. A multiple 
regression model was defined with Normalised Difference 
Vegetation Index, soil moisture, and soil temperature. Then, 
those variables are included in an artificial neural network 
model to generate graphics, which can be used by greenkeepers 
to estimate the velocity. The model archived 70% of correctly 
classified cases. Graphics of classification to be used by the 
greenkeepers, which include the estimated velocity based on soil 
moisture and Normalised Difference Vegetation Index, for four 
different temperatures are generated.  
Keywords-velocity of the putting greens; soil moisture; soil 
temperature; Normalized Difference Vegetation Index; turfgrass 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In the last decades, the use of sensing devices for 
environmental monitoring has become more and more 
popular. One of the areas in which the use of sensors has arisen 
more useful is the motorisation of crops. The use of Wireless 
Sensor Networks (WSN) in agriculture, as part of precision 
agriculture systems, provides higher sustainability and 
profitability of the activity. The sensors can be used to monitor 
the soil, the plants or the water as it was said in a survey about 
the Internet of Things (IoT) for agriculture [1]. The same 
systems can be applied for turfgrass monitoring in gardens or 
sportive areas such as golf courses, Football or Rugby camps.  
Nonetheless, in many cases, there are variables which 
cannot be easily measured with the current sensors or digital 
devices. Some examples are the sportive parameters of 
turfgrass such as velocity, firmness or traction. Nowadays, for 
the measurement of the aforementioned variables, analogic 
devices must be used, which require from the human action 
and cannot be connected with a WSN of an IoT system. Even 
though autonomous digital devices cannot measure those 
parameters, there exist the possibility to estimate them upon 
other parameters. It is usual to combine different easy-to-
measure parameters to estimate another parameter, which is 
not possible to measure it directly. This technique is known as 
multi-sensor data fusion, and we can find several examples of 
its applications for agriculture such as phenotyping [2], or 
estimating the evapotranspiration [3].  
In some cases, a simple linear regression model can be 
used to estimate the seek parameters. Nonetheless, 
occasionally the use of artificial intelligence (AI) systems 
must attain better results. In [4], authors proposed the use of 
soil temperature, moisture and pH values to estimate farmland 
soil carbon sink factors using multi-sensor data fusion and 
artificial neural network (ANN). Therefore, we can affirm that 
these techniques have been already used to estimate 
parameters in agriculture.  
Though, none of these techniques or methods has been 
used in sportive grass management. Unlike other examples 
found in agriculture, the use of estimating parameters in 
sportive turfgrass has a low direct impact on the sustainability 
of the activity. Nonetheless, the estimation of parameters such 
as velocity, firmness or traction of grass has an impact on the 
quality of the game of the users. Apart from the assumption 
that not all the greenkeepers have the devices or the time to 
monitor the status of the turfgrass, the measurement of 
velocity is one of the most tedious actions. It is generally 
measured only before a tournament. Besides this, the velocity 
is an excellent indicator of putting green status. The velocity 
might be controlled by changing some of the management 
variables. Some of the maintenance actions, such as aeration, 
have a dramatic effect on the velocity causing an abrupt 
reduction. 
The aim of the paper is to evaluate if the data gathered 
from digital sensing devices can be used to estimate the green 
velocity to monitor its recovery after aeration. The objective 
is to reduce the time required in the regular field monitoring 
in the golf courses. To have enough data to test the 
effectiveness of the results of ANN, we gathered measures 
before and after the maintenance action during several 
months. Data is analysed to determine which parameter or 
parameters can be used to estimate green velocity. We want to 
confirm two hypotheses, the first one if a single variable can 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

be used to estimate the putting green recovery as it can be done 
with the velocity. The second one is to determine if Multi-
sensor data fusion and ANN can be used to estimate the 
velocity.  
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section 2 outlines the related work in the field of turfgrass 
monitoring. The test bench is described in Section 3. Section 
4 presented our results and their applicability. Finally, the 
conclusions are summarised in Section 5. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, we described the existing efforts in 
turfgrass monitoring and multi-sensor data fusion with AI in 
agriculture. 
Although the interest in turfgrass monitoring is lower than 
in other farming systems, we can found several examples. 
Marin et al. [5] proposed the use of remote sensing to evaluate 
the turfgrass coverage by analysing the histograms of gathered 
images. They work oriented to ornamental lawns rather than 
sportive grasses. Parra et al. presented a new methodology for 
the identification of the weed plant in sportive turfgrass [6]. 
The authors use remote sensing images and image processing 
techniques based on edge detection to detect weed plants. 
Straw et al. measured multiple parameters in natural 
turfgrass sports fields to identify short-term spatiotemporal 
relationship [7]. The authors gather data about soil and plant 
variables finding some interesting correlations, for example, 
between Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) 
and surface hardness. Nonetheless, in this paper, no sportive 
variables are measured, estimated or correlated. More 
examples of the multi-sensor approach are found for 
grasslands. In [8], Ouyang et al. analysed vegetation dynamics 
by utilising the standardised NDVI data gathered with 
different remote sensing sources. By combining NDVI values, 
they were able to estimate the biomass. A parallel proposal 
was presented by Reddersen et al. [9]. In this case, the authors 
select and extensively managed grassland and several 
measures are gathered in the experimental area. The measured 
parameters included Leaf area index, ultrasonic sward height, 
and 12 vegetation indices to estimate the biomass for different 
species. The combination of different measured variables 
offers reasonable estimations of plant biomass. The objective 
in [8] and [9] was somehow similar to our aim, determine the 
value of a parameter which is hard to measure (the biomass) 
with other easy-to-measure variables (NDVI).  
Focusing on our objective, the estimation of velocity in the 
putting green, no one paper has been found that details the 
existence of a relation of agronomic variables and velocity. 
The only paper where the velocity of the putting green was 
measured we found is [10]. In [10], Rana and Askew evaluate 
the if Poa pratensis (one of the species that composes the 
green) has an effect on ball rolling behaviour. To do so, they 
measure the rolling behaviour in the putting gree, using a 
high-speed camera. Their results indicate that no effect was 
found on ball velocity regardless of tested surface (different 
grass species). Nonetheless, we are going to analyse more 
parameters to find a correlation between surface and velocity.  
We can affirm that currently there is no one technique 
which can be used to measure in-situ the green velocity, which 
can be integrated into IoT systems. Furthermore, no one 
authors have presented the possibility to estimate the velocity 
basing on multi-sensor data fusion with or without AI system.  
III. 
TEST BENCH 
In this section, the description of the studied area, the 
measured parameters and used equipment are detailed.  
A. Description of the studied area 
The studied area is two greens, green two and green 17, of 
the “Encin Golf Course” located at the region of Madrid 
(Spain). The greens are the part of the golf course in which the 
velocity becomes critical; therefore, it is essential to measure 
this parameter. Although many greens might have a low or 
null slope in the studied greens, we can identify areas with 
certain slopes as can be seen in Figure 1. 
The green is composed of Agrostis stolonifera T1 and 
presents a small incidence of Poa annua as an undesired plant. 
The greens are mowed, as average,  three times per week. The 
height of the grass in the green area is between 3 and 4mm. 
The greens are irrigated every day after sunrise according to 
the recommendations of the Food and Agriculture 
Organization. In each one of the greens, we have identified 
three areas to be measured.  
After starting the measurements, a maintenance action, 
green aeration, was carried out. Among the existing 
techniques for improving the green aeration, we have applied 
the half-inch-diameter hollow tines. It was done from 23rd to 
29th of March. The first measurement was carried out the 24th 
of February of 2020 with the green in normal status. In the 2nd 
of April, the greens were monitored after the maintenance 
actions. After this date, the greens are monitored once or twice 
per month according to the time disposal and the restrictions 
due to the COVID. A total of 8 records have been performed, 
finishing the experiment on 31st of July of 2020. Table 1 
details the days in which the greens are monitored and the 
label that we are going to use for each day. The label indicates 
the time pass after the maintenance action. 
B. Measured parameters  
We measure a total of four agronomic parameters (two 
forms the soil and two from the vegetation) using digital 
devices, and the green velocity as a sportive parameter. The 
monitored parameters are the soil moisture (SM), soil 
temperature (ST), canopy temperature (CT), and NDVI.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Image of Green 2 took on 1/07/2020 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF MEASUREMENTS 
Nº of 
measurement 
Day 
Label 
Description 
1 
24/02/2020 
-1 
Before the 
maintenance action 
2 
02/04/2020 
0 
Just after the 
maintenance action 
3 
20/04/2020 
1 
After the 
maintenance action 
4 
19/05/2020 
2 
5 
02/06/2020 
3 
6 
16/06/2020 
4 
7 
17/07/2020 
5 
8 
31/07/2020 
6 
 
The soil moisture is measured with the TDR 350 
FieldScout [11] at 5cm. In each point, we gather three 
measurements and only the mean value is used in this paper. 
The TDR was configured according to the instructions, and 
the selected soil type was set on the sand. The soil temperature 
is also measured with the TDR at 5cm. Again, three records 
are done in each one of the measured points.  
The CT is measured using an infrared thermometer. We 
have used the Fluke 561 [12]. Three records are performed in 
each one of the monitored areas, and again, the mean value is 
used. For the NDVI measurement, we have used the Handheld 
Crop Sensor GreenSeeker [13]. Since this device allows to 
perform a scan of the measured area, and the mean value is 
automatically calculated, we used this option. Both devices 
are considered as remote sensing devices and have been used 
at 1m above the soil.  
Finally, to measure the green velocity, we have used a 
stimpmeter. The stimpmeter is a tool designed by the United 
States Golf Association in 1930 used to measure the velocity 
of a golf ball in the green area. This measurement is performed 
manually using the stimpmeter and three golf balls. Although 
this is the official process to obtain the velocity of the green 
and it is used in before the most important championships, the 
process is tedious and might be affected by the person who is 
performing the measures.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
In this section, we present our results. First, the evolution 
of monitored parameters after the aeration is displayed. Then, 
the existing correlations and the use of ANN are analysed. 
A. Evolution of sensed variables 
In order to verify one of our main hypothesis, we are going 
to present the recorded values of all monitored parameters 
(including the measured with digital devices and with 
stimpmeter). 
First, we present the measured values of soil 
measurements. Figure 2 a) and b) represent the mean and the 
Fisher Least significant difference (LSD) intervals of 
measured soil moisture and soil temperature for the studied 
period. Regarding the soil moisture, Figure 2 a), the detected 
change is a constant increase of soil moisture, unless in data 
gathered in the second measurement after the maintenance. 
This increase is explained by a modification in irrigation due 
to the increase in the temperature, which must be compensated 
by a higher amount of applied irrigation. Apparently, no 
relation between the green recovery and the soil moisture can 
be detected. Concerning the soil temperature, Figure 2 b), 
again the general trend is due to the changes in environmental 
conditions. Nonetheless, we can identify that just after the 
aeration of the green (measure 0) the temperature of soil 
increases. This fact is caused by the change of surface during 
the aeration action, when part of the surface, previously 
covered by grass, changes to sand. Since the sand has different 
thermic properties than the green plants, the value of soil 
temperature increases. After 22 days (measure 1), the soil 
temperature lowers again and present similar values than 
before the maintenance action. Therefore, we can affirm that 
in terms of soil temperature, the disturbance caused by the 
aeration of the greens is recovered after 22 days.  
Following, we are going to detail the results of monitored 
vegetation variables, see Figure 3 a) and b). The results of CT, 
Figure 3 a) are similar to the results of soil temperature. 
Although the values are a bit lower due to the capability of 
reducing the temperature of healthy plants, the observed trend 
is the same. There is an increase of CT just after the 
maintenance action due to the introduced modification in the 
surface. The increase of CT is corrected in the next measure 
(Measure 1).  
Concerning the NDVI, Figure 3 b), the measured NDVI 
just after the maintenance was much lower than the NDVI 
before the maintenance. Again, this alteration is corrected 
after 22 days. Thus we can affirm that considering the 
agronomic variables, the disturbance of the aeration of greens 
is recovered in less than 22 days.  Finally, we analyse the 
evolution of green velocity in Figure 4. 
 
a)   
 
b)   
 
Figure 2.  Evolution on measured soil variables as mean value and Fisher 
LSD intervals 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

This is the variable that truly indicates us the recovery of 
the green after the aeration. We can identify that although 
there is a recovery in measures 1 and 2, the green is not 
entirely recovered after measure 6 (31/07/2020). We must 
clarify that the velocities of 7 feet are appropriate for playing. 
Even so, we cannot consider that green is recovered until the 
measured velocity is equal to the velocity measured in 
measure -1 (before the action).  
Thus, we can affirm that the simple measure of agronomic 
variables cannot inform us about the recovery of the green 
after maintenance action, at least in the case of aeration. 
According to the measured agronomic variables, we will 
establish the recovery of the green in Measure 1, 22 days after 
the aeration. On the other hand, attending to the green 
velocity, the recovery of green will be reached in Measure 6, 
124 days after the aeration. Therefore we need to discard our 
first hypothesis.  
B. Using agronomic variables to predict the green velocity 
Our second hypothesis is that the combination of two or 
more agronomic values can be used to predict the green 
velocity, allowing the evaluation of the recovery. In order to 
evaluate this option, different tools are proposed. First, a 
multiple regression, including agronomic variables as 
independent variables and the velocity as dependent variables, 
is presented.  
Following, and with the purpose of developing a graphics 
useful for greenkeepers, the application of the ANN is 
proposed. Despite there are other AI more powerful than 
ANN, such as Support Vector Machine (SVM), we focus on 
ANN as the first step of applying AI to gathered data. Other 
authors compared the performance of SVM with ANN of 
biological data and SVM showed slightly better accuracy, 
80% for ANN and 85% for SVM[14]. 
 
a)   
 
b)   
 
Figure 3.  Evolution on measured vegetation variables as mean value and 
Fisher LSD intervals 
 
Figure 4.  Evolution on measured velocity as mean value and Fisher LSD 
intervals 
Concerning the multiple regression, a first attempt is 
performed including all the variables and selecting the 
ordinary minimum squares as adjusting procedure. The 
generated model has an R2 of 0.63. Nonetheless, the results of 
statistical software pointed out that some of the CTs might be 
extracted to simplify the model. After extract this value from 
the model, the R2 has not changed; its value is 0.63. In Figure 
5, we can compare the observed value of velocity and the 
predicted value according to the generated model. We can 
identify that the lower errors are linked to values of velocity 
between 6.7 and 7.8 feet. The proposed mathematical model 
is presented in (1). 
 
𝑉 (𝑓𝑒𝑒𝑡) =  3.296 × 𝑆𝑀 (%) + 7.059 × 𝑁𝐷𝑉𝐼 + 0.115 × 𝑆𝑇 (º𝐶)     (1) 
 
where: 
V is the velocity of the green 
SM is the soil moisture 
ST is the soil temperature 
 
Although the proposed model confirms our hypothesis, the 
combination of three agronomic variables can be used to 
estimate the green recovery or velocity, and one more step 
must be carried out. Besides the application of proposed above 
model can be useful and its accuracy indicated by the R2, it is 
almost useless for the daily monitoring activities. Considering 
the different tasks of greenkeepers if we expect that the 
proposed model is adopted we need to avoid the use of 
equations and present the results in a more easy-to-apply and 
straightforward way. Therefore, and with the aim of 
generating a series of graphics, an ANN model is created. It 
will be easier for the greenkeepers to use the classification 
graphics of the ANN than the application of (1).  
The proposed ANN has three input neurons (soil moisture, 
soil temperature and NDVI), two hidden layers, and six output 
neurons. In order to simplify our variables, the velocity was 
included without decimals in the model. The velocity values 
go from 5 to 10 feet. The rest of the variables are maintained 
as they are. The probability was set as proportional to the 
observed and the cost of error equal to all groups. Finally, the 
sphere of influence was determined by jackknifing.  
From the total of 48 observations, most of the cases have 
a measured velocity of 7 and 8 feet, with 25 and 15 
observations. The optimised value of jackknifing during the 
training was set on 0.073. The results of the proposed ANN 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

pointed out that 70.83% of cases were classified correctly. The 
percentage of correct classification is shown in Table 2.  
According to our results, we can affirm that as found in the 
regression, the highest error are linked to the most extreme 
velocities (5, 9 and 10 feet with 0% of correct classified cases). 
The best accuracy, 88% of correct classified cased, is related 
to the central velocity, 7 feet. Now, we compare the results of 
ANN with the regression model. Even that we use the discrete 
values of velocity values in the regression, the R2 of the newly 
generated model is 0.60. Thus, we can affirm that ANN not 
only offers a more straightforward way to use their results for 
greenkeepers, the classification graphics but also offers the 
best accuracy compared with regression models. 
Finally, we present in Figure 6, the summary of 
classification graphics obtained. Since in our model, we have 
three variables we include as x and y-axis the SM and NDVI, 
and four different graphics are presented for four different ST. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Observed vs predicted values of velocity with the proposed 
mathematical model 
The objective is that those graphics can be easily used by 
the greenkeepers to estimate the velocity of their greens in the 
daily monitoring. Figure 6 a) shows the estimated velocity for 
a soil temperature of 10ºC. We can identify that the higher the 
NDVI, the faster the velocity. Meanwhile, the soil moisture 
has the opposite effect, the higher the soil moisture, the slower 
the green velocity. The same trend is found in Figure 6 b) for 
20 ºC, Figure 6 c) for 30ºC and Figure 6 d) for 40ºC. For 
scenarios with 10ºC, the maximum expected velocity will be 
8 feet. The predicted velocities increase with the temperature, 
and for scenarios with 30 ºC or more, velocities of 10 feet can 
be expected.  
TABLE II.  
SUMMARY OF CLASSIFIED CASES 
Velocity (feet) 
Number of 
observations 
Correct classified 
percentage 
5 
1 
0,0 
6 
4 
50,0 
7 
25 
88,0 
8 
15 
66,6667 
9 
2 
0,0 
10 
1 
0,0 
Total 
48 
70,8333 
 
 
 
 
Velocity (feet) = 
 
a)                       Soil temperature = 10 ºC 
 
b)                       Soil temperature = 20 ºC 
 
c)                       Soil temperature = 30 ºC 
 
d)                       Soil temperature = 40 ºC 
 
Figure 6.  Classification results of ANN applied to gathered data to estimate the velocity from SM, NDVI and ST. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

It must be noted that, although the data included in this 
ANN model is limited, include just one type of grass coverage, 
and it is affected by the maintenance action, the results are 
promising. The main limitation of this study is the fact that 
most of our measured have a similar velocity, between 7 and 
8, see Table 2. It is necessary to increase the measuring time 
to obtained more data under different circumstances.  
In addition, results are aligned with the empirical 
experience of greenkeepers. The knowledge of greenkeepers 
indicates that the greens are faster when they are dry. Those 
dry conditions correspond to low soil moisture. Therefore, we 
have demonstrated that although in previous papers authors 
have pointed out that no relation was found between ball 
velocity and surface [10] there is a correlation between soil 
conditions (NDVI, SM, and ST) and ball velocity. These 
papers follow the ideas developed in [8] and [9], to estimate 
parameters, which are hard to measure from NDVI.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have dealt with the use of sensing devices 
to monitor the changes in the velocity in two greens of 
Agrostis stolonifera. The objective is to obtain a way of using 
the data of the employed digital devices to estimate the 
velocity, which measurements are a tedious and time-
consuming practice. 
Our study is performed before, during and after a 
maintenance action that produces a decrease in the velocity. 
The results indicated that the measurement and analysis of a 
single variable are not enough to characterise the velocity of 
the green. Nonetheless, the combination of soil moisture, soil 
temperature and NDVI can be used to estimate the velocity. 
This was demonstrated with a multiple regression model and 
with the ANN model. The proposed ANN model offers a 
series of graphics, which can be used by the greenkeepers to 
estimate the velocity in the daily routine.  
The future work will be focused on extending the amount 
of data from the greens performing more measurements and 
including more variables. Furthermore, the comparison of our 
results with other AI techniques will be considered, as well as 
validate and test the obtained machine learning model with 
new data. In addition, we will start to monitor greens 
composed of other grass species and greens with a higher 
percentage of Poa annua. This must be considered since other 
species have different colourations and might affect to the 
NDVI measures.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been partially funded by AREA VERDE-MG 
projects, Projects GO-PDR18-XEROCESPED funded, by 
the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development 
(EAFRD) and IMIDRA, and by Conselleria de Educación, 
Cultura y Deporte with the Subvenciones para la contratación 
de personal investigador en fase postdoctoral, grant number 
APOSTD/2019/04. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] L. García, L. Parra, J. M. Jimenez, J. Lloret, and P. Lorenz, P. 
“IoT-Based Smart Irrigation Systems: An Overview on the 
Recent Trends on Sensors and IoT Systems for Irrigation in 
Precision Agriculture,” Sensors, 20(4), 2020, pp. 1042. 
[2] M. Maimaitijiang et al., “Unmanned Aerial System (UAS)-
based phenotyping of soybean using multi-sensor data fusion 
and 
extreme 
learning 
machine,” 
ISPRS 
Journal 
of 
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 134, 2017, pp.43-58. 
[3] K. A. Semmens et al., “Monitoring daily evapotranspiration 
over two California vineyards using Landsat 8 in a multi-sensor 
data fusion approach,” Remote Sensing of Environment, 185, 
2016, pp.155-170. 
[4] W. Qiulan, G. Xia, L. Yong, and X. Hongli, “Research on 
multi-sensor data fusion algorithm of soil carbon sink factors 
based on neural network,” In Proceedings of the IEEE 2013 
International Conference on Mechatronic Sciences, Electric 
Engineering and Computer (MEC 2013),  December 20-22, 
2013 Shenyang, China, pp. 637-641 
[5] J. Marín et al. “Urban lawn monitoring in smart city 
environments,” Journal of Sensors, 2018, pp. 2018. 
[6] L. Parra et al. “Edge detection for weed recognition in lawns,” 
Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 176, 2020, pp. 
105684. 
[7] C. M. Straw, R. A. Grubbs, and G. M. Henry, “Short‐term 
spatiotemporal relationship between plant and soil properties 
on natural turfgrass sports fields,” Agrosystems, Geosciences 
& Environment, 3(1), 2020, pp. e20043. 
[8] W. Ouyang, et al., “Integration of multi-sensor data to assess 
grassland dynamics in a Yellow River sub-watershed,”  
Ecological indicators, 18, 2012, pp.163-170. 
[9] B. Reddersen, T. Fricke, and M. Wachendorf, “A multi-sensor 
approach for predicting biomass of extensively managed 
grassland,” Computers and electronics in agriculture, 109, 
2014, pp. 247-260. 
[10] S. S. Rana and S. D. Askew, “Measuring Canopy Anomaly 
Influence on Golf Putt Kinematics: Does Annual Bluegrass 
Influence Ball Roll Behavior?” Crop Science, 58(2), 2018, pp. 
911-916. 
[11] TDR 
350 
Manual. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.specmeters.com/assets/1/22/6435_TDR_350_ma
nual_(web).pdf. Last access on 19/10/2020 
[12] Fluke 561 Infrared & Contact Thermometer manual. Available 
at: https://dam-assets.fluke.com/s3fs-public/56x_____umeng0 
000.pdf. Last access on 19/10/2020 
[13] GreenSeeker 
Information. 
Available 
at:  
http://trl.trimble.com/docushare/dsweb/Get/Document-47515 
0/022503-1123A_GreenSeeker_DS_MarketSmart_USL_0415 
_LR_web.pdf. Last access on 19/10/2020 
[14] H. Bisgin et al., “Comparing SVM and ANN based machine 
learning 
methods 
for 
species 
identification 
of 
food 
contaminating beetles,” Scientific reports, 8(1), 2018, pp.1-12. 
 
 
 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

