Measurement of Water in Oil for Active Bearing Performance Monitoring Using
Optical Fiber Sensor System
Florin Tatar
Mechatronics/ERC
SKF
Nieuwegein, Netherlands
e-mail: florin.tatar@skf.com
Elfed Lewis / Gerard Dooly
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering
University of Limerick
Limerick, Ireland
e-mail: elfed.lewis@ul.ie
e-mail: gerard.dooly@ul.ie
Abstract— The utilization of an optical fiber sensor for the
measurements of water in oil has been demonstrated.
Absorption of light by water in oil in the near infra-red region
(850 to 1650 nm) is measured with low noise level. Further,
measurements of water contamination in oil with a minimum
level of detection of around 0.002% were performed.
Keywords-bearing; lubrication monitoring; oil; water; optical
fiber.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Measuring the quality of oil in real time, and suggesting
corrective actions when needed constitutes real commercial
market demand. In the past, several researches activities have
been run regarding oil quality monitoring in bearings, to
measure for example remaining lubricant life, the lubrication
film thickness or investigating the capabilities of chemical or
viscosity sensors [1-4]. Among all these parameters, one of
the priorities of the lubrication experts is to measure the
quantity of water in the oil and especially the percentage of
water saturation of the oil. Indeed, water incursion into the
oil can have a major impact on the lifespan of the bearings.
In general, depending of the type of the lubricant, the water
level accepted can be in a range of 200 ppm to 5000 ppm.
This article is focused on the development of a sensor
system based on one immersible open path optical fiber
sensor for measuring the concentration of water in oil. In
Section 2, the sensor concept is introduced and the
measurements 
results 
are 
presented. In 
Section 3,
conclusions are summarized.
Figure1. Optical sensor
II.
CONFIGURATION OF THE SENSOR
An open path configuration was chosen as the sensing
element for delivering a high level of sensitivity. Optical
fiber cable, capable of operating effectively within the range
850 nm – 1650 nm, was sourced and tested to ensure a
significant level of transmission in this wavelength range. An
standard fiber connector (SMA) based miniature coupling
cell, fabricated out of brass and stainless steel, was
configured to be used as the sensing element. A photograph
of the sensing element is shown in Figure 1.
During the testing stages, the sensing element (Figure 1)
was simply immersed in the oil sampling medium. Light
from the Tungsten light source propagates through a 400 mm
length of optical fiber before traversing across an open path
space where it interacts with the sensing medium. The light
is then coupled back into a second length (400 mm also) of
optical fiber before being recorded by a spectrometer located
at the receiving end.
The use of dedicated optical fiber and a small open path
length resulted in a significant amount of light intensity
being detected by the spectrometer. The choice of the length
of open gap in turn resulted in a optimum accuracy of the
absorption measurement through the S/N ratio.
Figure 2. Light transmissions through 0.5% water in oil mixture depending
of open path length 0.5, 1, 2, 3 mm
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 3. Light transmissions through different water in oil mixture
samples
A.
Path Length
Preliminary tests were taken to record the effects of the
sensing system with regards to path length changes within
the sensing element. For this a number of sensing elements
were constructed (lengths 3 mm, 2 mm, 1 mm and 0.5 mm).
Significant sensitivity for water incursion was detected
for each of the sensing element including the smallest one of
0.5 mm (see Figure 2). Therefore, taking the signal-to-noise
ratio into consideration, the 0.5 mm sensing element was
chosen for use within the sensor for the subsequent tests.
B.
Measurements
1)
Sensitivity Tests
Sensitivity testing comprised seven samples of testing
liquids used during the testing stages; these were 0% and
0.5% through to 1% water content in oil (Cirkan C100). The
samples were mixed using an ultrasonic bath. The resulting
intensity spectra can be seen in Figure 3.
Figure 4. Light absorption for different water in oil mixture samples
Figure 5. Light transmission spectrums showing a difference of 200ppm
water in oil concentrations of two oil samples
The differences in the absorption percentages of the light
recorded for mixed water in oil samples (0.5% to 1%)
referenced to the light intensity recorded during the pure oil
test was calculated and can be seen in Figure 4.
2)
Lower-Detection-Limit
Recently, the lower detection limit of the sensor has
become a major factor, with targets of 50 ppm water-in-oil.
To achieve this accuracy in the mixing stage necessary
mixing equipment such as a micropipette (capable of 2.5 um
deliveries) were used.
Due to constrains in access to the experimental testing rig
only one sampling experiment has been completed thus far
(at least two of every experiment has been completed up to
this stage – this was deemed necessary in order to correlate
results in an accurate manner). In order to enhance sensitivity
an increased  path length of 2 mm was chosen.
Figure 6. The Hydac, Pal and optical SKF sensors measuring in parallel in
a well controlled humidity chamber
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 7. Light transmission variation (wavelenght of 1108 nm) for change
of  mineral oil saturation between 30-100%
The concentration chosen for this experiment test was
200 ppm and as can be seen from the result in Figure 5, a
significant amount of absorption was recorded.
3)
In-Situ Experiments
The sensing element was placed into a bath of mineral oil
which in turn was placed into an environmental chamber
where the humidity and temperature are very well controlled.
The concentrations of the water within the sample were thus
varied by accurately changing the temperature and humidity
within the chamber.
The measurements were performed in parallel with one
Hydac aqua sensor (type AS1008-C-000) and one Pall (type
WS05S) water in oil commercially sensors for calibration
purpose (see Figure 6).
The full spectrum was recorded over a number of hours
during which the concentration of the water was gradually
increased. The concentrations were increased steadily over a
number of hours until saturation level in oil was reached
(more precisely about 100% saturated).
Figure 8. Averaged measurements for light transmission variation
(wavelenght of 1108 nm)  for change of mineral oil saturation between 30 -
100%
The measured optical transmission for the full
experimental test recorded at a wavelength of 1108 nm is
shown in Figure 7.
The results show a strong and stable response to the ever
increasing levels of water content. However, when the
sample reaches a level above saturation, the sensor records a
significant increase in measured noise levels. The sampling
frequency of the measurement was 2 Hz, and the measured
noise level can be significantly reduced using digital filtering
such as a moving point average (see Figure 8).
Although, this shows a reduction in the level of noise, it
is expected that additional averaging and filtering will further
reduce this. In fact for the response shown above and taking
a signal-to-noise level of 1 into account, the lower detection
limit of the sensor can be estimated to be below 20 ppm. The
final graph (Figure 8) simply has shown the percentage
absorption taken from the in-situ experimental results. These
percentages also correlate to experimental results previously
taken in the lab (specifically during the sensitivity testing
stage).
An interesting conclusion is that after reaching 100% oil
saturation, the measurements of the optical sensor become
apparently instable due to the free water oil content. An
important advantage of this is the possibility to autocalibrate
the sensor for different types of oils. The 100% saturation
limit can be detected very precisely.
 One more observation was done for free water region.
Based on averaging the measured signal the water content
can be estimated. All these observations make the sensor
unique.
These experimental results have shown that the sensor
portrays a significant level of resolution of 20 ppm, a wide
range of detection (20 ppm – 10000 ppm. In a future
development, microspectroanalyzers or cheap LED’s should
be integrated in the readout measurement system for scaling
down the price of the sensor unit.
III.
CONCLUSIONS
The results of the experimental investigation of water
content in oil using a novel optical fiber sensor system have
resulted in the following successful outcomes:
·
The saturation of water in oil (Circan 100cc) was
measured
·
Measurements were done in a range of 30-100%
Relative Humidity  (RH)
·
The accuracy of measuring the water concentration
is around 20 ppm (0.002%)
·
The sensor shows good capabilities to measure also
emulsified water and free water
·
The sensor can be easily auto calibrated for 100% oil
saturation
REFERENCES
[1]
R. E. Kauffman, "Rapid Determination of Remaining
Useful Lubricant Life." Handbook of Lubrication and
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Tribology, Volume III. E. Richard Booser, Editor. CRC
Press, Boca Raton, Fla. 1994.
[2]
A. Cameron, R. Gohar, “Theoretical and experimental
studies of the  oil  film  in  lubricated  point  contact.”
Proc.  R.  Soc.  A  Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 291, 520–536,
1991.
[3]
H. Cen, P. M. Lugt, G. M. Espejel, “On the Film
Thickness of Grease-Lubricated” Contacts at Low
Speeds, Tribology Transactions, 57:4, 2004, 668-678,
DOI: 10.1080/10402004.2014.897781.
[4]
B. 
J. 
Hamrock, 
“Fundamentals 
of 
Fluid 
Film
Lubrication,” NASA RP-1255, 1991.
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

