A Miniature Multisensor Biosignal Data Recorder and its Evaluation for 
Unsupervised Parkinson’s Disease Data Collection 
 
Chris Bailey, Garry Hollier,  
Anthony Moulds, Michael Freeman 
Department of Computer Science 
University of York, UK 
chrisb@cs.york.ac.uk 
anthony.moulds@york.ac.uk 
garry.hollier@york.ac.uk 
mike.freeman@york.ac.uk 
 
Jim Austin,  
Alex Fargus, Thomas Lampert 
Cybula Ltd, 
York, UK 
austin@cybula.com 
alex.fargus@york.ac.uk 
tom.lampert@hotmail.com 
 
 
 
Abstract—An improved miniature biosignal data sensor and 
recorder device is described, (NAT-1-4G) with 3-axis 
accelerometer, and a 2K Sa/sec all-channel recording capacity 
of 24 hours or more with a single zinc-air battery cell. Like the 
previous NAT-1 prototype device, this measures less than 
18x22x10mm and weighs less than 2.3 grams, including the 
battery.  In this paper we describe the device in detail, and 
introduce the presentation of tremor data measurement 
captured in the context of Parkinson’s disease fore-arm 
monitoring. The NAT-1-4G device has already achieved 
translation to commercialization and we expect it to become 
commercially available in the near future. 
Keywords- Neurophysiology; Bio-signal sensors;  Medical 
sensors, Parkinson’s Disease. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
It is well understood that use of biosignal data acquisition 
is increasingly important in many application scenarios, not 
the least of which are biomedical applications. Often, such 
measurements are taken in wired or wireless umbilical 
modes, in other words, within a clinical evaluation setting, 
with data captured and analyzed over relatively short time 
windows, and in unnatural settings.  
However, the ability to perform ambulatory monitoring 
of patients provides the possibility of long-duration data 
capture of bio-parameters in a normal living situation or 
work-place. This has been an aim for many decades, and has 
developed from early magnetic tape based data capture [1], 
to digital systems [2], custom integrated circuits [3][4] and 
more advanced medical data recorders [5][6]. Such 
capabilities are identified by many clinical researchers as 
being desirable. The opportunity to learn more about medical 
conditions as well as the condition of individual patients 
themselves is seen as a major motivator for developing 
suitable devices.  This is very true of application in the 
domain of Parkinson’s Disease and similar tremor-related 
medical conditions, where often the primary mode of data 
capture is limited to a supervised scenario [7][8][9]. The 
importance 
of 
gathering 
continuous 
data 
for 
drug 
management, establishing and gauging long-term prognosis, 
and the personal reassurance for patients afforded by suitably 
presented feedback from monitoring systems, cannot be 
underestimated. 
The “NAT” (Neural Activity Tracker) project aims to 
produce a multi-purpose data sensing and recording solution 
that is extremely small, lightweight and having a recording 
capacity of days to weeks, dependent upon the selection of 
parameters such as sample frequency. The NAT-1 device 
[10] introduced our first solution to this problem in 2013. 
Since then we have enhanced and improved our design, 
resulting in NAT version 1-4G. This newer device includes 
multiple improvements, including the ability to alter the 
signal sensitivity of individual recording channels to adapt to 
a given bio-signal type, including ECG/EEG/EMG/EOG 
(Electro-encephalography 
(Electro-myography, 
Electro-
cardiography, Electro-oculography), and also auxiliary 
sensor modules (such as temperature for instance).  The 
NAT-1-4G 
also 
retains 
its 
capability 
for 
tri-axial 
accelerometer data capture, and in an accelerometer-only 
recording mode allows 500 samples per second across three 
simultaneous axes, with recording times up to 3 days in 
current prototypes. 
This paper presents the NAT-1-4G in technical detail in 
Sections II and III, whilst Section IV documents some initial 
experimental applications of the device with a Parkinson’s 
Disease tremor collection scenario. Note that the intention of 
this paper is not clinical, we do not make any clinically 
definitive claims about the data collected, but will observe 
and determine the suitability of the device for capturing such 
data, and for showing characteristics typically symptomatic 
of a Parkinson’s Disease subject.  
Section V highlights the additional resources developed 
alongside NAT, including docking station, wrist-mount, and 
the infra-red data signature time-stamp daughterboard. A 
brief state-of-the-art is given in Section VI, and conclusions 
are presented in Section VII. 
II. 
A SMALL FORM-FACTOR DATA-RECORDER 
The NAT is a device family of only 18x22mm in size, 
less than 10mm in height (when using a zinc-air disposable 
power cell). It weighs less than 2.3 grams, which means it is 
attractive in applications where regulatory constraints apply 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

(e.g., use with small animals). It is so light in weight that it 
quite unobtrusive as a human-subject wearable body-sensor. 
This low-weight attribute also means that multiple devices 
can be worn individually or in small groups where 
appropriate, without causing encumbrance of the subject's 
normal movements and behavior. We have verified this in a 
fashion, with team members wearing the device continuously 
for up to three days (using a 3D-printed wrist-capsule) with 
no issues.  
A NAT device is shown in the image of Figure 1, with 
a ball-point pen of normal size for scale. In the photograph 
provided in Figure 1, we can see some interesting features. 
The major part of the device has a profile of less than 4 mm. 
Also visible in Figure 1 is a specially designed battery clip 
for housing a zinc-air cell (as used in hearing aids). This is 
the gold-plated metal structure. The use of flatter button cells 
can be envisaged to make a smaller profile possible, though 
this has weight implications. We also note the potential for 
ultra-thin flexible lithium polymer rechargeable batteries, 
which have a similar footprint and only 2mm height profile, 
that would align well with the NAT PCB module in situ.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Top View of NAT Device 
 
 
 
Figure 2. NAT Device – Sub-component Block Diagram. 
 
Near the tip of the ball-point pen, one can see a small 
low-profile connector socket, which is actually a mezzanine 
daughterboard connector port. This permits a range of 
possible extension modules. Figure 2 shows the system level 
block diagram.  As for our previous NAT-1 device [10], this 
device comprises of three key components – a flash memory 
chip (largest chip in Figure 1), a proprietary CPU (mid-sized 
chip of Figure 1), and a proprietary MEMS (Micro-Electro-
Mechanical System) device for accelerometer (smallest chip 
of Figure 1).  Additional analogue front-end components 
provide appropriate signal conditioning for the signal ranges 
typically encountered in a range of biosensor and biomedical 
applications. This is augmented by the introduction of 
programmable gain on a per-channel basis, with signal range 
up to +/-8mV, and ability to scale to signals in the sub-1mV 
range without appreciable noise.  
  
 
III. 
NAT-1-4G DEVICE SPECIFICATIONS 
The NAT-1-4G has the specifications as outlined in 
Table I. The device has a wide range of possible sample 
rates, ranging from 100 Sa/sec to 2 KSa/sec via the user 
interface software application. At 2 KSa/sec, the device 
consumes 4.8mA of current from a single 1.4-volt cell, and 
can record for up to 12 hours. An 8-GBit flash option is 
possible (NAT-1-8G) and would have up to 24 Hours of 
recording capacity at maximum rates. At lower sample 
rates, the capacity of the flash is extended to many days, for 
example 6 days at 100 Sa/sec for accelerometer only. This 
compares well with reported state of the art examples [3,4], 
given that the system is comprised of readily available 
commodity integrated circuits. The device has three 
important connection mechanisms, these being the analog 
input connector (angled connector block to left of device in 
Figure 3a), the daughterboard extension socket (Figure3b) 
and the docking-shoe connectors (seen in Figure 3a) 
 
A particular feature of NAT-1 was the use of a single 
zinc-air power cell. Such cells are widely used in hearing 
aids, and have an active power-delivery life-span of around 
two weeks, after which the cell begins to lose effectiveness. 
We have retained this mode of power provision in NAT-1-
4G. However the possibility of using alternative power cells 
is being actively investigated at present. To date, the Zinc-
Air modules appear to give the best power density for size 
and weight with considerable record times up to 2 weeks. 
IV. 
EVALUATION METHODOLOGY  
Previously, most of the testing of the prototype device 
has been limited to test scenarios including (a) EEG and 
Accelerometer data collection from mice in live test 
scenarios undertaken by researchers at the University of 
Aberdeen, (b) a preliminary EMG capture evaluation at the 
University of York, and a (c) high-G test setting using a 
golf-club attachment to capture golf swing behaviors in 
terms of club rotation, side-movement and swing-path 
motion [10]. In all cases, the device was used untethered 
and powered exclusively with a single zinc-air cell. This 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

work was aimed at gaining an initial scope of capabilities of 
the device.  In this paper, with the newer NAT-1-4G, we 
describe the use of the device in capturing tremor motion in 
a Parkinson’s disease subject, and we compare this to data 
captured in the same way for healthy control subjects. This 
is a limited test-scenario owing more to engineering 
evaluation than clinical study, and should not be considered 
as a practical clinical evaluation study. 
The experimental method consisted of a wrist-mounted 
device (see later section VI for details and photographs) 
which in most cases is worn continuously for several days, 
and only being removed where not appropriate for the device 
operation (e.g. whilst showering). All three accelerometer 
channels were sampled at 500 Sa/Sec with a resolution of 8 
bits per channel for a full-scale range of  +/- 2000 milli-G.  
An important aspect of the data collection is that there is no 
knowledge of activities during data collection (it is 
unsupervised).  
Unlike short laboratory assessed (supervised) tremor 
measurements, where a series of directed or constrained 
actions are monitored for a period of perhaps 1 hour, here the 
data was collected blindly for up to 72 hours. This presents 
particular issues for data interpretation which we discuss 
further in later sections. The purpose of the evaluation was to 
make a straightforward determination that the NAT-1-4G 
device is (or is not) capable of gathering potentially 
clinically-useful tremor data during long unsupervised 
periods of use. 
 
(a) 
 
 (b) 
Figure 3. (a) Overhead View of NAT and Daughterboard Connector, and 
(b) Analogue Connector Port on NAT Device Underside 
In order to understand our evaluation, it is useful to first 
of all exemplify the typical data characteristics likely to be 
observed in such an experimental study. A common aspect 
of Parkinson’s tremor is the presentation of an excess of 
frequency components in the 5 to 7 Hz range as compared to 
typical healthy subjects.  
The example of Figure 4, reproduced from a recent 
publication [11], illustrates this quite well. It is seen that a 
control subject has a relatively broad range of frequency 
components 
in 
movement 
measurements, 
whilst 
a 
Parkinson’s patient exhibits a classical dominant frequency 
peak centered around the 5-6 Hz frequency, (often described 
as the unilateral or bilateral resting tremor) which is 
attributed to motor-neuron induced involuntary movements 
in the instrumented limb. These components usually have 
noticeably larger magnitudes than typical average motions 
generated by intended limb motion.  
TABLE I.  NAT-1-4G  SPECIFICATIONS 
a  
Recording time for all channels. Revised device has accellerometer-
only option with 6 day record time at 100 Sa/Sec. 
b  Original NAT had fixed +/-1mv voltage range. Revised NAT range  is 
channel programmable up to +/- 8mv. 
Parameter 
Limits 
Units 
Analogue inputs 
4 
channels 
Bits per  analogue 
channel recorded 
11 
bits 
Mems Accelerometer 
3 
Axis 
Bits per Accel. Axis 
8 
bits 
Sample rate (max) 
2000 
  x 4 ch 
Max Current   2KSa/s 
500Sa/s 
4.8 
2.4 
mA 
mA 
Data Capacity 
4 or 8 
Gbits 
All-Channel 
Recording Time 
at 2K Sa/Sec 
12 or 24 a 
Hours 
Analogue Range 
 
 
(previous NAT) 
   ± 500 min 
± 8000  max 
 
± 1000 b 
uV 
Accelerometer range 
Selectable 
2 / 8 
G (G-force) 
Accelerometer sensitivity 
18 / 72 
mG (G-force) 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 4, Example of Parkinson’s Tremor components centered around  
5 to 6 Hz for control (top) and affected patient (bottom). 
Reproduced from Meigal et al [11]  
 
It is important perhaps to note that there is a significant 
difference between a resting limb exhibiting tremor (as might 
be observed under a controlled measurement scenario) and a 
limb 
measured 
over 
a 
significant 
timescale 
with 
unsupervised ‘every-day’ behaviors.  The challenge for long-
term unsupervised monitoring is to distill reliable indicators 
from inherently component-rich data sets. NAT-1-4G can of 
course be used for both a controlled resting limb study and 
an unsupervised data recording scenario. 
In terms of existing devices, of which there are too many 
to present a comprehensive survey here, we have surveyed a 
subset of current devices that have succeeded in achieving 
commercial translation into common use, as tabulated in 
Table II, for comparative purposes. Several of these are 
wirelessly tethered devices, and several are non-wireless 
devices, including NAT-1-4G itself. 
The Neurologger-2A device has some similar sets of 
capabilities to the NAT-1-4G, as might be expected as it is a 
similar onboard storage recorder, whereas the wireless 
devices have significant demands for power, requiring larger 
batteries and more circuitry. It can be seen that NAT-1-4G 
provides the smallest, lightest, and longest recording lengths 
for a device integrating both accelerometer and analogue 
sensor 
(e.g. 
EEG) 
channel 
recording 
as 
standard. 
Neurologger-2 with add-on accelerometer board has 
comparable weight and size to NAT-1-4G. The NAT device 
has a large signal range and is programmable to accept 
analogue signal inputs up to +/-8mV and can be reduced to < 
+/- 500uV for high-sensitivity .  
Ambulatory monitoring has importance for the role of 
extended out-patient monitoring of EEG as a diagnostic aid 
and guide to treatment [12][13]. Recent work in this field 
includes 
many 
wireless 
approaches 
to 
ambulatory 
monitoring, but these are effectively 'tethered' via a 
secondary monitoring or recording station [14][15]. Recent 
literature reports an 8-channel EEG sensor node which 
“measures 35mm x 30mm x 5mm excluding Li-ion battery” 
[14], and power consumption in the range of 27-42mW., 
equivalent to around 3 to 5 mW per channel.  
 
 
TABLE II.   COMPARISON WITH SOME RECENTLY REPORTED DEVICES 
 
Device & Type 
SIZE & 
WEIGHT 
Battery Type & 
Record Time 
Sensors and Inputs 
Sample Rates 
Data 
Storage 
Refs if 
any 
MCROBERTS 
HYBRID 
Bluetooth 
Tethered 
87x45x17 mm 
74 grams 
Lithium Polymer 
60 hrs at 100 Hz 
2G tri-axial accelerometer 
triaxial Gyroscope 
100 Sa/sec 
SD card 
[16] 
Neurologger 2A 
Untethered  
EEG logger 
22x15x5 mm 
1.7 grams 
with battery and 
3-axis 
accelerometer 
2x ZN10 battery 
124 hrs at 100 Hz 
32 hrs at 400 Hz 
4 channel analog input 
 
extra board provides triaxial 
accelerometer with additional 
weight (about 0.4 gram). 
100 Sa/sec up to  
19 kSa/sec for one 
channel 
 
1000 Hz for 
accelerometer 
On board 
flash 
Up to 
1GBit 
[17] 
G-Link 
Wireless tethered 
58x43x21 mm 
40 grams 
Lithium polymer 
Record time not stated 
2 G/10 G Triaxial 
accelerometer, temperature 
sensor 
2 channel 
(accel/temp)  
4 kSa/sec 
4 channel 2 kSa/Sec 
Onboard 
2Mbyte 
[18] 
NAT-1-4G 
Untethered 
EEG/EMG/ECG 
and Accel Logger 
22 x18x10 mm 
< 2.3 grams  
with battery 
Zinc-Air hearing aid 
battery 
9 hours at 2000 Sa/Sec 
72 hours at 250 Sa/sec 
>1 week at 100 Hz 
2 G/8 G triaxial Accelerometer 
4 channel +/-8 mV analog in 
Up to 2000 Sa/sec 
Built in 
Flash  
4 or 8 Gbit. 
This 
paper 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

V. 
EVALUATION  RESULTS 
After gathering data from a total of four subjects, various 
data processing approaches were explored to derive useful 
data.  The initial raw data sets contain a number of artifacts 
that need to be managed. Inevitably the accelerometer range 
encounters clipping (saturation) , since the sensitivity of the 
accelerometer scale needs to be fine enough to detect tremor 
motions, even though other motions in unsupervised data 
collection can be more dynamic.  A second issue is that of 
constant-G offsets caused by orientations of the limb (in this 
case the wrist) in different postures for instance. Both of 
these aspects may be observed in Figure 5a, which shows the 
raw data collected over a 48-hour period, and clearly exhibits 
variable constant-G offsets as well as saturation. 
Figure 5a highlights a further aspect of interest, colorized 
in red on the trace. In the data survey we have conducted we 
have observed that it is possible to automate identification of 
‘quiet periods’ where activity is relatively low. These are 
analogous to a resting limb, though in fact these so-called 
quiet periods contain non-resting activity, but less so than 
other segments of the data.  
By applying very-low-frequency component extraction 
and adjustments to the raw data, it is possible to remove the 
constant-G offsets from the data, whereupon it is possible to 
plot the magnitude of acceleration of the data on each 
channel without bias due to such offsets. This is illustrated 
by Figure 5b, which shows the normalized magnitude in red 
against the whole data set in pink. Figure 5c shows a small 
segment of the data with the raw data magnitude plot versus 
the offset adjusted case.  
Once these treatments are applied to the gathered data, it 
becomes possible to generate power-spectra plots of 
magnitude versus frequency components using FFT analysis. 
We may then plot each accelerometer axis as well as a 
combined power spectra plot, which combines motion from 
all three axes.  Figure 6a shows such a collection of plots for 
a healthy subject, whilst Figure 6b shows the same for a 
known Parkinson’s disease volunteer. It is already noticeable 
that the Parkinson’s disease plots show the classical excess 
of activity in the 5 to 6 Hz region.  
Figures 7a and 7b show the combined data sets for four 
human volunteers for comparison. The subjects included 
three healthy individuals and one Parkinson’s disease 
diagnosed subject. Data was collected for each wrist 
(left/right) on separate occasions. When only the quiet 
periods of the data sets are analyzed, the components of the 
data become less ‘cluttered’. That is not to say there is not 
much to be discovered by analyzing a more complex data 
context – but rather that there is much to be done to develop 
useful analytical models from such data sets.  
Figures 8a and 8b show examples of non-selective data 
analysis (i.e. all data from a multi-day data capture run) and 
using the so-called ‘quiet periods’ only. 
In the healthy subjects the plots have a clearly defined 
roll-off toward 20 Hz and if the slope of the characteristic 
was subtracted from these plots there would be a fairly 
uniform response.  In the case of the Parkinson’s subject 
however , one can observe an obvious excess of frequency 
activity in the 5 to 7 Hz range and this correlates well with 
our expectation if the device were capable of effective 
collection of tremor data.  We note that the left and right 
hand characteristics of the Parkinson’s disease volunteer are 
different. This may reflect the fact that the dominant limb 
and non-dominant limb have different use in every-day 
activity and/or a function of the tremor being non-
symmetrically presented.  
All of the subjects exhibited a strong signal in the area of 
1 to 2 Hz, which we attribute to normal behavior – most 
likely arm swing due to walking and gait behavior. This will 
be subject to further investigation in future work planned by 
the group. As noted earlier this is not intended to be a 
clinical study – rather an observation of the suitability of our 
device for long term signal capture in this domain – can we 
capture data that is useful in differentiating tremor related 
micro-movements?  The data captured seems to confirm the 
value of the device for such work. 
 
VI. 
DOCKING STATION, ANALYSIS TOOLS,AND 
EXTENSION DAUGHTER BOARDS 
The NAT device has the advantage of being provided 
with a bespoke docking station, for download of data from 
flash via USB. This is illustrated in Figure 9. Once 
downloaded, the data can be processed using Cybula Ltd 
Signal Data Explorer software suite, which can be trained to 
perform auto detection and classification of signal behaviors 
and events [10]. A final notable aspect of the current NAT-1-
4G system suite is the infra-red time-code recording 
daughterboard. 
This extremely 
small 
add-on allows 
recording of an infrared pulse code stream along-side the 
analogue channels and accelerometer (see Figure 10 for 
photograph of IR device fitted on NAT main unit).   
Figure 11 shows the wrist-mount prototype capsule in 
various views when worn. The wrist module is quite 
compact but could be further reduced in size. With certain 
power cells the format and size of the capsule could certainly 
be reduced considerably. These early prototypes were 
developed using 3D rapid prototyping (close up view shown 
n Figure 12). We are currently working on more 
sophisticated one-piece wrist-mount modules with integral 
strap, and using more flexible plastics. 
Future developments for the daughterboard connector 
socket could include RF telemetry functions. It is also 
possible to use the daughterboard connector to act as a 
micro-backplane to permit multiple NAT devices to be 
ganged and synchronized to perform something like 16 or 32 
channel acquisition, thus linking multiple NATs in a 
synchronized data capture mode. This is particularly 
interesting for multi-limb monitoring where relationships 
between respective limb data-sets might be of interest.  
 
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

(a) 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 5.  (a) Raw Data Collection over 48 hours. 
(where red sections represent ‘quiet’ periods).  
(b), Raw data and Magnitude after Constant-G Correction 
(where red represents adjusted data). 
 
Figure 5c, Magnitude of Acceleration with Correction 
(blue - original data, green – offsets removed) 
 
Figure 6a, Three-Axis Power Spectra (Non-Parkinson) 
(right - dominant – hand), showing channels 1,2, and 3, plus 
 combined magnitude, linear vertical scale. 
 
 
 
Figure 6b, Three-Axis Power Spectra (Parkinson) 
(right - dominant - hand, showing channels 1,2, and 3, plus 
combined magnitude, linear vertical scale) 
 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 7b, Power Spectra for Parkinson’s Case and Controls:  (a) Left Wrist, (b) Right Wrist. 
(Parkinson’s subject red, blue and green are controls, right wrist Data Collection, log vertical scale) 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  8, Frequency vs. Magnitude for All , (a) without selectivity, and (b) with ‘quiet period’ selectivity  
 (right wrist, trace colours as noted in Figure 7.) 
 
 
Figure 9. NAT USB docking station 
 
 
Figure 10 NAT1-IRDB  Infra-red Receiver  
Daughter-Board, Shown mounted on NAT device
 
Figure 11 NAT Wrist-Mounted Early Prototype Capsule 
 
Figure 12, Close-up of NAT Capsule Prototype.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

VII. CONCLUSIONS AND ONGOING WORK 
The improvements made to the NAT-1-4G device are 
undoubtedly beneficial for its wider use in application 
areas such as EEG, EMG and in more complex mixed 
monitoring scenarios. This includes combined tremor-
motion and EMG capture in patients with conditions such 
as Parkinson's disease: a key area of interest at the present 
time. Research continues within our group on more 
sophisticated data analysis and algorithmic treatment of 
gathered data in long-duration unsupervised contexts. The 
use of low sample rates for accelerometer data recording of 
the order of 7 days is possible with the newer device, and 
we hope in future to evaluate the tradeoff between data 
quality and sample rates to establish a clinically useful 
long-duration recording configuration. The York team [19] 
and partners CYBULA Ltd. [20] are very interested in 
developing collaborative partnerships and would welcome 
enquiries from prospective evaluators and end-users in the 
clinical domain at the present time. 
This work, forms the first phase of a longer-term 
research project in which we expect to continue to collect 
data 
in 
increasingly 
sophisticated 
scenarios 
with 
continuous data capture over months and possible years. 
The particular aim is to achieve clinically useful 
continuous unsupervised and untethered monitoring in 
every-day environments. The availability of rich data sets 
in this area from a single device will be extremely valuable 
and lwill also guide development of the next generation 
NAT devices. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The NAT-1 and NAT-1-4G devices have been 
developed through a number of collaborative activities, 
including 
Cybula 
Ltd, 
University 
of 
York, 
and 
collaboration with the University of Aberdeen. We are 
also grateful for the support of the UK Government’s 
Technology Strategy Board funding agency in supporting 
the development of these devices to date, and for funding 
from the University of York Strategic Investment Fund.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  J. R. Ives, and J. F. Woods. "4-channel 24 hour cassette 
recorder for long-term EEG monitoring of ambulatory 
patients.” Electroencephalography 
and 
clinical 
Neurophysiology 39, no. 1 (1975): pp. 88-92. 
[2]  A. L. Vyssotski et al. "Miniature neurologgers for flying 
pigeons: multichannel EEG and action and field potentials 
in 
combination 
with 
GPS 
recording." Journal 
of 
neurophysiology 95, no. 2 (2006): 1263-1273. 
[3]   R. F. Yazicioglu, P. Merken, R. Puers, and C. Van Hoof,  
“A 200µW eight-channel acquisition ASIC for ambulatory 
EEG systems”. Solid-State Circuits Conference, 2008. 
ISSCC 2008, San Francisco.  IEEE International Digest of 
Technical Papers, Feb 2008,  pp. 164,603. 
[4]  N. Verma, A.  Shoeb, J. V. Guttag, and A. P. 
Chandrakasan. "A micro-power EEG acquisition SoC with 
integrated seizure detection processor for continuous 
patient monitoring." In  2009 Symposium on VLSI 
Circuits, 2009, pp. 62-63.  
[5]  E. 
Waterhouse. 
"New 
horizons 
in 
ambulatory 
electroencephalography." Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Magazine, IEEE 22, no. 3 (2003): pp. 74-80. 
[6]  F. S. Jaw, Y. L. Tseng, and J. K. Jang. "Modular design of 
a 
long-term 
portable 
recorder 
for 
physiological 
signals." Measurement 43, no. 10 (2010): pp. 1363-1368. 
[7]  W. Maetzler, J. Domingos, K. Srulijes, J.J. Ferreira, and 
B.R. Bloem. "Quantitative wearable sensors for objective 
assessment 
of 
Parkinson's 
disease." Movement 
Disorders 28, no. 12 (2013): pp. 1628-1637. 
[8]  M. A. Hobert, W. Maetzler, K. Aminian and L. Chiari. 
"Technical and clinical view on ambulatory assessment in 
Parkinson's 
disease." Acta 
Neurologica 
Scandinavica (2014), Volume 130, Issue 3, pp. 139–147. 
[9]  R. LeMoyne, T. Mastroianni, and W. Grundfest. "Wireless 
accelerometer configuration for monitoring Parkinson’s 
disease hand tremor." Advances in Parkinson's Disease 2 
(2013):  pp. 62-67. 
[10] C. Bailey et al. "A Miniaturized 4-Channel, 2KSa/sec 
Biosignal Data Recorder With 3-Axis Accelerometer and 
Infra-red Timestamp Function." In SENSORCOMM 2013, 
The 
Seventh 
International 
Conference 
on 
Sensor 
Technologies and Applications, 2013, pp. 213-219. 
[11]  A. Meigal et al. "Linear and nonlinear tremor acceleration 
characteristics 
in 
patients 
with 
Parkinson's 
disease." Physiological measurement 33, no. 3 (2012): pp. 
395-412. 
[12]  S. A. Rizvi, J. F. Téllez-Zenteno, S. L. Crawford, and A. 
Wu. "Outpatient ambulatory EEG as an option for epilepsy 
surgery 
evaluation 
instead 
of 
inpatient 
EEG 
telemetry." Epilepsy & Behavior Case Reports 1 (2013): 
pp. 39-41. 
[13]  H. J. Faulkner, H. Arima, and A. Mohamed. "The utility of 
prolonged outpatient ambulatory EEG." Seizure 21, no. 7 
(2012): pp. 491-495. 
[14] S. Patki et al. "Wireless EEG system with real time 
impedance monitoring and active electrodes." In IEEE 
Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS), 
2012, pp. 108-111. 
[15]  S. Mitra, J. Xu, A. Matsumoto, K. A. A. Makinwa, Chris 
Van Hoof, and R. F. Yazicioglu. "A 700µW 8-channel 
EEG/contact-impedance acquisition system for dry-
electrodes." In  2012 Symposium on VLSI Circuits 
(VLSIC),,. IEEE, 2012. pp. 68-69. 
[16] McRoberts 
Hybrid, 
commercial 
product 
data-sheet, 
https://www.mcroberts.nl/files/Flyer%20Hybrid%20En2.pd
f, url checked 21st July 2014. 
[17] Neurologger 
2A 
Product 
Data 
Sheet, 
http://www.evolocus.com/Products/Neurologger2A.pdf url 
checked 21st July 2014. 
[18] G-Link–LXRS datasheet, Lord Corporation MicroStrain© 
SensingSystems (USA), www.microstrain.com  url last  
checked 21st July 2014. 
[19] Advanced 
Computer 
Architectures 
Group 
(ACAG). 
www.cs.york.ac.uk/arch  , last accessed  01/10/2014. 
[20] Cybula Limited. UK Limited Company. www.cybula.com , 
last accessed  01/10/2014. 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

