Design of Knitted Pressure Sensors for Tactile  Perception Applications 
 
      Beyza Bozali 
Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering 
Delft University of Technology 
Delft, The Netherlands 
e-mail: B.Bozali@tudelft.nl 
Joris van Dam 
Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering 
Delft University of Technology 
 Delft, The Netherlands 
e-mail: J.J.F.vanDam@tudelft.nl 
Sepideh Ghodrat 
Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering 
Delft University of Technology 
 Delft, The Netherlands 
e-mail: S.Ghodrat@tudelft.nl 
Kaspar Jansen 
Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering 
Delft University of Technology 
 Delft, The Netherlands 
e-mail: K.M.B.Jansen@tudelft.nl 
 
Abstract—As an emerging technology, smart textiles attract a lot of 
interest in various fields in healthcare, sports, entertainment, etc. 
The new trend in smart textiles is to design sensor elements that are 
entirely textile-based consisting of conductive and non-conductive 
yarns which make the traditional sensor systems more comfortable 
and available for everyday use. In  this study, stretchable knitted 
pressure sensors with different configurations and designs were 
produced by using commercial conductive yarns. By controlling the 
knit structure, the overall resistance can also be fine-tuned for 
practical pressure sensor applications. The impact of different knit 
densities and knit designs on the pressure sensing performance is 
investigated for tactile sensing and force distribution applications 
for flat-knitted and dome-like knitted sensors. Initial studies 
showed that the  flat structures knitted less densely and in more 
stretcher knit designs result in better sensor performance with a 
sensitivity of 0.71 kPa−1 and within the pressure ranges of 0 to 0.71 
kPa and a sensitivity of 0.13 kPa−1 within a pressure range of 
0.70 to 2.5 kPa. This pressure sensor is knitted with the Rib 3x3 
design and with a stitch length of 3 mm, and the response time of the 
sensor is measured as 220 msec. For dome-like pressure sensors, Rib 
3x3 showed a relatively better sensitivity value within a pressure 
range of 0 to 10 kPa. A practical application of these sensors can 
be for touch detection in human-computer interaction applications. 
Keywords—pressure sensors; textile-based sensors; knitting 
I. INTRODUCTION 
As an emerging technology, textile-based sensors gained a lot 
of attention over the years due to their intrinsic softness, 
flexibility and comfort properties. They can distinguish between 
various environmental stimuli such as strain, pressure and 
temperature which enables them to be used in applications such 
as 
human-computer 
interaction 
[1], 
health 
monitoring 
applications [2], human motion recognition [3], and so on. 
Textile-based pressure sensors show high-pressure sensing 
ability and improved flexibility when compared to traditional 
pressure sensors. Depending on the application area, textile 
pressure sensors can be tuned in to have the desired 
characteristics. Monitoring physiological characteristics such as 
speaking, aspiration and pulse require low pressure, ranging from  
0 to 10 kPa. The medium pressure range (about 10-100 kPa) is 
suitable for the detection of finger movements  like clicking 
a mouse button, whereas the high-pressure range  (100 to 1000 
kPa) can be used for pressure sensing in socks and wheelchairs 
[4]. In addition to the pressure range, other performance 
indicators are sensitivity, durability, detection range and 
response time [5]. 
Textile-based 
pressure 
sensors 
manufactured 
from 
commercially available 
materials 
have 
been 
studied 
previously by several researchers. Riley, Oliveria, Morris and 
Dias    focused on knitted spacer pressure sensors for monitoring 
wheelchair users’ seat posture [6]. They explored the effect 
of pressure, applied pressure area and hysteresis of the sensor 
and found out that knitted sensors could measure up to a 
pressure of 25 kPa. Baribina, Oks, and Eizentals studied the 
comparative analysis of the effect of pressure loads on knitted 
pressure sensors with different shapes and knitted with copper-
coated acrylic yarns. They concluded that filled-shaped sensors 
in rectangular forms show the highest sensitivity at lower 
pressures [7]. Tian et al. produced a piezoresistive pressure 
sensor in the form of a composite pillow and noted that the 
sensor showed a high sensitivity of 3.5 kPa−1 and good 
durability. They also concluded that the change in diameter 
under  pressure results in a big change in sensitivity which 
proves  the importance of the structural design of pressure 
sensors [8]. Although metallic particle- coated yarns and 
conductive blended yarns have been used for making knitted 
pressure             sensors [9], there is still a lack of attention on directly 
implementing conductive yarn into piezoresistive pressure 
sensors.  In this study, we investigate the performance of knitted 
pressure sensors using commercial conductive yarns and 
materials. The proposed knitted pressure sensor designs 
possess the potential to be used in different application areas. 
This paper is structured as follows: In Section I, there will 
be an introduction to textile-based pressure sensors,  followed 
by an experimental section in Section II describing the material 
and measurement technique. Results and discussion will be 
summarized in Section III and the paper is finalized with the  
conclusion in  Section IV. 
 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-005-6
SENSORCOMM 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Knitted pressure sensors: A. Fat knitted, B, Dome-like knitted 
pressure sensors. 
II. EXPERIMENTAL  SECTION 
In this section, the materials used in sensor design and the 
measurement technique that we used to evaluate the sensor 
performance will be explained respectively.  
A. Materials 
In 
this paper, 
we 
conducted 
a 
study 
on 
the 
electromechanical performance of knitted pressure sensors in 
which the material and process parameters were varied 
systematically. In terms  of the materials, silver-plated nylon 
yarn from Shieldex with a resistivity of ≥600Ω/m and non-
conductive PES yarn with  a linear density of dtex 110/32 is 
used. The stitch density and the knit designs were the two 
parameters that we changed as knitting parameters for the 
pressure sensors. As shown in Fig. 1, two types of designs 
were produced one of which is rectangular and the other in a 
dome-like form. These forms were selected to investigate 
the 
importance of the structural design on sensing 
performance. The advantages and disadvantages of two 
different sensors were compared in Table I. 
TABLE I.  COMPARISON OF FLAT AND DOME-LIKE KNITTED 
PRESSURE SENSORS 
A&D 
Comparison of flat and dome-like sensors 
Flat knitted sensor 
Dome-like sensors 
Advantages 
Easy to produce at one 
go. 
Can be directly 
attached to the skin. 
Short response time 
Easy to use for tactile 
perception applications – 
bump form 
Disadvantages 
Low detection range 
Complex sensor design 
Rectangular samples were knitted via plating technique in 
such a way conductive and non-conductive yarn were knitted 
together. The dimension of the flat knitted sensors is 4 x 4 cm2. 
NP number and knit design were changed to examine the 
sensitivity, detection range and stability performance of the 
samples. The NP number which refers to the number of 
pitch directly change the loop length and changes the fabric 
tightness. In dome-like structures, the sensor part was 
produced only by using conductive yarn. The diameter (D) 
of the dome-like pressure sensor is 24 mm, and its area is 
calculated with the formula of S=π(D/2)2. To gather the 
resistance change values under deformation, conductive wool 
which was purchased from Bekinox® W12/8 as a filler was 
inserted inside and optimized. The knitted pressure sensors 
used in this study have been weft-knitted on a Stoll CMS 530 
flat knitting machine with an E8 machine gauge and 0.30 m/ 
 
 
 
m/sec carriage speed. 
B. Measurement Technique 
Knitted pressure sensors were evaluated in terms of sensitivity, 
in which P refers to applied pressure while ∆R refers to the 
resistance change and R0 is the initial resistance of the sensor. 
S = (∆R/R0)/P  
          (1) 
Sensitivity tests were conducted for flat knitted sensors 
by applying the same size blocks as pressure. And for dome-
like knitted pressure sensors, sensitivity tests were conducted 
by using a rheometer in compression mode. During the test, a 
digital multimeter was used to record the sensor’s resistance 
by connecting the cables on the sensor’s edges, and 2 wire 
resistance measurement was conducted. The test speed was set 
as 20 µm/sec. The axial force range is set to be between 0 and 
10N. 
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
In this section, the sensor performances of flat-knitted and 
dome-like pressure sensors will be analyzed and the results will 
be discussed in terms of sensitivity and detection range. 
A. Analysis of flat knitted pressure sensors 
Flat knitted sensors in different knit designs were evaluated 
in terms of sensitivity and detection range. Resistance changes 
were collected by loading different weights on top of the 
sensors and tests were conducted three times per set. Pressure 
sensors in the forms of  Rib 1x2, 2x2 and 3x3 were knitted 
in different NPs of 14 and 15. As can be seen in Table II, 
the pressure sensitivity  of the Rib 2x2 and Rib 3x3 sensors 
increases as the loop  length increased from NP 14 to NP 15. 
Fabrics with high stretchability allow the creation of more 
pressure-sensitive    sensors. [3]. In addition to that, Rib 3x3 
sensors have a higher elasticity than the Rib 2x2 which can 
explain the better sensitivity values. Under loading, yarn-to-
yarn contacts are adjusted which leads to a change in overall 
fabric resistance [9]. Response time is another important 
parameter to minimize delays during application. The Rib 3x3 
design knitted with NP 15 has a response time of 220 msec 
with a detection range of 0-0.7 kPa.  
TABLE II.  
SENSITIVITY RESULTS OF FLAT KNITTED 
PRESSURE SENSORS 
Knit 
Design 
Electromechanical Properties 
NP 
Sensitivity (kPa-1) 
Detection Range (kPa) 
Rib 1x2 
15 
0.10±0.006 
0-2.6 
Rib 1x2 
14 
0.23±0.01 
0-0.7 
Rib 2x2 
15 
0.28±0.02 
0-2.0 
Rib 2x2 
14 
0.09±0.004 
0-1.3 
Rib 3x3 
15 
0.71±0.01 
0-0.7 
Rib 3x3 
14 
0.05±0.03 
0-2.0 
aLoop length. 
 
As a preliminary study, Rib 3x3 sensors knitted with NP 15 
were tested to explore whether the sensor distinguish the 
different pressures. Blocks of the same size corresponding to 
1.2N are used to investigate the effect of pressure on resistance 
by applying pressure to the sensor area. As shown in Fig. 2, 
the Rib  3x3 flat knitted sensor has a good ability to distinguish 
the different loading forces. 
 
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-005-6
SENSORCOMM 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 2. The response of the Rib 3x3 sensor knitted with NP15 
when          different pressure is loading and unloading. 
 
Figure 3. Cyclic test of Rib 3x3 dome-like knitted sensor
According to the preliminary results in Table II, Rib 
2x2                and Rib 3x3 were chosen for the following knit design.  
B. Analysis of dome-like knitted pressure sensors 
In this section, dome-like knitted pressure sensors were 
prepared and the performance was evaluated in terms of 
sensitivity and detection range. Because of the difficulties in 
the manufacturing process, samples were not produced with 
higher NPs like in the flat knitted sensors and were knitted 
with NP 9. Rib 2x2 and Rib 3x3 samples were produced. The 
conductive wool amount is set as 0.046g. The results were 
depicted in Table III. The Rib 3x3 sensor showed better 
sensitivity performance than Rib 2x2 at a pressure range of 
0- 10 kPa.  
As mentioned in Table I, the detection range of flat-knitted 
sensors is lower than the dome-like sensors because of the 
contact areas and the interfaces related to the sensor design. 
When we think about the tactile perception application, a 
higher detection range is needed to be efficiently used which 
makes dome-like structures more promising. And higher 
sensitivities were observed for flat-knitted sensors at low 
detection ranges with looser samples. This can be related to the 
diameter variation in the conductive-filled  assembly fibers, 
sensitivity changes can be obtained [9]. For future studies, 
dome-like sensors will be produced in a looser form and the 
sensitivity range will be compared with the flat knit sensors at 
lower pressures. 
TABLE III.  
SENSITIVITY RESULTS OF DOME-LIKE 
KNITTED PRESSURE SENSORS 
Sample 
Names 
Electromechanical Properties 
Filler (g) 
Sensitivity (kPa-1) 
Detection Range (kPa) 
Rib 3x3 
0.046 
0.020 ± 0.004 
0-10 
Rib 2x2 
0.046 
0.015 ± 0.001 
0-10 
 
The Rib 3x3 dome-like sensor knitted with NP 9 was 
further investigated to explore its performance during 
loading and unloading. As shown in Fig. 3, 4 cycles were 
applied and it demonstrates that the sensor responds to the 
pressure changes. The dome-like knitted sensors have much 
lower sensitivity than the flat knitted sensors but do react 
properly when activated by a light finger press. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV. CONCLUSION 
This study demonstrates the importance of the structural 
design of knitted pressure sensors. Two different types of knit 
designs were produced and their sensor performance was 
evaluated. In the flat knitted form, Rib 3x3 with NP 15 
possesses a high sensitivity of 0.71±0.01 kPa−1. Apart from flat 
knitted structures, dome-like pressure sensors in the Rib 
design were produced and their sensor performance was 
evaluated. In the flat knitted form, Rib 3x3 with NP 15 
possesses a high sensitivity of 0.71±0.01 kPa−1. Apart from flat 
knitted structures, a dome-like pressure sensor  in the Rib 3x3 
form also possesses a potential design with a quick response 
time and a good sensitivity.  
Flat knitted can be directly attached to the skin or large area 
textiles and be utilized for human-computer interface systems. 
Dome-like sensors were found to be promising for tactile 
applications such as the detection of finger movements by 
pinch  or pressure sensing mats for shape or object recognition. 
Also, the user can perceive the sensors as protrusions by 
touching them, which provides convenience in the application.  
For future studies, dome-like pressure sensors will be 
evaluated in detail by changing the filler content, type of filler 
and the shape of the dome. The production of multiple dome-
like pressure sensors will be done at one-go and be tested for 
pressure sensing performance. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Zhang, J. He, Y. Liao, X. Zeng, N. Qiu, Y. Liang, P. Xiao, T. 
Chen, ”A self-protective, reproducible textile sensor with high 
performance towards human-machine interactions,” Journal of 
Materials Chemistry A, vol. 46, pp. 26631-26640, 2019. 
[2] J. Zhang, T. G. Yun, M. A. MJ, S. A. Imam, and A. Zhao, ”A 
review of passive RFID tag antenna-based sensors and systems 
for structural health monitoring applications,” Sensors, vol. 17, 
pp. 265-298, 2017. 
[3] C. Jingyuan, M. Sundholm, B. Zhou, M. Hirsch, and P. 
Lukowicz, ”Smart-surface: Large scale textile pressure sensors 
arrays for activity recognition,” Pervasive and Mobile 
Computing, vol. 30, pp. 97-112, 2016. 
[4] L. Possanzini, M. Tessarolo, L. Mazzocchetti, E. Campari, and 
B. Fraboni, ”Impact of fabric properties on textile pressure 
sensors performance,” Sensors, vol. 19, pp. 4686-4701, 2019. 
[5] J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. Yuan-yuan, and P. Wang, ”Textile-based 
flexible pressure sensors: A review,” Polymer Reviews, vol. 62, 
pp. 65-94, 2022. 
 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-005-6
SENSORCOMM 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[6] T. Hughes-Riley, C. Oliveira, R. Morris, and T. Dias, ”The 
characterization of a pressure sensor constructed from a knitted 
spacer structure,” Digital Medicine, vol. 5, pp. 22-29, 2019. 
[7] N. Baribina, A. Oks, I. Baltina, and P. Eizentals, ”Comparative 
analysis of knitted pressure sensors,” 7th International Scientific 
Conference, May 2018, pp. 1599-1604, ISSN: 1691-5976. 
[8] M. Tian, L. Yunjing, Q. Lijun, S. Zhu, X. Zhang, and S. Chen, 
”A pillow- shaped 3D hierarchical piezoresistive pressure sensor 
based on con- ductive silver components-coated fabric and 
random fibers assembly,” Industrial Engineering Chemistry 
Research, vol. 58, pp. 5737–5742, 2019. 
[9] J. Xie, J. Yongtang, and M. Miao, ”High sensitivity knitted 
fabric bi- directional pressure sensor based on conductive 
blended yarn,” Smart Materials and Structures, vol. 28, p. 
035017, 2019. 
 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-005-6
SENSORCOMM 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

