Combined Mechanical Stress – the Key Parameter of Fine Tuning of Magnetic
Microwires for Sensor Application
Alexander Chizhik
Materials Physics Department
University of the Basque Country
San Sebastian, Spain
email: oleksandr.chyzhyk@ehu.es
Arkady Zhukov
Materials Physics Department
University of the Basque Country
San Sebastian, Spain
email: arkadi.joukov@ehu.es
Julian Gonzalez
Materials Physics Department
University of the Basque Country
San Sebastian, Spain
email: julianmaria.gonzalez@ehu.eus
Paula Corte-Leon
Materials Physics Department
University of the Basque Country
San Sebastian, Spain
email: paula.corte@ehu.eus
Valentina Zhukova
Materials Physics Department
University of the Basque Country
San Sebastian, Spain
email: sckzhzhv@ehu.es
Andrzej Stupakiewicz
University of Bialystok
Bialystok, Poland
email: and@uwb.edu.pl
Przemyslaw Gawroński
AGH University of Science and Technology, Krakow,
Poland
email: gawron@newton.ftj.agh.edu.pl
Abstract— The experimental observation of the spiral domain
structure has opened a new possibility of the fine control of the
domain
structure
with
different
magnetization
states
in
magnetic microwires, which are the base elements of the
magnetic sensors. Here, we demonstrate that the tuning of
magnetic domain structures in amorphous microwires can be
engineered
by
the
combination
of
tension
and
torsion
mechanical stresses.
Keywords-soft magnetic materials;
amorphous magnetic
wires; magneto-optic Kerr effect.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Amorphous
magnetic
wires
present
a
number
of
properties suitable for technical applications, such as Giant
Magneto-Impedance (GMI) effect or magnetic bistability
associated with fast domain wall propagation [1]–[4].
Consequently, various types of magnetic wires have been
widely investigated during the past years [1]–[7].
While the separate application of different types of
mechanical stresses is the usual practice, the combination of
two different mechanical stresses could be considered as a
new step permitting the fine tuning of the magnetic
properties of the microwires.
Our study aimed at performing wide and complex
magnetic
and
magneto-optical
investigations
of
glass
covered
magnetic
microwires
under
the
simultaneous
presence of tension and torsion stresses. Also, we have paid
special attention to the domain walls motion in the wire
being under stress. The essential element of our study is the
simulation of the magnetic structure based on the theoretical
analysis proposed in [8]. As a result, the spatial distributions
of the vector of magnetization and the domain structures
have been obtained in the cylindrically shaped magnet. The
main idea of our work is the search of new magnetic states,
in particular on the surface of microwire, which could be
created only by the combination of torsion and tensile
stresses.
The paper consists of 4 parts. Section 2 is devoted to the
experimental description. Section 3 presents the results of
the experiments. In Section 4, the conclusions are presented.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
We studied glass-coated microwires (as cast and current
annealed)
with
a
Fe3.85Co67.05Ni1.44B11.53Si14.47Mo1.66
composition, a metallic nucleus diameter of d = 25.5 μm 
and a total diameter, including the glass coating, of D = 26.5
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

μm. The microwires were prepared by the Taylor–Ulitovsky 
method.
We represent the normalized magnetization, M/Ms as a
function of the axial magnetic field, H, where M is the
magnetic moment at a given magnetic field and Ms is the
magnetic moment of the sample at the maximum magnetic
field amplitude.
The study of the magnetization reversal on the surface of
microwires has been performed by means of the optical
polarizing magnetometer using the longitudinal Magneto-
Optical Kerr Effect (MOKE) configuration [9].
Domain wall (DW) propagation is measured by using
Sixtus–Tonks-like experiments. The magnetic field, H, is
generated
by a
solenoid
applying
rectangular
shaped
voltage. Three pick-up coils are mounted along the length of
the wire and propagating DW induces an electromotive
force EMF in the coils (see scheme in Figure 1). Each pick-
up coil is 2 mm long, the internal diameter is 1 mm, winding
thickness is also 1 mm and it has 200 turns.
A pair of Helmholtz coils provided an axial magnetic
field Hax. The mechanical torsion stress has been applied.
One of the wire ends was mechanically fixed, while the
second end was rotary stressed to apply the stress with
different angles. Also, tensile stress has been applied during
the experiments.
Figure 1.
Schematic picture of modified Sixtus–Tonks setup.
III.
MAGNETIC MEASUREMENTS
Figures 2 and 3 show the magnetic hysteresis loops
obtained in the presence of torsion and tension stresses in
as-cast and annealed microwires.
Figure 2.
Hysteresis loops of as cast wire in the presence of torsion and
tensile stresses.
Figure 3.
Hysteresis loops of annealed wire in the presence of torsion and
tensile stresses.
Without
stress,
as-cast
wire
demonstrates
a
non-
rectangular
hysteresis
loop
while
the
annealed
wire
demonstrates an almost rectangular curve. In the presence of
the stresses, the transformation of hysteresis in the two
studied wires looks similar.
First, in the presence of the torsion stress, the hysteresis
loop becomes clearly expressed as rectangular curve.
Evidently this is related to the bistability effect. At the same
time, it is known that the torsion stress induces the
formation of the inclined helical structure. So, we could
consider that here we observe the so called, helical
bistability. Second, the application of tension induces the
decrease of the remanent magnetization and the increase of
the coercive field.
The observed decrease of the remanent magnetization
and the increase of the coercive field must be attributed to
the redistribution of internal stresses upon applied external
stress and negative magnetostriction coefficient, λs, of the
studied microwire. Thus, arising of the axial magnetic
anisotropy upon torsion can be originated by negative λs –
values. Such torsion induced axial magnetic anisotropy gives
rise to magnetic bistability (rectangular hysteresis loops, see
Figure 2). On the other hand, tensile stress, σ, dependence 
of the switching field, Hs, has been previously observed in
microwires with spontaneous and stress-induced magnetic
bistability [10][11].
Experimentally, roughly Hs ~ has
been explained considering the Hs relation to the domain
wall energy involved in the re-magnetization process of
magnetically bistable samples [11]. We can assume a similar
mechanism in the present case considering that the magnetic
bistability is induced by the torsion stresses and the tensile
stress dependence is attributed to the stress dependence of
the domain wall energy. On the other hand, considering
commonly accepted domain structure of magnetic wires
consisting of the axially magnetized inner core and outer
domain shell [12], we can deduce that the outer shell volume
increases upon tensile stresses. Such modification of the
domain structure can be obtained from the relation between
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

the radius of the inner axially magnetized core, Rc, and the
wire radius R given by the squire-ness ratio, Mr/Ms as [12]
Rc =R(Mr/Ms)l/2,
(1)
Therefore,
the
observed
tensile
Mr/Ms
stress
dependencies must be associated with rising of the outer
shell volume due to negative λs values of the studied
microwire.
Figures 4 and 5 demonstrate the field dependencies of the
DW velocity measured in two studied wires in the presence
of the combination of the stresses.
The highest value of the velocity (about 1200 m/s) was
obtained in as-cast wire in the presence of only torsion
stress. The additional application of the tension increases the
start field, shifting in such a way the velocity dependence
along the field axis. Also, the decrease of the value of the
velocity is observed.
Figure 4.
Magnetic field dependence of the DW velocity in the presence
of torsion and tensile stresses (as cast wire).
The annealed wire shows a significantly lower value of
the velocity (about 400 m/s) when the stresses were not
applied. The application of the stresses causes the decrease
of the velocity. The lowest value was obtained for the case
of the combination of two types of the stresses.
The obtained dependencies of the DW velocity have
found the explanation in the frame of the conception of the
stress induced transformation of the magnetic structure in
as-cast and annealed microwires, demonstrating the clear
correlation with the magnetic hysteresis loops.
Measurement uncertainties of Sixtus–Tonks experiments
were determined by the thickness of the pick-up coil and do
not exceed the size of the experimental points in Figures 4
and 5.
Figure 6 shows the results of the simulation obtained for
the different values of parameter ρ (ρ = Rc/R) that
correspond, according to our approaching, to different
values of torsion stress.
Figure 5.
Magnetic field dependence of the DW velocity in the presence
of torsion and tensile stresses (annealed wire).
Figure 6.
Calculated spiral domain structure obtained for different values
of the parameter ρ: a) ρ=0.4, b) ρ=0.8. 
The formation of the spiral DW on the wire surface is
determined
by
the
competition
of
different
energy
contributions:
magnetic
anisotropy,
exchange
and
the
magnetostatic energy. The angle of the DW inclination
changes with parameter ρ.  
Figure 7.
MOKE hysteresis loops of as cast wire in the presence of
torsion stress.
Figure 7 demonstrates the independent confirmation of
our concept. Here, we can see the torsion stress induced
transformation of MOKE hysteresis loop. Torsion stress
induces the appearance of a rectangular hysteresis loop. It
means the formation of helical structure in the surface of the
microwire. Therefore, the torsion stress produces the spiral
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

helical structure in almost the whole thickness of the
microwire.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we propose a new method of control of the
magnetic structure in magnetic microwires, which are the
base elements of the magnetic sensors. The combination of
the torsion and tension stresses gives a new understanding
of the transformation of the magnetic structure. The
combination of magnetic and magneto-optical techniques
with the Sixtus–Tonks experiments permits us to select the
predicted magnetic structures. The results of magnetic
simulation confirm the validity of our conception.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We acknowledge support from the National Science
Centre
Poland
under
Grant
No.
DEC-
2016/22/M/ST3/00471. This work was also supported by
Spanish
MINECO
under
MAT2013-47231-C2-1-P
and
Spanish MCIU under PGC2018-099530-B-C31, by the
University of Basque Country UPV/EHU (Ref.: PPG17/35)
and by the Government of the Basque Country under
Elkartek RTM 4.0 project. The research of P.G. was
supported in part by PL-Grid Infrastructure.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. V. Panina and K. Mohri, “Magneto-impedance effect in
amorphous wires,” Appl Phys Lett., vol. 65, pp. 1189-1195,
April 1994.
[2]
A.
Zhukov,
Novel
Functional
Magnetic
Materials,
Fundamentals
and
Applications,
vol.
231.
Springer
International Publishing, 2016.
[3]
A. Zhukov, M. Ipatov, and V. Zhukova, Advances in Giant
Magneto - impedance of Materials, Handbook of Magnetic
Materials, ed. K. H. J. Buschow, 24: chapter 2, pp. 139–236,
April 2015.
[4]
I. Ogasawara and S. Ueno, “Preparation and properties of
amorphous wires,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 31, pp. 1219-
1225, May 1995.
[5]
P. Rudkowski, G. Rudkowska, and J. O. Strom-Olsen, “The
fabrication
of
fine
metallic
fibers
by
continuous
meltextraction and their magnetic and mechanical properties,”
Mater. Sci. Eng., vol. A 133, pp. 158-162, June 1991.
[6]
V. Zhukova, A. Zhukov, V. Kraposhin, A. Prokoshin, and J.
Gonzalez,
“Magnetic
properties
and
GMI
of
soft
meltextracted
magnetic amorphous fibers,” Sensors and
Actuators (A), vol. 106, pp. 225-230, July 2003.
[7]
K. Mohri, T. Uchiyama, L. P. Shen, C. M. Cai, and L. V.
Panina, “Amorphous wire and CMOS IC-based sensitive
micro-magnetic sensors (MI sensor and SI sensor) for
intelligent measurements and controls,” J. Magn. Magn.
Mater., vol. 249, pp. 351-354, March 2001.
[8]
A. Chizhik et al., “Spiral magnetic domain structure in
cylindrically-shaped microwires,” Scient. Rep., vol. 8, 15090-
6, June 2018.
[9]
A. Stupakiewicz et al., “Direct imaging of the magnetization
reversal in microwires using all-MOKE microscopy,” Rev.
Sci. Instrum., vol. 85, pp. 103702-5, June 2014.
[10] P. Aragoneses et al., “The Stress dependence of the switching
field in glass-coated amorphous microwires,” J. Phys. D:
Applied Phys., vol. 31, pp. 3040-3045, March 1998.
[11] P. Corte-Leon et al., “Stress dependence of the magnetic
properties of glass-coated amorphous microwires”, J. Alloys
Compound., vol. 789, pp. 201-208, March 2019.
[12] M.Vázquez and D.-X.Chen, “The magnetization reversal
process in amorphous wires,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 31, no.
2, pp. 1229-1239, June 1995.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

