Nanoparticles with Conductive Polymer as Photosensing Applications 
 
Si-Han Zenga, Shin-Hung Tsaib and Guo-Dung J. Suc 
Graduate Institute of Photonics and Optoelectronics, National Taiwan University 
 Taipei, Taiwan 
 E-mail: r98941035@ntu.edu.twa,  r98941081@ntu.edu.twb, gdjsu@cc.ee.ntu.edu.twc 
 
Abstract —In this study, we observed that the electric property 
of PEDOT:PSS was affected by LSPR effect. LSPR effect was 
generated by nano gold particles that embedded in 
PEDOT:PSS films. The high-intensity electric field of LSPR 
enhances the mobility of carriers. In order to observe this 
phenomenon, we made some devices. The devices under 
measurement were composed of ITO glass, thin PEDOT:PSS 
film, nano gold particles and an Al electrode. In our study, the 
effect of the devices that were doped with different density of 
gold nano particles was measured. The higher density of gold 
nano particles made the lower total resistance of device. The 
different wavelengths of incident light also made the total 
resistance of device different. Through those experiments, we 
validated that the change of electric property of PEDOT:PSS 
was caused by the LSPR effect from nano gold particles.  
Keywords-PEDOT: PSS; gold nano particles; LSPR 
(Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance).  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
PEDOT:PSS (Poly-3-4-ethyleneoxythiophene/poly-4-
sytrensulfonate) is an electro-chemically stable conjugated 
polymer that is commonly used as the buffer layer and a 
hole transport layer of organic solar cells and OLED 
(Organic Light-Emitting Diode), or with the ITO (Indium 
Tin Oxide) as the anode material. PEDOT:PSS has good 
light transmission, good conductivity, and can be deposited 
by either spin coating or ink-jet printing process as a more 
simpler way to make thin-films. A PEDOT:PSS can be 
coated on many different substrates, like flexible polymers 
or ITO glass substrates. These features also show that the 
PEDOT:PSS can reduce the cost of fabrication [1-3].  
A thin film of PEDOT:PSS is a buffer layer of organic 
solar cells or OLED between the active layer and ITO glass 
because the surface ITO glass usually has some defects and 
it is difficult to form a good thin-film active layer on the 
substrate. The buffer layer of PEDOT:PSS film can modify 
the surface of ITO glass and can make the film better. A 
PEDOT:PSS film can also reduce the generation of leakage 
current [4]. Adding an extra layer in the structure could 
increase the series resistance of solar cell inevitably. Those 
extra resistances would reduce the efficiency of components. 
In this study, the resistance of sample was decreased by 
LSPR (Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance). The 
localized surface plasmon resonance was generated by the 
gold nanoparticles deposited between ITO glass substrate 
and the PEDOT:PSS film.  
The idea of spreading gold nanoparticles between the 
substrate ITO glass and PEDOT:PSS film was inspired by 
the organic solar cell. Lots of studies have validated that the 
surface plasma induced by metallic nano particles can 
increase the efficiency of organic solar cell [5].  
LSPR effect has already been widely applied to 
biotechnology, such as surface enhanced Raman scattering 
(SERS) [6-7]. Those works usually made use of the 
different incident wavelength to measure the dielectric 
constant, so that the material type can be inferred then. In 
this study, we aimed for using the reaction of LSPR effect 
of the different incident wavelength with conductive 
polymer as a photo sensor. 
PEDOT:PSS is an important material in many photonic 
devices. In order to prove that the difference of the device 
resistance was caused by LSPR, DDSCAT was used to 
simulate the localized surface plasmon resonance spectrum 
of gold particles [8-10]. 
In the following paragraphs,  simulation methods and the 
sample preparation are described and explained. After that, 
experiment result and simulation result are discussed.  
II. 
SIMULATION OF SURFACE PLASMON 
Surface plasmon is a phenomenon that surface 
electromagnetic waves propagate on the interface between 
metal and dielectric material. Surface plasmon mode is 
confined near the metal surface to form a highly enhanced 
near-field. Surface plasmon between the metal and the 
dielectric material is divided into two types, SPP (surface 
plamon polariton) and the LSPR (localized surface plasmon 
resonance). SPP refers to the surface plasmon on the metal 
surface in the form of surface wave propagating in the 
interface of metal and dielectric material. LSPR refers to the 
highly localized, high intensity electric field resonance that is 
generated on the surface of metal particle. The electric field 
resonance would be calculated by Maxwell‟s equations and 
boundary condition under Quasi-static approximation [11]. 
 
In these two equations, „a‟ is the radius of the metal 
particle. Those equations and boundary condition (equation 2 
below) could be used to simulate the LSPR effect on a single 
particle. With the boundary condition, A and B in equation 1 
can be solved accordingly.  
(1) 
113
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
 
Then assuming an ideal dipole that can be described as 
 ⃗⃗         -    ̂
. 
The 
electric 
field 
of 
incident 
electromagnetic wave is   ⃗                   ̂ .   
We can use the above equations to calculate the 
extinction cross section (Ｃext) and scattering cross section 
(Csca).  
TABLE I.  
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF VARIABLES 
variabl
es 
significance 
 
ψ 
Electric Potential 
ε 
Dielectric constant 
A, B 
Constant 
E0 
Electric field  magnitude 
 ⃗  
Dipole moment 
α 
Polarizability 
 
 
But, to simulate a metal particle array just with those 
equations would be very difficult [12]. For this purpose, 
DDSCAT is used to simulate the effect that LSPR is 
generated on the surface of gold nanoparticles. DDSCAT, a 
FORTRAN code for calculating scattering and absorption of 
light by irregular particles, has been jointly developed by 
Bruce T. Draine and Piotr J. Flatau [8-10]. 
 Based on the discrete-dipole approximation, DDSCAT 
simulated the electric field around the particles by Maxwell‟s 
equations. The discrete-dipole approximation (DDA) is a 
flexible approach for calculating scattering and absorption 
properties of arbitrary continuum targets, usually a finite 
geometry of polarizable points. The local electric field 
induces dipole moments that could be acquired by the points. 
The dipoles influence each other through their electric fields 
as well. Therefore the DDA is sometimes called discrete 
dipole approximation.  
DDSCAT is well-developed simulation software. There 
can get the source code of DDSCAT on the internet [10]. 
After compiling the source code, we have an executable file. 
There are other two files, ddscat.par and diel.tab, that are 
used to control the executable file.  
For building the boundary condition to process 
DDACAT, it would be crucial to enter the dielectric constant 
of gold nano particles and the dielectric material 
(PEDOT:PSS and ITO glass) to the file (i.e., diel.tab) of 
DDSCAT. The particle radius and other boundary condition 
were entered into another file (i.e., ddscat.par).  We could 
then simulate the scattering and absorption of incident light 
by different wavelengths on gold nano particles. In this study, 
DDSCAT was used to simulate the absorption of the incident 
light between 300 nm and 800 nm and gold nano particles 
with 20nm diameter. The data of simulation would be 
compared with the experiment results  in the following 
section. 
  
III. 
SAMPLE PREPARATION 
Samples were fabricated with PEDOT:PSS (Baytron P 
VP Al 4083), gold nano particles (gold colloid SI-G1652) 
and ITO glass substrates (15 ohm/square). The patterned ITO 
glass substrates were placed into the ultrasonic cleaners for 
removing the surface dirt. Then the ITO glass substrates 
were washed by oxygen plasma for 20 minutes in order to 
make the PEDOT:PSS easy to form on substrates. After 
being cleaned by oxygen plasma, the surface of ITO glass 
would be changed to hydrophilic. We took PEDOT:PSS out 
from the refrigerator and put it aside until it returned to room 
temperature. After that, filtering PEDOT:PSS twice by target 
syringe filters with pore size of 0.45um.  
After finishing the preparation of PEDOT:PSS, we mixed 
the solution of gold nanoparticles and ethylene glycol at one 
to one and one to two ratio (The concentration of gold 
nanoparticles is 3.9 * 10 ^ -5g/ml and 2.6 * 10 ^ -5g/ml). 
Next, we coated the solution that contained gold nano 
particles on the ITO glass substrates by 1000 rpm for 10 
seconds and 2000 rpm for 20 seconds. We baked the samples 
after coating at 180 ℃ for 3 minutes to dry those residue of 
ethylene glycol. Then, those nano gold particles spread on 
the ITO glass substrate. The distance from particle to particle 
was about 100 nm. We then coated PEDOT:PSS on the ITO 
substrate with and without gold nano particles by 3000 rpm 
for 30 seconds. Baking those prepared sample at 180 ℃ for 5 
minutes [13]. PEDOT:PSS covered gold nano particles and 
formed a 30nm film. The thickness of PEDOT:PSS films 
were 30nm with and without gold nano particles. Finally, we 
deposited 120 nm of aluminum on the sample as the 
electrode by thermal evaporator. The samples are illustrated 
in  Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The structure of device 1 without add PEDOT:PSS, device 2 
with gold nanoparticles 2.6 * 10 ^ -5g/ml, device3 with gold nanoparticles  
3.9 * 10 ^ -5g/ml. 
The measurement was performed by using Keithley 2400 
to record the IV curve. PL-2100 COOL LIGHT SOURCE 
was light source, and we measured the current density of 
devices with bias voltage 1V under illuminating of different 
wavelength incident light from QE-III (Enlitech). The 
measurement setup is shown in Figure 2.  
(2) 
114
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

  
 
Figure 2.  The measurement setup diagram 
 
 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
Figure 1 shows the sample structure. The top aluminum 
is the cathode and the bottom of the ITO is the anode. Light 
source was incident from the side of ITO, and we used 
Keithley 2400 to record the current value from 0V to 1.5V. 
Figure 3 is the comparison of the two samples with and 
without gold nanoparticles. In Figure 3, it shows that the 
current density of the sample with gold nano particles was 
higher than the sample without gold nano particle at the same 
bias voltage. We also observed that if the density of gold 
nano particles was higher, the current density was higher too. 
In other words, the sample with gold nanoparticles has lower 
total resistance than the sample without gold nanoparticles 
when those sample are exposed to incident light irradiation 
[14- 15]. 
 
Figure 3.  The sample current varies with voltage, device 1 (black square), 
device 2 (red circle), device3 (blue triangle). 
Although the performance of device 3 is the best, the low 
repeatability and stability of device 3 is the reason that we 
focus our discussion on device 2 and device1. Figure 4 
shows the IV-curve of device 2 (with gold nanoparticles 
between ITO glass and PEDOT:PSS film) that was under 
illumination and not under illumination. In this figure, it can 
be found that when the bias voltage was the same, the current 
value of device 2 under illumination was increased 
significantly than device 2 without being exposed to incident 
lights. When the bias voltage was 1.5 volts, the current 
density of device2 under illumination was increased from 15 
mA to 25 mA. But if there were no bias voltage, the current 
density would be the same no matter the sample was under 
illumination or not. Therefore, this result can prove that the 
increase of current density was not caused by the excess 
carrier generation. We believe the overall resistance was 
decreased because of the incident light.  
 
Figure 4.  The device2 current density varies with voltage that is          
illuminated and isn‟t illuminated. 
In order to confirm that the effect of resistance decrease 
was caused by gold nano particles, we compared the current 
increases under illumination between device 1 (the sample 
with only PEDOT: PSS) and device 2 (the sample with gold 
nano particles) in Figure 5.  
 
 
Figure 5.  The increase of current density while device2 (red square) and 
device 1 (blue diamond) were exposed to incident light 
Even though the current density of device 1 also 
increased while the sample was illuminated, the value of 
increased current density was far less than that of device2. 
Therefore, it can be claimed that the phenomenon of the 
resistance reduce was due to the gold nano particles within 
the sample irradiated by light.  
The reason of that is considered that the LSPR generated 
by gold nanoparticles reduces the resistance of the junction 
of PEDOT:PSS films and ITO glass substrate 
The highly localize, and high-intensity electric field 
resonance of LSPR in the junction causes the transmission of 
those carriers (holes) easily, as shown in Figure 6. Due to the 
existence of the gold nano particles, the gold nanoparticles is 
in the dashed area. This increase the electric field gives 
electric holes an attractive force and make the mobility of 
electric holes be increased.  
115
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
Figure 6.  Schematic drawing of device with nano goldparticles, where A 
is acceptor, and D is the donor. The dashed area is gold metal cluster 
surface plasmon resonance. 
 
To further confirm the relationship between resistance 
and LSPR, the device 2 was exposed to visible light 
irradiation with the wavelength from 350 nm to 750 nm. We 
measured the current density with bias voltage, as shown in 
Figure 7. We used DDSCAT to simulate the absorption 
spectra of gold nano particles, 20nm diameter, from 300 nm 
to 800 nm, and compare it with experimental results. The 
simulation results are shown in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 7.  Current density (device 2) versus the wavelength of incident 
lights, normalized with the dark current density. 
 
Figure 8.  The absorption rate of 20nm gold particles versus incident 
wavelength by DDSCAT simulation. 
Comparing Figure 7 and Figure 8, it can be observed that 
the shape of those curve are very consistent with each 
another. Although the curve of experiment result was 20-
30nm shift to longer wavelength, we believed that reason of 
red shift is that not all the diameter of gold nano particles is 
actually 20nm. In our simulation the diameter is set to be 
20nm, since the average diameter of the gold nano particles 
used in the experiment is 20nm.  However, those gold nano 
particles with diameter larger than 20nm may affect the 
waveform. But it was still within measurement tolerance. 
This result still directly proved that the effect of LSPR was 
the main cause of sample's resistance decrease.  
As shows in Fig. 7, the device with gold nano particles 
are measured different current density while the wavelength 
of incident light is changed.  We can use device 2 
to recognize the wavelength of incident light by the  
measurement setup as shown in Fig. 2. This feature makes 
the device as a wavelength sensor. 
V. 
DISCUSSIONS 
 
According to the experiment and simulation, we get the 
following two results. First, the resistance of devices is 
reduced by gold nanoparticles.  Besides, this effect is strong 
when gold nanoparticles are illuminated. Second, the 
magnitude of absorption of gold nanoparticles is consistent 
with the current density of device. 
From the two results, it is validated that LSPR from gold 
nano particles is the reason why the current density of device 
is increased.  
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The project was financially supported by National 
Science Council of Taiwan under contract number NSC 99-
2221-E-002 -206 -MY3. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Greczynski, Th. Kugler, and W. R. Salaneck, “Characterization of 
the PEDOT-PSS system by means of X-ray and ultraviolet 
photoelectron spectroscopy “Thin Solid Films 354, pp. 129-135 (1999)  
[2] J. Luo and W. Tang, “Influence of PEDOT with Different 
Conductivity on the Performance of Polymer Photovoltaic Cells”, 
Journal of Guangdong University of Technology Vol．25 No．3, pp. 
6-9,  (2008) 
[3] Nurdan D. Sankir, “Selective deposition of PEDOT/PSS on to 
flexible substrates and tailoring the electrical resistivity by post 
treatment”, Circuit World Vol. 34 · Number 4, ·pp.32–37(2008) ·. 
[4] J. Ouyang, C.-W. Chu, F.-C. Chen, Q. Xu, and Y. Yang, “High-
conductivity poly (3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene): poly (styrene 
sulfonate) film and its application in polymer optoelectronic devices”, 
Advanced Functional Materials Vol. 15, Issue 2, pp. 203–208, (2005 ) 
[5] S.-S. 
Kim, 
S.-I. 
Na, 
J. 
Jo, 
D.-Y. 
Kim,  
and Y.-Ch. Nah, Plasmon, “Plasmon enhanced performance of 
organic solar cells using electrodeposited Ag nanoparticles", 
APPLIED PHYSICS LETTERS 93,pp. 073307-073309 (2008) 
[6] Jeffrey M. McMahon, Anne-Isabelle Henry, Kristin L. Wustholz, 
Michael J. Natan, R. Griffith Freeman, Richard P. Van Duyne ,and 
George C. Schatz, “Gold nanoparticle dimer plasmonics: finite 
element method calculations of the electromagnetic enhancement to 
surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy” , Vol. 394, Number 7, 
pp.1819-1825 (2009) 
[7] Qiuming Yu and Greg Golden, “Probing the Protein Orientation on 
Charged Self-Assembled Monolayers on Gold Nanohole Arrays by 
SERS”, Langmuir, 23 (17), pp 8659–8662 ( 2007) 
[8] Draine, B.T. and Flatau, P.J., "Discrete dipole approximation for 
scattering calculations", J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 11, pp.1491-1499 (1994)  
300
400
500
600
700
800
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Wavelength (nm)
Absorption (a.u.)
116
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

[9] Draine, B.T. and Flatau, P.J., "User Guide to the Discrete Dipole 
Approximation 
Code 
DDSCAT 
7.1", 
http://arXiv.org/abs/1002.1505v1 (2010) 
[10] Draine, B.T. and Flatau, P.J., "Discrete-dipole approximation for 
periodic targets: theory and tests", J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 25, pp.2593-
2703 (2008) 
[11] Stefan A. Maier, ” Plasmonics: fundamentals and applications” , 
Springer Verlag, pp.65-75 (2007) 
[12]  N. 
W. 
Ashcroft, 
and 
N. 
D. 
Mermin, 
“Solid 
State 
Physics”,Harcount(2000)  
[13] Vishal Shrotriya, Gang Li, Yan Yao, Tom Moriarty, Keith Emery,  
and Yang Yang, Accurate Measurement and Characterization of 
Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 16, pp2016–2023(2006) 
[14] Y.H. Zhou, F.L. Zhang, K. Tvingstedt, Sophie Barrau,  F.H. Li, W.J. 
Tian, and Olle Inganäs, “Investigation on polymer anode design for 
flexible polymer solar cells”, APPLIED PHYSICS LETTERS 92, 
pp.233308-233310 (2008) 
[15] S.W. Tong, C.F. Zhang, C.Y. Jiang, G. Liu, Q.D. Ling, E.T. Kang, 
D.S.H. Chan, and Chunxiang Zhu, “Improvement in the hole 
collection of polymer solar cells by utilizing gold nanoparticle buffer 
layer”, Chemical Physics Letters 453, pp.73–76 (2008) 
 
117
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

