Inverse Convolution Method for Periodic Media under Deterministic and Stochastic 
Condition 
Xuefeng Li, Mohamed Ichchou, Abdelmalek Zine, 
Noureddine Bouhaddi 
Ecole Centrale de Lyon, France 
Email: xuefeng.li@ec-lyon.fr 
Christophe Droz 
 KU Leuven, Division LMSD, Belgium 
Email: christophe.droz@ec-lyon.fr 
Abstract—Wavenumber extraction has attracted widespread 
attention in periodic structures, sonar, radar and sensor fields. 
The Inverse Convolution Method (INCOME) is presented and 
optimized to extract wavenumber of 1D and 2D wave 
propagating in periodic structures under deterministic and 
stochastic condition in this paper. This method is one of inverse 
methods and combines the principle of the Prony series and the 
Bloch-Floquet theorem based on convolution framework. 
Keywords- Periodic structure； Wavenumber Extraction； 
Inverse method； Deterministic and Stochastic condition； Wave 
propagation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Wavenumber extraction has been used in periodic 
structures field to reveal many unique properties, such as 
complex band structure which has been applied to many 
applications, such as damage identification, vibration 
isolation, unable filters, wave guides and more [1]. The whole 
frequencies from which wavenumber is extracted can be 
divided into three regions: low frequency region, medium 
frequency region and high frequency region. For the low 
frequency region, traditional model-based analysis methods, 
such as Transfer Matrix Method (TMM) and Wave Finite 
Element method (WFEM), have an effective performance to 
extract wavenumber. But in the medium and high frequency 
region, these model-based analysis methods generally cause 
the computational issues and even are invalid. In order to 
overcome these issues, an amount of inverse methods 
involving Fourier-based wavenumber estimation methods and 
improved signal processing methods have been proposed. 
Fourier-based wavenumber estimation methods contain two-
dimensional spatial Discrete Fourier Transform (2D-DFT), 
McDaniel’s method, Inhomogeneous Wave Correlation (IWC) 
method [2], Inverse Wave Decomposition (IWD) and so on. 
In particular, IWC method has obvious advantages on 
identification of guided waves propagating in plates. For 
example, IWC is smaller sensitive to the boundary condition 
and the source of force and only requires the sparse signal as 
input parameters. But as an extension of the Fourier transform, 
it has itself disadvantages, such as the limitation of 
wavenumber resolution, which cause the inaccurate results 
when the number of wavelengths within the signal is few. 
Additionally, IWC leads to a non-linear optimization problem, 
maximizing 
the 
correlation 
coefficient 
between 
an 
inhomogeneous wave and the complete wave field. In the past 
few decades, several improved signal processing methods 
have been proposed such as Matrix Pencial, ESPRIT, Prony 
method, MUSIC and HRWA. Prony method and ESPRIT 
method are limited to 1D application and regard fine periodic 
measurements as input parameters. Recently, the High 
Resolution Wavenumber Analysis (HRWA) method proposed 
by P. Margerit provides an effective way to increase the 
wavenumber resolution and only requires to solve the linear 
problem by the combination of ESPRIT algorithm and the 
ESTER criterion [3]. The signal order is estimated due to the 
use of ESTER criterion and the complex wavevectors are 
extracted from the measured frequency response using 
ESPRIT 
method. 
Additionally, 
from 
the 
extracted 
wavenumber, this method allows the identification of some 
mechanical properties. But HRWA is implemented without 
considering the effect of uncertainties factor, such noise and 
non-periodicity sampling, on the wavenumber extraction. 
More recently, Boukadia proposed a novel improved signal 
processing method referred to INCOME as an extension of 
Prony method [4]. This method can be applied to extract 
wavenumbers in 1D and process K-space analysis in 2D based 
on linear algebra. But the periodic measurement is still a 
strong constraint in this method and the problem of automatic 
signal order identification needs to be solved. The rest of this 
paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the 
principle of INCOME and uses a beam case to validate the 
effectiveness of INCOMDE. Section III describes the 
perspective and conclusion. 
II. 
INCOME PRINCIPLE AND SIMULATION EXAMPLE 
A. Principle 
The core of the INCOME method is to use the Prony 
method (commonly used in spectrum estimation) to solve the 
estimation of the wavenumber in the periodic structure. When 
only considering the incident wave, the displacement field can 
be expressed as the sum of complex exponentials including 
different positive propagation constants.  
                   Un= ∑
bm
nw
m=1
λm
-n                                              (1) 
Where bm is the complex amplitude of propagating wave for  
mth  wave, nw is the number of waves, λm  is equal to the 
propagation constant of mth  wave and km  is equal to 
wavenumber of mth wave. The corresponding characteristic 
polynomial with coefficient am of the formula (1) is  
                      ψ(λ)= ∑
am
nw
m=0
λnw-m                                      (2) 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

For INCOME, the input parameter is a series of 
experimental displacement data. These data can be expressed 
as an autoregressive matrix with Toeplitz structure and then, 
convolved with a vector of characteristic polynomial 
coefficients (product kernel). Finally, the least-squares 
method is used to estimate the best polynomial coefficients 
and propagation constant can be obtained by solving the roots 
of the characteristic polynomial. The out parameter is 
wavenumber obtained by Bloch-Floquet theorem. The whole 
process can be regarded as a filtering process and the 
estimation of the best filter is the key to the method. 
B. Simulation example 
The effectiveness of INCOME in deterministic condition is 
validated by the wavenumber extraction of two pairs of 
bending waves in a Timoshenko beam with resonators. Figure 
1 shows a model of Timoshenko beam with resonators and the 
corresponding results in the positive direction are as follows: 
Figure 1. The model of a Timoshenko beam with resonator 
  Figure 2. The frequency response curve at 500 Hz 
Figure 3. Real part of the complex dispersion curve 
The length L of beam is set to 1m and it is divided to 100 
elements evenly. The weight and height are set to 2cm and 
1cm respectively. The damping, Young’s modulus, density 
and Poisson are set to 0.005, 210 × (1 + 0.005i) GPa, 7800 
kg/m3 and 0.3 respectively. 30 resonators are distributed 
evenly through the Timoshenko beam. The mass of resonators 
is equal to 5% of the overall beam. The Natural frequency of 
resonator is 500Hz and the damping factor of resonator is 0.05. 
Figure 2 shows the frequency response curve in 500Hz, which 
shows 
the 
amplitude 
of 
displacement is decaying 
exponentially with wave propagating. Figure 3 and 4 present 
the complex dispersion curve of waves propagating in positive 
direction, which can illustrate that the INCOME is effective 
to extract wavenumbers. On the other hand, the dynamic 
properties of periodic structure can be explained. When the 
frequency reaches the natural frequency of the spring 
oscillator, resonance occurs. The energy is dissipated during 
the process of resonance, leading to the band gap existing near 
the natural frequency. In the band gap, the wave can’t 
propagate. This principle is mainly reflected by the imaginary 
part of the wavenumber. For example, in the imaginary part 
of the dispersion curve, the wavenumber of the propagating 
wave changes to negative number near the natural frequency 
of spring oscillator, which leads to the exponential attenuation 
of displacement and the appearance of band gap. 
III. 
 PERSPECTIVES AND CONCLUSION 
INCOME overcomes the limitations of Fourier-based 
methods and other traditional model-based analysis methods. 
The proposed method only relies on linear prediction theory 
instead of nonlinear optimization and allows a coherent 
estimate of the full K-Space in deterministic condition and 
stochastic condition. The theory of INCOME in deterministic 
condition is established and its effectiveness is validated by 
different cases in 1D. For stochastic case, it requires to be 
explored further, such as considering the effect of different 
kinds of disturbances on wavenumber extraction and the 
experimental cases need to be implemented to validate the 
effectiveness of INCOME further.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. I. Hussein, M. J. Leamy and M. Ruzzene, “Dynamics of 
Phononic Materials and Structures: Historical Origins, Recent 
Progress, and Future Outlook,” J. Applied Mechanics Reviews, 
pp: 1380-1419, 2014, doi: 10.1115/1.4026911.  
[2] M. N. Ichchou, J. Berthaut and M . Collet, “Multi-mode wave 
propagation in ribbed plates: Part I, wavenumber-space 
characteristics,” J. International Journal of Solids & Structures,  
Vol.45, pp: 1179-1195, March 2008. Available from: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsolstr.2007.09.032. 
[3] P. Margerit, A. Lebée, J. F Caron, K. Ege and X. Boutillon, 
“The 
High-Resolution 
Wavevector 
Analysis 
for 
the 
characterization of the dynamic response of composite plates,” 
J. Journal of Sound and Vibration, vol. 458, pp:177-196, 2019, 
dio: 10.1016/j.jsv.2019.06.026. 
[4] R. F. Boukadia, E. Deckers, C. Claeys, M. Ichchou and W. 
Desmet, “An Inverse Convolution Method for Wavenumber 
Extraction,” J. MSSP, in press.
 
Figure 4. Imaginary part of the complex dispersion curve 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

