Redox Sensors for the Control of Process and Waste Waters 
 
Winfried Vonau, Frank Gerlach, Kristina Ahlborn, Sandra Sachse 
Kurt-Schwabe-Institut für Mess- und Sensortechnik 
Waldheim, Germany 
vonau@ksi-meinsberg.de 
 
 
Abstract—The state of waste and process water depending on 
the particular application can be characterised by quantitative 
analysis of its composition (e.g., heavy metal ions, nitrate or 
phosphate) but often, at least in a complementary manner, by 
determinating of non-specific parameters like electrolytic con-
ductivity or redox potential. The latter is usually measured 
potentiometrically using indicator electrodes of precious met-
als. However, their application is connected with measurement 
errors caused by interactions between the media and the noble 
metal surfaces. Specifically this problem occurs in real media 
that can be found in process chemistry and in waste water sec-
tor, for example. Using electron conducting glass instead of 
noble metal membranes in potentiometric redox electrodes 
solves this problem. We present possibilities for their fabrica-
tion and results from their use. 
 
Keywords-redox potential; sensor; glass membrane; thick 
film; thin film; potentiometry 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The redox potential, also denoted as oxidation reduction 
potential (ORP), is a measure for the ability of an aqueous 
system to take up electrons from a chemical reaction or to 
give up electrons. The ORP of a system can be changed by 
the addition of substances unless they are oxidative or re-
ductive. Determination of redox potential is very important 
in nature and technology as it characterises the present state 
of a system. Additionally, ORP can be used as controlled 
process variable for the performance of technical reactions. 
As control variable it is essential, e.g., for the water 
treatment as in many cases it is comparable to the pH value. 
Temperature, ionic strength and pH value are all important 
contributing factors. Studies have shown that the lifetimes 
of bacteria and other microorganisms are also strongly de-
pendent on the ORP of the media. 
Currently, noble metal based electrodes (mostly in com-
pact embodiment according to standards) [1, 2] are predom-
inantly used for the determination of redox potentials, while 
occasionally, electrodes based on film technology or elec-
troplating [2] are used. Independent of the shape of the no-
ble metal indicator electrode, potentiometry is used for the 
redox potential determination. The material of the measur-
ing electrode is critical for the results. Typically, gold, plati-
num or palladium are used in their construction. 
Gold electrodes react to chlorides and cyanides present, 
while platinum electrodes do not. Instead, in reducing solu-
tions together with palladium they form hydrides. This im-
pacts the electrode properties, particularly the absolute posi-
tion of the potentials measured in analyte solutions with the 
redox electrodes, as well as the adjustment behaviour of the 
potentials in case of composition changes in the measured 
media. In addition to the poor reproducibility of noble met-
als electrodes, successive measurements are subject to an 
additional measurement uncertainly of  25 mV. 
The electrodes become unusable when catalytic poisons 
such as SO2 or other sulfur compounds reach their surface. 
Proteins also cause an inactivation of noble metal surfaces 
and the presence of gaseous oxygen or hydrogen in the test 
medium influences the half cell potential. Precious metals 
can act as an undesired catalyst, e.g., they promote the de-
composition of hydrogen peroxide. Precious metals are ex-
pensive meaning and a substitute is highly desirable. Inves-
tigations of cheaper carbon electrodes (e.g., graphite elec-
trodes) have shown that a high reproducibility of the elec-
trode potentials is very difficult to achieve; therefore, they 
are not an adequate alternative. 
The problems of precious metal electrodes can be cir-
cumvented by using glasses with very high electron conduc-
tivity. Such glasses were first investigated at the end of the 
1970s [3]. These electrodes operate based on the presence of 
iron and titanium oxides in the glass, whereby in the case of 
Ti the metal coexists in the oxidation states +3 and +4 in a 
predefined proportion. Currently, redox glass electrodes are 
based on platinum wires covered with redox glass [3] or 
prepared analogously to conventional pH glass electrodes 
[4]. However, it is rarely possible to handle the special 
glasses which readily crystallise by the glass blower. The 
thermal coefficients of expansion are incompatible, in gen-
eral, with those of usual electrode shaft glasses, inevitably 
leading to high wastage rates. For some niche uses it is re-
ported about results of their application [5]. Recently pub-
lished works deal with the use of thick film [6] and thin film 
technology [7] as new manufacturing technologies for redox  
glass based indicator electrodes. 
Previous solutions for the measurement of redox poten-
tials in this and other process waters in circulation were 
based on the use of noble metal indicator electrodes, solely.  
 
The above mentioned drawbacks were accepted. Alterna-
tively, a bioactivity sensor (BAS) [8, 9] was developed, 
based on the principle of a biofuel cell. The electron transfer 
from the biological component to the anode of the sensor 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

was used for analytical applications. An application in the 
practise is not given currently. 
 
In this paper a new glass based system for the determi-
nation of the redox potential is introduced. The paper is or-
ganised as follows. The motivation for the development of 
new a redox sensor system and its use in paper industry pro-
cesses is outlined in Section II. Section III describes manu-
facturing of the planar redox glass electrodes in thick film 
technology. First results of measurements with this multi-
sensordevice as a part of a process water analyser are 
demonstrated in section IV. Additionally, we introduce a 
procedure to extend the lifetime of the measurement system. 
The conclusions and acknowledgement close this article. 
II. 
PROBLEM 
In the production of paper, water is required for auxiliary 
and cleaning purposes and it is often used several times. 
Beside the raw materials, the production details are critical 
to the quantity and composition of the sewage. In general, 
ecological and economic considerations lead the paper in-
dustry to reduce the sewage it produces. In reducing the 
volume of waste water the proportion of soluble substances 
increases, creating an undesirable nutrient-rich habitat for 
micro-organisms. This leads to an increase of slime and 
biofilm growth in the system. The problem is treated effec-
tively by an optimised application of biocide active sub-
stances. In any case, an efficient sewage treatment with bio-
logical stage of degradation is necessary. Further reduction 
of sewage volume necessitates an enlargement of the bio-
logical sewage treatment arrangement with biofilters. For 
the controlled addition of peroxide based biocides to sup-
press the slime growth in the process water, redox potential 
determination can make an essential contribution, whereby 
the complicated composition of the medium does not re-
quire the use of precious metal electrodes. 
For the assessment of the determined redox potentials it 
has to be taken in account that beside the concentration of 
the biocides the position-dependent amount of oxygen 
and/or the pH values have a significant influence on the 
sensor signal. These parameters should additionally be de-
termined and considered for the evaluation of the redox po-
tentials.  
III. 
SOLUTION 
First a glass mixture consisting of SiO2, Na2O, CaO, 
Li2O, Fe2O3, and Fe3O4 was prepared according to [10], 
homogenised, melted in a high temperature chamber furnace 
at 1400 oC and processed into rods. These were milled in a 
planetary ball mill. Afterwards, the resulting powder was 
sieved through a mesh, weighed, blended with the identical 
amount of a terpineol containing binder and mixed again in 
the planetary ball mill. To fabricate planar thick-film sen-
sors, a circular electrode structure of platinum with a thick-
ness of 8 μm was screenprinted on an alumina substrate, 
dried and fired. For the redox-sensor fabrication by thick-
film technology the sensitive pastes and covered substrates 
were heated to decrease the paste-viscosity and to simplify 
the application of the pastes onto the substrates. Then, the 
glass paste was carefully applied to the substrate. After dry-
ing at 150 oC in an oven with recirculating air the sintering 
process was executed. The resulting redox glass membrane 
had a thickness of 40 … 100 μm. 
For the application of the electrodes in process water, the 
glass coated substrates were assembled in a high-grade steel 
case and equipped with a protective hood. As reference 
electrode for the measurements, a solid state electrode with 
an epoxy-membrane filled with KCl according to [11] was 
used. Figure 1 shows both electrodes separately assembled.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Glass based redox potential probe (right) and polymer based 
reference electrode (left) for the industrial application 
 
They were placed in measuring lances, where additional 
electrochemical sensors (T, pH, pO2) also were installed. 
Data collection is possible at different places within the wa-
ter cycle and as can be seen in Figure 2, it can also be meas-
ured beyond this circulation system after sample collection 
by means of pumps. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Measuring system for the monitoring of process water, consisting                    
of control box (a), Measuring lance (b) and measuring barrel (c) 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
The cleaning of contaminated sensors occurs in the meas-
uring tube under the following conditions: 
The measuring tube represents a current-optimised flow 
measuring cell with minimised volume and ¾“ hose connec-
tion delivering a high-enough current. This minimises the 
slime and biofilm growth in the sensors and inner surfaces 
of the measuring cell. Without measuring tube, the measur-
ing lance can be used as a multi-parameter insertion probe 
in large containers. The compressed air is provided by an 
autonomous small compressor. A compressed air nozzle 
was placed for every sensor to clean the sensitive surfaces. 
The number and the duration of the cleaning impulses can 
be adapted for every sensor of the respective load of the 
measuring solution. The cleaning cycles should be chosen 
so that biofilm formation is avoided. The inflow can be in-
terrupted by an added electromagnetic valve to detect the 
biological load of the process water by the oxygen reduction 
per unit time and the change of the redox potential. The ef-
ficiency of the cleaning procedure is demonstrated in Figure 
3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Multi sensor system to control process water of the paper indus-
try left contaminated; right after cleaning with compressed air 
 
The results obtained by means of the continous use of 
multisensors during the paper manufacturing process at dif-
ferent places of the water cycle system enable the plant op-
erators to judge the state of the system and its biological 
contamination (slime growth). The focus lies on the meas-
urement of redox potentials by means of glass-based elec-
trode. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
We present results of the multisensor-equipped measur-
ing lances in model waters and in process water of the paper 
industry with particular focus on the innovative new redox 
glass electrodes. As a paper mill typical model medium, a 
solution of CaCl2 * 6 H2O, Na2SO4 * 10 H2O, starch and 
NaCl was prepared. The influence different biocides have 
on the electrochemical measurements if no micro-organisms 
exist in the solution was examined. The biocide Wofasteril 
E 400 was used and Figure 4 shows it has a clear effect. For 
the investigations, different electrode types were used. In 
addition to the glass-based redox electrodes, conventionally 
made pH glass electrodes and a platinum sheet for referenc-
ing redox measurements were taken. The pH electrode ex-
hibits a decrease of the pH value with the addition of the 
peracetic acid based biocides, as is expected. The redox 
glass electrode records the change of the redox potential as a 
result of the biocide addition. The fact that the potential 
change with the platinum sheet also acting as a redox elec-
trode does not precipitate so high, can be traced back on its 
known pH dependence. Figure 5 shows the results of own 
investigations into the pH dependence of the measurements. 
 
Figure 4. Changes of potential and pH value when biocide is added to a 
paper mill typical model solution 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  pH dependence of ORP for different redox electrodes 
 
Figure 6 displayes an exemplary measurement of process 
water in a paper factory. Besides the redox potential which 
was measured using both a platinum and a glass electrode, 
the oxygen content as well as the temperature are shown. 
The sensors were installed in the measuring lances shown in 
Figure 3. The electrodes were automatically cleaned by 
means of compressed air every 12 hours, corresponding to 
4, 16, 28, 40 and 52 hours in Figure 6. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Potential vs. SSE [mV]
pH
 Pt electrode
redox glass A
redox glass B
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
Figure 6.  Course of redox potential, oxygen content and temperature in the 
process water of a paper mill (automatic cleaning cycle: 12 h) 
 
 
The oxygen concentration as well as the temperature are 
nearly constant in Figure 6. The redox potential curves par-
tially deviate by more than ~100 mV from each other due to 
the cross sensitivity of the platinum electrode to components 
in the process water. By means of the redox potential, de-
termined with the redox glass electrode, contamination 
caused by the microbial load of the process water can be 
determined. At the beginning of the measurement the redox 
potential appears to a roughly steady level of about 150 mV. 
Over longer timespans, the influence of the automatic clean-
ing by means of compressed air becomes more pronounced. 
The cause is the biofilm that forms on the electrodes as a 
result of the microbial contamination, which lowers the re-
dox potential. The cleaning removes this and the original 
potential can be reached again. The platinum electrode is 
influenced immediately by the cleaning with compressed 
air, because this reacts to the aerial oxygen. This precious 
metal-based electrode is therefore completely unsuitable for 
measurements in process waters of paper mills.  
CONCLUSION 
Target of the development was the realisation of redox 
glass electrodes to overcome some problems of noble metal 
electrodes like inhibition and catalytic side reactions. Re-
sults of the application of thick film redox glasses based on 
Ti- and Fe-oxides are presented in this paper. They are suit-
able for the requirement of process water in paper industry. 
As a part of multisensor devices the planar electrodes have 
successfully been used for the controlling of biocide input in 
industrial paper processing. This sensor system enables the 
save prevention of unwanted slime and biofilm growth in 
paper production processes without biocide overdosage. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The financial supports of this work by the German Fed-
eral Ministry of Economics and Technology (BMWi) in the 
context of two AiF projects (grant numbers 16274 BR/1 and 
KF2218311RH1) are gratefully acknowledged. 
REFERENCES 
[1] German standard methods for the examination of water, waste 
water and sludge,  DIN 38404-6, German standard methods 
for the examination of water, waste water and sludge, 
Physical and physical-chemical parameters (group C), 
determination of the redox potential (C 6). 
[2] M. Reinecke, J. Spindler, W. Vonau, F. Berthold, “Sensors by 
chemical metallisation“, in Mittweida Scientific Reports, J. 
Univ. of Appl. Sci. Mittweida Part I, Modern processes in 
surface engineering, Vol.13 , pp17-24, 2000. 
[3] B.P. Nikolsky, M.M. Shults, A.M.Pisarevsky, A.A. Beljustin, 
S.K. Bolkhontseva, V.A. Dolidze, V.M. Terasova, J.M. 
Karachentseva, L.I. Dolmazova, “Electron-conductive glass”, 
United States Patent 3 773 642. 
[4] M.M Schults, A.A. Beljustin, A.M. Pisarevsky, L.V. 
Avramenko, S.J. Volkov, V.N. Lachtikova, V.A. Dolidze, 
V.M. Tarasova, ”Glass electrode”, German Patent DE 
2645623. 
[5] M. Miloshova, E. Bychkov, A. Pradel, M. Ribes, “New redox 
sensors for environmental monitoring, biotechnology and 
medical applications” in meeting abstracts of the 1997 joint 
International meeting: Electrochemical Society 192nd meeting 
and International Society of Electrochemistry 48th annual 
meeting: Paris, August 31-September 5,1997. Electrochemical 
Society, Philadelphia , vol 97-2, p. 940-941, 1997. 
[6] W. Vonau, F. Gerlach, K. Ahlborn, “Glass-based redox 
sensor“ J. Solid State Electrochem. Vol.17, pp.969-976, April. 
2013. 
[7] W. Vonau, F. Gerlach, K. Ahlborn, M.J. Schöning, H. Iken, 
“Miniaturised 
potentiometric 
indicator 
electrode 
and 
processes for the production thereof“, German Patent DE 
10 2012 014 861. 
[8] D. Holtmann, D. Sell, Sensor Systems for Monitoring 
Microbial Activity in Industrial Water Circuits. Eng. Life Sci. 
(1) 6: 233-236 
[9] D. Sell, Ways for an online determination of microbial 
metabolic activity by a newly bioactivity sensor. University 
Department, University Hannover, Habilitation, 2004 
[10] W. Vonau, K. Ahlborn F. Gerlach, B. Hahnebach, E. Pöhler, 
“Electrochemical electrode and process for their preparation“, 
German Patent DE 10 2011 118 409. 
[11] W. Vonau, F. Gerlach, R. Sauer, S. Ruder, “Reference 
electrode“, German Patent DE 10 2010 050 481. 
 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

