Real-Time Underwater Communication Technique
for Energy Efﬁcient Ocean Monitoring
Ranjitha Parameshwaraiah, Ramya Ramesh and Narendra Kumar G
Dept. of Electronics & Communication,
University Visvesvaraya College of Engineering, Bangalore University.
Bangalore, India.
Email: ranjitha040391@gmail.com, ramya161091@gmail.com, gnarenk@yahoo.com
Abstract—The need for underwater communications exists
in the areas of pollution monitoring, ocean sampling networks,
tactical
surveillance
applications,
exploration
of
natural
undersea resources, mine reconnaissance and predicting wave
tides. Deployment of underwater sensor networks for real-time
investigation is the major challenge. There is a need to deploy
underwater networks that will enable real-time monitoring of
selected ocean areas, remote conﬁguration and interaction with
onshore human operators. This can be obtained by connecting
underwater instruments by means of wireless links based on
acoustic communication is the most versatile physical link for
continuous wireless sensor networks in underwater scenarios. In
this paper large-scale underwater Sensor Networks (UWSN) and
Underwater Ad-hoc Networks (UANETs) using Solar-Powered
Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (SAUV) to explore the oceanic
environment is proposed. Kong Wobbler base station with
acoustic communication devices is considered, which locates
the pre-deployed underwater sensor modules through acoustic
communication. The sensor modules are installed with various
acoustic sensors and video capturing devices to study the
underwater resources as well as for surveillance needs for
predicting the environmental conditions highlighting potential
applications of seismic monitoring that provides a better disaster
warning mechanism. The simulation results are encouraging as
this approach is extremely helpful in surveillance; intruders are
tracked and real-time data streaming is processed.
Keywords - Underwater Ad-hoc Networks (UANET’s); Un-
derwater Sensor Networks (UWSN); Solar-Powered Autonomous
Underwater Vehicles (SAUV); Acoustic Communication; Under-
water Acoustic Sensor Networks (UW-ASN); Geographic Adaptive
Fidelity (GAF) Protocol; Kong Wobbler.
I. INTRODUCTION
Sensor networks have the promise of revolutionizing many
areas of science, industry, and government with their ability
to bring computation and sensing into the physical world.
The ability to have small devices distributed near the objects
being sensed brings new opportunities to observe. Monitor-
ing the underwater environment is vital in predicting wave
tides, pollution monitoring, oceanic data collection, tactical
surveillance applications, disaster prevention and exploring
natural resources. While sensor networks are beginning to
be ﬁelded in applications today on the ground, underwater
operations remain quite limited by comparison. The largely
unexplored vastness of the ocean, covering about 79% surface
of the earth, has fascinated human race for a very long time.
The traditional approach for ocean-bottom or ocean-column
monitoring is to deploy underwater sensors that record data
during the monitoring mission and recover the instruments
ﬁnds disadvantages:
• Real-time monitoring is critical especially in surveil-
lance or in environmental monitoring applications such
as seismic monitoring wherein the recorded data cannot
be accessed until the instruments are recovered, which
may happen several months after the beginning of the
monitoring program.
• No interaction is possible between onshore control sys-
tems and the monitoring instruments which impedes
adaptive tuning of the instruments nor it is possible to
reconﬁgure the system.
• In case of failures, it is not possible to detect them before
the instruments are recovered which leads to the complete
failure of a monitoring mission.
• The amount of information that can be recorded during
the monitoring mission by every sensor is limited by the
capacity of the on-board storage devices in the instrument
[1].
The paper is organized as follows. Section II illustrates
the Kong Wobbler’s design, which carries the base station
for information relay. Section III and Section IV explain the
internal architecture of the underwater sensors and SAUV.
Section V presents the characteristics of the suggested acoustic
communication channel for the underwater scenario; to as-
sess the aqueous environment; its role and function in the
need for large-scale, long term and distributed information
collection networks for periodic oceanic monitoring. The large
scale aquatic applications demand us to build UWSN and
UANETs to explore the inhibited oceans. Energy efﬁcient
routing protocols are the most important criteria for the design
of underwater sensor networks, since the sensor nodes will
be powered by batteries with limited power capacity. Power
failure of a sensor node not only affects the node itself but also
its ability to forward data packets to the other nodes. Hence
Section VI is dedicated to Energy Efﬁcient, Geographical
Adaptive Fidelity (GAF) protocol [3]. A general layout is
presented in the Section VII. Sections VIII and IX, explain the
Implementation of the work and numerical results obtained by
Simulation in the Network Simulator (NS2) [2], respectively.
Conclusions are summarized in Section X.
243
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

II. KONG WOBBLER
A wireless access point with Kong Wobbler structure
is made to ﬂoat on the surface of sea around the area of
investigation to which the structure of the base station is
ﬁxed on the top. The weight of the base station is less than
the Wobbler base structure, maintaining a ratio of 1:4 to
prevent the whole structure from toppling. Kong Wobbler is
made up of non toxic Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
approved polypropylene chosen for its overall strength,
impact absorption, sound deadening and non toxicity on
the surface of sea made up of high strength polymer and
is Bisphenol A (BPA) and phthalate free. Kong Wobbler is
ﬁlled with compressed CO2 that allows the structure to ﬂoat
and uses play grade sand for its weight. The sand remains
in a compartment that has been permanently sealed using
ultrasonic technology. The Kong Wobbler is made to ﬂoat on
the surface of sea and anchored to the sea bed through cables
to keep in position such that due to its unique structure it
ﬂoats vertically. They are hand-launched over the side of a
ship or air dropped in the area of investigation. The column
of ﬂuid has greater pressure at the bottom of the column
of ocean than at the top. This difference in pressure results
in a net force that tends to accelerate the Kong Wobbler
structure upwards. The magnitude of that force is equal to the
difference in the pressure between the top and the bottom of
the column, and is also equivalent to the weight of the ﬂuid
that would otherwise occupy the column. For this reason, if
the density of the structure is greater than that of the ﬂuid
in which it is submerged, tends to sink. The buoyancy of the
Kong Wobbler exceeds its weight and tends to rise. Density
is maintained lesser than the liquid and shaped appropriately
so that force can keep the whole structure aﬂoat. The ﬂoating
Kong Wobbler tends to restore itself to an equilibrium
position after a small displacement. It has vertical stability,
in case it is pushed down slightly, which will create a greater
buoyancy force and unbalanced by the weight force, will push
the object back up. Rotational stability is of great importance
as given a small angular displacement, the structure returns
to its original position [3].
Kong Wobbler is of less density than the seawater and will
ﬂoat upward until it reaches the surface of the seawater at
which position, only part of it is submerged. Wobbler is made
out of such material, displaces a lot of water on the surface
of ocean as the force of the water trying to get into the space
keeps the wobbler aﬂoat.
Submerged fraction depends on the density of the Kong
Wobbler, as compared to the seawater. Hence:
ρsVs = ρoVo(Archimede′sprinciple)
(1)
where ρs the density of the seawater, Vs the volume
submerged, ρo the density of the Kong Wobbler, Vo the volume
of the whole structure,
The Submerged volume is maintained around 0.5 times the
total volume of the whole structure, as the density of the whole
Kong Wobbler lies in between the density of polypropylene
and compressed CO2.
ρs = 1027kg/m3, Density of seawater at the surface.
ρo= 946kg/m3, Density of polypropylene.
ρco2= 1.52 kg/m3, Density of compressed CO2
As the Wobbler is displaced vertically, a parcel of ﬂuid in
contact is also displaced. The buoyancy force F acting on
the Kong Wobbler is the difference between the weight of
the displaced parcel of ﬂuid with density ρ’, (gV ρ’) and the
weight of the surrounding water with density ρ2, (gV ρ2 ),
where V is the volume of the parcel.
F = gV (ρ2 − ρ′)
(2)
The acceleration of the displaced parcel is:
a = F
m = g (ρ2 − ρ′)
ρ′
(3)
but
ρ2 = ρ +
dρ
dz

water
δz
(4)
ρ′ = ρ +
dρ
dz

parcel
δz
(5)
Using (4) and (5) in (3), ignoring terms proportional to δz2,
E = −1
dρ
dρ
dz water

−
dρ
dz parcel

(6)
where E =
−a
(gdz) is the stability of the water column.
This can be written in terms of the measured temperature and
salinity t(z), S(z) in the water column [3].
E = α
 dt
dz − gρΓ

− β dS
dz
(7)
where
α = −1
ρ
∂ρ
∂t

|S,p
β = −1
ρ
 ∂ρ
∂S

|t,p
Γ =
 ∂t
∂p

|adiabatic
with α, the thermal expansion coefﬁcient, β the saline
contraction coefﬁcient, and Γ is the adiabatic lapse rate, the
change of temperature with pressure as the water parcel moves
without exchanging heat with it’s surroundings. p is pressure,
t is temperature in celsius, ρ is density, and S is salinity.
Few kilometers from the surface of the ocean, stability is
large such that the ﬁrst term in (6) is much larger than the
second. The ﬁrst term is proportional to the rate of change of
density of the water column; the second term is proportional to
244
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

the compressibility of sea water, which is very small. Hence,
neglecting the second term, stability equation reduces to:
E ≈ −1
ρ
dρ
dz
(8)
The approximation used to derive (8) is valid for
E > 50 ∗ 10−8/m
Below, about a kilometer in the ocean, the change in density
with depth is so small that we must consider the small change
in density of the parcel due to changes in pressure as it is
moved vertically, and (7) must be used [4]. Stability is deﬁned
such that
E > 0, Stable
E = 0, Neutralstability
E < 0, Unstable
Fig. 1.
Kong Wobbler structure
III. SENSORS
Sensor nodes collect data through their sensors. One pos-
sible approach to node deployment and communicate with
other nodes through short-range acoustic couplers. They have
batteries, but for long-term operation they spend most of their
life asleep. All nodes are integrated with temperature, vibra-
tion, pressure, viscosity, turbidity, seismic, proximity, chemical
& gas, ﬂuid ﬂow, speed, water level, altitude and visibility
sensors to measure the different parameters in the marine
environment which are small, robust, inexpensive, low power
consuming yet efﬁcient. Real-time readings are taken from all
the sensors to check readings crossing the threshold values to
take necessary actions. The typical internal architecture of an
underwater sensor is shown in Fig. 2. It consists of a main
controller/CPU (Central Processing Unit), which is interfaced
with an oceanographic instrument or sensor through a sensor
interface circuitry. The controller receives data from the sensor
and it can store it in the onboard memory, process it, and send
it to other network devices by controlling the acoustic modem.
The electronics are usually mounted on a frame which is
protected by a PVC housing. Sensor components are protected
Fig. 2.
Sensor node Architecture
by bottom-mounted instrument frames that are designed to
permit azimuthally omnidirectional acoustic communications,
and protect sensors and modems from potential impact of
trawling gear, especially in areas subjected to ﬁshing activities.
The protecting frame is designed so as to deﬂect trawling
gear on impact, by housing all components beneath a low-
proﬁle pyramidal frame. Underwater sensors include sensors
to measure the quality of water and to study its character-
istics such as temperature, density, salinity (interferometric
and refractometric sensors), acidity, chemicals, conductivity,
pH (magnetoelastic sensors), oxygen (Clark-type electrode),
hydrogen, dissolved methane gas (METS), and turbidity. Dis-
posable sensors exist that detect ricin, the highly poisonous
protein found in castor beans and thought to be a potential
terrorism agent. DNA microarrays can be used to monitor
both abundance and activity level variations among natu-
ral microbial populations. Other existing underwater sensors
include hydrothermal sulﬁde, silicate, voltammetric sensors
for spectrophotometry, gold-amalgam electrode sensors for
sediment measurements of metal ions (ion-selective analysis),
amperometric microsensors for H2S measurements for studies
of anoxygenic photosynthesis, sulﬁde oxidation, and sulfate
reduction of sediments. In addition, force/torque sensors for
underwater applications requiring simultaneous measurements
of several forces and moments have also been developed, as
well as quantum sensors to measure light radiation and sensors
for measurements of harmful algal blooms [5].
IV. SOLAR-POWERED AUTONOMOUS UNDERWATER
VEHICLES (SAUV)
The SAUV [6] is a solar powered AUV designed for
long endurance missions that require monitoring, surveil-
lance/station keeping, with real-time bi-directional communi-
cations to shore.
• The SAUV is a solar-powered autonomous vehicle which
is equipped with rechargeable lithium ion batteries to
allow maximum mission endurance even under conditions
where minimal solar radiation is available.
245
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

• Operate autonomously at sea for extended periods of time
from weeks to months. Typical missions require operation
at night and solar energy charging of batteries during
daytime.
• In case of failure of Kong Wobbler, SAUVs Communicate
with a remote operator on daily basis via the Satellite
phone or the RF radio or the acoustic telemetry.
• Operate at speed up to about 3 knots when needed and
cruise at speed of about 1 knot.
• Battery system is to provide a total capacity of around
1.5 kwh.
• Capability to acquire GPS updates on the ocean surface
and compute SAUV position at all times using GPS.
• Capability to maintain ﬁxed depth and ﬁxed altitude and
to smoothly vary depth or altitude proﬁle.
• Capability to log and upload all sensor data correlated in
time and SAUV geodetic position.
• Provide sufﬁcient volume, power, interfaces and software
hooks for future payload sensors.
• Allow user to program missions easily using a Laptop
PC and provide for graphical display of mission [6].
Fig. 3.
SAUV
V. ACOUSTIC COMMUNICATION
Wireless underwater communication is challenging task
with the growing need for underwater surveillance and
develop persistent long-term ocean observation has led to
many underwater wireless technologies. Present underwater
communication involves transmission of data in the form
of optical waves, electromagnetic or sound waves. Optical
waves involved in underwater communication are generally
limited to very short ranges because of the strong backscatter
from the suspended particles in the ocean, severe absorption
by water at optical frequencies and high level of ambient
light in the upper part of the water column. Even the clearest
water has 1000 times the attenuation of clear air and turbid
water has more than 100 times the attenuation of densest
fog. Electromagnetic waves in radio frequencies, does not
work underwater due to high conducting nature of the
medium, especially sea water. Average conductivity of sea
water is 4 mhos/meter, therefore the attenuation for 2.4GHz
is around 1695dB/meter which is not feasible. Underwater
acoustic communications is an important alternative to Radio-
Frequency (RF) communications. It is the most versatile and
widely used technique in underwater wireless communication
which has low attenuation of sound in water used as the
primary
carrier
for
underwater
wireless
communication
systems that holds well in thermally stable and deep water
settings [3]. It is seen that in simple acoustic propagation
models that multi-hop routing saves energy in underwater
networks
with
respect
to
single
hop
communications,
especially with distances of the order of some kilometers.
The
challenges posed
by
the
underwater channels for
underwater sensor networking are :
1) Path loss
• Attenuation: Is mainly provoked by absorption due
to conversion of acoustic energy into heat, which
increases with distance and frequency. It is also
caused by scattering and reverberation (on rough
ocean surface and bottom), refraction, and disper-
sion (due to the displacement of the reection point
caused by wind on the surface). Water depth plays
a key role in determining the attenuation.
• Geometric Spreading: This refers to the spreading
of sound energy as a result of the expansion of
the wave fronts. It increases with the propagation
distance and is independent of frequency. There are
two common kinds of geometric spreading: spheri-
cal (omni-directional point source), and cylindrical
(horizontal radiation only).
2) Noise
• Man made noise. This is mainly caused by machin-
ery noise (pumps, reduction gears, power plants,
etc.), and shipping activity (hull fouling, animal life
on hull, cavitation).
• Ambient Noise. Is related to hydrodynamics (move-
ment of water including tides, currents, storms,
wind, rain, etc.), seismic and biological phenomena.
3) Multi-path
• Multi-path propagation may be responsible for se-
vere degradation of the acoustic communication
signal, since it generates ISI (Inter-Symbol Inter-
ference).
• The multi-path geometry depends on the link congu-
ration. Vertical channels are characterized by lit-
tle time dispersion, whereas horizontal channels
may have extremely long multi-path spreads, whose
value depend on the water depth.
4) High delay and delay variance:
• The propagation speed in the UW-A channel is order
of ﬁve, magnitude lower than the radio channel. This
large propagation delay (0.67 s=km) can reduce the
throughput of the system considerably.
246
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

• The very high delay variance is even more harmful
for efﬁcient protocol design, as it prevents from
accurately estimating the Round Trip Time (RTT),
key measure for many common communication
protocols.
5) Doppler spread
• The Doppler frequency spread can be signicant in
UWA channels causing a degradation in the per-
formance of digital communications: transmissions
at a high data rate cause many adjacent symbols
to interfere at the receiver, requiring sophisticated
signal processing to deal with the generated ISI
(Inter-Symbol Interference) [5].
Perhaps the most distinguishing property of acoustic
channels is the fact that path loss depends on the signal
frequency. This dependence is a consequence of absorption,
i.e., transfer of acoustic energy into heat. In addition to the
absorption loss, signal experiences a spreading loss which
increases with distance. The ambient noise, which is always
present, may be modeled as Gaussian, but it is not white. Its
power spectral density decays at approximately 18 dB/decade.
The acoustic bandwidth depends on the transmission distance.
The bandwidth is severely limited at longer distances: at
100 km, only about a kHz is available. At shorter distances,
the bandwidth increases, but it will ultimately be limited by
that of the transducer. The fact that bandwidth is limited
implies the need for bandwidth efﬁcient modulation methods
if more than a bps/Hz is to be achieved over these channels.
Another important observation to be made is that the acoustic
bandwidth is centered at low frequencies [5].
The fact that the acoustic bandwidth depends on the
distance
has
important
implications
on
the
design
of
underwater networks. Speciﬁcally, it makes a strong case for
multi-hopping, since dividing the total distance between a
source and destination into multiple hops enables transmission
at a higher bit rate over each (shorter) hop. The same fact
helps to offset the delay penalty involved in relaying. Since
multi-hopping also ensures lower total power consumption,
its beneﬁts are doubled from the viewpoint of energy-per-bit
consumption on an acoustic channel [5].
By dividing the available bandwidth into a number of
narrower bands, Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing
(OFDM) [7] systems can perform equalization in frequency
domain and eliminate the need for complex time-domain
equalizers. OFDM modulation and de-modulation can easily
be accomplished using Fast Fourier Transforms (FFT) [7].
When the delay spread is long, the preﬁx length can signif-
icantly affect the bandwidth efﬁciency. Maximum likelihood
sequence detection (MLSD) on individual sub-carriers using a
low complexity PSP can combat ISI when the symbol period
is smaller than the delay spread. Other channel shortening
techniques such as sPRE may also be used in future OFDM
systems to reduce the preﬁx length and improve bandwidth
efﬁciency. Careful consideration of the physical layer param-
eters can help to design data packets so as to take maximal
advantage of limited resources.
Low carrier frequencies typically 15 kHz is ideal for un-
derwater acoustic data communication. Acoustic waves expe-
rience 1/R2 attenuation due to spherical spreading and also
absorptive losses [5] are signiﬁcant in underwater scenario.
Hence, the practical range selected for our carrier frequency
is 11-19 khz.
A. Ad hoc Networks
A wireless ad hoc network is a system of self-directed
nodes which form a decentralized communications network.
Wireless communication allows for a dynamic network
topology where new nodes can be rapidly deployed and
likewise rapidly removed. The nodes act as both host and
router, performing tasks and forwarding information to each
other. The mobile nodes can form dynamic networks where
they are linked with their nearest neighboring node and
when they move too far from their neighboring nodes might
lose connection but come into contact with other nodes
to begin interacting and changing the network topology.
Efﬁcient routing protocols is needed to communicate new
data over multi-hop paths consisting of possibly several links
to cope with noise and interference as well as sharing limited
bandwidth. A class of Ad hoc networks, UANET are used in
underwater explorations.
1) UWSN and UANETs: UANET and UWSNs are essential
to explore large uninhibited oceans. In the characteristics
of these new networks, the propagation delay, ﬂoating node
mobility, and limited acoustic link capacity are hugely
different
from
ground
based
mobile
ad-hoc
networks
(MANET) and Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN). UANET
and UWSN rely on low-frequency acoustic communications
because RF radio does not propagate well due to underwater
energy absorption. Unlike wireless links amongst land-based
ad hoc nodes, each underwater acoustic link features large-
latency and low bandwidth. Most ground sensor nodes in a
WSN are typically stationary and large portion of UWSN
sensor nodes, except some ﬁxed nodes mounted on the
sea ﬂoor are with low or medium mobility (3-5 knots)
due to environmental water current. The large-scale aquatic
applications demand to build UANET and UWSN to explore
the large uninhabited oceans. The difference between UANET
and UWSN is due to controlled mobility and associated
implementation cost. In a UANET, mobile nodes can be
implemented by SAUV and Autonomous Underwater Vehicles
(AUV) or Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROV), which are
high cost robots that can move under the water by following
pre-programmed or autonomous motion patterns. On the
other hand, UWSN only incurs a fraction of implementation
cost of UANET at the same network scale. All sensor nodes
in a UWSN are of low-cost [8].
247
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The advantages of the new UANET and UWSN paradigm
are:
• Localized and coordinated sensing and attacking is far
more precise than the existing remote telemetry technol-
ogy.
• Scalability of UWSN ensures that a large area can be
covered for time-critical applications.
• Casualty ratio is expected to be zero if unmanned UANET
and UWSN platforms are used.
• Implementing reusable underwater nodes reduces the de-
ployment and maintenance cost. Each underwater sensor
unit can be bundled with an electronically controlled
air bladder device. Once the network mission is accom-
plished, the command center issues commands to trigger
all air-bladder devices and all sensor units ﬂoat to surface
to be recollected for next mission [1].
VI. GAF PROTOCOL
When ad hoc networks are deployed using battery powered
sensor nodes, the effect of limited battery power on the lifetime
and performance becomes critical. In underwater applications,
it is vital to let every underwater node know its current position
and the synchronized time with respect to other coordinating
nodes. GAF protocol uses Global Positioning System (GPS) to
get the node location.As Global Positioning System (GPS) is
unavailable under the water surface as the high-frequency radio
waves used by Global Positioning System (GPS) is quickly
absorbed by water, hence cannot propagate deeply under
the water surface. Therefore, underwater networks rely on
Doppler Instrumentation or distributed GPS-free localization
and time synchronization schemes to let the sensor nodes know
their positions and the network clock value. In other words,
before the network can use geo-routing schemes, it needs a
multi-hop packet delivery service, which must be GPS-free.
Geographic adaptive ﬁdelity protocol is an energy effective
position based routing protocol. Position based protocols are
also referred to as geographic routing protocols as the sensor
nodes are addressed by means of their locations instead of the
information that they carry. Location information is needed in
order to calculate the distance between two particular nodes so
that energy consumption can be estimated. In GAF protocol,
each node uses location information to associate itself with
a virtual grid so that the entire area is divided into several
square grids, and the node with the highest residual energy
within each grid becomes the master of the grid. Only a single
node from a cell of a given virtual grid is chosen to be active
at any given time. The nodes will select one sensor node to
stay awake for a certain period of time which is responsible
for monitoring and reporting data to the sink on behalf of the
other nodes in the zone is known as the master node. Other
nodes in the same grid can be regarded as redundant with
respect to forwarding packets, and thus they can be safely put
to sleep without sacriﬁcing the routing ﬁdelity [3].
A. GAF Architectures
• Virtual Square Grids: In GAF, the entire network area is
divided into virtual square grids. All the nodes in the
network divide themselves in virtual square grids and
all those nodes which are under a same grid known as
equivalent nodes with respect to forwarding packets. The
nodes under a same grid coordinate among themselves
to decide the sleep time interval and sequence of sleep.
Load balancing is performed and a single node will not
get drained with a rigorous work.
Fig. 4.
GAF square grid structure
GAF algorithm can communicate directly to its adjacent
horizontal and vertical grid cells. But the diagonal cell
cannot be covered directly by virtual grid method due to
range limitations. For the diagonal cell, packets should
be transferred through vertical and horizontal cell which
cause the longer path else if a node tries to transmit
directly then the packet drop rate increases due to low
radio range. In the ﬁgure illustrating the virtual square
grid, the Node 1 is sending packets to Node 2. It can
take any route vertically and horizontally (see Fig. 4).
• Virtual Hexagon Grid: The hexagon GAF grid architec-
ture uses the hexagonal grid structure. In this, the square
grid in GAF is replaced with a hexagon mesh. Cell O
now has six neighbors covering destinations from all
directions. The hexagon architecture is named as GAF-
HEX (HGAF). A Hexagon cell in GAF-HEX is deﬁned
as, for two adjacent cell O and B, all nodes in cell O can
communicate with all nodes in cell B and vice versa. For
a cell O, all of its six adjacent cells are at the next hop,
they have the same maximum distance to cell O (see Fig.
5).
This is the scoring feature of hexagon mesh. In the square
grid architecture, there are eight neighboring cells (four
diagonal, two vertical and two horizontal cells) but only
four (vertical and horizontal two each) are at the next hop
distance while the hexagon cell covers all six possible
next hop cells with a single maximum distance due to
its symmetry property. Therefore all of the next hop cells
248
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 5.
GAF hexagon structure
for cell O are equally reachable.
GAF, the basis of HGAF, is an adaptive ﬁdelity algorithm in
which nodes working as cluster heads are selected in a dis-
tributed manner. GAF assumes that a large number of sensor
nodes are placed in the observation area. The fewest nodes in
the observation area are selected to transmit messages, while
the other nodes sleep. This way, GAF reduces the number of
nodes needed to form a network and saves node battery power.
GAF divides the observation area into square/hex areas and
groups nodes according to their position. In each group, one
active node is selected to work as the cluster head for routing
packets between groups. Other nodes sleep to save their battery
power. The selection of the active node in each group is done
in a distributed manner by referring to the remaining battery
power of each node [9].
Assume that the observation area is divided into squares with
r units on a side. We call each square a cell. Each node
decides which cell it belongs to according to its position.
One active node is selected in each cell. Thus, if we can
enlarge the cell size, we can reduce the number of active nodes
in the network and save even more battery power. However,
in enlarging the cell size, the communication between active
nodes in two adjacent cells must be guaranteed because active
nodes work as cluster heads. Therefore, the distance between
the two farthest nodes in any adjacent cell has to be smaller
than the radio communication range. The maximum cell area
SGAF is constrained by the maximum radio communication
range of sensor nodes R. The length of each cell r has to
satisfy the following condition:
r2 + (2r)2 ≤ R2
Thus, r ≤
R
√
5
The maximum cell area is thus
SGAF = (maxr2) = R2
5
In GAF, the nodes are in one of three states: sleeping,
discovery, or active. Nodes start out in the discovery state.
Fig. 6.
GAF virtual grid
One node in each group is selected as an active node, by
referring to the residual battery power of nodes in the group.
The active node in each group is changed dynamically as time
passes. When a node is in the discovery state, it turns on its
radio and broadcasts a discovery message to ﬁnd other nodes
within the same group. Each discovery message includes a
node ID, group ID, estimated node active time, and the node
state. Half of the estimated node active time is denoted by Ta.
When a node enters the discovery state, it sets a timer which
expires Td seconds later. When the timer goes off, the node
broadcasts a discovery message and becomes active. Then,
it sets a timeout value Ta that speciﬁes the length of time
in which it can stay active. After Ta, the node returns to the
discovery state. While in the active state, the node periodically
broadcasts its discovery message at intervals of Td. A node
in discovery or active states can change to the sleeping state
when it receives a discovery message.
• When a discovery node receives a discovery message, it
goes into the sleeping state.
• When an active node receives a discovery message, the
node compares its own expected lifetime with the one in
the discovery message. If the former is longer than the
latter, the node goes into the sleeping state.
A sleeping node wakes up after Ts seconds and goes back into
the discovery state. Ts is calculated from the estimated node
operation time of the current active node, which is written in
the received discovery messages [9].
VII. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
The general architecture of underwater sensor network
is reviewed before describing the speciﬁc applications. The
rough capabilities of a sensor node are estimated on its
interaction with the environment, other underwater nodes
and applications. At the lowest layer is the large number
of sensor nodes to be deployed on the sea ﬂoor which
has computing power, and storage capacity. They collect
information through their sensors and communicate with
other nodes through short-range acoustic communication.
In large networks, there exists a type of nodes, called
249
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 7.
GAF transition states
supernodes, having access to higher speed networks and
can relay data to the base station very effectively with
rich network connectivity creating multiple data collection
points. Battery power and the ability to carefully monitor
energy consumption are essential for the sensor node. All
components of the system operate at as low a duty cycle as
possible which is enabled by examining each layer of system
software to minimize energy consumption and in addition
nodes entirely shut off for very long periods of time, up
to hours or days during not in use. In a harsh, underwater
environment, some nodes will be lost over long deployments
due to ﬁshing trawlers and underwater life affecting cables
or node which needs redundancy in communication and
sensing as loss of a node will not have wider effects.
In addition, multiple failures can be recovered, either with
mobile nodes or with human deployment of replacements [11].
Fig. 8.
Logical diagram of System Architecture.
VIII. IMPLEMENTATION
Initially, the UWSNs and UANETs are deployed in
the ocean. Sensor nodes with limited battery power are
deployed to record the environmental changes underwater.
The recorded data is transferred to the surface of the earth
through the nearest access point, the base station ﬁxed to the
specially designed Kong Wobbler ﬂoating on the surface of
the water by the multi-hop network of sensor nodes which
results in energy savings and increased network capacity.
The base stations monitor the entire sensor nodes within
the network and receive as well as stores the recorded
sensor data within its area of range. These data are further
relayed to an onshore surface station via satellite transceiver.
Acoustic communication proves to be efﬁcient in data transfer
underwater from the sensor nodes to the base station. During
the process, the base station monitors the battery power
level of all the nodes. Upon receiving the request from
the nodes to recharge its batteries, the base station then
guides the submarines towards the requested nodes which is
continued with all the sensor modules deployed underwater.
The sub-marines would in turn charge themselves at the base
stations, which are installed with the solar panels. The power
required by the base station for the reception of the data from
the sensor modules and transmission is supplied by the solar
panels. Once the surface station has ﬁnished collecting data
from each sensor module, the processing and analysis of data
is performed to get the real-time study of the underwater
scenario. As the nodes have limited battery power, it is
essential to implement an energy efﬁcient routing protocol
that conserves power during transmission and reception of
data. Power failure of a node not only affects the node itself
but also its ability to forward packets on behalf of other nodes
and thus the overall network lifetime. GAF is an energy
efﬁcient routing protocol as the transmitting power is altered
according to the distance of the neighboring nodes. The ﬂow
chart explains the process undertaken in the investigation of
underwater environment.
Fig. 9.
Flow Chart of the system
The investigation of the underwater resources is thus col-
250
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

lected at real-time. Compilation of all the recorded sensor data
is done in the surface station which acts as the command center
and thus predicting the current scenario of the environment
underwater.
IX. SIMULATION AND RESULTS
Continuous network development and higher functionality
requirements have created the need for tools that could
monitor network transmissions and analyze them. Network
Simulator (NS) for communication networks works under
UNIX and Windows system platforms and is mainly used
for network research. The simulation is performed using NS2
(version 2.34) running on LINUX platform (Ubuntu 11.04).
The graphical representation of this simulation is shown with
Network Animator(NAM-1.14). 20 nodes are considered for
each Kong Wobbler base station on the surface of ocean bed.
The Kong Wobbler carrying base station act as the center
that monitors the entire sensor node within the network and
receives as well as stores the recorded sensor data. UANETs
along with Kong Wobbler structure is hand dropped by the
side of the ship. Kong Wobbler structure starts to ﬂoat on
the surface of the ocean and the UANETs start moving
randomly. The black ﬁxed nodes are anchored to the ocean
bed at speciﬁc co-ordinates (see Fig. 6). Some of the nodes
in UANET are mobile which are implemented by SAUV and
AUV or ROV, which are high cost robots that move under the
water by following pre-programmed or autonomous motion
patterns. And remaining nodes in UWSN are stationary,
mounted on the sea ﬂoor are with low or medium mobility
(3-5 knots) due to environmental water current. The trace ﬁle
and NAM ﬁle results provided by the NS2 gives enormous
amount of information. It speciﬁes position of the node,
number of nodes within the network of access point and
also visualizes in detail about the packet transmission among
the nodes and the Kong Wobbler carrying base station is
simulated. The red nodes represent nodes in UANET on the
ocean bed which are moving around collecting data. The
black nodes are ﬁxed nodes anchored to oceanic bed. The
blue node indicate the Kong Wobbler structure with base
station which covers the area under investigation.
Nodes discovering their themselves (Discovery State), (see
Fig. 10)
UANETs continue their random motion gathering data. Both
stationary UWSNs and mobile UANETs collect information
and relay it to base station which is carried by Kong Wobbler
structure (see Fig. 11). The acknowledgements are sent after
receiving the information.
NS simulation can produce a visualization ﬁle (NAM) and
an ascii ﬁle trace corresponding to the events generated in
the network. When tracing into an output ascii ﬁle, the trace
is organised into 12 ﬁelds as- Event/Time/From Node/To
Node/Pkt Type/Pkt Size/Flags/Fid/Source addr/Destination
addr/Sequence no/Pkt ID. The Traces are studied and infor-
mation is extracted from them to make Performance analysis.
Trace graph architecture enables implementing new system
Fig. 10.
Simulation in NS2
Fig. 11.
Simulation in NS2
functions very easy. For example adding a new graph can
take only 10 minutes. The system could be expanded to read
other trace ﬁle formats like real network traces, e.g., a trace
format converter could be created for conversion to Trace
graph format. Nodes movements with packets ﬂows 2D/3D
visualization could be added. More parameters from trace ﬁles
could be used for new graphs implementation; see snapshot
of our Trace ﬁle in Fig. 12.
Fig. 12.
Trace ﬁle
The investigation is carried out in two phases considering:
Packet Delivery Fraction (PDF): It is the ratio of the data
packets delivered to the destination to the total number of
251
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

packets generated by the Constant Bit Rate (CBR) source
1) First phase is with variation of the speed of the nodes
with PDF for AODV-GAF and DSDV-GAF is as shown
in Fig. 13.
Fig. 13.
Velocity v/s PDF
2) Second phase is the variation of simulation time with
PDF AODV-GAF and DSDV-GAF is as shown in Fig.
14.
Fig. 14.
Simulation Time v/s PDF
Inferring from the graphs, GAF implemented on AODV
protocol is more suitable for underwater environment than
DSDV-GAF.
X. CONCLUSION
This paper has summarized our ongoing research in un-
derwater sensor networks, including applications and research
challenges. It is explained that traditional approach to deploy
underwater sensors that record data during the monitoring
mission, then recovering the instruments is not a feasible
and the need of large-scale long-term and distributed infor-
mation collection networks for periodic oceanic monitoring
is essential. GAF (Graphical Adaptive Fidelity) protocol was
adopted as it proves to be an energy efﬁcient routing protocol.
It is also explained that acoustic communication is the most
versatile technique in underwater wireless communication.
The applications of UANET using SAUV and UWSN and
their reliability in implementing a localized, precise, and
large-scale networking efﬁciently than any existing small-
scale Underwater Acoustic Network (UAN) is described. The
main objective of the paper was to develop advanced com-
munication techniques for efﬁcient real-time investigation of
large uninhibited oceans. Development of underwater commu-
nication and networking for enhanced oceanic monitoring is
also essential for pollution monitoring, tactical surveillance,
exploration of natural undersea resources, predicting wave
tides and various applications.
REFERENCES
[1] Ian F. Akyildiz, Dario Pompili, and Tommaso Melodia, ”Challenges
for efﬁcient communication in underwater acoustic Sensor Networks”,
ACM SIGBED Review - Special issue on embedded sensor networks
and wireless computing, Homepage archive, vol. 1, issue 2, July 2004,
pp. 3-8. ACM New York, NY, USA , http://10.1145/1121776.1121779.
[2] Eitan Altnan and Tania Jinenez, ”NS simulator for beginners”, Lecture
notes 2003-2004.
[3] Swarnalatha Srinivas, Ranjitha P, R Ramya, and Narendra Kumar G,
”Energy efﬁcient investigation of oceanic environment using large-scale
UWSN and UANETs”, IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science
Issues, vol. 10, issue 1, no. 1, January 2013, pp. 566-573
[4] Robert H. Stewart, ”Introduction to physical oceanography”.
[5] Ian F. Akyildiz, Dario Pompili, and Tommaso Melodia, ”Underwa-
ter acoustic sensor networks: research challenges”, Telecommunica-
tions (ICT) 2010 IEEE 17th International Conference, pp. 257-279,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2005.01.004.
[6] James Jalbert, John Baker, John Duchesney, Paul Pietryka, William
Dalton Acoustikos Div. Falmouth Scientiﬁc, Inc., et al, ”Solar-Powered
Autonomous Underwater Vehicle Development”, supported by the Ofﬁce
of Naval Research under Contract # N00014-03-C-0109.
[7] Milica Stojanovic, ”Underwater acoustic communications: Design con-
siderations on the physical layer”, Wireless on Demand Network Sys-
tems and Services (WONS), 2008, Garmisch-Partenkirchen, pp. 1-10,
http://10.1109/WONS.2008.4459349.
[8] Jiejun Kong, Jun-hong Cui, Dapeng Wu, and Mario Gerla, ”Building
underwater Ad-hoc networks and sensor networks for large scale real-
time aquatic applications”, IEEE MILCOM, 2005, Atlantic City, NJ, vol.
3, pp. 1535-1541, http://10.1109/MILCOM.2005.1605894
[9] Tokuya Inagaki and Susumu Ishihara, ”HGAF: A power saving scheme
for Wireless Sensor Networks”, IPSJ Journal, vol. 50, no. 10, Oct 2009,
pp. 25202531.
[10] Jun-Hong Cui, Jiejun Kong, Mario Gerla, and Shengli Zhou, ”Chal-
lenges: Building scalable and distributed Underwater Wireless Sensor
Networks (UWSNs) for aquatic applications”, UCONN CSE Technical
Report: UbiNet-TR05-02, Last Update: September 2005, pp. 1-17.
[11] John Heidemann, Yuan Li, Affan Syed, Jack Wills, and Wei Ye,
”Underwater Sensor Networking: Research Challenges and Potential
Applications”, The IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference, Las Vegas, Nevad, USA, April 2006.
[12] Sudhakar Pillai M, Pranav P D, and Narendra Kumar G, ”MANET based
Dynamic Power Conscious emergency communication module”, 01/2011;
In proceeding of: LISS 2011 - Proceedings of the 1st International
Conference on Logistics, Informatics and Service Science, vol. 3, Beijing,
China, 8-11 June, 2011.
[13] Giuseppe Anastasi, Marco Conti, Mario Di Francesco, and Andrea
Passarella, ”Energy conservation in Wireless Sensor Networks: a Survey”.
[14] Robert Been, David T. Hughes, and Arjan Vermeij, ”Heterogeneous
underwater networks for ASW: technology and techniques”, UDT Europe,
Undersea Defence Technology Europe, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 10-12
June, 2008, pp. 1-17.
[15] Lanbo Liu, Shengli Zhou, and Jun-Hong Cui, ”Prospects and problems
of wireless communication for Underwater Sensor Networks”, Journal:
Wireless Communications & Mobile Computing - Underwater Sensor
Networks: Architectures and Protocols, pp. 1-25.
252
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[16] Raja Jurdak, Cristina Videira Lopes, and Pierre Baldi, ”Battery lifetime
estimation and optimization for Underwater Sensor Networks”, IEEE
Sensor Network Operations, IEEE Press, Winter 2004, pp. 1-25
[17] Sudhakar Pillai M, Pranav P Deshpande, Chetan B M, Smitha Shekar
B, and Narendra Kumar G, ”Efﬁcient performance Of MANETs in coal
mines”, Unpublished.
[18] Swarnalatha Srinivas, Ranjitha P, R Ramya, and Narendra Kumar G,
”Investigation of oceanic environment using large-scale UWSN and
UANETs”, The 8th International conference on Wireless Communica-
tions, Networking and mobile computing, Shanghai, China, sep 21-23,
2012, pp. 1-5, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WiCOM.2012.6478552.
253
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

