Stress Monitoring of Composites with Fe-based Amorphous Microwires
by Non-contact Magnetic Method
Margarita Churyukanova, Sergey Kaloshkin, Andrey
Bazlov
Institute of New Materials and Nanotechnologies
National University of Science and Technology “MISIS”
Moscow, Russia
e-mail: mch@misis.ru; kaloshkin@misis.ru;
bazlov@misis.ru
Valentina Zhukova,  Аrcady Zhukov 
Dept. Material Physics
UPV/EHU
San Sebastian, Spain
e-mail: arkadi.joukov@ehu.es;
valentina.zhukova@ehu.es
Dmitry Louzguine-Luzgin
WPI Advanced Institute for Materials Research
Tohoku University
Sendai, Japan
e-mail: dml@wpi-aimr.tohoku.ac.jp
Abstract - The deformation of amorphous materials causes a
change in their magnetic properties. If it occurs within the
elastic region, such changes are reversible and can be used to
control stresses. This applies both to the amorphous alloys
themselves and to composites with embedded amorphous
microwires. New experimental results on monitoring of the
applied tensile stresses in Fe-based amorphous microwires after
different regimes of treatment are presented. We investigated
the amplitude of the Electro-Motive Force (EMF) signal due to
the Barkhausen effect, the saturation magnetostriction and the
coercivity. We used a non-contact method for stress monitoring
of ferromagnetic microwires. It was found that the dependence
of the EMF signal on the axial tensile stress of microwire
exhibits a maximum. We observed a significant increase in the
maximum of the EMF signal for microwires after annealing
and its shift to higher tensile stresses. Using the obtained data,
we evaluated the possibility of stress monitoring in a composite
material containing such microwires.
Keywords-amorphous microwires; magnetic properties; stress
sensitivity; non-contact method.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Amorphous Fe-based microwires are attractive first of all
due
to
their
magnetic
bistability
and
Giant
MagnetoImpedance (GMI) effect, which is used as a contact
method of stress control in various magnetoelastic sensors
[1]-[3]. Additionally, their low dimensionality and excellent
mechanical properties are appropriate for the development of
composites with embedded microwires. In this case, the
microwires can be regarded as embedded sensors: their
impedance is sensitive to the wire magnetic structure and is
responsible for the appearance of a controlled microwave
dielectric response [4][5]. The stress-sensitive magnetic
properties of the amorphous ferromagnetic microwire have
also been used for stress control. This is due to the stress
dependence of the switching field that is determined to a
great extent by the value of the magnetostriction coefficient
of microwires [1]. During the magnetization reversal of the
ferromagnetic microwire, jumps in its magnetization (large
Barkhausen jumps) occur. They can be registered as the
electromotive force peaks depending on the magnetic field
[3]. The peak amplitude and the peak position are affected by
stress. Consequently, the stress state of the composite
material containing such microwires can be controlled by a
non-contact method.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, we present the experimental details. Section III contains
the results and discussion, and we conclude the work in
Section IV.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
In this work, we investigated the change in amplitude of
the electromotive force signal under tensile stress of Fe-
based amorphous microwires with different composition.
Under the influence of the external Alternating Current
(AC) magnetic field, generated by the magnetizing coil, the
EMF induction is produced in the pick-up coil. Pulses
associated with the motion of domain walls appear on the
main sinusoidal signal. For given amplitude and frequency of
magnetic field, the value of register signal depends on the
magnitude
of
the
mechanical
stresses
in
the
sample
(microwire or the composite). The value of magnetostriction
coefficient for as-prepared microwire was measured by a
small angle magnetization rotation method.
The tensile stress in the microwire was carried out using
a universal Zwick/Roell tensile machine with a high-
precision force transducer according to uniaxial stretching.
During the experiment, the pick-up coil was placed in the
vicinity of the testing sample.
For the stress monitoring of the composite material, a
ferromagnetic
microwire
was
introduced
into
it.
The
composite samples were made of carbon fiber impregnated
with
resin
and
the
ferromagnetic
microwire
was
implemented between the layers of prepregs. Afterwards, the
composite was compressed and cured under the pressure of
170 МPа at 115°C for 120 min. The composite samples for 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

the tensile tests had an in-plane size of 2x15 cm and a
thickness of 1-2 mm.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In the first step, the amplitude of the EMF signal of the
ferromagnetic
amorphous
microwires
with
a
different
composition and geometry was measured. We observed
sharp
EMF
peaks
associated
with
the
domain
wall
propagation under an action of the AC magnetic field on the
screen. The amplitude of the EMF signal at a given
frequency and amplitude of the external magnetic field was
proportional to the magnetic flux of the microwire. For the
as-prepared microwire, we measured the value of the
magnetostriction coefficient, λs, and found that the amplitude 
of
the
EMF
signal
grows
with
increasing
the
magnetostriction coefficient of the investigated microwires:
there is a correlation between the amplitude of EMF signal
and the magnetostriction coefficient of the investigated
microwires. This allowed us to choose the most suitable
microwire compositions.
In the second step, we measured the dependence of the
EMF voltage of the microwires on the tensile stress. For all
investigated microwires, the dependence of the EMF signal
on external stress presents a maximum at 60-120 MPa. This
peak may be associated with a change of the hysteresis loop
of the amorphous microwires under the stress, which must be
attributed to the influence of the applied stresses on the
velocity of the Domain Wall (DW) propagation and the
magnetostriction
coefficient.
The
magnetization
of
a
ferromagnetic material due to strain is known to be
proportional to the magnetostriction coefficient and the
initial
magnetic
permeability.
The
magnetostriction
coefficient of ferromagnetic amorphous microwires changes
with
stresses exhibiting a maximum and
their initial
magnetic permeability decreases because the domain wall
mobility decreases with the applied stresses. Thus, it can be
suggested that the observed dependence, which exhibits a
maximum, is most likely related to the stress dependences of
magnetization and magnetostriction.
After removing the glass coating, i.e., by reducing the
internal stresses, there is an increase in the magnitude of the
peak by 2 times. We also observed a shift of the EMF peak
toward higher values of tensile stresses. For the microwire
with removed glass coating, this maximum was observed up
to 300 MPa, whereas for the glass-coated microwire - only
up to 100 MPa.
In the case of the partially crystalline sample, the internal
stresses are smaller due to partial stress relaxation associated
with recrystallization of nanocrystalline materials. This
sample presents larger stress sensitivity of the EMF signal
due to a higher magnetic permeability of this sample. In
addition, the maximum EMF amplitude versus stress from
partially crystalline microwire is observed at higher stress
values.
This
can
be
explained
by
lower
values
of
magnetostriction in a partially crystalline microwire, which
leads to higher stress sensitivity for the partially crystalline
microwire as compared to the amorphous sample.
Annealing
of
the
Fe-rich
microwires
leads
to
improvement
of
magnetic
softness,
DW
velocity
and
mobility, and internal stresses relaxation. Owing to this, we
observed a significant increase in the maximum of the EMF
amplitude for microwires after annealing and its shift to
higher tensile stresses.
After the introduction of a microwire in the carbon
composite, the overall appearance of the dependence of EMF
on stress is maintained. The detected signal from a microwire
in the composite is proportional to its deformation. The
elastic modulus of the amorphous Fe-based alloy is about
120 GPa [6]. The measured value of elastic modulus for the
studied carbon composite is 54 GPa. This means that, for the
same strain, the microwire in the composite is exposed to
twice higher stress value than the composite matrix. This, at
first, reduces the range of possible stresses measured from
microwire embedded in the composite, and, secondly, leads
to the appearance of strong stresses at the interface between
the microwire and the composite matrix. The main cause of
the breakdown of the connection between the microwire and
the composite is the destruction of the glass coating. Low
limit of glass coating deformation becomes, therefore, an
obstacle to expanding the measuring range of mechanical
stresses in the composite.
IV.
CONCLUSION
The magnetic properties of a ferromagnetic microwire,
embedded in the composite matrix, depend on its stress-
strain state. This allows stress monitoring in composites by
non-contact induction method. Using a microwire without
glass coating as a stress-sensitive element, we can expand the
range of stress control in the composite material by this
method.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge the Russian Foundation for
Basic Research (Grant 16-53-48012) and the Ministry of
Education and Science of the Russian Federation in the
framework of Increase Competitiveness Program of NUST
«MISIS» (К2-2014-013 and К2-2017-089). 
REFERENCES
[1]
P. Aragoneses et al., “The Stress dependence of the switching
field in glass-coated amorphous microwires,” J. Phys. D:
Applied Phys. V.31, pp. 3040-3045,1998.
[2]
A. F. Cobeño, A. Zhukov, J. M. Blanco, V. Larin, and J.
Gonzalez,
“Magnetoelastic
sensor
based
on
GMI
of
amorphous microwire,” Sensors and Actuators A, v.91, pp.95-
98, 2001.
[3]
J. Olivera et al., “An Embedded Stress Sensor for Concrete
SHM Based on Amorphous Ferromagnetic Microwires,”
Sensors, v.14, pp. 19963-19978, 2014.
[4]
M. Ipatov, V. Zhukova, A. Zhukov, and L.V. Panina,
“Microwave Metamaterials Containing Magnetically Soft
Microwires,” Advances in Science and Technology, v.75, pp.
224-229, 2010.
[5]
F.X. Qin et al., “Effects of wire properties on the field-tunable
behaviour of continuous-microwire composites,” Sensors and
Actuators A, v. 178, pp.118– 125, 2012.
[6]
H. Chiriac, T.A. Ovari, and Gh. Pop, “Internal stress
distribution in glass-covered amorphous magnetic wires,”
Phys. Rev. B., v.42, 101- 105, 1995.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

