Performance Evaluation of High-Accuracy Time Synchronization Sensor Device 
Using Indoor GNSS Time Information Delivery System for Structural Health 
Monitoring of Buildings and Civil Infrastructures 
 
 
Narito Kurata 
Tsukuba University of Technology 
Tsukuba City, Ibaraki, Japan 
e-mail: kurata@home.email.ne.jp 
Tsutomu Sano, Makoto Ishii 
ENABLER Ltd. 
Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: t.sano@enabler.co.jp, ishii@enabler.co.jp 
Satoru Ishida, Masaki Tanaka 
Hitachi Industry & Control Solutions, Ltd. 
Taito-ku, Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: satoru.ishida.xr@hitachi.com, 
masaki.tanaka.hc@hitachi.com 
 
 
Abstract—The purpose of this research and development is to 
realize structural health monitoring for increased efficiency in 
the maintenance of buildings and civil infrastructures, and 
observations to prepare for natural disasters, such as 
earthquakes. The most difficult and interesting issue is the 
realization of inexpensive time-synchronized measurements. It 
is necessary to install numerous sensors in a building or civil 
infrastructure and to acquire measured data whose time 
synchronization is ensured. Although Global Navigation 
Satellite System (GNSS) time information is generally only 
available outdoors, the authors designed a system capable of 
using GNSS time information indoors. This system can deliver 
time information to a building by using existing TV coaxial 
cables. The authors further developed a sensor device able to 
receive indoor GNSS time information and to add high-
accuracy time information to measured data. This paper 
describes the development of a sensor device that adds high-
accuracy time information to measured data by using a system 
to deliver GNSS time information indoors. The performance of 
the developed sensor device equipped with a mechanism for 
receiving GNSS signal-based time information was verified 
from the results of a shaking table experiment. It was shown 
that it can be applied to structural health monitoring of 
buildings and civil infrastructure and seismic observation. 
Keywords; time synchronization; GNSS; structural health 
monitoring; earthquake observation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Japan has suffered serious damage from natural disasters,  
such as the Great Hanshin Earthquake and the Great East 
Japan Earthquake. While technologies are being developed 
to reduce damage at the time of a disaster, one of the most 
important issue to be addressed is the automation of 
operations, such as the structural health evaluation of 
buildings and civil infrastructures after earthquakes, and 
assessments of damage situation of cities. Because structures,  
such as houses and other buildings and infrastructures, such 
as expressways and bridges have deteriorated over time, the 
automation of inspection for their maintenance is an urgent 
social issue. To automate such inspection and error detection, 
data collection is required, using sensors. In order to analyze 
the data collected by the sensors and so evaluate the 
structural health of buildings and civil infrastructures, time 
synchronization between the sensors must be ensured. 
In general, dedicated wiring or a wired or wireless 
network is used to ensure time synchronization for the 
sensors installed in a building or other structure. Installing 
wiring over multiple stories of a building is neither easy nor 
cheap. Because space for wiring and locations for sensors are 
limited, it is virtually impossible to install sensors in 
arbitrary locations inside a building. When a wireless 
network is used, wiring is no longer required. The 
application of a wireless network is therefore being 
anticipated 
now. 
Applying 
wireless 
sensor 
network 
technology, the authors developed a sensor device 
specifically for structural health monitoring and earthquake 
observations, and verified its performance in a skyscraper [1] 
–[3]. 
In 
a 
wireless 
sensor 
network 
system, 
time 
synchronization was realized through the transmission and 
reception of wireless packets between sensors [3]. However, 
with wireless sensor network technology, it is impossible to 
cover every floor of a skyscraper, or a long structure, such as 
a bridge, or an extensive area of a city. 
Despite these limitations, the problem can be solved 
fundamentally if the sensors installed in various locations 
can autonomously hold accurate time information. Using a 
clock of ultra-high accuracy, namely a Chip Scale Atomic 
Clock (CSAC) [4]–[6], whose delay time is radically short 
compared to other devices, such as crystal resonators, a 
prototype was manufactured of a sensor device that 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

autonomously holds accurate time information [7][8]. 
Improvements 
were 
then 
made 
to 
develop 
and 
commercialize the prototype, and a sensor device for 
practical use was developed [9]. In order to apply the 
developed sensor device to earthquake observations, a logic 
was implemented to detect the occurrence of an earthquake 
and store data of an earthquake event only. The functioning 
of the logic was checked by a shaking table experiment [10] 
and the logic was applied to an actual building [11]. The 
sensor device’s ability to autonomously hold accurate time 
information was confirmed, and it was shown that it could be 
applied to such operations as structural health monitoring 
and 
earthquake 
observations. 
Autonomous 
time 
synchronization sensing using CSAC is the most effective 
method. In addition, research into and development of a 
miniature and inexpensive CSAC is underway, and it is 
expected that a CSAC that can be mounted in a smart phone 
will be realized. However, the CSAC available at present is 
quite expensive, which hinders its widespread use. 
For a device, such as a sensor to acquire high-accuracy 
time information, a Global Navigation Satellite System 
(GNSS) can be used. A GNSS, such as the Global 
Positioning System (GPS), Global Navigation Satellite 
System (GLONASS), or Galileo Satellite Navigation 
Network (Galileo), measures positions and delivers time 
information by using signals emitted by satellites. A sensor 
with a mechanism capable of receiving GNSS signals can 
add high-accuracy time information to measured data. 
However, GNSS signals are available only in outdoor places 
where satellites are not blocked from view. Sensors installed 
inside a building cannot use GNSS signals. For that reason, 
the authors designed a system in which signals acquired from 
an antenna installed on the roof of a building are delivered 
indoors; GNSS signals can then be used indoors as well as 
outdoors. The authors also developed a sensor device able to 
receive indoor GNSS signals, and equipped it with a Micro 
Electro Mechanical System (MEMS) acceleration sensor.  
In Section II of this paper, previous researches into time 
synchronization methods are described, to show the 
originality of this research. Section III describes the system 
for delivering GNSS signals indoors. Section IV describes in 
detail the development of a sensor device with a mechanism 
for receiving GNSS signal-based time information. Section 
V describes a shaking table experiment conducted to check 
the performance of the developed sensor device, and shows 
that good acceleration measurement and high-accuracy time 
synchronization between sensors could be realized. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
A time synchronization function must be provided to 
sensor devices to be used in the structural health monitoring 
of buildings and civil infrastructure, or for earthquake 
observations. If time-synchronized data sets are not acquired, 
time series analysis using phase information cannot be 
performed. For example, it will then not be possible to 
perform a mode analysis of a structure, or analysis for 
structural health evaluation, or a wave propagation analysis 
of seismic waves traveling through the Earth’s layers. Many 
previous 
studies 
have 
been 
conducted 
of 
time 
synchronization sensing, such as the use of GNSS signals 
using satellites, and the Network Time Protocol (NTP) 
intended for time synchronization on the Internet [12]. In 
addition, as a technology for realizing high-accuracy time 
synchronization indoors, there is the IEEE 1588 Precision 
Time Protocol (PTP). In PTP, with an Ethernet cable used 
for a common Local Area Network (LAN) and others set as a 
transmission path, a synchronization accuracy is realized of 
one microsecond or less, using time packets. However, when 
affected by fluctuations of packet delay or by packet loss due 
to congestion in a LAN, PTP has difficulty in providing a 
stable synchronization accuracy. PTP also faces multiple 
other problems due to the amount of delay being corrected 
by exchanging packets, such as the limited number of PTP 
devices that can be connected to the master station, and PTP 
not being deployable under a Wide Area Network (WAN), in 
which the amount of delay fluctuates greatly. Some studies 
realized time synchronization by making use of the wireless 
sensor network characteristic of small propagation delay. For 
example, time synchronization protocols, such as Reference 
Broadcast Synchronization (RBS), Timing-sync Protocol for 
Sensor 
Networks 
(TPSN), 
and 
Flooding 
Time 
Synchronization Protocol (FTSP) are being studied [13]–[15]. 
Although these technologies are used for many purposes, 
they are not the most appropriate method for sensor devices 
used to monitor the structural health of buildings and civil 
infrastructures, or earthquake observations. To be specific, as 
mentioned previously, GNSS signals can be used outdoors 
only, and the NTP’s time synchronization accuracy is not 
adequate. A time synchronization method using wireless 
technology is highly convenient, but does not guarantee that 
wireless communication is always possible. In particular, if 
wireless communication ceases when an earthquake occurs, 
it becomes impossible to perform sensing with time 
synchronization ensured. 
In this research, the authors developed a sensor device 
that retains accurate time information, based on a system 
capable of using GNSS signals indoors. Even when a huge 
number of sensors are installed in a building, provided 
accurate time information can be added to data measured by 
each sensor based on indoor GNSS signals, time 
synchronization between sensor data can be ensured simply 
by collecting data by any method and sorting it by using the 
time information. Data sets whose time synchronization is 
ensured by the sensor device developed in this research can 
be used for analysis of the structural health of buildings and 
civil infrastructures, or the earthquake observation. 
III. 
INDOOR GNSS TIME INFORMATION DELIVERY 
SYSTEM 
Time synchronization using GNSS, of high accuracy and 
over a vast area, is widely used in mobile communications. 
For positioning by GNSS, clock synchronization between 
GNSS satellites and a GNSS receiver is required, which 
makes it possible to measure the distance between each 
satellite and a receiver. In other words, positioning using 
GNSS is realized by highly accurate synchronizing of the 
controlled atomic clocks mounted in each artificial satellite 
orbiting the Earth and the clock of a GNSS receiver on the 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

ground. First, the distance (pseudo-distance) between each 
satellite and the relevant receiver is measured. A pseudo-
distance can be obtained by measuring the difference 
between the time a signal departs from each satellite and the 
time the receiver receives it. An atomic clock is mounted on 
the GNSS satellite side, so that the time of day is always kept 
with high accuracy. The clock of the GNSS receiver is 
inexpensive, and is synchronized with the satellite time. 
After the clock synchronization is completed, the use of only 
one satellite is sufficient for acquiring the time. From the 
GNSS receiver, Pulse Per Second (PPS) signals are output 
based on the timing of satellite synchronization. 
In an environment where GNSS signals can be received, 
the GNSS receiver can perform high-accuracy time 
synchronization and positioning, but cannot be used in an 
indoor area where GNSS signals cannot be delivered. The 
authors designed an indoor GNSS time information delivery 
system that realizes high-accuracy time synchronization by 
delivering GNSS signals indoors. Specifically, GNSS signals 
are received on the roof of a building, and delivered as 
broadcasting into the building by using the transmission path 
of an existing system, such as a common antenna TV system 
or cable TV system. A transmitter is installed at any location 
from which the delivery of GNSS signals into the building is 
desired, and the signals are sent. The GNSS receiver 
receiving these signals reads position and time information 
and outputs high-accuracy synchronization signals (PPS 
signals). By mounting a GNSS receiver on each sensor 
device and implementing a mechanism to add high-accuracy 
time stamps to measured data, it becomes possible to collect 
data sets whose high-accuracy time synchronization is 
ensured from indoors. Measured data with accurate time 
stamps added can be grouped into data sets whose time 
synchronization is ensured simply by collecting data by any 
method, such as 3G, 4G, 5G, Wi-Fi, and Ethernet. 
The transmission path of a CATV system or cable TV 
system in a building is used to deliver indoors high-accuracy 
times synchronized with GNSS satellites. As shown in 
Figure 1, an indoor GNSS time information delivery system 
consists of D1 on the roof, D2 inside the building, and D3 at 
the terminal (a transmitter for delivering GNSS time 
information indoors). D1 shown in Figure 1 receives a signal 
from 
the 
GNSS 
satellite, 
frequency-converts 
the 
synchronized time signal, and transmits it into the building. 
D2 receives time signals from D1 and demodulates them into 
high-accuracy time synchronization signals (PPS signals). 
D3 receives data from D2, adjusts the timing, and sends time 
information to a sensor device. Time information sent from 
D3 is received by a sensor device to add high-accuracy time 
information to measured data. By using a hub, it is possible 
to connect multiple D3s under D2. In addition, by 
incorporating the transmission function of D3 into D2, space 
can be saved. 
IV. 
DEVELOPMENT OF SENSER DEVICE ABLE TO RECEIVE 
INDOOR GNSS SIGNALS 
Structural health monitoring of buildings and civil 
infrastructure is evaluated by analyzing acceleration data 
from sensor devices that ensure time synchronization. 
Structural health and damage after an earthquake can be 
detected by analyzing changes in the natural frequency of the 
structure and inter-story deformation of the building. A 
sensor device normally consists of components, such as a 
CPU that controls measurement, an analog sensor, analog 
filter, A/D converter, memory, and network interface. In this 
development, to reduce the risk that noise will enter during 
measurement, a sensor device was developed with a digital 
sensor mounted on it instead of an analog sensor. Tables I 
and II show the specifications of the sensor device and the 
mounted digital three-axis MEMS acceleration sensor, 
respectively. The acceleration sensor is a low-noise and low 
power consumption type, capable of high-resolution 
vibration measurement. Furthermore, minimal offset drift 
over temperature, and long-term stability enabling precision 
applications with minimal calibration are provided.  
 
D1
Indoor
GNSS
Antenna
GPS
QZSS
Outdoor
Coaxial
cable 
D2
D3
D3
D3
TV outlet 
Hub
D2
D3
D3
D3
TV outlet 
Hub
D2
D3
D3
D3
TV outlet 
Hub
Floor / Rooms
Sensors
 
 
Figure 1. System configuration. 
TABLE I.  
SPECIFICATION OF SENSOR DEVICE 
GNSS module 
FURUNO/GF-8801 
Frequency 
1555.983-1610.202 MHz 
Center frequency 
1597.926 MHz 
FGGA/CPU 
Zynq2 (CPU Dual-core ARM Cortex-A9) 
RAM 
SDRAM 512Mbyte 
ROM 
Serial-FLASH 128Mbyte×２ 
Power supply 
14 W (Typ.) 
Size 
102（W）× 172.5（D）× 40（H） 
Weight 
1.65 kg 
TABLE II.  
SPECIFICATION OF MEMS ACCELERATION SENSOR 
Model 
ADXL355 
Measurement direction 
3 
Maximum acceleration (± G) 
2 
Outside dimensions (mm) 
6 × 6 × 2.1 
Consumption current (µA) 
200 
Stand-by power consumption (µA) 
21 
Sensitivity 
256,000 LSB/G ± 8% 
Noise characteristics 
22.5 μG/√Hz 
ADC Resolution 
20 Bits 
Operating temperature Range (°C) 
-40 - +125 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

A crystal oscillator is used for the CPU of the general 
sensor device. However, when an attempt is made to receive 
indoor GNSS signals and perform measurement while 
correcting the time information of the CPU, a delay occurs 
because the clock accuracy is too high. Therefore, in order to 
add GNSS signal-based time information directly to data 
measured by a sensor through hardware, the authors 
developed a mechanism equipped with a dedicated integrated 
circuit, a Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA), to 
manufacture a sensor device. Because an FPGA is 
programmable, it is also possible to embed logic for an 
operation, such as earthquake detection using measured data, 
while adding GNSS signal-based time information to 
measured data.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Sensor device. 
 
GNSS module
Accelerometer
Thermometer
Gyroscope
Barometer
Thermistor
Geomagnetic Sensor
Sensor group
Wi-Fi
FPGA/CPU
Power 
Module
PC
LEDs
Power
(12V)
EEPROM
64KB
FLASH
128MB
FLASH
128MB
UART
→USB
x 2
1PPS
Debug
Port /
DIP SW
BLE
Ambient Light Sensor
DDR3
512MB
USB
PHY
GNSS
Antenna
GPS
QZSS
Indoor 
GNSS
or
I/O
Port
ADC
MEMS Accelerometer 
ADXL355
1PPS
Test 
point
 
 
Figure 3. Hardware block diagram. 
 
The sensor device consists of such components as a 
GNSS receiver, FPGA, CPU, memory, local storage, and 
network interface. The FPGA controls the sensor’s 
measurement while generating time stamps using GNSS 
signal-based ultra-high accuracy time information. Measured 
data is stored in the memory, then sent to the network via 
Ethernet or wireless communication. Data can be collected 
using a wired or wireless method. Figures. 2 and 3 show 
details of the sensor device. 
V. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF THE SENSOR DEVICE 
ABLE TO RECEIVE INDOOR GNSS TIME INFORMATION 
A shaking table experiment was conducted to evaluate 
the measurement performance and time synchronization 
performance of the sensor device developed in Section IV. 
During the shaking table experiment, measurement was 
performed with the digital three-axis MEMS acceleration 
sensor incorporated in each sensor device. Figure 4 gives an 
overall view of the experiment system. A red circle indicates 
the indoor GNSS time information delivery system, a yellow 
circle indicates the sensor device and shaking table, and a 
blue circle indicates the shaking table control system. As 
shown in Figure 5, the indoor GNSS time information 
delivery system consists of D1, D2, and D3. As shown in 
Section III, D1 receives a signal from the GNSS satellites 
and frequency-converts the synchronized time signal and 
sends it into the building. Since the purpose of this 
experiment was to evaluate the performance of the sensor 
device, the GNSS satellite was not used, and the time signal 
was generated by the GNSS simulator and input to D1. D2 
receives time signals from D1 and demodulates them into 
high-accuracy synchronization signals (PPS signals). D3 
receives data from D2, adjusts the timing, and sends time 
information to the sensor device via the antenna in Figure 4. 
The sensor device receives time information sent from D3 
and adds high-accuracy time information to measured data. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Overall View of Experimental System. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Indoor GNSS Time Information Delivery System. 
Antenna of D3 
Indoor GNSS 
time information 
delivery system 
Antenna of 
sensor device 
#1 and #2 
Sensor device 
#1 and #2 
Shaking table 
control system 
D3 
D2 
D1 
GNSS 
simulator 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

A. Sweep Input Experiment 
As shown in Figure 6, two sensor devices and a servo 
acceleration sensor for comparison were fixed to the shaking 
table, and the same vibration was applied to compare the 
results of measurement. The natural frequencies of houses, 
small buildings, and skyscrapers range from 0.1Hz to 10Hz. 
In addition, the dominant frequency of seismic motion has a 
similar frequency component. Therefore, the frequency band 
from 0.1 Hz to 10 Hz was used as the test target. Two types 
of input waves were prepared to vibrate with a large 
acceleration amplitude in each frequency band. In the 
experiment, 0.1–2.0 Hz and 2–10 Hz swept sine waves 
(Figure 7) were set as input waves to vibrate the shaking 
table. The measurement sampling frequency for each sensor 
device was set to 100 Hz. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Sensor Device and Shaking Table. 
 
Vibrations were applied to the horizontal direction of 
sensor device # 1 and the vertical direction of sensor device # 
2, and measurements were taken with the sensor device and 
the servo-type acceleration sensor for comparison. Figure 8 
shows the results of Fourier amplitude spectrum ratios 
calculated for acceleration waveforms measured by the 
sensor device #1 and the servo acceleration sensor. 
Compared to the servo acceleration sensor, the amplitude of 
the sensor device #1 was flat in the 0.1–2.0 Hz and 2–10 Hz 
bands, showing that the MEMS digital acceleration sensor 
mounted in the sensor module has good performance in 
terms of components in the horizontal direction. Figure 9 
shows the results of Fourier phase spectrum ratios calculated 
for the acceleration waveforms of sensor devices #1 and #2 
on the shaking table. If there is no phase delay between the 
sensor devices, and if time synchronization is ensured, the 
Fourier phase spectrum ratio must be near zero in all 
vibration frequency bands. In the figure, phase delays within 
0.001 seconds are plotted in dotted lines. It can be seen that 
time synchronization within 0.001 seconds could be realized 
between the sensor modules. 
 
200
400
600
800
Time(sec)
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
Acceleration(cm/sec2)
 
(a) 0.1-2.0 Hz 
100
200
300
400
500
Time(sec)
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
Acceleration(cm/sec2)
 
(b) 2.0-10Hz 
 
Figure 7. Input Swept Sine Waves. 
0.5
1
1.5
2
Frequency(Hz)
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Amplitude ratio
 
(a) 0.1-2.0 Hz sweep 
2
4
6
8
10
Frequency(Hz)
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Amplitude ratio
 
(b) 2.0-10Hz sweep 
 
Figure 8. Fourier Amplitude Spectrum Ratios of Sensor Device #1 
Compared to Servo Acceleration Sensor. 
 
Sensor device #1 
Sensor device #2 
Servo acceleration 
sensor 
Vibration  direction 
Input Swept Sine Wave (0.1-2.0Hz) 
Input Swept Sine Wave (2.0-10Hz) 
Fourier Amplitude Spectrum Ratio 
Fourier Amplitude Spectrum Ratio 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

0.5
1
1.5
2
Frequency(Hz)
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Phase lag(degree)
 
(a) 0.1-2.0 Hz sweep 
2
4
6
8
10
Frequency(Hz)
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Phase lag(degree)
 
(b) 2.0-10Hz sweep 
 
Figure 9. Fourier Phase Spectrum Ratios of Sensor Device #2 Against 
Sensor Device #1. 
B. Seismic Wave Input Experiment 
In order to evaluate the measurement performance and 
time synchronization performance when inputting seismic 
waves containing random vibration frequency components, 
the shaking table was operated using seismic records 
measured at the Kobe Local Meteorological Office during 
the Great Hanshin Earthquake. Figure 10 shows the 
measured time-history waveforms of the horizontal sensor 
device # 1, the vertical sensor device # 2, and the servo 
accelerometer for comparison.  
 
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
Time(sec)
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
Acceleration(cm/sec2)
Servo Acceleration Sensor
Sensor Device #1
Sensor Device #2
 
Figure 10. Seismic Wave Input Experiment. 
 
The results in the three cases matched, confirming that 
the developed sensor device has a good measurement 
performance, equivalent to that of the servo acceleration 
sensor, and that time synchronization between two sensor 
devices was ensured. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
For the purpose of application to the structural health 
monitoring of buildings and civil infrastructures, or to 
earthquake observations, this paper reported a sensor device 
that adds high-accuracy time information to measured data 
by using a system to deliver indoor Global Navigation 
Satellite System (GNSS) time information.  A system for 
delivering GNSS time information indoors was described 
first. The development of a sensor device with a mechanism 
for receiving GNSS signal-based time information was then 
explained in detail. The results of a shaking table experiment 
conducted to evaluate the basic performance of the sensor 
device were presented. From the results mentioned above, 
the measurement performance and time synchronization 
function of the developed sensor device were verified, to 
show that it could be applied to such automatic operations as 
structural health monitoring of buildings and civil 
infrastructures and earthquake observations. Verification 
using an actual building is now scheduled to be carried out. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by JSPS 
KAKENHI Grant Number JP16K01283 and JP19K04963. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Kurata, M. Suzuki, S. Saruwatari, and H. Morikawa, 
“Actual Application of Ubiquitous Structural Monitoring 
System using Wireless Sensor Networks” The 14th World 
Conference on Earthquake Engineering (14WCEE) IAEE, 
Oct. 2008, pp. 1-8, Paper ID:11-0037. 
[2] N. Kurata, M. Suzuki, S. Saruwatari, and H. Morikawa, 
“Application of Ubiquitous Structural Monitoring System by 
Wireless Sensor Networks to Actual High-rise Building” The 
5th World Conference on Structural Control and Monitoring 
(5WCSCM) IASCM, July 2010, pp. 1-9, Paper No. 013. 
[3] M. Maroti, B. Kusy, G. Simon, and A. Ledeczi, “The 
Flooding 
Time 
Synchronization 
Protocol” 
The 
2nd 
International Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor 
Systems (SenSys '04) ACM, Nov. 2004, pp. 39-49, ISBN:1-
58113-879-2. 
[4] D. L. Mills, “Internet time synchronization: the network time 
protocol,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 39, 
Issue 10, pp. 1482-1493, Oct. 1991, doi:10.1109/26.103043. 
[5] B. W. Parkinson, and J. J. Spilker Jr. eds, Global Positioning 
System: Theory and Applications, Vol. I & II. American 
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), 1996, 
ISBN: 978-1-56347-106-3. 
[6] S. Knappe, et al., “A microfabricated atomic clock,” Applied 
Physics Letters, vol. 85, Issue 9, pp. 1460-1462, August 2004, 
doi:10.1063/1.1787942. 
[7] Q. Li, and D. Rus, “Global Clock Synchronization in Sensor 
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 55, Issue 2, 
pp. 214-226, Jan. 2006, ISSN: 0018-9340. 
[8] R. Lutwak, et al., “The Chip-Scale Atomic Clock - Prototype 
Evaluation” The 39th Annual Precise Time and Time Interval 
(PTTI) Meeting ION, Nov. 2007, pp. 269-290, ISSN: 2333-
2069. 
0.001 seconds 
-0.001 seconds 
0.001 seconds 
-0.001 seconds 
Fourier Phase Spectrum Ratio 
Fourier Phase Spectrum Ratio 
・ Servo Acceleration Sensor 
・ Sensor Device #1 
・ Sensor Device #2 
 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[9] N. Kurata, “Disaster Big Data Infrastructure using Sensing 
Technology with a Chip Scale Atomic Clock” World 
Engineering Conference and Convention (WECC2015) 
WFEO, Dec. 2015, pp. 1-5. 
[10] N. 
Kurata, 
“Basic 
Study 
of 
Autonomous 
Time 
Synchronization Sensing Technology Using Chip Scale 
Atomic Clock” The 16th International Conference on 
Computing in Civil and Building Engineering (ICCCBE2016) 
ISCCBE, July 2016, pp. 67-74. 
[11] N. Kurata, “An Autonomous Time Synchronization Sensor 
Device Using a Chip Scale Atomic Clock for Earthquake 
Observation and Structural Health Monitoring” The Eighth 
International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and 
Applications (SENSORDEVICES 2017) IARIA, Sept. 2017, 
pp.31-36, ISSN: 2308-3514, ISBN: 978-1-61208-581-4. 
[12] N. Kurata, “Improvement and Application of Sensor Device 
Capable 
of 
Autonomously 
Keeping 
Accurate 
Time 
Information for Buildings and Civil Infrastructures” The 
Ninth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Sensor 
Device 
Technologies and Applications (SENSORDEVICES 2018) 
IARIA, Sept. 2018, pp. 114-120, ISSN: 2308-3514, ISBN: 
978-1-61208-660-6. 
[13] J. Elson, L. Girod, and D. Estrin, “Fine-Grained Network 
Time Synchronization using Reference Broadcasts” The 5th 
Symposium 
on 
Operating 
Systems 
Design 
and 
Implementation (OSDI’02) ACM, Dec. 2002, pp. 147-163. 
[14] S. Ganeriwal, R. Kumar, and M. B. Srivastava, “Timing-sync 
Protocol for Sensor Networks” The 1st international 
conference on Embedded networked sensor systems (SenSys 
'03) ACM, Nov. 2003, pp. 138-149. 
[15] K. Romer, “Time Synchronization in Ad Hoc Networks” The 
2nd ACM International Symp. on Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networking & Computing (MobiHoc’01) ACM, Oct. 2001, 
pp. 173-182. 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

