Rapid Fabrication Approach of Graphene Sensor for Biological Application
Idris Musa and John Hedley
School of Engineering, Newcastle University,
Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK
Email: i.musa@newcastle.ac.uk, john.hedley@newcastle.ac.uk
Abstract- In this work, we show that sensitive sensing
platforms can be derived from the laser irradiation of a
non-conducting and flexible material using a laser
machine, which can then be used to implement the
sensing element of a biosensor to detect and determine
the concentration of the target analyte. The aim is to
investigate and develop new ways of producing an
inexpensive Graphene sensor, implemented as a Radio
Frequency (RF) filter for biological application. A
Graphene-like material can be produced by the laser
irradiation (Laserscribe) of Kapton tape in the form of a
filter. The fabrication of this designed filter geometry
was achieved by using a laser machine to irradiate the
Kapton tape on the chosen substrate (Flame Retardant 4
(FR-4)), by applying the earlier obtained parameters for
the fabrication. Several power ratings were used for
their fabrication and their conductivity was found to
range from 171 x10-6 S/mm to 279 x10-6 S/mm. The
ANSYS (Analysis of System) simulation indicates good
results, and options to enhance the material property are
also being reviewed. Tests are currently on the way to
using a Vector Network Analyser (VNA) to verifying
their viability of being employed as the sensing element
of
a
biosensor,
thereby
leading
to
their
potential
application in biological sensing.
Keywords-Laserscribe; Graphene; Biosensor; Radio
Frequency filter; Kapton tape.
I.
INTRODUCTION
There is a need in the medical diagnostics for accurate,
fast and inexpensive devices, which can be routinely used.
In this context, biosensors are considered to provide a viable
solution to the problems posed by the contemporary
healthcare industry. This is because these sensing devices
offer considerable advantages such as: specificity, small
size, faster response than laboratory test and cost. These
cost-effective, practical, portable, and robust diagnostic
devices have received significant interest since there is an
important
need
for
bio-devices
that
can
rapidly and
precisely analyse biological samples. Diverse ranges of
chemicals, biochemical and biological analytes have been
detected using sensors made form carbon materials. The
electron transfer rate and the performance of these devices
are significantly affected by the structure of the carbon
material itself. This is due mainly to the electronic states
density, and the edge plane site obtainable on the carbon
material surface [1][2]. There has been previous work on
Laserscribe Graphene Oxide (LSG) like in [1], where
Graphene Oxide (GO) film was used to produce LSG
electrode, using lightscribe Digital Versatile Disc (DVD)
label writing technology, which allows for direct laser
writing of the DVD on the GO. Tian et al. fabricated a
flexible strain sensor using a light scribed DVD burner to
reduce GO film, they achieved a flexible Graphene strain
sensor with a low Gauge Factor (GF) for high a deformation
application, and a high GF for a low strain sensing
application [3].
The
shortage
of
Graphene
growth
and
patterning
techniques
has
become
a
serious
issue
affecting
its
deployment
in
several
specialised
applications
[3].
Graphene, through synthesis and engineering design, can
possess 3-dimensional (3D) structures and porosity, earning
them wide range of applications like: composite filter,
disposable electronics, energy storage devices and flexible
electronics [4]-[6]. In spite of these merits, the current
synthesis
method
of
porous
Graphene
requires
high
temperature processing of multi-stepped chemical synthesis
routes,
thereby
limiting
their
widespread
commercial
applications [4]. Therefore, straightforward synthesis of
Graphene based materials in a scalable manner is still an
important technological goal in achieving commercialised
applications for Graphene material especially in the field of
biochemical and biological applications [4]. Glassy carbon
has been produced from insulating Polyimide (PI) through
pulse
ultraviolet
laser
treatment
[4][7],
and
microsupercapacitor
was
produced
from
commercial
polymer film using CO2 infrared laser [4].
However,
the
technique
of
laser
scribing
for
the
fabrication of an RF low pass filter microstrip transmission
line has hitherto not been demonstrated. In this work, we
show the production of a microstrip filter made of a
Graphene-like material from a non-conducting film by laser
reduction technique, which has indicated a vista in the
biological sensing application of LSG. Maher et al. used a
standard light scribe DVD optical drive to do direct laser
reduction of graphite Oxide film to Graphene [8]. Their
mechanical strength, electrical conductivity and specific
surface area indicated good results, which was then used
directly as electrochemical capacitor electrodes, where
devices made from these electrodes indicates high energy
density values in different electrolytes, while maintaining
good electrochemical attributes under high mechanical
stress, making them a good contender for high power
flexible electronics [8]. All these previous works have
shown the viability of an LSG material in biological and
electrochemical applications, hence, the need to develop
cheaper and easily fabricated means of deriving a suitable
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

sensing platform from LSG material. Since the material for
implementing a sensing platform is determined, the next is
to look at the shape this sensing platform should take.
There is an increase in demand for microwave systems
to meet the emerging telecommunication challenges with
respect to cost, size and performance [9]. This work
describes the design of a microstrip filter for biological
application. Microstrip is an electrical transmission line
which can be fabricated using a Printed Circuit Board (PCB)
technology, employed to carry microwave frequency signal
[9]. It comprises a conducting strip separated form a ground
plane by a dielectric substrate and it much cheaper than the
traditional waveguide technology [9]. This microstrip will
be designed in the form of a filter. Since filters are crucial
components in microwave communication systems and RF
circuits, they are used to either combine or separate the
selected frequencies in the band, to fulfil the required
specification [10].
Microstrip line is a good technique for filter design due
to its benefits of low cost, light weight, compact size, planar
structure and its ease of integration with other component on
a single board [11]. By extension microwave filters can be
divided in to two different types; the lumped element,
consisting of capacitors and inductors and the distributed
element which used lengths and widths of transmission lines
to create their inductance or capacitance value [11][12],
resulting in an Inductor Capacitor (LC) ladder type stepped
impedance Low Pass (LP) microstrip Filter if a LPF was the
design intension [13]. The structure of this work is as
follows. Section II deals with the microstrip mathematical
design, while Section III deals with the experimental
techniques. In Section IV, the results were illustrated, and
the Section V handles the discussion and conclusion.
II. DESIGN METHODS
A.
Microstrip Transmission Line Design
Several different equations have been developed for use
in determining the characteristic impedance for microstrip
design. Probably the most convenient are the following
which are stated to be accurate to within about 1% [13]. A
simple but accurate equation for microstrip characteristic
Impedance is shown below with Figure 1 being the
microstrip arrangement [14]:
ܼ0 =
଺଴
√ఌ௘௙௙ ቄ݈݋݃ ቀ8
௛
௪ +
௪
ସ௛ቁቅ
(1)
where the effective dielectric constant is given by (2) as:
ߝ݂݂݁=
ఌ௥ାଵ
ଶ
+
ఌ௥ିଵ
ଶ
ቊቀ1 + 12
௛
ଶ௪ቁ
ିଵ ଶ
ൗ
 + 0.04 ቀ1 −
௪
௛ቁ
ଶ
ቋ 
(2)
while (3) and (4) are for whenݓ/ℎ≥1  
ܼ0 =
ଵଶ଴గ
ඥఌ௘௙௙ቄೢ
೓ାଵ.ଷଽଷା଴.଺଺଻௟௢௚ቀೢ
೓ାଵ.ସସସቁቅ
(3)
ݓℎ݁ݎ݁:
 ߝ݂݂݁=
ఌ௥ାଵ
ଶ
+
ఌ௥ିଵ
ଶ
ቊቀ1 + 12
௛
ଶ௪ቁ
ିଵ ଶ
ൗ
ቋ
(4)
For the purpose of this work, the design was based on
the second sets of conditions where
, hence equations
(3) and (4) had to be employed.
B.
Microstrip Transmission Line Design for A Single Strip
Case
From equations (3) and (4), the width of the proposed
microstrip line was then calculated since for a wide
microstrip (i.e. width=W), nearly all of the electric field
lines will be focused between the metal planes, similar to
the case of a parallel plate capacitor. On the other hand, for
narrow W the electric field lines will be about equally
divided between the air and the board dielectric [13].
To get the effective dielectric constant, (4) would have
been used, however, there are two unknowns, as a result, the
formula
that
gives
an
approximate
value
of
the
characteristics impedance was then used, which is given as
shown in (5) below [12][15].
ܼ0 =
଼଻
√ఌ௥ାଵ.ସଵ ቄ݈݋݃ ቀ
଻.ସ଼௛
௪ିଵ.ଶହ்ቁቅ 
(5)
From which:
ݓ=
଻.ସ଼௛
௘
ቆೋబ√ഄೝశభ.రభ
ఴళ
ቇ + (1.25ݐ)(6)
For the purpose of this work, an FR-4 dielectric material
was employed, with a dielectric constant ranging from 4 to
4.47 [12][16]. From the pre-test samples, the thickness T
was found to be 4.8532 mil. The Material used for this work
was, an FR-4 board of dielectric thickness of 10mil. The
characteristic impedance of choice for the material is 50Ω. 
From the information above, the following was deduced:
T=4.8532mil
H=10mil
Z0=50 Ω ߝݎ=4.4
By putting all these parameters in equation (6) above the
width of the material can be calculated as shown below:
w =
଻.ସ଼×ଵ଴
ୣ
ఱబቆ√ర.రశభ.రభ
ఴళ
ቇ +(1.25×4.8532)
w=24.7852mil≈25mil
w=0.635mm
Figure 1. Microstrip Transmission line arrangement
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

This value is close to the value measured using a
Mitutoyo stylus surface roughness measuring tester (Surftest
SJ-410) where the thickness value was measured to be
0.4835mm.
C. Microstrip Transmission Line Design for A Multiple
Strip Case
For this case, the strip was made up of several single
strips (for this work, several single strips were used), as
such to calculate the width of this strip, it would have been
the addition of the width of the individual single strips and
the resultant sum becomes the width of this strip (i.e. a
multiple strip). However, this is not so because during the
production of this material it was observed that the machine
always makes overlapping tracks on the Kapton tape which
means the width of the material produce would not be
brought about as expected. As a result, the width of this
material was not calculated but was measured using the
Surftest SJ-410, from this measurement the width was
obtained as 1.75875 mm which is equivalent to70 mil. In a
bid to obtain the accurate results for each of the slope of the
results measured from the resistance of the materials along
its length, an analytical method of determining the slope of
the straight line was used. To achieve this, the method of
least squares was employed.
III. EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUE
The mathematical design of the microstrip was done in
the previous section where the calculation (Mathematical
formulation) of the width and expected thickness was made.
The implementation of this design was achieved using the
laser scribe technique for making GO. This technique of GO
production is one of the do-it-yourself methods of producing
Graphene. This technique has exposed one to a new way of
making a Graphene Oxide or rather a Graphene Oxide-like
material. To achieve this task several experiments were
conducted, and the materials that were initially used were;
Kapton tape, silver paint, plywood (substrate), digital
multimeter and laser machine (Laserscript HPC laser) with
laser spot size of 0.2 mm and a vertical scanning position.
There are two basic categories of material, from which eight
samples of these materials with varying parameters were
produced.
The
two
categories
of
samples
were;
the
Multiple-Strip (MS) line and the Single Strip (SS) line. The
two main parameters that were varied are the speed at which
the laser engraves on the Kapton tape and the thickness of
the width of the strip line.
The MS line sample has four set of samples, where each
sample is made up of five materials with varying laser
power settings ranging from 26% to 34% in increment of
2% (this was determine base on test carried out on the pre-
test samples to ascertain the power settings that would
produce a material with the best property). This fabrication
principles also applies to the single strip-line, it has the same
fabrication principles and the same parameters as its
multiple-strip counterpart but differ by the number of strip
line on it (in its own case it is just a single strip line). For
the multiple strip, the two main parameters which were the
speed at which the laser engraves on the Kapton tape and
the width of the microstrip, these were chosen and set.
These parameters changes from sample to sample to
produce the four sets of samples for each category of
sample. The same principles apply to the single strip
samples. For both the MS line and the SS line the samples
main parameters are shown in Table I below.
TABLE I. SETTINGS USED TO PRODUCE THE MICROSTRIP
parameter
Sample
1
Sample
2
Sample
3
Sample 4
Speed
(mm/s)
300
300
400
400
Width
(μm) 
300
350
300
350
% power
26, 28,
30, 32,
34.
26, 28,
30, 32,
34.
26, 28,
30, 32,
34.
26,
28,
30,
32,
34.
These sets of settings were employed for both the
multiple strip line and the single strip line, which resulted in
samples amounting to eight in total. To achieve the design
of these samples several steps were followed; Firstly, after
the mathematical design, some Kapton tapes were then laid
(taped) unto the surface of FR-4 material. After which, the
settings for the category of interest was done on the system
(computer). Then, the settings for the material of interest
was also done on the system before transferring these
settings to a flash drive, and on to the laser machine. The
sample obtained from the first step above was then
introduced into the working area of the laser machine to
begin the irradiation process. The same procedure was
repeated from the first step to the fourth step for all the two
categories to produce the entire forty materials. From these
samples produced, several tests were carried out on them
using a digital multimeter to obtain necessary resistance
values from the resulting materials (Graphene Oxide-like).
The reason for carrying out this test is to determine the
resistivity of the resultant material to ascertain the viability
of its being employed as a material that has the required
property for use as the sensing element of the proposed
biosensing platform. The two categories of samples (the
multiple strip and the single strip) were tested to explore
which material from any of the two sets of materials (twenty
different materials for the multiple strip and twenty for the
single strip) is viable and results were taken.
The results of these tests carried out were recorded. From
these results, several plots were also done, and with further
manipulations it led to the determination of the material
parameters that is optimum and suitable for the design of the
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

material of interest. In order to determine the suitable
resistivity of the materials produced, the areas of each
material needed to be determined, and to achieve this task,
the thickness and the width of the individual materials were
measured using the Mitutoyo stylus surface roughness
measuring tester (Surftest SJ-410), with this device the
measurement were done to the nearest micron. This
technique was used to fabricate a 5th order LPF microstrip
LSG on a PCB substrate for use in the intended application.
Figure 2 below gives the steps by step process of fabricating
the LSG microstrip LPF, while Figure 3 shows the
fabrication machine and the filter during fabrication.
IV. SAMPLE RESULTS
The results of the test carried out for the different
parameters of the different materials developed, were
recorded as measured. From the results obtained it was
observed that certain resistance values do not increase
linearly with increase in length (i.e. they are irregular). As
such, these give an idea of which material, from this set of
samples that might possess the needed property for the
intended usage. From these results, plots were made to
determine the slope which is the resistance per unit length of
the produced material. A typical slope for these results is as
shown in Figure 4 below. The same procedure was followed
to obtain results of the single strip line, using the same
equipment as used for the multiple strip line above, results
were obtained and recorded as shown below. From these
results, plots were also made to determine the slope which is
the resistance per unit length of the produced material. A
slope typical to these results is as shown in Figure 5 below.
From the above results, the resistance per unit length was
plotted against the percentage power in both categories for
all the strips. The results are as shown in Figures 6a and 6b.
From these plots, it has become obvious that there is more
discontinuity associated with the SS materials. These
Figure 2. Laser scribed Graphene fabrication process
Figure 3. Microstrip LPF Fabrication
Figure 4. Resistance against length for a multiple strip line material.
y = 26.273x - 697.76
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
0
200
400
Resistance (Ω)
Length(mm)
MULTIPLE STRIP (n=5) Each Strip Width
(ESW)=0.30mm, Speed=300mm/s
% power of
26
Linear (%
power of 26)
Figure 5. Resistance against length for a typical single strip line material.
y = 259.77x - 6342.9
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
80000
90000
0
200
400
Resistance (Ω)
Length(mm)
SINGLE STRIP (Width of Strip (WOS)=0.30mm),
Speed=300mm/s
% power of
26
Linear (%
power of 26)
non linearity in
resistance
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

materials and
the percentage powers at
which these
discontinuities occurred become evident from the plots.
From the plot it can be observe that certain points were
enlarged,
this
highlights
the
materials
with
observed
abnormalities and the corresponding percentage powers at
which they were fabricated. These plots have also helped in
narrowing down the material with the needed property from
either category. As can be seen from the results shown
below in Figure 6a and 6b, it can be observed that the
resistance per unit length (on the vertical axis) for the single
strip material is about ten times that of the Multiple-Strip
(MS) material. More so, the number of defective materials
as indicated with bold black dots are more prevalent in the
single strip materials than its multiple strip counterpart. This
is an indication that the multiple strip material has shown
promising characteristics to make it a viable option for its
design scheme to be implemented for the designing of the
microstrip transmission line, which will in turn serve as the
sensing element of the biological sensor whose efficacy is
dependent on the resistivity of the material.
In a bid to determine the most suitable fabrication
scheme for this method of producing this laser scribed
Graphene Oxide material, further processing of the results
was done which resulted in the plots of Figure 6c and 6d
below. These results show typical plot for both categories,
from which useful data about the material and the method of
making the material can be obtained. ANSYS simulation
was done using the conductivity value derived from the test
results and the results indicated that the fabricated filter’s
response was similar to the theoretical lowpass filter as
shown in Figure 7.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Haven produced the 5th order LPF using the MS line
technique. VNA was used to measure its S-parameters, to
determine suitability for the intended application. From the
observed results shown in Figure 7, there is a difference
between the expected and the experimental/simulation
response of a microstrip LPF, thereby indicating that more
fine-tuning of the fabrication parameters is necessary.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The aim of this work was to develop new ways of
producing a Graphene sensor, starting with cheap rapid
prototyping of implementing an inexpensive and flexible
electronic material that is easily reproduceable, with high
conductivity, and can be deployed for use as a sensor for
biological
application.
The
results
indicated
that
the
multiple strip line material has a promising conductivity
value ranging from 171 x10-6 S/mm to 279 x10-6 S/mm,
signalling its viability for the proposed application. From
these results, it can be concluded that this LSG can also be a
fine application in various sensing platforms where light
weight and flexible conductor is desired. The results of the
microstrip LPF implementation indicated the need to fine
tune fabrication parameters so as to improve the filter
response.
The
future
work
includes
fine
tuning
the
fabrication parameters and the use as biological sensor.
Then, testing the device with a mouse IgG needs to be done,
to show its applicability as a biological sensor before
moving on to more sensitive analytes like Prostate-specific
antigen (PSA). To achieve that, in this work, both a
Chebyshev type 5th and 7th order low pass and bandpass
filters are to be implemented as the sensing surface using
the insertion loss method.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was sponsored by Petroleum Technology
Development Fund (PTDF). We also thank Frank Atkinson
for his support.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Griffiths, C. Dale, J. Hedley, M.D. Kowal, R.B.
Kaner and N. Keegan, Laser-scribed Graphene presents
an opportunity to print a new generation of disposable
electrochemical sensors. Nanoscale, 2014. 6(22): pp.
13613-22.
[2]
R. L.
McCreery and M.T. McDermott, Comment on
electrochemical kinetics at ordered graphite electrodes.
Anal Chem, 2012. 84(5): pp. 2602-5.F
[3]
H. Tian et al., Scalable fabrication of high-performance
and flexible Graphene strain sensors. Nanoscale, 2014.
6(2): pp. 699-705.
[4]
J. Lin et al., Laser-induced porous Graphene films from
commercial polymers. Nat Commun, 2014. 5: pp. 5714.
[5]
X. Wang et al., Three-dimensional strutted Graphene
grown by substrate-free sugar blowing for high-power-
density supercapacitors. Nat Commun, 2013. 4: pp.
2905.
[6]
Z.
Chen
et
al.,
Three-dimensional
flexible
and
conductive interconnected Graphene networks grown by
chemical vapour deposition. Nat Mater, 2011. 10(6): pp.
424-8.
[7]
M. Schumann, R. Sauerbrey, and M.C. Smayling,
Permanent increase of the electrical conductivity of
polymers induced by ultraviolet laser radiation. Applied
Physics Letters, 1991. 58(4): pp. 428-430.
[8]
M. El-Kady et al., Laser Scribing of High-Performance
and
Flexible
Graphene-Based
Electrochemical
Capacitors. Science (New York, N.Y.), 2012. 335: pp.
1326-30.
[9]
K. Rajasekaran, J. Jayalakshmi, and J. Thangaiyan,
Design and Analysis of Stepped Impedance Microstrip
Low Pass Filter Using ADS Simulation Tool for
Wireless Applications. 2013. 3: pp. 1-5.
[10]
N. B. Mohd Hashim, M. Shahrazel Razalli., S. Z.
Ibrahim and F. Farid, Compact Ultra Wideband Stepped
Impedance Low Pass Filter Utilizing Open Circuit Stub
Resonator. ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied
Sciences, 2015. 10: pp. 9120-9126.
[11]
I. Mansour, H. Elhennawy, and A.S. Tag El-dein, Design
of Stepped Impedance Microstrip Low Pass Filter with
DGS. International Journal of Engineering Research and
Development, 2014. 10(7): pp. 58-67.
[12]
V.M. Anerao, Implementation of Stepped Impedance
Microstrip Low Pass Filter. International Journal of
Emerging Trends in Electrical and Electronics (IJETEE)
2013. 2(2): pp. 89-92.
[13]
N. Garvansh, A Kumar, Design and Synthesis of Stepped
Impedance
Microstrip
Line
Low
Pass
Filter.
International Journal of Scientific Research Engineering
& Technology, 2014: pp. 48-50.
[14]
I.
Rosu,
Microstrip
Stripline
and
CPW
Design,
http://www.qsl.net/va3iul.
[15]
S.H. Hall, G.W. Hall, and J.A. McCall, High Speed
Digital System Design A Handbook of Interconnect
Theory and Design Practices. 2000.
[16]
C. Wang, Determining Dielectric Constant and Loss-
Tangent in FR-4, UMR EMCLaboratory Technical
Report TR-00-1-041, March, 2000.
Figure 7. Experimental and Theoretical Results of a Microstrip LPF
-1.40E+02
-1.20E+02
-1.00E+02
-8.00E+01
-6.00E+01
-4.00E+01
-2.00E+01
0.00E+00
2.00E+01
0.00E+00 5.00E-01 1.00E+00 1.50E+00 2.00E+00 2.50E+00 3.00E+00
Gain (dB)
Frequency (Hz)
Theoretical LPF Response
S11
S21
-1.20E+02
-1.00E+02
-8.00E+01
-6.00E+01
-4.00E+01
-2.00E+01
0.00E+00
2.00E+01
0.00E+00
1.00E+09
2.00E+09
3.00E+09
Gain (dB)
Frequency (Hz)
Experimental Result
S11
S21
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

