A Management Strategy for Centralized Wireless Sensor Networks Applied to 
Small and Medium Sized Manufacturing Enterprises 
 
Pedro Chaves and Omar C Branquinho 
CEATEC 
PUC Campinas 
Campinas, Brazil 
e-mail: pedrochaves@hotmail.co.uk 
e-mail: branquinho@puc-campinas.edu.br 
Fabiano Fruett 
FEEC 
UNICAMP 
Campinas, Brazil 
e-mail: fabiano@ dsif.fee.unicamp.br
 
 
Abstract—The demand for Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) 
applied to industrial process monitoring and control is 
increasing as the forth industrial revolution (Industry 4.0) 
gathers pace. Flexibility and low cost make WSN the perfect 
choice for these modern 21st century manufacturing plants. 
Small and Medium Sized Enterprises (SMEs) have an 
important role in the growth of developing economies as they 
account for approximately 60% of all private sector 
employment, but are currently finding it difficult to take 
advantage of new sensor technologies. This paper describes the 
tests carried out with a WSN in order to ascertain the 
relationship between the Received Signal Strength Indicator 
(RSSI) and the Packet Error Rate (PER). Subsequently, a new 
RSSI based network management strategy is presented; it 
includes two RSSI tracking indices that guarantee an early 
warning in case the radio signal deteriorates. Both indices are 
generated in real time; the first estimates the RSSI tendency 
allowing for the mapping of a sample position in the set and its 
value, while the second compares the current RSSI to a 
preconfigured reference value. This article ends with the 
implementation and testing of the strategy on the ScadaBR 
Supervisory System. 
Keywords-Wireless Sensor Networks; WSN; PER; RSSI;  
Network Management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Small and Medium Sized Enterprises (SMEs) contribute 
decisively for the advancement of developing countries. 
Worldwide, SMEs account for about 52% of private sector 
value added, varying from 16% of the gross domestic product 
(GDP) in low-income countries to 51% of GDP in high-
income ones. SMEs dominate the world business stage; 
estimates suggest that more than 95% of enterprises across the 
world are SMEs, accounting for approximately 60% of all 
private sector employment [1]. 
If compared to wired networks, Wireless Sensor Networks 
(WSN) 
can 
offer 
substantial 
advantages 
regarding 
deployment, commissioning, and maintenance [2]. These 
networks can cover areas that are out of reach for wired 
networks allowing for the improvement of the processes. 
The WSN currently offered by large solution providers 
tend to be complex, non-centralized and expensive [3] putting 
these solutions out of the reach of most SMEs considering 
that, differently from large corporations,  these companies 
have neither the capital to acquire nor the dedicated 
departments 
to 
manage 
these 
new 
communication 
technologies [4]. 
The raison d’être of a WSN is to monitor and control 
processes and environments. A manufacturing process can be 
defined as a systematic series of operations executed to 
produce something. The more critical the process is, the more 
reliable the link needs to be [5]. The management of a WSN 
must define a set of functions that will integrate configuration, 
monitoring, operation and maintenance of the network 
services and devices [6].  
Table I compiles the service classes for industrial 
environments, according to the International Society of 
Automation (ISA) [z]. 
 
TABLE I.  
SERVICE CLASSES (ISA) 
 
Use 
Class 
Description 
Characteristic 
Safety 
0 
Emergency 
Action 
Always Critical 
Control 
1 
Control (Closed 
Loop) 
Usually Critical 
2 
Supervision 
Control 
(Closed Loop) 
Usually not Critical 
3 
Open Control 
(Open Loop) 
Human Action 
Monitoring 
4 
Alert 
Few Consequences 
5 
Logging, up e 
download 
No immediate 
Consequences 
 
The processes criticality and the characterization of the 
signal and medium generate subsidies to the network 
management system. The International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) divides the network management into 
five distinct areas. This classification was developed for the 
Open System Interconnection (OSI) model: 
• 
Configuration management - controls, identifies and 
collects from and supplies data to managed objects. 
• 
Performance management - evaluates the behaviour 
of managed objects and the effectiveness of the 
communication. 
• 
Fault management - enables the detection, isolation 
and correction of abnormal operation of the OSI 
environment. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

• 
Security management - addresses aspects essential to 
the safe operation and protection of managed objects. 
• 
Account management - enables charges to be 
established and costs to be identified [7]. 
 In wireless communications, the received signal strength 
is media dependent [6]. A strategy that assists in estimating 
the Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) tendency with 
relation to a threshold would be relevant to the performance 
and configuration management, as actions could be taken 
before that threshold is reached. 
Supervisory Data Acquisition and Control Systems 
(SCADA) are industrial control systems used in the 
monitoring and control of remote devices. These systems 
collect data from remote sensor nodes in real time in order to 
monitor and control communication networks, including 
alarm monitoring, data processing, and equipment and 
conditions control. Based on the information from remote 
sensor nodes, manual or automatic commands can be executed 
on remote devices [8]. 
Big WSN suppliers tend to offer solutions for the needs of 
large enterprisers, with prices that can reach millions of 
dollars. These suppliers offer large, noncentralized networks 
that grant the routing decisions to the nodes [9][10][11], 
effectively rendering the network hostage of the topology, 
impacting in its control. This reality does not really attend the 
necessities of SMEs regarding cost, control and complexity, 
as, usually, these plants are small in area, demanding cheaper, 
less complex network solutions. Centralized solutions also 
allow for full network control. 
For the tests in this paper, we use a low cost, centralized 
WSN approach geared towards SMEs, where the network 
manager has total control over its running. 
We also identified a shortage of low-complexity network 
summarization solutions that can be used by non-technical 
operators working in SMEs. For that reason, in this paper, we 
present a management strategy that uses the RSSI as the main 
metric. 
This paper is organized into eleven sections: in Section II 
we compare different WSN solutions, in Section III we 
explain the relation between RSSI and Packet Error Rate 
(PER), in Section IV we present the Radiuino Platform, in 
Section V we specify the testing set up, in Section VI we show 
the benchmarking test results, in Section VII we introduce the 
indices management strategy, in Section VIII we describe the 
tests done with the strategy, in Section IX we show the 
strategy implementation on a supervisory system, in Section 
X we show the tests done and in Section XI we present our 
conclusions and future work. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II. 
WSN IN THE INDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT 
Since WLANs, Bluetooth, WiFi, WirelessHart and 
Zigbee, to mention just some, were introduced, a lot of the 
effort was focused on the non-licensed Industrial, Scientific 
and Medical (ISM) band of 2.4 GHz as some systems can 
require higher data rates. However, in some cases, this band 
may get overcrowded, degrading the signal. There are, 
however, other non-licensed bands reserved for ISM 
applications that can be used for wireless communication [12].  
The 915 MHz ISM band is narrow and limits the 
maximum data rates. Applications such as SCADA, where the 
data requirements are lower than applications found in the 2.4 
GHz frequency band, can use the 915 MHz band. 
In this paper, we use a platform which operates on the 915 
MHz band as there are no restrictions for the use of this ISM 
band regarding the application type [12]. 
III. 
THE RSSI-PER RELATION 
The RSSI is chosen as the main metric in this study since 
link quality monitoring methods based on hardware, e.g., Link 
Quality Indicator (LQI), Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) and 
RSSI, make use of basic metrics provided by the chip that, if 
compared to software solutions, require far less overhead 
allowing for a better response to changes on the link [13]. 
As indicated by [14], for a given scenario, there is a clear 
relation between the RSSI and the PER as the latter tends to 
go up as the RSSI goes down. In this paper, we propose a 
strategy that takes advantage of this relation.  
IV. 
THE RADIUINO PLATFORM 
All measurements in this work are done using the low cost, 
open software, open hardware Radiuino platform [15]. The 
firmware used in the transceivers was developed using the 
Radiuino Integrated Development Environment (IDE). The 
Radiuino platform is structured in layers of protocol akin to 
the 
Transmission 
Control 
Protocol/Internet 
Protocol 
(TCP/IP).  
The RSSI and PER monitoring applications were 
developed in Python 2.6 [16] and the supervisory system used 
for the management was the open software ScadaBR [17]. 
V. 
BENCHMARKING AND TEST SET UP 
Benchmarking tests were carried out on all modules before 
any tests with the strategy were carried out. 
The module BE990 was the transceiver used in all nodes. 
All were configured with a data rate of 38.38 Kbps, operating 
in the ISM band of 915 MHz and using frequency shift keying 
(FSK) modulation. The BE990 complies with the Brazilian 
National 
Telecommunications 
Agency 
(ANATEL) 
regulations; it carries an Atmega 328 micro controller, a Texas 
CC1101 transceiver and a Texas CC1190 radio frequency 
(RF) amplifier [18].  
Each sensor node was constituted of a module BE990 
mounted on a DK104 development board. The module on the 
sink node was mounted on a UartSBee board [15]. We used 
12 volts batteries to power the nodes during tests. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

For the benchmarking tests, the wireless communication 
link between the sink node and each remote sensor node was 
emulated using a coaxial cable.  
In order to avoid saturation, Mini-Circuit attenuators [19] 
were placed between the module in the sink node and the 
modules in each sensor node, as indicated in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Emulation Setup Diagram. 
The modules in each sensor node were placed in a sealed 
RF test chamber to check their normalization and assess their 
PER and RSSI results with minimum electromagnetic 
interference (EMI).  
VI. 
BENCHMARKING AND CORRELATION TESTS RESULTS 
The results of the benchmarking tests are summarized in 
Table II. It shows that all modules were conforming, returning 
very similar values of RSSI and PER for the same attenuation 
scenario, in this case 90 dB. The highest standard deviation 
was just 0.13 dBm and the highest PER only 1.6%, indicating 
good stability of all modules. We concluded that the modules 
could be considered normalized and could be used in the 
correlation tests. 
TABLE II.               BENCHMARKING RESULTS 
 
Sensor 
RSSI (average) 
S.D. (dBm) 
PER (%) 
S1 
- 42.50 dBm 
0 
0 
S2 
- 42.50 dBm 
0.13 
1.6 
S3 
- 42.00 dBm 
0 
0 
 
The same set up shown in Figure 1 was used again to 
collect the information that allowed correlating the RSSI to 
the PER. This time, the attenuation was gradually increased, 
thus reducing the RSSI level at the sensor node and 
consequently increasing the PER, so to find the RSSI level 
corresponding to the 5% PER reference level suggested by 
[20]. In order to guarantee the reliability of the results, three 
series of 200 packets each were sent to each sensor node. The 
data presented in Table III shows the average results of the 
three test series. 
 
 
 
 
TABLE III.  
CORRELATION RSSI - PER 
 
RSSI Average (dBm) 
PER (%) 
RSSI SD (dBm) 
-45.0 
0 
0.11 
-52.0 
0 
0.31 
-63.0 
0 
0.38 
-69.5 
0 
0.64 
-70.0 
2.0 
0.57 
-71.5 
2.5 
0.69 
-72.0 
4.5 
0.76 
-75.0 
5.0 
0.57 
-77.5 
12.5 
1.15 
-80.0 
38 
4.41 
 
The results indicate that -72 dBm is the maximum RSSI 
before the PER reaches the 5% reference level.  
VII. INDICES ZR AND ZT 
Indices aid in the monitoring work since they simplify the 
comparison of a current state with a past or predefined one. 
This paper presents a management strategy that includes 
two indices, both generated in real time. The first estimates 
the trend of RSSI allowing for the mapping of a sample 
position in the set and its value, while the second compares 
the current RSSI to a preconfigured reference one. 
These indices are loosely based on the Box Plot diagram 
and therefore present benefits such as the low complexity 
calculations required to obtain them, thus ensuring their easy 
implementation in supervisory systems. 
In order to evaluate the trend of the RSSI based on the 
signal dispersion, we propose the index Zr composed by the 
ratio of the average RSSI values of a large, configurable, 
sliding time window (Zb) expressed by (1), which can also be 
understood as the historical average, by the average of the 
RSSI values of a small, configurable, sliding time window 
(Zs) expressed by (2). 
 
          
Zb = x̅  =  
x1+x2+⋯+xm
m
                                        (1) 
 
         Zs = x̅  =  
x1+x2+⋯+xn
n
                                         (2)  
 
 Where m > n.                              
The index Zr, expressed by (3), shows how far Zs departs 
from the historical average Zb indicating the dispersion and, 
more importantly, the RSSI trend, with the advantage of 
returning values around 1. This index is independent of the 
signal strength in which the sensor node operates. This feature 
allows for its easy implementation in the monitoring of 
wireless sensor networks; since these sensor nodes are usually 
Coaxial Cable 
 Sensor Node 
Sink Node 
Sealed RF Chamber 
Attenuators 
Coaxial Cable 
TX 
RX 
TX 
RX 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

positioned in different areas, they tend to present different 
RSSI levels. 
The index Zr will tend to 1 as Zs approaches Zb. 
 
                   
Zr =  Zb / Zs                                              (3)                                       
 
The second index, Zt, expressed by (4) tracks the value of 
Zs in relation to a reference value Rv correlated to a PER 
threshold and tends to 1 as Zs approaches this reference value. 
This index is dependent on the signal strength at which the 
sensor node operates. 
 
                       Zt = Rv / Zs                                               (4) 
 
The observation of these two indices gives the operative 
in charge of the network a clear vision of the sensor nodes 
current situation with respect to the RSSI and, consequently, 
the PER. 
VIII. INDICES TESTING 
For the preliminary tests of the strategy, a WSN as 
specified in Section V, comprising a sink node and a single 
sensor node was setup with the sensor node operating with a 
RSSI above the reference level of -72dBm, as established in 
Section VI, allowing for the mapping of the RSSI variation to 
the increase of the PER. From this data, the indices Zr and Zt 
were extracted and compared to the RSSI behavior. The 
choice of the sliding time window for the tests was based on 
the Quality of Service (QoS) we expect industrial processes 
will demand from a WSN, so the sliding time window used 
for Zb was 60 minutes and for Zs it was 1 minute. However, 
these values are still subject of research. 
To validate the results, graphical comparisons between the 
variation of RSSI and Zr, RSSI and Zt and Zr and PER were 
done.  
Figure 2 shows the RSSI with values in dBm on the 
primary vertical axis against the index Zr with values on the 
secondary vertical axis and the number of packets on the 
horizontal axis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  RSSI x Index Zr. 
The graph shows that the index Zr was equal to 1 up to 
approximately the packet 1000, which is equivalent to the 60 
minutes required for Zb to be established. From that point on, 
the index tracks the variation of RSSI, always centred on 1 
and differs from the RSSI as it considers the averages of the 
last 1 and 60 minutes sliding windows. This feature dilutes the 
impact of possible extreme and discrepant samples.  
The graphs in Figure 3 show the RSSI with values in dBm 
on the primary vertical axis against the index Zt with values 
on the secondary vertical axis, and the number of packets on 
the horizontal axis. The index Zt tracked the RSSI variation 
with respect to the reference level of -72 dBm that was never 
reached. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  RSSI x Index Zt. 
The index Zt acts as an alarm that is triggered whenever 
the RSSI reaches the pre-defined reference value, since its 
permanence at or below this threshold indicates an increase in 
the PER. 
Figure 4 presents the index Zr with values on the primary 
vertical axis against the PER with values on the secondary 
vertical axis and the number of packets on the horizontal axis.  
The graphs show that although the PER was consistently 
very low, it was higher at the times when the index Zr was 
below 1, that is, when the RSSI was below its historical 
average. It is important to observe that the graph of the PER 
is shown as the hourly average of its values. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acessed August 2016. 
 
Figure 4.  Index Zr x PER. 
The results shown on the graphs confirm the robustness of 
the indices Zr and Zt and their applicability as a wireless 
network management strategy. 
0
0.5
1
1.5
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
1
506
1011
1516
2021
2526
3031
3536
4041
4546
5051
5556
6061
6566
7071
RSSI S1
Índice Zr
1
473
945
1417
1889
2361
2833
3305
3777
4249
4721
5193
5665
6137
6609
7081
0
1
2
3
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
RSSI S1
 Índice Zt
0
5
10
15
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
1
473
945
1417
1889
2361
2833
3305
3777
4249
4721
5193
5665
6137
6609
7081
7553
Índice Zr
PER
Index Zr 
Index Zr 
Index Zt 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

IX. 
IMPLEMENTATION ON SUPERVISORY SYSTEM 
The strategy was implemented on the ScadaBR 
Supervisory System. For the tests, a WSN as specified in 
Section V, consisting of a sink node and three sensor nodes 
using a point-to-multipoint topology was set up, as shown in 
Figure 5. The supervisory system was configured to collect 
the downlink RSSI data from each sensor node, calculate Zs 
for the last minute and Zb for the last 60 minutes. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Point-to-Multipoint Topology. 
Monitoring via supervisory system allows the construction 
of graphical interfaces in which different levels of information 
can be presented, contemplating different levels of 
knowledge. Figures 6, 7, 8 and 9 show the ScadaBR screen. 
In each figure, the bottom chart on the right, "RSSI Sensors 
1,2 and 3" brings information that will be appreciated by a 
technically qualified person, the network manager, for 
example. The upper chart on the right, "Indices Sensors 1, 2 
and 3" will be of great value for a person that is interested in 
the network but not necessarily technical, such as the 
production manager. The most concise information appears 
on the left side of the dashboard, with the Limit and Tendency 
light emitting diodes (LEDs) that are intended to alert a person 
that is not necessarily interested in the network, but dependent 
on it, such as a machine operator. Figure 6 shows a snapshot 
of the graphs obtained with sensor nodes 1, 2 and 3.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Supervisory System Dashboard. 
The chart "Indices Sensors 1, 2 and 3" shows the variation 
of the index Zr for each sensor node while the chart "RSSI 
Sensors 1,2 and 3" brings the variation of RSSI. On the left, 
the Limit LEDs flash green while the index Zt is above the 
reference value, in this case -72 dBm, and red when Zt is at or 
below it, and the Tendency LEDs that indicate the position of 
the index Zr, flashing green while it is above 1 or red when 
it’s below. For the sake of screen simplicity, we chose not to 
present graphs with the Zt index variation. It can be seen that 
the Tendency LEDs for sensor nodes 1 and 2 were red 
indicating that RSSI on these two nodes were in a downward 
trend. This fact can be confirmed by the graph "Indices Sensor 
nodes 1, 2 and 3" as the trend lines for sensor nodes 1 and 2 
(red and blue lines) end below 1.  
X. 
STRESS TESTING 
To validate the use of the indices strategy on the ScadaBR 
Supervisory System, we extended the use of the test setup 
described in Section VIII. Tests introducing unexpected 
situations of use were carried out. These tests were useful to 
reveal any potential problems with the strategy on the 
supervisory system, such as performance or behavior issues, 
errors on startup, shutdown or on the interface.  
The first test, shown in Figure 7, was done in order to 
ascertain what would be the supervisory system behavior in 
case one of the sensor nodes became unavailable.  
The network was started and the 60 minutes needed for Zb 
to be established were observed. To simulate unavailability, 
the sensor node 3 was purposely disconnected from power. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Supervisory System Dashboard - First Test. 
The Limit and Tendency LEDs for the sensor node 3 
immediately lit up in red and the green trend lines for the 
sensor node 3 on graphs "Indices Sensors 1,2 and 3" and 
"RSSI Sensors 1,2 and 3" disappear. We conclude that the 
strategy in the supervisory system behaved as expected. 
The second test, shown in Figure 8, investigated the 
behavior of the indices strategy on a supervisory system in 
case of sudden signal deterioration. For this test, the sensor 
node 3 was distanced from the sink node, simulating signal 
deterioration. Again, it can be seen that the Tendency LED for 
sensor node 3 lights up in red and the green line in the "RSSI 
Sensors 1,2 and 3" graph reaches values below -40 dBm, 
reflecting accurately the node situation.  
7 meters 
7 meters 
5 meters 
Sensor 3 
Sensor 1 
Sensor 2 
Sink 
Limit    Tendency 
          Dashboard 
S 1 
 
S 2 
 
S 3 
RSSI Sensors 1, 2 and 3
Indices Sensors 1, 2 and 3 
Tendency LED red = Attention 
Tendency LED green = OK 
 
Limit LED red = Emergency 
Limit LED green = OK 
          Dashboard 
RSSI Sensors 1, 2 and 3
Indices Sensors 1, 2 and 3 
Tendency LED red = Attention 
Tendency LED green = OK 
 
Limit LED red = Emergency 
Limit LED green = OK 
S 1 
 
S 2 
 
S 3 
Limit    Tendency 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Supervisory System Dashboard - Second Test. 
The third test, shown in Figure 9, investigated the 
supervisory system behavior in case of acute signal 
deterioration. For this test, the sensor node 3 was moved even 
further away from the sink node to a point where the RSSI 
reached and exceeded the reference value of -72 dBm, 
established in Section VI. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Supervisory System Dashboard - Third Test. 
In this test, the dashboard shows the sensor node 3 Limit 
LED in red, indicating that the RSSI on that sensor node was 
below the reference value, which can lead to a PER above 5%. 
This condition was confirmed by the graph "RSSI Sensors 1, 
2 and 3" as the green trend line for sensor node 3 reaches 
values below -80 dBm. The Tendency LED for that node also 
lights up in red indicating a RSSI deterioration which can be 
confirmed by the graph "Indices Sensors 1, 2 and 3" where the 
sensor node 3 green trend line shows the drop of the index Zr. 
In order to carry out the last and most extensive test, all 
nodes were connected to mains power, in order to guarantee 
the uninterrupted supply of power. The test consisted of a 
continuous and uninterrupted use of the indices strategy on the 
ScadaBR for a whole week, in order to ascertain any possible 
system locking. At the end of that period, the tests pointed out 
that the system did not present any faults. The tests results 
with the indices strategy on the ScadaBR Supervisory System 
confirm the robustness of the solution. 
XI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper objective was to demonstrate the feasibility of 
employing a new network management strategy based on 
indices that use the RSSI as the only metric, as this solution 
requires far less overhead allowing for a better response to 
changes on the link. For that, a testing set up using the 
Radiuino platform was assembled so data could be collected.  
The preliminary tests with the indices strategy indicated 
that, when compared to the RSSI readings, the strategy 
presents an easier interpretation of the data as the impact of 
extreme and discrepant samples were diluted by it. 
 The strategy was also implemented on the ScadaBR 
Supervisory System where an interface that attended the needs 
of different levels of network expertise was created. The stress 
tests carried out then returned results that also confirmed that 
the strategy was stable and robust enough to be employed in 
the monitoring of WSN in SMEs and thus help these 
companies to take full advantage of the Industry 4.0 
possibilities.  
There are still a number of topics following from our 
findings that would benefit from more research, including the 
further development of the supervisory system, as other open 
source network and application monitoring software like the 
Zabbix could be tested and evaluated, and the development of 
a methodology for the choice of the sliding time window for 
the indices Zb and Zs, according to the different industrial 
plant environments and requirement settings. 
Also, the deployment of the indices strategy in a real SME 
environment with sensors distributed across the plant, where 
adverse conditions like propagation issues and interferences 
in the spectrum are the norm, would allow for a better 
understanding of the real capabilities of the strategy. 
REFERENCES 
[1] The Edinburgh Group, “Growing the global economy through SMEs 
Contents,” 
Available: 
http://edinburgh-
group.org/media/2776/edinburgh_group_research_-
_growing_the_global_economy_through_smes.pdf. Accessed May 
2017. 
[2] ISA 100 Wireless, “Control Over Wireless: Current Applications and 
Future 
Opportunities,” 
Available: 
http//:www.nivis.com/resources/WCI_auto_Week_2012_%20Paper_
v18Sep.pdf. Accessed May 2016. 
[3] O. Branquinho,“Wireless Networks Technologies,” ISBN 97885-
63630-49-0. 
Available: 
http://pt.scribd.com/doc/206659698/Tecnologias-de-Redes-sem-Fio#. 
Accessed Octobre 2016. 
[4] W. Peres and G. Stumpo, Small and medium-sized manufacturing 
enterprises in Latin America and the Caribbean under the new 
economic model, World Dev., vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 1643–1655, 2000. 
[5] International 
Society 
of 
Automation, 
Available:  
https://www.isa.org/isa100/. Accessed Decembre 2016. 
[6] Emerson Process Management, “Wireless Training,” Available: 
http://www2.emersonprocess.com/enUS/plantweb/wireless/WirelessT
raining/Pages/index.aspx.  Accessed Decembre 2015. 
[7] W. Stallings, “SNMP, SNMPv2, SNMPv3, and RMON 1 and 2” (3rd 
Edition). 1999 
 
 
 
Limit    Tendency 
          Dashboard 
Indices Sensors 1, 2 and 3 
RSSI Sensors 1, 2 and 3
Tendency LED red = Attention 
Tendency LED green = OK 
 
Limit LED red = Emergency 
Limit LED green = OK 
S 1 
 
S 2 
 
S 3 
          Dashboard 
Tendency LED red = Attention 
Tendency LED green = OK 
 
Limit LED red = Emergency 
Limit LED green = OK 
Limit    Tendency 
RSSI Sensors 1, 2 and 3
S 1 
 
S 2 
 
S 3 
Indices Sensors 1, 2 and 3 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[8] Guide to Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) and 
Industrial 
Control 
Systems 
Security. 
Available: 
https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/csd-nist-
guidetosupervisoryanddataccquisition-
scadaandindustrialcontrolsystemssecurity-2007.pdf. Accessed August 
2016. 
[9] Emerson 
Web 
Page. 
Available: 
http://www.emerson.com/en-
us/expertise/automation/industrial-internet-things/pervasive-sensing-
solutions/wireless-technology. Accessed July 2017. 
[10] Banner 
Web 
Page. 
Available: 
https://www.bannerengineering.com/us/en/products/wireless-sensor-
networks.html. Accessed July 2017. 
[11] Siemens 
Web 
Page. 
Available: 
http://w3.siemens.com/mcms/industrial-communication/en/industrial-
wireless-communication/iwlan-industrial-wireless-
lan/Pages/iwlan.aspx. Accessed July 2017. 
[12] J. Shandle. “Unlicensed 915-MHz Band Fits Many Applications and 
Allows 
Higher 
Transmit 
Power,” 
Available: 
http://www.digikey.com/en/articles/techzone/2011/may/unlicensed-
915-mhz-band-fits-many-applications-and-allows-higher-transmit-
power  Accessed August 2015. 
[13] C. Wei, L. Jian. “An Improved LQI- based Link Quality Estimation 
Mechanism 
for 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks,” 
Available: 
http://www.atlantispress.com/php/pub.php?publication=csss14&fram
e=http%3A//www.atlantispress.com/php/paperdetails.php%3Ffrom%
3Dsession+results%26id%3D12655%26querystr%3Did%253D222  
Accessed Jyly 2016. 
[14] V. Pereira, “PER Estimate, RSSI Reading Protocol and WSN Best 
Routes Determination,” Available: http://tede.bibliotecadigital.puc-
campinas.edu.br:8080/jspui/handle/tede/889. 
Accessed 
Setember 
2016. 
[15] Radiuino Site. Available: http://radiuino.cc/. Accessed August 2015. 
[16] Python 
Software 
Foundation. 
Available: 
https://www.python.org/downloads/. Accessed May 2015. 
[17] ScadaBR Forum. Available: http://www.scadabr.com.br. Accessed 
August 2016. 
[18] CC1101 Low-Power Sub-1 GHz RF Transceiver. Available: 
http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/cc1101.pdf. Accessed July 2016. 
[19] Minicircuits 
Data 
sheet. 
Available: 
https://www.minicircuits.com/pdfs/ZFRSC-123+.pdf 
Accessed 
August 2016. 
[20] H. Karl, A. Hillig, Protocols and Architectures for Wireless Sensor 
Networks. Hoboken, NJ: Willey, 2005. 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

