Detection of Proteins Associated with Alzheimer’s Disease  
using a Terahertz Chemical Microscope 
Kohei Iwatsuki, Yuichi Yoshida, Xue Ding, Jin 
Wang, Kenji Sakai, Toshihiko Kiwa 
Graduate School of Interdisciplinary Science and 
Engineering in Health Systems 
Okayama University 
Okayama, Japan 
e-mail: (prsd3x9h, pjaa6rfb, pm7g9k5d) @s.okayama-
u.ac.jp 
(wangjin, sakai-k, kiwa) @okayama-u.ac.jp 
Sayaka Tsuji 
Faculty of Engineering 
Okayama University 
Okayama, Japan 
e-mail: proc9afb @s.okayama-u.ac.jp 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— In recent years, the number of Alzheimer’s Disease 
(AD) has been increasing. We proposed a Terahertz Chemical 
Microscope (TCM) for early diagnosis of cognitive decline by 
measuring the concentration of Apolipoprotein AⅠ (ApoA1) 
and Complement component 3 (C3) in solution as biomarkers 
for AD using the TCM. As a results, ApoA1 and C3 with the 
concentration of 0.1 µg/ml and 1.0 µg/ml could be respectively 
detected by measuring the change in the amplitude of 
terahertz waves by the TCM. 
Keywords- Terahertz; TCM; Alzheimer’s Disease; mild 
cognitive impairment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, the number of Alzheimer’s Disease 
(AD) has been increasing as the increase of average life 
expectancy. Generally, a cognitive function of patients of 
AD gradually declines. Patients at mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) stage, where is the initial stage of AD, 
have potential to recover by appropriate prevention and 
treatment. So, early detection and diagnosis of AD is 
important. Conventionally, imaging systems such as 
computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI), single photon emission computed tomography 
(SPECT) are used to diagnose. However, these types of 
modalities are expensive so that diagnostic fees are 
relatively high. Therefore, primary screening method are 
essential for early diagnosis of AD. 
Practically, detection of concentration of biomarkers, 
transthyretin (TTR), Apolipoprotein AI (ApoA1) and 
Complement component 3 (C3), in the blood are measured 
for the screening [1]. This screening method require 
multiple testing methods and a large amount of specimens 
to detect proteins. 
In our group, a Terahertz Chemical Microscope (TCM) 
has been proposed and developed to detect proteins or 
sugar chains in small amount of liquids [2][3]. In this study, 
the concentrations of ApoA1 and C3 in solution were 
measured using the TCM. 
Section II describes a schematic of the TCM and 
experimental procedure. Section III describes the results, 
and Section IV describes the conclusion. 
Figure 1. Schematic of the optical system of the TCM. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
The TCM visualize chemical reactions on a sensing 
plate, which consists of a SiO₂ film and a Si film on a 
sapphire substrate (Al₂O₃). The thicknesses of the films 
were a few nm for the SiO₂ film, 500 nm for Si, and 500 µm 
for the sapphire substrate (Al₂O₃), respectively. When a 
femtosecond laser is irradiated from the sapphire substrate 
side to the Si film, terahertz wave is generated in the Si film. 
The amplitude of terahertz wave depends on the surface 
potential of Si, which depends on chemical reactions on the 
sensing plate. Thus, the chemical reaction can be related to 
the amplitude of terahertz wave radiated from the sensing 
plate. 
Figure 1 shows a schematic of the optical system of the  
TCM. The femtosecond laser was divided into a pump light 
and a probe light by a beam splitter, and the pump light was 
focused onto the substrate side of the sensing plate by an 
objective lens. The amplitude map of the terahertz wave 
from the sensing plate was obtained by changing the 
position of the femtosecond laser across the surface of the 
sensing plate by moving the XY stage and measuring the 
amplitude by a photoconductive antenna. The repetition rate 
of the laser was 82 MHz. And the output power, the center 
wavelength, and the pulse width of the laser were, 
respectively, 780 mW, 780 nm, and 100 fs. 
Figure 2 shows the protocol to immobilize protein 
antibodies on the sensing plate to selectively detect antigens. 
First, the SiO2 side of the sensing plate was chemically  
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 2. Immobilization protein antibodies and proteins. 
 
(a)                                      (b) 
Figure 3. The concentrations of proteins of (a) C3 and (b) ApoA1 in 
the wells fabricated on the sensing plate. 
 
modified and activated. Then, an avidin was conjugated to 
the surface of the sensing plate for 24 hours at 4℃. Then, 
the sensing plate was coated by skim milk to prevent from 
non-specific reactions on the surface of the sensing plate. 
After coating, biotin-labeled antibodies were immobilized 
using avidin-biotin reaction. A human complement C3 
antibody (Rabbit, Polyclonal, Biotin conjugate) and 
Apolipoprotein A1 antibody (Goat, Polyclonal, Biotin 
conjugate) were respectively used as antibodies for 
selective detection of C3 and ApoA1. Before measuring the 
C3 and ApoA1, the amplitude map of the terahertz wave 
was recorded as a background signal of the TCM. After 
reacting with C3 and ApoA1, the sensing plate was washed 
10 times to remove unbounded antigen. Then, the amplitude 
map of the terahertz wave was measured to evaluate the 
change in the amplitude from the background signal.   
Figure 3 shows the photos of the solution wells 
fabricated on the sensing plates and the concentration of (a) 
C3 and (b) ApoA1 in the wells fabricated on the sensing 
plate. The volume of each well was 30 µl. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
      Figure 4 shows change in the amplitude of the 
terahertz waves (a) before and (b) after the reaction of C3 
and C3 antibody. The amplitude of the terahertz wave was 
reduced by the reaction of C3. On the other hand, Figure 5 
shows the change in the amplitude of the terahertz waves 
before and after the reaction of ApoA1 and ApoA1 
antibody. The amplitude of terahertz wave increased by the 
reaction of ApoA1. 
The difference between (a) and (b) in Figure 4 and 5 was 
calculated and then, the values in the each well were 
averaged. Then, the averaged values were plotted in Figure 
6 (a) and (b). 
 
 
(a)                                      (b) 
Figure 4. The terahertz maps (a) before and (b) after reaction of C3. 
The concentrations in the image is the concentration of C3. 
 
(a)                                      (b) 
Figure 5. The terahertz maps (a) before and (b) after reaction of ApoA1. 
The concentrations in the image is the concentration of ApoA1. 
 
(a)                                            (b)                                                                                        
Figure 6. Protein concentration and terahertz wave amplitude of (a) C3 
and (b) ApoA1. 
 
One can see that the amplitudes could be related to the 
concentration of C3 and ApoA1. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The TCM has been proposed for early diagnosis of AD 
by measuring several types of biomarkers. Antibodies 
(Anti-ApoA1 and Anti-C3) were immobilized on the 
sensing plate using avidin-biotin conjugation to measure 
the ApoA1 and C3, respectively. The change in the 
amplitude of terahertz wave from the sensing plate 
depended on the concentration of C3 and ApoA1 in the 30 
µl solutions with the concentration ranges of from 1 to 100 
and from 0.1 to 10 µg/ml, respectively. These results 
suggest the TCM is one of potential tools for AD diagnosis.  
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Uchida et al.,“Amyloid-β sequester proteins as blood-
based biomarkers of cognitive decline.”, Amst., 1(2), pp. 
270-280, 2015. 
[2] T. Kiwa et al., “Chemical sensing plate with a laser-terahertz 
monitoring system”, Appl. Opt., 47(18), pp. 3324-3327, 
2008. 
[3] T. Kiwa et al.,“Terahertz chemical microscope for label-
free detection of protein complex”, Appl. Phys. Lett., 96 (21), 
211114, 2010. 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

