Ability of Acoustic Sensor Devices for Medical Analysis 
Thomas Rösel, Achim Voigt, Friederike J. Gruhl 
Institute for Microstructure Technology (IMT) 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) 
Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany 
thomas.roesel@kit.edu, achim.voigt@kit.edu, friederike.gruhl@kit.edu  
 
 
Abstract—There is an increasing demand to monitor course of 
disease or therapy success of certain diseases via determining 
concentrations of specific protein markers in blood. For such 
biomedical applications implying the detection of multiple 
proteins a cost-effective and rapid analysis system with small 
sample consumption is required. Biosensor packaging is a 
useful means to interface the biosensor with the surroundings 
while ensuring its integrity and performance. We recently 
developed surface acoustic wave (SAW) biosensor chips, which 
allow the label-free, sensitive and cost-effective detection of 
proteins. For that, single SAW devices first are embedded in 
polymer housings, however, the sensitive sensor area still 
remains accessible for surface modification. The sensor surface 
is modified with capture molecules binding specifically to the 
analyte. Unspecific binding reactions are prevented via 
intermediate hydrogel layers, such as dextran. Advantages of 
those SAW biosensor chips are simple handling, low 
consumption of chemicals used in the coating process and 
enabling parallel analysis of multiple analytes in one sample. 
Hence, when applying biosensor surface modifications to a 
packaging, it is essential that both the effect on the housing and 
the impact on the biosensor signal response in a subsequent 
assay are investigated. Our housed SAW chips enable a user-
friendly, easy and rapid way to detect different clinical 
analytes.  
Keywords-SAW biosensors; array; point-of-care; cancer 
diagnosis  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In many cases, it is possible to diagnose diseases, such as 
cancer, via determining concentrations of several specific 
protein markers in blood to create a marker profile of the 
patient. Such a marker profile can also be used for 
monitoring the success of the therapy applied to cure those 
diseases. For example, therapy of breast cancer patients often 
has to be modified to achieve best possible chances for 
healing. In many cases, the critical time already lies within 
the first six weeks after therapy start [1]. For such Point of 
Care (POC) applications based on the detection of multiple 
proteins analytes in one sample a cost-effective and rapid 
analysis system with small sample consumption is required.  
It has been shown by numerous publications [2] and 
patents [3] that biosensors allow rapid and accurate detection 
and 
determination 
of 
analyte 
concentrations 
in 
a 
comparatively easy way. Still, compared to the scientific 
output, the number of complete biosensor systems which are 
actually commercialized is rather small. One of the reasons 
could be that research projects often deal with optimization 
of individual biosensor system components only, but real 
system integration into a reliable instrumentation is 
neglected [4]. System integration includes, among others, the 
protection of the biosensor element in the system against 
external negative influences, while its mechanical, electrical, 
and biological integrity is ensured, for instance, accessibility 
to sample solutions. These requirements can be met with an 
appropriate biosensor packaging which provides both 
mechanical protection and suitable connections to the 
system’s surroundings required for operation, such as a 
fluidic delivery system [5].  
SAW biosensors allow the label-free, sensitive and cost-
effective detection of biomolecules. They have been applied 
successfully to detect proteins, desoxyribonucleic acid 
(DNA) and bacteria [6]. For the detection of proteins the 
sensor surface is modified with capture molecules, specific 
analyte binding partner. Unspecific binding reactions were 
prevented by coupling the binding molecules via an 
intermediate hydrogel layer, such as dextran, on the sensor 
surface. This is a crucial issue for all biosensors based on 
label-free detection of analytes in serum samples due to the 
high protein background [7].  Capture molecules can be 
immobilized by amine coupling via reactive esters using a 
carbodiimide, e.g., 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbo-
diimide (EDC), and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS). Due to 
its flexibility, relative ease of use, high coupling yields and 
robustness, the EDC/NHS coupling procedure is the most 
frequently employed immobilization method [8]. Therefore, 
if hydrogel layers supply amino groups instead of carboxyl 
groups, it might be useful to convert the amino groups to 
carboxyl groups prior to protein coupling, e.g., by means of 
dicarboxylic acid anhydrides [9], to obtain a higher coupling 
yield. 
Our previous set-up was used successfully in several 
affinity binding experiments [10], however, it is not suited 
for medical applications: Aside from the SAW device itself it 
consists 
of 
non-disposable 
components 
making 
it 
inappropriate for a POC device.  
We recently developed a SAW biosensor system consists 
of a SAW device embedded in a polymer housing, which is 
connected to an external flow injection analysis (FIA) 
system. Using acoustic biosensors, such as SAW biosensors, 
it additionally has to be considered that aside from mass 
change the change of viscoelasticity of the sensing layer 
(including layer thickness and penetration depth of the 
SAW) also contributes to the SAW biosensor signal 
response. The effect of the latter strongly depends on the 
morphology of the sensing layer and hence could be 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

influenced by the surface modification procedure [11] [12]. 
To guarantee the suitability of a newly developed biosensor 
chip, after ensuring intactness of the materials involved, it is 
essential to test the effect of this procedure in a subsequent 
binding experiment. This will be shown in the following, by  
using the example of streptavidin/biotin assay. 
 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS  
A. SAW device and fluidic set-up 
The shear horizontal SAW resonator is based on a small 
(4 x 4 mm²) 36°YX-LiTaO3 device with gold transducers 
and has a frequency of operation of 428.5 MHz. SAW 
measurements were performed in an oscillator circuit 
developed in-house with the SAW resonator as frequency-
determining element. Difference frequencies relative to a 
permanently oscillating reference oscillator, featuring a 
constant frequency in the range of 434 MHz, were used as 
signal output. The frequency resolution was 1 Hz. 
Experiments were performed using a flow injection analysis 
(FIA) system equipped with two peristaltic pumps (Ismatec, 
Wertheim, Germany) and an injection valve (Besta-Technik, 
Wilhelmsfeld, Germany). PTFE tubes served as connections 
between single units and as sample loop. The SAW resonator 
was included by means of a flow cell which was designed as 
part of an electronic circuit board integrated in the oscillator 
unit. The SAW device was mounted upside down onto 
isolated contact pads on the electronic board and coupled 
capacitively. The milled flow channel in between the contact 
pads allowed the fluid to pass along the SAW path. Details 
of the previous measurement setup (Fig. 1) have been 
described earlier [10].  
Our new developed SAW chips were mounted in a flow 
cell adapter, which connects the sensor device with FIA 
system (Fig. 2). The principle of measurement setup is the 
same as aforementioned.  
 
B. Parylene coating 
All SAW devices used in the following experiments were 
first coated with 0.1 µm parylene C to obtain a chemically 
homogeneous 
surface. 
This 
improves 
success 
and 
reproducibility of further preparation steps. Details of the 
process have been published earlier [10].  
C. Covalent binding of hydrogel 
Aminodextrane (AMD) with Mr 3.000 was used as 
intermediate hydrogel layer. The parylene C layer was 
activated by oxidation via plasma treatment and subsequent 
silanization 
with 
(3-glycidyloxypropyl)trimethoxysilane. 
After rinsing with acetone the sensors were treated overnight 
with an aqueous solution of hydrogel, c = 2 mg/ml. Then 
sensors were rinsed thoroughly with bidestilled water and 
dried. 
D. Immobilization of biotinylated BSA (b-BSA) 
The affinity system of streptavidin with biotin was used 
for exemplary measurements. The capture molecule b-BSA 
was immobilized on the AMD coated sensors. The amino 
groups were converted to carboxyl groups via glutaric 
anhydride dissolved in aqueous solution, c = 2 mg/µl. Details 
of the process have been published earlier [11]. Protein 
immobilization was performed on-line by means of the 
external FIA system. Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) was 
used as carrier stream. First, the carboxylized surface was 
activated with a solution of 0.05 M N-hydroxy succinimide 
and 0.2 M N-(3-dimethylamino-propyl)-N’-ethylcarbodi-
imide hydrochloride in bidistilled water and rinsed with PBS. 
Second, the surface was incubated with a solution of 1.8 µM 
b-BSA in acetate buffer, pH 5, and rinsed with PBS. Third, 
the remaining reactive groups on the surface were 
deactivated by flushing with a solution of 1 M ethanolamine, 
pH 8.5. After rinsing with PBS, the sensor was immediately 
used for the assay. 
E. Streptavidin assay 
Experiments were performed with PBS, pH 7.4, as carrier 
stream. The flow rate was set to 0.05 ml/min. Samples were 
loaded in the sample loop, injected into the carrier stream via 
the injection valve, and transported to the sensor. The 
injection interval was set to 60-300 s. After each injection 
the sensor was rinsed with PBS. Sensors with covalently 
immobilized b-BSA or BSA were used. Samples containing, 
c = 0 (1; 5; 10) µg/ml streptavidin were injected in the carrier 
stream. 
 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
SAW biosensors enable label-free and direct detection of 
DNA, proteins, and bacteria in real-time. Aiming at multi-
parameter analysis, we developed a disposable SAW 
biosensor chip based on an array-compatible biosensor 
housing  which encapsulated a SAW sensor (Fig. 1 A) except 
for an opening in the area of the active sensing structure (Fig. 
2 A) to permit common surface modification steps for 
immobilizing the sensing layer as described in section II. 
The effects of the packaging of the newly developed 
SAW biosensor chips on the signal responses were compared 
to those of the previous SAW biosensor devices to 
investigate the suitability of the new housing regarding the 
biosensor’s performance. Therefore, SAW measurements 
based on the affinity system streptavidin/biotin were 
performed with SAW biosensors integrated in the flow cell 
(Fig.1) and with newly developed SAW biosensor chips in 
the flow cell adapter (Fig.2) with the external FIA system. 
Biotinylated BSA was immobilized on the SAW sensor 
surface via an intermediate AMD layer, samples contained 
streptavidin. Each sensor was tested by injection of several 
concentrations of streptavidin, c = 0 (1; 5; 10) µg/ml. 
Exemplary signal responses are shown in Figure 3, the 
signals were reproducible (data not shown). Using a sensor 
with immobilized binding partner, i.e., b-BSA, the SAW 
signal response increases with higher concentrations of 
streptavidin until saturation is reached (Fig. 3A).  
 
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

In this work, the ability of the use of SAW biosensor for 
specific protein detection was shown with measurements in 
our previous flow cell in general. Significant streptavidin 
signals were obtained when the corresponding binding 
partner, b-BSA, was immobilized on the SAW biosensor 
surface. Aside from being specific, direct and label-free, the 
protein binding is monitored time-resolved enabling the 
determination of kinetic parameters of the binding reaction. 
However, the SAW set-up with flow cell is not suitable for 
medical applications. It contains mainly non-disposable 
components which could lead to carry-over effects between 
different measurements. An additional disadvantage is the 
comparatively large dimensions of flow cell (and tubing) 
leading to a significant delay of signal response times and 
increase of sample volumes. In consequence, the flow cells 
are not array compatible.  
 
     A 
 B 
 C
                       
                    
    
Figure 1.  Previous set-up with inserting of the SAW device. SAW device 
(a), flow cell, open (b) and flow cell, closed.  
 
 
  A 
 B 
 C
                        
                      
    
Therefore, we investigated if inserting SAW devices in 
disposable polymer housings are not only enable simple 
handling and reduction of coating chemicals but also the 
signal response of streptavidin assay is comparable to those 
obtained with unpacked SAW devices. The signal response 
of SAW biosensor chips resulting from binding of different 
concentrations of streptavidin to b-BSA on the surface is 
significantly higher (Fig. 3 B) than obtained with the 
previous set-up (Fig. 3 A). We think that the increased 
signals obtained with SAW biosensor chips result from the 
different channel geometry of the two described setups. In 
consequence, this would apply the use of SAW biosensor 
chip system to develop a suitable platform for biomedical 
applications.  
Figure 2.  Current set-up with inserting of the SAW chip. SAW chip 
(SAW device embedded in a polymer housing) (A), cavity of flow cell 
adapter, open (B) and flow cell adapter, closed (C). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      A                                                                                                    B
 
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
difference frequency [kHz]
time [sec]
0 µg/ml
0,5 µg/ml
1 µg/ml
5 µg/ml
10 µg/ml
c (Streptavidin)
          
-10
0
70
10 µg/ml
c (streptavidin)
0 µg/ml
0.5 µg/ml
1 µg/ml
5 µg/ml
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
differnce frequency [kHz]
time [sec]  
Figure 3.  Streptavidin assay. Typical measurement curves of the SAW biosensor. Biotinylated BSA  immobilized on sensor surface coated with AMD 
3.000. Different concentrations of  streptavidin (0 – 10 µg/ml) were used as analyte.  (A) Previous set-up with SAW devices. (B) Actual set-up with housed 
SAW devices (B).
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
We presented a set-up for analysis of future POC 
applications. In particular, this set-up offers a simple and 
cost-effective method for the detection of multiple protein 
analytes out of one sample, i.e., a protein marker profile. 
Such a profile could give a quick answer about the state of  
health of a patient (Figure 4) allowing an immediate 
adaptation of therapy. In the next step, the SAW biosensor 
chip array is optimized for biological applications with 
regard to real samples and required detection limits.  
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

In this work, we investigated that surface modification 
procedure established for unpacked SAW biosensors was 
successfully adapted to SAW biosensor chips in which the 
SAW devices were integrated in polymer housings. SAW 
biosensor 
signal 
responses 
obtained 
with 
streptavidin/biotin affinity system were not only similar to 
signals obtained with the previous setup, but even higher. 
Therefore, SAW biosensor chips permit a better biosensor 
efficiency.  Our housed SAW chips will now used for 
medical applications, e.g., detection of different disease 
markers.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. Lüftner et al., “Serum HER-2/neu in the management of 
breast cancer patients”, Clin. Biochem. vol. 36,  pp. 233-
240, 2003. 
[2] P. D’Orazio P, “Biosensors in clinical chemistry—2011 
update.”,  Clin Chim Acta vol. 412,  pp.1 749–1761, 2011. 
[3] J.H.T. Luong, K.B. Male and J.D. Glennon, “Biosensor 
technology: technology push versus market pull.”, Biotechnol. 
Adv ., vol. 26, pp. 492–500, 2008. 
[4] P. D’Orazio, “Biosensors in clinical chemistry – 2011 
update”, Clin. Chim. Acta, vol. 412, pp. 1749-1761, 2011. 
[5] T. Tekin, “Review of Packaging of Optoelectronic, 
Photonic, and MEMS Components”, IEEE J. Sel. Top. 
Quantum Electr., vol. 17, pp. 704-719, 2011.  
[6] F.J. Gruhl, B.E. Rapp and K. Länge, „Biosensors for 
Diagnostic 
Applications”, 
 
Adv. 
Biochem. 
Eng. 
Biotechnol., 2012, doi: 10.10007/10_2011_130. 
[7] G. Gauglitz and G. Proll, “Strategies for label-free optical 
detection “, Adv. Biochem. Engin./Biotechnol. vol. 109, pp. 
395-435, 2008. 
[8] R.B.M. Schasfoort and A.J. Tudos, Handbook of surface 
plasmon resonance, RCS Publishing, Cambridge, 2008, pp. 
173-220 
[9] G.T. Hermanson, Bioconjugate Techniques, 2nd ed., 
Academic Press, London, 2008, pp 101-109 
[10] F.J. Gruhl and K. Länge, „Surface modification of an 
acoustic biosensor allowing the detection of low 
concentrations of cancer markers”, Anal. Biochem. vol. 
420, pp. 188-190, 2012.  
[11] G. McHale, M.I. Newton, M.K. Banerjee and J.A. Cowen, 
“Acoustic wave–liquid interactions”,  Mat. Sci. Eng. C vol. 
12, pp. 17-22, 2000. 
[12] K. Länge, F.J. Gruhl and M. Rapp, „Influence of 
preparative carboxylation steps on the analyte response of 
an acoustic biosensor”,  IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 9, pp. 
2033-34, 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.   Model of a potential marker profile. Concentration of 
distinct proteins (here: 8) in serum can give quick information about 
state of health of patient. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

