Reducing Energy Consumption in a Sheep Tracking Network Using a Cluster-based 
Approach 
 
Ragnar Stølsmark 
Institute of Computer Science and Electrical 
Engineering 
University of Stavanger 
Stavanger, Norway 
rstolsmark@live.no 
Erlend Tøssebro 
Institute of Computer Science and Electrical 
Engineering 
University of Stavanger 
Stavanger, Norway 
erlend.tossebro@uis.no
 
 
Abstract—Sheep tracking ease the work of the farmer when 
retrieving the sheep. The current commercial sheep tracking 
solution is popular but not energy-efficient. It only uses GSM 
and GPS and has no interaction between the sheep. Sheep 
often walk in clusters. If a farmer knows the location of all 
clusters and also which sheep are in each cluster, he does not 
need to know the exact location of each sheep. By using a new 
cluster-based localization and data retrieval approach this 
paper show, through energy measurements and simulations, 
that it could be possible to reduce the average energy 
consumption by more than 50 % in flocks were the sheep 
walks in large clusters. The reduced energy consumption could 
be used to either increase the update frequency or to reduce 
the battery capacity. The cluster–based approach can also 
eliminate the need for GSM and GPS modules on part of the 
sheep nodes, thereby making the system more affordable for 
farmers. The reduced energy consumption and cost makes the 
solution described in this paper better than the currently 
available commercial one.  
Keywords-Wireless Sensor Networks; Animal Tracking; 
Energy Consumption. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Sheep farmers in Norway send their sheep to graze on the 
fertile mountain grass during the summer. This is important 
since the grass on the farm then is allowed to grow freely 
and can be harvested and used as food for the sheep during 
the winter. One of the big problems with this custom is to 
locate the sheep when the summer is over. The common 
method for sheep localization has been that the farmer 
searches for the sheep manually. This search will typically 
start in the area where the farmer thinks the sheep will be 
located and expand outwards to the less likely areas. The 
search continues until all sheep are found, or the farmer 
grows tired of looking for them. This process can take a 
week or more of walking in often challenging terrain. 
In the last few years there have come a solution to this 
inefficient retrieval method.  Telespor [1] is a commercially 
available system based on the electronic shepherd research 
project [2]. It tracks the sheep using GPS and sends the 
position of the sheep back to the farmer using the GSM 
network. However, it is far from perfect. The biggest 
problem is cost. Each unit cost approximately € 200, which 
is too expensive for most farmers, at least if they want to 
equip their entire flock with these devices. Another limiting 
factor is the battery capacity. The batteries should not have 
to be replaced during the season which last around 100 days. 
Since there is a size and cost limitation on the batteries, it is 
important to reduce the energy consumption of each update 
to allow for more position updates and thereby increase the 
utility of the system.  
This paper looks at the possibility of mitigating both the 
cost and energy consumption problem by taking advantage 
of the fact that sheep tend to move in clusters. In the current 
Telespor system every sheep find their own position using 
GPS. The farmer however, only needs to know which sheep 
are in each cluster and the position of one of the sheep in 
every cluster. Knowing this, it is possible to construct an 
algorithm where only the sheep with the highest battery 
level in a cluster use the GPS to find its location. The rest of 
the cluster only needs to report which cluster they belong to. 
This will reduce the energy consumption since GPS 
localization requires fairly high amounts of energy.  
Using a cluster-based approach it is also achievable to 
have some of the sheep only carry radio transceivers, not 
GPS receivers and GSM transceivers,. It will only be 
possible to locate these cheaper equipped sheep when they 
are in a cluster with at least one sheep with a GPS receiver. 
It can be argued that this information is of limited value 
when retrieving the sheep. The farmer has to retrieve every 
cluster anyway and will therefore find these extra sheep. It 
can however be useful during the season for a farmer to 
know if a sheep is doing well. If for instance a sheep that 
has been following a cluster for some time suddenly 
disappears, it might be a signal that it is injured or dead. 
Two systems have been developed and tested during this 
research project. The difference between the two systems 
lies in how the sheep transport data back to the server. In the 
system called Distributed GSM, every sheep reports their 
position. In the Centralized GSM approach, only the sheep 
responsible for finding the GPS position of the cluster, 
report its position along with the information of which 
sheep are in the cluster. 
This paper is structured as follows: Section II contains 
related work. System design and equipment is covered in 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Section III. Section IV contains the results found by 
analyzing the different systems, measuring the energy 
consumption and performing simulations. Section V 
concludes the paper and looks at future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The Telespor [1] system described in [2] is used as a base 
line reference throughout this paper and is therefore a 
closely related work. Telespor is described in Section III as 
a benchmark version was made to work on the same 
equipment used in the rest of this paper. This benchmark 
version was built on the principles described in the 
electronic shepherd paper. 
Stølsmark and Tøssebro looked at the possibility of 
localization via trilateration in a sheep tracking network [6]. 
Some of the sheep would be equipped with GPS and the rest 
of the flock would find their position by using GPS sheep as 
beacons for RSSI-based trilateration. They found that the 
position estimates were not accurate enough to be useful. 
This was mainly due to the RSSI being highly dependent on 
non-distance related factors, such as 
weather and 
topography. 
Huircán et al [7] tried to locate cattle in a field using 
RSSI. They were able to achieve a high level of accuracy 
but only by having a dense beacon placement, with around 
80 m between each beacon. This makes such a localization 
scheme unsuitable for a large area where sheep typically 
graze.  
 In the Zebranet project [8, 9] Juang et al. tried to track 
zebras in an area without GSM coverage. The zebras would 
store logs of their own positions and exchange these logs 
when they met other zebras. The logs could then be 
downloaded by the data collecting scientists driving around 
the savannah with radio transceivers.  
The WildSensing project [10] tries to monitor badgers in 
the wild in an energy-efficient manner. Dyo et al. equipped 
the badgers with RFID tags and set up RFID readers at 
strategic locations where the badgers would likely be. Since 
the badgers sleep during the day, the readers would only be 
active at night. Markham et al. even tried monitoring the 
badgers in their underground burrows using magnetic fields 
[11]. 
Polastre et al. monitored seabirds on the remote Great 
Duck Island [12] using a tiered architecture to save energy 
and money. This meant that the wireless sensor network 
nodes would send their data to a base station on the island 
which would provide WAN connectivity to send data back 
to the scientists. 
Surveys on different localization methods can be found as 
part of the extensive wireless sensor network survey 
performed Yick et al. [13] and in the survey by Akyildiz et 
al. [14]. 
Much research effort has been put into localization, but 
different applications require different solutions. A solution 
that works for badgers is not necessarily suitable for sheep. 
In the case of sheep, it is possible to design a system that 
benefits from the fact that lambs follow their mothers. The 
application-specific requirements will make it difficult to 
design one tracking system that can handle every situation. 
It could be possible to identify a few different scenarios that 
would fit most applications and design solutions to them. 
An example of such a scenario could be tracking a large 
animal in an area without GSM coverage. Identifying the 
suitable scenarios and creating solutions to them is still an 
open problem.       
III. 
SYSTEM DESIGN AND EQUIPMENT 
A sheep tracking system has to be able to provide the 
farmer with the position of his sheep, at regular time 
intervals, throughout an entire season, without any manual 
local 
intervention. 
Any 
method 
requiring 
manual 
synchronization or battery replacement is therefore not an 
option. It should also be possible to change the frequency of 
position updates during the season since it is more important 
to have frequent updates when collecting the sheep. 
This paper looks closer at three possible sheep tracking 
solutions. They all use GSM for data transport between the 
sheep and the farmer. They also use GPS as part of the 
localization process. The difference between them lies in the 
amount of interaction between the sheep in a flock. 
A. Telespor 
Telespor is the system farmers are currently using to 
locate their sheep. It is a simple but working solution with 
no interaction between the different sheep in a flock. At 
regular intervals the sheep calculates their location using 
GPS and sends this location to a server via the GSM 
network. The benefit of this approach is that since it does 
not communicate between the sheep, it is not necessary to 
equip the sheep with an additional transceiver and antenna. 
One of the problems the farmers have reported with the 
Telespor system is the poor performance in areas with little 
GSM coverage [3]. Sometimes, it could take weeks between 
sheep position updates. The results presented in [4] show 
that adding sheep to sheep communication equipment is a 
good solution to the coverage problem. Therefore it is 
reasonable to argue that sheep to sheep transceiver 
equipment should be added anyway, and thereby making it 
possible to implement the two other systems studied in this 
paper. 
Telespor is used as a baseline reference when studying 
the performance of the different systems. It is especially 
interesting to look at how much energy consumption can be 
reduced by using a cluster-based positioning approach, to 
see if it is worth the effort and added complexity. Algorithm 
1 describes the Telespor solution.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

On init(){ 
 
SleepUntil(first update); 
} 
On update(){ 
 
pos = GPS.getPosition(); 
 
GSM.SendToServer(pos, id);
 
SleepUntil(next update); 
} 
Algorithm 1. The Telespor algorithm. 
B. Distributed GSM 
The Distributed GSM solution is identical to the 
Telespor system in the way that each sheep send their 
position back to the server. The positioning differs due to 
the cluster-based approach. The sheep are synchronized and 
wakes up from sleep at regular intervals. Upon wake up, 
every sheep will calculate a delay based on the amount of 
energy left in their battery. In experiments 20 seconds was 
found to be a sufficient maximum value for this delay. If a 
leader message is received during this time the receiving 
sheep will become a follower of the leader sheep. If a sheep 
does not receive any leader message before the delay expire, 
it will become a leader sheep itself and send out a leader 
message. A leader sheep and all of its followers are 
considered to be one cluster. The leader will locate its 
position using GPS and broadcast this position to the 
followers. The followers, as well as the leader, will report 
the same position back to the server via the GSM network. 
Distributed GSM require every sheep to individually report 
its own position, no in-network aggregation or collection is 
performed in this solution. The Distributed GSM algorithm 
can be seen in Algorithm 2.   
 
On init(){ 
 
Clock.Synchronize(); 
 
SleepUntil(first update); 
} 
On update(){ 
 
delay = CalculateDelay(battery.status); 
 
Wait(delay); 
 
if(HasReceived(leaderMessage)){ 
 
   //become follower 
 
   leader = leaderMessage.leader; 
 
}else{ 
 
   //become leader 
 
   leader = this; 
  
   leaderMessage.leader = this; 
 
   Broadcast(leaderMessage) 
 
   pos = GPS.getPosition(); 
 
   Broadcast(sheepid, pos); 
 
} 
 
GSM.SendToServer(leader.id, id); 
 
SleepUntil(next update); 
} 
Algorithm 2. The Distributed GSM algorithm. 
C. Centralized GSM  
Centralized GSM is identical to Distributed GSM when it 
comes to leader choice and sheep localization. However, 
instead of each sheep individually reporting its position to a 
server via the GSM network, the follower sheep send a 
notification to the leader. The leader sends its position along 
with the list of followers to the server. This has the potential 
of saving energy since the energy consumption of each 
follower is reduced at the expense of increased energy 
consumption for the leader. The increased consumption at 
the leader is due to more communication and an extra 
listening period when waiting for the messages from the 
followers. It is also possible to use the Centralized GSM 
solution to reduce costs by not equipping every sheep with 
GSM transceivers. Centralized GSM is described in 
Algorithm 3. 
 
On init(){ 
 
Clock.Synchronize(); 
 
SleepUntil(first update); 
} 
On update(){ 
 
delay = CalculateDelay(battery.status); 
 
Wait(delay); 
 
if(HasReceived(leaderMessage)){ 
 
    //become follower 
 
    SendToLeader(id); 
            SleepUntil(next update); 
         }else{ 
 
   //become leader 
 
   numFollowers = 0; 
 
   followers = Ø; 
 
   Wait(followerdelay); 
 
   For(each receivedFollower){ 
   
      followers.Add(receivedFollower) ; 
 
      numFollowers++;  
  
   } 
 
   pos = GPS.getPosition(); 
GSM.SendToServer(pos, id,           
numFollowers, followers); 
 
   SleepUntil(next update); 
 
} 
} 
Algorithm 3. The Centralized GSM algorithm. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
To find the best algorithm, three different investigation 
methods were used: Analysis, experiments and simulations. 
A. Analysis of the different solutions 
 To be able to better understand the difference in energy 
consumption between the different solutions an analysis of 
them was performed. The analysis tries to calculate the 
expected number of updates each sheep can perform before 
running out of battery.  
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE 1. LIBELIUM WASPMOTE ENERGY FIGURES. 
 
The analysis use the energy consumption figures for the 
Libelium Waspmote [5]. This is the hardware that was used 
to measure the energy consumption of the different 
algorithms. The relevant hardware figures are listed in Table 
1.  
The analysis is based on a scenario where the sheep is 
always part of the same cluster and every sheep starts with a 
fully charged battery. Defining N as the number of sheep in 
a cluster, each sheep will be leader in 1/N of the execution  
cycles. U is defined as the average number of position 
updates a sheep can perform before running out of battery 
power. The following formulas were used for the different 
algorithms: 
1) Telespor 
                       
GSM
Proc
GPS
Bat
U



         

2) Distributed GSM 
         
Proc
GSM
*(2*XRcv)
N
N 1
2*XBc)
N *(GPS
1
Bat
U






     (2)
 
 
3) Centralized GSM 
Proc)
XBc)
*(2*XRcv
N
1
N
GSM)
)1 *Xrcv
(N
2*XBc
N *(GPS
1
(
Bat
U









     (3) 
 
When performed with a varying number of sheep in the 
cluster, the analysis was able to provide some insight into 
the properties of the different algorithms. Telespor is the 
preferred algorithm when there is only one sheep in a 
cluster, making it good for small flocks. For clusters with 
more than one sheep Distributed and Centralized GSM is 
better than Telespor. Distributed and Centralized GSM has 
almost the same energy consumption, however the gap 
between them increase with cluster size in favor of 
Centralized GSM. The analysis results can be viewed in Fig. 
1. 
 
Figure 1. Analysis of average number of updates per sheep with different 
cluster sizes.  
One algorithm was analyzed, in addition to the three 
mentioned earlier. This was a Centralized GSM algorithm 
were the nodes would broadcast every message they 
received to extend it into a multi-hop network, since this 
could increase flock size. It was decided that this algorithm 
would be dropped after the analysis showed that it 
performed worse than the other algorithms, especially in 
clusters with more than 10 sheep. Another point is that if the 
cluster covers a very large area, it gets harder for the farmer 
to find the sheep. With a multi-hop network it becomes 
more difficult to define the maximum area of a cluster. 
Limiting the number of hops could be a possible solution.  
B. Measurements of Energy Consumption 
The three different systems were implemented on the 
Libelium Waspmote [5] wireless sensor network platform. 
This is a platform were different modules can be attached 
when needed. The GPS and GSM modules were used during 
the 
energy 
consumption 
experiments. 
The 
GSM 
communication was performed by means of GPRS data 
packets with a maximum payload of 100 bytes. If a sheep 
cluster had more than 30 sheep, it would have to send 
additional packets and thereby slightly increase energy 
consumption. The communication between the nodes was 
carried out using an XBee 868 MHz transceiver attached to 
a 4.5 dBi antenna. This has five different power levels. On 
the highest power level it has an output of 315 mW and a 
mean range of 515 m [4]. The transceiver was set to 
transmit at the lowest power level during the energy 
measurements. This corresponds to an output of 1 mW, with 
an unmeasured range shorter than 515 m. The energy 
consumption analysis showed that the choice of power level 
was not a significant factor in the total energy consumption. 
There was only a 2% increase in battery life at the lowest 
power level compared to the highest. The battery used in the 
test had a voltage of 3.7 V and a capacity of 6600 mAh. All 
tests were performed with the nodes stationary, in close 
proximity and in an office environment.  
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1
3
5
7
9
Number of updates 
Cluster size 
Telespor
Distributed
GSM
Centralized
GSM
Battery capacity (Bat) 
6600 mAh 
GPS consumption (GPS) 
27.5 mA 
GSM consumption (GSM) 
100 mA 
Processor consumption (Proc) 
9 mA 
XBee broadcast consumption,  
full power (XBc)  
160 mA 
XBee receive consumption (XRcv) 
73 mA 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE 2. ENERGY CONSUMPTION MEASUREMENTS 
 
Six different setups were used for the experiments: 
Single node Telespor, Distributed GSM and Centralized 
GSM, two nodes running Distributed GSM and Centralized 
GSM and three nodes running the Distributed GSM 
algorithm. Every time one cycle of the algorithm had been 
completed the nodes would start the algorithm over again 
without sleeping, as the sleeping energy consumption 
should be equal among the three algorithms. All nodes 
reported their battery level back to the server in the same 
message used for reporting position. In the Centralized 
GSM case this information was sent via the current leader 
node. Each setup was tested with approximately 100 updates 
per node. The average decrease in battery level per update is 
displayed in Table 2 along with the standard deviation of the 
measurements. The most surprising result was the big 
difference between the energy consumption between the 
Centralized and Distributed GSM algorithms. It seems like 
the GSM use more energy than assumed in the analysis, 
however some of the difference might be caused by the 
battery level measurements not being 100 % accurate. 
Sometimes the battery level would actually increase 
between updates. This factor is probably the reason why 
Telespor has higher measured energy consumption than the 
Leader in the Distributed GSM algorithm. The Distributed 
GSM leader algorithm does everything the Telespor 
algorithm does, but also sends out two XBee messages and 
waits for synchronization with potential followers. This 
leads to the conclusion that some of the energy 
measurements must be wrong. Therefore we have chosen to 
conservatively set the Telespor energy consumption as 80% 
of the measured Distributed GSM consumption when 
comparing the algorithms in simulations. 
C. Simulation Setup 
The  results from the energy consumption measurements 
was used as input to a Java simulator built for the purpose of 
evaluating the three different algorithms in a realistic sheep 
grazing scenario with between 50 and 250 sheep. The 
simulator placed the sheep randomly in a landscape 
measuring 5000 x 5000 meters. Every sheep was equipped 
with a transceiver that had a range which followed a 
gaussian distribution with a configurable average.  
 Figure 2. Libelium Waspmote [5]. 
Once placed, the sheep would discover the other sheep 
within their transceiver range and form clusters. The sheep 
would then start executing the leadership choice part of the 
two cluster-based algorithms. With a role as leader or 
follower the sheep would then deduct energy from the 
battery accordingly. This cycle of leader choice and energy 
deduction would continue until no sheep had any energy left 
in their battery. Each simulation scenario was repeated 1000 
times and the figures presented in the results section are 
averages of these simulations. The simulations focus on 
number of updates instead of time until battery depletion. 
This is because all algorithms use the Waspmote hibernate 
mode between updates. In this mode the Waspmote 
consumes no energy from the main battery, since it only use 
the auxiliary clock battery to run the real-time clock. 
Therefore it is not necessary to consider the update interval 
when comparing the algorithms.  
The Telespor solution was not simulated since it has no 
interaction between sheep. This means that it will have the 
same energy consumption no matter how the sheep are 
distributed. A simple calculation was done instead. If one 
Telespor update costs on average 0.244 % (80% of the 
measured consumption of the Distributed GSM leader) of 
the total energy in the battery, the battery would last 
approximately 410 updates. 
D. Simulation Results 
1) Effect of Transceiver Range:  The transceiver range 
is adjustable by changing the transceiver power level. It is 
interesting to look at how this range affects the energy 
consumption. A shorter range will give smaller clusters and 
thereby increase the localization accuracy but it will also 
consume more energy. To test this, simulations with 
different transceiver ranges and a constant flock size of 250 
sheep were performed. Table 3 shows the average number 
of updates per sheep in these simulations while Table 4 
displays the average error. 
The results indicate that it is possible to double the battery 
life by increasing the transceiver range from 100 to 500 m. 
An average error of approximately 300 m might be 
unacceptable, especially in areas with limited visibility such 
as forests.  
Node type (number of nodes 
in test) 
Average battery level 
percentage decrease 
per update 
Standard 
deviation 
Telespor (1) 
0.5472 
3.2 
Distributed GSM leader (1) 
0.1445 
0.7 
Centralized GSM leader (1) 
0.4043 
0.9 
Distributed GSM leader (2) 
0.2418 
0.8 
Distributed GSM follower (2) 
0.0875 
0.6 
Centralized GSM leader (2) 
0.7576 
1.5 
Centralized GSM follower (2) 
0.0400 
1.3 
Distributed GSM leader (3) 
0.3056 
1.0 
Distributed GSM follower (3) 
0.0920 
0.7 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
TABLE 3. AVERAGE NUMBER OF UPDATES PER SHEEP WITH 
DIFFERENT TRANSCEIVER RANGES  
Transceiver range/std. 
dev. 
Distributed GSM 
Centralized 
GSM 
100 m/34 m 
380 
168 
200 m/68 m 
483 
245 
300 m/103 m 
578 
335 
400 m/138 m 
659 
429 
505 m/174 m 
728 
530 
 
TABLE 4. AVERAGE ERROR [M] FOR EACH UPDATE WITH 
DIFFERENT TRANSCEIVER RANGES. 
Transceiver range/std. 
dev. 
Distributed GSM 
Centralized 
GSM 
100 m/34 m 
17 
20 
200 m/68 m 
77 
90 
300 m/103 m 
149 
165 
400 m/138 m 
223 
234 
505 m/174 m 
299 
318 
 
Choosing a transceiver power level that gives a range of 
300 m is a good trade-off between energy consumption and 
accuracy. When comparing the two algorithms it seems like 
the average error is quite similar.  
The battery lasts longer using Distributed GSM than 
Centralized GSM, especially with a short transceiver range. 
There are simply not enough followers per leader to 
outweigh the added leader cost of the Centralized solution. 
Clustering of Sheep: The two new algorithms presented in 
this paper use a cluster-based approach for localization and, 
in the Centralized version, also for data retrieval. Therefore, 
it is interesting to look at what effect the average cluster size 
has on the performance of the algorithms. To simulate sheep 
flocks with different tendencies to move in clusters, the 
sheep placement method was changed. First, a number of 
clusters were given a random position. Then, the sheep 
would be added to a random cluster and given the same 
position as that of the cluster. The simulations were 
performed with 250 sheep in the flock and the transceiver 
range set to 300 meters with a standard deviance of 103 
meters. The average number of updates per sheep can be 
seen in Fig. 3. The centralized algorithm becomes better 
than the distributed when cluster size increases. The average 
energy consumption curves intersect at an average cluster 
size of approximately 8 sheep. This is not an unrealistic 
cluster size, especially if lambs are fitted with transceivers 
as well. The lambs always follow their sheep mother unless 
there has been an accident. Since each sheep typically have 
2 lambs, there only needs to be 3 separate sheep in a cluster 
to get a total of 9 transceivers. If the lamb also carry 
transceivers the centralized algorithm is preferable. If not, 
the distributed algorithm will probably perform better, 
unless the flock is very large or in a small area. With a very 
small area there may not be much use for a sheep tracking 
system anyway.     
 
  
Figure 3. Average number of updates per sheep with different number of 
clusters.  
2) GPS percentage:  The sheep that are not leaders do 
not use GPS to find their position. To save money it could 
be possible to drop the GPS module from some of the sheep. 
These will then only have the possibility to be followers and 
can not find and report their position unless they are within 
range of another sheep with GPS. If this approach is to be 
implemented, it would be best to use the Centralized 
algorithm since it would then be possible to also abandon 
the GSM module on the nodes without GPS. The success of 
this method can be measured using the update failure ratio 
of the non-GPS nodes. The update failure ratio is the 
number of updates failed due to being out of range of a 
GPS-sheep, divided by the total number of updates 
performed by non-GPS nodes. Table 5 shows the update 
failure ratio for different flock sizes and number of clusters 
with a GPS percentage from 20-80 %. The transceiver range 
is kept at 300 m, with a standard deviance of 103 m and the 
centralized GSM algorithm is used. The GPS sheep are 
randomly chosen from the set of sheep. The results show 
that it is possible to drop the GPS and GSM modules on 
some of the sheep if the flock is big enough. 50 sheep is too 
few, but with more than 100 sheep and some clustering it is 
a good solution. Especially if lambs are included among 
those 100, since that increase the clustering effect. 
 
 TABLE 5. AVERAGE NON-GPS UPDATE FAILURE RATIO FOR 
DIFFERENT FLOCK SIZES AND NUMBER OF CLUSTERS.  
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Number of updates 
Number of clusters 
Distributed
GSM
Centralized
GSM
Flock size and number of clusters 
20 % 
GPS 
50 % 
GPS 
80 % 
GPS 
50 sheep and no clustering 
0.89 
0.74 
0.62 
100 sheep and no clustering 
0.79 
0.55 
0.39 
250 sheep and no clustering 
0.55 
0.23 
0.10 
50 sheep and 30 clusters 
0.65 
0.33 
0.18 
100 sheep and 30 clusters 
0.41 
0.11 
0.03 
250 sheep and 30 clusters 
0.12 
0.01 
0.00 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
TABLE 6. AVERAGE NUMBER OF UPDATES PER SHEEP WITH 
DIFFERENT FLOCK SIZES  
 
A good solution could be to equip the sheep mothers with 
GPS and the lambs with no GPS, since lambs would be able 
to report their position as long as they stay with their 
mother. 
3) Flock size: The flock size is a factor in choice of 
algorithm, but not as important as the clustering effect. 
However, a bigger flock can lead to bigger clusters.  The 
simulation results in Table 6 show the average number of 
updates with different flock sizes. The simulations were 
performed with no clustering effect and a 300 m transceiver 
range. The performance varies with flock size, but with no 
clustering effect the Distributed GSM outperforms the 
Centralized GSM for all common flock sizes. For flocks 
with less than 50 sheep and no clustering effect the most 
efficient algorithm is Telespor.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The energy measurements and simulations showed that it 
is possible to reduce the energy consumption of a sheep 
tracking network by more than 50% by using the Centralized 
GSM algorithm in a sheep flock with big clusters. In small 
flocks the Telespor solution is still the best since it has the 
lowest cost in clusters with only one sheep. In flocks with an 
average cluster size of approximately five sheep the 
Distributed GSM is the most energy efficient algorithm. The 
Centralized GSM is still preferable in these situations due to 
the possible cost reduction of not having to equip every 
sheep with GSM modules.  
The best setup for a typical farmer with a flock consisting 
of more than 100 animals will be to equip all the sheep 
mothers with full functionality GSM and GPS nodes running 
the Centralized GSM algorithm. The lambs could then be 
equipped with a simpler version without GSM and GPS. 
This will reduce cost without increasing the update failure 
ratio since lambs follow their mothers. 
The next step in this project is to simulate and check the 
efficiency of the Centralized algorithm using real-world 
sheep location data. Telespor has allowed us access to a data 
set with over 400 000 sheep positions. Using this data will 
give a clearer indication of how much performance gain can 
be expected. It will be interesting to look at how big the 
clustering effect is, as some sheep prefer walking alone while 
others are more social. With real-world data it is possible to 
simulate movement and thereby look at the possibility of 
enhancing the algorithm if some sheep stay together in a 
group over time. 
The final step in this project should be a real-world 
deployment with as many sheep as possible. This is the only 
way to really prove the performance of the Centralized GSM 
algorithm.      
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Telespor. 
Company 
Website. 
Available: 
http://www.telespor.no. Last accessed: 24th Apr 2012. 
[2] B. Thorstensen, T. Syversen, T-A. Bjørnvold, and T. Walseth, 
''Electronic shepherd – a low-cost, low bandwith, wireless 
network system,'' Proc. of the 2nd international conference on 
Mobile systems applications and services, ACM, 2004, pp. 
245-255. 
[3] A. S. Haugset and G. Nossum, ''Erfaringer med bruk av 
elektronisk overvåkningsutstyr på sau i 2010,'' Notat 2010:17 
Trøndelag Forsking og Utvikling AS, 2010. 
[4] R. Stølsmark and E. Tøssebro, ”Can a multi-hop solution 
improve GSM coverage for tracking networks?,” Proc. of the 
european conference on the use of modern information and 
communication technologies (ECUMICT 2012), Nevelland 
v.z.w Landegem, Mar 2012, pp. 95-106. 
[5] Libelium Waspmote: Product information. Available: http:// 
http://www.libelium.com/products/waspmote. Last accessed 
24th Apr 2012.  
[6] R. Stølsmark and E. Tøssebro, “Uncertainty in trilateration: Is 
RSSI-based range estimation accurate enough for animal 
tracking?,” Proc. 1st international conference on sensor 
networks (SENSORNETS) 2012,  ScitePress, Feb 2012, pp. 
237-241. 
[7] Huircán, J. I., Muñoz, C., Young, H., Von Dossow, L.,Bustos, 
J., Vivallo, G. and Toneatti, M., “ZigBee-based wireless 
sensor network localization for cattle monitoring in grazing 
fields,” in Computers and Electronics in Agriculture vol. 
74(1), Elsevier, 2010, pp. 258-264.  
[8] Juang P., Oki H., Wang Y., Martonosi M., Peh L.S. and 
Rubenstein D., “Energy-efficient computing for wildlife 
tracking: design tradeoffs and early experiences with 
ZebraNet,” Proc. of the 10th international conference on 
Architectural support for programming languages and 
operating systems (ASPLOS-X), ACM, 2002, pp. 96-107. 
[9] Zhang P., Sadler C. M., Lyon S. A. and Martonosi M., 
”Hardware design experiences in ZebraNet,” Proc. of the 2nd 
international conference on Embedded  networked sensor 
systems (SENSYS „04) , 2004, ACM, pp. 227-238. 
[10] Dyo V., Ellwood S. A., Macdonald D. W., Markham A., 
Mascolo C., Pásztor B., Scellato S., Trigoni N., Wohlers R. 
and Yousef K., “Evolution and sustainability of a wildlife 
monitoring sensor network,” Proc. of the 8th ACM 
Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems 
(SENSYS ‟10), 2010, ACM, pp. 127-140. 
[11] Markham A., Trigoni N., Ellwood S. A. and Macdonald D. 
W., “Magneto-inductive tracking of underground animals” 
Proc. of the 8th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked 
Sensor Systems (SENSYS ‟10), 2010, ACM, pp. 365-366. 
[12] Polastre J., Szewczyk R., Mainwaring A., Culler D. and 
Anderson J., “Analysis of wireless sensor networks for habitat 
monitoring” in Wireless Sensor Networks, 2004, Springer, pp 
399-423. 
[13] Yick J., Mukherjee B. and Ghosal D., “Wireless sensor 
network survey” in Computer Networks vol. 52(12), 2008, 
Elsevier, pp. 2292-2330. 
[14] Akyildiz I. F., Su W., Sankarasubramaniam Y., Cayirci E., 
“Wireless sensor networks: a survey,” in Computer Networks 
vol 38(4), 2002, Elsevier, pp. 393-422. 
 
Flock size  
Distributed GSM 
Centralized 
GSM 
50 sheep  
409 
189 
100 sheep 
469 
235 
150 sheep  
514 
272 
200 sheep 
549 
305 
250 sheep 
578 
335 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

