A Wireless Sensor Network to Study the Impacts of Climate Changes in
Agriculture: The Coffee FACE in Brazil
André Torre-Neto
Embrapa Agricultural Instrumentation
São Carlos, SP Brazil
andre@cnpdia.embrapa.br
Raquel Ghini
Embrapa Environment
Jaguariúna, SP Brazil
raquel@cnpma.embrapa.br
Abstract—Climate change is considered one of humankind’s
greatest challenges in the near future. The climate change is
expected to interfere in the scenario of worldwide agriculture.
Its economic, social and environmental impacts can be positive,
negative or neutral, since these changes can decrease, increase
or have no impact on plant diseases, pests or weeds depending
on each region or period of time considered. A type of
experiment
called
FACE,
Free
Air
Carbon-dioxide
Enrichment, has been conducted in the USA, UK, Germany,
Japan, Australia, Italy, Denmark, among other countries, to
study particularly the impacts of the CO2 concentration
increasing on crops. In Brazil, the first FACE experiment in
South America has been installed by a group of scientists of
Embrapa
(Brazilian
Agricultural
Research
Corporation).
Compared to the existing FACE projects, the Brazilian
implementation has been innovated with a wireless sensor
network approach. In the present article, we describe the
design and some operational aspects of that implementation.
Keywords-Wireless Sensors; Environment Monitoring; Plant
Diseases; Climate Change; FACE Facility.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The global atmospheric CO2 concentration is increasing
rapidly in the last decades and despite the international
efforts for the reduction of CO2 emission. It will probably
continue increasing and a long period will be necessary for it
to return to the previous concentration [1]. The effects of
high CO2 atmospheric concentration on crops are often
observed in the host plant, resulting in alterations in the host-
pathogen relationship. CO2 enrichment promotes changes in
plant metabolism, growth and physiological processes. There
is a significant increase in the photosynthetic rate and a
decrease in the transpiration rate per unit of leaf area, while
total plant transpiration sometimes increases, due to the
larger leaf area. Despite the evidence of beneficial effects of
CO2 on the host plant, it is not well known whether these
effects will still take place in the presence of pathogens,
pests and weeds or other limiting factors, particularly in
tropical countries [2]. Few studies have been conducted in
controlled conditions. They might not reflect plant responses
in the field, where there are variations and interactions
among temperature, precipitation, and other factors. The
search for more realistic conditions has led to the use of
open-top chambers (OTCs) and Free Air Carbon-dioxide
Enrichment (FACE) experiments [3].
In Brazil, the first FACE facility has been installed near
Jaguariúna city - state of São Paulo, besides the installation
of six OTCs experiments throughout the country (Belém,
PA; Petrolina, PE; Sete Lagoas, MG; Londrina, PR;
Jaguariúna, SP; and Vacaria, RS). The project named
“Impacts of climate change on plant diseases, pests and
weeds”, with the nickname “Climapest”, has been supported
by Embrapa (Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation).
The
severity
of
diseases
and
pests,
weeds,
plant
development,
interaction
with
microorganisms,
plant
nutrition, production and other possible impacts will be
evaluated. The Climapest-FACE has been planned
to
discover the effects of high CO2 concentration on coffee
diseases, pests and weeds, as well as plant characteristics.
The studies with forest species, apple, peach, soybean, grape,
corn, cotton, castor beans, forage crops, coffee, cassava and
banana will be conducted in the OTCs.
There are more than 30 FACE facilities around the
world. They consist of a set of circles having pipes around
them to perform the CO2 fumigation. The fumigation can be
achieved by direct injection or prediluted injection [4]. In
either case the main operational issue is to maintain
acceptable
fluctuations
and
gradients
of
the
CO2
concentration inside the circles, which are affected mostly by
the wind. In Brazil it was chosen the direct injection system
and an octagonal arrangement of pipes, which is generally
utilized in existing installations. Each octagon segment has
individual gas valves to compensate the wind direction and a
flow control device to compensate the wind speed changes.
The OTCs have smaller circles, around 2m in diameter, and
a plastic cover with an open top surrounds them. The basic
instrumentation for a FACE and OTCs experiments usually
consists of an Infra Red Gas Analyzer (IRGA) to measure
the CO2 concentration, an anemometer, a set of proportional
or on-off valves and other environmental sensors like air
temperature and humidity, solar radiation and precipitation.
The improvement that has been accomplished for the
Brazilian FACE and OTCs instrumentation is to operate all
those devices based on the Wireless Sensor Network
technology, already present in the rural area [5] and which is
the expertise of the Brazilian FACE implementation group
[6]. This approach has simplified the system installation and
maintenance
and
has
improved
its
electromagnetic
compatibility, since lightning is a huge issue in Brazil.
II.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
By the time this project started (January 2009), most
necessary instruments were not commercially available as
wireless devices. Therefore, the decision was to buy
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

conventional sensors and actuators, as well as wireless
ZigBee based
modules, to
develop
a
general-purpose
interface circuit to integrate those parts to achieve the
required wireless sensor network devices. In Table 1, it is
shown a list of the chosen devices and the features
considered for developing the interface circuit. The CO2
sensor
model
GMP343
was
selected
for
the
FACE
experiment and the CO2 sensor model GMM222 was chosen
for the OTCs experiment. The weather devices, i.e., the
anemometer, the sensors of air temperature, air humidity,
precipitation and barometric pressure are all part of the same
instrument, the WXT520 weather station.
The wireless modules were purchased from Telegesis
Inc., specifically the ETRX3 series. They incorporate the
ZigBee protocol and operate in 2.4 GHz. They are IEEE
802.15.4 compliant and they are expected to operate in the
planned range of 100 meters from each other with an on-
board antenna. They also have all necessary digital and
analog inputs/outputs, besides a serial interface and five
counter/
timers.
A
set
of
proprietary
AT
commands
facilitates their software development.
The general-purpose interface circuit was designed with
the following premises:
• Should be powered by a 12Vdc external source or a
4.2Vdc internal lithium-ion battery;
• Should have serial communication with either EIA or
TTL levels;
• Should provide four analog single ended inputs with
fixed gain individually adjustable;
• Should have a switchable 12Vdc output capable to
supply the power requirements of the selected sensors and
actuators devices;
• Should provide I/O pins and power supply lines in a
connector for a secondary interface board.
The block diagram of the achieved circuit can be seen in
Figure 1. Two light emitter diodes (LEDs) inform the system
operation mode. The 3.3Vdc regulator is a low dropout and
low quiescent current circuit since the internal battery mode
is supposed to be low power giving long battery life
operation. This basic circuit was used to interface all devices
listed in Table 1 but the latching Solenoid Valves. For those
valves it was developed a secondary board with H bridge
circuits to provide the direct and reverse pulses for up to four
solenoids.
Figure 2 shows the final assembly for the GMM222 CO2
probe adapted as a wireless sensor. A 12Vdc lead-acid
battery associated to a photovoltaic panel was used as power
supply due to the relatively high power requirements of the
probe itself. The remaining devices had similar construction.
The network coordinator is an USB ZigBee interface,
also purchased from Telegesis Inc. This USB stick has been
used with the Windows 7 and Ubuntu Linux version 10.4
operating
systems
through,
respectively,
the
Telegesis
Terminal and the minicom terminal, to send the AT
command lines directly to the devices. In this way, basic
tests have been conducted to: check, list or modify the sensor
network,
switch
the
devices
power;
perform
serial
communication direct with the devices (through a data
mode); acquire analog and digital signals; and switch the
valves. Based on the set of the most useful AT commands, a
program has been written in the LabView 8.2 graphical
development environment to perform data collection and run
the control algorithm for the CO2 injection (Figure 3).
TABLE 1. LIST OF SENSORS AND ACTUATORS AND THEIR FEATURES
Device
Operation
method
Signal interface /
Protocol
Power
requirements
Response
time
Supplier
Model /
Comments
CO2 Sensor 1
IRGA
Serial RS-232/ASCII
or analog (0-2.5V)
12 Vdc (11 to 36) / 1
W (max. 3.5 W)
2 s (no filter,
no average)
Vaisala
GMP343 /
Difusion probe
CO2 Sensor 2
IRGA
Serial TTL/ASCII or
analog (0-2.5V)
12 Vdc (11 to 20) /
2.5 W
20 s
Vaisala
GMM222 /
OEM / Difusion
probe
Anemometer
Ultrasound
Serial RS-232/ASCII
12 Vdc (5 to 32) /
36mW (with no
heating)
0.25 s
Vaisala
WXT 520
Air
Temperature
Capacitive
Immediate
Air Humidity
Capacitive
Immediate
Rain
Piezoelectric
Immediate
Barometric
Pressure
Capacitive
Immediate
Solar radiation
Silicon
photodiode
Analog (mV)
None
Immediate
Li-cor
LI-90
(Quantum) and
LI-200
(Pyranometer)
Flow
Controller
Differential
precision
temperature
sensor windings
Serial RS-232/ASCII
or analog (0-5V)
12 Vdc / 9.6W
2 s
Aalborg
GFC 17 with
optional RS-232
Solenoid Valve
Latching
Direct and reverse
pulses
12 Vdc / 24W
(100ms pulses)
Immediate
Jefferson
BA222-70
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. Block diagram for the circuit used to implement the wireless
sensor network nodes.
Figure 2. The OTCs CO2 probe adapted as a ZigBee device powered by a
12Vdc lead-acid battery associated to a photovoltaic panel.
Figure 3. Screen shot from the system program showing the
control window, the configuration and data collecting window and
the data-plotting window.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Six OTCs experiments and one FACE facility have been
established with the obtained Wireless Devices. Only the
operational aspects restricted to the FACE facility are
presented here. The OTCs have similar results from the
operational point of view. Figure 4 shows one FACE plot of
twelve, with the adapted sensors and valves. The experiment
has been running with a constant gas flow of 60 l/min. The
injection occurs only from two octagon sections, the ones
positioned against to the wind direction. If the wind direction
predominates towards just one section, mostly at a right
angle to it, then the control algorithm alternates the injection
from its left and right neighbors sections in a cycle of 5
seconds each, besides injecting all the time from the central
section. In order to save money in the CO2 consumption it
was decided to run the injection only during the day, through
the period from 7:00 to 17:00 hours. Therefore, during the
night data have been collected only from the plots with
injection to make sure there is no gas leak and to have data
from the environment concentration. The system has been
adjusted to allow injection only for wind speeds in the range
from 0.2 to 4.0 m/s. There is yet no variation in the flow to
compensate for wind speed. By the time the flow controllers
were purchased, the specifications have been mistaken and
they have not yet been replaced. Figure 5 shows the graphs
of data collected during an arbitrary regular day of operation.
It can be observed higher concentrations during the early
morning period, due to calm wind conditions, and lower
concentrations
in
the
afternoon,
due
to
heavy
wind
conditions during that period.
The most important practical observation is that the
wireless instrumentation offers no significant time delay for
the system control, allowing to follow the changes in wind
direction in about a second. That is excellent considering that
a lag time of up to 30 seconds has been reported for this
application [7]. The experiment has been running for seven
months
now,
what
can be
considered
a
middle-term
evaluation. As expected, lightning has not been an issue. On
the other hand, the network has often hung up. The problem
has been identified as some ZigBee modules getting stuck in
the data mode. This mode is used for direct serial data
communication with most devices, and despite the correct
sequence of the Telegesis AT commands supplied to open
and close this mode, the transmission has eventually failed.
A self-recovery solution has come up by a timeout function
implemented in the ZigBee modules to leave itself the data
mode. This function is also available among the Telegesis
AT commands. This operational evaluation has included the
system software, which has been improved a lot since the
first day of operation in August 25th, 2011, with monthly
updates.
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In the present article, we have described the design and
some operational aspects of the implementation of the FACE
project in Brazil. The implementation was innovated with a
wireless sensor network approach. It has been shown that the
wireless instrumentation poses no significant time delay for
the system control
Future works and challenges include: 1) to utilize the
correct flow controller to compensate the effects of the wind
speed; 2) to improve the injection control algorithm,
reducing the operating costs; 3) to make the fumigation as
uniform as possible inside the plot and avoiding the
contamination of neighbor plots; all that making use of the
advantages of wireless sensor network.
Figure 4. Partial view of one FACE plot showing the
adapted devices: 1) one CO2 probe and one weather station
at the plot center and 2) one flow controller and eight valves,
one for each octagon section, positioned at the south border.
The general- purpose circuit is inside the small plastic boxes. A 65
Watts photovoltaic panel has been used to supply power for each
plot.
Figure 5. Data collected during one arbitrary day of operation at
the center of two adjacent plots, one with and other without CO2
injection
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
To the funding agencies:
- The Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation, Embrapa,
Macroprogram project “Impacts of climate change on plant
diseases,
pests
and
weeds”:
http://www.macroprograma1.cnptia.embrapa.br/climapest
- Latin America Science & Technology Development Programme,
CYTED project “Redes de sensores y microsistemas para el
control del impacto de la producción agricola y la mineria en los
acuiferos (REDSENSA)“
- National Council for Scientific and Technological Development,
CNPq and The State of São Paulo Research Foundation,FAPESP
in Brazil– project INCT NAMITEC: http://namitec.cti.gov.br/
To the people:
The technicians at Embrapa, especially Mr. Gilmar Victorino, Mr.
Luis Aparecido de Godoy and the assistant Mrs. Anamaria Ferreira
Mayer Dentzien
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

REFERENCES
[1]
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, IPCC Web
Page: http://www.ipcc.ch/index.htm Access: oct. 2010.
[2]
Raquel
Ghini
and
Emilia
Hamada,
“Climate
Changes:
Impacts on Plants and Deseases in Brazil / Mudanças
Climáticas: Impacto sobre Doenças e Plantas no Brasil”,
Embrapa, first edition, Jaguariúna, SP, Brazil, 2008.
[3]
G.R. Hendrey and F. Miglieta, “FACE Technology: past,
present and Future” in: Nosberger J, Long SP, Norby RJ, Stitt
M, Hendrey GR, Blum H (eds) “Managed ecosystem and
CO2”, Springer, Germany, vol. 187, 2006.
[4]
Keith F. Lewin, John Nagy, W. Robert Nettles, David M.
Cooley and Alistair Rogers,
“Comparison of gas use
efficiency and treatment uniformity in a forest ecosystem
exposed to elevated [CO2] using pure and prediluted free-air
CO2 enrichment technology” in Global Change Biology,
n.15, 2009, pp. 388-395
[5]
N. Wang, N. Zhang and M.
Wang, “Wireless sensors in
agriculture and food industry-Recent development and future
perspective” in Computer and Electronics in Agriculture, n.
50, 2006, pp. 1-14
[6]
Andre Torre-Neto, R. Ferrarezi, D. Razera, E. Speranza, W.C.
Lopes, T.P. Lima, L. M. Rabello and C.M.P. Vaz, “Wireless
sensor network for variable rate irrigation in Citrus.” Proc. 7th
Information
&
Technology
for
Sustainable
Fruit
and
Vegetable Production, Montpellier, France, v. 1, 2005., pp.
18-118
[7]
Franco Miglieta, Alessandro Peressotti, Francesco Primo
Vaccari, Alessandro Zaldi, Paolo deAngelis and Giuseppe
Scarascia-Mugnozza “Free-air CO2 erichment (FACE ) of a
poplar plantation: the POPFACE fumigation system” in New
Phytologist, no. 150, 2001, pp. 465-476
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

