Drone Operations and Communications in an Urban Environment 
Sandeep Shivakoti, Aurelie Aurilla Arntzen Bechina, 
Serkan Güldal 
Department of Science and Industry Systems  
University of South-Eastern of Norway 
Kongsberg, Norway 
e-mail: aurillaa@usn.no 
Esther Nistal Cabañas  
Transport and ICT Directorate 
Ingeniería de Sistemas para la Defensa de España, S.A., 
S.M.E., M.P. 
Madrid, Spain 
 e-mail: enistal@isdefe.es 
Abstract—The last few years have seen a growing interest in 
Remote piloted aircraft systems (RPAS), also known as 
Unmanned Aerial vehicles (UAV) or drones.  Domains of 
application The Unmanned Traffic Management (UTM), 
adopted in Europe as U-Space by the Warsaw Declaration,  
have triggered numerous research and development projects 
on securing drones flights in an urban area. The EU project 
USEPE funded by the Single European Sky ATM Research 
Joint Undertaking (SESAR) focuses on ensuring a safe 
separation of flying drones in an urban setting. There are 
many technical and societal challenges to tackle to ensure that 
drones are safely and securely integrated into European 
airspace (U-space). For instance, real time communication 
between millions of drones and Air Traffic Control (ATC) 
rises concerns for the implementation, especially dense aerial 
activities in urban areas. Therefore, the implementation of 
highly 
populated 
drone 
systems 
requires 
a 
reliable 
communication network to maintain a real time information 
exchange.
This paper investigates a model of reliable 
communication of multiple drones with the web-based ATC. 
Based on simulations of different use cases of multiple drones 
flying in an urban setting, we demonstrated that the Message 
Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) is a promising 
protocol for the communication of multiple drones within a 
network. In our simulations, four drones communicated over 
a single network with the limited hardware namely 
RaspberryPi combined with the ThingsBoard. 
Keywords-Drones; network; communication; IoT; MQTT; 
RaspberryPi 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have been around 
before they become popular. UAVs trace their modern 
origin back to the development of aerial torpedoes almost 
95 years ago [1]. The UAVs were first designed for 
surveillance by the USA military. Nowadays, a drone can 
be equipped with any kind of sensors, therefore drone 
systems flying at low altitudes open up for a different kind 
of domain application such as delivery [2], photography [3-
5], agriculture [6, 7], disaster management [8]. The shift in 
initial focus of surveillance can be traced back to 
advancements 
in 
other 
sectors, 
including 
battery 
technologies, improvement in motor power and size ratio, 
communication advancements, Global Navigation Satellite 
Systems (GNSS) for positioning accuracy and metallurgy, 
which help design low-weight chassis and improve other 
different factors affecting drone flight. Significant 
improvements in technology have greatly revolutionized 
different sectors of the market. Therefore, advances in 
drone technology initiated a chain reaction revolutionizing 
other sectors along with it.  
Increasing air traffic density is leading to issues related 
to security and safety. To address these problems, the 
European Union has launched several initiatives and 
regulations under the "European Drones Regulation" for 
European airspace use [9].  Other countries like the USA 
and Japan have their UTM program as NASA UTM [10, 
11] and Japan as JUTM [12]. By the end of 2016, The 
European Commission adopted the UTM concept in Europe 
and called it U-Space [10]. Since then, many research 
activities started at the European level, with funding of the 
European Commission through the Single European Sky 
Air Traffic Management Research Joint Undertaking 
(SESAR JU) [9]. 
Several EU projects focus on various technical 
challenges of separation or collision avoidance in order to 
ensure safe integration of drones in the European airspace.  
Our project, USEPE focuses on drone separation methods 
in  
 high demanding environments such as cities, by exploring 
the use of machine learning algorithms to automate the 
deconfliction of drones. They are many aspects to consider 
and one of them, for the simulation purpose, is the 
investigation of a suitable protocol of real time reliable 
communication between drones and eventually the air 
traffic management (ATM) systems. Several promising 
Internet of Things (IoT) communication protocols could 
provide reliable and scalable communications for drone to 
drone or drone to ATM. For example, "Bluetooth is a short-
range, low-power IEEE open standard for implementing 
wireless personal area networks",  but it cannot provide 
drone to ATM communication [13]. IEEE 802.15.4 
committee started low data rate ZigBee technology and 
joined forces with ZigBee Alliance to further development 
[14]. A typical LoRaWAN network consists of end-devices 
commonly known as motes, gateways, and servers. 
Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) was made a full 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) Internet standard in 
2014 officially [15]. "CoAP is a specialized web transfer 
protocol Analogous to Hyper-Text Transfer Protocol 
(HTTP) designed for use with constrained nodes and 
networks in the IoT (Internet of Things). The protocol 
design is extremely (Machine to Machine) M2M 
application-oriented to deliver low data packets [16]. 
Finally, MQTT is a lightweight publish subscribe 
messaging protocol designed and developed by Andy 
Stanford-Clark (IBM) and Arlen Nipper in 1999 for M2M 
[17]. 
 The listed protocols are effective in their specified context.  
However, there are generic issues that should be considered 
in the implementation phase such as: 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

1.  Short Communication range 
2.  Communication Only within Visual Line of 
Sight (VLOS) 
3.  Large bandwidth requirement. 
4.  Higher power consumption 
5.  No data filter specification 
6.  Critical data security concern 
7.  Pairing and system compatibility 
These advantages and disadvantages have been 
evaluated based on the drone’s type, environment, and 
mission assigned to the UAVs. We considered two 
parameters such as flight dynamics and positioning for the 
selection of the proper IoT protocol. Preliminary 
investigations of available IoT protocols resulted that 
MQTT might be the most suitable one ensuring real time, 
reliable and scalable communications for a drone in an 
urban area. Section 2 outlines the adopted methodology and 
provides some implementation descriptions. The results of 
the experiments are discussed in Section 3. 
II.
METHODOLOGY AND IMPLEMENTATION
One of the aims of the USEPE project is to delineate a 
concept of the operation of drones flying in an urban 
environment. A basic concept of the operation of drones is 
depicted in Figure 1. Due to the structural environment 
such as buildings, we define a zone for flying as a corridor 
or highway to foresee that drones could move within 
specific corridors or highways and in respect of flying rules. 
A communication system could be easily integrated.  
Figure 1. Concept of Operations of a drone mission. 
A. MQTT Network Topology 
MQTT is a lightweight publish/subscribe protocol 
designed around a central broker. Hence MQTT follows a 
simple start network topology, as shown in Figure 2. The 
broker acts as the centralized hub. 
Figure 2. MQTT Star network topology. 
The heart of implementing an Internet of Things (IoT) 
service is reliable network connectivity. Therefore, the 5G 
cellular network is used for reliable connectivity within 
urban airspace [18-21]. The generalized hardware structure 
is shown in Figure 3. 
Figure 3. Interface Block Diagram. 
1. Ultrasonic sensors 
An ultrasonic sensor detects any nearby objects within 
the range. The scan distance depends on the specification of 
the sensor. Sensor-ranging detection capability from 1cm to 
20m are commonly available types [22]. The sensor emits 
and detects a sonic pulse reflected by the object. HRLV-
MaxSonar-EZ, an ultrasonic sensor product from MaxBotix 
with a range of 5m, is implemented in the practical. Any 
object within a range of 30 cm accounts for 30 cm. Since 
the sensor has a narrow beam angle of ~8o, the sensor is 
placed in the servo to scan 360o. The graphical 
representation is presented in  Figure 4. The sonic pulse, 
time of flight between the emitter and the object, and back 
to the receiver is measured using the formula 1.
Distance =
ୗ୮ୣୣୢ ୭୤ ୱ୭୳୬ୢ × ୗ୭୬୧ୡ ୲୧୫ୣ ୭୤ ୤୪୧୥୦୲ 
ଶ

Figure 4. Time-of-flight measurement. 
2. Gyroscope 
A gyro sensor detects any angular tilt in the vertical and 
horizontal orientation of the drone. It generates an event-
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

based trigger each time the device angle changes (See 
Figure 5). Some advanced gyro sensors have a 
programmable average window and a programmable 
average threshold.  
Figure 5. Lateral/Angular tilt Detection [23]. 
3. Raspberry Pi 
The simulation of the drone communication is carried 
out using Raspberry pi 3b+. Features [24] of raspberry pi, 
5V TTL logic level, Wi-Fi, GPIO's, and high processing 
power, make it ideal for simulation usage. Each raspberry 
pi is treated as a removed drone connected to the server. 
Sensors onboard to the raspberry pi continuously read the 
ambient data and continuously push the reading to the 
ThingsBoard. The data can be visualized in the 
ThingsBoard dashboard. The raspberry pi acts as a bridge 
linking the sensor data to the ThingsBoard. Therefore, it 
requires software that supports sensing the data from it to 
the server. 
a) Paho MQTT 
Paho is an Eclipse foundation project which helps to 
create an MQTT client. The client can both subscribe and 
publish data on any particular topic. Therefore, Paho 
MQTT client library is used for procuring the data to and 
from the ThingsBoard server. 
4. ThingsBoard  
"ThingsBoard [25] is an open-source IoT platform for 
data collection and processing, visualization, and device 
management". It enables connectivity via industry standard 
IoT protocols - MQTT, Constrained Application Protocol 
(CoAP), and HTTP facilitating both cloud and local 
deployments. ThingsBoard leverages device scalability, 
data visualization, cloud data processing, ensuring data 
protection. Features of ThingsBoard can be referred to [25]. 
B. Simulation Process 
1.
Take off approval 
Only the authenticated drones must be allowed to fly 
and enter the flying corridors. Safety should be ensured by 
not only drone identification but also by monitoring how 
many drones are flying and where they are positioned. An 
approval system is therefore required.  
Each drone connected to the ThingsBoard has a unique 
access token and device id. On creating a device, the access 
token and device id are autogenerated. Connection to 
ThingsBoard requires an access token,  if not, the drone 
connection to ThingsBoard and the authentication will fail. 
For any reason, like port number, incorrect URL, the 
compiler throws an error with error code 111. The error 
represents the socket connection error. The drone tries to 
reconnect to the server repeatedly with failed attempts until 
a valid access token is provided.  
When the access token is authenticated, with connection 
session 0, the drone is granted permission to take off. The 
drone then follows the path instructed by the path planning 
algorithm. Static GPS coordinates are fed to the system in 
advance. The drone follows the static coordinates. The 
drones, on approved take-off, attain a vertical height of 
250m which is considered default before any forward 
motion (See Figure 7). During the flight, all drones’ states 
are monitored continuously as shown in Figure 6. 
Figure 6. Drone Status. 
2. Routing 
The routing of a drone is divided into three different 
components. 
a) Ascending 
Once the drone is authenticated and approved for take-
off, the drone firstly attains a default height of 250m, 
considering its initial position as the reference, as shown in  
Figure 7. Once the default height is attained, the drone 
makes any further moves. 
Figure 7. Drone Ascending. 
Position of the drone with changing time is shown in 
Figure 8 during the ascending phase of the flight. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 8. Drone Ascending Graph. 
Once the take-off is clear, the current altitude of the 
drone is considered 0m. It is an assumed altitude; the initial 
height of the drone varies based on its area/region of 
operation. GPS sensor is read before in industrial practice. 
The drone slowly gains altitude with reference to its initial 
position coordinates. It follows initial reference coordinates 
until the drone attains the default height of 250 m. From 0m 
altitude to 250m, the whole process is considered as 
ascending of a drone.  
b) On route 
When the drone attains the default height of 250m, the 
drone then starts its forward journey towards its destination. 
The route from the end of ascending to the start of 
descending is defined as on route. In this stage, the drone 
makes an onward journey to the destination, continuously 
following the route as instructed by the routing algorithm. 
The GPS continuously reads the current position of the 
drone and continuously updates the server for any drift in 
position and correction of the same. Figure 9 represents the 
current drone status, drone 1 status as on route. 
Figure 9. Drone on the route. 
c) Descending 
Descending is analogous to ascending, where the drone 
gradually climbs down the altitude from the current 
highway to the ground level. When the drone reaches its 
final GPS coordinate, the status of the drone is updated to 
"descending.". It then slowly climbs down, following the 
Euclidian path until it reaches ground level. In Figure 10, 
drone 1 represents the descending status of the drone. 
While the drone descends, the drone's speed is maintained 
to stop properly at the last 5m since its descending height 
for the safety of the drone and the payload it carries.  
Figure 10. Altitude graph of landing drone. 
3. Hovering 
Hovering is a state where a drone maintains its current 
coordinates in the air, maintaining the same altitude. 
Hovering conditions, in general, can be programmed or 
autogenerated to prevent a collision. During the hovering 
state, the algorithm gets a chance to route/manage the 
traffic avoiding collisions or long flight time. 
Figure 11. Hovering command and status panel. 
Figure 11 shows that the hovering command is sent 
(HV), and the same is reflected as the drone's 
acknowledgment. This is the server-side command for 
hovering. However, an automated system is also 
incorporated into the project. The ultrasonic sensor onboard 
the drone senses the surrounding distance and objects' 
presence. If an object is closer than 5m, the drone updates 
its current status to hovering. When the other drone safely 
passes the shared route, the status of the hovering drone is 
changed back to "on the route," and the drone heads its 
further journey. 
4. Object detection 
HRLV-MaxSonar-EZ from MaxBotix is successfully 
implemented to detect any object in the drone trajectory. 
Two experimental cases were carried out in [26]. Figure 12 
[26] is the trajectory of the drone. The blue line is the actual 
drone trajectory, while the line represents the ideal drone 
trajectory, and the red block is the object in the trajectory of 
the drone. The sensor continuously scans for any object in 
its vicinity. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 12. Drone trajectory [26]. 
Figure 13. Distance vs Time [26]. 
Figure 13 [26] indicates that the drone reads the object 
in its trajectory and pushes itself back in ~6.4s. It then 
slightly changes its trajectory and avoids the object in its 
flight plan.  
Therefore, real-time tracking of drones Beyond Visual 
Line of sight (BVLOS), enables dynamic routing, 
handle high 
traffic 
density. 
The 
monitoring 
and 
authentication of drones are efficiently completed. 
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Operating them beyond a certain meter to a few 
kilometers is a recurrent challenge that is addressed today 
by the concept of Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS) as 
opposite to VLOS flights, which are operated within the 
pilot’s line of sight.  In order to achieve the issue,  real time 
communication and information exchange should be 
tackled 
since 
drones 
are 
controlled 
by 
on-board 
instruments. Information should be related for instance to 
the altitude position, speed, etc. In this paper, we describe 
an experiment based on MQTT protocol for multi UAVs’ 
communication. MQTT provides a promising service in 
connecting multiple devices to a central hub.  
Number of Devices: Theoretically, a single MQTT 
broker can handle millions of devices over a single 
network. As seen from the implementation results, on 
ThingsBoard, a web-based Internet of Things (IoT) 
platform efficiently handles four drones in a single network. 
Data Delivery: A highly flexible data delivery and 
acknowledgment feature of MQTT proves to be very 
beneficial for different applications. Three MQTT QOS 
provides high flexibility, unlike any other protocol.  
Visual Confirmation: A large number of widgets in the 
ThingsBoard provide visual confirmation. Therefore, 
ThingsBoard proves to be very user-friendly with an 
attractive dashboard. 
Object Detection: Object detection by Ultrasonic limits 
to a short range with limited information of the type, 
structure, and property of their object detected. 
The implementation of Multi UAV communication over 
the Internet of Things (IoT) using MQTT has been 
explored. MQTT uses a basic time-based routing algorithm 
to send data from a drone to the IoT platform. The 
conducted simulations served as one of the investigations to 
ensure a safe separation within the EU which is one of the 
objectives of the USEPE project. However, we have also 
identified some other challenges that need to be considered 
before integrating MQTT or adopting it in the framework of 
the flying drones platform simulator that is currently being 
developed by the project USEPE. Some of these challenges 
are listed below:  

Capacity management of the U-space will 
impact the communication models 

Minimal considerations regarding connection 
failure. A better security and emergency 
landing system, in case of connection failure, 
could highly improve the overall safety. 

An emergency delivery route needs a special 
focus based on priority requirement  

An optimum and efficient message routing 
algorithm using MQTT can optimize payload. 

Extrinsic factors like  wind and  atmospheric 
pressure are   not considered  in our 
experiment 

Exploring the use of LIDAR. Ultrasonic 
sensors can only detect the presence of an 
object that has a limited range of detection of 
~20m, while LIDAR can sense other properties 
of objects such as shape, size and have a range 
of detection of 75–660m [27]. 
IV.
CONCLUSION
Autonomous aerial vehicles are gaining high 
interest not only from the research community but also 
from the business community. Drone operations in an 
urban environment will become a reality, but several 
technical challenges should be tackled for ensuring a 
safe separation by preventing and eliminating risks of 
drone collision. The USEPE U-Space is exploring 
techniques to solve the crucial issue of separation 
management for a safe integration of drones in the 
urban space. However, issues such as investigating the 
best protocol for communication and information 
exchange should be investigated. This paper describes 
an experiment conducted on the use of the MQTT 
protocol 
for 
communications. 
The 
conducted 
simulation and the outlining results show that MQTT is 
a promising protocol for real time and scalable 
communication for drones that could be integrated with 
the USEPE simulation drone platform for ensuring a 
safe flight in urban areas. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The USEPE  U-Space project has received funding from 
the SESAR Joint Undertaking under the European Union’s 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under 
grant agreement No 890378 
The authors appreciate Srinivas Yemula because of 
proofreading and improving the work. 
REFERENCES
[1] 
J. F. Keane and S. S. Carr, "A brief history of early 
unmanned aircraft," Johns Hopkins APL Technical 
Digest, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 558-571, 2013. 
[2] 
S. R. R. Singireddy and T. U. Daim, "Technology 
Roadmap: Drone Delivery–Amazon Prime Air," in 
Infrastructure and Technology Management: Springer, 
2018, pp. 387-412. 
[3] 
S. Hamilton and J. Stephenson, "Testing UAV (drone) 
aerial 
photography 
and 
photogrammetry 
for 
archaeology," Lakehead University, Tech. Rep., 2016. 
[4] 
S. Hamilton, "Drone mapping and photogrammetry at 
Brandon House 4," Historical archaeology, vol. 51, no. 
4, pp. 563-575, 2017. 
[5] 
B. Prodanov, I. Kotsev, T. Lambev, L. Dimitrov, R. 
Bekova, 
and 
D. 
Dechev, 
"Drone-based 
geomorphological and landscape mapping of Bolata 
Cove, Bulgarian coast," Proc. of IMAM, pp. 592-598, 
2019. 
[6] 
S. Ahirwar, R. Swarnkar, S. Bhukya, and G. Namwade, 
"Application of drone in agriculture," International 
Journal of Current Microbiology and Applied Sciences, 
vol. 8, no. 01, pp. 2500-2505, 2019. 
[7] 
D. Murugan, A. Garg, and D. Singh, "Development of 
an 
adaptive 
approach 
for 
precision 
agriculture 
monitoring with drone and satellite data," IEEE Journal 
of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and 
Remote Sensing, vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 5322-5328, 2017. 
[8] 
K. M. Hasan, S. S. Newaz, and M. S. Ahsan, "Design 
and development of an aircraft type portable drone for 
surveillance and disaster management," International 
Journal of Intelligent Unmanned Systems, 2018. 
[9] 
 E. Bassi, "European drones regulation: Today’s legal 
challenges," in 2019 International Conference on 
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), 2019: IEEE, pp. 
443-450.  
[10] 
 P. Kopardekar, J. Rios, T. Prevot, M. Johnson, J. Jung, 
and J. E. Robinson, "Unmanned aircraft system traffic 
management (UTM) concept of operations," in AIAA 
aviation forum, 2016.  
[11] 
A. S. Aweiss, B. D. Owens, J. Rios, J. R. Homola, and 
C. P. Mohlenbrink, "Unmanned Aircraft Systems 
(UAS) Traffic Management (UTM) National Campaign 
II," in 2018 AIAA Information Systems-AIAA Infotech@ 
Aerospace, 2018, p. 1727. 
[12] 
 H. Nakamura, K. Harada, and Y. Oura, "UTM concept 
demonstrations 
in 
Fukushima; 
overview 
of 
demonstration and lesson learnt for operation of 
multiple UAS in the same airspace," in 2018 
International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft 
Systems (ICUAS), 2018: IEEE, pp. 222-228.  
[13] 
P. McDermott-Wells, "What is Bluetooth?," 20 
December 2004, Dec. 2004-Jan. 2005. 
[14] 
S. C. Ergen, "ZigBee/IEEE 802.15. 4 Summary," UC 
Berkeley, September, vol. 10, no. 17, p. 11, 2004. 
[15] 
 L. Coetzee, D. Oosthuizen, and B. Mkhize, "An 
analysis of CoAP as transport in an Internet of Things 
environment," in 2018 IST-Africa Week Conference 
(IST-Africa), 2018: IEEE, pp. Page 1 of 7-Page 7 of 7.  
[16] 
C. 
Bormann. 
"CoAP, 
RFC 
7252 
Constrained 
Application 
Protocol." 
Coap 
Technology. 
https://coap.technology/ (accessed 2021). 
[17] 
 M. Collina, G. E. Corazza, and A. Vanelli-Coralli, 
"Introducing the QEST broker: Scaling the IoT by 
bridging MQTT and REST," in 2012 IEEE 23rd 
International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and 
Mobile Radio Communications-(PIMRC), 2012: IEEE, 
pp. 36-41.  
[18] 
V. Petrov et al., "Achieving end-to-end reliability of 
mission-critical traffic in softwarized 5G networks," 
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 
vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 485-501, 2018. 
[19] 
 P. Popovski, "Ultra-reliable communication in 5G 
wireless systems," in 1st International Conference on 
5G for Ubiquitous Connectivity, 2014: IEEE, pp. 146-
151.  
[20] 
 Q. Zhang and F. H. Fitzek, "Mission critical IoT 
communication in 5G," in Future Access Enablers of 
Ubiquitous and Intelligent Infrastructures, 2015: 
Springer, pp. 35-41.  
[21] 
 P. Skarin, W. Tärneberg, K.-E. Årzen, and M. Kihl, 
"Towards mission-critical control at the edge and over 
5G," in 2018 IEEE international conference on edge 
computing (EDGE), 2018: IEEE, pp. 50-57.  
[22] 
S. S. Intelligance, "Ultrasonic Sensors: Ultimate 
Ultrasonic Sensor Solution from Sick," Online, 2019-
10-15 2019.  
[23] 
G. 
Allegato, 
C. 
Valzasina, 
and 
L. 
Zanotti, 
"Gyroscopes," in Handbook of Silicon Based MEMS 
Materials and Technologies: Elsevier, 2020, pp. 899-
914. 
[24] 
R. P. Foundation. (2019). Raspberry Pi Compute 
Module 3+ / Raspberry Pi Compute Module 3+ Lite.  
[25] 
"Thingsboard 
Devices." 
https://thingsboard.io
(accessed 13/06/2021). 
[26] 
 M. F. Rahman and R. A. Sasongko, "Obstacle 
avoidance for Quadcopter using Ultrasonic sensor," in 
Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 2018, vol. 1005, 
no. 1: IOP Publishing, p. 012037.  
[27] 
C. Edson and M. G. Wing, "Airborne light detection 
and ranging (LiDAR) for individual tree stem location, 
height, and biomass measurements," Remote Sensing, 
vol. 3, no. 11, pp. 2494-2528, 2011. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

