Sum Minimum Cost Link Algorithm for Wireless
Sensor Networks
Noureddine Assad∗, Brahim Elbhiri†, Sanaa El Fkihi‡, My Ahmed Faqihi‡,
Mohamed Ouadou∗ and Driss Aboutajdine∗
∗LRIT, Research Unit Associated to the CNRST (URAC 29), FSR, Med V-Agdal University, Rabat, Morocco
assad.noureddine@gmail.com
†EMSI Rabat, Morocco
‡ENSIAS Mohammed V University Souissi Rabat, Morocco
Abstract— A Wireless Sensor Network is a group of small
sensor nodes which are used to cooperatively monitor physical or
environmental conditions. Each node collects events or data from
the ﬁeld of interest, which seems inaccessible at the most time. By
using the wireless communication capacities, sensor node sends
its information to the remote base station where the end-user
can access data. To deal with this, an appropriate energy-efﬁcient
routing algorithm is needed to the inherent characteristics of this
kind of networks. The objective of our paper is to extend the
whole network lifetime by applying two routing algorithms, one
on the entire network and the other, on a special area called a
hotspot, with the aim to tackle the problem of the isolation of the
sink node caused by the depletion of the energy of sensor nodes
surrounding it. The ﬁrst protocol is based on residual energy
and link distances, and aims seeking the optimal path from the
sensor node transmitter to the sink node. The second protocol is
based on the equitably distribution of the energy over all nodes
located in the hotspot area and avoids the isolation the sink node
from the rest of the network.
Keywords-WSNs; Event detection probability; Route selec-
tion; Energy Consumption.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in technological developments at the
micro-application, the radio communication and the integra-
tion of microprocessors, have made possible to develop a
new range of small low-cost electronic devices. The latter
may be deployed in large numbers to form an intelligent and
autonomous Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) that can monitor
speciﬁc areas. Each sensor node collects events or data from
the ﬁeld of interest, which seems the most time inaccessible,
by using the wireless communication capacities. Then, sensors
usually communicate with each other in a multi-hop manner
and speciﬁc nodes send information to a remote Base Station
(BS) or sink, where the end-user can access them [1]. Because
of limitations on the energy supply, the available storage space
and the computational capacity of the sensor nodes, the energy
conservation is a critical challenge in a WSN [2].
The energy restrictions of sensor networks inﬂuence the de-
sign of every piece of the software running in the network. To
increase energy saving, protocols might take advantage of net-
work speciﬁc characteristics to optimize their operations, such
as radius coverage, sensing coverage, event-driven operation,
and node positioning [3]. Thus, to extend the whole network
lifetime, protocols must interact only with nearby nodes to
increase their scalability and efﬁciency; sensor nodes are more
prone to failures and harsh communication conditions. If all
sensors in a ﬁeld of interest follow the nearest sink strategy,
sensors around nearest sink, called hotspot, will exhaust energy
early. It means that this sink is isolated from the network early
and numbers of routing paths are broken. This task must be
taken into account because when the sink node is isolated from
the rest of the network, the WSN becomes useless [4].
The objective of this paper is to extend the whole network
lifetime by applying two routing algorithms, one on the whole
network and the other on a special area called a hotspot, in
order to tackle the hotspot problem, the isolation of the sink
node caused by the depletion of the energy of sensor nodes
surrounding it.
The ﬁrst protocol is based on residual energies and link dis-
tances, and aims to ﬁnd the optimal path from the transmitter
sensor node to the sink node.
The second protocol is based on the equitably distribution of
the energy over all nodes located in the hotspot area and avoids
the isolation of the sink node from the rest of the network;
only nodes with residual energies greater than the network
energy average will participate to relay the data parquets.
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows: In
Section II, some related works are presented. Then, radio
model and problem statement are reviewed in Section III. In
Section IV, we describe the new proposed route algorithm,
while in Section V, we present the simulation results and their
analysis. Finally, conclusions are drown in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
In this article, we focus on the ﬂat-based routing algorithms,
in which all nodes are typically assigned equal roles or
functionalities. In ﬂat-based networks, each node typically
plays the same role and sensor nodes collaborate to perform
the sensing task. This is also called Multi-hop ﬂat routing.
In the next paragraphs we will give some examples of these
protocols.
One of the ﬂat-based routing techniques is SPIN (Sensor
Protocols for Information via Negotiation) [5]. It is a source
initiated protocol that uses a ﬂat network structure and reactive
routing. The SPIN protocol family is designed based on four
basic messages that are:
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

• ADV: new data advertisement. This message is used by
a node to inform other nodes that it has data to send; the
actual data is sent only when acknowledged and requested
by a node. Also, this massage contains only meta-data.
• REQ: request for ADV data. It is sent by the recipient to
the sender node, if the recipient is interested in the actual
data. Here also, it contains only meta-data.
• DATA : this is the actual data message.
In addition, the Directed Diffusion (DD) [6] is a data-centric
(DC) and application-aware protocol in which data generated
by sensor nodes is named by attribute-value pairs. In the DC
protocol, data coming from different sources are combined
and thus eliminating redundancy and minimizing the number
of transmissions. It consists of four elements: (1) Interest: a
task description which is named by a list of attribute-value
pairs that describe a task, (2) Gradient: path direction, data
transmission rate, (3) Data message, and (4) Reinforcement:
to select a single path from multiple paths.
The MCFA (Minimum Cost Forwarding Algorithm) [7]
consists in ﬁnding a path with the minimum of intermediate
sensors nodes to reach the remote Sink; each node maintains
the least cost estimated from itself to the Sink. Source node
will forward the message to its neighbors, which is nearest
to the Sink. This process repeats until the Sink is reached.
Besides, the MTE (Minimum Transmission Energy) [8] pro-
posed protocol is based on selecting route that uses the least
amount of energy to transport data from the source node to the
Sink. Assuming that the energy consumption is proportional to
square distance between nodes, the intermediate nodes, which
operate as routers, are chosen for minimizing the sum of
squared distances over the path. Thus, if a node A transmits
data to a node C, the node B will participate to the route only
if (dxy is the distance between x and y):
d2
AC > d2
AB + d2
BC
(1)
Furthermore, xMREPsum (Sum Maximum Residual Energy
Path) [9] is another route technique. Here, the authors propose
a cost function that represents the reciprocal of the residual
energy at node Ni after the route will have been used by a
packet, and uses an exponential parameter P. This function is
given by the next equation:
f(cij) =

1
Eri − eij
P
(2)
where Eri is the residual energy of the node Ni and eij is
the energy expenditure per bit transmission across the link
(Ni, Nj). This last energy is deﬁned as follows:
eij = max

0.01, dij
Ei

(3)
where Ei is the initial energy of the node i, and dij is the
distance between the two nodes Ni and Nj.
Then, the shortest path is obtained by using the conventional
BellmanFord [10] equation given by:
Dn+1
i
= min

The isolation of the sink node is caused by the depletion
of the energy of sensor nodes surrounding it (the hotspot
problem). It means that this sink is isolated from network
early and numbers of routing paths are broken, so the WSNs
becomes useless [16]. To avoid the isolation of the sink node,
we aim to suggest a new strategy which distributes equitably
the energy over all nodes of a WSN.
Another challenge of the WSNs is the efﬁcient deployment
of the required coverage [17]. Speciﬁcally, given a monitoring
region, how can we guarantee that every point in the region is
covered by the required number of sensors? In other words,
we need to recognize which areas are covered by enough
sensors. This problem is challenging due to the limitations of
wireless sensors. In the next section, we will deﬁne sensing
coverage and will formulate the maximum sensing coverage
region problem.
IV. PROPOSED ROUTE ALGORITHM
To reduce the energy consumption in WSNs, we propose a
protocol architecture to ensure good routing of data between
nodes and the BS. We adopt a sensing model probability in
dense networks. A sensor can detect any events located in
the area sensing, so we can identify the redundant nodes that
will change their operating modes between sleep and active
ones. In this section we will give more details of the different
components of our proposal MCLsum (Sum Minimum Cost
Link) algorithm.
A. Event detection probability
WSNs are characterized by random network topology where
all nodes are randomly deployed in ﬁeld of interest. Our
objective in this section is to deﬁne the optimal number of
the nodes used in an area and sensing coverage. To achieve
this objective, we study the sensing model probability that is
generally coupled closely with the speciﬁc sensor application
and the type of sensor device used [18][19]. We adopt a
sensing model probability where a sensor can detect any events
located in the area sensing. All sensor nodes are assumed to
be homogeneous, and have the same sensing coverage (Rs).
For a uniformly distributed sensor network with node den-
sity λ [20], we denote the number of sensors covering the
location by n. The sensing model probability follows a Poisson
distribution as given by the next formula:
P(n = k) = (Sλ)k
k!
e(−Sλ)
(10)
P is the probability that an event can be immediately detected
by k sensors located within the area of interest, each sensor
covering an area of S = πR2
s. Hence, the previous probability
can further be represented as:
P(n = k) = (λπR2
s)k
k!
e(−λπR2
s)
(11)
Therefore, the probability that no sensor in an area of
interest can detect an event is P = e(−λπR2
s). Then, the
complement of P is the probability that there is at least one
sensor which detects an event. This sensing model probability
can be represented as:
P = 1 − P = 1 − e(−λπR2
s)
(12)
P is determined by the node density and the sensing range,
while increasing the sensing coverage and the number of
nodes, the detection probability increases and all events that
happen in the network, will be covered. The optimal values
that must be considered to totally cover an area are obtained
by the simulation of the formula event detection probability.
B. Availability of nodes and redundant nodes
We can efﬁciently reduce the energy consumption in most of
the WSNs applications, and extend the whole network lifetime,
when sensor power can be put on/off periodically. Thus, it
is appropriate to take into account the node availability rate
p in our analysis. Each sensor node can decide whether to
become active with probability p or move to the sleep mode
with probability 1 − p witch means to be off in every sensing
period. Thus, the probability that the event can be immediately
detected once it appears in an homogeneous WSNs with node
density λ, sensing range Rs and node availability p, can be
given determined by:
P = 1 − P = 1 − e(−pλπR2
s)
(13)
In a dense network, the sensing areas of different nodes may
be similar to their neighbor nodes and nodes will transmit
redundant information. This will increase the total energy
consumption of the WSN. Therefore, it is important to place or
select the effective number of sensor nodes to cover the same
monitored area as much as possible without diminishing the
overall ﬁeld coverage. Thus, we must identiﬁes the redundant
nodes denoted by probability 1 − p in a dense networks and
changes their operating mode between sleep and active modes.
1) The overlapped area and redundant nodes in WSNs:
Consider two nodes Ni and Nj location at (xNi, yNi) and
(xNj, yNj) respectively. The node Ni covers the SNi area
and the other node covers the SNj area. Let us note dij the
distance between nodes Ni and Nj.
The overlapped area Sol of nodes Ni and Nj is deﬁned as
the intersection region between SNi and SNj areas, that is
formulated by the next equation:
Sol = SNi ∩ SNj
(14)
An example of Sol is represented in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2.
Example of redundant node Ni totally overlapped by nodes N1, N2,
and N3.
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

As in [17], Sol can obtained by the follow result:
Sol
=
R2
s ×

θ − dij
Rs
s
1 −
 dij
2Rs
2


(15)
with θ is the central angle of the overlapped area given by the
next equation:
θ = arccos
 dij
2Rs

(16)
We can note that each point located in Sol can be covered
by both Ni and Nj nodes.
2) Operation modes of nodes: Due to the fact that the
deployment of node in the network is random, many redundant
nodes may be detected [21]. As discussed above, a redundant
node is a node where its entire sensing region is covered by the
sensing region of other nodes. Hence, we run our algorithm to
determinate this kind of nodes. Assume that each node knows
positions of its neighbours, it is possible that all of them have
the capability to deﬁne their state (redundant or not). If the
node is redundant, it powering-off both the sensing and the
communication units. Here, we note that the node is operating
in the sleep mode, but from time to time it powering-on only
the radio module to listen if data is coming from its neighbours
during a listening time Tlisten. Consequently, the remaining
energy is saved and the whole network lifetime is extended.
But, how long should a redundant node remain in a sleep
mode? To response to this question, we apply the following
approach based on the minimum residual energy threshold pa-
rameter. Node Ni participating to cover a part of one redundant
node and having residual energy Eri greater than threshold
ΘEng, will broadcast continually a short message during a
period Tbroadcast with a radio range equal to Rs. The objective
of these transmissions is to inform the redundant node that its
remaining energy will be exhausted soon. Indeed, the sufﬁcient
and necessary conditions to wake-up the redundant node are:
Tbroadcast
>
Tlisten
(17)
Eri
>
ΘEng
(18)
Thus, the redundant nodes verifying the two last conditions,
can switch from the sleep mode to the active one. Therefore,
a large part of energy will be saved and the redundant
transmissions will be efﬁciently reduced. Consequently, the
whole network lifetime will be extended.
C. Routing inside Hotspot area
We suggest a new protocol to select nodes that will par-
ticipate to the data transmission path in the hotspot area. It
is based on a strategy which distributes equitably the energy
over all nodes located in the hotspot area and avoids the sink
node isolation from the rest of the network. Sink deﬁnes the
radius of hotspot area by broadcasting a short message, and
requesting the residual energy for each node located in hotspot
area. In order to compute the energy average of the hotspot
area, each node sends a short message to the sink containing
the residual energy; only nodes with residual energy greater
than the network energy average will be selected by the Sink
to participate to relay the data packets, as expressed by the
next equation:
Eri ≥ Emean : i ∈ B
(19)
where Eri is the residual energy of the node i, Emean is the
energy average of hotspot area, and B is the node set located
in hotspot area.
The diagram in Fig. 3 shows more details and resumes all
these steps.
Broadcast energy
 message
Each node Nj (j#i)
Add the Ej to the
residual matrix
Calculates the Pl
value
Selects the
maximum of Pl
Defines the 
optimal path
Transmission and
path update
Goes to sleep
 mode
If Ej>=Emean
If Ei>0
End
Node Ni
 takes measurement
Begin
Fig. 3.
Routing inside Hotspot area ﬂow chart.
D. Selecting an optimal route
It consists to select paths with maximum residual energy
and squared distances. So, energy consumption is balanced
among all nodes with the aim to minimize the sum of squared
distances over the path. More speciﬁcally, cost function that
represents the link cij is:
f (cij) = d2
Erj
= | Ni − Nj |2
Erj
(20)
where Erj is the residual energy of the node j and the distance
| Ni − Nj | is deﬁned as the length of the line segment
connecting Ni and Nj; this Euclidean distance must be less
than the coverage radius Rc of node i. The total cost for a
route l of length D is computed by the following equation:
Pl =
D−1
X
i=0
f (ci,i+1) =
D−1
X
i=0
| Ni+1 − Ni |2
Eri+1
(21)
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Using the Dijksta algorithm, the optimal route with the mini-
mum Pl can be ﬁxed. As a conclusion, the selected route Pk
is the one that satisﬁes the following property:
Pk = min{Pl : l ∈ A}
(22)
where A is the set of all the possible routes. Our proposed
scheme, routing inside hotspot area is shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4.
Wireless sensor networks.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our architec-
ture protocol using MATLAB software. We consider a random
wireless sensor network composed of n static sensor nodes and
one sink node. These static sensor nodes are independent and
distributed uniformly on an area 100m × 100m. Each sensor
node sends its acquired data to the sink node located at the
center of the sensor ﬁeld. Moreover, we run our simulation
using the radio model presented in Fig. 1 with simulation
parameters shown in Table I.
TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
NODES
100
INITIAL ENERGY Er
5 J/node
TRANSMITTER ELECTRONICS Eelec
50 nJ/bit
Eefs
10 nJ/bit
Eamp
100 nJ/bit
DEAD NODES
< 0.1 J
DATA PACKET SIZE
4000 bytes
ENERGY MESSAGE SIZE
200 bytes
A. Optimal node number with sensing coverage for an area
The results illustrated in Fig. 5 shows that the event detec-
tion probability P is determined by the node density and the
sensing range. Event detection may need a large sensing range
or a high node density, thus increasing the WSN deployment
cost. Fig. 5(a) shows the simulation results of the formula
event detection probability. On the other hand, we can obtain
the same results given in Fig. 5(b). By running simulations,
we change the node density by varying two parameters, the
sensing range Rs from 0m to 20m, and the node number n
from 1 to 100. We assume that an event occurs randomly
in a given location on the network and we compute the
probability to detect this event. For given values of Rs and n,
we run 10000 simulations and we calculate the percentage of
detection. We can note that if we increase the lasts parameters
the probability to cover an event happens in the network
increases to. However, for a given value of Rs or n we can see
that this percentage of coverage is constant and attend 100%.
Indeed, increasing more n or Rs will not affect the robustness
of detection. Consequently, for a given value of Rs, we can
ﬁnd the optimal node number which can be deployed to cover
efﬁciently the controlled region and reciprocally. This node
number and sensing range will be the optimal values, which
must be used to totally cover an area.
B. Node availability
We set the node number to 100 and the sensing coverage
to 20. we run our algorithm to determinate redundant nodes.
Fig. 6.
Redundant nodes for a 100m × 100m network area.
Fig. 6 shows the redundant node location determined in the
WSN area. We note that there are approximately 35 redundant
nodes expressed by the green color dispersed over the network.
Moreover, we see that only 65 nodes can cover efﬁciently the
total region. So, 65 is the optimal node number which can be
deployed to cover the region.
We can express the efﬁcient number of nodes which can be
deployed to cover the area of interest by node availability rate
p as a variable in event detection probability P.
P = 1 − e(−pλπR2
s)
(23)
Fig. 7.
Node availability.
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

(a)
(b)
Fig. 5.
Event detection probability, (a) Sensing model probability (b) Simulation.
Fig. 7 shows the curves of event detection probability model
according to different values of node availability rate. It is
obvious that if node availability rate p increases the event
detection probability P increases too.
In the next subsection, we will evaluate the performance
of our routing protocol MCLsum by taking into account that
redundant nodes switch from sleep mode to active one, and
vice versa.
C. Performance evaluation
We give the comparisons between MCLsum, the MTE and
the xMREPsum algorithms. The evaluations are discussed in
terms of energy stored, number of nodes still alive, and number
of messages received at the sink.
Fig. 8.
Total energy stored (Joule).
In each round, we assume that an event occurs randomly
in a given location on the network. During the simulation, the
network nodes die randomly in the supervised area. We then
give the simulation results of the three compared approaches.
Fig. 8 gives the total network remaining energy in ev-
ery sensing round. The network remaining energy decreases
rapidly in the Direct transmission and xMREPsum protocols.
We can see that, in the 0.1 ∗ 106 ﬁrst events, approximately
45% of the total network energy is consumed in the MTE
and 35% in xMREPsum protocol. Whereas, the MCLsum
consumed only 20% of the total energy of the network. From
the 0.2 ∗ 106 ﬁrst events, rate event detection for protocol
xMREPsum is reduced compared to two other protocols MTE
and MCLsum, which explains low energy consumption.
As shown in Fig. 9, we represent the number of data
messages that are correctly received by BS. We can notice
that the total number of these messages is substantial for the
MCLsum protocol. This means that MCLsum is more efﬁcient
than MTE and xMREPsum protocols.
Fig. 9.
Number of data messages correctly received at the Sink.
Fig. 10.
Number of nodes still alive.
Fig. 10 shows the variation in the total number of sensors
that are still alive. We observe that in MTE protocol, the
ﬁrst node die appears in the 1800th event, in xMERPsum
it happens in the 900th event and in MCLsum it comes in
16300th event. So, our protocol increases the whole network
lifetime. Moreover, our MCLsum protocol is approximately
2x better than MTE in term of node death, and better about
3x than xMREPsum. Taking in consideration the residual
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

energy, square distance between nodes, and average network
energy in hotspot area, our protocol presents more efﬁciency
and more robustness. Consequently, the MCLsum enlarges
substantially the lifetime of the whole network related to the
others algorithms.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a novel routing protocol for
WSNs by taking into account the hotspot problem. The pro-
posal provides better solution for routing protocol of WSNs.
It is based on residual energy and link distances of nodes,
and aims to seek the optimal path from a transmitter sensor
node to a sink node. The hotspot problem is solved thanks
to our strategy which equitably distributes the energy over all
nodes located in the hotspot area and avoids the isolation of
the sink node from the rest of the network. The simulation
results show that, compared to the MTE and the xMREPsum
protocols, best results are obtained by the MCLSum protocol.
Thus the whole WSNs lifetime is signiﬁcantly extended by
the last approach.
REFERENCES
[1] I. F. Akyildiz, T. Melodia, and K. R. Chowdhury, “A survey on wireless
multimedia sensor networks,” Computer networks, vol. 51, no. 4, pp.
921–960, 2007.
[2] I. F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, “A survey
on sensor networks,” Communications magazine, IEEE, vol. 40, no. 8,
pp. 102–114, 2002.
[3] Y. Wang, “Topology control for wireless sensor networks,” in Wireless
Sensor Networks and Applications.
Springer, 2008, pp. 113–147.
[4] B. Nazir and H. Hasbullah, “Mobile sink based routing protocol (msrp)
for prolonging network lifetime in clustered wireless sensor network,”
in Computer Applications and Industrial Electronics (ICCAIE), 2010
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 624–629.
[5] E. Woodrow and W. Heinzelman, “Spin-it: a data centric routing protocol
for image retrieval in wireless networks,” in Image Processing. 2002.
Proceedings. 2002 International Conference on, vol. 3.
IEEE, 2002,
pp. 913–916.
[6] C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, D. Estrin, J. Heidemann, and
F. Silva, “Directed diffusion for wireless sensor networking,” Network-
ing, IEEE/ACM Transactions on, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 2–16, 2003.
[7] J. N. Al-Karaki and A. E. Kamal, “Routing techniques in wireless sensor
networks: a survey,” Wireless Communications, IEEE, vol. 11, no. 6, pp.
6–28, 2004.
[8] M. Ettus, “System capacity, latency, and power consumption in
multihop-routed ss-cdma wireless networks,” in Radio and Wireless
Conference, 1998. RAWCON 98. 1998 IEEE.
IEEE, 1998, pp. 55–
58.
[9] D. J. Vergados, N. A. Pantazis, and D. D. Vergados, “Energy-efﬁcient
route selection strategies for wireless sensor networks,” Mobile Networks
and Applications, vol. 13, no. 3-4, pp. 285–296, 2008.
[10] G. L. Nemhauser and L. A. Wolsey, Integer and combinatorial opti-
mization.
Wiley New York, 1988, vol. 18.
[11] T. S. Rappaport et al., Wireless communications: principles and practice.
Prentice Hall PTR New Jersey, 1996, vol. 2.
[12] Y. Liu and Z. Wang, “Maximizing energy utilization routing scheme in
wireless sensor networks based on minimum hops algorithm,” Comput-
ers & Electrical Engineering, 2012.
[13] M. Patil and R. C. Biradar, “A survey on routing protocols in wireless
sensor networks,” in Networks (ICON), 2012 18th IEEE International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 86–91.
[14] M. Noori and M. Ardakani, “Characterizing the trafﬁc distribution in
linear wireless sensor networks,” Communications Letters, IEEE, vol. 12,
no. 8, pp. 554–556, 2008.
[15] N. Bartolini, T. Calamoneri, A. Massini, and S. Silvestri, “On adaptive
density deployment to mitigate the sink-hole problem in mobile sensor
networks,” Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 134–
145, 2011.
[16] S.-T. Cheng and T.-Y. Chang, “An adaptive learning scheme for load
balancing with zone partition in multi-sink wireless sensor network,”
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 39, no. 10, pp. 9427–9434, 2012.
[17] V. Tran-Quang and T. Miyoshi, “A novel gossip-based sensing coverage
algorithm for dense wireless sensor networks,” Computer Networks,
vol. 53, no. 13, pp. 2275–2287, 2009.
[18] C.-Y. Chong and S. P. Kumar, “Sensor networks: evolution, opportu-
nities, and challenges,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 91, no. 8, pp.
1247–1256, 2003.
[19] J. Jia, X. Wu, J. Chen, and X. Wang, “Exploiting sensor redistribution
for eliminating the energy hole problem in mobile sensor networks,”
EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol.
2012, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 2012.
[20] Y. Wang, X. Wang, B. Xie, D. Wang, and D. P. Agrawal, “Intrusion
detection in homogeneous and heterogeneous wireless sensor networks,”
Mobile Computing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 698–711,
2008.
[21] I. Demirkol, C. Ersoy, and F. Alagoz, “Mac protocols for wireless sensor
networks: a survey,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 44, no. 4,
pp. 115–121, 2006.
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

