An Effective Voronoi-based Coverage Enhancing Algorithm in Directional Sensor 
Networks 
 
Cheng-Yen Chung, Hao-Wei Chen, and Chiu-Kuo Liang 
Dept. of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Chung Hua University 
Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
Email: {m10002012, m10402026, ckliang}@chu.edu.tw 
 
 
Abstract—A directional sensor network is composed of many 
directional sensor nodes. Unlike conventional omni-directional 
sensors that always have an omni-angle of sensing range; 
directional sensors may have a limited angle of sensing range 
due to technical constraints or cost considerations. Area 
coverage problem is still an essential issue in directional sensor 
networks. In this paper, we study the area coverage problem in 
directional sensor networks. The problem is to maximize the 
area coverage of a randomly deployed directional sensor 
network. Each directional sensor can rotate its sensing 
direction in order to get better coverage in an interested region. 
In this study, we propose a distributed greedy algorithm that 
can improve the effective coverage area by using the 
characteristics of Voronoi diagram. The sensor field is divided 
into Voronoi cells by the calculation of sensors and the 
working direction of each sensor is evaluated based on the size 
and the location of the farthest Voronoi vertex of its 
surrounding Voronoi cell, respectively. Simulation results 
show that our proposed algorithm achieves around 5% to 15% 
better performance than that of previous proposed methods in 
terms of the area coverage rate. 
Keywords-Directional Sensor Networks; Rotatable Sensors; 
Area Coverage Problem; Voronoi Diagram. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION (HEADING 1) 
In recent years, wireless sensor networks have received a 
lot of attention due to their wide applications in military and 
civilian operations, such as fire detection [1], vehicle traffic 
monitoring [2], ocean monitoring [3], and battlefield 
surveillance [4]. In wireless sensor networks, many works 
have been done during the last decade. However, most of the 
past works were always based on the assumption of omni-
directional sensors that has an omni-angle of sensing range. 
In real environment, there are many kinds of directional 
sensors, such as video sensors [5], ultrasonic sensors [6] and 
infrared sensors [7]. The omni-directional sensor node has a 
circular disk of sensing range. The directional sensor node 
has smaller sensing area (sector-like area) and sensing angle 
than the omni-directional one. Compared to omni-directional 
sensors, the coverage region of a directional sensor is 
determined by its location and orientation. This can be 
illustrated by the example in Figure 1. 
1
2
3
4
5
 
Figure 1. An example of five directional sensors deployed to cover the 
target region. 
Area coverage is a fundamental problem in wireless 
sensor 
networks. 
Sensor 
nodes 
must 
be 
deployed 
appropriately to reach an adequate coverage level for the 
successful completion of the issued sensing tasks [8][9]. 
However, in many potential working environments, such as 
remote harsh fields, disaster areas, and toxic urban regions, 
sensor deployment cannot be performed manually. To scatter 
sensors by aircraft may result in the situation that the actual 
landing positions cannot be controlled. Consequently, the 
coverage may be inferior to the application requirements no 
matter how many sensors are dropped. For obtaining the 
better 
performance 
in 
directional 
sensor 
networks, 
directional sensors (e.g., cameras) may be able to rotate 
around a fixed axis to enhance its coverage in sensing radius 
[7]-[9]. Therefore, the coverage region of a directional sensor 
is determined by both its location and its direction of sensing 
radius. Those sensors that can rotate their sensing directions 
are called the rotatable sensors. We define the working 
direction of a sensor as the direction in which it is currently 
pointing at. We also call the sensing range of a sensor’s 
working direction as its coverage region. The coverage 
region of different sensors may be overlapped with other 
sensors after they are randomly deployed. Thus, we need to 
schedule sensors to face to certain directions to maximize the 
covered area of the whole network. 
In this paper, after sensors are randomly deployed into a 
target region, our goal is to maximize the total area coverage 
that can be achieved by rotating each sensor's working 
direction to proper direction. The problem of working 
direction scheduling to cover maximal regions, called 
Maximum Directional Area Coverage (MDAC) problem, has 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

been proved to be NP-complete [9]. A greedy solution has 
also been provided through scheduling working directions of 
sensors. We propose a distributed greedy algorithm for 
MDAC problem with rotatable sensors to increase the area 
coverage. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Related work is discussed in Section II. In Section III, the 
directional sensing model and some preliminaries are 
proposed. In Section IV, the problem statement is proposed. 
Section V proposes the distributed greedy algorithm for 
solving the problem. In Section VI, we present experimental 
results obtained from different perspectives on the number of 
sensors, the sensing radius and the sensing angle, 
respectively. Section VII summarizes our findings. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Ma and Liu [10] discussed that the number of directional 
sensors can be deployed to achieve coverage rate p in a 
distributed directional sensor network (equation (1)). 
Directional sensors are randomly and uniformly scattered 
within a given area. Here, R is the sensing radius, S is the 
given area, and α is the offset angle of the field of view. To 
be clear, αR2 /S indicates that a directional sensor can 
monitor given area that is within its sensing region. 
Therefore, after N directional sensors are deployed, the 
probability that covers a given area is represented in 
𝑝 = 1 − (1 − 𝛼𝑅2
𝑆 )𝑁.                                      (1) 
 
In other words, if the coverage rate of a given area is at 
least p, the number of deployed directional sensors should be 
represented in 
𝑁 =
ln(1 − 𝑝)
ln 𝑆 − 𝛼𝑅2 − ln𝑆 .                               (2) 
 
Kandoth and Chellappan [11] proposed a greedy solution 
called the Face-Away (FA) algorithm to achieve the 
maximal area coverage rate in the interested region. The FA 
algorithm works in a very simple manner. Each sensor 
calculates a new working direction that only needs the 
positions of neighboring sensors. The neighboring sensors of 
a directional sensor, say s, are those sensors located within 
the circular area centered at s with sensing radius R. In fact, 
every sensor should be recognizable from its surroundings 
when being viewed by its neighbors. Once a sensor is 
recognized, each sensor must center it in view and record the 
current working direction. 
Li et al. [12] proposed the Voronoi-based centralized 
approximation (VCA) algorithm and the Voronoi-based 
distributed approximation (VDA) algorithm of the solution 
to their proposed optimal coverage in directional sensor 
networks (OCDSN) problem for covering maximal area 
while activating as few sensors as possible. Their algorithms 
are both based upon the so-called boundary Voronoi diagram 
(BVD). Each sensor will rotate its working direction to cover 
the largest edge of its surrounding Voronoi region. Thus, the 
covered area will be increased. However, as the number of 
sensors increased and non-uniformly deployed into the 
region, the overlapped area among sensors increased as well.  
In [13], the authors proposed two greedy schemes, 
namely the Intra-cell Working Direction Selection (IDS) and 
the Inter-cell Working Direction Adjustment (IDA) schemes,  
which are also based on the Voronoi diagram, to rotate the 
working direction of each sensor to the direction of the 
vertices of its corresponding Voronoi cell. The IDS scheme 
rotates the working direction of each sensor to the Voronoi 
vertex having the maximum coverage. Then, the IDA 
approach improves the overlapped coverage between 
adjacent cells to increase the overall area coverage. 
In this paper, we devised a greedy approach for sensors 
to select their working directions to increase the area 
coverage. Simulation results show that our proposed 
algorithm outperforms than previous algorithms, including 
Face-Away, VDA, and IDS algorithms. 
III. 
PRELIMINARIES 
A. Directional Sensing Model 
Compared to an omni-directional sensor, which has a 
disc-shaped sensing range, a directional sensor has a smaller 
sector-like sensing area and smaller sensing angle, as 
illustrated in Figure 2. In Figure 2, the sensing region (also 
called the sensing sector) of a directional sensor is a sector 
denoted by 4-tuple (p(x,y), r, , ). Here, p(x,y) is the 
location of the sensor node, r is the sensing radius,  
(0<2) is the working direction angle and  (0<2) is 
the angle of view. The special case of this model, where   = 
2 can be described as omni-sensing model.  
Working 
Direction
0

2
3 
2
1 


r
p(x,y)
   
Figure 2. The directional sensing model. 
We illustrate the characteristic of directional sensors: 
 
Each directional sensor is homogeneous, such as: 
sensing angle, sensing radius, and communication 
radius.  
 
Each directional sensor can sense only one limited 
angle of omni-direction. 
 
Each directional sensor is fixed and can rotate 
arbitrary angle in sensing region. 
 
The communication radius is twice than the sensing 
radius such that sensing neighbors can reliably 
communicate. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

B. Voronoi Cells 
Voronoi diagram, a well-known data structure in 
computational geometry [14], partitions a plane into a set of 
convex polygons such that all points inside a polygon are 
closest to only one site. This study used the Voronoi diagram 
structure and divided the sensing area into Voronoi cells 
according to the positions of deployed sensors, as shown in 
Figure 3. 
s3
s1
s2
s4
s5
s6
Voronoi cell
 
Figure 3. Dividing sensing area into Voronoi cells associated with sensors. 
The construction effectively produces polygons with 
edges that are equidistant from neighboring sites. Those line 
segments that form the boundaries of Voronoi cells are 
called the Voronoi edges. The endpoints of these edges are 
called the Voronoi vertices. 
IV. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
Usually a numerous of sensors are randomly deployed 
into a target region for covering the area as much as possible 
in order to reach an adequate coverage level for further 
applications. However, it is not easy to obtain optimum 
coverage because of the overlapped covered area. The defect 
in using centralized algorithms for this problem is that a node 
with powerful computing resource is required for calculation. 
Moreover, massive node information must be transmitted to 
the sink node in multi-hop mode, thus consuming a lot of 
sensor network transmission resources. On the contrary, the 
distributed algorithms do not need global information but 
only local information gathered from neighboring sensors for 
calculation, thus consuming fewer calculation and network 
transmission resources. In addition, the distributed algorithm 
is more practical to implement real-time response or 
adjustment according to the dynamic environment change. 
For numerous directional sensors randomly distributed in 
the sensing field, the field coverage problem is a basic and 
important problem without optimal solution. This study used 
the distributed greedy algorithm to obtain the near optimum 
solution. Based on the Voronoi cells structure, each sensor 
uses the vertices of its cell as the candidate targets of 
working direction. The working direction is selected and 
adjusted and the original direction of each sensor is changed 
on the two principles: (1) to enlarge the area covered by the 
sensor while reducing the sensors overlapped coverage with 
neighboring sensors as much as possible; (2) to avoid the 
sensor coverage being outside the sensing field as possible; 
so that the overall target area coverage is improved.  
Now, we formally state our problem as follows: 
Problem: Randomly deploying N directional sensors with 
sensing range RS, communication range RC and sensing angle 
α in a given target sensing region where RC = 2RS and 
0 < 𝛼 ≤ 2,  we are asked to devise a distributed algorithm 
for each sensor to adjust or rotate its working direction so 
that the total area coverage is maximized. 
V. 
PROPOSED SENSOR DIRECTION CONTROL SCHEME 
In this section, the algorithm corresponding to the two 
major principles of selecting working direction will be 
described respectively, which are Working Direction 
Selection scheme  and Out-of-Field Coverage Recovery 
procedure. 
A. Working Direction Selection 
Although we all know that a sensor can rotate its sensing 
direction to increase the coverage, we still do not know 
which direction is the best for a sensor to rotate. Therefore, 
the main idea of our proposed algorithm is to determine the 
most possible direction of a sensor to rotate so that after the 
rotation, the overlapped region with other sensors is 
minimized. The following is our strategy for finding the 
rotating direction. According to [13], the sensor having the 
optimal sensing quality is to cover the most area within its 
corresponding Voronoi cell. Thus, our first step is to 
determine which direction is the most likely for a sensor to 
cover within its Voronoi cell zone. To do so, when each 
sensor completes the construction of its Voronoi cell, the 
vertices of the cell are used as preliminary working direction 
candidates. The sensor calculates respective coverage sizes 
within the cell zone of aligning direction with each vertex of 
its Voronoi cell and selects the vertex having the maximum 
coverage and the minimum overlapped with other sensors 
within the cell zone as its working direction. In other words, 
this selection will decide the most effective or non-
overlapped sensing area from the position of sensor.  
Obviously, the decision for a sensor of selecting the most 
effective or non-overlapped sensing area depends on the 
directions of its neighboring sensors. If the working 
directions of all neighboring sensors are determined, the 
sensor can easily determine its working direction to the 
direction that has no overlapped area with its neighboring 
sensors. However, if some neighboring sensors have not 
decided their working directions yet, then there may have 
chances to overlap with these undecided sensors. Therefore, 
the sequence of sensors for determining their working 
directions will affect the performance of reducing the 
overlapped area. For determining the decision sequence, we 
consider the average edge length of the Voronoi cell of each 
sensor. The average edge length of each sensor is calculated 
as the length of all edges in its surrounding Voronoi cell 
divided by the number of its neighboring sensors. Therefore, 
it can be seen that if the average edge length is small, the 
sensor may have more neighboring sensors than those with 
larger average edge lengths. In this case, it is better for the 
sensor to determine its working direction before other 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

sensors since once it decided, all the neighboring sensors can 
easily determine their working directions by avoiding the 
area covered by the decided sensor. 
Here, we describe our proposed greedy algorithm for 
MDAC problem. The proposed algorithm is called the 
Voronoi-based Minimal Size First (VMSF) algorithm. In our 
proposed algorithm, when each sensor completes the 
construction of its Voronoi cell, the sensor calculates the 
average edge length of its surrounding Voronoi cell as the 
priority of rotation. It should be noticed that, as we 
mentioned above, the smaller the average edge length is, the 
higher the priority will be. In other words, if the average 
edge length of a sensor is small, meaning that the sensor may 
have many neighbors, then the sensor has higher priority to 
be scheduled for rotation. Once a sensor has determined to 
rotate, the new direction can be obtained by finding the 
vertex of its Voronoi cell with largest uncovered and non-
overlapped region.  
B. Out-of-Field Coverage Recovery 
The positions of a part of deployed sensors may be close 
to the boundary of the target region. The working direction 
of these sensors may face toward the boundary so that most 
of coverage is outside the sensing field, wasting the coverage 
of sensors of the sensing field. Therefore, after the working 
direction selection procedure, this study implements 
additional Out-of-Field Coverage Recovery procedure on 
these sensors near the boundary. Figure 4 shows an example 
with three cases. The working direction of an out-of-field 
sensor can be recovered by rotating the working direction 
towards the inside of sensing field, as shown in Figure 5, so 
that the working direction angle  of si should conform to 1 
or 2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
sj
si
sk
 
Figure 4. An example of out-of-field coverage. 
Working 
Direction
si
 
 
 
 
2

2

2
1
 
 
 
Figure 5. Direction adjustment for of Out-of-Field Coverage Recovery. 
The pseudo-code of the our proposed VMSF algorithm is 
shown in Figure 6. 
Algorithm: Voronoi-based Minimal Size First algorithm 
I. Initialization Phase (only performed once) 
1:  Send a coverage message containing sensor ID, initial 
working direction, and location of sensor si  and wait a 
period of time for collecting the information from 
sensing neighbors 
2: Calculate the Voronoi diagram and determine the 
priority value Pi and broadcast the value 
3:  Collect the priority values from all neighboring sensors 
and go to the Decision Phase. 
II. Decision Phase 
1: while true do 
2:  
Find the highest priority values, denoted as Pmax, 
 
 among neighboring sensors  
3:  
if Pi > Pmax then 
4: 
    Find the point, say A, on the Voronoi cell with 
 
    maximal uncovered region and non-overlapped 
 
    region 
5              Rotate its working direction to point A, set 
  
 
    its priority value to 0 and send a scheduled 
  
 
    message containing ID and priority value to its 
sensing neighbors 
6:  
    Exit the while loop 
7:  
else  
8:  
    if Pi = Pmax then  
9:  
        Wait for a random duration or a scheduled 
     message sent by a sensor, say sj, is received 
10:  
         if no scheduled message received then 
11:  
             Find the point, say A, on the Voronoi cell 
 
 
             with maximal uncovered and  
 
 
             non-overlapped region  
12:  
             Rotate its working direction to point A, set 
its priority value to 0 and send a scheduled 
message containing ID and priority value to 
its sensing neighbors. 
13:  
            Exit the while loop 
14:  
         end if 
15:           else 
16:               Wait until a scheduled message sent by a 
sensor, say sj, is received 
17:            end if 
18:            Set the status of sj as “scheduled” and update its 
  
 
     priority Pi according to its remaining 
                 “unscheduled” neighboring sensors 
19:            Send Pi to its “unscheduled” neighboring sensors 
20:  
     Collect the priority values from all of its 
 “unscheduled” neighboring sensors 
21:        end if 
22:   end while 
 
Figure 6. The proposed sensor direction selection algorithm. 
In the next section, we will present the performance of 
our proposed sensor movement algorithm. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

VI. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
This section describes the parameters and performance 
effects of different perspectives on our proposed algorithm, 
compared with previous algorithms. We conducted our 
experiments on a computer with 3.0 GHz CPU and 4GB 
memory. All experiments are done in C# on .NET platform. 
Our simulation network consists of 50 to 200 directional 
sensor nodes placed randomly within a 500 m x 500 m area. 
Every experiment was repeated 100 times and the recorded 
data was averaged over those runs. Table 1 lists the values of 
the common parameters used in all the experiments. 
TABLE I.  EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETERS 
Parameters 
Description 
Network Size 
500 × 500 (m2) 
Sensing Radius 
30m, 35m, …, 60m 
Sensing Angle 
60,80, …, 180 
Number of Sensors 
50, 75, …, 200 
 
The main goal of our simulation is focused on the 
comparison of the performance of our proposed VMSF 
algorithm, random approach (Random) in which each sensor 
select its working direction randomly, FA, VDA and IDS 
algorithms, in terms of the coverage rate. The coverage rate p 
is defined as the ratio of the total covered area by all sensors 
over the network size. We evaluate the effects of our 
algorithm on three different perspectives. First, we examine 
the effect that the number of sensors N makes to the 
improvement of coverage rate p. Second, we evaluate the 
effect that the sensing radius improves the coverage rate p. 
Third, we examine the effect that the offset angle makes to 
the improvement of coverage rate p.  
A. Coverage rate vs. Number of sensors 
This experiment evaluates the effect that the number of 
sensors N makes to the performance of coverage rate p of 
Random approach, FA, VDA, IDS, and VMSF algorithms 
respectively. The sensing radius R is set to 50m and the 
sensing angle  is set to 120. The result is shown in Figure 
7. 
 
 
Figure 7. Coverage rate vs. number of sensors with R = 50m and  = 120.  
 
In Figure 7, we can see that our proposed VMSF 
algorithm outperforms all other approaches. For example, 
when the number of sensors is 200, the sensing radius is 50m 
and the sensing angle is 120, the coverage rates of Random 
approach, FA, VDA, IDS, and VMSF algorithms are 77.31%, 
74.48%, 83,18%, 84.09%, and 92.42% respectively. Thus, 
the VMSF algorithm outperforms other approaches. This is 
because that VMSF algorithm can achieve the less 
overlapping area and the order of sensors chosen to rotate 
will influence the performance of coverage rate. Therefore, 
our proposed VMSF algorithm can get the most 
improvement on coverage rate among all algorithms. 
B. Coverage rate vs. Sensing radius 
This experiment examines the effect that sensing radius R 
makes to the performance of coverage rate p of Random 
approach, 
FA, 
VDA, IDS, 
and 
VMSF 
algorithms 
respectively. The sensing angle is set to 120. The number of 
sensors is set to 200. The result is shown in Figure 8. 
In Figure 8, we can see that our proposed VMSF 
algorithm outperforms all other approached. For example, 
when the number of sensors is 200, the sensing radius is 60m 
and the sensing angle is 120, the coverage rates of Random 
approach, FA, VDA, IDS, and VMSF algorithms are 86.89%, 
86.12%, 90.58%, 93.23% and 96.91% respectively. Thus, the 
VMSF algorithm performs better than other approaches from 
3.68% to 10.02%. This is because that our VMSF algorithm 
can achieve less overlapped region and higher coverage rate. 
We also note that, as the sensing radius increases, the 
coverage rates of all algorithms rise. This is obvious since 
the greater the sensing radius is, the more sensing area can be 
obtained. 
 
 
Figure 8. Coverage rate vs. sensing radius with N = 200 and  = 120. 
C. Coverage rate vs. Sensing angles 
This experiment evaluates the effect that sensing angle  
makes to the performance of coverage rate p of Random 
approach, 
FA, 
VDA, IDS, 
and 
VMSF 
algorithms 
respectively. The sensing radius is set to 50m. The number of 
sensors is set to 200. The result is shown in Figure 9. 
 
35
45
55
65
75
85
95
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Average coverage rate(%)
Number of sensors
R=50, α=120°
VMSF
IDS
VDA
FA
Random
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
Average coverage rate(%)
Sensing radius (m)
N = 200, α = 120°
VMSF
IDS
VDA
FA
Random
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 9. Coverage rate vs. sensing angles with R = 50m and N = 200. 
In Figure 9, we can see that our proposed VMSF 
algorithm outperforms all other approaches. For example, 
when the number of sensors is 200, the sensing radius is 50m 
and the sensing angle is 120, the coverage rates of Random 
approach, FA, VDA, IDS, and VMSF algorithms are 78.12%, 
82.31%, 84.92%, 86.53%, and 91.68% respectively. Thus, 
the VMSF algorithm performs 5.15% better than the IDS 
algorithm. This is because that our proposed VMSF 
algorithm can achieve less overlapped area and higher 
coverage rate. We also note that, as the sensing angle  
increases, the coverage rates of all algorithms rise. However, 
once the value of  exceeds a certain value ( 140 in this 
experiment), the increasing coverage rate becomes flat rising. 
This is because, when the network density and sensing radius 
are fixed, the larger the sensing angle is, the smaller the 
possibility of uncovered area becomes. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we investigate the Maximum Directional 
Area Coverage (MDAC) problem in which we are asked to 
maximize the area coverage by scheduling the sensing 
direction or rotating the working direction of each sensor. 
We propose a distributed greedy algorithm, called the 
Voronoi-based Minimal Size First (VMSF) approach, which 
is based on the size of the corresponding Voronoi cell and 
the area of the overlapped region between directional sensors. 
Simulation results show that our proposed algorithm 
achieves better performance around 8% to 15%, 4% to 10%, 
and 5% to 13% than those of previous algorithms in terms of 
coverage rate on different number of sensors, sensing radius 
and sensing angles, respectively. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Hefeeda and M. Bagheri, “Randomized k-coverage 
algorithms for dense sensor networks”, In: 26th IEEE 
International Conference on Computer Communications 
(INFOCOM ’07). Anchorage, AK: IEEE Press, 2007, pp. 
2376–2380. 
[2] K. Chakrabarty, S. Iyengar, H. Qi, and E. Cho, “Grid 
coverage for surveillance and target location in distributed 
sensor networks”, IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol.51, 
no.12, pp.1448–1453, 2002. 
[3] S. Kininmonth et al., “The Great Barrier Reef Sensor 
Network”, PACEM IN MARIBUS XXXI proceedings, 
Townsville, 2005, pp.361–369. 
[4] I. F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, 
“A survey on sensor networks,” ACM Trans. on Multimedia 
Computing, Communications and Applications, pp. 102-114, 
Aug 2002. 
[5] M. Rahimi et al., “Cyclops: In situ image sensing and 
interpretation in wireless sensor networks,” in ACM 
Conference 
on 
Embedded 
Networked 
Sensor 
Systems(SenSys), pp. 192-204, 2005. 
[6]  J. Djugash, S. Singh, G. Kantor, and W. Zhang, “Range-
only SLAM for robots operating cooperatively with sensor 
networks,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 
Automation, pp. 2078-2084, 2006. 
[7] R. Szewczyk, A. Mainwaring, J. Polastre, J. Anderson, and D. 
Culler,“An analysis of a large scale habitat monitoring 
application,” ACM Conference on Embedded Networked 
Sensor Systems (SenSys), pp. 214-226, 2004. 
[8] T. Clouqueur, V. Phipatanasuphorn, P. Ramanathan, and K. K. 
Saluja, ”Sensor Deployment Strategy for Target Detection,”  
Proc. First ACM International Workshop Wireless Sensor 
Networks and Applications, pp. 42-48, 2002. 
[9] W. Cheng, S. Li, X. Liao, C. Chen, and H. Chen , “Maximal 
Coverage Scheduling in Randomly Deployed Directional 
Sensor Networks” in International Conference on Parallel 
Processing Workshops, ICPPW 2007, pp. 68-68, 2007. 
[10] H. D. Ma and Y. Liu, “On coverage problems of directional 
sensor networks,” in International Conference on Mobile Ad-
hoc and Sensor Networks (MSN), pp. 721-731, 2005. 
[11] C. Kandoth and S. Chellappan, “Angular Mobility Assisted 
Coverage in Directional Sensor Networks,” Proceedings of 
International Conference on Network-Based Information 
Systems (NBIS 2009), pp. 376-379, 2009.  
[12] J. Li, R. Wang, H. Huang, and L. Sun, "Voronoi-Based 
Coverage 
Optimization 
for 
Directional 
Sensor 
Networks," Wireless Sensor Network, Vol. 1 No. 5, 2009, pp. 
417-424. 
[13] Tien-Wen Sung and Chu-Sing Yang, “Voronoi-based 
coverage improvement approach for wireless directional 
sensor networks,” Journal of Network and Computer 
Applications, Volume 39, March 2014, pp. 202–213. 
[14] F. Aurenhammer, “Voronoi Diagrams: A Survey of a 
Fundamental Geometric Data Structure,” ACM Computing 
Surveys, vol. 23, pp. 345-405, 1991. 
[15] S. Meguerdichian, F. Koushanfar, M. Potkonjak, and M.B. 
Srivastava, “Coverage Problems in Wireless Ad-Hoc Sensor 
Network,” Proc. IEEE Infocom, pp. 1380-1387, 2001. 
[16] C. K. Liang, M. C. He, and C. H. Tsai, “Movement Assisted 
sensor 
deployement 
in 
directional 
sensor 
networks,” 
Proceedings of 6th International Conference on Mobile Ad-
hoc and Sensor Networks, Hangzhou, China, 2010, pp. 226-
230. 
[17] C. Zhu, C Zheng, L. Shu, and G. Han, “A survey on coverage 
and connectivity issues in wireless sensor networks,” Journal 
of Network and Computer Applications, Volume 35, 2012, pp. 
619-632.  
 
 
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Average coverage rate(%)
Sensing Angles 
N = 200, R = 50
VMSF
IDS
VDA
FA
Random
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

