Cluster-based Performance Analysis of Sensor Distribution Strategies on a Wireless 
Sensor Network 
Majid Bayani Abbasy, José Pablo Ulate 
Universidad Nacional de Costa Rica, Escuela informática 
Universidad Nacional de Costa Rica, Escuela informática 
mbayani@una.ac.cr, jose.ulate.castro@est.una.ac.cr 
 
Abstract— Since the placement of sensor nodes has a direct 
effect on its performance, this paper explores three predefined 
configurations in order to compare their power consumption 
performance. The experiments assume an obstacle free, 
rectangular field, with a cluster-based routing protocol and the 
event location in the field. The results demonstrated the 
different significant behaviors of the placement strategies in a 
cluster-based scenario.  
      Keywords-Wireless 
Sensor 
Network 
(WSN); 
Sensor 
placement strategy; WSN performance; Cluster-based. 
                            I.         INTRODUCTION  
       Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) consist of a group of 
sensor nodes, distributed over a field, in order to sense and 
collect the data of an event. Among the constraints that 
affect the WSNs performance such as the low availability of 
energy, low bandwidth, sensing limitations and sensor 
lifetime, energy consumption is the most challengeable [1]. 
      In order to improve the WSN performance huge number 
of techniques has been developed before the writing of this 
paper. Some of them concentrate on routing protocols such 
as Directed Diffusion, Leach [24], BVR, VRR and Gear [2], 
to decrease the power consumption of sensor nodes. Using 
ultra-low power data storage [7], new low-power processors 
[5], and transmitters [4], the efficiency of WSNs has 
significantly improved. Applying different positioning 
strategies for sensors is another complementary approach to 
increase the efficiency of a WSN performance that has been 
considered by some researchers lately [3].   
       Two main factors are considered and evaluated in this 
research. The first being the sensor location strategy and its 
effect on the WSN performance, and the second factor of 
this investigation is the cluster-based approach.  
       The focus in this paper is mostly on the second factor or 
the cluster-based approach.  
       The results showed that the first factor (sensor 
placement) in a cluster and query based environment has a 
direct impact on WSN performance. However, in many 
query-based cases, the main constraint is the cost of 
manually locating and replacing sensors nodes. Therefore, it 
was considered essential to evaluate the clustering scenarios 
of the WSN and their effect on their energy consumption 
performance. 
 A.  Related Work 
      Sensor deployment is a topic, which has been studied by 
many researchers. Chen et al. studied the placement of a 
given number of sensors to maximize WSN lifetime per unit 
cost [4]. Another approach in this route was discussed in [8] 
considering the joint optimization of sensors for data 
gathering, where a given number of nodes needs to be 
placed in a field in such a manner that sensed data can be 
reconstructed at a sink, while minimizing the energy 
consumed for communication. A constrained multi-variable 
nonlinear programming problem is formulated in order to 
determine the optimal location of the nodes in [6].  Also, [3] 
a comparison of random allocation and two different 
geometric placements in order to find the optimized sensor 
placement strategy among the defined strategies and 
consequently, increasing the WSN performance in terms of 
power consumption has been undertaken. The [3] 
experiments are realized in a flat-based environment using 
Directed Diffusion Protocol. 
       The main objective of this paper is the study of 
geometric configuration of the sensor nodes in a clustered 
environment. 
       The main idea is based on finding the impact of the 
node placement strategy among the defined strategies and 
consequently, increasing the WSN performance in terms of 
power consumption. 
       Overall 
performance 
under 
different 
placements 
depends on the pattern of queries requested from the 
network, which in turn might depend on the physical 
segmentation of the filed. For example, queries for a 
volcanic surveillance will be carried out from a small 
number of sites at some distance from a (central) crater, to 
those sensors, which are found closer to the location of the 
volcanic activity.  In this particular occasion, the filed 
around the target can be segmented into heterogeneous and 
homogeneous regions. Theoretically, the clustering the 
heterogeneous part of the scenario can be a realistic option. 
This paper emphasizes the use of a geometric clustered-
based approach to obtain a significant increase of the energy 
consumption performance. The strategies, which are 
deployed, are compared to one another to determine which 
one optimizes power consumption. This paper presents a 
realistic simulation-based research whereas all requests for 
161
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

information originate at random points in of the field, and 
are directed to the selected clustered pieces of the area. 
II.      METHODOLOGY 
      This section describes in detail, the methodology used in 
the simulation-based experiments. The strategies for sensor 
allocation are described subsequently. 
A.  Sensor Placement Strategies 
      The two main strategies used are random and plan-
based. Both are the Cluster-based types.  
The two planned strategies which were used are: Uniform 
and Circular. The Random Strategy is a default common 
strategy and the Uniform Strategy is the theoretical optimal 
placement to reduce the number of nodes on a field without 
obstacles, and the Circular Strategy was an arbitrary plan 
choice. All strategies were implemented on a small clustered 
filed in a 50x50. Sensors can only be located at grid 
intersections.   
       The experiments are divided into two main categories: 
with a leader and without a leader: 
       With a leader: for all kinds of the sensor placement, a 
sensor is selected as the leader and located on the center of 
experimented clustered piece. 
       Without a leader: in each cycle of communication each 
one of 16 sensors may act as a leader.  
1) 
Random Placement 
      In Random placement, the sensor nodes are randomly 
scattered over a previously allocated intersection on the grid 
and a random distribution scenario is generated.  Figure 1 is 
an illustration of a random distribution for 16 sensor nodes. 
 
 
Figure 1. Random Clustered-Distribution of 16 sensor nodes. 
2)  Plan-Based Placement 
      In the plan-based strategies, sensors are placed in the 
field following a predefined geometric plan or using a 
predefined distribution algorithm.   
a)  Uniform Distribution 
      In the uniform strategy, a sensor was placed at each 
intersection on a selected clustered area.  Given the number 
of sensors used in the experiments, and the predefined area 
of coverage of each sensor, this type of strategy provides 
100% connectivity. Figure 2 illustrates this distribution for 
16 sensors with a leader on the center. 
 
 
Figure 2. Uniform Clustered-Distribution of 16 sensor nodes. 
b) Circular Distribution 
      The Circular Distribution Strategy is an arbitrary option; 
the sensors form a predefined circle of nodes distribution 
that radiates symmetrically from the center. This distribution 
can be considered as an alternative arrangement of 
distributing the sensors. Figure 3 shows a Circular 
distribution for 16 sensors with the head cluster in the 
center. 
 
 
Figure 3. Circular Clustered-Distribution of 16 sensor nodes. 
B)  Power Consumption Measurement model 
 
      As part of the research objectives, the performance 
analysis was done on power usage at different abstract levels 
(network, query, individual sensor). In order for the 
simulation to behave in the same way as it would in reality, 
battery characteristics have to be defined.   
       In order to achieve this goal, a particular type of sensor 
was chosen, and its main characteristics were mapped to the 
simulation model (battery life, transmission range, and so 
on). The sensor chosen was the MICA2DOT which is part 
of the Mica family [12] due to its popularity in WSN design. 
Its transmission speed is 250 Kbps, and its outdoor range is 
75-100 m. The maximum battery capacity is 2000 m.A.h. 
Some of the relevant energy characteristics of this type of 
sensor are summarized on Table I. 
162
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

TABLE I. ENERGY USAGE BY ACTION TYPE 
Action 
Energy used (µ joules) 
Reception of data message 
100 
Reception of  control message 
3 
Transmission of data message 
100 + 200 x d2 
Transmission of control message 
3 + 64 x d2 
 
      As an assumption, the simulation required some 
simplification over the traditional battery consumption 
behavior. The total power consumption by each node was 
based on the estimated consumption rate in “wake up” 
mode. Another important assumption is that the “wake up” 
mode includes only transmit and receive modes only, while 
energy consumed in both the idle and sleep states is ignored. 
Each time a message (data or control) passes through a 
node, the energy spending for that node is reduced in the 
amount necessary to transmit all the messages.  
C)  Experimentation Design 
 
      A C-Sharp Interface was implemented in order to 
simulate the experiments.  
When a sink injects a query from any point of the scenario, a 
possible leader (head cluster) receives the message and 
sends the control message to the first sensor node in the 
cluster, consequently, the target node will send back the 
DATA to the leader. The leader receives the DATA, 
consumes energy as well as the sender, and will send 
another control message to the other nodes and repeat the 
process. The procedure of sending and receiving the control 
messages between leader and all 16 sensors was defined as a 
Query Cycle. The sensors can die as they do not have 
sufficient energy to receive or transmit the DATA or control 
a message in different query cycle. 
       As mentioned above, the experiments are cluster-based 
and are implemented under two categories: with a leader and 
without a leader.  
       In the case of experiments with a leader, a particular 
sensor allocated in the center called the Leader (head 
cluster). In the without leader option, each of the nodes can 
be act as a leader (head cluster) and when it has died another 
sensor takes the role of conducting the process.  
The details will be explained in the next subsections.       
 
1) 
With leader  
      In a typical scenario as shown in Figure 4, 16 sensors are 
deployed. The leader of the cluster (HC) is located in the 
center, sequentially it injects a query into the WSN and a 
flooding algorithm [3] propagates the query (interest 
message) over the WSN. When the sink injects a query, all 
those sensors with enough power to receive and transmit the 
sensory data back to the leader. All sensors that participate 
in the process of data delivery consume energy. ETi (µj)) 
represents the total energy consumed by the message and 
data delivery is calculated as the sum of the energy 
consumed when the i-th query cycle starts, the network has 
already used some energy for the processing of i-th queries.  
 
 
      Figure 4. An experimental scenario With and Without Leader. 
2) 
Without a Leader 
        In this scenario each of the 16 sensor nodes acts as the 
leader of the cluster (HC). As an assumption, the sequence 
of the change is ignored in this experiment because, all 
sensors are charged the same amount of energy and what is 
calculated is the sum of energy consumed at the end of the 
sequence. The rest of the process is the same as the previous 
section (with a leader).  
 
III.      RESULTS 
      The results obtained under normal and stress conditions 
in the simulation are organized in different categories. The 
analysis starts with the total energy consumption under non-
stress critical point conditions. Under normal conditions, no 
sensors can die of energy exhaustion, so unsuccessful 
queries, that create energy consumption variability, are due 
to non-reachability issues in the Random strategy. 
 
A)  Analysis of the results  
       At the most critical point, whereas the first sensor was 
dead, the behavior of the three strategies is varied. The 
result shows a significant difference between three 
strategies. The Uniform that theoretically, because of 
scattering 
of 
the 
nodes, 
uniformly, 
total 
energy 
consumption, is lower than the Circular and Random 
strategies. In the Uniform Distribution Strategy more 
sensors than the other configurations will be involved in the 
process.  
       In the particular case of Circular scattering (Figure 5), it 
demonstrates a reasonable response in terms of the total 
power consumption (µj) compared to the Random. This fact 
is shown in the Figure 5. 
163
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

 
Figure 5. Total Energy Consumption in the Critical Point. 
       Figures 6(a), 6(b) show total energy consumption for 
different strategies under stress situation. The results were 
obtained for three stress situations. The total energy 
consumed by all sensor nodes is calculated when 25%, 50% 
and 75% of the sensors are dead. As the results show, the 
best result is that of the Uniform Strategy. The Random and 
Circular cases show the closed outcome in terms of the total 
energy consumption. When a high rate of the nodes was 
dead, the Random Strategy was close to that of the Uniform 
Strategy. This is to be expected as more sensor nodes are 
involved in any query in the Random Strategy case. Based 
on the Figures 6)a ,6)b , the result did not demonstrate any 
significant difference between the results for both with 
leader and without leader cases. 
 
  6 (a) Total Energy Consumption (with leader) in different rate of sensor 
death. 
 
6(b) Total Energy Consumption (without leader) in different rate of 
sensor death. 
       Another useful result that is revealed in Figure 7, is the 
total energy consumption for all strategies in different cycles 
of the query in the normal condition where none of sensors 
dies. As Figure 7 demonstrates, all strategies have the 
similar answer. The Uniform Strategy shows a more active 
strategy when compared to the others. The Random Strategy 
shows a lower activity in opposition to Circular Strategy and 
the Uniform Strategy. Based on these aggregate statistics for 
normal 
conditions, 
the 
rate 
of 
increasing 
energy 
consumption for all cases is smooth and very similar. 
 
Figure 7. Total Energy Consumption for different Query Cycle. 
      Figure 8, exhibits another essential piece of data 
obtained in the experiments. As shown in Figure 8, the 
number of sensor that died in the process during different 
cycles is varied. In the Uniform strategy, the higher number 
of nodes died as a result of higher activity that was expected 
from the Uniform distribution. When starting the query 
cycles, a lesser number of the nodes were dead. As the 
cycles 
increased, 
more 
sensors 
died 
during 
the 
communication process in the Circular Strategy clustered 
area as well as the Uniform Strategy. The death rate of the 
nodes for Uniform Strategy is almost two times the same 
rate for the Random Strategy. This is due to the fact that the 
sensor nodes were participating in the communication 
process in the Uniform Strategy and were more active than 
the Random Strategy case. It is acceptable to state that when 
the sensors are distributed in a cluster area based on a 
geographic plan they will be more active than when they 
were scattered randomly in a WSN clustered filed. 
 
Figure 8. Rate of Sensor death for three Sensor Placement Strategies.  
       As a final point, Figure 9 shows the different amounts 
of the average power consumption for different query 
cycles. Based on the Figure 9, the average energy 
164
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

consumption pattern for all strategies is similar whereas the 
Uniform Strategy spends less total energy for almost all 
queries and in most cycles, as expected.  
 
Figure 9. Average Power Consumption for different Query Cycle. 
The explanation for this fact, as discussed before, relates to 
the ability of the Uniform layout of constructing the closest-
to-straight path between leader and target nodes. However, 
the Uniform Strategy has the highest rate of sensor death, 
which means that with each subsequent query cycle, the 
paths are of lesser and lesser quality. This is apparent in the 
fact that the differences between the Uniform Strategy and 
the other strategies are fewer than under normal conditions. 
Although, the plan-based Circular Strategy shows a very 
similar answer to the Random, on the whole, the results 
were located in a lower level of energy consumption than de 
Random case by the sensors.  
       Lastly consideration is: for all cases, the result of the 
experiments with HC and without leader hasn’t shown any 
significant difference. 
 
6) CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
       Simulation results obtained under stress situation for 
clustered sensor placement have confirmed that plan-based 
strategies use less total energy than Random deployment 
strategies. In particular, Plan-based sensor distribution 
strategies demonstrate better response in terms of the total 
energy consumption in the system. 
Under normal conditions, the Uniform Strategy is the best-
proposed strategy for applying in terms of the participating 
of the sensor nodes and high covering the cluster area. In 
this case the energy consumption behavior of the all 
strategies relatively, is similar.    
      Another significant issue that was observed is, in the 
critical point that first sensor is dead, the results are very 
reasonable. As was theoretically expected, the plan-based 
strategy and the Uniform Strategy, in particular, is the most 
optimized strategy in terms of the total energy consumption 
by all sensors that are scattered over the cluster. 
 
      Finally, the rate of sensor death was different for all 
strategies. The first death of the sensor occurs in the 
Uniform due to the high rate of sensors participating in the 
process. In different query cycles, this rate varied. The circle 
Strategy starts with a delay but as the cycles increases the 
participating level of the nodes in this strategy increases, as 
well. The Random always keep the same rate compared to 
the plan-based strategies.  
      Due to the fact that the selection of deployment of a 
sensor strategy has a significant effect on WSN 
performance, a strategic focus for future work could be the 
task 
of 
discovering 
optimized 
cluster-based 
sensor 
placement strategies on the different WSN scenarios using a 
particular sensor placement strategy. This investigation is a 
query-based research. 
      An additional line of research could focus on the 
modeling of possible Circular sensor distributions for 
volcanic monitoring is an example of a real implementation 
focus for researchers of this paper.        
 
           REFERENCES 
[1] I. F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, “A 
Survey on Sensor Networks”, IEEE Communication Magazine, Vol. 
40, No. 8, August 2002, pp. 102-114. 
[2] J. N. Al-Karaki and A. E. Kamal, “Routing Techniques in Wireless 
Sensor Networks: A Survey”, IEEE Wireless Communications, Vol. 
11, Issue 6, December 2004, pp. 6-28.  
[3] M. Bayani Abbasy, “Performance Analysis of Sensor Placement 
Strategies on a Wireless Sensor Network”,IEEE Fourth International 
Conference on Sensor Technologies and Appalications , July 2010. 
[4] Y. Chen, C. Chuah, and Q. Zhao, “Sensor placement for maximizing 
lifetime per unit cost in wireless sensor networks”, IEEE Military 
Communications Conference, MILCOM 2005, October 2005, pp. 
1097-1102. 
[5] L. Ciaran and F. O'Reilly, “Processor Choice for Wireless Sensor 
Networks”, Workshop on Real-World Wireless Sensor Networks 
REALWSN'05 Sweden, June 2005. 
[6] G. Deepak and B. Beferull-Lozano, “Power-efficient Sensor 
Placement and Transmission Structure for Data Gathering under 
Distortion Constraints”, ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks 
(TOSN), Vol. 2, Issue 2, May 2006, pp. 155 – 181. 
[7] G. Deepak, P. Desnoyers, and P. Shenoy, “Ultra-low  Power Data 
Storage for Sensor Networks”, In Proceedings of  the Fifth  
International  Conference on Information Processing in Sensor 
Networks, April 2006, pp. 374- 381.  
[8] W. R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, “Energy-
Efficient Communication Protocols for Wireless Micro Sensor 
Networks”, Proceedings of the 33rd Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences, Vol. 8, January 2000, pp. 20-29. 
[9] C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, and D. Estrin, “Directed Diffusion: 
A Scalable and Robust Communication Paradigm for Sensor 
Networks”, In Proceeding of Mobicom’2000, August 2000, pp. 56–
67. 
[10] F. Silva, H. Heidemann, and R. Govindan, “An Overview of Directed 
Diffusion”, to appear in Frontiers in Distributed Sensor Networks, 
ISI-TR-2004-586, February 2004. 
   
165
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

