Adaptive Optical Sensors
Ivan Krejci, Karel Dvorak
Department of Technical Studies
College of polytechnics Jihlava, VSPJ
Jihlava, Czech Republic
e-mail: krejci19@vspj.cz, dvorak96@vspj.cz
Abstract—The
sensors
containing
microcontrollers,
digitizers and some standard communication line(s),
offering digital output expressed in corresponding units
of measured quantities, are usually called intelligent
sensors. This contribution offers another view on the
sensor intelligence – on the ability to adapt their
measuring range to different tested materials’ physical
properties to get accurate results. The article describes
two methods of measurements and control of band
material position by means of optical sensors, which
adapt their range to the current optical properties of the
material used (steel, web or plastic foil).
Keywords- optical sensors; band material; optical transmitter
and receiver; microcontroller.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The task of band material positioning is very frequent in
companies manufacturing band shape materials such as tyre
makers, sheet rolling mills, conveyor belts, and textile or
plastic film rolls producers. In these cases, the central
position or constant width of the soft material bands are
required during the technological process. The importance
of the accurate measurement of the belt position and its
dimension (the width) is crucial, if a good quality of the
final product is to be achieved. This measurement must be
worked out without any mechanical contact with the
measured band material. For this purpose, optical sensors
are usually used. The sensors create the measurement part of
an automation control system, the goal of which is the
position or dimension control of a processed band material.
The basic tasks of the band material position control can be
explained from the schematic diagrams in Figures 1 and 2.
The case of the band material centre is shown in Figure
1. The position is measured by two optical sensors
positioned symmetrically with respect to the longitudinal
axis of the technological equipment, e.g., a rolling mill,
calendar, etc. If the signals from both sensors are identical
(their difference is equal to zero), then the band is situated
in the centre of the machine. Achieving this position is the
goal of the control task.
Figure 1. The basic principle of the belt material automatic centering.
S1, S2 – optical sensors, S1-S2 electronic unit, M – actuating mechanism.
The band transversal position can be changed by a roll,
which can be moved in the direction orthogonal to the band
movement. If the centered material does not transmit any
light, then, in many cases, only a single sensor is used to
determine
the
central
material
position.
In
such
configuration, the optical centre of the sensor determines the
required position of the material edge.
Similar to this task is the setting of the processed band
width, the principle of which is shown in Figure 2. If a soft
material (plastic foil, textile, cord, etc.) is processed, its
width is changing with the pulling force causing the band
movement.
Figure 2. The basic principle of the belt web material width automatic
control. S1, S2 – optical sensors, CTRL1, CTRL2, measurement and
control units, M1, M2 – actuating mechanisms.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

A pair of optical sensors placed symmetrically with
respect
to
the
longitudinal
axis
of the
technological
equipment again measures the band edge position. Besides,
their centers are fixed in distance which is equal to the
required width of the band. If both sensors show a half of
their measuring range, then the width is set correctly. If one
or both sensors give a false position, the band width is
adjusted
using
two
independent
rolls,
which
correct
individually the material edge position in the required width.
Both methods have some bottlenecks that should be
overcome to achieve satisfying results.
The rest of the paper is divided into the following
sections. Section II contains the present state overview.
Section III describes the new concept of the system solution.
Section IV includes the sensors realization and results of the
first test. The acknowledgment and conclusions close the
article.
II.
STATE-OF-THE-ART
A.
Mechanical Arrangement
At
present,
optical
sensors
consist
of
an
optical
transmitter, which involves the light source, usually Light
Emitting Diodes (LED) operating in the InfraRed (IR)
region of the light spectrum, and an optical receiver, which
uses phototransistors operating also in the IR region. The
optical elements of both sensor parts are arranged in the
shape of a row array, and both arrays are placed against
each other [1]. The optical transmitter and receiver are built
in a frame that can have either a narrow rectangle or a
horse-shoe shape. Usually, the measuring system contains a
pair of the sensors, each equipped with one transmitter and
one receiver. The centered material is led in the gap between
sensors so that its edges will lie in the active range of
sensors, in the gap between the transmitter and receiver
inside the frame. The principle arrangements of both shapes
of sensor frames are shown in Figures 3 and 4.
Figure 3 shows the position of optical sensors in the
rectangular frame. The red fields assign the IR flux emitted
by the optical transmitters and accepted by the optical
receivers. The range of the material width is given by the
difference MAX – MIN. This type of frame is usually used
if the centered band width is within the range from 1 to 2 m
(cords for tires or conveyor belts). The row array of the
sensor parts must be wider than this measuring range. The
advantages of this sensor arrangement are its simplicity and
no need for manipulation if the material width is changed
for another type of final product during the process of
production. But this performance requires a very careful
match of several tens of applied optoelectronic elements for
transmitters and receivers to ensure good linearity and
symmetry of both sensors [2].
Figure 3. The frame performance of the optical sensor for the automatic
centering task.
The sensor shown in Figure 4 takes advantage of two
horse-shoe frames placed on carrier 3, equipped with an
adjustable mechanism 1,2,5,6, which makes it possible to
set the distance of both sensors 5 according to the actual
width of the band material 7 [2]. This arrangement requires
much fewer matched optoelectronic elements, but its
mechanical construction is more complicated (slide way of
frames, bidirectional set screw, width scale, etc.). This type
of the sensor is often used either if the belt material is
extremely wide (more than 2 m) or not flexible (steel
plates).
The principal problems of this sensor type are the match
of optoelectronic components for the IR radiation generating
and sensing, and undulated edges of non-flexible materials.
The only solution of these problems is the precise match of
components with the same characteristics on one side, and
the subjective decision of a rolling-mill worker about which
plate edge could be the reference one, if the centering
process determines only one edge position.
The sensors for the material width measurement are very
similar to the horse-shoe shaped sensors; the only difference
is that the frames are fixed so that their centres will be
positioned at the measured distance. In this case, only one
width can be measured and, thus, these sensors are built in
special purpose machines. The problem of the measurement
is that the material, a web, is more or less transparent. This
material property causes errors in measurement, especially
if the transparency (the material optical density) varies from
place to place.
Figure 4. The horse-shoe type of the optical sensor for the automatic
centering.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

B.
Electrical Equipment
The electronic units of the sensors serve to supply the
optical
receivers
and
to
process
the
received
signal
proportional to the luminous flux passing through the
material in the operating space of the sensor. To prevent
unwanted influence of outer sources of the IR radiation, the
LEDs of receivers are supplied with a constant current
source which operates in the switching mode so that the
luminous flux is modulated. The signals from the receivers
are
demodulated,
amplified
and
subtracted
using
a
differential amplifier. All present systems we have met in
various factories take advantage of the analogue principle.
The sensors are calibrated in two points, at the zero
luminous flux and the maximum luminous flux, when no
object is placed in the working place of the calibrated
sensor. In both cases, the LEDs are fully excited from their
current source.
In systems with the horse-shoe frame, which use only
one sensor selected by the operator, the reference position is
determined by the active sensor centre. The electronic
equipment must be able to handle both sensors individually,
because the reference sensor is selected during the material
processing.
The sensors measuring the band material width are used
to control the leading rolls position. Each of the sensors
controls its own roll so each sensor has its own electronic
control unit taking advantage of a similar signal processing
as in the previous task.
C.
Band Position Control Problems
It is no problem to control the width of band materials
that are not transparent, but if the material is more or less
transparent (plastic foils) or diaphanous (textile, tyre cord)
the measurement becomes very problematic. For instance, if
the receiver measures 50% of the full scale luminous flux,
the material edge is in the centre of the sensor in case of an
opaque material. But this is not true if some light passes
through the material. Then, the material must cover more
than 50% of the sensor active space to get the same signal.
Thus, the sensor offers a false result of the
width
measurement.
The
error
depends
on
the
material
transparency. To avoid this problem, it is necessary to
calibrate the sensor whenever the material transparency
changes. This is very problematic because it requires a
production interruption, but in case of the inhomogeneous
material
(tyre
cord)
such
calibration
does
not
bring
sufficient improvement. Certain suppression of this effect
can be achieved, if the sensor frame is turned a bit so that
the light beam is not orthogonal to the material surface
(Figure 5) and the gaps between material threads are
smaller. Again, the problem is reduced, not eliminated.
Besides, the sensor can be damaged because of the material
longitudinal swing if the angle between the light beam and
the material surface is acute.
Figure 5. Turning of the sensor drops off the material transparency error.
III.
NEW CONCEPTION
Our effort was turned to the width control and automatic
reference
edge
selection
tasks
as
a
reaction
to
the
requirements of industrial companies. To address the above
mentioned problems requires a new strategy of the sensor
and electronic equipment conception. If the system has to
change its properties automatically, or has to make any
decision, if the process conditions are changing, it is
necessary to use the digital principles of the control. The
following paragraphs show the solutions of two tasks,
measurements of the width of materials the transparency of
which varies in time and the automatic reference steel sheet
edge selection during its procession in the rolling mill.
A.
Band Width Measurement
The basic goal of this task is the measurement of the
processed material transparency, its evaluation and the
system recalibration based on the measurement results. It
was necessary to develop an original type of the optical
sensor capable of the continual material transparency
measurement and then to calculate the material width.
The sensor mechanical concept comes out of the horse-
shoe shape, but it consists of three sections (Figure 6),
equipped with three optical transmitters (Tr1 – Tr3) and
receivers. These are placed in the working space so that the
first section is fully covered by the band material, the
second one, the measuring part of the sensor, is partially
covered by the tested material, and the third section is clear
of the material. All the three transmitters are connected in
series and take advantage of the pulse current, the peak
value of which is 10 mA. The signals from the first receiver
(REC1) and the third one (REC3) provide the zero and full
scale
points
of
the
material
coverage.
The
central,
measuring part of the sensor is provided by the signal of the
second section receiver REC2, which lies between the
boundaries defined by the signals REC1and REC3. Then,
the degree of the measuring sensor coverage D can be
calculated:
D = (REC2 – REC1) / (REC3 – REC1)
(1)
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure 6. The basic block diagram of the three - section sensor for the
width measurement.
If all three sections provide the same signals after the
calibration of signal traces, and if the centre of the second
section determines the correct material width, then the goal
of the control task is to reach the value of 0.5.
According to Figure 2, there are two identical sensors
located on both material edges (S1 and S2). The distance
between the measuring section centers is equal to the
required material width.
The signal trace function is controlled by a built in
MicroController
Unit,
MCU,
(Texas
Instruments
MSP430AFE253) [3], which ensures excitation pulses for
optical transmitters (Tr1, Tr2 and Tr3) supplied with the
Constant Current Source (CCS), and switching pulses for
Synchronous Detectors (SD1, SD2 and SD3) processing the
received signals from all three sensor sections. These signals
are then led to the Low-Pass Filters (LPF1, LPF2 and LPF3)
that reject high frequency modulation products presented in
the detected signals. The signals are then digitized in three
independent 16-bit Analogue-to-Digital Converters (ADC1,
ADC2 and ADC3). The digitized signals are calculated in
compliance with (1). If the value of D is different from 0.5,
a non-zero error signal is generated. This digital signal is
converted to the analogue form using a 12-bit Digital-to-
Analogue Converter DAC, Analog Devices AD 5320 [4].
This analogue signal is amplified in amplifier A and used
for the control of the position roller that adjusts the material
width.
The MCU measures and controls the material optical
density in 100 ms intervals, and so continuously adapts the
measuring range to the actual optical transparency of the
processed band material. This arrangement completely
eliminates the material transparency error. For the purposes
of the basic signal trace calibration, the MCU serial
Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter (UART) is
used for communication with the host PC. The block
diagram of the sensor and its signal trace are shown in
Figure 6. The electronic unit is supplied from the mains
electricity, 230 V, 50 Hz.
B.
Steel Plate Centering
This task is solved during the roll-milling process, when
the processed band is led to the centre of the rolling-mill
machine. The plate is then rolled up to a spool, the centre of
which is also localized in the centre of the rolling-mill
machine and it is necessary to put the turns of the plate onto
each other with minimum position fluctuation. The sensing
mechanism consists of two horse-shoe optical sensors, the
positions of which are controlled by a bidirectional screw (if
the
screw
turns
clock-wise,
the
horse-shoes
distance
diminishes, if the screw is turned in opposite direction, the
distance rises). The active width of each sensor is 60 mm.
The sensors are fixed so that the distance of their centres is
equal to the input material width. For this purpose, the
sensors are equipped with a scale, so that the required width
of the material can be adjusted before the controlling
process starts. During this process, only one sensor is active
to measure the band position. The problem of this position
control is in undulated edges of the plate because of unequal
material tensions.
These undulations cause control errors.
Therefore, it is suitable to select the less undulated edge as
the reference one to reach better results of the control. As
mentioned above, the choice is worked out by the worker
who is in the control room several meters from the
processed material and, thus, his decision is very subjective.
To get a more objective choice, the decision was committed
to a MCU controlled sensor unit, which learns the material
edges fluctuations during the process and after a time period
(30 seconds) is able to evaluate the undulations because of
that learning. The less undulated side of the plate is
determined as the reference one. During the learning period,
the control is running on the default or previously optimized
reference edge. The undulation errors are, in most cases,
within a range of +/- 10 mm. To get the best results, the
maximum gain of the control unit is required round the
sensor centre. Therefore, the dynamic range of the controller
manipulating variable was divided into two ranges (Figure
7). The highest gain of the control loop was within the range
of +/- 6 mm from the zero point of the sensor. In this region,
one half of the output 12-bit DAC dynamics was used for
the control. The other half of the DAC dynamics is intended
for the control within the rest of the sensor range – the
sensor adapts its sensitivity to the error magnitude. It should
be noticed that the material position data from both sensors
must be mirrored to get the proper direction of the position
correction (it is necessary to resolve the right and left side
sensors).
Figure 7. The sensitivity versus error characteristic of the horse-shoe
sensors for the steel plate centering during the roll-mill process.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The sensor electronic unit takes advantage of the same
electronic circuits and the signal processing as in the case of
the width measurement, but only two measuring channels
are used. The basic difference is in the firmware of the
MCU, because the tasks of the measurement are different.
IV.
SENSORS REALIZATION AND RESULTS
Both types of sensors were designed and manufactured
as
per
the
mechanical
and
electrical
construction
specifications. Figure 8 shows the width sensor arrangement
with three measuring sections.
Figure 8. The three sections sensor for the belt width measurement.
The sensor is placed on a welded frame formed by
square profiled tubes. To save space, the sensor part which
is never covered by the band is placed upright to the
remaining two sections. The sensor takes advantage of three
sections; the active width of each section is 60 mm. There
are glass windows protecting the sensor optoelectronic
elements on the active sides of the sensor. They protect the
sensor elements against the mechanical stresses and dust.
The
Printed
Circuit
Boards
(PCB)
of
the
sensor
transmitter and receiver are shown in Figure 9. The PCBs
are built in the sensor frame. The figure shows two sections
of
the
sensor.
Note
the
linear
arrangement
of
the
optoelectronic elements. The dimensions of the sensor
carriers are 200 x 15 mm.
The PCB electronic circuitry is shown in Figure 10. It
includes the mains power supply, supply of the optical
transmitter and all three signals analogue and digital traces
processing the transmitter’s signals. This PCB is built in the
BOPLA Elegant box, and its dimensions are 130 x 75 mm.
Figure 9. One section schematic diagram of the transmitter (upper) and
receiver (lower) optical elements.
Figure 10. The PCB with all controlling and measuring electronics of a
three sections sensor.
The sensor for the centering of the steel sheet band is
shown in Figure 11. This figure shows its implementation
during the tests in the roll-mill. See the adjusting wheel
(RK) for setting the sensor centre to the required position.
The firmware for both tasks’ solutions was created and
the sensor’s functionality was tested.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
The first function tests in the real industrial environment
were successful because the achieved results of the control
process were much better compared with previous solutions.
The width control error was within the range of +/- 1 mm (at
the material width of 2000 mm); the error of the control in
the case of centering of the steel plate was +/- 2 mm at the
output spool. However, these errors are the errors of the
entire control process caused by the propagation delay
between the points of measurement and the position
actuating, by the hydraulics of the manipulator, etc. These
tests showed improved properties of the systems and
confirmed expected results. At present, a new test tool has
been designed and is being produced. This will let us
perform detailed analysis of the system parameters.
Figure 11. The implementation of the horse-shoe sensor in the roll-mil
machine.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The
sensor
parameters
(accuracy,
resolution,
repeatability and stability) will be evaluated in the following
weeks because the project dealing with these sensors is not
yet finished.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The topic of adaptive optical sensors is supported by an
internal project granted by the College of Polytechnics
Jihlava,
Czech
Republic.
The
authors
thank
the
manufacturers Barum-Continental Ltd. and Bilstein AG
(Czech Republic) that made it possible to test the sensor
functionality in a rough industrial environment.
REFERENCES
[1]
Electronic publication: Highly Precise, Non-contact Width
Measurement of Webs and Boards.
https://www.elovis.com/en/applications/non-contact-widths-
heights-diameter-measurement/webs boards-plates/, ELOVIS
GmBH, Germany 2019. [retrieved: 9, 2019]
[2]
User Manual of the Centering System of bands width 950 -
2200 mm. [In Czech] HAAL, s.r.o., Brno, Czech Republic,
2001.
[3]
Electronic
publication:
16-bit
Ultra-Low-Power
Microcontroller,
http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/msp430afe253.pdf, pp. 28,
35, 38, Texas Instruments Incorporated, Dallas, Texas 75265,
USA, 2019. [retrieved: 9, 2019].
[4] 
Electronic publication: 2.7 V to 5.5 V, 140 μA, Rail-to-Rail 
Output
12-Bit
DAC
in
an
SOT-23.
https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-
documentation/data-sheets/AD5320.pdf, pp. 1, 11, 12, Analog
Devices, USA, 2019 [retrieved: 9, 2019].
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

