Digital Dataspace and Business Ecosystem Growth
for Industrial Roll-to-Roll Label Printing
Manufacturing: A Case Study
Parwinder Singh, Nidhi .Nidhi, Justina Karpavice, Michail J. Beliatis, Mirko Presser
Department of Business Development and Technology, Aarhus University, Herning, Denmark
Emails: (parwinder, nidhi, justina, mibel, mirko.presser) - @btech.au.dk,
Abstract—Manufacturing
industries
across
the
globe
are
adopting modern technologies rapidly and are now moving
towards Industry 5.0. However, many manufacturing units still
need to yield their Industry 4.0 level amid reasons including heavy
investments in upgrading existing infrastructure and scrapping
existing machinery in the name of modern digitalization. These
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) need help finding
the best-fit technology to meet their business requirement and
impact along with the capital to support digitization. In this
study, we present one such case of a Danish manufacturing
industry, a label printing SME, stranded between conventional
technology and a race towards modern digitization. On the one
hand, it has old machinery with a large volume of heavy printing
and lamination operations with an established customer base.
On the other hand, it is willing to digitalize its manufacturing
processes (with minimal upgradation in its existing mechanical
infrastructure) to enhance its efficiency and sustainability and
catch up with the pace of digitalization for further expansion.
This can be achieved by nurturing the benefits of digitalization
through the latest technologies, such as Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP), Internet of Things (IoT), Edge, Blockchain,
Cloud computing, etc. We studied and analyzed the case of the
SME in consideration to understand the core requirement and
anticipated bottleneck in the process. This paper has presented
our findings through related business process flow mappings,
challenges, vision, and possible digital architectural solutions
using modern-day technologies, scientific approaches and real-
ization tools. These findings and methods will also be value-
added and applicable to other SMEs in similar situations. Thus,
it enables them to save their Return on Investment (ROI) while
adapting to modern technologies with minimal risk, impact and
investments.
Index
Terms—Architecture,
Blockchain,
Business
Process
Mapping, Digitalization, Edge, IoT, Label Printing, Manufac-
turing, Semantics
I. INTRODUCTION
The manufacturing industry has been the backbone of any
economy across the globe for decades. With the advent of
Industry 4.0 [1], the manufacturing industry has focused
towards adaptation, automation and data-driven manufacturing
operations leveraging modern technologies such as the Inter-
net of Things (IoT) [2], Big Data [3], Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP), Platform Solutions, etc. [4]. The industry
is slowly moving towards Industry 5.0, wherein human and
machine interaction is a prime focus. However, the Indus-
try 5.0 evolution can only be achieved once Industry 4.0
is adopted, as it addresses the socio-economic impacts of
Industry 4.0 on humans [5]. Thus, the manufacturing industry
must first achieve the Industry 4.0 goals, which seems way
easier for large manufacturing companies because of the
available workforce, resources and investments than SMEs.
Adopting Industry 4.0 seems strenuous for SMEs as they have
limitations with finances, knowledge resources, workforce, and
trending technical advances [6].
To deal with similar challenges of SMEs in Denmark, the
Danish government has started a growth technology project
called Manufactory to boost collaborations between industry
and knowledge institutions at a regional level under the
supervision of the Danish Industry Foundation [7]. This project
has several consortium partners from academia and industry
to develop a common platform where both can collaborate
and co-create solutions, leveraging modern cutting-edge tech-
nologies, to real-world industrial problems (particularly for
SMEs). This study results from one such initiative among
several taken under this Manufactory project at our Depart-
ment of Business Development and Technology (BTECH),
Aarhus University, - a key academic partner in this project.
We collaborated with a Roll-to-Roll (R2R) Label Printing
SME with a worldwide clientele base in the Midtjylland
area of Denmark. The company got its latest machinery and
other infrastructure installed in 2007; thus, the upgradation
to modern mechanical infrastructure is not straightforward.
However, the SME still has a desire to nurture benefits and
cope with modern digitalization to create efficient and value-
added expansions, such as data sharing with their customers
in real-time, making the production environment smarter and
augmenting digitalization slowly and steadily to come up
with a differentiator and transformed business model in the
Label Printing domain. In this context, for example, IoT
technology and related edge network sensing capabilities, such
as environmental, print quality, ink toning, bar-code, energy ef-
ficiency, predictive maintenance, production line sensing, etc.,
can streamline operations, improve quality control, enhance
supply chain visibility, and reduce costs for the SME. Thus
ultimately benefiting both the SME and its customers.
This study summarizes the insights and knowledge acquired
while collaborating with the R2R label printing SME through
workshops and one-on-one interactions with the company’s
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-090-2
SENSORCOMM 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 1. Business Process Model for the SME workflow
top-level management to understand their business process,
perspectives, associated challenges and vision. The study con-
tributes with both business and technical standpoints wherein
a business of SME is investigated, which leads to the iden-
tification of challenges and process level understanding and
results in a system architecture that supports the vision and
mission towards digitalization and sustainability.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section II will
highlight the background of the label printing industries with
associated challenges and our approach to the investigation
and analysis. Section III will elaborate on our findings and
business propositions, and highlight BPM. Section IV will
present the proposed architecture to mitigate and digitize the
concern challenge. Finally, Section V will conclude the paper
with future opportunities and research scope.
II. BACKGROUND AND METHODOLOGIES
The label printing industry is essential in manufacturing
for creating labels for varied purposes such as brand pro-
motion, product packaging, information leaflets, etc. These
industries are further classified based on the print type, ma-
terial, and adopted technology. For instance, the labels can
be of various types with materials ranging from paper to
specialized films, such as pressure-sensitive, shrink sleeves,
cut-and-stack, in-mould, etc., employing different print tech-
nologies like flexographic, digital, and offset printing [8].
With such exhaustive and complex processes, it is evident
that errors in label print manufacturing can disrupt production
and affect label quality. Common errors in the print industry
include misalignment, colour variations, ink smudging/fading,
inconsistent print quality, registration, paper jams, spooling,
tearing, adhesive problems, barcode errors, missing labels,
material compatibility, poor winding quality, etc. These errors
can cascade on SMEs, impacting their operations, customer
relationships, costs, and overall business performance [9].
To address these challenges, manufacturers employ quality
control, equipment maintenance, and staff training to ensure
labels consistently meet quality and accuracy standards. In
this realm, the convergence of technologies (e.g., IoT, AI,
and Blockchain) and dedicated sensors orchestrates precision
and efficiency, from monitoring temperature, humidity and
pressure to tracking motion, light and colour functions of label
printing. The application of sensors in line with the manufac-
turing process enables real-time data generation, monitoring
and collection to provide efficient label printing and quality
control in industrial automation settings.
We adopted Business Process Modeling and Notation
(BPMN) models and tools [10] to realize efficiently the SME’s
process flow. It helped us to identify bottlenecks, challenges,
gaps and opportunities to enable digital technologies in SME’s
environment. In addition, a mix of case study and action re-
search methodologies have been used to conduct our research
for this study. We also conducted onsite and offsite workshops
with the company’s top-level management and researchers
from the university as a method of qualitative research to
understand, observe, collect, map and analyse the information
about the relevant processes, operational flows, challenges and
future perspectives. The workshops were conducted openly,
focusing on transparent communication, setting clear agenda
and objectives, practical use cases and scenarios of the SME,
and the participant’s presentation, followed by in-person visits
to the SME facility, discussions, feedback loop and lots of
brainstorming sessions.
III. BUSINESS ANALYSIS
The Danish Label Printing SME for our study is a pioneer
in flexible packaging employing the Flexo printing technique
followed by solvent-free and water-based laminations. The
SME also provide customer-ready foils for customers to use on
their packaging machines after cutting and adding customized
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-090-2
SENSORCOMM 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

functionalities to the foil, such as micro-perforation, emboss-
ing, etc., if requested. Based on the data gathered through the
workshops, the process flow was developed to map all the
operations and inter-departmental process flows as illustrated
in Figure 1. It represents the entities in the supply chain, from
raw materials to market-ready finished products, primarily
categorized into three clusters: Supplier End, Label Printing
Company (i.e., SME) End, and Customer End, as explained
below:
• Supplier End: Once the raw materials are delivered from
the suppliers, the supplier barcode placed on each item
is uploaded to the ERP system and then transferred to an
internal barcode.
• Label
Printing Company
End: Label manufactur-
ing consists of four main processes: printing, lami-
nation, curing, and slitting. After each process, the
new barcode is created, printed and attached to the
printed/laminated/slitted reel, except for the curing oper-
ation, which needs to be processed separately. Then, the
reels, a.k.a bundles, are slitted into smaller reels labelled
with the finished product barcode, packaged, and shipped
to customers.
• Customer End: The received reels of labels are de-rolled
and applied to the customer products in distinct tech-
niques concerning the type of the products that must be
packaged, i.e., labels can be attached, wrapped, laminated
on the product, or filled with the product.
A. Identified Challenges
Flexography, used by the SME, is a well-known printing
technique for producing high-quality images and graphics
at high printing speed in a versatile and cost-effective way
[11]. Although flexography is based on a simple concept of
ink transfer, multiple variables affect the final quality of the
production, including properties of the plates, anilox rollers,
printing pressure, and printing substrates [12]. As a result, the
investigated SME faces several challenges related to print de-
fects requiring frequent process stoppages for quality control.
The following challenges have been identified as outcomes of
our workshops and visits to the SME’s facility.
• Error Management: The main challenge for the SME,
which it wants to address immediately, is error manage-
ment. During the printing or lamination operation, errors
occur and need to be communicated internally and to the
customer. For internal communication, two (green and
red) labels are used manually to mark the start and end of
the material to be scrapped during the slitting processes,
shown in Figure 2. Similarly, the external error marking
allows SME’s customers to manually adjust their filling
and packaging operations based on the position of the red
label, thus acting as passive markers of errors.
• Automation of Processes: The processes at the produc-
tion line are primarily manual. For instance, the real-time
information flow between different production stages and
waste management is logged manually. The company’s
ERP system does not cover all the operational aspects, as
Fig. 2. Error in Bundle (Red/Green Label indicators)
upgrading and integrating old machinery infrastructure is
challenging, impacting overall productivity efficiency.
• Reduction in Waste Material: During printing and
lamination operations, the occurred errors result in waste.
But no data or logs are maintained for the errors’ cause,
occurrence or frequency. Therefore, a semantic context
awareness-driven digital method enablement must be
there to enhance productivity and reduce scraps.
• Data-driven Compliances and Decision Enablement:
Abiding the Climate Act, Denmark, like other EU coun-
tries, aims to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emis-
sions by 50-54% in 2025 and 70% in 2030 compared
to 1990 levels [13]. Thus, this necessitates stringent
compliance from manufacturing industries, demanding
comprehensive data on their operations. The SME is
found to be struggling to comply with these requirements
due to a lack of data-driven operations.
B. Vision
Our workshops and brainstorming sessions with the SME
management highlighted their vision behind the initiative to
incorporate and facilitate the convergence of technologies into
their existing manufacturing and production lines. The SME
expects to digitalize the operations to make their products
smarter. For example, the printed bundles have associated a
lot of operational data during their printing journey, but it is
not captured and thus adds no value. The SME’s immediate
focus is on error management, a low-hanging fruit where
digital operations can be induced as a starting point and scaled
incrementally for other challenges. Additionally, they want to
develop a data-driven servicing model in future, which can
sustain and expand the current business horizon for the SME.
Therefore, we proposed a platform model based on which
the servitization business model [14] will provide value-chain
enablement across customers and also enable them to make
their production environment smarter.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-090-2
SENSORCOMM 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 3. Digital Intervention Architecture
IV. ARCHITECTURE
This section will primarily provide potential solutions and
an architecture to address the identified challenges, focusing
on Error Management as the starting point for inducting
digital tools in the SME environment. In the present scenario,
the entire error identification at its occurrence and relevant
communication/action process is handled manually without
any digital intervention, giving rise to our problem statement:
”How can we make error management and dependent opera-
tions smarter to enhance the overall productivity?”
Based on our interactions and analysis, we proposed a
solution to tackle the challenge of managing errors through
the entire workflow and having a log of occurrences. A digital
intervention architecture is shown in Figure 3 to address this
question. This consists of digital enablement of services at
SME and relevant customer on-premises environments, and
finally, the Dataspace platform-enabled services provide real-
time distributed data services to all the stakeholders. The high-
level operational flow of the label printing process is given in
the following three steps:
• Step A: The Manufacturing Unit receives raw material in
huge bundles, each of which goes on the de-rolled roller.
• Step B: The de-rolled material goes through the design
printing operation, where errors are manually observed
during the printing operation and marked with tapes for
identification, which is removed later. The error could
occur for many reasons, as explained earlier. For instance,
when one bundle is finished, it is spliced into a new
bundle, and the point of occurrence is notified using
tapes. Apart from splicing, errors occur due to printing
operations, such as misalignment, colour variations, ink
smudging, inconsistent print quality, machine malfunc-
tion, etc. To address such errors, we proposed a digital
intervention to detect and record the error (explained in
the next section).
• Step C: At the customer end, the reverse process is
repeated to de-roll the bundle and make adjustments on
a machine for the error flag in the bundle, and then the
error-free labels are split from the bundle and pasted onto
the final product.
The above steps have associated data labels as barcodes
or manual receipts, but they lack real-time linkage as they
flow through the printing operations. Thus, to automate this
stage, we propose IoT edge-enabled Quick Response (QR)
code-based data labels at all stages of printing operations.
We also propose to generate a ”Context-Aware Operational
Environment” and link the information in different functional
flows in future during the entire ”Order and Error Manage-
ment” process for the relevant customer. The semantic model
can easily capture the business level flow relevant operational
context and provides technical implementation grounding at
the system level, such as using semantic RDF [15], NGSI-LD
[16] or JSON-LD [17] standards. In the following subsections,
we have described the applicable process and system model us-
ing the semantics ontology approach that can be implemented
by the supporting digital platform to induce digitization in the
processes.
A. Digital Processing Model for Printings Operations
Figure 4 illustrates the semantic data model for managing
printing errors. The Customer places an Order, which has to
be processed with delivery target Date by assigning an order
identification - ID. Similarly, the ID property can be used for
every operational entity in printing processing. To process this
order, there is a need for Bundle that contains the raw material
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-090-2
SENSORCOMM 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

for printing with a certain Length in meters provided by the
customer in his order to print the labels. During the printing
operation, there might be Error associated, which is identified
by an ID, defined by its Metadata, occurred due to a Reason
that in turn belongs to a specific Type of an Error. The printing
bundle is finally prepared on specific Date for delivery to the
customer that receives the final bundle on relevant Date.
Fig. 4. Semantic Processing Model for Label Printing Operations
B. Semantic System Model
To initiate digitization, we mapped the SME processes
against the digital processes. The system is perceived as a
semantic system that provides operational and linked data
context awareness [18]. Figure 5 shows the semantic system
model that captures the system’s relevant operational entity
level information. The system focuses on the activities inside
a label printing manufacturing unit, that starts with the Raw
Material Bundle, a type of Bundle used for Printing Label.
During the printing operation, there can be an occurrence of
Error, which is explained by its metadata that is digitally
captured in a QR Code Label by the error detection method
that also sends the related error information to the Dataspace
via MQTT protocol. In addition, the error method can also
query the information from Dataspace for various purposes,
such as to generate a QR code for encountered errors. At
present, the error is monitored manually by personnel of the
SME, but in the future, we propose to automate and replace it
through edge-enabled (on-premises) IoT sensing and computer
vision capabilities. The data received by Dataspace platform
is persisted in the Database, which can be queried later.
C. Dataspace Platform
We propose a platform with Dataspace capabilities [?],
currently implemented at the university facility, for the SME
Fig. 5. Semantic System Model
to prototype and validate its expectations towards initializing
digitalization for its error management challenge. The platform
is implemented with dataspace capabilities for many reasons:
first, the SME management wants to enable digitalization for
its processes to augment data-driven decisions over cross-
organizational boundaries and thus exploit it as a value addi-
tion in their products, i.e., printing bundles, for their business
value-chain. For example, the transition of dummy bundles
into smart bundles having associated data at the customer
end in real-time that can explain the bundle digitally and
enable customers to fine-tune their operations and planning
accordingly, thus enhancing operational productivity at the
customer end. Second, it allows the SME to bring innovation
in their business value chain that spans and has an impact at
the customer end. This will enable the expansion of SME’s
portfolio using the platform services model based on smart
printing products. Finally, the significant objective for any
business is to create monetary opportunities provided by this
Dataspace platform, based on the data associated with printing
operations. As shown in Figure 3, the Dataspace platform
consists of a wide range of data processing services, as
explained below.
• MQTT: This is an industrial protocol standard [19] that
provides standardized push, pull, subscribe or notify data
operations. It is widely deployed in the IoT domain that
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-090-2
SENSORCOMM 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

needs lower resources and power to transmit data over
the internet. Though the data model is not standardized
at the application level, the communication protocol is
standardised. Therefore, context-aware semantic models
such as NGSI-LD can be used at the application level.
• QR Code Service: This service creates, generates and
manages QR codes compatible with various programming
languages such as python-qrcode, js-QR in javascript,
etc. through open-source libraries. QR codes can be
generated from JSON data models, derived from the
earlier semantic process model, improving error tagging
in manufacturing. This will digitalize the printing op-
erations at each step we explained earlier. In addition,
these QR tags can be pushed to the blockchain network
to make them digitally traceable and transparent for all
stakeholders [20].
• Data Enrichment: Inside the platform, this service will
allow the modification of received data from the manu-
facturing unit, e.g., to add a timestamp when the bundle
gets its error or when it gets delivered to the customer or
error reference modifications or semantic adaptation.
• Data Storage: This service allows the data to persist for
history and real-time operations among different stake-
holders within or across customers of the SME.
• Semantic Context Broker: This provides context aware-
ness over the data defined as per the semantic model—for
example, the error, length, bundle, customer and delivery
relationship. The stakeholder can query the data with a
specific context. For example, a customer can ask - How
many and where the errors were when the ordered bundle
was printed?. Under such a scenario, the knowledge
base created by a semantic context broker will yield the
corresponding query result in a much simplified manner.
• Data Analytics: These AI/ML-driven data analytical
services can assist SME and customers in their decision-
making process. For example, questions like how many
errors have occurred in the last 6 months and how much
material has been wasted due to different error types?
can be answered through these services efficiently, and
estimated predictive analysis can also be performed.
• Security and Governance: This aspect is very im-
portant, especially when data and multiple stakeholders
are involved. On top of that, GDPR compliances are
stringent in Europe for manufacturing units to comply
with to avoid hefty fines. This can be implemented
using smart contracts among stakeholders, leveraging
Blockchain technology such as HyperledgerFabric [21].
This will enable trust through transparency, immutability,
digital traceability and tamperproof printing operations.
In addition, this service will also provide identity, au-
thentication and authorization management functionality.
• Resource Management: This typical ERP-related service
manages resources at different operational stages. In
addition, this service can also host the responsibility to
manage the edge and cloud-level resources consumed by
instantiated or orchestrated services. Here, oper-source
ERP systems such as Odoo [22] can be very helpful for
SMEs to start with.
• Data Visualization: This service will provide data visual-
isation in different formats such as bar charts, line charts,
pie charts, heatmaps, 3D charts, Scatter plots, Gantt
Charts, etc. Here, open-source tools like Grafana, Elastic
Search Logstach Kibana (ELK) stack and industrial tools
like Power-BI are heavily used.
• Integration Service: This service will provide the re-
quired interfaces or Software Development Kit (SDK)
to integrate with the Dataspace platform. This will be
needed when the SME, under its customer service initia-
tive for its products, say smart bundle, wants to share its
operational data with the customer at the customer end
so that the customer can align its processing or planning
operations accordingly or for other purposes.
• API Gateway: This acts as a proxy gateway for the back-
end microservices running in a distributed environment
and thus provides a single point of interaction for the
SME or the external world, including customers. This
can be implemented using production-grade open-source
such as Nginx.
This dataspace platform is recommended to implement fol-
lowing the distributed microservices architectural design ap-
proach. This allows the services to be realized at the edge with
the IoT sensing capabilities for data generation and processing
to optimize bandwidth usage and reduce latency at the edge,
i.e., the on-premises environment of the SME. In addition,
this can be extended further to integrate the digital twin func-
tionality to achieve operations validation during command and
control, higher levels of efficiency, quality, and flexibility. This
platform can be deployed on-premises as a private edge cloud
and can leverage resources at the cloud level, following the
Cloud-Edge continuum hybrid approach [23]. We suggested
starting with the edge level deployment to re-use the existing
infrastructure to deploy edge cloud leveraging open source
Kubernetes-based bare metal microservices oriented container-
ized approach [24]. Later, as required, it can expand to the
public cloud, e.g., AWS, MicrosoftAzure, Google Cloud Plat-
form, etc. This platform enables value-added services across
the value chain of the SME by enhancing the label printing
process through optimized data-driven real-time operations,
ensuring data integrity, and providing powerful analytics and
visualization capabilities. This will empower the SME and its
customers to make informed decisions, transparency, trust and
drive efficiency in label printing operations.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this study, we have provided insights on business analysis
and digitizing approach for Industrial R2R Label Printing
Manufacturing SME in Denmark as part of the Manufactory
project. We observed that the SME, operating on a global
scale with substantial printing operations and recently installed
heavy machinery, faces significant challenges in upgrading its
existing infrastructure due to various constraints such as capital
investment, resources and affordability. Our approach focused
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-090-2
SENSORCOMM 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

on understanding the intricacies of the SME’s operational
processes, leading to valuable insights. As a result, we did
the business process mapping that provides a better and
more precise understanding of enabling data and digitaliza-
tion points in the existing environment. We identified nu-
merous challenges, including productivity enhancement, error
management, communication inefficiencies, waste reduction,
compliance requirements, and the potential for smart products
through platform-based data augmentation etc. To address
these challenges, we narrowed our focus to error management
within printing operations and presented a semantic process
and system model. We addressed the error management chal-
lenge specific to printing operations that can occur for many
reasons, e.g., inconsistent material, colour, speed, alignment,
etc.) through the induction of digital processes around the
same. In addition, we have also proposed a process-mapped
architectural solution based on a semantic model that captures
the business and technical level aspects concurrently. This
proposed solution implementation approach is also explained
based on well-defined standards, protocols and an open-source
tools ecosystem that requires minimal investments and risks.
As an outlook, we would like to measure the impact and value
addition of the proposed solution on SME’s printing opera-
tions to enable digital transformation in business productivity
enhancements, reduction in waste material, and expansions
through data-driven sustainable growth.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Rojko, “Industry 4.0 concept: Background and overview.” Interna-
tional journal of interactive mobile technologies, vol. 11, no. 5, 2017.
[2] A. Ghasempour, “Internet of things in smart grid: Architecture, appli-
cations, services, key technologies, and challenges,” Inventions, vol. 4,
no. 1, p. 22, 2019.
[3] L. D. Xu and L. Duan, “Big data for cyber physical systems in industry
4.0: a survey,” Enterprise Information Systems, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 148–
169, 2019.
[4] J. Qin, Y. Liu, and R. Grosvenor, “A categorical framework of manufac-
turing for industry 4.0 and beyond,” Procedia cirp, vol. 52, pp. 173–178,
2016.
[5] X. Xu, Y. Lu, B. Vogel-Heuser, and L. Wang, “Industry 4.0 and industry
5.0—inception, conception and perception,” Journal of Manufacturing
Systems, vol. 61, pp. 530–535, 2021.
[6] T. Masood and P. Sonntag, “Industry 4.0: Adoption challenges and
benefits for smes,” Computers in Industry, vol. 121, p. 103261, 2020.
[7] S. Thomsen, The Danish industrial foundations.
Djøf Forlag, 2017.
[8] B. A. Morris, The science and technology of flexible packaging: multi-
layer films from resin and process to end use.
William Andrew, 2022.
[9] C. H. Rao, K. Avinash, B. Varaprasad, and S. Goel, “A review on printed
electronics with digital 3d printing: fabrication techniques, materials,
challenges and future opportunities,” Journal of Electronic Materials,
vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 2747–2765, 2022.
[10] Y. Odeh, “Bpmn in engineering software requirements: an introductory
brief guide,” in Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Information Management and Engineering, 2017, pp. 11–16.
[11] Z. Abusaq, S. Zahoor, M. S. Habib, M. Rehman, J. Mahmood, M. Kanan,
and R. T. Mushtaq, “Improving energy performance in flexographic
printing process through lean and ai techniques: A case study,” Energies,
vol. 16, no. 4, p. 1972, 2023.
[12] D. Valdec, K. Hajdek, L. Vragovi´c, and R. Geˇcek, “Determining the
print quality due to deformation of the halftone dots in flexography,”
Applied Sciences, vol. 11, no. 22, p. 10601, 2021.
[13] D. E. Agency, “Denmark’s climate status and outlook,” Danish Energy
Agency, Tech. Rep., 2022.
[14] S. Lamperti, A. Cavallo, and C. Sassanelli, “Digital servitization and
business model innovation in smes: A model to escape from market
disruption,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, pp. 1–
15, 2023, times cited: 3 event-title: IEEE Transactions on Engineering
Management.
[15] R. Angles, H. Thakkar, and D. Tomaszuk, “Rdf and property graphs
interoperability: Status and issues.” AMW, vol. 2369, 2019.
[16] E. CIM, “Ngsi-ld cim 009,” ETSI, Tech. Rep., 2019, times cited: 3.
[Online]. Available: https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsigs/CIM.
[17] M. Sporny, D. Longley, G. Kellogg, M. Lanthaler, and N. Lindstr¨om,
“Json-ld 1.1,” W3C Recommendation, Jul, 2020.
[18] P. Singh, K. S. Acharya, M. J. Beliatis, and M. Presser, “Semantic search
system for real time occupancy,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference
on Internet of Things and Intelligence Systems (IoTaIS).
IEEE, 2021,
pp. 49–55.
[19] O. Standard, “Mqtt version 5.0,” Retrieved June, vol. 22, p. 2020, 2019.
[20] P. Singh, K. Holm, M. J. Beliatis, A. Ionita, M. Presser, P. Wolfgang, and
R. C. Goduscheit, “Blockchain for economy of scale in wind industry:
A demo case,” in Global IoT Summit.
Springer, 2022, pp. 175–186.
[21] A. Srivastava and Y. Desai, “Performance analysis of hyperledger fabric
based blockchain for traceability in food supply chain,” in 2021 IEEE
2nd International Conference on Technology, Engineering, Manage-
ment for Societal impact using Marketing, Entrepreneurship and Talent
(TEMSMET).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–5.
[22] C. Li, S. Mantravadi, and C. Møller, “Aau open source mes architecture
for smart factories–exploiting isa 95,” in 2020 IEEE 18th international
conference on industrial informatics (INDIN), vol. 1.
IEEE, 2020, pp.
369–373.
[23] F. Lordan, D. Lezzi, and R. M. Badia, “Colony: Parallel functions as
a service on the cloud-edge continuum,” in European Conference on
Parallel Processing.
Springer, 2021, pp. 269–284.
[24] A. Orive, A. Agirre, H.-L. Truong, I. Sarachaga, and M. Marcos,
“Quality of service aware orchestration for cloud–edge continuum
applications,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 5, p. 1755, 2022.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-090-2
SENSORCOMM 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

