Energy-aware Clustering with Variable Ranges in Wireless Sensor Networks
Faruk Bagci
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
German University in Cairo
Cairo, Egypt
Email: faruk.bagci@guc.edu.eg
Abstract—Traditional wireless devices communicate directly
with a beacon or base station located in range of the device.
Multi-hop messages are still a rarity in wireless communication.
Wireless sensor network protocols often are based on peer-to-
peer infrastructure, where messages traverse long distances
through the network to reach a certain destination. A ﬂat
infrastructure is hard to manage regarding routing and scal-
ability, if number of nodes increase drastically. Because of
battery operated nodes, energy-effective mechanisms are very
important in wireless sensor networks. Clustering brings hier-
archy into the network and can save energy since nodes within a
cluster usually communicate locally in a short range. Messages
sent to large distances are handled by cluster-heads routing
them through an inter-cluster backbone. A heterogeneous
infrastructure with a large number of simple and cheap sensor
nodes and only a small percentage of more powerful cluster-
heads is beneﬁcial but not necessary. This paper presents a
new clustering approach called Variable Ranges Protocol that
provides basic features to modify the range of each node. A
dynamic transmission range adaption protocol substantially
prolongs the lifetime of the nodes through energy efﬁcient
communication without signiﬁcantly decreasing the node con-
nectivity. The VR protocol is implemented combining several
MAC protocols for local communication within a cluster.
Keywords-Wireless sensor network; cluster architecture; en-
ergy efﬁciency; connectivity; wireless communication;
I. INTRODUCTION
The study of sensor networks, while being a research
ﬁeld in and of itself, forms a basis for various areas where
the collection of environmental data through sensors is es-
sential (e. g., security, trafﬁc control, ubiquitous computing,
etc.). The combination of sensing/sensoring, computational
aspects, and communication solutions provides for a broad
range of applications such as smart hospitals, intelligent
battleﬁelds, earthquake response systems, and learning en-
vironments [1] [2]. Generally, the term sensor network has
come to describe a dynamically self-organizing collaborative
network of widely distributed, tiny, low-cost, sensoring
nodes (“smart dust”) that are capable to cover an area and
automatically communicate the collected data to a beacon
or base station over multi-hop paths.
Sensor nodes are usually tiny, self contained, battery pow-
ered devices. Under normal circumstances it is impossible
to replace or recharge these batteries, therefore the lifetime
of a wireless sensor network is intrinsically restricted by the
initially available power in each individual node, making
power consumption considerations an essential part of any
new protocol design. Similarly, very small memory, low
processing power, and a limited communication bandwidth,
all in comparison to traditional wireless devices, further
restrict the options. Also, high failure rates, occasional
shutdowns, and sporadic communication interference force
continuous dynamic changes upon the topology. Finally,
the sheer number of individual sensing devices of a sensor
network, ranging from hundreds to thousands, make it
infeasible to rely on previous solutions of ad-hoc networking
protocols such as. For example ﬂooding-based standard
routing schemes for ad hoc networks simply do not scale
adequately [3].
In [4] we proposed a security architecture for wireless
sensor networks called SecSens which fulﬁlls security re-
quirements on multiple levels. SecSens focuses mainly on
three security aspects: key management, secure routing, and
veriﬁcation of sensor data. The sensor network in SecSens
consists of clusters, each containing a number of simple
sensor nodes and one powerful node that acts as a cluster-
head. Sensor nodes connect directly to the cluster-head, i.e.
routing in clusters is not necessary. A node can be a member
of several clusters at the same time. All cluster-heads form
together an inter-cluster network used for sending messages
to base stations. We assume that sensor nodes do not
change their position once they are attached to a location.
SecSens works with multiple base stations in order to avoid
single-point-of-failures (see Figure 1). In the ﬁrst version
of SecSens clusters were built in the initial phase and
remained unmodiﬁed for the whole lifetime of the network.
Furthermore, all nodes used the same sending conﬁguration,
i.e. transmission power and range were set to maximum
on each node. This paper describes an extension of this
approach with dynamic features. The new variable ranges
(VR) protocol optimizes the communication range of each
node. This optimization results in more efﬁcient usage of
energy throughout the overall sensor network.
The next section describes related energy efﬁcient com-
munication approaches for sensor networks. Section III
introduces the variable ranges protocol. We evaluated the
new architecture in a wireless sensor network simulator.
Section IV presents the evaluation results. The paper ends
233
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Base station
Cluster head
Marked Cluster heads
Simple sensor nodes
Cluster
Inter-cluster network
Figure 1.
Basic sensor network architecture
with the conclusion.
II. RELATED WORK
The Sensor-MAC (S-MAC) protocol [8] is an energy efﬁ-
cient communication protocol for wireless sensor networks.
S-MAC is a slot-based protocol where each sensor node has
alternating sleep and awake phases. The network is divided
into clusters and all members of a cluster are awake or asleep
at the same time. All cluster nodes exchange schedules in
an initial phase. Within a cluster only one schedule is used,
i.e. the schedule of the ﬁrst node that sent a schedule. If
a node receives multiple schedules it follows all of them.
Such nodes have a higher energy consumption. Within an
awake phase all cluster nodes contend with each other for
medium access. The contention mechanism of S-MAC is
the same as that in IEEE 802.11, i.e., using RTS (Request
To Send) and CTS (Clear To Send) packets. S-MAC needs
a strict timer synchronization in order to achieve correct
functionality. Periodic synchronization among neighboring
nodes is performed to correct their clock drift. An extension
of S-MAC by adaptive listening is described in [9]. If a node
A notices an ongoing communication of node B whom it
wants to send a message, it sleeps the time until B is ready.
A modiﬁcation of S-MAC called Timeout-MAC or T-
MAC is introduced in [10]. In S-MAC all nodes need
to be awake in the contention phase even if they have
nothing to send or receive. T-MAC uses a speciﬁc timer
TA to shorten the awake phase if the node does not need
to communicate. Obviously the TA is smaller than the
contention phase, thus the energy consumption is reduced.
But if the timer TA is chosen too small, the node sleeps
early missing possible message requests of other nodes. This
early sleeping problem could even lead to unfairness. In
further extensions of T-MAC this problem is solved by future
request to send (FRTS) messages, but this increases again
the energy consumption. Nevertheless T-MAC gains better
energy results compared to S-MAC.
Token ring [11] can be classiﬁed as a combination of
TDMA and contention-based. Each node has its own time
slot (token holding time) where it has to manage the commu-
nication with multiple contending nodes. The Wireless Token
Ring Protocol (WTRP) [12] was developed for mobile ad-
hoc networks. All nodes build a single ring in the initial
phase. The aim of WTRP is to maximize the throughput
and minimize the latency without restraining the mobility.
Energy efﬁciency is not considered in WTRP because the
nodes are mobile devices with strong energy resources like
Laptops or PDAs. A mapping of WTRP on wireless sensor
networks is E2WTRP that is described in [13]. E2WTRP
aims to enhance the energy balance by dynamic adaptation
of the token holding time. An active node can send more
messages if the token holding time is increased. The fre-
quency of token hand-over is decreased at the same time that
reﬂects in lower energy consumption. ESTR [14] is an energy
saving token ring protocol for wireless sensor networks that
introduces sleep periods for nodes which does not need to
send or receive messages. This leads to a very good energy
balance.
III. VARIABLE RANGES PROTOCOL
A sensor node consumes most of the energy in its ac-
tive mode. The energy cost rises enormously if the node
uses radio communication. The energy consumption of the
microprocessor Texas Instruments MSP430F149, which is
used in several sensor boards, is 1.6 µA in sleep mode and
rises to 280 µA in active mode at 1 MHz. In [8] the energy
rate between active:receive:send is determined as 1:1.05:1.4,
i.e. the energy consumption of sending a message outweighs
other tasks. It is plausible that the energy consumption
can be highly decreased by establishment of sleep intervals
and avoidance of unnecessary packet sending. Using sleep
intervals can lead to a contrary effect, i.e. the data exchange
is reduced to a shorter time, which can cause higher packet
collisions.
The energy consumption of sensor nodes that send with
maximum transmission power lies signiﬁcantly higher than
with reduced power. Decreasing transmission power results
in exponentially decreased energy consumption. Therefore,
the Variable Ranges (VR) protocol saves energy by adjusting
and optimizing the signal strength to particular circum-
stances of the sensor network in order to extend the lifetime
of nodes. Additionally, the initial state of reduced transmis-
sion power of nodes ensures that complexity of network is
low. With high signal strength nodes are confronted with fre-
quent interferences and redundant paths within the network.
Low signal strength means that number of neighboring nodes
is less, i.e. probability for message collisions decreases.
Regarding the security architecture, the number of neigh-
bors is also an important parameter. Each cluster-head has
to manage several keys with each other neighboring sen-
sor node and cluster-head for securing the communication
234
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Figure 2.
Range adjustment in VR protocol
and ensuring authentication. More neighbors means higher
management effort and more storage space, as well as more
encryption and decryption processing. All of this result again
in increased energy consumption. Therefore, it is essential
that the security architecture works hand in hand with the
underlying communication protocol.
In the initial phase of the VR protocol, the nodes search
for neighboring nodes starting with a minimum signal
strength. For this reason, each node sends a DiscoverNodes
message containing its own range parameter and ID. Then
the node waits a certain time to get a response. The waiting
time is also dynamic, i.e. the time is low, if the range is low
and increases, if the range increases. The reason for this
is that a node with a low range will reach less neighbors.
Therefore, there is no need to wait a long time for a response.
The nodes increase stepwise their transceiver power and send
new discovery messages until a pre-conﬁgured number of
nodes is found. A node which receives a DiscoverNodes
message of an unknown node, extracts the range information
of its seeking new neighbor. In the next step, the node
compares the received range value with its own range. If the
own range is lower, the node increases its range and sends a
DiscoverNodesReply message back. Since the signal strength
of the nodes would increase in this way until all nodes
would settle at the range of the largest distance between two
nodes, the VR protocol performs only a temporary range
adjustment. This means that nodes discard the adaptation
after a certain time and return again to their previous values.
Figure 2 illustrates this adjustment scheme. Assuming a
maximum number of neighbors is set to three in this ﬁgure, it
would be unfavorable for node y to use the range parameter
of node x, since it can reach three neighbors with a much
lower signal strength. For this reason, y will only increase
range temporarily to answer node x and return to its previous
range, in order to proceed with its own search. Cluster-heads
ﬁnd in this way a minimum number of other cluster-heads
and as well as sensor nodes.
Actually, the aim of each cluster-head is to be reachable
through the inter-cluster network by at least one base station.
After the initial phase, each base station sends a broadcast
through the new built network. This sink message is also
important to generate new keys for further authentication.
In [4] this key generation is described in detail. Therefore,
reachability of base stations is essential to establish the secu-
rity architecture in the sensor network. If a cluster-head does
not receive a broadcast message after a certain time, it starts
a new search phase to ﬁnd new cluster-heads. The cluster-
head uses this time a different message DiscoverNewNodes.
It ﬁrst uses the current range, since there could be cluster-
heads which are in range, but not discovered. Cluster-heads
who receive such a message, adjust their signal strength to
answer, but keep their new range value this time. If the node
does not get any answers, it increases its range and repeats
the procedure until it ﬁnds new connections. Figure 3 shows
the TryToConnect phase. You can see on the right side of the
ﬁgure, that after the initial search phase, several local cluster
networks are established, but not all of them can reach a base
station marked here as green squares at the four corners.
On the left picture you can recognize that the connectivity
is enhanced after the TryToConnect phase, but nevertheless
there are still local clusters remaining unreachable by any
base station. The reason is that nodes are deployed randomly.
There is a small probability that some nodes cannot reach
a base station, even if transmission power is set to the
maximum or due to message collisions in the initial phase.
Figure 3.
Initial phases of VR protocol: a) neighbor search b) TryToCon-
nect
Cluster-heads check periodically their neighborhood for
node losses or new arriving nodes. During lifetime the
VR protocol ensures that nodes can dynamically adapt to
changes in their environment. This network adaptation goes
hand in hand with security adjustments.
Additionally, routing information is updated by cluster-
heads after each VR adjustment phase. Simple sensors
do not need routing capability, because they exclusively
communicate with the cluster-head. Routing is used only
within the inter-cluster network established by cluster-heads.
Our architecture uses probabilistic multi-path routing based
on the level values to forward messages from cluster-heads
on the way to the corresponding base station. Cluster-
heads build up a trust matrix, where each transmission to
its neighbors is recorded. Based on this trust information,
cluster-heads calculate a probability value and write it into
the packet header. This value is used to decide in which
direction the packet has to be send. Each cluster-head
235
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Figure 4.
The Simulator GUI
modiﬁes the probability value and sends the message over
the most trustworthy route. Furthermore, our architecture
provides passive participation, i.e. sensor nodes listen to
packet transmissions of their neighbors. If cluster-head u
detects a packet addressed to its neighbor v, and recognizes
that v is not forwarding the message, u takes responsibility
with a certain (low) probability. Also, if u assumes that v
forwards the message to a non-existent node, u takes care
of transferring.
IV. EVALUATION
To evaluate the efﬁciency of our variable ranges security
architecture we implemented a simulation tool where it
is possible to establish different sizes of sensor networks.
Figure 4 shows the GUI of the simulator. The simulation is
divided into three phases: node distribution, initialization of
network, and report sending. In the ﬁrst phase, a predeﬁned
number of nodes is distributed randomly over a given area.
Sensor nodes and as well as cluster-heads are deployed after
setting for each a maximum transceiver range.
Basic parameters for the network are total number of
nodes, initial node range, initial node energy, and network
density. Type, range, and position of nodes can be changed
easily using the simulator GUI. Furthermore, new nodes
can be added or existing nodes can be deleted before the
next phase of the simulation is started. Figure 4 shows a
screenshot after the ﬁrst phase. Dark circles are cluster-
heads whereas light dots are simple sensor nodes. The
squares at the corners represent again four base stations.
In this case one cluster-head is selected and you can see the
communication range of the current node.
The second phase initializes the network based on a
communication protocol. We implemented three protocols
that can be selected by the user in the beginning of this
phase. These are the SMAC protocol, the energy saving
token ring protocol (ESTR), and the variable ranges (VR)
protocol. The user can change a set of parameters depending
on the selected communication protocol, e.g. cluster size,
timer settings, update periods. In this phase security and
routing information is exchanged, too.
At the end of initialization, the network is established
and nodes can start to exchange secured messages. This is
simulated in the last phase by randomly generated reports
that are sent to base stations. The user can halt the simulation
at any time, in order to change parameters for nodes. For
example, one can turn off a node to simulate a node loss. It
is also possible to simulate a compromised node that sends
false reports into the network.
Nodes consume energy for processing data, like encryp-
tion and decryption, and sending or receiving messages. For
some communication protocols nodes can switch to a sleep
mode, where energy consumption is minimal. Our simulator
236
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

bases on an energy model that uses speciﬁcations of real
sensor boards: ESB 430/1 and MSB-430 of Freie University
Berlin [15].
In a ﬁrst evaluation we measured the number of messages
sent in the initialization phase using the VR protocol.
We performed several simulations where we modiﬁed the
maximum range of nodes in order to get average number of
sent packets, collisions, and lost packets. Figure 5 shows the
results of a network with 500 nodes. Trafﬁc load increase
with higher range of single nodes, because nodes can reach
more neighbors to exchange messages with.
Figure 5.
Trafﬁc load in relation to signal strength
The VR protocol can be initialized with several parame-
ters. As mentioned in the previous section, the VR protocol
continues to search for new neighbors by increasing the
transmission range. Using the simulator the user can set
the maximum number of neigboring cluster-head and sensor
for each node in the network, e.g. setting the number to
three would stop the search after ﬁnding three cluster-heads
in the neighborhood. In some cases, this would lead to
a low connectivity, since nodes which could not join a
cluster group would be disclosed. Therefore, VR protocol
offers a second optimization step that was described in the
previous section (TryToConnect). Figure 6 shows number
of sent packets, packet collisions, and lost packets using
different conﬁgurations of VR protocol. The notation Init VR
3-3-ExtCon means that each cluster-head searches for new
neighbors until 3 other cluster-heads and 3 sensor nodes are
found and the TryToConnect mode is turned on. It is clearly
seen that packet collision in VR protocol is very low and
there are nearly no packet losses, since the communication
range is very reduced. The less packets are sent, the less
energy is consumed. In Figure 6 the conﬁguration Init VR
2-3 noExtCon seems to be the optimal conﬁguration.
But regarding the connectivity this is not the best choice.
Figure 7 shows the connectivity for each conﬁguration. It
is clearly seen that the connectivity for the conﬁguration
Init VR 2-3 noExtCon is only %14.15, i.e. only a small
number of cluster-heads can actually reach a base station.
Figure 6.
Trafﬁc load for different conﬁgurations of VR protocol
Turning on the TryToConnect modus brings only an increase
of %10 in connectivity. Only after increasing the number of
neighboring cluster-heads leads to reasonable results. Even
without the second optimization phase, VR protocol can
reach nearly %90 connectivity.
Figure 7.
Connectivity for different conﬁgurations of VR protocol
As mentioned in the previous section, the complexity of
sensor network is much lower using VR protocol. On the left
side of Figure 8 the network was established with maximum
node range. It is clearly seen that in dense areas of the
network, the number of different connections is rather high.
In a second simulation, we used the VR protocol to establish
the network. As seen on the right part of Figure 8 using the
VR protocol lowers the complexity of the network.
The optimal usage of signal strength in VR protocol
shows its advantages also in energy consumption. Figure 9
illustrates the energy consumption for sending reports from
a sensor node to the base station. Level represents here
the distance between sending node and nearest base station,
e.g. level 6 means that messages traverse six intermediate
cluster-heads until they reach the base station. We performed
the energy measurement in four different networks with
the same size. For the ﬁrst three networks the maximum
range parameter of each node was set to a ﬁxed value, i.e.
range 6 stands for %60 maximum signal strength. The last
237
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Figure 8.
Network complexity without (left) and with VR protocol (right)
network used the VR protocol with at least three cluster-head
and three sensor node neighbors and a further optimization
step to increase the connectivity (VR 3-3 ExtCon). One can
clearly see that the VR protocol has the best energy balance
leading to a longer lifetime of the network.
Figure 9.
Energy consumption for reporting
V. CONCLUSION
This paper presented the Variable Ranges protocol for
wireless sensor networks. Cluster architectures offer a good
basis for scalable and energy-efﬁcient protocols. Using hi-
erarchy of cluster-heads and sensor nodes, it is possible
to limit the range of each node and to exploit multi-hop
communication. By dynamically adapting the range of each
node, the network can be established with low complexity,
but still with high connectivity. Since nodes do not sent mes-
sages with full transmission power, the energy consumption
decreases considerably. This results in an extended lifetime
of the overall sensor network.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Mainwaring, J. Polastre, R. Szewczyk, D. Culler, and
J. Anderson, “Wireless Sensor Networks for Habitat Mon-
itoring,” in ACM International Workshop on Wireless Sensor
Networks and Applications (WSNA’02), Atlanta, GA, USA,
September 2002.
[2] G. J. Pottie and W. J. Kaiser, “Wireless integrated network
sensors,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 43, no. 5, pp.
51–58, 2000.
[3] P. Downey and R. Cardell-Oliver, “Evaluating the Impact of
Limited Resource on the Performance of Flooding in Wireless
Sensor Networks,” in Proceedings of the 2004 international
Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks, Washing-
ton, DC, USA, June 2004.
[4] F. Bagci, T. Ungerer, and N. Bagherzadeh,
“Multi-level
Security in Wireless Sensor Networks,” International Journal
On Advances in Software, vol. 4, no. 6, 2010.
[5] Adrian Perrig, Robert Szewczyk, J. D. Tygar, Victor Wen,
and David E. Culler, “SPINS: Security Protocols for Sensor
Networks,” Wireless Networks, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 521–534,
2002.
[6] Donggang Liu and Peng Ning, “Multilevel µTESLA: Broad-
cast authentication for distributed sensor networks,” Trans. on
Embedded Computing Sys., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 800–836, 2004.
[7] Sencun Zhu, Sanjeev Setia, and Sushil Jajodia,
“LEAP:
efﬁcient security mechanisms for large-scale distributed sen-
sor networks,” in CCS ’03: Proceedings of the 10th ACM
conference on Computer and communications security, New
York, NY, USA, 2003, pp. 62–72, ACM Press.
[8] Wei Ye, John Heidemann, and Deborah Estrin, “An Energy-
Efﬁcient MAC Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks,” in
Proceedings of the 21st International Annual Joint Confer-
ence of the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies
(INFOCOM), New York, USA, June 2002, vol. 3, pp. 1567–
1576.
[9] W. Ye, J. Heidemann, and D. Estrin, “Medium Access Control
With Coordinated Adaptive Sleeping for Wireless Sensor
Networks,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 12,
no. 3, pp. 493–506, June 2004.
[10] Tijs van Dam and Koen Langendoen, “An adaptive energy-
efﬁcient MAC protocol for wireless sensor networks,”
in
Proceedings of the 1st international conference on Embedded
networked sensor systems, Los Angeles, California, USA,
Nov. 2003, pp. 1567–1576.
[11] IEEE, IEEE CS, Token Ring Access Method and Physical
Layer Speciﬁcations. ANSI/IEEE Standard 802.5, 1985.
[12] M. Ergen, D. Lee, R. Sengupta, and P. Varaiya,
“WTRP
- Wireless Token Ring Protocol,”
IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1863–1881, Nov.
2004.
[13] Zhenhua Deng, Yan Lu, Chunjiang Wang, and Wenbo Wang,
“E2WTRP: An Energy-Efﬁcient Wireless Token Ring Pro-
tocol,”
in Proceeding of the IEEE conference on Per-
sonal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communications, Barcelona,
Spanien, 2004, pp. 398–401.
[14] F. Bagci, T. Ungerer, and N. Bagherzadeh, “ESTR - Energy
Saving Token Ring Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks,”
in Proceedings of the International Conference on Wireless
Networks (ICWN ’08), Las Vegas, NV, USA, July 2008.
[15] http://www.scatterweb.com, ScatterWeb Homepage, 2007.
238
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

