A Scalable Localization Scheme using Particle
Swarm Approach for Sensor Networks
Pei-Hsuan Tsai
Institute of Manufacturing Information and Systems
Department of Computer and Information Engineering
National Cheng Kung University
Tainan, Taiwan R.O.C.
Email: phtsai@mail.ncku.edu.tw
Chun-Lung Lin
Industrial Technology
Research Institute
Hsinchu, Taiwan R.O.C.
Email: chunlung@itri.org.tw
Ching-Yi Chen and Jia-Shung Wang
Department of Computer Science
National Tsing Hua Univeristy
Hsinchu, Taiwan R.O.C.
Email: jswang@vc.cs.nthu.edu.tw
Abstract—This paper proposes a scalable grid-based local-
ization scheme for establishing relative coordinate system of
sensor networks. A distributed selection algorithm is proposed
to select a small number of nodes from the set of sensor nodes
as virtual grid nodes. The virtual grid nodes are then used
to establish grid coordinate system by using particle swarm
optimization. The grid coordinate system forms the backbone
of node localization. The other nodes, which are not selected
as grid nodes, can then compute (distributed) their locations
based on the grid coordinate system efﬁciently. The precision
of node localization is highly dependent on the number of
grid nodes and can be adaptively adjusted according to target
applications. Furthermore, the proposed localization scheme has
high scalability and can work without any assistance of GPS.
The simulation results show that about sixty percent of non-grid
nodes could be correctly positioned in terms of grid coordinates,
and nearly all of the non-grid nodes could be correctly be located
in one of nine grids surrounding their real positions.
Keywords—wireless sensor networks; localization; grid coordi-
nate system.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, wireless sensor networks have become an
active research topic because of its wide variety of applications,
such as battleﬁeld surveillance, smart environments, health-
care, disaster relief [1], [2]. Wireless sensor networks also
draw a lot of research challenges, such as sensing coverage
controls, energy-efﬁcient communication protocols, and data
aggregations. The problem of localization aims to compute
the coordinates of nodes in the network. Geographic infor-
mation can be obtained by installing a Global Positioning
System (GPS) receiver on each node in the network. Feasi-
ble solutions, however, are to equip only a few nodes with
GPS, called anchor nodes, and the other nodes, using the
estimated distances between anchor nodes and them to infer
their position. Extensive studies have shown that the more
estimated distances used to compute the coordinates of nodes,
the higher accuracy of the established coordinate system,
because measurement errors in the estimation of distances can
be more effectively eliminated. However, the computational
complexity of establishing the coordinate system increases
exponentially with the number of distances used in calculating
the coordinates of nodes. Although location information is
crucial in wireless sensor networks, it is not necessary for
all nodes in the network to know their precise position. In
fact, requirements of location accuracy is highly application
dependent in wireless sensor networks. For example, for many
location-based routing protocols [3]–[6], grid-based coordinate
system provides sufﬁcient geographic information. Another
example is that, in many event-based applications, we are
interested in the region where an event takes places rather than
the precise location of the node issuing the event. In this case,
region-based coordinates are accurate enough for supporting
target applications.
In this paper, we propose a scalable grid-based localization
scheme for establishing relative coordinate system of sensor
networks. The basic idea of the localization scheme is to
establish a grid-based coordinate system by using a small
number of virtual grid nodes selected from a given set of sensor
nodes (In the following, those nodes that are not selected as
grid nodes will be referred to as non-grid nodes). The grid
coordinate system acts as the backbone of localization for the
non-grid nodes. That is, the non-grid nodes can compute their
positions via information exchange with their adjacent grid
nodes. The overall precision of node localization is highly
dependent on the number of grid nodes. The more the number
of grid nodes, the higher the accuracy of localization. In
such way, the localization scheme can be adaptively adjusted
to balance the tradeoff between computation complexity and
precision of the established coordinate system according to
target applications. In summary, the proposed localization
scheme has the following features:
1)
Adaptive: The precision of the grid-based localiza-
tion technique can be adjusted adaptively according
to the requirements of target applications so that all
nodes in the network could be positioned efﬁciently.
2)
Self-conﬁgurable: The grid-based localization tech-
nique establishes the local grid coordinate system
without the existence of anchor nodes (the sensor
nodes that know their global coordinates). The grid
coordinates, however, can also be transformed into
the global coordinates if there are at least three grid
nodes knowing their global position.
3)
Scalable: The grid-based localization scheme works
in large-scale sensor networks, e.g., more than 500
nodes.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II introduces the related works. In Section III, the proposed
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

localization scheme is presented. The simulation results are
given in Section IV. Finally, we draw the conclusion of this
paper and the future work in Section V.
II.
RELATED WORKS
DV-Hop approach assumes that the network comprises a
small number of anchor nodes [7]. The other non-anchor
nodes calculate their locations based on the averaged one-hop
distance to every anchor nodes in the network. Leng et al. [14]
addressed the problem of sensor localization in wireless net-
works in a multipath environment and proposed a distributed
and cooperative algorithm based on belief propagation, which
allows sensors to cooperatively self-localize with respect to a
single anchor node in the network, using range and direction
of arrival measurements. The research study [8] investigated
neighborhood collaboration based distributed cooperative lo-
calization of all sensors in a particular network with the con-
vex hull constraint. Three iterative self-positioning algorithms
were present for independent implementation at all individual
sensors of the considered network. Gu et al. [9] addressed
the localization with incompletely paired mutual distances
and proposed a Partially Paired Locality Correlation Analysis
(PPLCA) algorithm. Sugihara and Gupta [10] described a
novel SDP-based formulation for analyzing node localizability
and providing a deterministic upper bound of localization error.
The SDP-based formulation gives a sufﬁcient condition for
unique node localizability for any frameworks. A compressive
sensing (CS) based approach for node localization in wireless
sensor networks was presented by Zhang et al. [15]. Low et
al. [16] proposed a localization system in which localization
information is obtained through a probability based algorithm
that requires the solving of a nonlinear optimization problem.
The authors used the particle swarm approach to solve the
nonlinear optimization problem.
III.
THE PROPOSED GRID-BASED LOCALIZATION
ALGORITHM
Given a set of sensor nodes S deployed in an interested
region F, the coordinate system is established in two steps.
First, a small number of nodes are selected as grid nodes to
establish the grid coordinate system by using the proposed dis-
tributed selection algorithm. The grid nodes compute their grid
coordinates themselves by exchanging information between
each other and minimizing an error objective function. In this
paper, a Particle Swarm Optimization technique is proposed
to minimize the error objective function and to establish the
grid coordinate system. The grid coordinate system then serves
as the backbone of the coordinate system, whereby the other
nodes in the network can compute their own position according
to the grid coordinate system.
A. Grid Coordinate System Establishment
1) Distributed Grid Node Selection Algorithm: To create
the grid coordinate system, all the nodes in the network
need to estimate the distances between themselves and their
communication neighbors. There are several technologies that
can be used for this purpose, such as Received Signal Strength
(RSS) and Time-of-Arrival (ToA) [17]. Generally, RSS is
easier to implement, while ToA may have higher accuracy.
Let ˜di,j be the estimated distance between two adjacent nodes
si and sj. Let w be the grid width of the grid coordinate
system. We assume, without loss of generality, sensor nodes
are deployed in a L×L square region, where L is multiple of
w. To improve computation efﬁciency as well as localization
accuracy, if the estimated distance between two adjacent nodes
is smaller than the grid width w, only one of them is selected
as a grid node for establishing the grid coordinate system. Thus
we need to ﬁnd the maximum set of nodes so that the distance
measurement between any two nodes in the set is larger than
or equal to the grid width w. Let G = (V, E) be a graph.
Each node si ∈ S is represented by a vertex vi ∈ V . There is
an edge e ∈ E between two vertices vi and vj if and only if
˜di,j < w. An independent set of graph G is a subset V ′ ⊆ V
vertices such that each edge in E is incident on at most one
vertex in V ′. A maximal independent set is an independent set
V ′ such that for all vertices v ∈ V − V ′, the set V ∪ {v} is
not independent. The selection of maximum set of grid nodes
for creating the grid coordinate system is equivalent to one of
ﬁnding the maximum independent set of the graph G, which
is a NP-complete problem.
In this paper, we propose a distributed grid node selection
algorithm, similar to the one proposed by Luby [18]. Let Ni
be the set of nodes that are within the transmission range of
node si. Let NGi = {vj∥∀vj ∈ V and ˜di,j < w} be the
set of nodes that their distances to si is smaller than the grid
width. The distributed grid node selection algorithm proceeds
in rounds. In each round, every node sends to all its neighbors
a message containing its identity. When a node si collects
all such messages from its neighbors, it becomes a grid node
(winner) if either of the following two conditions is satisﬁed:
1)
NGi is nonempty (there exists at least one communi-
cation neighbor sj such that ˜di,j < w ). Moreover, si
has the smallest Node ID when comparing its Node
ID with the received Node IDs of the nodes in NGi.
2)
NGi is empty
Subsequently, grid nodes (winners) send to all their neighbors
a message specifying their winner state. A sensor that receives
such a message from one of its neighbors becomes a non-grid
node, loser. Winners and losers of a round do not participate in
subsequent rounds. The expected number of rounds is O(logn)
where n is the number of initial participants. An analysis of
the expected number of rounds and a proof of termination of
a similar algorithm can be found in Luby [18].
2) Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) Algorithm: Let S′
be the set of grid nodes obtained by using the proposed
distributed grid node selection algorithm. In order to establish
the grid coordinate system, it is crucial to obtain the distance
measurement between two grid nodes in S′. If two grid nodes
are adjacent, ToA or RSS can be employed to estimate their
distances. However, the distance estimation becomes nontrivial
when the two grid nodes are not within the transmission range
of each other. In this paper, we employ a simple and effective
scheme to estimate the distance between two remote grid
nodes, called multi-hop distance estimation model [15]. The
model utilizes the correlation of the Euclidean distance and the
corresponding shortest path length between two nodes in the
network for a given node distribution. Based on this model, a
node si can estimate the Euclidean distance to another node sj
by sending a control packet that includes a route length ﬁeld
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 1.
Grid coordinate system establishment. (a) The constructed graph G(V, E) (b) The set of grid nodes for establishing the grid coordinate system. (c) The
local grid coordinate system. (d) The transformed grid coordinate system.
with initial value of zero. When an intermediate node receives
the control packet, it adds the one-hop distance between itself
and the previous node, obtained by using ToA or RSS, to the
route length ﬁeld. Upon receiving the control packet, node sj
sends it back to node si. After node si receives the return
control packet from sj, it can read the route length ﬁeld and
estimates the distance between si and sj according to the
multi-hop distance estimation model. Here, we also use ˜di,j to
denote the estimated distance, obtained by using the multi-hop
estimation model, between two remote grid nodes si and sj.
(If two nodes are adjacent, ˜di,j denotes the estimated distance
obtained by using ToA or RSS). We assume, without loss of
generality, the grid node with the lowest identify number, say
s1, will perform the calculation for creating the grid coordinate
system. Once a grid node si has obtained a set Ki of distances
to all other grid nodes, i.e., Ki = { ˜di,j∥∀sj ∈ S′ and j ̸= i}, it
sends Ki to s1. Thus s1 has the distance information between
any two grid nodes in the network. Our objective is to calculate
the grid coordinate system that minimizes the sum of the errors
of the distances between any two grid nodes. Let (gxi, gyi) be
the grid coordinate of node s ∈ S′. Then, the distance between
two grid nodes si and sj in the established grid coordinate
system is
Dij =
q
(gxi − gxj)2 + (gyi − gyj)2
(1)
Without loss of generality, assuming that |S′| = M and S′ =
{si∥i = 1, 2, ..., M}. The error function is deﬁned as.
ϵ(X) =
M
X
i=1
M
X
j=1
(Di,j − ˜di,j)2
(2)
Where X = {(gxi, gyi)∥i = 1, 2, ..., M}. A PSO algorithm is
applied to minimize the error function and give each node the
grid coordinate. PSO is an optimization technique developed
by Kennedy and Eberhart in 1995, inspired by social behavior
of organisms such as bird ﬂocking and ﬁsh schooling [11]–
[13]. PSO is a population-based search method where individ-
uals, called particles, change their position with time. Particles
change their position by ﬂying around in a multidimensional
problem space. During ﬂight, each particle keeps track of its
coordinate that has the best solution encountered by itself so
far and modiﬁes its position based on its own history and the
history of all other particles to make use of the best position.
Therefore, PSO combines local search methods with global
search methods. Here, each particle represents a solution set
of grid coordinates of nodes in S′. Each particle evaluates how
good the solution is according to the value, called ﬁtness, of
the error objective function in (2). One of the advantages of
the proposed grid-based localization approach is that the PSO
algorithm can be calculated efﬁciently because the number of
grid nodes used to create the backbone of grid coordinate sys-
tem is usually small (e.g., 5 to 15 grid nodes). Speciﬁcally, the
number of grid nodes can be adjusted adaptively by setting the
grid width according to the requirements of target applications.
Furthermore, the grid-based coordinate system digitizes the
solution space of the PSO algorithm. Let K = (L/w)2 be
the number of grid points in the established grid coordinate
system. The upper bound of position vectors needed to be
checked is
CK
M · M! =
M
Y
i=1
(K − i + 1)
(3)
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

(x, y)
(x + w, y)
(x, y + w)
(x + w, y + w)
Grid (x , y)
Fig. 2.
Grid(x, y).
Fig. 1(a)-(d) illustrate an example of the grid coordinate
system
establishment
in
the
network
consisting
of
ten
nodes.
Fig.
1(a)
is
the
constructed
graph
G(V, E),
where
V
=
{01, 02, ..., 10}
and
E
=
{(01, 04), (01, 05), (02, 04), (03, 05), (03, 06), (04, 05), (05, 06)
, (05, 08), (06, 07), (06, 10), (07, 08), (07, 09), (07, 10)}.
Fig. 1(b) shows the set of grid nodes S′ = {02, 05, 09, 10}
for establishing the grid coordinate system.
ϵ = (d02,05− ˜d02,05)2+(d02,09− ˜d02,09)2+(d02,10− ˜d02,10)2+
(d05,09 − ˜d05,09)2 + (d05,10 − ˜d05,10)2 + (d09,10 − ˜d09,10)2
Fig. 1(c) shows the established local grid coordinate system.
Note that the coordinate system is relative coordinate system
and it can be arbitrary rotated or translated as long as the
relative distances between nodes remain unchanged. To
facilitate the comparison between the real positions of grid
nodes and the established grid coordinates, the coordinate
system in Fig. 1(c) is transformed to obtain Fig. 1(d). The
node with lowest ID is set to be the origin (0, 0), the node
with the second lowest ID is set to be on positive X-axis with
coordinate (x, 0) where x > 0, and the node with the third
lowest ID is set to be on positive Y -axis. In 1(d), the small
circles (”o”) denote the real coordinates of the nodes and the
squares (”∗”) represent the grid coordinates after coordinate
transformation.
B. The Non-grid Nodes
Let Grid(x, y) denote the grid shown in Fig. 2. Then,
(x + w/2, y + w/2) is the center coordinate of Grid(x, y).
Grid(x, y) is said to be within the R + ϵ range of the grid
node si if
p
(x + w/2 − gxi)2 + (w + w/2 − gyi)2 ≤ R + ϵ.
After the grid coordinate system is established, the non-grid
nodes compute their locations, i.e., the grid they are located in,
by sending a request message to the nearby grid nodes (within
the transmission range R) on demand. Let Gi be the set of grid
nodes that receive the request message from non-grid node si.
Upon receiving the request, every grid node sj ∈ Gi responses
a message containing its identity number, the grid coordinate
(gxi, gyi), and the set Hj of grid coordinates that are within
the R + ϵ range of grid node sj. (ϵ is a tunable parameter
used to tolerate possible measurement errors in estimation of
distance.) Let H = ∩sj∈GiHj be the intersection set of grid
coordinates. With the received information from nearby grid
nodes, si calculates its own location (p, q) by calculating the
following formula.
(p, q) = arg
min
(x,y)∈H{f(x, y)}
where
f(x, y) =
X
sk∈Gi
(
q
(x + w/2 − gxk)2 + (y + w/2 − gyk)2 − ˜di,k)2
(4)
The proposed localization scheme for the non-grid nodes is a
digitized triangulation approach. The advantage of this scheme
is that every non-grid node can be positioned efﬁciently
because the total number of grids needed to be evaluated in
(4) is bounded by ( (R+ϵ)2·π
w2
). Since R and w are usually
constant in most wireless sensor networks, the computation
complexity of the localization approach for non-grid nodes
is O(1). For example, let R = 40, w = 15 and ϵ = 5
in a wireless sensor networks. Then, each regular node only
requires evaluating at most 28 grids to determine the best grid
in which they reside. Fig. 3 shows an example to illustrate
this scheme more clearly. Assume Gi = {A, B, C}, R + ϵ =
3, w = 1, ˜di,A
= 1, ˜di,B
= 2, and ˜di,C
= 3. H
=
{(1, 1), (2, 1), (3, 1), (1, 2), (2, 2), (3, 2), (2, 3). f(2, 2) ≃ 3.3.
IV.
SIMULATION
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the pro-
posed localization technique via extensive simulations. Partic-
ularly, we study the impact of several parameters of interest,
such as the number of grid nodes, grid width, and node density
(grid nodes plus non-grid nodes). The proposed grid-based
localization method was implemented in Matlab. Measurement
error in the estimation of distances between adjacent nodes
were modeled as zero-mean additive white Gaussian noise,
which was also adopted in [17]. In the following evaluations,
the sensor nodes are randomly deployed in a 100×100 square
area, i.e., L = 100.
A. Grid Nodes
1) Grid Width versus Number of Grid Nodes: Extensive
simulations have shown that the more distance measurements
used to locate nodes, the higher accuracy of the established
grid coordinate system, since the errors in the estimation of
distances could be smoothed out more effectively. However,
since the coordinate of every grid node is restricted by grid
coordinate (see the error function in (2)), this would bring
additional errors slightly, depending on the grid width and
the total number of grid nodes used in the establishment
of grid coordinate system. To evaluate the accuracy of the
established grid coordinate system, the grid coordinate system
is transformed by setting the node with lowest ID to be the
origin (0, 0), the node with the second lowest ID to be on
positive X-axis with coordinate (x, 0) where x > 0, and the
node with the third lowest ID to be on positive Y -axis. The
average error of the grid coordinate system is evaluated as
follows.
ψ =
qPM
i=1(xi − gxi)2 + (yi − gyi)2
M
(5)
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
A(1, 1)
B(4, 1)
B(3, 4)
 
(a)
A(1, 1)
B(4, 1)
B(3, 4)
2
2
2
2
4)
(
3)
(
−
+
−
y
x
2
2
2
2
)1
(
4)
(
−
+
−
y
x
2
2
2
2
)1
(
)1
(
−
+
−
y
x
2,2 )
(
cell
(b)
Fig. 3.
Location computation of non-grid nodes. (a) The intersection set. (b) The distances between grid cell (2,2) and grid nodes.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 5.
The established grid coordinate system with M = 15. (a) ψ = 1.7804, w = 5. (b) ψ = 4.0752, w = 10. (c) ψ = 4.8085, w = 15. (d)
ψ = 8.4885, w = 20.
where (xi, yi) is the real coordinate of grid node si and
(gxi, gyi) is the calculated grid coordinate after coordinate
transformation, and M is the total number of grid nodes.
Here, ψ represents the average of distance between the real
coordinates of grid nodes and the grid coordinates. Fig. 4
shows the average error of the grid coordinate system where
the X-axis represents grid width w and the Y -axis denotes
the average error ψ. As demonstrated in Fig. 4, ψ increases
(approximately) linearly with grid width w and the average
error is no more than w/2 when M ≤ 20 and 1 ≤ w ≤ 20.
(Note that M ≤ (100/w)2 in a 100 × 100 area.) Additionally,
ψ increases about k · (M2 − M1) · w (e.g., in our simulations,
k ≃ 1/50) as M increases from M1 to M2. For example, ψ
increases about 3 units when M changes from 10 to 20 and
w = 15.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
1
5
10
15
20
 
 
M=5
M=10
M=15
M=20
Grid width w
Average error ψ
Fig. 4.
Average grid coordinate error versus grid width.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
5
10
15
20
P1
P2
P3
Percentage (%)
w
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
5
10
15
20
P1
P2
P3
Percentage (%)
w
Fig. 6.
The localization accuracy of non-grid nodes versus grid width.
2) Grid Coordinate System: Fig. 5(a)-(d) depicts the estab-
lished grid coordinate system with M = 15. The small circles
(”o”) denote the real coordinates of the nodes and the squares
(”∗”) represent the calculated grid coordinates after coordinate
transformation. As shown in Fig. 5, the real coordinates are
very close to the estimated coordinates when w = 5 and 10.
As w increases, the differences between them become slightly
obvious, but the simulation results in Fig. 4 demonstrate that
the average error is no more than 10 units. This simulation
also veriﬁes that our proposed grid-based localization indeed
establishes the local grid coordinate system.
B. Non-grid Nodes
We simulate networks containing 100 randomly distributed
sensor nodes. Fifteen nodes are selected to serve as grid nodes,
i.e., M = 15, and the non-grid nodes communicate with
the nearby grid nodes to obtain necessary information. Then,
they determine which grid they belong to using (4). We set
R = 40 units so that each non-grid node has an average
of about ﬁve neighboring grid nodes. The non-grid nodes
that their real positions are near grid boundary in the grid
coordinate system may be located incorrectly due to errors
of the estimated distances between non-grid nodes and grid
nodes. Let (xi, yi) be the real grid coordinate in which node
si is located and (˜xi, ˜yi) be the estimated grid coordinate,
respectively. Let P1 represent the percentage of non-grid nodes
that locate themselves correctly, i.e., (˜xi, ˜yi) = (xi, yi). Let P2
denote the percentage of non-grid nodes that locate themselves
partially correct. The localization result of a node si is said
to be partially correct if (˜xi, ˜yi) equals to one of eight grids
surrounding the real grid (xi, yi). Let P3 = P1 + P2. Fig. 6
demonstrates that P1 increases slightly with grid width w.
About sixty percent of non-grid nodes locate themselves at
correct grid as w ≤ 20. Signiﬁcantly, although some of non-
grid nodes (near 40%) locate themselves incorrectly, almost all
of them are located correctly in one of eight grids surrounding
their real positions.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a scalable grid-based localization
technique to balance the tradeoff between computation com-
plexity and precision of localization. The simulation results
show that a small number of nodes, e.g., ﬁve to ﬁfteen,
are usually enough for create the coordinate system with
acceptable localization accuracy for many applications. The
average error of the grid coordinate system is no more than
half the grid width. About sixty percent of non-grid nodes
could compute in which grids they are located correctly.
Signiﬁcantly, although some of non-grid nodes (near 40%)
locate themselves incorrectly, almost all of them are located
correctly in one of eight grids surrounding their real positions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was partially supported by NSC under Grant
No. 100-2218-E-006-035-MY2 and No. 101-2221-E-006-235-.
REFERENCES
[1]
I. F. Akyildiz,W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, Wireless
sensor networks: A survey, Computer Networks, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 393-
422, March 2002.
[2]
D. Estrin, D. Culler, K. Pister, and G. Sukhatme, ”Connecting the
Physical World with Pervasive Networks,” IEEE Pervasive Computing,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 59-69, January-March 2002.
[3]
X. Li, J. Yang, A. Nayak, and I. Stojmenovic, ”Localized Geographic
Routing to a Mobile Sink with Guaranteed Delivery in Sensor Networks,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 30, no. 9, pp.
1719-1729, Oct. 2012.
[4]
A. Awad, R. German, and F. Dressler, ”Exploiting Virtual Coordinates
for Improved Routing Performance in Sensor Networks,” IEEE Trans.
on Mobile Computing, vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 1214-1226, Sep. 2011.
[5]
B. Li, W. Wang, Q. Yin, H. Li, and H.-M. Wang, ”Energy-efﬁcient
cooperative geographic routing in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Int’l
Conf. Communications (ICC), June 2012, pp. 152-156.
[6]
G. Tan and A.-M. Kermarrec, ”Greedy Geographic Routing in Large-
Scale Sensor Networks: A Minimum Network Decomposition Ap-
proach,” IEEE/ACM Trans. on Networking, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 864-877,
June 2012.
[7]
D. Nicolescu and B. Nath, DV-based positioning in ad hoc networks,
Journal of Telecommunication Systems, vol. 22, no. 1-4, pp. 267-280,
2003.
[8]
S. Zhu and Z. Ding, ”Distributed Cooperative Localization of Wireless
Sensor Networks with Convex Hull Constraint,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless
Communications, , vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 2150-2161, July 2011.
[9]
J. Gu, S. Chen, and T. Sun, ”Localization with Incompletely Paired
Data in Complex Wireless Sensor Network,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless
Communications, vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 2841-2849, Sep. 2011.
[10]
R. Sugihara and R. K. Gupta, ”Sensor localization with deterministic
accuracy guarantee,” IEEE INFOCOM, April 2011, pp. 1772-1780.
[11]
J. Kennedy and R. Eberhart, ”Solution Swarm Optimization,” IEEE Int’l
Conf. Neural Networks, 1995, pp. 1942-1948.
[12]
R. Eberhart and J. Kennedy, A new optimizer using solution swarm
theory, Int’l Symp. Micro Machine and Human Science, 1995, pp. 39-
43.
[13]
R. Eberhart and Y. Shi, Comparison between Genetic Algorithms and
Particle Swarm Optimization, Int’l Conf. Evolutionary Programming,
1998.
[14]
M. Leng, W.-P. Tay, and T.Q.S. Quek, ”Cooperative and distributed
localization for wireless sensor networks in multipath environments,”
IEEE Int’l Conf. Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
March 2012, pp. 3125-3128.
[15]
B. Zhang, X. Cheng, N. Zhang, Y. Cui, Y. Li, and Q. Liang, ”Sparse
target counting and localization in sensor networks based on compressive
sensing,” IEEE INFOCOM, April 2011, pp. 2255-2263.
[16]
K.-S. Low, H.A. Nguyen, and H. Guo, ”A particle swarm optimization
approach for the localization of a wireless sensor network,” IEEE Int’l
Symp. Industrial Electronics (ISIE), 2008, pp. 1820-1825.
[17]
H. Wu, C. Wang, and N. F. Tzeng, ”Novel self-conﬁgurable position-
ing technique for multi-hop wireless networks, IEEE/ACM Trans. on
Netowkring, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 609-621, June 2005.
[18]
M. Luby, A simple parallel algorithm for the maximal independent set
problem, SIAM Journal on Computing, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 1036-1055,
Nov. 1986.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

