Automation and Control in Engineering 
A Global Approach with Educational Kits 
 
Filomena Soares, Celina P. Leão 
Centro Algoritmi R&D  
University of Minho, Guimarães, 
Portugal 
email:(fsoares@dei,cpl@dps).uminho.
pt 
José Machado 
MEtRICs R&D Centre  
University of Minho, Guimarães, 
Portugal 
email: jmachado@dem.uminho.pt 
 
Vítor Carvalho 
School of Technology & Centro 
Algoritmi R&D 
Polytechnic Institute of Cávado and 
Ave (IPCA) & University of Minho 
Barcelos & Guimarães, Portugal 
email:vcarvalho@ipca.pt
 
 
Abstract— The well-known paradigm learning by doing is 
particularly important in engineering courses. Still, in some 
situations, there is a lack of real-world didactic workbenches 
due to the absence of financial support, human resources or 
maintenances restrictions. Following this trend, the authors 
have been trying to overcome this difficulty designing and 
implementing virtual and remote laboratories in Process 
Monitoring, Control and Automation teaching applied to 
Mechanical, Electronics and Biomedical Engineering. The goal 
of this paper is to review and present the work developed 
regarding the real-world workbenches to be used in 
automation and control practical classes as an integrated 
virtual and remote laboratory. Some important points include 
the modelling and control of Discrete Event Systems, 
Continuous Systems and Real-Time Systems as well as 
Industrial Control Networks. The physical parts were 
developed and connected, in a closed-loop configuration, with 
the respective controllers. The developed kits and systems were 
geared towards the engineering students’ needs. This 
integrated approach is very useful for providing students with 
a global set of skills in this domain.  Quantitative and 
qualitative studies are continuously applied not only for 
obtaining students feedback but also to gather information to 
devise strategies for future virtual and remote laboratory 
applications development suitable for the target public. The 
positive results achieved so far are very encouraging. 
Keywords-automation; control design; control engineering; 
control equipment; engineering education. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The design of new teaching/learning methodologies 
implies the definition of tools and environments that promote 
students and teachers’ engagement in the knowledge 
acquisition process. These tools will serve as a complement 
to the traditional face-to-face lectures. 
In engineering courses the laboratory work is very 
important since it is when students have the opportunity to 
apply the theoretical concepts learned earlier. So, to install 
and maintain several working positions in the laboratory is 
sometimes a challenge: the equipment is expensive, 
laboratorial space and qualified personnel are not enough. 
And this problem is replicated at each school. 
The virtual and remote (V&R) laboratories may 
overcome this limitation [1-6]. The students may access the 
V&R laboratory at any time and place testing the real-world 
case-study through a graphical animation or a remote 
webcam.  
Nevertheless, a good understanding of the pedagogical 
aspects is crucial for an efficient remote labs use [7]. Remote 
laboratories can also be used as a link between the University 
and the Industry, by providing remote monitoring for some 
industrial applications [8]. 
With this in mind and regarding Automation and Control 
education, a multidisciplinary group of teachers with 
different backgrounds, from the University of Minho (UM) 
and from the Polytechnic Institute of Cávado and Ave 
(IPCA), at North of Portugal, have been centering their 
attention in designing and developing workbenches in order 
to enable a practical learning environment. The goal was to 
provide to the engineering students different pedagogical 
tools/examples in order to have real-world interactive 
situations, for instance virtual processes and interactive 
animations, as well as local and remote experiences.  
Considering the main domains, concerning Control and 
Automation, considered at UM and IPCA - namely: Discrete 
Event Systems modeling and control, Continuous Systems 
modeling and control, Real-Time Systems modeling and 
control 
and 
control 
industrial 
networks 
- 
several 
workbenches have been developed. For teaching these 
domains several software tools and controllers can be used. It 
was, in this spirit, that the workbenches were developed. 
Also, the physical part of the workbenches were developed 
and connected, in a closed-loop configuration, with the 
respective controllers. 
Some (five) of the developed solutions include: the 
velocity control of a Direct Current (DC) motor (modeled as 
a Continuous System, controlled by a microcontroller in 
which was implemented a discrete Proportional, Integral, 
Derivative (PID) algorithm); two examples of systems 
controlled by Programmable Logic Controller (PLC): an 
automation workbench for testing and simulating PLC 
programs (modeled as a Discrete Event System), and the 
implementation of a small intelligent house (modeled as a 
Real-Time 
System); 
and, 
finally, 
two 
workbenches 
controlled by Industrial Computers modeled, both, as Real-
Time Systems: one, of them - the level control of a two-tank 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

system - using LabVIEW, and the other one - the acquisition 
of physiological signals – using, first, LabVIEW and, finally, 
C# and Java. This paper presents the developed solutions as 
an integrated V&R laboratory. Among others, this approach 
allows students to support and consolidate the traditional 
classes’ model allowing an efficient learning methodology in 
the specific areas of Control, Automation, Domotics, and 
Biomedical Data Acquisition fully integrated in one 
laboratory. 
In this way, in order to describe the work developed and 
exchanged experience on best practice in the use of V&R 
laboratory for educational purpose over several years this 
paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the five 
developed real-world didactic kits used in the work, Section 
3 describes the qualitative and quantitative students feedback 
obtained during the experiments and finally, Section 4 
enunciates the final remarks. 
II. 
REAL-WORLD DIDACTIC KITS 
The 
real-world 
engineering 
problems 
are 
from 
automation and control areas. The goal was to provide 
students with practical real-world examples previously 
learned at class. These examples were used in engineering 
courses of different areas Mechanical, Electronics and 
Biomedical, at two institutions, Minho University (Braga and 
Guimarães, Portugal) and IPCA (Barcelos, Portugal) with 
3rd and 4th year’s students. In the next subsections there are 
presented five developed kits: the velocity control of a DC 
motor, controlled by a Microcontroller; two examples of 
systems controlled by PLC: an automation workbench for 
testing 
and 
simulating 
PLC 
programs 
and 
the 
implementation of a small intelligent house; and, finally, two 
workbenches controlled by Industrial Computers: the level 
control of a two-tank system and the acquisition and 
treatment of physiological signals. The booking of students 
to access the developed kits is done by a queue defined by a 
set of conditions for proper priority (i.e., role of the 
participant – administrator or general user, user with/without 
previous scheduled access, etc). 
A. Velocity Control of a DC Motor 
A remote controlled DC motor velocity was developed 
for undergraduate control studies [9], allowing discrete PID 
algorithm testing and simulation [10]. A DC Motor “Maxon 
RE36” is inserted with an encoder “HEDS-5540 A11” for 
velocity measurement. The control methodology was 
implemented in a microcontroller. Four different digital 
versions of the PID algorithm are available. The 
microcontroller PIC16F876 from Microchip is used to 
directly control the motor; the control board is linked to the 
local personal computer by a serial RS-232 communication 
link for monitoring. 
The user interface was developed in a LabVIEW (Figure 
1). Twelve motor velocity values can be selected (from 
7m/min to 335m/min). The user must select the PID 
algorithm to be tested as well as the proportional, integral 
and derivative controller parameters. 
B. Automation Workbench 
The main focus of the workbench is to allow faster 
testing and validation of PLC programs, modeled as discrete 
event systems. The global goal of the developed system is to 
simulate and test the control programs in order to be sure 
that, when tested on the real system, those programs will not 
damage the physical part of the platform. It must be 
highlighted that this platform can be accessed from outside 
by different users – using Internet access - from different 
origins. 
 
 
Figure 1.  User interface [9]. 
Thus, it was decided to use a PLC as the controller 
device and another PLC that will interact with the first one, 
using a developed network for that, as the plant simulator. 
For this purpose, the PLC that will run the program that 
simulates the plant behavior generates all the input signals 
for the PLC that runs the program of the controller.  
The best configuration to meet the needs of the proposed 
workbench is presented in Figure 2. OMRON equipment 
was used due to its availability in the laboratory. Both the 
controller and the plant models were implemented in the 
controllers OMRON CP1L M30 with CX-Programmer. The 
physical connection between components (the convertor 
MDW-45 and Personal Computer, PC and the converter and 
the PLC) was done using a serial port RS-422; in the 
connection PC-Converter an adaptor USB to serial port RS-
232 was included.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Hardware In the Loop Workbench circuit. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

There were used the CX-One software and CX-
Supervisor from OMRON. CX-One allows using CX-
Programmer to edit and simulate programs and CX-Designer 
that allows creation of simulation scenarios (drawings, 
schemes, among others) and using these scenarios associated 
to the program developed in CX-Programmer the user can 
understand the simulation of the system. Together with these 
tools, CX-Supervisor is devoted to the design and operation 
of PC visualization and machine control. It allows interaction 
between the user and the PLC program that is running on the 
controller and also the interaction with the program that is in 
the PLC that simulates the plant. 
C. Small Intelligent House 
A test kit for a “small intelligent house” [2] with the 
following functionalities was developed: alarm control, 
temperature 
control, 
entrance 
door 
open/close, 
and 
illumination control (Figure 3). The sensors were positioned 
in order to allow control of alarm intrusion, main and 
internal illumination, main door opening/closing and attic 
temperature, using the PLC CQM1H-CPU61 from Omron. 
The simulation of the “small intelligent” house was 
developed in LabVIEW (Figure 4). The LabVIEW interface 
enables both simulation and “small intelligent” house 
monitoring and actuation, but direct control is performed by 
the PLC. The interface allows also monitoring and testing 
different proportional, integral and derivative parameters of 
the attic temperature control algorithm, as well as real time 
monitoring using a Webcam. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Small Intelligent House Kit. 
 
Figure 4.  User interface. 
D. Level Control of a Two-Tanks System 
This work considers the objective of the design and 
implementation of a remote experiment for controlling the 
water level in a two-tank system (Figure 5) [7].  
 
 
Figure 5.  Two tanks system Layout [7]. 
The system includes two tanks made in acrylic, a pump 
to circulate the water from the lower to the upper tank, two 
ultrasonic sensors for measuring both tank levels, an 
electrovalve to stop the flow between the upper and the 
lower level tank and a manual valve for security purposes. 
The upper tank is being controlled and the lower tank serves 
as a buffer.  
An 8-bit Atmega16 microcontroller from Atmel is used 
for data acquisition, control and pump actuation. A custom 
made LabVIEW tool, the Watch Tank, was developed for 
monitoring purposes. The control algorithms, on-off and PID 
are implemented in the microcontroller that is connected to a 
PC by a RS232 protocol. 
The user interface, Watch Tank, developed in LabVIEW 
allows the monitoring of the system (Figure 6). In the Watch 
Tank program, the user must select the PID type algorithm to 
be tested, as well as the controller parameters, Kp, Ki and 
Kd, the proportional, integral and derivatives constants, 
respectively. 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 6.  User interface [7]. 
The user can test the digital algorithms and parameters, 
change level reference values and register the output data. 
The system can be set available with either local or remote 
control configurations for teaching/learning purposes. A 
Webcam is used for real-time monitoring. 
E. Remote Physiological Signals 
The study of human physiology allows understanding the 
human body’s structure and the processes that are carried out 
within it, which involves mechanical, electrical and chemical 
forces. So, and in order to support the biomedical 
engineering undergraduate students’ learning process on 
physiological data acquisition studies, an innovative remote 
laboratory 
has 
been 
developed: 
RePhyS 
(Remote 
Physiological Systems) laboratory. RePhyS is capable of 
engaging biomedical engineering students, providing the 
real-time remote acquisition of physiological signals from 
the human body through a web platform. The educational 
goals should be achieved, namely the knowledge of 
acquisition methods, the recognition of the signals and the 
identification of important components of each one [11]. 
RePhyS 
was 
developed 
using 
the 
commercial 
BioStarter® kit, with sensors’ modules: Electrocardiogram 
(ECG), Electromyography (EMG), Galvanic Skin Response 
(GSR), Strain Gauge and an accelerometer. The system 
includes different remote experiments for the acquisition and 
study of different physiological signals [12]. The data 
processing, storage and transmission are made by a computer 
Bluetooth connection. The general architecture of the 
RePhyS lab is presented in Figure 7. The ShimmerTM 
device captures the data through the electrodes placed on the 
human body. The Bluetooth (IEEE 802.15.1) connection 
established between the computer, in the real laboratory, and 
the experiment allows the control and the configuration of 
the device, and the transfer of measured physiological data. 
The students, located in a distance place, access the 
experience through an interface, on an Internet browser, 
facilitating the interaction with the device through various 
control buttons. A webcam allows monitoring of the 
experience. 
 
 
Figure 7.  General architecture of RePhyS. 
Figure 8 shows the user interface for the acquisition of 
ECG remote data acquisition. The experiments developed 
were initially implemented with LabVIEW being others 
user-side solutions (C and Java) under development [12]. 
Thus, the student/user can acquire, visualize and analyze, 
in real-time, the results of practical experiences being able to 
interact and to control the measurement parameters. The 
stored data is always available for further processing.  
Currently, the architecture defined for the first version of 
the remote laboratory is being improved. Thus, RePhyS will 
allow simultaneous access up to three users, each having a 
control experiment, and will also allow the simultaneous use 
of several modules that is, in the same experiment, able to 
study various physiological conditions of the system. 
 
 
Figure 8.  RePhyS user interface during an ECG remote acquisition.    
III. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE STUDENTS 
FEEDBACK 
For all kits and systems described herein, and in order to 
obtain the feedback of students, questionnaires were always 
presented and results analyzed by the teachers involved in 
the process. The studies also allow the identification of 
students learning style in order to develop a platform suitable 
for the engineering learners. The detailed results can be 
found elsewhere [9, 13].  
The use of these questionnaires (n=200, number of 
students) enabled the improvement of the educational kits in 
order to accomplish their objective. The questionnaires had 
open questions in order to obtain students feedback towards 
specific points as well as quantitative questions defined in 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

the Likert scale (1, strongly disagree, to 5, completely agree). 
The analysis was performed using SPSS software.  
The questionnaires were divided in sections: after the 
student characterization, close, open and multiple choices 
responses, and the evaluation of several statements for the 
experiment evaluation, the simulator assessment, and to 
analyze students’ perspectives, fillings and knowledge before 
and after carried out the experiment were used.  
The students that participated in this study were from 
Mechanical, 
Electronics 
and 
Biomedical 
engineering 
courses, having an average of 21 years old, of which 20% 
were female (Biomedical presents the highest percentage of 
female students with 40%). Concerning the experiment 
evaluation, on average, students evaluate it with a positive 
score (values higher than 3 for Q1, Q2, Q4, Q5, Q6 and 
lower than 3 for Q3), as described in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
 KITS AVERAGE STUDENTS’ EVALUATION BY ITEM  
Item 
Average 
Q1: In general, I was motivated for the use of these kits in 
the course context. 
4.4 
Q2: In general, I can say that the performance of the kits… 
 
      1: … helped me assimilate the concepts presented during 
the course  
3.6 
      2: … made my learning more objective 
3.7 
      3: … increased my chances of getting a high final 
evaluation 
3.5 
      4: … motivated me towards the course 
3.8 
      5: … raised my expectations relative to the assessment 
3.5 
Q3: Running the kits had nothing to do with my motivation 
and my interest in this course. 
2.2 
Q4: The kits are suitable for my Control/Automation 
learning process. 
4.2 
Q5: I recommend the implementation of these kits and 
activities, in the next school year, as a teaching/learning tool. 
4.3 
Q6: The implementation of the remote experiment … 
 
      1: … has increased understanding of the operation of an 
on-off controller. 
3.5 
      2: … has increased understanding of the operation of the 
PID controller. 
3.1 
3: … allow the visualization of the effect of the off-set 
reduced when going from a controller P to PI. 
3.0 
4: motivated to learn the subjects under study. 
3.5 
 
Based on a protocol, Biomedical engineering students 
performed several remote experiments in physiological 
signals acquisition (RePhyS: ECG, body acceleration and 
body temperature acquisition). All students understood the 
ECG signal acquisition and they were able to identify all the 
waves’ constituents during the data real-time visualization 
(as demonstrated in Figure 8). For the other two experiments, 
89% identified to have understood and visualized the 
experiments. 
Recently students’ perception in relation to their own 
learning style and the learning style employed during the 
experiment performance, in accordance with the students’ 
perspective, has been considered. The analysis of this factor 
becomes an important indicator on how these kits or the 
V&R laboratories procedure is appropriate for the students’ 
learning process. 
In short, it is possible to observe that, and based on the 
Biomedical engineering students, 67% prefer to process 
information more actively (2nd and 3th quadrants, Figure 9), 
and 67% also prefer to understand the concepts through 
concrete experiences (1st and 2nd quadrant, Figure 9). This 
behavior (expected in some way) is coherent to an 
engineering behavior: motivated to investigate how 
situations are processed and to put into practice ideas. This 
information is important as it suggests that the development 
efforts of these didactics kits meet engineering students’ 
learning styles. 
 
Figure 9.  Learning Styles diagram obtained: 1st quadrant – diverging 
style, 2nd quadrant – accomodating style, 3rd quadrant – covengent style, 4th 
quadrant – assimilating style. 
 
The qualitative analysis of the data helped to recognize 
the necessity of devising and implementing new learning 
strategies to fulfill students’ needs. The students replied to 
the questionnaire on a voluntary basis and according to the 
experiment conducted. A majority if not all students who 
performed the experience have accepted this challenge.  
The strategy designed V&R laboratory development is 
appropriated 
for 
the 
target 
public’s 
learning 
style 
(converging learning style) where students do the things in 
an active way and they have a more abstract perception of 
the situations.  
In general, the students’ feedback about the use of the 
kits and system in Automation and Control Engineering 
studies is very positive stating that these kits and activities 
should be used in the coming years, and being suitable for 
the Automation and Control learning process. The majority 
of students felt encouraged in using these kits and sentences 
like: “an innovative and useful tool”; “easy to understand”, 
and “rewarding experience” were found. 
The less positive issues pointed out by students were 
concerned to more technical aspects, like specific problems 
with the Internet connection, real-time monitoring of an 
experiment. For a continuous improvement, new alternatives 
are under studied to overcome the identified problems. The 
feedback from students to these real-world engineering 
problems was very positive allowing the researchers to 
continue and improve this methodology. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

IV. 
FINAL REMARKS 
This work describes the work undertaken at two Higher 
Education Institutions, from north of Portugal, on the 
development of V&R laboratories as facilitators in the 
students’ study. The students can be from different 
engineering branches, aiming towards a final objective 
of optimizing their learning about different important 
subjects that must be highlighted in the context of teaching 
of Control and Automation for different future Engineers in 
many areas, including mechanical engineering, biomedical 
engineering, and electronics engineering that will need 
Control and Automation knowledge during their professional 
life. 
Although some of the didactics kits developed and 
presented in this paper could be considered comparable to 
some described in the literature (while it has been authors’ 
choice to include as they are part of the automation and 
control laboratory described), the acquisition and treatment 
of physiological signals correspond to an innovative remote 
laboratory. So, this paper describes the development of the 
virtual and remote laboratory since its creation until today, 
highlighting the strengths of the didactics kits selected. 
A real added value of this project is the use of dedicated 
workbenches – covering, in a complementary way, the 
domains related with teaching of control and automation 
fields - for dedicated needs of real learning, as commercial 
tools available are very specific mismatching important 
concepts, together, in the Control and Automation domains. 
Based on the different views expressed by students, the 
final users of the kits and system in Automation and Control 
Engineering studies, alongside positive points, there are also 
a few negative points to be identified. The positive points 
state that these kits and activities are suitable for the 
Automation and Control learning process and should be used 
in the coming years. The less positive point identified is 
concerned to technical aspects, namely specific problems 
with the Internet connection and real-time monitoring of an 
experiment.  
Finally, it is important to highlight that strong physical 
and human resources have been optimized because students 
from both institutions can use this remote access laboratory 
and experiences have been developed taking into account 
their specific Curricular Unit’s needs.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors are grateful to the students that participated in 
this project as designers and as end users.  
This work has been supported by FCT – “Fundação para a 
Ciência e Tecnologia” in the scope of the project: PEst-
UID/CEC/00319/2013. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Gomes and S. Bogosyan, “Trends in Remote Laboratories”, IEEE 
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 56, issue 12, Dec. 2009, 
pp. 4744-4756. 
[2] P.M. Silva, P.C. Oliveira, N.C. Carvalho, C.P. Leão, and F. Soares, 
“Virtual and Remote Control: an experience by students for students”, 
International Conference on Remote Engineering and Virtual 
Instrumentation (REV07), Porto, Portugal, Jun. 2007, p.3. 
[3] S. Santos, B. Alves, and F. Soares, “Remote Laboratory for Control 
Studies – A Case-study Developed by Students for Students”, 9th 
Portuguese Conference on Automatic Control (Controlo2010), 
Coimbra, Portugal, Set. 2010. 
[4] T. Karakasidis,” Virtual and remote labs in higher education distance 
learning of physical and engineering sciences”, IEEE Global 
Engineering 
Education 
Conference 
(EDUCON2013), 
Berlin, 
Germany, March 13-15, 2013, p. 798-807. 
[5] T. Machet and D. Lowe, “Issues Integrating Remote Laboratories into 
Virtual Worlds”, 30th Australian Society for Computers in Learning 
in Tertiary Education (ASCILITE 2013), Sydney, Australia, 1-4 
December, 2013, p. 521-525. 
[6] X. Chen, G. Song, and Y. Zhang, Y., “Virtual and Remote Laboratory 
Development: A Review”, Earth and Space, 2010, pp. 3843-3852. 
[7] N. Brito et al., “A Remote System for Water Tank Level Monitoring 
and Control - a Collaborative Case-study”, 3rd IEEE International 
Conference on e-Learning in Industrial Electronics (ICELIE 2009), 
Porto, Portugal, Nov. 2009, pp. 19-23. 
[8] A. Mokhtar, G. R. Mikhail, and C. Seong-Joo, “A Survey on Remote 
Laboratories 
for 
E-learning 
and 
Remote 
Experimentation”, 
Contemporary Engineering Sciences, vol. 7, issue 29, 2014, pp. 1617-
1624.  
[9] F. Soares, C.P. Leão, V. Carvalho, R.M. Vasconcelos, and S. Costa, 
“Automation & Control Remote Laboratory: A Pedagogical Tool”, 
International Journal of Electrical Engineering Education, vol. 51 
issue 1, Jan. 2014, pp. 54-67. 
[10] K. Ogata, Modern Control Engineering, 4th ed., Prentice-Hall: New 
York, 2001. 
[11] C. Barros, C. P. Leão, F. Soares, G. Minas, and J. Machado, 
“RePhyS: A Multidisciplinary Experience in Remote Physiological 
Systems Laboratory”, International Journal of Online Engineering, 
vol. 9, no. S5, Jun. 2013, pp. 21-24. 
[12] C. Barros, C. P. Leão, F. Soares, G. Minas, and J. Machado, “Issues 
in remote laboratory developments for biomedical engineering 
education”, International Conference on Interactive Collaborative 
Learning (ICL2013), Kazan, Russia, Sep. 2013, pp. 293–298. 
[13] C. Barros et al., "Assessing Remote Physiological Signals Acquisition 
experiments", International Mechanical Engineering Congress & 
Exposition (IMECE2014), Montreal, Canada, Nov. 2014, pp. 
V005T05A049-7. 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

