Small Scale Unmanned Aircraft System and Photogrammetry Applied for 3D 
Modeling of Historical Buildings 
 
Alexandre dos Santos Boente 
Military Institute of Engineering 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
E-mail: alexandreboente@ime.eb.br 
 
Thiago Eustaquio A. de Oliveira 
Department of Computer Science 
Lakehead University 
Thunderbay, ON, Canada 
e-mail: talvesd@lakeheadu.ca 
Thiago J. M. Baldivieso 
Military Institute of Engineering 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
e-mail: thiagojmb@ime.eb.br 
 
Vinicius Prado da Fonseca 
Department of Computer Science 
Memorial University 
St. John's, Canada 
e-mail: vpradodafons@mun.ca 
Paulo F. F. Rosa 
Military Institute of Engineering 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
e-mail: rpaulo@ime.eb.br 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Heritage preservation is the active conservation of 
cultural assets, historic structures and buildings of a specific 
cultural group. This paper presents a methodology for the 3D 
reconstruction of large-scale cultural assets, such as buildings 
using photogrammetry, which is a way to get measurements 
of objects from a set of photographs. The present study uses 
images from small scale unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) for 
the 3D reconstruction of the “Palacete da Babilônia”. The 
study case presented here is a historical building from 1866, 
located in the Military School of Rio de Janeiro whose com-
plex also includes a historical museum.The experimental 
setup used three mini drones in addition to flight mission 
planning and execution application evaluation.The final re-
construction used off-the-shelf software to generate the 3D 
model reconstruction, model adjustments finishing with the 
3D printing of the model generated for the preservation of this 
historic construction. 
Keywords-Heritage Preservation; UAS; 3D Reconstruction; 
Photogrammetry. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The conservation of historical buildings is crucial for 
the cultural preservation of a community, nation or social 
group. Therefore, access to a three-dimensional description 
of such assets is valuable and possibly crucial for the pro-
cess of reconstruction and restoration. The three-dimen-
sional (3D) representation of an object of interest can be 
achieved using 3D mapping techniques with photogram-
metry [1]. In addition to the popularization of small-scale 
unmanned aircraft systems (UAS)[4], collecting and pro-
cessing information can be automated using mission plan-
ning and off-the-shelf 3D surface applications[6]. The pre-
sent paper focuses on evaluating the use of UAS for the 
large-scale model reconstruction of buildings in Rio de 
Janeiro, a 456-year-old city with hundreds of historical and 
cultural assets. Specifically, the present work focuses on 
the study case of 3D reconstruction of the “Palacete da Ba-
bilônia,” a historic building part of the Military School 
complex in Rio de Janeiro. 
Even though UASs have become popular, the present 
paper uses, and processes images generated by a UAS, 
which comprises the aircraft, control system guidance, and 
mission planning. Experiments used and compared three 
models of DJI rotary-wing drones of small size and low-
price range, which allowed the generation of 3D models of 
the target building. Commercial aircraft usually have more 
straightforward flight control, reduced size and excellent 
portability and stability. Moreover, the efficiency of take-
off and landing makes this kind of device optimized for 
solo control. The use of external applications and embed-
ded technologies, such as inertial sensors, Global Position-
ing System (GPS) and good embedded cameras, with flight 
automation ability, makes this system perfect for a small-
scale 3D reconstruction of historical buildings. 
Weather, rain and wind, short battery life, reduced 
range, and small payload limit the use of small-scale 
drones. However, selected brands have compatible auto-
mated flight planning apps that enable easier mission plan-
ning in many devices such as smartphones. Furthermore, 
the evolution of the technology embedded in small-scale 
drones, along with the wide availability of software for the 
dense cloud of points, in addition to modern tools for model 
generation and correction, makes it the perfect tool to get a 
full-scale 3D model exported in a short time interval with a 
reduced staff.  
 
 
Figure 1. “Palacete da Babilônia” Mavic Air2 aerial photo 
The application of easy-to-use, off-the-shelf compo-
nents means that the flight mission would require less staff, 
usually a single person. Training the survey personnel, they 
could later perform post-processing for generating and ad-
justing the 3D models. 
The following sections present the methodology, fol-
lowed by the materials and methods used in this work.  Sec-
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

2 
 
 
tion III presents the final model 3D printed in PLA, fol-
lowed by a discussion in section IV with Conclusions in 
section V.  
 
II. METHODOLOGY 
The present work has a general objective to present how 
photogrammetry [2] with small-scale UAS can contribute 
to the 3D reconstruction of historical buildings. In addition, 
technological tools allow cultural preservation by archiving 
3D models that could be used as a reference for future res-
torations. This section will present the methodology used 
for the study case in the 3D model reconstruction of the 
“Palacete Babilônia,” using drone photogrammetry. 
The initial evaluation of drone images used three mod-
els, with the Mavic Air 2 performing more missions. In ad-
dition, a single external collaborator operator was able to 
perform several missions. Finally, some missions used a 
Spark and the Mavic Air 2 drones. Figure 2 shows a com-
parison of the camera's sensor size. An increased sensor 
size means better quality concerning the amount of noise in 
the image.  
 
Figure 2. Sensor size comparison [7] 
A. Mission Planning and Tools 
First, the mission requires evaluation of weather condi-
tions, a limiting aspect of small-scale drone use. Figure 3 
shows a screenshot of UAVForecast.com that provides ad-
equate information for the flight. 
 
 
Figure 3.  UAVForecast.com information for the flight 
The best time for this mission is around noon when 
shadows have a minor influence on the images. A cloudy 
day may also provide favorable image conditions if good 
flight conditions are also available. However, we must con-
sider that the reduced light could affect the camera's shoot-
ing speed and image quality. It is essential to highlight that 
the choice of a micro-SD card is an essential factor. A low 
recording capacity card can interfere with the recording 
quality of the set of obtained images. Considering that the 
sequence of photos should have a good overlap, we use 
80% in the front overlay and 75% in the lateral overlay.  
Height is also a primary factor in the relationship of 
pixel size with the exact measure of the object. The number 
of pixels in a sensor is constant, and the Ground Sample 
Distance (GSD) is variable with height. The GSD is a sam-
ple of the terrain in the image. Figure 4 describes the cam-
era parameter for the drone model we used. In the present 
paper, this issue is favorable because we fly at a low height 
very close to the historical construction. 
 
 
Figure 4.  GSD Calculation Spark [8] 
Flight automation applications are essential. Therefore, 
it is crucial to investigate the drone model’s compatibility 
with the application. The present paper used three drone 
flight apps: Copterus, Litchi and Dronelink. The Mavic Pro 
drone is compatible with most off-the-shelf applications, 
such as PIX4D and Dronedeploy. The Spark drone also 
works with pix4d but has restricted automated flight 
modes, which requires manual mode flights. The Mavic Air 
2 drone works with Dronelink and Copterus, which runs on 
Apple smartphone models only. 
The missions planned for this study case used three 
main types of flights: orbiting, waypoints and grid, Figures 
5, 6 and 7 respectively. First, the operator builds the poly-
gon, line or circle centered on the construction, adjusts the 
height predicting safety, and checks with the desired GSD 
to get as much detail as possible from the construction. 
Second, there is the confirmation of mission time and 
the drone's battery time. The possibility of dividing the mis-
sion into parts was unnecessary, considering the dimen-
sions of the target construction. Consequently, one battery 
was enough for a mission. Finally, the most battery auton-
omy drone is the Mavic Air 2, closely followed by the Ma-
vic Pro. 
The Litchi app allows plane flights in orbit and follow-
ing waypoints such as shown in Figure 5. Mission planning 
works well, requiring more work for the path assembly. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

3 
 
 
Unfortunately, it did not work with Mavic Air 2, consider-
ing the flight date of the drones in this work.  The orbital 
flight requires angular velocity adjustments, radius meas-
urement, circle height and image-taking interval. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Flight in orbit mode in the Litchi app. 
Figure 5 shows the Litchi application. It is possible to 
create a point of interest (POI), referencing the gimbal to 
direct the drone's camera. Determining the height of this 
point will influence the angle of the gimbal. For example, 
Figure 5 shows the POI near the center of the rectangle with 
the building's top view, with a height of negative 6 meters. 
Figure 6 shows the waypoints mode, where it is possible to 
determine an action for each point in the chosen trajectory. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Flight planning waypoints in the Litchi app. 
 
Dronelink presented a more significant number of au-
tomated flight patterns. The operator has the possibility of 
using a computer to plan the mission. Figure 7 shows the 
grid pattern, which is one of the quite comprehensive flight 
pattern alternatives.  
 
 
Figure 7. Grid Flight Planning in the Dronelink software. 
 
The chosen application must automatically provide all 
the essential information for the model reconstruction with 
the drone's camera data. Manual flights were also required 
to circumvent another construction to the left side of the 
target building and near trees on the back and right side. 
 
Figure 8. Mission measurements in the Dronelink app. 
 
The solution used in this study case does not require 
previous camera calibration. Besides, the actual geographic 
coordinates of the terrain were support points taken from 
Google Earth images. In this way, misaligned sets of sparse 
dots could be fixed when they visibly did not align with the 
app's maps. In addition, this procedure fixed an issue while 
constructing points in the Agisoft Metashape software, al-
lowing the operator to use it to perform automatic post-cal-
ibration of the cameras of the drones used. The spatial in-
tersection was the main georeferencing used. We can align 
the position and orientation of two-by-two images, accord-
ing to the principle of stereography. Dronelink works by 
allowing us to simulate missions in advance, helping to 
evaluate various data such as flight times, map trajectories, 
speeds, heights, photo shots and more. Facilitating flight 
execution. 
Copterus was the last app tested, which works out of a 
smartphone. It also has several other similar functionalities 
to previous applications. The 4:3 photo setting was ideal 
because using 16:9, there is pixel loss, compromising im-
ages' overlay. Some Mavic Air 2's features, such as smart 
photo and the 48 Megapixel, which help reduce the noise 
of photos, are not available on the Mavic Pro drone. The 
digital negative photo (DNG) feature was also not availa-
ble. Those features are also unavailable options on the 
Spark drone. 
Briefly, the mathematics involved is in the relationship 
between drone translations and rotations on the three X, Y 
and Z axes that occur with drone movements and the fixed 
target building. The focal length, the number of camera 
sensor pixels, and the sensor dimensions are also fixed and 
associated with the fiducial system. Therefore, using the in-
formation above is possible to construct a projection of the 
camera perspective center (CP)  to the points of the actual 
object.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

4 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Drone's image shots position in relation to the object. 
 
The drones used have an essential feature of storing the 
coordinates obtained by the GPS and the height in each im-
age, facilitating the photos' alignment by the 3D recon-
struction programs. 
 
Figure 10.  Geometric relationship between photo and scene when ter-
rain is irregular [3] 
 
The similarity of triangles can calculate the relationship 
for the irregularity of the heights found in the construction. 
Figure 10 shows this approach which can be arranged in the 
following equation [3]: 
 
𝑓
𝐻 − ℎ𝐴𝐵
= 𝑎𝑏
𝐴𝐵 
 
Epipolar geometry [5] and stereo vision concepts of ste-
reo vision are used here to reconstruct a 3D model such the 
one described in Figure 11. Then, taking the homologous 
points in 2D images, it is possible to describe the 3D view 
of the object by two cameras in different locations and the 
points projected in space. 
 
 
Figure11.  Epipolar Geometry [9] 
 
With the knowledge of the dimensions of the pixels, we 
can transform this system and the fiducial equation below: 
[𝑥´
𝑦´]=[𝑆𝑥
0
0
−𝑆𝑦] ∙ [
𝑥 −
𝑊−1
2
𝑦 −
(𝐻−1)
2
] 
Where: x ́ and y ́ the coordinates of the fiducial system. 
Sx and Sy are pixel dimensions, and X and y are the coor-
dinates in the screen system as described in Figure 15. 
 
B. 3D Reconstruction Tools 
This study case used three 3D reconstruction software 
named Meshroom, Open Drone Map and Agisoft 
Metashape, with the latter presenting satisfactory results. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

5 
 
 
texture. Finally, the Metashape algorithm does a very elab-
orate job analyzing homologous points, which leads to 
good 
results.
 
Figure 12.  Mavic Pro 249 images in 16:9 format 
 
 
 
Figure 13. Mavic Air 2 697 images in 4:3 format 
 
 
 
Figure 14. Mavic Air 2 with 526 images, separated by groups of object 
faces. 
Metashape provides an easy workflow. The operator 
starts by adding the drone photos. After that, it is possible 
to use the software photo evaluation and select only images 
above 70% quality. Next, it is necessary to check the geo-
graphic coordinate system.  
The software workflows proceed with alignment, 
where the sparse cloud is generated. After that, the work-
flow includes a dense cloud of dots, mesh construction and 
Figure15. Screen Coordinate System [1] 
 
There was a problem using the images from the Spark 
drone obtained by the standard application. Even using the 
additional manual photos covering the lack of images on 
the side and background of the building, there was notice-
able truncation. Marking common points concerning geo-
graphic coordinates and height obtained in Google Earth in 
the images manually could fix this problem, generating a 
considerable increase in manual work. The Spark drone 
also has an older sensor that only has jpeg images, generat-
ing more unsatisfactory results. 
The Meshroom software presented the most automated 
operation. After adding the images, the operator follows a 
pipeline. However, this was the most time-consuming pro-
cessing, making it difficult to perform many variations in 
the tests. Moreover, the result presented was not superior 
to that of the other tools. However, it is free software that, 
together with Meshlab, provides many possibilities for gen-
erating and correcting the 3D model. It was necessary to 
correct the model delivered in Metashape, which does not 
make corrections to the delivered part. Therefore, it is an 
alternative to use Meshlab in the sequence of generating the 
model for printing. 
It is also noticeable comparing Figures 13 and 14 that 
using the 4:3 (dimension 4000 x 3000) instead of 16:9 uses 
more pixels, providing better results. Figure 15 also shows 
that tagging the images with the building faces groups out-
puts a more efficient model generation. 
The Open Drone Map (ODM) software is a free soft-
ware like Meshroom processing workflow. With few com-
mands, the algorithm starts processing and delivers the fin-
ished 3D model. ODM and Metashape provide a lot of pro-
cessing information, including detailed reports. Thus, they 
are potent tools that can be used to construct the orthophoto 
of the terrain. All programs worked in Windows with the 
main bottleneck in RAM. It takes a long time to process, 
even with a machine with 16 Gb.  
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The result of the three-dimensional models generated 
from the historic construction had to adjust their mesh to be 
printed on a 3D Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM) printer.  
Figure 16 shows the file on the Simplify 3D software 
was with the appropriate firmware settings for operation 
with the printer. Figure 17 shows the Sethi3D S3 software 
also tested for the printer model. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

6 
 
 
 
Figure 16.  3D model in Simplify 3D. 
One application that worked well in automatic mode 
and running online was Netfabb from Autodesk. Microsoft 
3D Printing works similarly but is more time-consuming 
and fails to process multiple STL file submissions. The Ul-
timaker Cura print program allows the installation of a 
Mesh Tools plugin that solves some problems of the gen-
erated part. The Slic3r program fixes some problems auto-
matically. The Meshmixer program analyzes and fixes 
some parts automatically and allows for more advanced ad-
justments. MeshLab works similarly. Blender is also a free 
tool that allows more complex adjustments to the part. 
We verified that the quality of the 3D reconstruction is 
directly proportional to the image quality. We must con-
sider the quality of the camera, quality of light available at 
the time of taking the photos. It is important to adapt the 
speed of the UAS with its speed of taking images and their 
archiving processing. 
 
 
Figure 17.  Full-scale printed model on Sethi3D S3. 
 
IV. CONCLUSION 
The study case of the 3D modelling of the "Palacete Ba-
bilônia" allowed an analysis based on the generation of 3D 
models of the historic building. The present paper pre-
sented a study on the benefits of using photogrammetry 
with small drones and the challenges encountered when 
working on the generation of the 3D model. The result in-
cludes 3D printing of the building for later preservation. In 
addition, the present work shows different applications and 
software that is constantly updated. Finally, it evaluates 
how each of them delivers the final model. The methods 
presented here make it possible to archive three-dimen-
sional models to preserve cultural heritage with a small 
budget and a reduced crew. 
 
Acknowledgement 
     This study was financed in part by the Cooerdenação 
de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior -Brasil 
(CAPES) – Finance Code 001.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J.K.Hasegawa, Photogrammetric Restitution (Analyti-
cal and Digital): Theory of Guidelines - Introduction. 2004. 25p. 
Typed. 
[2] 
E.M.Lima, T.A.M.Thomas, T.C.Severo, Digital Aerial 
Photogrammetric Mapping Using Medium Format Photographs. 
Porto Alegre, 2010. (Course Completion Work). Federal Univer-
sity of Rio Grande do Sul 
[3] 
M.L.L.Reiss, Photogrammetry I. 2009. Lesson Notes 
[4] 
E.Trucco, A.Verri, Introductory Techniques for 3-D 
Computer Vision. United Kingdom: Prentice Hall, 1998. 
[5] 
“Epipolar geometry”, 7 March 2021, at 21:46, Accessed 
on: 7 March 2021, at 21:46. [online]. Available: https://en.wik-
ipedia.org/wiki/Epipolar_geometry 
[6] 
P. J.Zarco-Tejada, , R.Diaz-Varela, V.Angileri, , P. 
Loudjani, Tree height quantification using very high resolution 
imagery acquired from an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) and 
automatic 3D photo-reconstruction methods. European Journal of 
Agronomy, v. 55, p. 89–99, 2014. 
[7] 
“Sensor size comparison”, 3 March 2021, at 21:00, Ac-
cessed 
on: 
3 
March 
2021, 
at 
21:00. 
[online]. 
https://djzphoto.com/gear 
[8] 
“Ground Sample Distance”, 3 March 2021, at 20:35, 
Accessed on: 3 March 2021, at 20:35. [online]. Available: 
https://www.propelleraero.com/gsd-calculator/ 
[9] 
“Epipolar geometry”, 7 March 2021, at 21:16, Accessed 
on: 7 March 2021, at 21:16. [online]. Available: https://www.re-
searchgate.net/figure/Epipolar-geometry-and-triangulation-
method_fig1_334066559 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

