Neural Cell Chip to Assess Toxicity Based on Spectroelectrochemical Technique 
Jeong-Woo Choi1,2* and Tae-Hyung Kim1 
1 Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering and 2Graduate School of Management of Technology, 
Sogang University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea 
E-mail: jwchoi@sogang.ac.kr, thkim0512@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—A cell chip is an useful tool for the toxicity 
assessment of various kinds of chemicals, drugs or 
nanomaterials. Nanoscale film was fabricated on a conducting 
electrode surface to establish a cell-friendly environment which 
is effective for increasing cell adhesion, spreading and 
proliferations. Biofilm was further developed to three 
dimensional peptide nanopillar arrays which were more 
efficient than two dimensional peptide film in regard to various 
kinds of cellular functions. The electrochemical signals 
obtained from cells were found to be proportional to the cell 
viability which can be used as indicator for the toxicity 
evaluation 
of 
various 
kinds 
of 
toxic 
chemicals 
and 
nanomaterials quickly and sensitively. Surface-enhanced 
Raman spectroscopy (SERS) was further developed as 
powerful supplementary tool to identify cell cycles at different 
stage, to distinguish different cell lines, to discriminate alive- or 
dead- cells and to investigate toxicity of anticancer drugs on 
target cells. The combination of electrical detection and SERS 
technique was found to be excellent to investigate the changes 
of intracellular composition of cells, as well as to study the 
internal redox properties of single neural cell. Proposed cell 
chip based on spectroelectrochemical technique that combined 
electrochemical and SERS methods can be applied as an in 
vitro analysis tool in various kinds of biotechnology fields. 
Keywords-Toxicity 
assessment; 
Spectroelectrochemical 
method; Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy; Cell chip 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In vitro techniques are efficient tools for the assessment 
of toxic effects of newly developed chemicals and 
environmental toxins on human beings, as well as for the 
cytological diagnosis which are not possible in DNA-, 
proteins- or even animal-based researches [1-2]. However, 
most of the in vitro methods utilize optical and/or biological 
tools that are laborious and hard to integrate. Moreover, 
materials containing fluorescence dyes or fluorphores itself 
used for cellular study can cause light/fluoresence 
interference and also cause the variations of optical signals 
that directly affect the determination of cell viability [3]. A 
variety of electrochemical methods have been carried out to 
detect the cell viability without utilizing optical sources, such 
as 
electrochemical 
impedance 
spectroscopy 
(EIS), 
amperometry and cyclic voltammetry (CV) [4-6]. Most of 
these techniques showed proper performance for the 
detection of cell viability; however, the sensitivity of 
electrochemical methods was found to be not enough to 
overcome the problems of conventional optical techniques.  
We have previously reported a cell-based chip composed 
of nano-scale peptide layer to attach cells directly on 
electrode surface and to enhance the sensitivity of 
electrochemical signals [7-9]. Since the intensities of redox 
signal generated or transferred from cells are the indicator of 
cell viability, establishment of cell-friendly environment on 
the artificial electrode surface using biomaterials is most 
important factor for the enhancement of sensitivity of cell 
chip. RGD-MAP-C peptide, a peptide containing arginine-
glycine-aspartic acid (RGD) and cysteine terminal, was 
proved as very effective material for enhancing cell 
proliferation and electrochemical signals of cells [10-11]. 
The RGD-MAP-C peptide modified cell chip further used as 
efficient drug screening tool that successfully monitoring the 
effects of various kinds of anticancer drugs on cancer cells 
with high sensitivity and reproducibility.  
In this paper, we report a cell chip composed RGD-
MAP-C peptide layer or nanopillar array to detect 
electrochemical characteristics of neural cells and to evaluate 
the toxicity of environmental toxins, chemicals and 
nanoparticles. 
Surface-enhanced 
Raman 
spectroscopy 
(SERS) technique was further utilized to detect intracellular 
composition of target cells, as well as to assess the toxicity of 
anticancer drugs on several cell lines. Finally, both 
electrochemical and SERS methods were combined as 
spectroelectrochemical tool to monitor the changes of cell 
viability and bio-composition of target cells simultaneously 
(Fig. 1). 
II. 
 TOXICITY ASSESSMENT BASED ON ELECTROCHEMICAL 
METHODS 
Although the exact origin of redox signals generated 
from cells were not fully discovered yet, electrochemical 
tools are still very effective label-free tool for the 
determination cell viability. The redox signals obtained 
from target cells can be translated to cell viability which are 
excellent indicator for assessing various kinds of materials 
of interest. Almost all of the materials including drugs, 
chemicals, biological materials and even nanoparticles are 
the candidates whose toxicity can be assessed by cell chip 
based on electrochemical tools. 
A. Modification of cell chip using RGD-MAP-C peptide 
Cell-friendly environment was established by using 
RGD-MAP-C synthetic peptide. Since RGD-MAP-C peptide 
contains cysteine residue at the end of its sequence, 
nanoscale RGD peptide film was fabricated by simple self-
assembly technique via strong Au-S bond. RGD peptide film 
was very effective for enhancing cell adhesion on the 
artificial electrode surface; however, peptide that physically 
absorbed on the electrode surface increased the thickness of 
biofilm and contributed to increase of the resistance between 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

cell and electrode interface which was a big barrier for 
enhancing 
the 
sensitivity 
of 
cell 
chip 
based 
on 
electrochemical methods.  
Anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) mask consist of 
homogeneous cylindrical nanopores was used to fabricate 
peptide nanopatterned array on the artificial electrode surface 
[12]. The structures of peptide could be easily controlled by 
adjusting the concentrations of RGD-MAP-C peptide that 
resulted in the different shapes of peptide structures such as 
nanodots, nanorods and nanopillars. The peptide nanopillar 
array among several RGD peptide nanopatterned array was 
found to provide the best condition for enhancing various 
kinds of cell functions including cell adhesion, spreading and 
proliferation rates. The enhanced cell functions contributed 
to the increase of sensitivity of cell chip which was 50% 
higher than RGD-MAP-C peptide monolayered surface [13]. 
B. Toxicity assessment of environmental toxins  
Cells on RGD-MAP-C functionalized surface were 
exposed to two kinds of toxic chemicals to assess its 
cytotoxicity 
on 
neural 
cells. 
2,2’,4,4’,5,5’-
Hexachlorobiphenyl (PCB) was exposed to rat neural cancer 
(PC12) cells for 24 hours and its toxicity was analyzed by 
differential 
pulse 
voltammetry. 
Current 
intensities 
representing cell viability were linearly decreased with 
increasing the concentrations of PCB from 40nM to 80nM 
[13]. In case of bisphenol A (BPA), a common plastic 
monomer widely used in the manufacture products, dual-
mode correlation was found between the concentrations of 
BPA and the current intensities from neural cells (SH-SY5Y). 
The intensities of peak current increased with the 
concentration of BPA up to 300nM and then start to decrease 
at the concentration of BPA above 300 nM due to the 
stimulation and cytotoxic effects of BPA on cancer cells, 
respectively [14].  
C. Toxicity assessment of nanoparticles 
Next, we tested potential cytotoxicity of two kinds of 
nanomaterials which have been widely applied in various 
kinds of cell-based research fields. 100nm-sized silica 
nanoparticles (SNP) with positive charge on its surface were 
added to SH-SY5Y cells on chip and its toxicity was 
evaluated by cyclic voltammetry (CV). 50 μg/ml SNP was 
found to be slightly toxic for neural cells; however, acute 
toxicity was found at 200 μg/ml SNP that decreased the 
current intensity as almost 70% versus control group [15]. 
We also evaluated the cytotoxicity of mercaptoacetic acid 
(MAA) functionalized green- and red-emitting CdSe/ZnS 
quantum dots (QDs) via CV (Fig 2a, c). Cathodic (Epc) and 
anodic potential (Epa) of neuroblastoma cells were 210mV 
and 290mV, respectively, and the Epc values were used as 
indicators for determining cell viability. As a result, red-
emitting QDs (6.3nm in diameter) were found to decrease 
cell viability slightly at 5 μg/ml while green-emitting QDs 
(2.1nm in diameter) hugely decreased cell viability at 1 
μg/ml (Fig. 2b). Huge decrease of cell viability was observed 
when cells were exposed to 30 μg/ml of red-emitting QDs, 
indicating that green-emitting QDs were more toxic for the 
human neural cells than red-emitting QDs (Fig. 2d).  
D. Toxicity assessment of graphene oxide  
Graphene, planar sheets of carbon atoms densely packed 
in a honeycomb structure, is an excellent conducting material 
with high optical transparency and rigidity. Unlike graphene, 
graphene oxide (GO) is an insulating material that contains 
many hydroxyl groups on its surface suitable for drug 
carriers and/or photothermal therapeutic agents. Hence, we 
evaluated the toxicity of GO nanopellets using neural stem 
cell chip. Unfortunately, GO itself was found to be toxic for 
human neural stem cells even at the low concentration of GO 
(25 μg/ml). Similar toxicity was found from MTT viability 
assay, indicating that GO have acute toxicity for human 
neural cells and should be functionalized with cell-friendly 
materials to reduce its toxicity.  
III. 
TOXICITY ASSESSMENT BASED ON  
SERS METHOD 
SERS phenomenon offers an exciting opportunity to 
overcome the weak intensity of normal Raman method. 
Using the SERS technique, the intensity of Raman signal can 
be increased by the structured metal surface and measured 
effectively by low laser power with short signal acquisition 
time suitable for biological applications. Although metal 
nanostructures or nanogaps are essential for the enhancement 
of Raman signals, SERS method is still powerful for 
detecting the toxicity of target materials on cells with high 
sensitivity.  
A. Fabrication of SERS-active surface 
Since the enhancement of Raman signal is generated in 
‘hot spots’ which normally exist in the gap between the 
metal nanostructures, a great deal of attention has been 
focused on synthesis of shape-controlled SERS structures 
with different morphologies. However, a fabrication of 
SERS-active surface was found to have numerous problems 
such as low signal enhancement, uniformity and further 
removal process of the template and/or byproducts. 
Therefore, an improved technique for fabrication of the 
substrate that enhance Raman signal effectively is still 
crucial for more effective enhancement of Raman signals. 
We fabricated uniformly deposited Au nanopatterned surface 
on an ITO electrode using AAO mask as a template, which 
provides low signal variances with high intensity and 
reproducibility of SERS signals [16].  
The superiority of AAO-assisted Au nanopatterned ITO 
substrate as SERS-active surface was confirmed by 
comparing the signals intensities and variations of peak 
intensities of aminothiophenol (ATP) with that from 
randomly distributed Au nanoparticle on ITO surface. The 
Raman signals of PATP/Au nanopatterned surface from nine 
different positions showed significantly enhanced signal 
intensities with very low variations. These results indicate 
that the newly fabricated SERS-active surface is proper for 
analyzing the characteristics of cells and also useful for 
assessing the toxicity of various kinds of chemicals. 
B. Characterization of target cells  
The intracellular composition of target cells was 
detectable by analyzing each peak from various kinds of cell 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

lines [17]. Based on the Raman spectra of each cell, 
identification of different cancer cell lines was also possible 
using SERS method due to the difference of intracellular 
composition of each cell. We also successfully characterized 
the difference between normal and cancer cells which was 
derived from same organ and species. From the results, we 
concluded that cancer cell might express more proteins 
containing β-pleated sheet structures than normal cell, which 
induce the mitotic activity. The discrimination of alive- or 
dead- cells were also available by comparing the Raman 
spectra obtained from each cell. 
C. Toxicity assessment of anticancer drugs 
Cells were treated with anticancer drug to confirm the 
application potentialities of cell chip based on SERS method 
as effective in vitro analysis tool. Living HepG2 cells were 
exposed to hydroxyurea (200 μM) and the Raman spectra 
from HepG2 cells was recorded 5 times in 24 hours to assess 
the time-dependent toxicity of hydroxyurea. Intensities of 
several peaks in Raman spectra were found to decrease in 
time-dependent manner, indicating that the changes of cell 
viability can be sensitively measured by SERS method [18].  
IV. 
TOXICITY ASSESSMENT BASED ON 
SPECTROELECTROCHEMICAL METHOD 
Integration of electrochemical and SERS method is not 
simple process; however, this combined technology can give 
an opportunity to investigate the biochemical changes of 
various kinds of cellular components (signaling molecules, 
DNA/RNA, proteins, enzymes, etc.) simply and sensitively. 
Hence, we combined linear sweep voltammetry and SERS as 
spectroelectrochemical tool to evaluate the toxicity of 
anticancer drug on neural cancer cells precisely. The DNA 
components in Raman spectra and the electrochemical 
responses of PC12 cells were significantly decreased when 
cells were exposed to 50 μM cisplatin for 24 hours (data not 
shown). 
Hence, 
we 
concluded 
that 
the 
proposed 
spectroelectrochemical 
tool 
provide 
many 
invaluable 
information including the damages caused by anticancer 
drugs for whole cells, single cell and even for the specific 
region in single cell, which is not possible in conventional in 
vitro tool, electrochemical and SERS method itself. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
A cell chip was fabricated to determine toxicity of 
various kinds of environmental toxins, drugs and functional 
nanoparticles based on electrochemical and/or SERS method. 
Both electrochemical and SERS method were proved as 
suitable in vitro tool for evaluating the cytotoxicity of 
materials that showed high sensitivity and reproducibility. 
Remarkably, electrochemical method was found to be more 
proper than SERS for the toxicity assessment on large 
numbers of cells, while SERS method showed superior 
characteristics to voltammetric tool for the toxicity 
evaluation of specific materials on single cell and/or the 
specific region in single cell. Hence, the proposed cell chip 
based on spectroelectrochemical technique that enables both 
electrochemical and Raman analysis is very promising for 
toxicity assessment, drug screening and diagnostics. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the National Research 
Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea 
government (MEST) (2012-0000163) and by the Nano/Bio 
Science & Technology Program (M10536090001-05N3609-
00110) of the Ministry of Education, Science and 
Technology 
(MEST), 
and 
by 
Korea 
Institute 
for 
Advancement in Technology (KIAT) through the Workforce 
Development Program in Strategic Technology. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. –H. Yea, J. Min, and J. –W. Choi, “The fabrication of cell 
chip for use as bio-sensors”, Biochip J., vol. 1, 2007,  pp. 219- 
227. 
[2] J. –H. Lee, B. –K. Oh, S. Jeong and J. –W. Choi, “Electrical 
detection-based analytic biodevice technology”, Biochip J., 
vol. 4, 2010, pp. 1-8. 
[3] T. –H. Kim, W. A. El-Said, J. –W. Choi, “Highly sensitive 
electrochemical detection of potential cytotoxicity of 
CdSe/ZnS quantum dots using neural cell chip”, Biosens. 
Bioelectron., vol. 32, 2012, pp. 266-272. 
[4] C. –Y. Lin, N. –C. Teng, S. –C. Hsieh, Y. –S. Lin, W. –J. 
Chang, S. –Y. Hsiao, H. –S. Huang and H. –M. Huang, “Real-
time detection of β1 integrin expression on MG-63 cells using 
electrochemical 
impedance 
spectroscopy”, 
Biosens. 
Bioelectron., vol. 28, 2011, pp. 221-226. 
[5] N. Borghol, L. Mora, T. Jouenne, N. Jaffézic-Renault, N. 
Sakly, A. C. Duncan, Y. Chevalier, P. Lejeune and A. 
Othmane, “Monitoring of E. coli immobilization on modified 
gold electrode: A new bacteria-based glucose sensor”, 
Biotechnol. Bioprocess Eng., vol. 15, 2010, pp. 220-228. 
[6] J. –W. Choi, R. Bhusal, T. –H. Kim, J. H. An, H. Kim, 
“Electrochemical Detection of Bisphenol A - Induced 
Neuronal Toxicity Using RGD Peptide Modified ITO 
Electrode Cell Chip”, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., vol.519, 2010, 
pp. 36-42. 
[7] W. A. El-Said, C. –H. Yea, H. Kim, B. –K. Oh, J. –W. Choi, 
“Cell-based Chip for the Detection of Anticancer Effect on 
HeLa Cells using Cyclic Voltammetry”, Biosens. Bioelectron., 
vol. 24, 2009, pp. 1259-1265. 
[8] W. A. El-Said, C. –H. Yea, I. –K. Kwon, J. –W. Choi, 
“Fabrication of Electrical Cell Chip for the Detection of 
Anticancer Drugs and Environmental Toxicants Effect”,  
Biochip J., vol. 3, 2009, pp. 105-112. 
[9] M. A. Kafi, T. –H. Kim, J. H. An, J. –W. Choi, “Fabrication 
of Cell Chip for Detection of Cell Cycle Progression Based on 
Electrochemical Method”, Anal. Chem., vol. 83, 2011, pp. 
2104-2111. 
[10] C. –H. Yea, H. Kim, J. Kim, S. –U. Kim, J. –W. Choi, 
“Fabrication of Mouse Embryonic Stem Cell Chip using Self-
assembled Layer of Cysteine-modified RGD Oligopeptide”, 
Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., vol.492, 2008, pp. 548-555. 
[11] C. –H. Yea, B. Lee, H. Kim, S. –U. Kim, W. A. El-Said, J. 
Min, B. –K. Oh, J. –W. Choi, “The Immobilization of Animal 
Cells using the Cysteine-modified RGD Oligopeptide”, 
Ultramicroscopy, vol.108, 2008, pp. 1144-1147. 
[12] M. A. Kafi, W. A. El-Said, T. –H. Kim, J. –W. Choi, “Cell 
adhesion, 
spreading, 
and 
proliferation 
on 
surface 
functionalized with RGD nanopillar arrays”, Biomaterials, vol. 
33, 2012, pp. 731-739. 
[13] M. A. Kafi, T. –H. Kim, C. –H. Yea, H. Kim, J. –W. Choi, 
“Effects 
of 
nanopatterned 
RGD 
peptide 
layer 
on 
electrochemical detection of neural cell chip”, Biosens. 
Bioelectron., vol. 26, 2010, pp. 1359-1365. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of cell chip based on spectroelectrochemical method. A Gold attached transparent ITO electrode was 
first modified with RGD-MAP-C peptide for successful cell adhesion on the artificial electrode surface. RGD-MAP-C peptide can 
be directly self-assembled on the gold surface due to the cysteine residue via Au-S bond. After the cell adhesion, both 
electrochemical and Raman spectroscopy can be applied for intensive cell analysis. 
 
 
Figure 2. Voltammetric response of SH-SY5Y cells treated with different concentrations of (a) Red-MAA QDs and (c) Green-MAA 
QDs. (b) and (d) represent the intensities of cathodic currents (Ipc) obtained from (a) and (c), respectively. Data represent mean ± SE 
of three different experiments under similar condition. Cyclic voltammetry was measured using phosphate buffered saline (10mM, 
pH 7.4) as electrolyte at a scan rate of 50mV s-1. 
[14] M. A. Kafi, T. –H. Kim, J. –H. An, J. –W. Choi, 
“Electrochemical cell-based chip for the detection of toxic 
effects of bisphenol-A on neuroblastoma cells”, Biosens. 
Bioelectron., vol. 26, 2011, pp. 3371-3375. 
[15] T. –H. Kim, S. –R. Kang, B. –K. Oh, J. –W. Choi, “Cell Chip 
for Detection of Silica Nanoparticle-induced Cytotoxicity”, 
Sens. Lett., vol. 9, 2011, pp. 861-865. 
[16] S. –M. Kang, T. –H. Kim, J. –W. Choi, “Cell chip to detect 
effects of graphene oxide nanopellet on human neural stem 
cell”, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., vol. 12, 2012, pp. 5185-5190. 
[17] W. A. El-Said, T. –H. Kim, H. Kim, J. –W. Choi, “Analysis 
of Intracellular State Based on Controlled 3D Nanostructures 
Mediated Surface enhanced Raman Scattering”, PLoS One, 
vol. 6, 2011, p. e15836. 
[18] W. A. El-Said, T. –H. Kim, H. Kim, J. –W. Choi, “Detection 
of effect of chemotherapeutic agents to cancer cells on gold 
nanoflower patterned substrate using surface enhanced raman 
scattering and cyclic voltammetry”, Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 
26, 2010, pp. 1486-1492. 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

