Early Detection of Emissions Preceding Fires from Overloaded Electric Cables: 
Approach with Thermo-Cyclically Operated MOG SensorArrays and Numerical 
Signal Analysis  
 
Rolf Seifert and Hubert B. Keller 
Institute of Applied Informatics (IAI) 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 
e-mail: rolf.seifert@kit.edu 
Navas Illyaskutty, Jens Knoblauch and Heinz Kohler  
Institute for Sensor and Information Systems (ISIS) 
Karlsruhe University of Applied Sciences 
e-mail: heinz.kohler@hs-karlsruhe.de 
 
 
Abstract—A thermodynamically operated multi metal oxide 
sensor array is introduced together with a novel signal analysis 
approach for early detecting the emissions from overheated 
isolation cable materials used in electrical cabinets. The princi-
pal sensor element is a thermo-cyclically operated four sensing 
layer array, which can yield conductance signatures appropri-
ate to specifically identify gases. The obtained conductance 
profile shapes bear good capability for detection and identifica-
tion of pyrolysis gas emissions at relatively low sample heating 
temperatures even before a color-change of the polyvinyl 
chloride (PVC)-isolation is visible. The dynamic conductance 
signals were evaluated using SimSens, a numerical analysis 
tool designed for simultaneous evaluation of conductance 
profiles. 
The 
results 
show 
promising 
pyrolysis 
gas 
identification and concentration determination capabilities in 
relation to the conductance profile shapes of model gases like 
carbon monoxide (CO) and propene.  
Keywords-metal oxide gas sensor; sensor array; early fire 
detection; pyrolysis; data analysis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In the current scenario, developing sensor systems for 
early detection of fires instigated by overloaded electrical 
circuits has gained great attention due to increased sensibility 
for security aspects. Metal oxide gas sensors (MOG) can be 
used as appropriate candidates for detection of conventional 
fires and smoke [1]. This type of gas sensor could be utilized 
for early detection of fires in electrical installations, as 
pyrolysis of cable materials leads to emission of distinct gas 
mixtures depending on insulation material composition [2]. 
Identification of those typical gas mixtures by thermo-cyclic 
operation of MOG sensor arrays and simultaneous sampling 
of conductance over time profiles (CTPs) together with 
numerical analysis of these profiles has been shown in the 
past to be an elegant and reliable method for detection of 
fires [3]-[7].  
The present study proposes a thermo-cyclically operated 
four-layer sensor array, which yields gas specific dynamic 
conductance profiles, as well as a signal analysis approach 
using SimSens [8]; both together could open new 
applications as e.g. in the field of early detection of 
overloaded cables and fire. 
In Section II, the program SimSens for simultaneous 
evaluation of sensor data is briefly introduced. Section III 
gives a survey over the experimental set up of the sensor 
system. The results of the experimental set up are discussed 
in context with the results of the numerical data analysis for 
identification of pyrolysis gases in Section IV. Section V 
involves the conclusions and gives an outlook. 
II. 
OUTLINE OF THE SIMSENS PROGRAM  
In many applications, a multitude of different gases may 
occur, which have to be identified and analyzed 
simultaneously. One application of great interest is the above 
mentioned detection of fires due to electrical overload of 
cables at early stages of development. Depending on the 
various coating materials of the cables a variety of gases or 
gas mixtures can be emitted. These gases or gas mixtures 
according to the related coating materials have to be 
simultaneously identified and analyzed for early detection of 
such developing risk. The term “simultaneously” in this 
context means that the measurements are performed with 
only one sensor system and the instantaneous analysis is 
performed with only one analysis procedure covering all the 
different gases or gas mixtures, which may occur at a certain 
time but not at once. 
The calibration and evaluation program SimSens was 
designed to meet these demands on simultaneous gas 
identification capability. SimSens is an extension of the well-
introduced program ProSens [9],[10], which was designed to 
analyze only one target gas or gas mixture under 
consideration.  
Like ProSens, SimSens consists of a calibration part and 
an evaluation part. In the calibration part SimSens provides 
the mathematical calibration models for every gas to be 
analyzed. Each calibration model consists of functions for 
determination of the component concentration und of 
functions for calculating the related so-called theoretical 
CTP for substance identification. This means the calibration 
part of SimSens provides calibration models for every gas or 
gas mixture under consideration, whereas ProSens calculates 
only one calibration model. The functions included in the 
calibration part of SimSens are parametric functions and the 
parameters are determined by multiple linear regressions of 
the CTP sample values versus concentration.  
These parameters are transferred to the evaluation part of 
SimSens for the analysis of an unknown gas sample. Based 
on these parameters and the CTP of an unknown gas sample 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

the evaluation part of SimSens calculates theoretical CTPs 
for each calibrated gas and compares these CTPs with the 
measured CTP.  
If the measured CTP and one of the theoretical CTPs are 
close together, i.e., a difference value calculated from the 
sum of quadratic differences of every sample point of the 
measured CTP and the theoretical CTP is smaller than a pre-
determined decision value, SimSens identifies the unknown 
gas sample as the related calibrated target gas.  
Otherwise SimSens recognizes that the gas sample is 
none of the calibrated target gases. In case of identification, 
SimSens calculates the concentration of the gas sample 
based on the related calibration model.  
Using these algorithms of numerical sensor signal 
analysis, SimSens has the capability to identify and analyze a 
variety of target gases or gas mixtures. This is due to the fact 
that in the calibration part of SimSens more than only one 
calibration model can be determined, namely one calibration 
model for each gas or gas mixture, which may occur in the 
considered application. Furthermore, in the evaluation part of 
SimSens, not only one gas or gas mixture can be identified, 
but all gases or gas mixtures, which are calibrated. 
 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL SET UP 
The principal sensing element used for pyrolysis gas 
identification studies is a four-fold sensor array on a 4x4 
mm2 alumina chip (Figure 1), which comprises four micro-
dispensed 
thick-film 
sensing 
layers 
of 
different 
SnO2/additive-composites [3]. In operation, the sensor-chip 
is thermally modulated by applying a steady slope heater-
voltage, which results in a periodic, nearly triangular 
temperature profile between 100 °C and 450 °C, at a cycle 
time of three minutes (Figure 2). Operating MOG sensors 
thermo-cyclically and sampling of the conductance simulta-
neously yields gas specific CTPs [3]-[6], which enable 
identification of the gas atmosphere from the characteristic 
CTP shapes. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Multi-sensor-array with four different layers dispensed on thin-
film Inter-Digital-Electrodes. The chip is mounted on TO 8 header.  
Pure 
SnO2, 
SnO2/2%ZnO-, 
SnO2/1%PtO- 
and 
SnO2/1%PdO-composites were selected systematically from 
a variety of material combinations by investigating their 
sensitivity performance. The various material combinations 
were investigated towards their specific conductance 
behavior to propene (C3H6), carbon monoxide (CO) and 
methane (CH4) at different concentrations in synthetic air 
and 37.5 % (21°C) relative humidity (r.H.) and were later 
exposed to pyrolysis gases as described in the following 
sections. These model gases were particularly selected as 
they are found to be the main components evolved during the 
pyrolysis of standard PVC-insulation cable materials. The 
selected sensing materials show optimal sensitivity, stability 
and gas identification capabilities towards model gases like 
CO and propene and to pyrolysis gases. The sensitivity to 
methane is very low and not further reported. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Triangular heater voltage profile applied to operate the sensor 
array at thermo-cyclic mode (left ordinate) and corresponding temperature  
monitored by IR camera (right ordinate).  
A detailed description of the sensor fabrication, 
experimental set up and generation of pyrolysis gases is 
depicted in refs [3], [5], [6]. Pyrolysis experiments were 
conducted with 3.5 g of PVC isolated litz copper wires (LiY 
– 0.14mm2, AWG26, 2A current rating, yellow). The 
pyrolysis gases were generated by heating the samples in a 
quartz tube reactor and the evolving gas is carried to the 
sensor by a constant synthetic air flow. After the reactor, the 
constant flow is mixed with another adjustable flow of 
synthetic air in order to get varied gas concentrations. The 
reactor temperature was increased in a stepwise fashion 
starting from room temperature up to 170 °C. This fixed 
temperature 
was 
selected 
after 
several 
systematic 
experiments conducted below and above 170 °C. Evidently, 
the wire sample showed no visible change up to temperatures 
of 150°C and even at 170°C only a slight change of the 
sample by shrinking of insulation diameter is observed. At 
200°C discoloring takes place, the sample turns brown. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Sensor Response 
An overview of the pyrolysis experiment with sensing 
pattern of a pure SnO2 layer towards pyrolysis gas at 
different concentrations is given in Figure 3. The pyrolysis 
gas was transported by a constant primary gas flow and 
diluted by a dilution flow of synthetic air. It is demonstrated 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

that at 170 °C, an almost constant emission from the polymer 
material is observed over more than five hours. The absolute 
conductance-values presented here vary greatly depending 
on experimental parameter values. Several CTPs were 
recorded at a reactor temperature of 170°C, while changing 
the dilution level to set defined relative concentrations. The 
CTPs at each concentration are highly reproducible at the 
repeated cycling by showing similar baseline and peak 
conductance values (Figure 3, inset). 
The CTPs measured by different sensitive materials to 
model gases (CO and propene) and pyrolysis gases at 
different concentrations are visualized in Figure 7 for 
comparison. In the very most cases they show very specific 
features with respect to gas identification capabilities.  
The thermo-cyclically driven array of four different gas 
sensitive SnO2/additive-composites exhibits four different 
profiles to an exposed gas, which in fact can enhance the gas 
identification capability compared to conventional mono-
sensors operated at isothermal mode. For example, in 
consideration of propene and CO response, the different 
sensing materials show completely different CTP shapes 
(Figure 7, 1st and 2nd column). In case of pyrolysis gas, 
although the profile shapes of all materials look similar with 
two distinctive conductance peaks at the temperature rising 
and dropping regions, the conductance peak positions are 
dependent on temperature. Also, by the CTP-features of each 
sensor the pyrolysis gases can be clearly distinguished from 
the model gases (Figure 7, rows).  
 
Figure 3.  Measurement sequence of a pure SnO2 layer exposed with 
pyrolysis gas of a heated PVC-coated wire with temperature profile and gas 
flows. The numbers relate the pyrolysis gas concentrations in percent.  At 
each concentration, the heater cycles 10 times. The inset and the oval in 
green show the reproducibility of the profiles with stable baseline and 
maximum conductance at repeated temperature cycles.  
B. Data Analysis 
To demonstrate the performance of the sensor system and 
the procedure SimSens, it was assumed that besides 
pyrolysis gases propene and CO as interfering atmospheres 
may occur. The goal is to distinguish between the different 
gas atmospheres, this means to recognize whether an 
unknown gas sample is one of the considered gases. In case 
of identification, additionally, the concentration of the gas 
has to be determined. The analysis model is based on the 
CTP-data of all four gas sensitive layers of the chip (Figure 
7), which are simply linked together to one “extended CTP” 
(ECTP) as visualized in Figs. 4-6.  
For the calibration model of pyrolysis gas, the CTPs of 
pyrolysis gases at 30%, 40% and 60% relative gas 
concentrations (Figures 3 and 7) were used and for the 
calibration model of propene and CO, the CTPs were taken 
at the corresponding concentrations 125ppm, 250ppm and 
500ppm.  
To test the capability for identifying, the gas 
component/mixture and to determine the associated 
concentrations, three gas samples were measured and 
evaluated by SimSens. These are pyrolysis gas at 50% 
relative concentration, propene and CO at 375ppm. 
The following figures show that the pyrolysis gas sample 
at 50% relative concentration could be clearly recognized as 
a pyrolysis gas. This is due to the fact that in Figure 4 the 
difference between measured CTP and calculated CTP on 
the basis of the pyrolysis calibration model is very small. In 
Figure 5 and in Figure 6, the differences between measured 
CTP and calculated CTP based on the calibration model of 
propene, respectively CO, are much higher. Analogous 
results were obtained when evaluating the propene sample 
and the CO sample.  
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5 x 10
-3
Pyrogas50,Pyrogas-Model
 Sample Points
 Conductance (S)
 
 
Measured CTP
Calculated CTP
 
Figure 4.  Measured ECTP of pyrolysis sample at 50% dilution and 
associated calculated ECTP based on the pyrolysis calibration model.  
 
 
 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

0
100
200
300
400
500
600
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16 x 10
-3
Pyrogas50,Propene-Model
 Sample Points
 Conductance (S)
 
 
Measured CTP
Calculated CTP
 
Figure 5.  Measured ECTP of pyrolysis sample at 50% dilution  and 
associated calculated CTP based on the propene calibration model.  
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5 x 10
-3
Pyrogas50,CO-Modell
 Sample Points
 Conductance (S)
 
 
Measured CTP
Calculated CTP
 
Figure 6.  Measured ECTP of pyrolysis sample at 50% dilution  and 
associated calculated CTP based on the CO calibration model.  
TABLE I.  
DIFFERENCE VALUES BETWEEN MEASURED CTPS AND 
THEORETICAL CTPS 
 
Pyrolysis 
Model 
Propene 
Model 
CO Model 
Pyrolysis-50% 
2.2e-03 
6.6e+02 
8.7e+06 
Propene 
375ppm 
9.9e+01 
1.3e-02 
1.5e+05 
CO 375ppm 
1.0e+00 
4.3e+02 
1.7e-01 
 
Of course, the decision of identification is not based on a 
visual impression. For substance identification, a difference 
value D is calculated as a measure of the difference between 
measured CTP and calculated CTP. D is the relative sum of 
quadratic differences of every sample point of the measured 
CTP and the theoretical CTP. If the difference value is 
smaller than a so-called decision threshold value eps, the 
sample under consideration is identified as the associated 
gas. In this investigation, the decision threshold value was 
set to eps=4.e-01.  
In Table I, only the red bold numbers are smaller than the 
decision threshold value. Therefore, the pyrolysis sample 
could be identified as a pyrolysis gas, the propene sample as 
a propene gas and the CO sample as a CO gas. 
After identifying the gas samples, SimSens calculates the 
associated gas concentrations. The evaluation results are 
given in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
COMPARISON OF DOSED AND ANALYZED 
CONCENTRATION VALUES AND RELATIVE DEVIATION. ABOUT THE 
MEANING OF CONCENTRATIONS IN % SEE FIGURE 3. 
Sample 
Dosed 
concentrations 
Calculated 
Concentrations 
Relative 
Error 
Pyrolysis 50 
50% 
47,6% 
4,7% 
Propene 
375ppm 
375ppm 
388,8ppm 
3,7% 
CO 375ppm 
375ppm 
379,6ppm 
1,2% 
 
The concentration values estimated by the calibration 
model deviate from the experimentally adjusted values by 
less than 5% in all cases.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 
The thermo-cyclic operation of a MOG array combined 
with simultaneous numerical analysis of the CTPs has been 
shown to be an elegant way for identification of gas 
mixtures. In this study, the pyrolysis gases emitted by heated 
PVC-based insulation materials are registrated by well 
reproducible CTPs, even at temperatures where no color 
change of the sample material could be observed. These 
CTPs are well distinguishable from those obtained for two 
model gases, CO and propene. The results look promising 
considering the aim of early fire detection with high 
sensitivity.  
The 
acquired 
CTPs 
were 
numerically 
analyzed 
employing the SimSens algorithm and the results showed 
very good identification capabilities and concentration 
estimation accuracy, which can lead to better incident 
identification and a very sensitive, more robust detection 
with a low false alarm rate.  
In case of field applications, gas detection experiments 
for fire or any other dangerous gases using MOG sensors 
may have to be conducted in a real environment, where 
indefinite and unspecific but typical gas mixtures are present. 
In such cases, the numerical analysis of data using SimSens 
of a thermo-cyclically operated MOG-array will be of great 
advantage because the CTPs of four sensitive layers provide 
numerous gas specific features. To enable these advanced 
field applications, a microprocessor-based sensor system has 
to be devised, featuring the necessary means. This work has 
already been started.  
 
 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank German Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) for financial 
support of this work (Project Nr. 16N12262). 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Gutmacher, C. Foelmli, W. Vollenweider, U. 
Hoefer, and J. Wöllenstein, “Comparison of gas sensor 
technologies 
for 
fire 
gas 
detection”, 
Procedia 
Engineering 25, 2011, pp. 1121–1124 
[2] G. Korotchenkov, V. Brynzari, and S. Dmitriev; SnO2 
thin film gas sensors for fire-alarm systems, Sensors 
and Actuators B 54, 1999,  pp. 191-196 
[3] N. Illyaskutty, J. Knoblauch, M. Schwotzer, and H. 
Kohler, ”Thermally modulated multi sensor arrays of 
SnO2/additive/electrode 
combinations 
for 
gas 
identification”, Sensors and Actuators B 217, 2015, pp. 
2-12.  
[4] K. Frank, V. Magapu, V. Schindler, H. Kohler, H. B. 
Keller, and R. Seifert, “Chemical analysis with tin 
oxide gas sensors: choice of additives, method of 
operation and analysis of numerical signal”, Sensor 
Letters 6, 2008, pp. 908–911 
[5] J. Knoblauch, N. Illyaskutty, and H. Kohler, ” Early 
detection of fires in electrical installations by thermally 
modulated SnO2/additive-multi sensor arrays”, Sensors 
and Actuators B 217, 2015, pp. 36-40. 
[6] J. Knoblauch et al., “Sensor system applying thermally 
modulated MOG for early detection of fires in electrical 
cabinets”, 15. Internationale Tagung über Automatische 
Brandentdeckung, 15th International Conference on 
Automatic Fire Detection, Proceedings Vol. II, pp 105-
112, 14. - 16. Oktober 2014, Duisburg 
[7] H. Kohler, R. Becker, N. Link and J. Röber;; 
“Apparatus 
and 
process 
for 
identifying 
and/or 
determining the concentration of at least one gas 
component“, EP 0 829 718 B1 (2004) 
[8] H. B. Keller, R. Seifert, and H. Kohler, “SimSens – a 
New 
Mathematical 
Procedure 
for 
Simultaneous 
Analysis of Gases with Resistive Gas Sensors”,Sensors 
& Actuators: B. Chemical (2015), DOI information: 
10.1016/j.snb.2014.10.133, pp. 203-207 
[9] R. Seifert, H. B. Keller, K. Frank, and H. Kohler, 
”ProSens - an Efficient Mathematical Procedure for 
Calibration and Evaluation of Tin Oxide Gas Sensor 
Data”, Sensor Letters 9/1, 2011, pp. 7-10 
[10] R. Seifert, H. B. Keller, “Verfahren zur Klassifikation 
und zur Bestimmung der Einzelkonzentrationen eines 
Stoffgemisches (Procedure for Classification and 
Determination of the Concentration of the Components 
of a Gas Mixture)“, Patentschrift  DE10 2004 057 350 
 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Matrix  representaion of the comprehensive sensor responses: Conductance over time profiles (CTP) of the four sensing layers (in columns) when 
exposed to various concentration of propene, CO and pyrolysis gas (in rows). The propene and CO concentrations are given in ppm and the pyro gas 
concentration is given in percentages in relation to the dilution flow used, (see caption of Figure 3 for more details). 
 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

