Group IV Photonic Slot Structures for Highly Efficient Gas Sensing in mid-IR 
  
Vittorio M. N. Passaro, Benedetto Troia 
Photonics Research Group, DEE 
Politecnico di Bari 
Via E. Orabona n. 4, 70125 Bari, Italy 
e-mail: passaro@deemail.poliba.it 
e-mail: ing.b.troja@gmail.com 
Francesco De Leonardis 
Photonics Research Group, DIASS 
Politecnico di Bari 
Viale del Turismo n. 8, 74100 Taranto, Italy 
e-mail: f.deleonardis@poliba.it 
 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, novel high-performance group IV 
photonic structures for very efficient gas sensing are presented. 
Various combinations of group IV materials and alloys based 
on silicon (Si), germanium (Ge), tin (Sn) and carbon (C), have 
been studied in CMOS-compatible technology for design of 
optical slot waveguides for homogeneous optical sensors in 
mid-IR (3.39 μm). An analysis of fabrication tolerances is 
presented and a comparison among different photonic sensing 
structures is also given. Theoretical investigation demonstrates 
very efficient optical field concentrations in the sensing area, as 
well as ultra high sensitivity of gas sensing for environmental 
applications.   
 Keywords- Silicon-on-Insulator; Photonic Sensors; Gas 
Sensing; Slot Waveguides; Group IV materials. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, increasing interest is devoted to photonic 
label-free integrated sensors and biosensors, which 
represent the state of the art in a number of application 
fields, including environmental monitoring, biomedical, 
healthcare, pharmaceuticals, homeland security, to name a 
few. Gas sensing is a crucial application field for 
environment monitoring and health. Usually, spectroscopic-
based sensing techniques are used, but with high costs. Both 
miniaturization, integration and low cost should be possible 
by photonic structures. However, the integration of  
photonic devices for gas sensing in sophisticated 
architectures like Mach-Zehnder interferometers, photonic 
crystals [1] and ring resonators [2] is not yet developed as 
for chemical and biochemical sensors [3] [4].  
Slot waveguides implemented in Si/SiO2 material system 
(Silicon-on-Insulator, SOI) constitute an intriguing photonic 
sensing approach, which potentially enables high sensitivity 
(S) and ultra-low limit of detection (LOD) [5]. Optimized 
SOI slot waveguides designed at λ = 1.55 μm, have been 
presented in literature [6], demonstrating a homogeneous 
sensitivity Sh > 1. In order to detect the exact gas 
concentration, different research groups have proposed 
some test methods, including spectroscopic absorption, 
photo-acoustics and electrochemistry. Despite this potential, 
early mid-IR sensing applications were limited to specific 
applications due to the involved instrumentation sizes and 
limited availability of appropriately compact mid-IR optical 
components, such as light sources, detectors, waveguides 
and spectrometers. On the other hand, reasons that 
encourage research efforts in mid-IR gas sensing are mainly 
related to increasing attention to harmful gases like carbon 
dioxide (CO2), carbon monoxide (CO), methane (CH4) and 
sulfure dioxide (SO2), to name a few, all having refractive 
indices around 1. Moreover, these gases are characterized 
by absorption spectra in mid-IR, specifically in the range 2-
8 μm. Thus, ingenious design techniques are needed to 
extend group IV photonics from near-IR to mid-IR 
wavelength range, exploiting the advantages of photonic 
architectures in terms of high compactness, high sensitivity 
and low LOD. In this context, this paper presents some 
significant results for design of efficient group IV photonic 
sensors working in mid-IR. In particular, several alloys 
characterized by precise compositional space configurations 
have been considered in order to ensure optical transparency 
and prevent photon absorption at λ = 3.39 μm. In addition, 
optical properties of alloys as SiGeSn, SiGe, SiGeC, GeC 
and GeSn, have been evaluated by using Sellmeier 
dispersion equations, in order to predict their refractive 
indices (RIs) as a function of optical wavelength. In this 
paper, novel vertical slot waveguides are investigated at 
3.39 µm, by using full-vectorial 2D Finite Element Method 
(FEM) approach [7]. In FEM mesh generation for effective 
index and modal profile calculation, triangular vector-
elements have been adopted with about 35,000 elements and 
a domain region area of 9 µm2, using Dirichlet boundary 
condition. Changing from a perfect electric to a perfect 
magnetic conductor, influence on simulation results appears 
to be negligible. In all simulations, the buried oxide layer is 
assumed 1 µm thick. The influence of slot waveguide 
geometrical parameters (gap region g, slot height and width 
of lateral wires w) is analyzed in order to optimize both field 
confinement in the slot region and homogeneous sensitivity. 
A detailed optimization to achieve the best alloys of group 
IV materials enabling ultra-high gas sensing is given. 
Finally, an analysis of fabrication tolerances is presented.  
II. 
HOMOGENEOUS AND SURFACE SENSING IN OPTICAL 
SLOT WAVEGUIDES 
Slot waveguides represent a very interesting and 
promising architecture for photonic sensing. In fact, using 
103
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

such structures it is possible to confine an extremely high 
optical field in a low RI region called “slot region”. In 
Figure 1, schematic cross-sectional view of a typical slot 
waveguide is shown. The structure consists of a thin low-
index (nL) slot embedded between two high-index (nH) 
regions (Si-wires), separated to each other by a slot region 
gap g. Due to the large index contrast at the interfaces, the 
normal electric field undergoes a large discontinuity, which 
results in a field enhancement in the low-index region [8]: 
H
2
L
H
L
E
n
n
E
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
= ⎛
 
 
(1) 
In Eq. (1) EL is the E-field in the slot region, while EH is 
the E-field in high index regions (Si-wires). Thus, the larger 
the refractive index contrast (Δn = nH - nL) between slot 
region and Si-wires, the higher the field confinement in slot 
region. For instance, an optimized SOI waveguide has been 
designed at 1.55 μm with nSi = 3.45, nSiO2 = 1.45, and Δn = 2 
[4]. 
Figure 1. Cross-section of a typical SOI single-slot waveguide.  
 
In vertical slot waveguides, the main E-Field component 
undergoing discontinuities is that along x-direction, the only 
one subjected to a refractive index change in the slot region. 
For this reason, the only fundamental eigenmode considered 
in this paper is quasi-TE, as shown in Figure 2 for air cover. 
 
 
Figure  2. Ex-Field intensity of quasi-TE mode distribution (w = 180 nm, h 
= 324 nm, g = 70 nm, λ = 1.55 μm, air cover). 
 
Thus, in the design of novel photonic slot waveguides 
working in mid-IR, high index contrast is needed in order to 
ensure high Ex-Field confinement. This constitutes a 
fundamental requirement for both homogeneous and surface 
sensing. In fact, in both approaches the concentration 
change of an analyte (gas) to be sensed affects the 
propagating mode effective index to be monitored in 
different ways, i.e., reflection, transmission, absorption and 
so on, according with sensor architecture. In general, this 
effective index change can be produced either by a change 
of cover medium refractive index (homogeneous sensing) or 
by a change of thickness of an ultra-thin layer of receptor 
molecules, immobilized on the waveguide surface (surface 
sensing), as sketched in Figure 3. The ultra-thin adlayer 
directly influences the mode effective index. As a 
consequence, it is possible to define two different 
waveguide sensitivities, one for homogeneous sensing (Sh) 
and the other for surface sensing (Ss), as follows: 
eff
h
c
n
S
n
∂
= ∂
  
eff
s
n
S
ρ
∂
= ∂
 
 
(2) 
where neff  is the propagating mode effective index, nc  is the 
cover medium RI, and ρ is the molecular adlayer thickness. 
 
 
Figure 3. Selective surface sensing of two different types of molecules. 
 
Now, our approach to photonic gas sensing can be 
classified as homogeneous sensing. In fact, when a 
particular gas (e.g., CO2, CO, CO4, SO2) covers the device, 
the cover medium RI will change with respect to air RI as 
evaluated at the same wavelength. By this way, the index 
contrast ∆n = nH - nL at the interface between wires and 
cover medium (gas) will change and, consequently, the 
optical field distribution in the slot region will be modified 
according to Eq. 1. Then, its sensitivity Sh can be evaluated 
as follows [6]: 
 
0
0
0
2
2
0
0
2
2
( , )
( , )
C
C
eff
c
c
c
h
C
c
n
n
n
n
n
S
E x y
dxdy
E x y
dxdy
n
P
P
η
η
∞
=
∂
⋅
⋅
⋅Γ
=
=
=
∂
⋅
⋅
∫∫
∫∫
K
K
 (3) 
(
)
*
*
P
E
H
E
H
z dxdy
∧
∞
⎡
⎤
=
×
+
×
⋅
⎢
⎥
⎣
⎦
∫∫
K
K
K
K
 
where nc
0 is the unperturbed value of nc, η0 is the free space 
impedance (377 Ω), z the unit vector of the propagation 
direction, and 
,
E H
G G
 the electric and magnetic field vectors, 
respectively. Moreover, optical power confinement factors 
are defined as the fractions of power confined and guided in 
the regions of interest, i.e., cover medium including slot (ГC) 
or only slot region (ГS), as follows: 
104
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

              
2
2
( , )
( , )
C
C
E x y
dxdy
E x y
dxdy
∞
Γ
=
∫∫
∫∫
  
 
(4) 
                    
2
2
( , )
( , )
S
S
E x y
dxdy
E x y
dxdy
∞
Γ =
∫∫
∫∫
  
 
(5) 
where the integrals are calculated in the regions of interest, 
cover C and slot S, respectively.  
Slot wires are characterized by different combinations of 
group IV material systems, which have been chosen on the 
basis of their electronic and optical properties, as well as 
their technological compatibility. 
III. 
OPTIMIZED GROUP IV OPTICAL SLOT WAVEGUIDES 
The first step needed for optimization of these novel 
group IV photonic sensors is the definition of their alloys 
and material systems for slot wires. In Table I all group IV 
materials and alloys employed in this paper are summarized 
with their refractive indices calculated at 3.39 μm. 
TABLE I.  
GROUP IV ALLOYS AND MATERIALS AND RELEVANT RI 
 Group IV materials and alloys 
RI @ 3.39 μm 
Si 
3.429 
Ge 
4.035 
SiO2 
1.488 
Si0.15Ge0.85 
3.9441 
Si0.08Ge0.91C0.01 
3.97 
Ge0.97C0.03 
3.9854 
Ge0.91Sn0.09 
4.2340 
Ge0.78Si0.08Sn0.14 
4.2960 
  
At mid-IR wavelengths, it is very important to analyze 
and ensure very low propagation losses. In fact, the longer 
the wavelength, the greater the spatial distribution of the E-
Field in the guided region and, possibly, the relevant losses. 
However, it is clear that a percentage of the total confined 
optical field will interact and be distributed into the buried 
oxide layer. A lot of investigations have been carried out in 
order to predict propagation losses of different well known 
technologies, e.g., SOI, silicon-on-sapphire (SOS) [9]. In 
particular, using linear interpolation and assuming that a 
significant fraction (30%) of the guided-mode power is 
found in the buried insulator layer, the estimated 
wavelength region with propagation losses less than 2 
dB/cm ranges from 1.2 µm to 3.6 µm for SOI (apart from a 
2.6÷2.8 µm spike), and from 1.2 µm to 4.3 µm for SOS. 
Obviously, in order to prevent high propagation losses, it is 
needed to confine a high percentage of Ex-Field in the slot 
region instead of dispersing it in the buried oxide. 
Additional criteria have been followed for choice of 
material systems used in this work. In fact, Ge-on-Si 
exhibits infrared wavelength ranges of operation (1.9 ÷ 16.8 
µm and 140 ÷ 200 µm) at 300 K, where the fundamental 
mode propagation loss is less than 2 dB/cm. The other 
material system SiGe-on-Si exhibits operative wavelength 
ranges 1.6 ÷ 12 µm and 100 ÷ 200 µm. Finally, the material 
system GeSn-on-Si has propagation losses lower than 2 
dB/cm in the range 2.2 ÷ 19 μm. Therefore, the principal 
operative limitation is represented by SiO2 buried cladding 
layer, since this layer presents significant propagation losses 
in a shorter wavelength range. 
The optimization procedure proposed in this paper 
consists in a numerical iterative method allowing to achieve 
the optimal geometrical configuration giving maximum 
sensitivity and low losses. This procedure has been applied 
to each proposed photonic structure, characterized by a 
different group IV material combination. In Figure 4 cross 
sectional views of all investigated photonic slot waveguides 
are sketched. The photonic structures proposed in this paper 
include Ge-on-Si material system (Figure 4a), SiGe alloy 
directly grown on SiO2 (Figure 4b), binary alloy SiGe 
grown on Si (Figure 4c), SiGeC ternary alloy directly grown 
on SiO2 (Figure 4d) and SiGeC-on-Si material system 
(Figure 4e). Moreover, the last two structures are 
characterized by slot wires with three different layers, based 
on SiGeSn-on-GeSn-on-Si (Figure 4f) and SiGeSn-on-GeC-
on-Si material system (Figure 4g), respectively. 
In Table II all waveguide configurations are named with 
a letter from (a) to (g) as in Figure 4, in order to simplify the 
notation. In particular, all alloys and material systems in 
Figure 4 and Table II are characterized by different 
percentages of single group IV materials, according with 
data in Table I. Moreover, optimized parameters are given 
in Table II, with the only exception of the slot region width 
g, which is considered as a variable for parametric sweep 
analysis, since it critically influences sensing performance 
such as sensitivity and confinement factors. 
TABLE II.  
OPTIMIZED GEOMETRICAL STRUCTURES AT λ = 3.39 μm. 
Geometrical parameters [nm] 
 
Structure 
w 
h 
t 
s 
Type (a) 
410 
660 
40 
0 
Type (b) 
400 
690 
0 
0 
Type (c) 
400 
680 
50 
0 
Type (d) 
400 
710 
0 
0 
Type (e) 
400 
690 
30 
0 
Type (f) 
380 
520 
20 
50 
Type (g) 
390 
560 
20 
50 
 
IV. 
SENSING PERFORMANCE 
As stated before, performance parameters, in particular 
sensitivity Sh and confinement factors ΓC and ΓS, have been 
investigated as a function of the slot region width g in each 
optimized slot waveguide reported in Table II. 
In Figure 5 it is possible to note the high value of 
sensitivity evaluated, being Sh > 1 in every structure with g 
< 110 nm. A value Sh > 1 clearly implies that an effective 
index change Δneff > ΔnC is induced by a cover index shift 
ΔnC. The waveguides previously indicated with letters (f) 
and (b) are the best suitable, because their sensitivities are 
very high still remain stable over a large range, g < 140 nm. 
105
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Novel slot optical waveguides based on group IV alloys and material systems, designed at λ = 3.39 μm. 
 
 
Figure 5. Sensitivity of optimized waveguides designed at 3.39 μm  
(quasi-TE slot mode).  
 
This means to have more relaxed sizes, without any critical 
technological limitation as lithographic resolution. The 
parametric analysis has allowed the waveguide geometrical 
sizes to be optimized by setting a precise value of g, 
simultaneously achieving very high sensitivity, large 
confinement factors as well as low losses. Generally, the 
trend of the sensitivity function can be well supported by the 
analysis of relevant confinement factors, as shown in 
Figures 6 and 7.  
 
Figure 6. Confinement factor in the cover medium of optimized slot 
waveguides. 
 
In fact, the waveguides exhibiting the highest ΓC and ΓS  are 
still those previously indicated as (f) and (b). In both 
photonic devices, the percentage of the optical field in the 
slot region is higher than 60% for g < 140 nm. All other 
optimized photonic devices are characterized by a strong 
dependence on the slot region width. In fact for g > 140 nm, 
all sensitivities rapidly drop to 0.5 and 0.4. Analogous 
considerations can be derived for confinement factors. 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e)
(f) 
(g) 
106
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
Figure 7. Confinement factor in the slot region of optimized waveguides. 
 
V. 
FABRICATION TOLERANCES 
All above investigated photonic structures represent an 
ideal case of realistic optical slot devices. In fact, vertical 
sidewalls characterizing slot waveguide wires are very 
difficult to be obtained by state of the art etching processes, 
for example inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching. 
Thus, deviations from ideal case have to be considered and 
the most important parameter quantifying this effect is the 
tilting angle θ, as sketched in Figure 8. Thus, it is possible 
to distinguish between ideal and real structures, having 
vertical (θ = 0°) or non vertical sidewalls (θ ≠ 0°), 
respectively. 
Figure 8. Schematic view of real slot waveguide.  
 
Therefore, an analysis of real photonic structures, 
corrupted by fabrication characteristics, has been carried 
out, again in terms of homogeneous sensitivity, by choosing 
a specific value for the slot region width, g = 100 nm. 
Figure 9 shows the influence of etching tilting angle on 
sensitivity. All values at θ = 0° are referred to optimized 
ideal waveguides, whose geometrical parameters are 
summarized in Table II, and are also shown in Figure 5 for 
g = 100 nm.  
Therefore, it is possible to define a critical range for the 
tilting angle θ, extended from 4° to 6°. In particular, a large 
negative slope of all sensitivity functions can be recognized 
in Figure 9 for these values. 
 
Figure 9. Sensitivity of optimized slot waveguides as a function of the 
tilting angle for g = 100 nm (λ = 3.39 μm). 
 
In fact, sensitivities rapidly drop to very low values, e.g., 
Sh = 0.2. It is clear how this performance cannot be suitable 
for gas sensing because only 20 % of cover refractive index 
change should be detected in this case. Obviously, the 
smaller the parameter g, the poorer the fabrication 
tolerances. In addition, the thicker the slot wires, the 
stronger the effect of the sidewalls inclination. 
The theoretical investigation on fabrication tolerances 
has been also carried out for calculation of confinement 
factors in the same way, where ΓC and ΓS  are characterized 
by similar trends as a function of tilting angle θ. In 
conclusion, it is not possible to fabricate real photonic 
sensors with g = 50 nm, i.e., the lowest slot gap width 
allowing highest sensitivity (see Figure 5), while etching 
tilting angle must be limited within 4° or 5°, to avoid any 
corruption of sensor performance. Thus, the solution to this 
technological problem is strictly related with optimization 
of etching process for a given combination of material 
systems. However, standard etching processes can assure 
tilting angles within 1°-2°, not critical for our structures.  
Moreover, these novel photonic structures are also 
characterized by another very important feature, i.e., the 
presence of a second order quasi-TE slot mode. In Figure 10 
the sensitivity evaluated for the second order slot mode in 
all optimized structures presented in Table II, is shown as a 
function of g. All curves, obtained by FEM, exhibit a peak 
value (around 1) of sensitivity, commonly placed at g = 160 
nm. For g > 160 nm, all sensitivities drop to 0.6. For values 
of g < 160 nm, a steep negative peak characterizes all 
trends, Sh quickly dropping to about 0.55. In conclusion, the 
presence of the second order slot-mode in optimized 
waveguides represents an additional technological degree of 
freedom in the design of these novel photonic sensors 
working in mid-IR. Thus, the solution to fabrication 
tolerance problems can be found by selecting the parameter 
g greater than the optimal one, in order to prevent a 
reduction of the slot region width due to non vertical 
sidewalls generated by etching process. 
θ 
107
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
Figure 10. Sensitivity of optimized SOI slot waveguides as a function 
of g (second order slot-mode, λ = 3.39 µm). 
 
In addition, confinement factors are both characterized by 
analytical trends similar to those of sensitivity functions. In 
conclusion, the choice of g = 100 nm appears to be the best 
suitable for both first order and second order slot-mode, 
simultaneously improving the fabrication tolerances. Then, 
relaxed dimensions of optimized waveguides will allow the 
fabrication of high performance multi-mode photonic 
devices for gas sensing applications. 
In summary, novel photonic sensors proposed in this 
paper exhibit intriguing performances (Sh > 1). In particular, 
their integration in sophisticated photonic architectures, 
such as ring resonators, is expected to show very interesting 
performance in terms of wavelength shift per refractive 
index unit (RIU). This possibility has been also simulated 
and some values of wavelength sensitivity (WS) Δλ/nc are 
summarized in Table III for optimized structures with g = 
100 nm.  
TABLE III.  
OPTIMAL STRUCTURE WAVELENGTH SENSITIVITY IN RING 
RESONATOR ARCHITECTURES (g = 100 nm). 
Optimal structures 
WS [nm/RIU] 
LOD [RIU] 
Photonic crystal [1] 
80 
1×10-4 
Ring resonator [2] 
140 
8×10-5 
SOI at 1.55 µm [6] 
~ 1000 
8×10-5 
Type (a) 
2050 
3.90×10-5 
Type (b) 
2126 
3.76×10-5 
Type (c) 
2126 
3.76×10-5 
Type (d) 
2111 
3.79×10-5 
Type (e) 
2115 
3.78×10-5 
Type (f) 
2194 
3.64×10-5 
Type (g) 
2128 
3.76×10-5 
 
A comparison with some results in literature, both 
experimental and theoretical, can be observed. Thus, huge 
wavelength shifts as large as 2200 nm/RIU, which cannot be 
achieved by other photonic architectures, could be exploited 
in ring resonators based on these optimized photonic slot 
structures, realized with an appropriate combination of 
group IV materials and alloys. Since a wavelength 
resolution as low as 80 pm is practical in ordinary optical 
spectrum analyzers, a limit of detection as low as 3.6×10-5 
RIU could be obtained in these powerful photonic 
structures, able to detect very small volumes of gas traces in 
mid-IR, of the order of 1 μm3. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, intriguing novel photonic sensors have been 
investigated in detail by a FEM approach. In particular, 
unconventional group IV alloys and material systems have 
been adopted for design of ultra-high performance photonic 
gas sensors working in mid-IR. Appropriate combinations 
of group IV compounds have been chosen on the basis of 
their technological compatibility and low losses in mid-IR 
wavelength range. Optimized photonic slot structures are 
characterized by relaxed dimensions allowing large margins 
of fabrication tolerances. In addition, the presence of a 
second order slot-mode has been also demonstrated, giving 
further flexibility in design. In conclusion, optimized slot 
waveguides for efficient sensing in mid-IR exhibit much 
higher performance with respect to SOI slot devices 
designed at near-IR (1.55 μm), with an improvement of 
more than 110%. Further work on this topic will be devoted 
to detailed model and design of slot-based ring resonators 
constituted by several combinations of group IV materials 
and alloys, with the aim to further improve the performance 
of photonic sensors in mid-IR and their use in several 
application fields. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Sunner, T. Stichel S.-H. Kwon, T. W. Schlereth, S. 
Holfing, M. Kamp, A. Forchel “Photonic crystal cavity based 
gas sensor,” Appl. Phys. Lett., Vol. 92, n. 26, 2008, art. 
261112. 
[2] V. M. N. Passaro, F. Dell’Olio, and F. De Leonardis, 
“Ammonia Optical Sensing by Microring Resonators,” 
Sensors, Vol. 7, n. 11, 2007, pp. 2741-2749. 
[3] X. Fan, I. M. White, S. I. Shopova, H. Zhu, J. D. Suter, Y. 
Sun, “Sensitive optical biosensors for unlabeled targets: A 
review,” Analytica Chimica Acta, Vol. 620, 2008, pp. 8-26. 
[4] V. M. N. Passaro, F. Dell’Olio, C. Ciminelli, and M. N. 
Armenise, “Efficient Chemical Sensing by Coupled Slot SOI 
Waveguides,” Sensors, Vol. 9, n. 2, 2009, pp. 1012-1032. 
[5] P. Bienstman, K. De Vos, T. Claes, P. Debackere, R. Baets, J. 
Girones, E. Schacht, “Biosensors in Silicon on Insulator,” 
Proc. SPIE on Silicon Photonics IV, Vol. 7220, 2009, art. 
72200N. 
[6] F. Dell’Olio, and V. M. N. Passaro, “Optical sensing by 
optimized silicon slot waveguides,” Opt. Express, Vol. 15, n. 
8, 2007, pp. 4977-4993. 
[7] Comsol Multiphysics by COMSOL, Stockholm, ver. 3.2, 
single license, 2005. 
[8] M. Iqbal, Z. Zheng, and J. S. Liu, “Light confinement in 
multiple slot structures investigated,” Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. 
on Microwave and Millimiter Wave Technol. (ICMMT), 
2008, pp. 878-891. 
[9] R. Soref, S. J Emelett, and W. R Buchwald, “Silicon 
waveguided components for the long-wave infrared region,” 
J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt., Vol. 8, 2006, pp. 840-848. 
108
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

