An Intelligent and Customized Electrical Conductivity Sensor to Evaluate the Response
Time of a Direct Injection System
Heitor V. Mercaldi∗§, Caio H. Fujiwara∗§, Elmer A. G. Pe˜naloza∗§, Vilma A. Oliveira§ and Paulo E. Cruvinel∗
∗Embrapa Instrumentac¸˜ao
Rua XV de Novembro 1452, S˜ao Carlos, SP, Brazil
§ Universidade de S˜ao Paulo
Av. Trabalhador S˜aocarlense 400, S˜ao Carlos, SP, Brazil
Email: heitor@usp.br, caio.fujiwara@usp.br, egamboa@usp.br, vilma@sc.usp.br, paulo.cruvinel@embrapa.br
Abstract—In pesticide application based on direct injection sys-
tems, the sprayer response time plays an important role for
the spraying quality, mainly when operating in real time. The
response time is deﬁned as the time elapsed from the time of
injection until the concentration of the mixture (water mixed
with herbicide) reaches 95% of its regime value in the spray
nozzles. Therefore, in the response time the transport delay
and the rise time for achieving the desired concentration are
considered. This paper describes an intelligent sensor mounted
near the spray nozzles to measure the concentration response
time in a herbicide direct injection system, which uses a highly
stable sinusoidal excitation signal. The sensor calibration was
performed with NaCl solutions at concentrations similar to those
found in actual application conditions. Using an integrated system
based on the Arduino platform, an algorithm was developed to
relate the measurements to the response time. The integrated
system comprises the sensor with its own sensing hardware, A/D
converter, processing and storage capabilities, software drivers,
self-assessment algorithms and communication protocols. The im-
mediate application of the integrated system is in the monitoring
of the response time of a precision pesticide application. The
results point to the next generation of smart devices that have
embedded intelligence to support decision making in precision
agriculture.
Keywords–direct injection; response time; electrical conductiv-
ity; intelligent sensors
I.
INTRODUCTION
Brazil has experienced in the last two decades a signiﬁcant
increase in the use of pesticides for agricultural production.
Despite the signiﬁcant growth of the area cultivated with trans-
genic seeds, a technology that promises to reduce chemical use
in agricultural production, sales of these products increased
by over 72% between 2006 and 2012 and is still rising up
according to data from the Brazilian National Union of the
Industry of Agricultural Defense Products [1], association
which represents the pesticide manufacturers in the country.
In the same period, the area planted with grains, ﬁber,
coffee and sugar cane grew by less than 19%, from 68.8
million to 81.7 million hectares, according to the Brazilian
National Company for Supply [2]. This means that the average
consumption of pesticides, which was just over 7 kilograms per
hectare in 2005, rose to 10.1 kilograms in 2011, an increase
of 43.2%. Although this amount indicates more protection for
products and higher incomes, the uniform rate of application
leads to soil and water contamination. A key approach to
reduce environmental pollution is to use variable-rate appli-
cation.
An approach to develop variable-rate sprayer technologies
is to install automation and control procedures on conventional
sprayers. In this direction the direct injection type of sprayer
systems have been used along with electronic controllers. In
order to adjust the sprayer operation, reference for variables
such as working pressures, traveling speeds, and spraying
concentration change rates can be selected to achieve the
quality for spraying drop distribution.
The agricultural machinery and technologies available to-
day enable variable-rate chemical application based on pre-
scription maps or sensors [3]. Variable-rate application can be
performed by varying the concentration of the chemical on-
the-go using a direct injection system [4]. The direct injection
system is an electronically controlled system in which the
chemical is injected into the carrier stream. The direct injection
system has separated chemical and carrier reservoirs and the
chemical can be injected into the carrier stream in different
positions.
In the literature, reports of systems to inject concentrated
pesticides into diluent stream began to appear in the 70th
decade [5]. In [6], Vidrine and collaborators tested the fea-
sibility of injecting concentrated pesticides. In [7], Reichard
and Ladd developed a ﬁeld sprayer which included injection
of pesticides at speciﬁc rates accounting for variations in travel
speed. In [8], Chi and collaborators developed a ﬂow rate
control system which allowed the measurements of concen-
trated pesticides. In [9], Ghate and Perry developed a ﬁeld
sprayer based on the use of a compressed air to inject chemical
into the carrier stream. In [10], Miller and Smith reported on
development of a direct nozzle injection system. In general,
during the spraying process errors can be observed. Research
works on the evaluation of the application rate errors has been
shown that errors are not only due to the deviations from
the target ﬂow rates but also due to interaction between the
dynamics of the systems and sprayer response time. By now,
is quite well known that the direct injection system sprayer
response time depends on the sprayer dynamics and on the
transport delay [11].
The transport delay is due to the ﬂow rate and distance of
the nozzle from the injection point. The farther the nozzle
is from the injection point larger the mix uniformity and
lower the cost but higher the transport delay of the sprayer.
Several studies have appeared regarding to the performance
of the direct injection sprayers and reducing their response
time [12]–[20]. Therefore, the conventional implements can
be reorganized to operate into variable-rate ones using control
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

systems [21].
An advantage of the injection type variable rate application
over pressure-based variable rate application is the ability to
perform instantaneous changes in the concentration, as well as
the herbicide type [22]. One of the most important injection-
type systems is the direct injection, in which ingredients are
pumped into a carrier ﬂuid carrying them to the boom. The
direct injection system advantage is in mixing the required
amount of chemicals with water, saving the excess amount for
later use [23]. A key indicator to determine the precision of
a direct injection sprayer is the control system response time.
The shorter its response time, the higher its ﬁeld precision.
This paper presents an intelligent and customized electrical
conductivity sensor (ICCS) for evaluation of the response
time of direct injection sprayers. With the response time
measurements in variable rate sprayers, a looking-ahead ap-
proach, which is useful to increase competitiveness and support
sustainability in agriculture, can be performed.
After this introduction, this paper is organized as follows.
Section II presents the theoretical background on the mea-
surements of electrical conductivity, Section III presents the
used materials and the methods for the development of the
ICCS and the procedures for its validation. Finally, the results
and discussions are presented in Section IV, followed by the
conclusion in Section V.
II.
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
The electrical conductivity, also called speciﬁc conduc-
tance, is the ability of a solution to conduct an electric
current. The mechanism for the electrical current conduction
in electrolyte solutions is not the same as for metals. In
liquids, this process is performed based on the movement
of solvated ions, which are attracted by an electrical ﬁeld.
Therefore, the physical-chemical process is related to the
occurrence of combination between the molecules of a solvent
with molecules or ions of the dissolved substance. However,
electrolyte solutions obey Ohm’s law in the same way as the
metallic conductors. When powered by direct current passing
through the body of the solution, the conductance denoted G
is deﬁned as the inverse of the resistance expressed in Ω−1 or
Siemens (S). However, the conductance G of a homogeneous
body having uniform section is proportional to the sectional
area A and inversely proportional to the length ℓ, then:
G = σA
ℓ
(1)
where the proportionality constant σ is the conductivity and
given in S/m. The ratio ℓ/A is called the conductivity cell
constant and depends on the instrumentation used. The con-
ductivity increases with increasing temperature. Furthermore,
the conductivity of a solution depends on the number of ions
present and for this reason the most common is the use of the
molar conductivity deﬁned as:
Λm = σ
M
(2)
where Λm is the equivalent conductivity or the molar conduc-
tivity in Sm2/mol and M is the molarity or molar concentration
in mol/L. The molar conductivity varies with the concentration
of the electrolytes. A major reason for this effect is the change
in the number or mobility of the ions present. The ﬁrst case
occurs in weak electrolytes, where the dissociation of ions
in a solution is not complete. The second case occurs on
strong electrolytes, where in the solution the dissociation of the
molecule into ions is total, resulting in a very strong interaction
between the oppositely charged ions, and can reduce your
mobility.
The study of electrical conduction in ionic solutions would
be useful for a quick and routine analysis of solutions, since
it is a simple measure related to the properties of the solution.
In this context, the conductivity of a solution in a cell having
an arbitrary dimension can be obtained by determining the
cell constant by measuring the resistance of a solution of
known concentration. After the cell constant is determined, the
values of conductivities of different solutions can be obtained
from experimental measurements data. For devices that do
not have the automatic temperature compensation system,
the conductivity must be determined at 25◦C which is the
reference temperature.
In solutions, yet it is necessary to correct the conductivity
observed by subtracting the conductivity of the solvent, i.e., to
get the value of σcorrected. Therefore, the molar conductivity
Λm shall be written as:
Λm = σcorrected
M
.
(3)
Thus, turning the unit concentration
mol/L to
mol/cm3, the
equivalent conductivity Λm between two electrodes spaced
1 cm away due to 1 mol of substance may be given as:
Λm = 1000σcorrected
M
.
(4)
Then, for a parallel plate sensor, the conductance G can be
determined based on the molar conductivity Λm, the corrected
speciﬁc conductivity of the electrolyte σcorrected, the total
ionic concentration M (mol/cm3) of the substance in the elec-
trolyte solution, and the conductivity cell constant ℓ/A in the
form:
G (A, ℓ, Λm, M) =
ΛmM
1000
  ℓ
A

.
(5)
Figure 1. The delay time td, rise time tr and response time tT involved in a
typical injection system as deﬁned in [24]. The red line indicates the
behavior in time of the concentrated mixture (water-NaCl) as an
injection input.
Peck and Roth deﬁned response time (tT ) as the period
from the instant the injection begins until the chemical con-
centration rate reaches 95% of the equilibrium rate [24]. The
rise time tr and transport delay td characteristics of a sprayer
proposed by these authors are shown in Figure 1. A 95%
concentration rate corresponds to the chemical concentration of
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

the spraying, which is necessary for satisfactory weed control
[25].
III.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The components of the customized smart sensor designed
to measure the response time in spraying systems using
direct injection of pesticides are shown in Figure 2. For
the construction of the smart sensor, voltage regulators, an
integrated circuit for a function generator having the capability
of frequencies adjustment, opto-isolators and ﬁlters were used.
Operational ampliﬁers were used in the active analog ﬁlters,
non-inverting ampliﬁer drives and isolators circuits. A power
transistor was used to drive the injection pump and optocou-
plers were used to isolate the power circuit from the control
circuitry.
A. Excitation Circuit
An excitation circuit for the conductivity sensor was con-
structed to provide a sinusoidal signal with stability, appropri-
ate frequency and magnitude (Figure 3). The circuitry com-
prises a sine wave oscillator, a high-pass ﬁlter, two insulators
and an inverting ampliﬁer circuit (Figure 3). The circuitry was
developed to produce signals with high stability and accuracy
in an operating frequency range of 0.01 Hz to 1 MHz (Figure
4).
For the generation of the sinusoidal signal an XR2206
integrated circuit which produces sinusoidal signals with con-
siderably low harmonic distortion was used [26]. The oscillator
frequency was set to 1.0684 kHz, which is suitable for the
application and useful to reduce the electrolysis and the
polarization of the solution. In order to tailor the signal for the
sensor application considered, a high-pass ﬁltering and a signal
ampliﬁcation module were also used. After conditioning, the
signal was appropriate for use presenting voltage values limits
as Vmax = 4.96 V and Vmin = -4.92 V.
Figure 2. Block diagram of the customized intelligent sensor for response
time measurements in spraying systems based on direct injection of
pesticides.
B. Signal Conditioning
For signal conditioning, the operational ampliﬁer LF347
integrated circuit, which presents broad bandwidth range
(4 MHz), high Slew-Rate (13 V/s), high impedance input
(1012 Ω ) and fast settling time (2 µs), was used [27]. The
use of the OPA344 operational ampliﬁer (low voltage) with
an output type Rail to Rail [28] was considered to isolate and
protect the Arduino Uno platform against voltage surges or
malfunctioning of the mounted circuits.
Figure 3. Block diagram of the excitation circuitry.
Figure 4. Circuit for the excitation signal generator.
The output of the isolator circuit is limited to voltages
from 0 V to 5 V, safe input voltage range for the analog/digital
converter (ADC) of the Arduino Uno platform. This ADC has
6 channel 10-bit resolution with absolute accuracy of ±2 LSB
(≈15mV), and maximum sample rate of 15 kS/s. The Arduino
Uno is an electronic prototyping platform, hardware open and
single board, designed with an Atmel AVR microcontroller
with built-in input-output support and a standard programming
language with origin in Wiring projects, essentially based on
C/C ++ [29]. The Arduino Uno platform was used for data
acquisition, signal conditioning, computational processing, in-
telligence aggregation [30], and also for activating the sprin-
kler system of the injection pump through the LabVIEW R
⃝
software. The use of a buffer circuit, commonly called unity
gain buffer, ensures isolation between the two separate stages
of the circuit, and the electrical characteristics of a stage does
not inﬂuence the characteristics of the other. The frequency
response and impedance characteristics of the isolation circuit
were analyzed through computer simulations, performed in
LTspice R
⃝ software. The output signals of each of the stages
of excitation circuitry were obtained using an oscilloscope
Tektronix TDS2012B and graphics were later built in the
Matlab R
⃝ software.
C. Sensor Mounting
Based on the theoretical backgrounds previously presented,
a set of parallel plates conductivity type transducers have been
built and analyzed for measuring the response time based
on the electrical conductivity of the herbicides present in an
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

agricultural direct injection spraying system. Two stainless
steel electrodes with a diameter of 5 mm were used. These
transducers were constructed by using a polyacetal base and
assembled direct into the nozzle bodies equipped with a
diaphragm check valves. For the analysis of the sensor with
a static ﬂuid, the electrodes were coupled to the base and
spaced at three different distances chosen as 0.5 mm spacing,
1.5 mm and 1 mm, resulting in a set of constant of cells equal
to 0,255 cm−1, 0,500 cm−1 and 0,764 cm−1, respectively. The
Figure 5 illustrates the positioning and location of the sensor
for response time measurements.
Figure 5. Details of the smart sensor customized to measure the response
time of a system of direct injection of pesticides.
D. Sensor Calibration
In order to validate the developed sensor, a real experiment
to measure the response time of a sprayer system based on
direct injection was performed. The experiment was set for
a cell constant of 0.500 cm−1. Furthermore, the sensor was
directly assembled into a spray nozzle holder arranged as
shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6. Instrumental arrangement for validation of the intelligent sensor to
measure response time of a direct injection sprayer with TeeJet R
⃝ QJS
Multiple Nozzle Bodies e-ChemSaver.
For analysis in real time, the conductivity was measured
and the results were processed via LabVIEW R
⃝ software.
Additionally, an Arduino Uno platform was used to capture
the analog signals from the sensor, which were previously
conditioned for digital measurements, and further processed
by computational methods.
The calibration was performed using a commercial con-
ductivity meter from the Tecnopon mCA150 with an operating
range of 0 to 200 µS/cm, resolution of 0.1 µS/cm (for solutions
in the range of 0 to 200 µS/cm), 2% of full scale accuracy and
1% of full scale precision [31]. The measurements performed
with the commercial conductivity meter were checked with
a standard KCl solution (0.02000
mol/L). Static tests were
carried out for the analysis of solutions consisting of water
and NaCl. The procedures were performed for three different
cell constants.
IV.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The computational processing of data and analysis with
the developed conductivity sensor was performed using the
LabVIEW R
⃝ software, after the analog/digital conversion and
signal conditioning with the Arduino Uno platform. The use
of the electronic Arduino Uno platform and the LabVIEW R
⃝
interface allowed the aggregation of intelligence for self-
diagnostic of the ICCS, as well as its self-assessment based
on the use of a speciﬁc pseudo-code algorithm (Figure 7).
The data valid ﬂag was determined experimentally, i.e. based
on the dynamic range of the ICCS, deﬁned by 0.50V±2LSB
< VICCS ≤ 4.90V±2LSB, which is related with the accuracy
allowed by the internal ADC of the Arduino Uno platform.
Initialization (TIMER, SERIAL, ADC);
if 0.50V < VICCS ≤ 4.90V then
data valid ﬂag = true;
else
data valid ﬂag = false;
end
while true do
if data valid ﬂag == true then
read temperature ADC;
read conductivity ADC;
calculate CONDUCTIVITY;
send CONDUCTIVITY to SERIAL;
else
send ERROR to SERIAL;
end
end
Figure 7. Pseudo-code of the algorithm for self-assessment and
self-diagnostic.
The calibration results identiﬁed the relation for a better
accuracy for the conductivity sensor, which is dependent on
the conductivity cell constant of the transducer. The shorter
the distance between the faces of the electrodes for a same
section greater will be the accuracy of the measurements. The
calibration curves are shown in Figures 8, 9 and 10 for constant
cells given by 0.255 cm−1, 0.500 cm−1 and 0.764 cm−1. The
individual time responses and the transport delay time for
each repetition (Figure 11) were analyzed based on the use
of the conductivity sensor and its application in an actual
spraying system with a water-NaCl solution ﬂow of 16 L/min
and pressure equal to 200 kPa. Table I shows the experimental
values obtained for determining the response time and the
delay times.
TABLE I. EXPERIMENTAL VALUES OF DELAY AND RESPONSE TIMES.
Flow (L/min)
Repetitions
Vmin (0%)
Vmax (100%)
td (s)
tT (s)
1st
1.583
4.160
29.560
42.480
16
2st
1.574
4.170
28.800
41.550
3st
1.568
4.150
28.360
41.400
1st
1.558
3.989
22.530
32.810
23
2st
1.534
3.964
22.520
33.010
3st
1.548
3.969
23.090
33.770
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 8. Calibration curves and comparison of measurements of the
electrical conductivity from experimental solutions obtained with the
intelligent and customized sensor with cell constant of 0.255 cm−1.
Figure 9. Calibration curves and comparison of measurements of the
electrical conductivity from experimental solutions obtained with the
intelligent and customized sensor with cell constant of 0.500 cm−1.
Figure 10. Calibration curves and comparison of measurements of the
electrical conductivity from experimental solutions obtained with the
intelligent and customized sensor with cell constant of 0.764 cm−1.
Figure 11. Transients and transport delay times of the sprayer with the
conductivity sensor assembled in an actual spraying system with water-NaCl
solution ﬂow of 16 L/min and pressure equal to 200 kPa.
Figure 12. Transients and the transport delay times obtained with the
intelligent conductivity sensor assembled in an actual spraying system with
water-NaCl solution ﬂow of 23 L/min and pressure equal to 400 kPa.
The obtained results of the dynamic responses for the three
repetitions demonstrated the sensor accuracy and reliability.
For this experimental arrangement, the average delay time was
28.91 s and the average response time 41.81 s.
A second set of experiments was conducted and the results
are shown in Figure 12. In this case, a water-NaCl solution
ﬂow of 23 L/min and pressure of 400 kPa were used.
Also, is important to observe that reliability effects and
faster circuits have higher current densities, lower voltage
tolerances and higher electric ﬁelds, which make integrated
circuits more vulnerable to electrically failure. The integrated
circuits used for the intelligent sensor represent new gener-
ations of electronic devices and they provided good perfor-
mance. Furthermore, the use of the polyacetal base for the
intelligent sensor requires a failure analysis.
These procedures for reliability assessment are crucial for
the end user as adjustments to electrical conditions and thermal
management, since the electrical conductivity is dependent of
the temperature of the ﬂows related to the mixture of water
plus pesticide.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The results obtained for the sprayer system having a ﬂow
rate equal to 23 L/min and pressure of 400 kPa, as occurred previ-
ously, have shown again, accuracy and reliability in achieving
results based on the developed sensor. The average delay time
was of 22.71 s and the average response time 33.20 s.
V.
CONCLUSION
An intelligent sensor to measure the response time of
spray systems based on direct injection was presented. The
results have shown its usability in real time applications. The
decision to embed the smart sensor directly in the sprayer
nozzle provides a scenario, where the input data from the
physical sensor could be analyzed by various knowledge-based
routines. The sensor output could be raw data or preprocessed
information. This information could be in the form of a ﬂag,
which shows a conﬁdence level of the response time for
pesticide applications.
The results based on the calibration curves for the sen-
sor in three different assemblies showed that the accuracy
of measurements depends directly on the conductivity cell
constant. However, to determine the response time of a direct
injection system of pesticides, one can use a customized sensor
with greater spacing between its electrodes to get an adequate
sensitivity for sensing the degree of the mixture involving
pesticide plus water. Thus, the time involved in the path
traversed by the mixture in the sensor can be minimized.
The results of the sprayer system response time with direct
injection obtained in this research work have shown that the
smart sensor developed has good repeatability, reliability and
practicality. Therefore, the results also show the decreasing of
the response time with the increasing of the ﬂows, resulting
from the increased speed, in which the mixture of water plus
the pesticide goes through the system.
The use of intelligent sensor is anticipated to provide
additional information than that of traditional sensors. The
information provided by an intelligent sensor can include
actual data, corrected data, validity of the data, and reliability
of the sensor.
Furthermore, such ICCS development attend future per-
spectives for practical applications, potential beneﬁts for sus-
tainability, as well as precision agriculture processes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge the ﬁnancing support from the
Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation (Embrapa Instru-
mentation, Process MP2 No. 02.11.07.0.25.00.00) as well as
from the CNPq Brazilian agency under grant 306477/2013-0.
REFERENCES
[1]
SINDAG. SINDAG and Embrapa study agchem aerial application
in
Brazil.
Accessed
at
March
5,
2015.
[Online].
Available:
http://news.agropages.com/News/NewsDetail—13170.htm (2014)
[2]
CONAB, “Monitoring of the Brazilian grain crops - season 2013/14
(original in portuguese),” Brazilian National Company for Supply, Tech.
Rep., 2014.
[3]
M. S¨okefeld, “Variable rate technology for herbicide application,” in
Precision Crop Protection - the Challenge and Use of Heterogeneity.
Springer Verlag, 2010, pp. 335–347.
[4]
J. Vondrica, “Study on the process of direct nozzle injection for real-
time site-speciﬁc pesticide application,” Ph.D. dissertation, Institut f¨ur
Landtechnik der Rheinschen Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universit¨at, 2008.
[5]
K. L. Hughes and A. R. Frost, “A review of agricultural spray metering,”
Journal of Agricultural Engineering Research, vol. 32, no. 3, 1985, pp.
197–207.
[6]
C. G. Vidrine, C. E. Goering, C. L. Day, M. R. Gebhardt, and
D. B. Smith, “A constant pesticide application rate sprayer model,”
Transaction of the ASAE, vol. 18, no. 3, 1975, pp. 439–443.
[7]
D. L. Reichard and T. L. Ladd, “Pesticide injection and transfer system
for ﬁeld sprayers,” Transactions of the ASAE, vol. 26, no. 3, 1983, pp.
683–686.
[8]
L. Chi, R. L. Kushawara, and F. W. Gigsby, “Chemical ﬂow rate control
in injection-type sprayers,” Canadian Agricultural Engineering, vol. 30,
no. 1, 1988, pp. 19–26.
[9]
S. R. Ghate and C. D. Perry, “Ground speed control of pesticide appli-
cation rates in a compressed air direct injection sprayers,” Transaction
of the ASAE, vol. 37, no. 1, 1994, pp. 33–38.
[10]
M. S. Miller and D. B. Smith, “A review of application error for
sprayers,” Transactions of the ASAE, vol. 35, no. 3, 1992, pp. 787–
791.
[11]
P. S. Lammers and J. Vondricka, “Direct injection sprayer,” in Precision
Crop Protection - the Challenge and Use of Heterogeneity.
Springer
Verlag, 2010, pp. 295–310.
[12]
R. S. Budwig, J. M. McDonald, and T. J. Karsky, “Evaluation of
chemical injection system for mobile agricultural spray equipment,”
Transaction of the ASAE, 1988, Paper No. 88-1592.
[13]
F. D. Tompkins, K. D. Howard, C. R. Mote, and R. S. Freeland, “Boom
ﬂow characteristics with direct chemical injection,” Transaction of the
ASAE, vol. 33, no. 3, 1990, pp. 737–743.
[14]
K. A. Sudduth, S. C. Borgelt, and J. Hou, “Performance of chemical
injection sprayer system,” Applied Engineering in Agriculture, vol. 11,
no. 3, 1995, pp. 343–348.
[15]
Y. M. Koo and H. R. Sumner, “Total ﬂow control for a direct injection
sprayer,” Applied Engineering in Agriculture, vol. 14, no. 4, 1998, pp.
363–367.
[16]
H. Zhu, R. D. Fox, H. E. Ozkan, R. D. Brazee, and R. C. Derksen, “A
system to determine lag time and mixture uniformity for inline injection
sprayers,” Applied Engineering in Agriculture, vol. 14, no. 2, 1998, pp.
103–110.
[17]
E. A. Anglund and P. D. Ayers, “Field evaluation of response times for a
variable rate (pressured-based and injection) liquid chemical applicator,”
Applied Engineering in Agriculture, vol. 19, no. 3.
[18]
P. Hloben, “Study on the response time of direct injection systems for
variable rate application of herbicides,” Ph.D. dissertation, Universit¨ats-
und Landesbibliothek Bonn, 2007.
[19]
A. EL Aissaoui, F. Lebeau, M.-F. Destain, and K. Houmy, “Applying
control volume ﬁnite element for modeling direct injection boom spray-
ing.”
Reno, USA: 7th World Congress of Computer in Agriculture,
June 22-24 2009, pp. 190–198.
[20]
N. S. Hassen, C. S. Nor Azwadi, and J. M. Sheriff, “Advanced tech-
niques for reducing spray losses in agrochemical application system,”
Life Science Journal, vol. 11, no. 3, 2014, pp. 56–66.
[21]
M. Jafari, A. Hemmat, and M. Sadeghi, “Development and performance
assessment of a DC electric variable-rate controller for use on grain
drills,” Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 73, no. 1, 2010,
pp. 56–65.
[22]
M. L. Stone, D. K. Giles, and K. J. Dieball, “Distributed network
system for control of spray droplet size and application rate for precision
chemical application,” Toronto, Canada.
[23]
A. Landers. The theory and constituent parts of a direct injection
sprayer.
Accessed
at
January
27,
2015.
[Online].
Available:
http://vivo.cornell.edu/individual/AI-24241250305 (1998)
[24]
D. R. Peck and L. O. Roth, “Field sprayer induction system development
and evaluation,” Transaction of the ASAE, 1975, Paper No. 75-1541.
[25]
K. A. Bennet and R. B. Brown, “Direct nozzle injection and precise
metering for variable rate herbicide application,” Transaction of the
ASAE, 1997, Paper No. 97-1046.
[26]
Exar
Corporation,
Datasheet
XR2206.
Acessed
at
February
24,
2015.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sparkfun.com/datasheets/Kits/XR2206 104 020808.pdf
(2008)
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[27]
Texas Instrument, Datasheet LF147, LF347-N. Acessed at February 24,
2015. [Online]. Available: http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/lf147.pdf
(2013)
[28]
Texas Instrument, Datasheet OPA344. Acessed at March 04, 2015.
[Online]. Available: www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/opa344.pdf (2008)
[29]
Arduino, Arduino Uno. Acessed at March 16, 2015. [Online].
Available: http://arduino.cc/en/Main/ArduinoBoardUno (2015)
[30]
R. Taymanov and K. Sapozhnikova, “Metrological self-check and
evolution of metrology,” Measurement, vol. 43, no. 7, 2010, pp. 869
– 877.
[31]
Tecnopon, Instructions manual mCA150. Acessed at February 24,
2015. [Online]. Available: http://www.tecnopon.com.br (2014)
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

