1D MEMS Micro-Scanning LiDAR
Norbert Druml, Ievgeniia Maksymova, Thomas Thurner, Diederik van Lierop,
Marcus Hennecke and Andreas Foroutan
Inﬁneon Technologies Austria AG, Graz, Austria
email:{norbert.druml, ievgeniia.maksymova, thomas.thurner, diederik.vanlierop, marcus.hennecke, andreas.foroutan}@inﬁneon.com
Abstract—Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) sensor technology
will be the major enabler for automated transportation. As all major
OEMs in transportation outline, only by fusing the sensor data of LiDAR,
Radar, and cameras, a holistic and robust environment perception can be
achieved. However, most of today’s available long-range LiDAR solutions
are complex and costly, which impedes a broad integration into affordable
vehicles and robots. This work details the recently emerged and currently
most promising technology towards a low-cost, long-range, robust, and
automotive certiﬁed LiDAR system: the micro-scanning 1D MEMS-
mirror LiDAR. In this work, we depict not only a proposed future 1D
LiDAR system design and involved ASIC concepts, we also showcase a
very ﬁrst realized LiDAR prototype which will pave the way towards the
future >200m and <200$ LiDAR perception system.
Keywords—LiDAR; direct Time-of-Flight; 1D MEMS mirror; micro-
scanning
I. INTRODUCTION
Highly automated transportation will usher in a major paradigm
shift in transportation. It will not only enable radically new use-
cases and applications, but will also signiﬁcantly increase safety for
passengers and road users in general. In order to achieve the future
goal of highly automated vehicles, various redundant and diverse
sensor types are required in order to enable robust environment
perception during all possible weather conditions. According to
industry and academia, the Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR)
technology will be the key enabler, in conjunction with Radar and
cameras, for robust and holistic environment perception (see also
[1] and [2]). Figure 1 depicts the basic building blocks of a LiDAR
system realizing the direct Time-of-Flight sensing principle: a central
system controller triggers the emission of a laser pulse. This laser
pulse is reﬂected by the scenery and is eventually received by a
photo diode. The laser pulse’s Time-of-Flight, which is measured
with the help of fast running counters, directly correlates with the
distance between scenery and sensor, thus enabling three-dimensional
environment perception.
Today, there are several automotive qualiﬁed LiDAR technologies
available targeting, e.g., the short-range use-case of emergency break-
ing. However, when it comes to the long-range (>200m) and low-cost
(<200$) automotive use-case, there is still a major gap in technology.
So far, there has not been any suitable technology identiﬁed that will
cover these two essential requirements at the same time. Thanks to
the latest technological and manufacturing advances in the ﬁeld of
3D 
Scene
Optical Signal
Reflected 
Optical Signal
Emitter
Receiver
2
t
c
d
 

System
Controller
Depth 
Data
Figure 1. Basic principle of the LiDAR environment perception technology.
Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS), promising new LiDAR
concepts based on MEMS mirrors are emerging. These very small
mirrors of, e.g., 2x2mm size are employed to deﬂect the LiDAR
system’s laser beam into the scenery. Thus, a robust near-solid-
state approach is given that enables not only highly accurate and
optical-/power-efﬁcient laser deﬂection, but also enables cost-efﬁcient
LiDAR system solutions.
This work presents in detail the 1D micro-scanning MEMS-based
LiDAR solution and therefore makes the following fundamental
contributions:
• It presents from semiconductor point of view the latest con-
ceptual and technological advances in automotive 1D MEMS
micro-scanning LiDAR.
• It showcases a ﬁrst highly-integrated LiDAR prototype based on
the 1D MEMS micro-scanning approach.
• It provides a clear vision towards the future long-range (>200m)
and low-cost (<200$) LiDAR system for automotive and robotic
applications.
This paper is structured as follows. Section II gives a short intro-
duction into the related work covering the topic of the latest LiDAR
technologies. In Section III, our vision of a 1D micro-scanning
LiDAR is presented. Section IV depicts a very ﬁrst working 1D
micro-scanning LiDAR prototype. Finally, our results are concluded
and some details about our future work are given in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
LiDAR technologies, which are currently explored by industry and
academia, can be fundamentally categorized as depicted in Figure
2. The most important conceptual difference concerns the scanning
or staring way of perceiving the environment [3]. Staring-based
solutions are available in the market and proved to be robust and
mature. Although staring-based solutions can be manufactured in a
cost-efﬁcient way, they are constrained in terms of ﬁeld-of-view and
maximum measurement range (up to approximately 60m) due to eye-
and skin-safety regulations. Flash LiDAR sensors are commercially
available through companies like Continental or LeddarTech [4].
Flash LiDARs illuminate the whole scenery at once and employ a
detector array or matrix for receiving the reﬂected light [5]. They are
commonly used for short-range use-cases, such as blind spot detection
or emergency breaking. Similar to the ﬂash LiDARs, the multi-beam
approaches [6] are used for short-range applications.
In contrast to the staring principle, the scan-based approaches divert
a collimated laser beam to the target and thus illuminate a small
fraction of the scenery at once. By moving the beam position, a
3D surround image of the entire scenery can be generated. Because
the whole laser energy is focused in a point or a line instead of
the whole ﬁeld-of-view, better signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and thus
longer measurement distances are achievable. Velodyne, a pioneer
in the ﬁeld of rotating LiDAR scanners, came up with a very
ﬁrst solution for the DARPA Robotic Car Races [7] in 2007. This
system achieved a measurement range of up to 120m, 20 frames per
second, and a horizontal ﬁeld-of-view of 360°. Since then, spinning
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Light Detection and Ranging - LiDAR
Scanning
Non-scanning (staring)
Spinning head with 
single-spot sensors
Moving mirrors/
prisms
Optical phased-
arrays
Fixed (multi-) beam
Diffuse light cone 
“FLASH” LiDAR
Rotating/oscillating 
macro mirrors/prisms
Oscillating MEMS 
mirror
Figure 2. Fundamental classiﬁcation of various LiDAR concepts.
heads and rotating/oscillating macro mirrors/prisms solutions have
further improved in terms of performance, resolution, and robustness.
For example, LiDAR systems from Velodyne achieve measurement
ranges of 200m with a horizontal ﬁeld-of-view of 360°. However,
their main drawbacks are high costs and moving macro components
that degrade the form factor and that hinder a lean car integration.
A novel concept which is currently explored by academia and
industry is optical phased arrays [8]. The major advantage of this
novel approach is the possibility for electronic laser beam forming
(similar to phased array antennas in Radar), thus omitting the
integration of any moving or rotating mechanical parts required
for deﬂecting of beams in a traditional way. However, preliminary
research results show that there is still a critical technological gap
concerning the efﬁciency of the photonic integrated circuits. This
efﬁciency degradation, which is in the range of a high double
digit percentage, represents a major limitation for long-range LiDAR
applications.
The currently most promising concept towards a realizable low-
cost (<200$), long-range (>200m), robust, automotive qualiﬁed
LiDAR environment perception is the micro-scanning MEMS mirror
concept. As summarized by Holmstrom et al. [9], there are various
types of MEMS-scanner concepts. A crucial differentiating factor is
whether one moving axis (as depicted by Krastev et al. [10]) or
two moving axes (such as [11] or [12]) are implemented. While
the 1D approach typically deﬂects a vertical laser beam line into
the scenery and performs a horizontal scanning (see also Figure 3),
the 2D concept deﬂects a laser point or narrow line and performs
vertically as well as horizontally scanning. Furthermore, there are
mirrors which are driven in resonance (robust against shocks and
vibration, instantaneous measurement of the position for all angles is
not required) or without resonance (prone to shocks and vibrations,
difﬁcult to control due to the inevitable ringing which needs to be
suppressed by a control loop). This work focuses on the resonant 1D
MEMS mirror, because this speciﬁc setup enables higher scanning
frequencies compared to 2D approach and provides high robustness
against external perturbations (such as shocks and vibrations which
are given in transportation).
Summarizing, even though the LiDAR research community is
highly active, there is still a huge gap concerning a realizable long-
range and low-cost solution. Therefore, this paper provides a highly
relevant and important contribution to the ongoing discussion in this
important ﬁeld of research.
III. 1D MEMS-BASED AUTOMOTIVE LIDAR
Currently, the most promising approach towards a long-range, low-
cost, robust, and automotive qualiﬁed LiDAR system is enabled
through the micro-scanning 1D MEMS mirror concept. In the fol-
lowing, this solution (as depicted in Figure 3) is detailed.
A. Requirements
Requirements for a long-range LiDAR sensor are, from OEM and
Tier 1 perspective, still in a dynamic development process and differ a
lot. Thus, some partly representative requirements can be summarized
as follows:
• 120° horizontal ﬁeld-of-view and 16° vertical ﬁeld-of-view
• 20cm distance resolution, 0.1° horizontal and 0.5° vertical
resolution
• 200m measurement range
• 20 frames per second of ﬁeld-of-view’s point cloud
• 200$ system costs
• ASIL-C and laser class 1 guaranteeing functional-, eye-, and
skin-safety
• High robustness against shocks and vibrations
Figure 3. 1D micro-scanning LiDAR illuminating the scenery with a vertical
laser beam line and scanning horizontally.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

System 
Safety 
Controller 
(AURIX)
Laser Illumination
MEMS Mirror
MEMS
Driver
ASIC
Actuation
Sensing
 
Reflected 
Signal
Photo Diodes
dt
Emitted 
Signal
Point 
Cloud 
Data
Trigger and 
Laser Power Setting
FPGA / Dedicated 
LiDAR Hardware 
Accelerators
Receiver 
Circuits
Raw Data
Emitter Path
Receiver Path
Trigger and 
Gain Setting
Config 
and
Status
Figure 4. System concept of a potential future 1D MEMS-based automotive
LiDAR system.
B. Design Space Considerations
Given these requirements, the design space of MEMS mirrors
considerable favors the 1D scanning approach over a 2D scanning
approach. By deﬂecting a vertical laser beam line horizontally, a
sweet spot in terms of signal-to-noise ratio and sampling rates is
achieved compared to 2D mirrors (slower line-by-line sampling)
and Flash LiDARs (degraded signal-to-noise values at long ranges
due to eye-safety limitations). This is of special importance when
considering the maximum possible laser pulse repetition rates of
affordable laser sources, which is in the range of 100kHz. Given a
modest ﬁeld-of-view of, e.g., 400 x 80 pixel, a 2D scanning solution
requires a laser pulse-repetition-frequency of 640kHz in order to
achieve 20fps (without taking signal averaging for improved SNR
into account). When taking into account also the ﬂight time of light
(e.g., 2µs for 300m), 2D scanning is regarded as an unfavorable
approach in order to meet the automotive frame-rate and SNR
requirements. In contrast, the 1D approach, which scans with each
laser beam trigger one complete vertical line, enables the integration
of affordable 100kHz pulse-repetition-frequency lasers, and thus
making the <200$ vision feasible. The achieved high frame-rates can
then be exploited for scene oversampling in order to further improve
the signal quality. In addition to pulse repetition frequency and SNR
considerations, an automotive LiDAR system has to be robust against
shocks and vibrations. Here, oscillating scanning solutions provide
more robustness compared to non-oscillating approach. In particular,
the 1D oscillating scanning solution provides highest robustness by
design. Summarizing, based on currently available technologies, 2D
micro-scanning and Flash LiDARs hardly fulﬁll the requirements for
robust, long-range, and low-cost LiDAR systems.
C. Overall System Concept and Chipset
Figure 4 depicts the system concept of a potential future 1D
MEMS-based automotive LiDAR system. This chipset is composed
of the oscillating 1D MEMS mirror and its MEMS Driver ASIC, a
System Safety Controller, a laser illumination unit, an (1D or 2D)
array of photo diodes (such as avalanche photo diodes (APDs) or
Figure 5. Fabricated and packaged 1D MEMS Mirror.
single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs)), and Receiver Circuits. The
main purpose of MEMS Driver ASIC is to sense, actuate, and control
the oscillating MEMS mirror. Furthermore, it implements crucial
functional safety features and provides an essential MEMS phase
clock that is used to synchronize the whole system to the movement
of the mirror. The MEMS Driver ASIC’s phase clock and safety
signals are provided to the central System Safety Controller. This
System Safety Controller synchronizes with the MEMS phase clock
and triggers the laser illumination unit according to a laser-shoot-
pattern. At the same time, the System Safety Controller triggers the
Receiver Circuits in order to capture the laser beam reﬂections. The
Receiver Circuits samples and digitizes the reﬂected laser light. The
Receiver Circuits’ output data is then forwarded to the System Safety
Controller. Finally, the System Safety Controller performs the ﬁnal
signal processing (e.g., calculation of the point cloud), which may be
carried out hardware accelerated either with an FPGA or dedicated
hardware units, and sends the data to a central ADAS ECU or sensor
fusion box.
D. MEMS Mirror
The central element of the whole LiDAR system design is given
by the 1D oscillating MEMS mirror and its MEMS Driver ASIC.
The MEMS mirror, as it is depicted in Figure 5, implements an
electrostatic comb drive approach [13] with a very high Q factor
of approximately 150. By applying a voltage of, e.g., 100V to the
comb ﬁngers, an electric force is applied by the capacitance structure
that pulls the rotor towards its zero position. Switching off this high-
voltage after the rotor crossed the zero position, let’s the mirror
swing towards its maximum deviation. When reaching the maximum
deviation, high-voltage is again switched on. Figure 6 depicts the very
concise response curve if the frequency of the high voltage actuation
is changed. Starting with an actuation frequency fstart and reducing
it, let’s the operation point move on the lower resonance curve.
While being on the lower resonance curve the phase relation between
actuation voltage and mirror is positive, which means that the mirror
and its zero crossing follow the actuation voltage. If the actuation
frequency is further reduced until it reaches fjump, a jump in the
phase relation and in the mirror’s deviation angle is observable. At
the top resonance curve, the phase relation between actuation voltage
and mirror is now negative, which implies that the actuation voltage
follows the mirror and its zero crossing. If the actuation frequency is
now increased, also the mirror’s deviation angle increases. Finally,
when surpassing a maximum stable frequency, the working point
drops back to the lower resonance curve. Therefore, the response
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 6. MEMS mirror response curve. Changing the actuation frequency
results in a non-linear change in mirror’ oscillation angle.
curve describes the mechanical behavior of the MEMS mirror as a
non-linear harmonic oscillator.
Depending on the mirror design (mechanical design, leaf springs,
comb drive structure, etc.), deviation angles of more than +/-15°are
achievable. Thanks to the mirror’s high Q factor, its oscillator
design, and the one-dimensional rotation axis, a laser beam deﬂection
solution is given that provides high robustness against external
perturbations (such as shocks or car vibrations). Furthermore, thanks
to its conventional mirror design, the laser beam can be deﬂected
almost losslessly and with high pulse-repetition frequencies (which
is an essential enabler for oversampling of the environment).
E. MEMS Driver ASIC
The crucial task of the MEMS Driver ASIC is to sense, actuate, and
control the movement of the MEMS mirror. Actuation of the mirror
is carried out by simply switching on / off the mirror’s high-voltage at
the right point in time. However, in order to perform this high-voltage
switching on / off properly, precisely sensing of the mirror position
is essential. Since the mirror’s comb ﬁngers form a capacitance
that varies with the mirror’s position, position sensing is carried
out by measuring this position dependent capacitance. Such kind
of capacitance sensing can be performed with various measurement
principles. One feasible measurement principle is the usage of trans-
impedance converters in order to convert the capacitor’s current ﬂows
into voltages levels. These voltage levels can then be analog-to-
digital converted and can be processed by digital analysis and control
circuits.
In general, the MEMS mirror can be operated either in open
control-loop or closed control-loop, cf. [14]. While the open control-
loop mode actuates the mirror with a deﬁned frequency without
taking advantage of any control strategies, the closed control-loop
mode implements two important control strategies:
• A phased-locked loop precisely follows the movement (phase)
of the oscillating MEMS mirror.
• An amplitude control loop ensures that the maximum deﬂection
angle of the MEMS mirror stays constant.
With the help of these two control loops, a robust scan shape can be
guaranteed. In order to signal the central System Safety Controller
(which triggers the laser beam ﬁring) the momentary position of
the MEMS mirror, the following important signals are provided:
POSITION L (mirror is either on the left or right side) and DIREC-
TION L signals (mirror moves either towards the left or right side)
Figure 7. MEMS position and safety signaling of the MEMS Driver ASIC.
provide precise information of the mirror’s momentary position, as
illustrated in Figure 7. When the mirror crosses its zero position, the
position signal changes. When the mirror is at its maximum deﬂection
angle, the direction signal changes. A PHASE CLK signal, which
counts in equi-temporal steps from 0 to nmax during one mirror
swing, provides a precise and high-frequent phase information of the
momentary mirror position. These three signals are not only crucial
for the system controller in order to decide at which mirror position
to trigger the laser beam ﬁring, but also to enable an efﬁcient way
to track the MEMS mirror. As a consequence, the precision of these
signals directly inﬂuences the whole LiDAR system’s measurement
accuracy. In addition to these tracking signals, an ANGLE OK signal
is provided by the MEMS Driver ASIC in order to notify the
system controller whether the angle setpoint is reached or not. This
notiﬁcation is crucial for ensuring functional-, eye-, and skin-safety:
if and only if both the MEMS mirror and the MEMS Driver ASIC
operate properly within their speciﬁed set of parameters, then laser
shooting is permitted.
F. Photo Diodes and Receiver Circuits
The LiDAR system’s receiving part (which is primarily deﬁned
through an 1D or 2D array of photo diodes, Receiver Circuits, and
hardware-accelerated signal processing) is absolutely crucial in order
to achieve the required SNR and maximum distance requirements.
The number of implemented photo diodes deﬁnes vertical resolution,
which is not constrained by our system architecture. In the shown
receiver signal chain, the Receiver Circuits’ main purpose is to
amplify the received electrical current from the array of photo diodes
with the help of high-performance ampliﬁers. This ampliﬁcation
circuit has to implement not only a high dynamic range (in order
to detect targets in near vicinity and far away), but shall also support
adjustable gain settings, short recovery times (in order to detect a
weak pulse directly after a strong pulse), and low electrical/optical
cross-talk between channels. After ampliﬁcation of the sensed analog
signals, a high-speed conversion to the digital domain is required. At
this point, the LiDAR system’s design space critically expands by
selecting the ADCs’ resolution and sampling rate: more than 1-Bit
ADC resolution is required for signal amplitude analyses (in order to
detect for example lane markings), high sampling rates are required
for more accurate range resolutions (e.g., 1.5 GHz for 10cm range
resolution). Given a modest laser pulse-repetition rate of, e.g., 100kHz
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

M1
M2
M3
M4, M5, ...
Histogram
Distance
Confidence
Raw Data Measurements 
Threshold
Figure 8. Increasing conﬁdence by oversampling and histogram evaluation.
and 32 vertical pixels, results according to (1) in several GBit/s of
raw data.
RawData = PRF · V Pixels · ADCRes · ADCRate
(1)
After acquisition of the raw sensor data, a lot of effort (in terms
of computational resources and power dissipation) has to be spent in
order to compute a robust 3D point cloud. Such a signal processing
chain can include various types of computations, e.g., averaging of
several measurements, evaluation of histograms, usage of matched
ﬁltering, etc. The aim of these signal processing steps is not only on
improving the LiDAR system’s SNR and on mitigating interferences
from sunlight and other LiDARs, but also on reducing the ﬁnal
data rate towards the System Safety Controller or a central sensor
fusion box. Figure 8 highlights the beneﬁts of signal averaging and
histogram evaluations: SNR and conﬁdence increase, while data rates
decrease at the same time by factors. These fundamental LiDAR
signal processing steps deﬁne a very active research arena impacted
by both academia and industry. Moreover, further important research
questions arise when aiming for an optimized system partitioning:
what kind of signal processing shall be integrated into Receiver
Circuits, a potential FPGA, the System ASIC, and a central sensor
fusion box in order to minimize data rates while maintaining as much
Figure 9. 1D MEMS mirror based LiDAR prototype.
data- and algorithm-ﬂexibility as possible.
G. System Safety Controller
Inﬁneon Technologies’ AURIX can be employed as the central
System Safety Controller. AURIX is a 32-Bit System-on-Chip, com-
pliant to various standards, such as IEC 61508, ISO 26262, and
ISO 25119, and is used in particular in automotive and industrial
domains as a Safety Element out of Context (SEooC) for applications
such as electric power steering, airbag control, etc. In the given 1D
MEMS micro-scanning LiDAR system, AURIX is not only employed
to monitor the integrity of the MEMS mirror, MEMS Driver, and
Receiver Circuits, but also to monitor power supply, control signals,
and the LiDAR data stream. Apart from functional safety features,
the AURIX also implements hardware and software for controlling
and signal processing. In particular the laser scan pattern is controlled
by the AURIX by triggering lasers and the Receiver Circuits at well
deﬁned points in time. With regards to signal processing, the task of
AURIX is to compute and provide 3D point cloud data for dedicated
ADAS and sensor fusion ECUs. Depending on the OEMs’ / Tier1s’
requirements, not only the pre-processed LiDAR point cloud data is
provided, but for example also each pixel’s most relevant multi-hit
targets. As highlighted in Figure 4, the next generation AURIX safety
controllers will also support dedicated LiDAR hardware accelerators
that will further enhance and speed-up LiDAR signal processing.
IV. PROTOTYPE
Based on the presented 1D MEMS micro-scanning LiDAR concept
and the proposed system partitioning (see Figure 4), we realized a
very ﬁrst working prototype. Please note that due to disclosure poli-
cies, currently only some overview results can be provided. Figure 9
and Figure 10 showcase the assembled and opened prototype. Only
thanks to the miniaturizing of emitter path (MEMS mirror, MEMS
Driver ASIC) and receiver path (photo diodes, Receiver Circuits,
signal processing FPGA, AURIX Safety Controller), such a small
form factor is achievable. Moreover, the LiDAR prototype imple-
ments advanced hardware-accelerated signal processing techniques,
which makes its sensing capabilities unaffected by interferences from
other LiDAR systems, which is a crucial requirement for a broad
adoption in transportation. The output of this LiDAR prototype is a
3D point cloud with more than 20 frame per seconds. Due to the
Figure 10. LiDAR prototype implementing optics, lasers, controllers, MEMS
mirror, Receiver Circuits, MEMS Driver ASIC, and signal processing.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 11. A clearly classiﬁable pedestrian detected in a few meters distance
of the LiDAR system. Visualization is performed with ROS Robot Operating
System.
usage of standardized data formats, the 3D point cloud data can be
easily visualized with freely available software tools such as ROS
Robot Operating System (cf. [15]). Finally, Figure 11 shows the ROS
visualization of a pedestrian crossing the LiDAR’s ﬁeld-of-view, and
Figure 12 depicts a standard indoor lab scenery and its 3D point
cloud representation.
V. CONCLUSIONS
Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) sensor technology will be
the major enabler for automated transportation. Only by fusing the
sensor data of LiDAR, Radar, and cameras, a holistic and robust
environment perception can be achieved. As outlined, currently there
is major gap concerning a realizable long-range and low-cost LiDAR
solution.
This work detailed the recently emerged and currently most
promising approach towards a low-cost, long-range, robust, and
automotive LiDAR system: the micro-scanning 1D MEMS mirror
LiDAR. We depicted not only the vision of a potential future system
design and its required ASIC concepts, we also showcased a very ﬁrst
realized 1D LiDAR prototype. Given the presented results, a quantum
leap towards the future >200m and <200$ LiDAR perception system
and the future revolution in transportation was made.
Our future work fully focuses on advancing the semiconductor
components of the the micro-scanning 1D MEMS mirror LiDAR in
order to make our vision happen.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the ECSEL Joint Undertaking
and the Austrian Federal Ministry for Transport, Innovation and
Technology which funded the PRYSTINE project under the grant
agreement n◦ 783190.
Furthermore, the authors would like to thank all LiDAR colleagues
from Inﬁneon Technologies in the Netherlands, Germany, and Austria
for their valuable contributions.
REFERENCES
[1] Frost & Sullivan, “LIDAR-based Strategies for Active Safety and
Automated Driving from Major OEMs in Europe and North America,”
August 2015.
[2] R. Rasshofer and K. Gresser, “Automotive Radar and Lidar Systems
for Next Generation Driver Assistance Functions,” Advances in Radio
Science, vol. 3, no. B. 4, pp. 205–209, 2005.
[3] H. Winner, S. Hakuli, and G. Wolf, Handbuch Fahrerassistenzsysteme:
Grundlagen, Komponenten und Systeme f¨ur aktive Sicherheit und Kom-
fort.
Springer-Verlag, 2011.
Figure 12. Standard lab scenery and its 3D point cloud visualized with ROS
Robot Operating System.
[4] Spec sheet: Leddar Vu Compact ﬁxed-beam lidar sensor module, Led-
darTech Inc., 2016.
[5] T. E. Laux and C.-I. Chen, “3D ﬂash LIDAR vision systems for imaging
in degraded visual environments,” in SPIE Defense+ Security, vol. 9087.
International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2014.
[6] R. Liebske, SRL 1 Short Description, Continental, August 2012.
[7] J. R. McBride, J. C. Ivan, D. S. Rhode, J. D. Rupp, M. Y. Rupp,
J. D. Higgins, D. D. Turner, and R. M. Eustice, “A Perspective
on Emerging Automotive Safety Applications, Derived from Lessons
Learned through Participation in the DARPA Grand Challenges,” Journal
of Field Robotics, vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 808–840, 2008.
[8] C. DeRose, R. Kekatpure, D. Trotter, A. Starbuck, J. Wendt, A. Yaacobi,
M. Watts, U. Chettiar, N. Engheta, and P. Davids, “Electronically
controlled optical beam-steering by an active phased array of metallic
nanoantennas,” Optics express, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 5198–5208, 2013.
[9] S. T. Holmstrom, U. Baran, and H. Urey, “MEMS laser scanners: a
review,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, vol. 23, no. 2, pp.
259–275, 2014.
[10] K. Krastev, H. van Lierop, H. Soemers, R. Sanders, and A. Nellissen,
“MEMS scanning micromirror,” September 2013, US Patent 8,526,089.
[11] T. Sandner, T. Grasshoff, M. Schwarzenberg, and H. Schenk, “Quasi-
static microscanner with linearized scanning for an adaptive 3D-laser
camera,” in International Conference on Optical MEMS and Nanopho-
tonics (OMN).
IEEE, 2013, pp. 103–104.
[12] R. Moss, P. Yuan, X. Bai, E. Quesada, R. Sudharsanan, B. L. Stann,
J. F. Dammann, M. M. Giza, and W. B. Lawler, “Low-cost compact
MEMS scanning ladar system for robotic applications,” in Laser Radar
Technology and Applications XVII, vol. 8379, 2012.
[13] P. Deng and W. Ma, “Nonlinearity investigation of the MEMS scanning
mirror with electrostatic comb drive,” in IEEE International Conference
on Nano/Micro Engineered and Molecular Systems (NEMS), September
2014, pp. 212–215.
[14] B. Borovic, A. Liu, D. Popa, H. Cai, and F. Lewis, “Open-loop versus
closed-loop control of MEMS devices: choices and issues,” Journal of
Micromechanics and Microengineering, vol. 15, no. 10, August 2005.
[15] M. Quigley, K. Conley, B. Gerkey, J. Faust, T. Foote, J. Leibs,
R. Wheeler, and A. Y. Ng, “ROS: an open-source Robot Operating
System,” in ICRA workshop on open source software, vol. 3, no. 3.2,
2009, p. 5.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

