Real-time Detection of Infrared Radiation by
Position-sensitive Superconducting Bolometer
Francesco Laviano, Roberto Gerbaldo, Gianluca Ghigo, Laura Gozzelino, Enrica Mezzetti
dept. Physics
Politecnico di Torino and INFN Sezione Torino
Torino, Italy
Email: francesco.laviano, roberto.gerbaldo, gianluca.ghigo, laura.gozzelino, enrica.mezzetti@polito.it
Luca Mesin
dept. Electronics
Politecnico di Torino
Torino, Italy
Email: luca.mesin@polito.it
Alberto Rovelli
Istituto Nazionale Fisica Nucleare
Laboratori Nazionali del Sud
Catania, Italy
Email: rovelli@lns.infn.it
Abstract—Infrared sensors are fundamental building blocks
of strategic applications such as atmospheric gas monitoring,
thermal imaging and telecommunications. While single frequency
applications can employ resonant devices that have high resolu-
tion and high sensitivity, broad-band infrared detection relies on
bolometric sensors. In this paper, we present a high-temperature
superconducting sensor whose structural and electrical properties
are locally modiﬁed by heavy-ion irradiation, in order to obtain
position-sensitive broad band infrared detection. The bolometer,
biased with constant current, responds to infrared radiation
(from near to far-infrared spectra), with a dissipative voltage
signal that can be monitored in real-time with a standard
voltmeter. The digitized signal is processed with artiﬁcial neural
networks (ANN) in order to correct for thermal and electronic
noise contributions. Once trained, the ANN can be applied to
new detected data and process them in real-time. In this way,
real-time, position-sensitive detection of broad-band infrared
radiation is achieved.
Index Terms—Real-time sampling, superconducting devices,
superconducting ﬁlms, THz detector, neural networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
Detection of infrared radiation is a fundamental task for
many strategic applications in biomedical, environment mon-
itoring, space science and military ﬁelds [1]. Since the very
beginning of the research in these ﬁelds [2], much attention
was paid to the low-frequency part of the infrared spectrum,
the far-infrared (FIR), because many molecular absorption
spectra are centered in this frequency range. However, the
FIR radiation slightly interacts with solid state devices and
therefore development of high responsivity devices is still
a crucial task for many applications. Resonant devices [3]
have high sensitivity for selected frequency ranges and op-
erate at room temperature, making them the best choice for
single frequency applications. On the other hand, wide band
bolometric detection is commonly achieved with bolometers
operated at liquid Helium temperature or below [1], making
them expensive solutions (both for what concerns cost of
instrumentation and size), sometimes limiting the operation
time due to the cryogenic requirements, e.g., in satellite appli-
cation. After the discovery of high temperature superconduc-
tors (HTSC) [4], promising applications of HTSC bolometers
were envisaged, because they can be used above the liquid
nitrogen temperature. In particular, several solutions have been
already proposed for HTSC YBa2Cu3O7−x (YBCO) based
bolometers that have been demonstrated to respond to the
infrared radiation [5]. Since responsivity is corresponding
to the resistance versus temperature slope, the maximum
responsivity is achieved at the mid-point of the transition to the
superconducting state. Optimally doped YBCO bolometers,
whose critical temperature (Tc) is around 90 K, display
the highest responsivity [6]. For what concerns high speed
operation, thermal modeling suggested that thin membranes
or suitable substrates should be used. In order to obtain a
high responsivity and position-sensitive YBCO bolometer with
controlled Tc, we employed irradiation with micro-collimated
high energy heavy ion (HEHI) beams. In this way, Tc can be
ﬁnely tuned (reduced), while the resistance versus temperature
slope is totally preserved. Another chief result of this process
is to conﬁne the sensitive area to the irradiated part, therefore
a position-sensitive detector is obtained. Detection of broad-
band infrared radiation can be performed with standard four
probe techniques used for resistance measurement, therefore
real-time monitoring of infrared signals is achieved. Since
the device is sensitive to the full infrared spectrum, thermal
ﬂuctuation is an important noise source along with Johnson
noise. In order to correct for these major noise sources, we
applied an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) signal processing.
The ANN processing eliminates the thermal background ﬂuc-
tuation and renormalizes the signal intensity due to the change
in responsivity. In this way, real-time monitoring of infrared
signals is achieved with a position sensitive detector that can
be housed in a light weight, liquid nitrogen temperature dewar.
95
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

II. METHODS
A. Device design and construction
YBCO ﬁlms are deposited by thermal co-evaporation on
MgO substrates [7]. YBCO ﬁlm thickness is 250 nm, in order
to obtain high critical current density, Jc, in the as-grown
material [8]. Tc of as-grown samples is about 89 K, at the
transition onset, and the transition width, ∆Tc, is less than
one kelvin. Sample patterning is obtained by standard UV
photolithography and wet-etching in HCl/H2O solution. The
device layout consists of two meander structures, which are
connected in series. One of them is uniformly irradiated with
a suitable ion ﬂuence, in order to obtain localized dissipation.
The other meander serves as control signal for the background
temperature monitoring [9]. The irradiation was performed at
INFN laboratories [10], employing 114 MeV 197Au ions for
the controlled reduction of YBCO Tc. With a ﬂuence of 4.84
· 1011 cm−2, the zero resistance temperature is lowered by
about 5 K.
B. Photoresponse measurements
Broad-band, continuous-wave infrared radiation is produced
by a high pressure Hg arc lamp (OSRAM HBO 100W) [2].
The wavelength range is selected by proper ﬁltering. In partic-
ular, high-resistivity n-type Si (ﬂat transmittance above 50%),
enables the transmission of the mid and far infrared (MIR-
FIR) spectra (wavelength range 1-100 µm). The electrical
measurements were performed by 4-probe method for each
meander following the scheme reported in Figure 1 . The
contacts were made by direct soldering Au wires (diameter
of 50 µm for voltage pads and 125µm for current leads), on
the YBCO pads with a low-temperature alloy (In-Sn-Bi). The
electrical current was kept constant during the measurement
(current source Keithley model 224) and the voltage signals
were recorded in real-time (integration time 100 ms) by a dual
channel nano-voltmeter (Keithley model 2182A). A custom
Labview software was used for controlling the instruments
(through GPIB interface) and for collecting the raw data on a
PC.
C. Features selection and neural model
The output of the sensor is affected by thermal and elec-
tronic noise. In particular, thermal noise induces a nonlinear
bias which increases as the sensor warms during the mea-
surement. In order to compensate for the effect of noise, a
nonlinear, real time signal processing technique was devel-
oped, based on ANN. ANNs are biologically inspired models
consisting of a network of interconnections between neurons,
which are the basic computational units. A single neuron
processes multiple inputs and produces an output which is
the result of the application of an activation function (usually
nonlinear) to a linear combination of the inputs
yi = φi


N
X
j=1
wijxj + bi


(1)
Fig. 1.
Scheme of electrical measurement method. In the inset, a photo of
the actual bolometer is shown.
where yi is the output of the ith neuron, φi is the activation
function, wij is the weight between the jth input xj and the
ith neuron and bi is a bias. The weights and the bias are free
parameters that can be adaptively chosen in order to estimate
an input-output map associating the input measurements to the
desired output, provided by a set of training data.
The selection of optimal features that are going to be used as
the input of the ANN is of great importance, in order to reduce
the measurement and storage requirements, to counteract the
difﬁculties of facing a problem with large dimension, to reduce
noise content and to improve performance. We used a method
based on the selection of the input data providing maximal
information on the output. In order to avoid redundancy
between input features, we used the algorithm proposed in [11]
which determines the interdependencies between candidate
variables computing the Partial Mutual Information (PMI).
This technique found applications in feature selection for
system identiﬁcation in meteo forecast and in air pollution
distribution prediction [12]. PMI represents the information
between a considered variable and the output that is not
contained in the already selected features. Variables with
maximal PMI with the output are iteratively selected from
the set of candidates.
The considered candidate variables were the values of the
output of the sensor at the present instant and its delayed
versions, with a time delay up to 5 samples. The desired output
was the power of the source. Using PMI selection method, the
candidate variables were ordered, starting from the one with
maximum mutual information with the output and continuing
with the input features in decreasing order of PMI with the
output. Then, to map the input to the desired output, a set
of multilayer perceptrons (MLP) was used. Different MLPs
were obtained using a different number of inputs, a single
hidden layer with number of neurons in the range 1 − 10
(with sigmoidal activation function) and a single output neuron
(with linear activation function). Different MLP topologies
were trained by modifying iteratively the weights and the bias
in order to reduce the error in ﬁtting the desired output, using
96
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

Fig. 2.
Resistance versus temperature behavior of irradiated and as-grown
YBCO (bias current 10 µA). The Tc difference is around 5 K (114 MeV
197Au 4.84 · 1011 ion cm−2). Note that the resistance versus temperature
slope is preserved.
the quasi-Newton algorithm with a number of iterations in the
range 10 − 50.
Data included 5 radiation events with constant power. Each
ANN was trained with a portion of signal including 4 of
the 5 events and tested on a portion of signal including the
remaining one (test set). All root mean squared (RMS) errors
on the test data were computed and the ANN with minimum
average error across the 5 trials was selected as that with best
generalization performance.
III. RESULTS
The resistance versus temperature characteristics of the
device are shown in Figure 2. The irradiated meander displays
increased resistivity and lowered Tc with respect to the as-
grown structure, as expected. The working point for the device
is around the onset of dissipation of the irradiated meander
(around T = 81.5 K with a bias current of 1 mA [9]).
If the device is exposed to infrared radiation, the local
temperature will raise and only the irradiated meander displays
dissipative signals, as shown in Figure 3.
The voltage picked up on the as-grown meander is due to
the thermoelectric signal spreading from the irradiated YBCO
and therefore it is indicating the variation of the substrate tem-
perature. On the other hand, the temperature ﬂuctuations due
to the infrared radiation to be detected and to the environment
are changing the responsivity of the bolometer: the voltage
is continuously increasing when the infrared beam hits the
detector. In order to correct for these problems due to the
thermal backgroung, we applied an ANN signal processing as
described above. For each of the ﬁve training experiments,
PMI selected the present measurement as the feature with
maximal mutual information with the radiated power and the
one step delayed measure as the feature with maximal partial
mutual information with the desired output, once selected
the present measure. The selected optimal ANN, with best
Fig. 3. Sample signals of both irradiated and as-grown meanders. The infrared
beam is coming from a black-body source which is turned on and off by means
of an electro-mechanical shutter. The irradiated meander responds with sharp
jumps to the infrared beam, while the as-grown meander displays a signal
whose evolution is determined by the background temperature.
Fig. 4.
Topology of the ANN with best generalization performances.
generalization to the test set (average generalization error
about 2.5%), has three inputs and two hidden neurons (see
Figure 4) and was trained for 30 iterations. Figure 5 shows the
raw data and the infrared radiation estimated by the optimal
ANN for one choice of the training and the test sets. Good
performances (average generalization error about 10%) were
obtained also using two input features (the present measure
and the 1 step delayed measure) and a single hidden neuron.
IV. CONCLUSION
We have tested a high-temperature superconducting bolome-
ter for monitoring infrared signals in real-time. High re-
sponsivity is obtained for temperature just above the liquid
nitrogen temperature thanks to the local irradiation with HEHI
which reduces in a controlled way the critical temperature
but retains the resistance versus temperature slope. Since the
97
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

Fig. 5.
Raw data, desired output and ANN estimated output for an example
of training set and test set.
infrared radiation to be detected is coupled with a noisy
thermal background, we implemented an ANN approach in
order to obtain the subtraction of the thermal background and
the renormalization of the output intensity in dependence on
such background. Once trained and validated on experimental
signals, the ANN can ﬁlter new detected data in real-time.
Different MLPs were tested. Optimal performances were
achieved using MLPs with simple topology. Good perfor-
mances were obtained using only the actual measure and the
1 step delayed one. This selection of inputs indicates that the
measurement and its time derivative are sufﬁcient to estimate
the required output. In that case, only one neuron in the
hidden layer was required. This is due to the binary desired
output. The optimal MLPs was a bit more complicated, as
a further delayed version of the measure was selected and
one more neuron was placed in the hidden layer. This choice
improved the stability of the estimates to noise, improving
slightly the performances. It is worth noticing that to detect
the presence of a constant radiation, the output neuron could
also have a sigmoidal activation function. Future investigation
will be devoted to the estimation of an arbitrary proﬁle of
thermal radiation. In such a case, a linear activation function
for the output neuron is preferred. Moreover, a more complex
topology of the network is expected to be able to optimally
adapt to the data.
This study demonstrates the possibility to develop high
responsivity infrared bolometers based on superconducting
oxides which are working at temperature above the liquid
nitrogen. The suitably engineered detector in a portable, light-
weight cryostat is desired for molecular spectroscopy, thermal
imaging and telecommunications.
V. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by INFN-MONADE
and INFN-TERASPARC projects and by the national project
AWIS (Airport Winter Information System), funded by Pied-
mont Authority, Italy.
REFERENCES
[1] P. H. Siegel, Terahertz Technology,
IEEE Trans. on Microwave Theory
and Techniques, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 910-928, 2002.
[2] M.F. Kimmitt, Restrahlen to T-Rays - 100 Years of Terahertz Radiation,
Journal of Biological Physics, vol. 29, pp. 77-85, 2003.
[3] W. Knap, F. Teppe, Y. Meziani, N. Dyakonova, J. Lusakowski, F. Boeuf,
T. Skotnicki, D. Maude, S. Rumyantsev and M. S. Shur, Plasma wave
detection of sub-terahertz and terahertz radiation by silicon ﬁeld-effect
transistors,
Appl. Phys. Lett. vol. 85, pp. 675-677, 2004.
[4] J. G. Bednorz and K. A. Mller, Possible high Tc superconductivity in the
Ba-La-Cu-O system,
Zeitschrift fr Physik B Condensed Matter 64, pp.
189-193, 1986.
[5] A.J. Kreisler and A. Gaugue, Recent progress in high-temperature super-
conductor bolometric detectors: from the mid-infrared to the far-infrared
(THz) range,
Supercond. Sci. Technol. 13 pp. 1235-1245, 2000
[6] A. Jukna and R. Sobolewski, Time-resolved photoresponse in the resistive
ﬂux-ﬂow state in YBaCuO superconducting microbridges,
Supercond.
Sci. Technol., vol. 16 pp. 911-915, July 2003
[7] B. Utz, R. Semerad, M. Bauer, W. Prusseit, P. Berberich, and H. Kinder,
Deposition of YBCO and NBCO ﬁlms on areas of 9 inches in diameter,
IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1272-1277, 1997.
[8] F. Laviano, D. Botta, R. Gerbaldo, G. Ghigo, L. Gozzelino, L. Gianni, S.
Zannella, and E. Mezzetti, Thickness dependance of the current density
distribution in superconducting ﬁlms,
Physica C, vol. 404, pp. 220-225,
2004.
[9] F. Laviano, R. Gerbaldo, G. Ghigo , L. Gozzelino, B. Minetti, A. Rovelli,
and E. Mezzetti, THz detection above 77K in YBCO ﬁlms patterned by
heavy-ion lithography,
IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 10, pp. 863-868,
2010.
[10] A. Rovelli, A. Amato, D. Botta, A. Chiodoni, R. Gerbaldo, G. Ghigo,
L. Gozzelino, F. Laviano, B. Minetti, and E. Mezzetti, A new apparatus
for deep patterning of beam sensitive target by means of high energy
ion beam,
Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. B, vol. 240, no. 4, pp.
842-849, 2005.
[11] A. Sharma, Seasonal to interannual rainfall probabilistic forecasts for
improved water supply management: 1 - A strategy for system predictor
identiﬁcation,
Journal of Hydrology, vol. 239, pp. 232-239, 2000.
[12] L. Mesin, F. Orione, R. Taormina, E. Pasero, A feature selection method
for air quality forecasting,
Proceedings of the 20th International Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ICANN), Thessaloniki, Greece,
September 15-18, 2010.
98
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

