Serious Games Assisted By Playware As A Way To Improve Socio-Emotional Skills 
In Children With Autism Spectrum Disorder 
 
José Azevedo1, Vinicius Silva2 
1Dept. of Industrial Electronics  
2Algoritmi Research Centre  
University of Minho 
Guimarães, Portugal 
[email: a70448, a65312]@alunos.uminho.pt 
Filomena Soares1,2, João Sena Esteves1,2, and Ana 
Paula Pereira3  
3Research Centre on Education, Institute of Education, 
University of Minho 
Braga, Portugal 
[email: fsoares, sena]@dei.uminho.pt, 
appereira@ie.uminho.pt 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a project developed with the 
aim of promoting emotional skills in children with Autism 
Spectrum Disorders (ASD). The project involves a serious 
game and a playware object, which is a physical component 
that allows the user to interactively play the serious game. The 
playware object has six buttons, each one showing an emoji 
with a specific facial expression and communicates via 
Bluetooth with the serious game app installed in an Android 
device. The facial expressions used are: happiness, sadness, 
fear, anger, surprise and neutral/normal. They were applied to 
the 
three 
game 
activities 
(imitation, 
recognition 
and 
storytelling). The chain of tests started with an online 
questionnaire to validate the avatars created to represent the 
previously mentioned facial expressions in the game, which 
was followed by a usability test of the application (serious game 
and playware object) with six typically developing children. 
Finally, the three game activities were tested with six children 
with ASD in three/four sessions. Due to the small test group 
and reduced number of sessions, the primary objective was to 
assess if the target group accepted the application. In fact, it 
had a high level of approval regarding both the serious game 
and the playware object. 
Keywords - Serious Games; Playware; Autism Spectrum 
Disorder; Emotions. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Humans are social by nature. Every interaction is 
emphasized by the participants’ emotions, which are 
constantly present during their lives. Being unable of 
“reading” the emotional state of their peers is a very 
significant deficit for anyone. This is the situation in which 
children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) usually find 
themselves 
in, 
since 
they 
struggle 
with 
emotions 
interpretation, replication and control. This fact is present 
throughout their lives but may have a reduced effect if the 
subject undergoes behavioural intervention and/or receives 
specialized education. 
Several works have been developed in areas, such as 
robotics and software engineering, in the form of serious 
games [1]–[6], playware technology [7]–[11] and robots 
[12]–[19], among others, with the aim of facilitating the 
assimilation and improvement of emotional skills by children 
with ASD. 
Playware is the term attributed to the use of intelligent 
technology that aims at producing playful experiences by 
combining the use of both hardware and software [7]. 
This project integrates playware and serious games with 
the objective of delivering an interactive and appellative 
serious game to the user, allowing him/her to improve 
his/her socio-emotional skills.  
This article is divided into four sections: Section 2 
addresses the application, presenting the playware object and 
the serious game, Section 3 focus on the obtained results and 
Section 4 presents the concluding thoughts. 
II. 
THE APPLICATION 
The application is composed of a serious game and a 
playware object. The goal was creating a serious game to 
deliver the information in a “funny” way. A playware object 
was added with the aim of making the game even more 
attractive and interactive, working as a reinforcement. 
 
A. Playware Object 
A playware object was created for this project to act as 
the intermediary between the user and the Android device 
(Fig. 1).  
 
 
Figure 1. The playware object that acts as the game controller 
 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The style chosen for the playware was a panel of six 
buttons, which is simple, making it easy to assimilate 
information, acting as an intuitive controller. Furthermore, 
the fact that all six buttons are visible at once facilitates the 
task of going through the facial expressions available to 
choose from and decide upon the one that the user finds 
more appropriate. 
The playware object integrates a microcontroller, which 
detects which button was pressed and sends the respective 
signal to the serious game wirelessly through a Bluetooth 
module. 
 
B. Serious Game 
The serious game is the core of the application, because it 
is where all the information is centred. It was developed for 
Android and, during the test phase, it was played in an 
Android tablet. Upon the start, the serious game opens the 
main screen, i.e., the menu (Fig. 2, in Portuguese). From the 
menu, the user can choose one of the three game modes to 
play (imitation, recognition or storytelling), access the 
options menu (to adjust the volume, start the Bluetooth 
connection or access the scoreboard) or quit the game. 
 
 
Figure 2. The serious game main menu (in Portuguese) – Imitation, 
Recognition, Storytelling and Options buttons respectively. 
 
 
Visually, the serious game has a very simplistic and clean 
design, not only in the main menu, but also throughout the 
game itself, so the users’ attention will not change its focus 
towards unnecessary features. 
Note that the chosen game language is Portuguese, due to 
the target group. 
 
1) Imitation game mode 
In this game mode, several different facial expressions 
displayed by the avatar are presented to the user, one at a 
time. After stating what emotion is being displayed, the user 
him/herself replicates that emotion. This set of instructions is 
given to the user in a pre-game screen, designed for this 
purpose. 
The game is played side by side with a therapist/teacher 
that acts as a reinforcement to motivate the user to show the 
facial expression that matches each emotion. This agent has 
also the role of evaluating if the correct facial expression is 
replicated and sending the respective feedback to the serious 
game.  
2) Recognition game mode 
The instruction screen tells the user how to perform this 
game mode, which he/she does using the playware object.  
The same set of images (avatars) is presented to the 
player, but the task is different. In this case, the user looks at 
the display, identifies the emotion that the avatar is 
portraying and chooses the emoji present in the playware 
object that more accurately shows that emotion.  
3) Storytelling game mode 
This is the hardest of all three game activities. 
Throughout the exhibition of 15 images, each displaying a 
unique scenario with its own narrative, the user listens to the 
story and, at the end, he/she is prompted to tell what emotion 
the main character was feeling in that specific situation. 
The answer is transmitted to the serious game in the same 
manner used in the recognition game mode, i.e., by the user, 
through the playware object. 
III. 
RESULTS 
The first test that was performed had the objective of 
validating the avatars (Fig. 3) that were created to represent 
each of the six previously mentioned facial expressions. This 
was possible to achieve due to an on-line questionnaire that 
was developed for this purpose. After 114 submissions, all 
avatars had an accuracy of over 90% for the emotion that 
they meant to portrait. The values were: fear – 94.7%, 
surprise – 93%, neutral – 95.6%, happiness – 99.1%, sadness 
– 98.2% and anger – 99.1%. 
A usability test of the application was then performed 
with six typically developing children that were asked to 
look at the avatars and say what emotion they were 
representing. After, they looked at the emojis and chose the 
one that they felt matched that emotion.  
It is worth to point out that only two of the six children 
did not answer correctly to all questions (each failed one 
emotion). 
 
 
Figure 3. Avatars used in the serious game 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
The last round of tests was performed over the course of 
a maximum of four sessions with children with ASD, with 
ages ranging between 6 to 10 years old, where data was 
saved considering the time they took to answer and if that 
answer was correct or not. For the purpose of anonymity, the 
children will be referred as subject 1 to 6 (or S1 to S6). 
 
A. Subject 1 
The teachers considered that the two activities, recognize 
and imitate facial expressions, would be easy for Subject 1. 
On the other hand, the storytelling game would be 
challenging for her.  
In fact, as it is visible in Figures 4 to 6, both the imitation 
activity, as well as the recognition activity were executed 
flawlessly, and it is possible to see a significant increase in 
the percentage of correct answers between both sessions for 
the storytelling game mode. 
It is to note that subject 1 was highly participative and 
stated that she enjoyed these activities very much. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Results for the imitation activity from S1 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Results for the recognition activity from S1 
 
Figure 6. Results for the storytelling activity from S1 
B. Subject 2 
Subject 2 demonstrated a good understanding of the 
game and it is clearly visible the improvement in both time 
and percentage of correct answers for the recognition activity 
(Fig. 7).  
The imitation game mode was slightly more difficult, but 
S2 was able to identify emotions and replicate them, for the 
most part (Fig. 8). 
The storytelling activity was by far the hardest (Fig. 9), 
which was expected. It should also be mentioned that even 
though the number of correct answers for this game mode 
improved in the second session, the therapist needed to be 
more interventive, which did not happen for the two other 
game modes, in any of the sessions. 
 
Figure 7. Results for the recognition activity from S2 
 
 
Figure 8. Results for the imitation activity from S2 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 9. Results for the storytelling activity from S2 
C. Subject 3 
This child had already studied emotions before and was 
very 
participative, 
which 
contributed 
to 
the 
good 
performance demonstrated and visible in Figures 10 to 12. 
The main issue was the “fear” of giving wrong answers, 
something that was more present in the last sessions and 
even led him to quit the activity. 
Improvements are very visible, especially in the first two 
game modes.  
The storytelling activity is a particular case, because the 
data gathered from session 1 is only regarding seven 
answers. Subject 3 quit the activity at that point and only 
completed all the fifteen stories on the second session.  
 
Figure 10. Results for the imitation activity from S3 
 
Figure 11. Results for the recognition activity from S3 
 
Figure 12. Results for the storytelling activity from S3 
 
D. Subject 4 
Subject 4 was very young and had a lot of difficulties 
playing the game in a correct manner. 
Most of the time he was distracted, focusing on the 
screen of the Android device and trying to touch the avatar 
face. He could not replicate emotions and did not show any 
interest in doing so, which led that activity to fail completely.  
The recognition game mode followed similar steps. The 
therapist had to intervene in the session trying to obtain an 
answer from the child, which was almost always the wrong 
one.  
Since both the imitation and the recognition activities 
were unsuccessful, the conclusion was that there was no 
point in keep trying during further sessions, because he 
would not engage in the activity, due to the lack of attention 
demonstrated. 
 
E. Subject 5 
This child was very participative and autonomous, stating 
more than once that the game was interesting and funny to 
play. 
Her main difficulty was interpreting emotions, especially 
when those emotions were shown by the emojis. 
In the imitation game mode, she had an easier time 
replicating the facial expressions than identifying emotions 
(Fig. 13).  
Similarly to the imitation activity, the recognition game 
was played during all four sessions. The results are visible in 
Fig.14 and show an improvement in the number of correct 
answers, even though interlinked with an increase in 
response time. 
The storytelling activity was the one where she showed 
more difficulties (Fig. 15), what was expected since she 
would have to interpret specific situations and have a deeper 
knowledge regarding emotions.  
 
 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 13. Results for the imitation activity from S5 
 
Figure 14. Results for the recognition activity from S5 
 
Figure 15. Results for the storytelling activity from S5 
F. Subject 6 
No data was gathered regarding subject 6 because he did 
not engage in the activity at all.  
The lack of attention was the main issue. This child went 
into the room and shifted his focus between everyone and 
everything around him. Furthermore, he could not 
understand the game or even pay attention to the application 
long enough to start playing.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper presented the work developed using a serious 
game and a playware object, aimed at improving the socio-
emotional skills of children with ASD. The main goal was to 
determine if this application would be well accepted by the 
target group and its impact in teaching and/or facilitating the 
learning of emotions. 
After testing it first with six typically developing children 
and later with six children with ASD (these ones during four 
sessions), it was noticeable that both the playware and the 
serious game are intuitive, attractive, and easy to use. The 
entire application was well received and even though the 
sample size was too small, improvements were visible, 
indicating that this type of tool could act as a mediator in the 
learning of emotional skills. 
Future work with the application will be based on more 
testing, with a larger group and over a larger period. This 
type of testing allows for a better support and provides more 
reliability to the results and respective conclusions, 
consequently determining if this type of tool really acts as a 
facilitator in the learning of social skills. There is also a high 
possibility of integrating this application with other works 
developed by the group Robótica-Autismo (http://robotica-
autismo.dei.uminho.pt/) which would involve humanoid 
robots like ZECA [15] 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to express their acknowledgments 
to COMPETE: POCI-01-0145-FEDER-007043 and FCT – 
Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia within the Project 
Scope: UID/CEC/00319/2013. Vinicius Silva also thanks 
FCT 
for 
the 
PhD 
scholarship 
SFRH/BD/ 
SFRH/BD/133314/2017. The authors thank the teachers and 
students of the Elementary School of Gualtar (EB1/JI 
Gualtar) in Braga for the participation in the tests.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
H. Noor, F. Shahbodin, and N. Pee, “Serious game for 
autism children: review of literature,” World Acad. Sci., 
vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 554–559, 2012. 
[2] 
A. Z. Hassan et al., “Developing the concept of money by 
interactive computer games for autistic children,” Proc. - 
2011 IEEE Int. Multimedia, ISM 2011, pp. 559–564, 
2011. 
[3] 
A. Anwar, M. M. Rahman, S. M. Ferdous, S. A. Anik, and 
S. I. Ahmed, “A computer game based approach for 
increasing fluency in the speech of the autistic children,” 
Proc. 2011 11th IEEE Int. Conf. Adv. Learn. Technol. 
ICALT 2011, pp. 17–18, 2011. 
[4] 
M. Frutos, I. Bustos, B. G. Zapirain, and A. M. Zorrilla, 
“Computer game to learn and enhance speech problems 
for children with autism,” Proc. CGAMES’2011 USA - 
16th Int. Conf. Comput. Games AI, Animat. Mobile, 
Interact. Multimedia, Educ. Serious Games, pp. 209–216, 
2011. 
[5] 
S. Bernardini, K. Porayska-Pomsta, and T. J. Smith, 
“ECHOES: An intelligent serious game for fostering 
social communication in children with autism,” Inf. Sci. 
(Ny)., vol. 264, pp. 41–60, 2014. 
[6] 
Z. S. S. De Urturi, A. M. M. Zorrilla, and B. G. B. G. 
Zapirain, “Serious Game based on first aid education for 
individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) using 
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

android mobile devices,” Proc. CGAMES’2011 USA - 
16th Int. Conf. Comput. Games AI, Animat. Mobile, 
Interact. Multimedia, Educ. Serious Games, pp. 223–227, 
2011. 
[7] 
H. H. Lund, T. Klitbo, and C. Jessen, “Playware 
technology for physically activating play,” Artif. Life 
Robot., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 165–174, 2005. 
[8] 
G. N. Yannakakis, O. M, J. Hallam, and H. H. Lund, 
“Comparative Fun Analysis in the Innovative Playware 
Game Platform,” Proc. 1st World Conf. Fun ’n Games, 
pp. 64–70, 2006. 
[9] 
H. H. Lund and P. Marti, “Designing modular robotic 
playware,” Proc. - IEEE Int. Work. Robot Hum. Interact. 
Commun., pp. 115–121, 2009. 
[10] 
H. H. Lund, L. S. D. Jensen, Y. Ssessanga, S. Cataldo, 
and K. I. Yahya-Malima, “An approach for a national 
eHealth implementation - The case of modular interactive 
tiles for rehabilitation,” 2015 IST-Africa Conf. IST-Africa 
2015, pp. 1–10, 2015. 
[11] 
K. Suzuki, “Social Playware: Device-mediated social 
interaction for therapeutic activities,” Proc. - IEEE Int. 
Work. Robot Hum. Interact. Commun., vol. 2014–Octob, 
no. October, pp. 69–72, 2014. 
[12] 
S. Costa, F. Soares, and C. Santos, “Facial expressions 
and gestures to convey emotions with a humanoid robot,” 
Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. (including Subser. Lect. Notes 
Artif. Intell. Lect. Notes Bioinformatics), vol. 8239 LNAI, 
pp. 542–551, 2013. 
[13] 
H. Kozima, M. P. Michalowski, and C. Nakagawa, 
“Keepon: A playful robot for research, therapy, and 
entertainment,” Int. J. Soc. Robot., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 3–18, 
2009. 
[14] 
B. Vanderborght et al., “Using the social robot probo as a 
social story telling agent for children with ASD,” Interact. 
Stud., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 348–372, 2012. 
[15] 
S. Costa, F. Soares, A. P. Pereira, C. Santos, and A. 
Hiolle, “A pilot study using imitation and storytelling 
scenarios as activities for labelling emotions by children 
with autism using a humanoid robot,” IEEE ICDL-
EPIROB 2014 - 4th Jt. IEEE Int. Conf. Dev. Learn. 
Epigenetic Robot., pp. 299–304, 2014. 
[16] 
P. Chevalier et al., "Dialogue Design for a Robot-Based 
Face-Mirroring Game to Engage Autistic Children with 
Emotional Expressions ", “Social Robotics,” vol. 7621, 
4th International Conference, ICSR 2012, Chengdu, 
China, October 29-31, 2012., pp. 546–555, 2012. 
[17] 
“Aims &amp; Objectives – DE-ENIGMA.” [Online]. 
Available: http://de-enigma.eu/features/aims-objectives/. 
[Retrieved: Feb,2018]. 
[18] 
A. Ghorbandaei Pour, A. Taheri, M. Alemi, and A. 
Meghdari, “Human–Robot Facial Expression Reciprocal 
Interaction Platform: Case Studies on Children with 
Autism,” Int. J. Soc. Robot., pp. 179-198, 2018. 
[19] 
D. O. David, C. A. Costescu, S. Matu, A. Szentagotai, and 
A. Dobrean, “Developing Joint Attention for Children 
with Autism in Robot-Enhanced Therapy,” Int. J. Soc. 
Robot., pp. 1-11, 2018. 
 
 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

