Ultraviolet Photodetectors Fabricated on 4H-SiC 
 
Andrzej Kociubiński, Mariusz Duk, Krzysztof Muzyka 
Institute of Electronics and Information Technology 
Lublin University of Technology 
Lublin, Poland 
e-mail: akociub@semiconductor.pl, m.duk@pollub.pl, 
krzysztof.muzyka.1990@gmail.com 
Michał Borecki 
Institute of Microelectronics and Optoelectronics 
Warsaw University of Technology 
Warsaw, Poland 
e-mail: borecki@imio.pw.edu.pl
 
 
Abstract—The aim of the present work is an application of the 
fabrication 
technologies 
of 
p-n 
junctions 
working as  
photodetectors into the ultraviolet region. Usually, the 
ultraviolet (UV) photodetectors are fabricated as a standard p-
n diode structure with the anode on the top and the cathode on 
the bottom on silicon carbide (4H-SiC) substrates. The critical 
part for detectors is the formation of the p-n junction. It can be 
done by different technological processes, such as ion 
implantation, epitaxy, etc. This paper presents three different 
technological approaches to fabricate UV photodetectors as p-
n photodiode. 
Keywords- ultraviolet photodetector; semiconductor; thin 
film; ultraviolet light. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Ultraviolet (UV) photodetectors have drawn extensive 
attention owing to their applications in industrial, 
environmental and even biological fields. All these 
applications require very sensitive devices with high signal-
to-noise ratio and sometimes high response speed. Compared 
to UV-enhanced Si photodetectors, a new generation of wide 
bandgap semiconductors, such as III–V nitrides, gallium 
nitride (GaN) and SiC, allow to position the p-n junction 
deeper in the semiconductor structure, which results in lack 
of sensitivity to unwanted planar defects. Moreover, the SiC 
material is present in different morphology monolithic and 
amorphous, which enables realization of advanced stacked 
photodetecting 
structures 
[1]. 
The 
monolithic 
SiC 
photodiodes 
are 
commonly 
characterized 
by 
high 
responsivity, high thermal stability, robust radiation hardness 
and high response speed. But, their parameters depend on the 
material polytype. The 4H-SiC polytype device, due to its 
large bandgap (Eg=3.26 eV), offers lower leakage current 
and excess noise factors compared to other SiC polytypes 
such as the 6H-SiC and 3C-SiC. The aim of this work is the 
presentation of the fabrication techniques of p-n SiC 
junctions, aimed to work as photodetectors in UV region, 
and comparison of obtained results in the form of collected 
electrical characteristics. 
The paper consists of 4 sections. The first section is the 
introduction, where the new generation of wide bandgap 
materials for the ultraviolet photodetectors are presented. 
The second section describes 3 fabrication approaches of SiC 
p-n junctions. The results of the electrical characterization of 
the 
photodiodes 
are 
presented 
in 
section 
three.  
The conclusion is gathered in section four. 
II. 
TECHNOLOGIES AND ELECTRICAL 
CHARACTERIZATION OF SIC P-N JUNCTIONS 
A p-n junction photodiode is just a p-n junction diode 
that has been specifically fabricated and encapsulated to 
permit light penetration into the vicinity of the metallurgical 
junction. The formation of the p-n junction is critical for 
detectors. It can be done by different technological 
processes, such as ion implantation, epitaxy etc. 
Three different technological approaches to fabricate UV 
photodetectors as p-n photodiode where the p-n junction is 
made by [2]–[4]: 
 p-type epitaxial layer grown in the chemical vapor 
deposition process (CVD) (#1), 
 4H-SiC wafers purchased (Cree Inc.) with formed p-n 
epitaxial layer (#2), 
 multiple optimized plasma Al ion implantation (#3), 
are under examination. All photodiodes are based on the 
SiC(n++) substrate with a back metal electrode on the bottom, 
which use 3-inch diameter 4H-SiC wafers purchased from 
Cree Inc. The junction is formed from the top by the above 
mentioned technologies. The whole structure has a metal 
electrode formed on the top. For experiments, the wafer was 
diced into segments (10 mm × 10 mm) with a diamond 
cutting saw. 
A. Approach #1: p-type epitaxial layer grown in the CVD 
process 
The p-n junctions were fabricated on the substrate having 
an n-type resistivity of 0.015-0.028 Ωcm (~1018 cm-3).  
A p-type epitaxial layer was grown on the (0001) Si face via 
CVD to a thickness of 0.5 μm and a carrier concentration of 
1015 cm-3, as presented in Figure 1. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 1.  Cross-section of UV photodetector structure with p-type 
epitaxial layer grown in the CVD process. 
The devices are fabricated using mesa geometry to 
delineate the p-n junction by standard photolithography. The 
junction was passivated by a thin layer of thermal oxide, 
which was followed by plasma-enhanced-chemical-vapor 
deposited silicon oxide (SiO2). Silicon oxide provides an 
edge termination of the diode metal contact. The electrodes 
on n-type and p-type regions were formed by titanium (Ti) 
and Ti/Al (aluminium) evaporation (lift-off technique), 
respectively. The contacts were annealed for 5 minutes at 
1050°C in argon (Ar) ambient using a rapid thermal 
annealing (RTP). 
B. Approach #2: 4H-SiC wafers purchased (Cree Inc.) 
with formed p-n epitaxial layer 
In the approach #2, contrary to approach #1, the p-type 
layer was formed by implantation using plasma source of 
aluminum ions through windows made in a 1um thick 
deposited oxide. Aluminum is the preferred dopant to 
produce p-type regions in SiC because of its stability during 
post-implantation annealing. In fact, the severe ion-induced 
lattice damage caused by the implantation process requires 
an appropriate post-implantation annealing for the electrical 
activation of the dopant and for recovering the crystalline 
structure, even when an ion implantation at high temperature 
is performed.  
The dopant activation was made by subsequent annealing 
at 1600°C for 20 min. The electrodes on n-type and p-type 
regions were formed by Ti/Al/Ti and Ti evaporation (lift-off 
technique). Both contacts were annealed simultaneously at 
1050°C for 5 min. in Ar ambient. The scheme of the 
obtained structure is presented in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2.  Cross-section of UV photodetector structure with formed p-n 
epitaxial layer in producer (Cree Inc.). 
C. Approach #3 multiple optimized plasma Al ion 
implantation 
The diodes were fabricated on wafers consisting of  
n-type 4H-SiC substrate with resistivity of 0.021 Ωcm, 
0.5 μm thick n-type buffer epitaxial layer with a doping 
concentration of 1×1018 cm-3 and 4.5 μm n-type top epitaxial 
layer with a doping concentration of 1.52×1016 cm-3. The 
cross-section of the fabricated diodes is presented in 
Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3.  Cross-section of UV photodetector structure with multiple 
optimized plasma Al ion implantation. 
The p-type dopant was again Al and the technology was 
the implantation. But, the main boundary conditions of 
implantation as maximally flat (quasi flat, box-shape) profile 
were taken into implementation. According to the 
experimental results, it was assumed that minimum 
implantation energy should be around 55 keV and should not 
exceed 250 keV. Such process of the flat distribution of p-
type Al dopant and a box-shaped profile was realized with 
multiple energy ion implantations. The total fluence was 
7×1014 cm-2. 
III. 
RESULTS 
The electrical characterization of the p-n photodiodes is 
mainly covered by measurements of reverse characteristics at 
room 
temperature 
in 
the 
dark 
conditions. 
These 
characteristics are most suitable to the leakage current 
representation, which determines the photodetector quality 
and sensitivity. The results of the electrical characterization 
of the prepared photodiodes structures with the use of 
KEITHLEY SMU 237 [5] are presented in Figure 4.  
1,00E-08
1,00E-07
1,00E-06
1,00E-05
1,00E-04
1,00E-03
1,00E-02
1,00E-01
1,00E+00
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Current [A/cm2]
Voltage [V]
#1
#2
#3
 
Figure 4.  Comparison of reverse I-V characteristics of the circular SiC  
p-n photodiodes for all three technological approaches. 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

A comparison of the obtained results shows that the 
optimization of the quality of p-n junctions leads to expected 
improvement of photodiode quality by reducing the leakage 
current by about one order of magnitude. The best 
characteristics of the device fabricated by approach #3 can 
also be explained by the fact that the p-type region was 
formed not by a simple singe implantation, but by an 
optimized multiple ion implantations. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, the general ideas of various technological 
approaches 
of 
the 
p-n 
junctions’ 
formation 
and 
characterization were presented. For the UV photodetector 
purpose, the most suitable technological approach is 
optimized multiple Al plasma ion implantations. Purchased 
4H-SiC substrates with the epitaxial p-n layer are also good 
for photodiodes preparation. The epitaxial layer grown in the 
CVD process looks as the least promising technology for use 
in SiC photodiodes. In future work, we are planning to test 
structures developed with the use of different UV radiation 
sources. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by the NCN grant 
2012/06/A/ST700398 “Oxide nanostructures for electronic, 
optoelectronic and photovoltaic applications”. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Vieira, M. Vieira, P. Louro, A. Fantoni, and V. Silva, “SiC 
multilayer photonic structures: A new active filter design,” 
The Third International Conference on Sensor Device 
Technologies and Applications (SENSORDEVICES 2012) 
IARIA, Aug. 2012, pp. 25-30, ISBN: 978-1-61208-208-0. 
[2] A. Kociubinski et al., “Fabrication and characterization of 
epitaxial 4H-SiC pn junctions,” Proc. SPIE 9228, Optical 
Fibers and Their Applications 2014, pp. 922804-1 - 922804-6. 
[3] A. Kociubiński et al., “Technology and characterization of 
4H-SiC p-i-n junctions,” Proc. SPIE 8903, Photonics 
Applications in Astronomy, Communications, Industry, and 
High-Energy Physics Experiments 2013, pp. 89030V1-
89030V6. 
[4] M. Borecki et al., “Large-area transparent in visible range 
silicon carbide photodiode,” Proc. SPIE 8903, Photonics 
Applications in Astronomy, Communications, Industry, and 
High-Energy Physics Experiments 2013, pp. 89030H1-
89030H9. 
[5] Keithley Products | Tektronix, https://www.tek.com/keithley. 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

