Intelligent Road Infrastructure - A Concept Study
Ralf Wunderlich∗, Sebastian Strache∗, Christian Busen†, Bernhard Steinauer†, and Stefan Heinen∗
∗Chair of Integrated Analog Circuits
†The Institute of Road and Trafﬁc Engineering Aachen
RWTH Aachen University, D-52062 Aachen, Germany
Email: ias@rwth-aachen.de
Abstract—A promising approach for future road construction
is based on a surface which is manufactured in a production plant
and can be unrolled on a conventional base. This paper deals with
the idea to make the road ”intelligent” by integrating a net of
sensor nodes. Equipped with acceleration sensors the sensor net
can detect the trafﬁc situation. With the knowledge of the exact
position and velocity of each car a driver assistance system is
able to ﬁnd the fastest route or to give an accident warning on a
very reliable level. This concept study describes the main idea of
a low cost, energy harvesting sensor node containing an MEMS
accelerometer with frontend, a processing unit, a photovoltaic
energy harvesting power supply and a wireless communication
link.
Keywords—road construction, intelligent road, MEMS, energy
harvesting, sensor node
I. INTRODUCTION
The next step in road building is to introduce a high quality,
centimeter thin top cover manufactured in production plants
probably on the base of a synthetic material. A better noise
reduction and a lower rolling drag can be achieved since
a production in a plant is done under best conditions. The
feasibility of a ”rollable” road has been shown in [1] and [2].
A conventional street needs a large amount of (oil based)
bitumen, which is running out and therefore more expensive.
In order to damp down the cost increase the amount of bitumen
needed has to be reduced by decreasing the thickness of the
bitumen based top layer of the road or to ﬁnd a low priced
suitable alternative material.
The road networks of developed countries are the backbones
of their economies. To increase their capacity without building
new roads intelligent trafﬁc management systems are needed.
These systems need exact information about the trafﬁc ﬂow to
avoid trafﬁc jams and minimize the individual traveling times.
The quality of trafﬁc management heavily depends on good
input data.
Further it is getting more and more challenging and ex-
pensive to enhance the safety with vehicle based systems.
In near future driving assistance systems will be upgraded
to highly automated, nearly autonomous systems which need
more reliable data to proceed. Vehicle based sensor systems
are not able to provide these systems with data on the
required quality level in every situation as shown by [3]. In
contrast to this the here proposed infrastructure can be used
for autonomous driving in the long run. Furthermore it can
also provide information about the road situation ahead of
the individual vehicle like humidity, temperature and slickness
which are unknown for vehicle based systems.
II. SYSTEM CONCEPT
Fig. 1 shows a cross section of the ”intelligent” road. The
base layer can be build conventional, the top layer is called
car-pad (analogy to carpet). The centimeter thin, high quality,
industrialy produced car-pad is unrolled and mounted to the
conventional base. Therefore the time required for construction
works is short.
The industrial fabrication of the car-pad enables the integra-
tion of sensors inside the top layer of the road (colored dots
in Fig. 1). Integrated wireless sensor nodes allow to measure
passing vehicles and different ambient road conditions like
temperature or moisture. The cost of the sensor net is almost
insigniﬁcant compared to present-day’s overall road costs.
Each passing vehicle generates structure-borne sound which
propagate through the top layer of the road and can be detected
by an accelerometer (see Fig. 2). Accelerometers have very
small dimensions, are cheap and can easily be integrated inside
a sensor node.
After preprocessing, the data are transmitted to small base
stations mounted in beacons at the side of the road. These
base stations combine the information of the different sensor
nodes to a more global view of the trafﬁc ﬂow at this part
of the road. The base stations transmit this information to a
central trafﬁc management center and to the passing cars.
Due to the very dense sensor network not only the trafﬁc
ﬂow but also local events like accidents or other dangerous
situations like cars in blind spots can be detected and road
users can be warned. Since the information is determined by
the infrastructure and not by a car based system, the system
will even work if most users are not equipped with a vehicle
on-board unit. To participate from warning signal no special
hardware is needed. The on-board unit can be integrated into
the navigation system.
Subsequently the energy harvesting sensor node is dis-
cussed. Besides the utilization in the road, this sensor node can
also be used for structural health monitoring (e. g. in bridges
or buildings).
III. INITIAL MEASUREMENTS
To the knowledge of the authors this is the ﬁrst project
which wants to use the structure-borne sound of vehicles for
their detection. Since there were no data available for the
1
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

 
 
Stimulation / Propagation
Detection / Preprocessing
Transmit 
Transmit - Receive
Calculate Traffic Situation
Receive - Act
Fig. 2.
Working principal.
damping of the structure-borne sound nor the spectrum and the
amplitude of that sound a measurement series was performed.
A
commercial
accelerometer
with
a
sensitivity
of
2270 mVs2/m was used. Fig. 3 shows the accelerometers
output for a passing car with 50 km/h in a distance of 30 cm.
The peaks in the acceleration show the points when the car’s
axes passes the sensor.
In order to reduce the amount of transmitted data, prepro-
cessing is needed inside the sensor node. This can be realized
using a straight forward ﬁlter as shown in Fig. 4 which can
recognize the axes of passing vehicles.
The ﬁlter output is drawn in Fig. 5. Its period was experi-
mentally determined to 10 ms, the sample time to 1 ms.
IV. SENSOR NODE
The structure of the sensor node to be integrated in the top
layer of the road is shown in Fig 6. The power supply of
the sensor node consists of series connected solar cells, power
regulators, an energy storage and a power management unit.
A MEMS (Microelectromechanical System) accelerometer is
the primary sensor of the node to detect the structure born
sound of passing vehicles. Further sensors for temperature and
 
 
Car-Pad
10 – 15 mm
Asphalt Binder*
Base Layer*
*Alternative:
Concrete Carriage-Way
 
Sensor Node
Fig. 1.
Structure ”intelligent” road.
1 Second
Fig. 3.
Passing car with 50 km/h in 30 cm distance.
(z-1)
Ts z
 From
 ADC
U
 To
 Logic
20
Fig. 4.
Digital Filter Algorithm.
Fig. 5.
Recognition with the ﬁlter of a passing car with 50 km/h in 30 cm
distance.
humidity can also be attached to the ASIC. Only the solar cells,
the supercapacitor and the accelerometer sensing element are
2
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Solar Cell
DC/DC-
Converter and 
Energy Storage
Power-
Management-
Unit
Sensor-
Frontend
MEMS-
Accelerometer
Digital Signal 
Processing
Transmitter and 
Receiver
Extension for further sensors  
possible
ASIC
Fig. 6.
Block diagram sensor node.
external components. All other functions are fully integrated
into the ASIC. By this the sensor node dimensions, its power
consumption and its price are drastically reduced.
In the following section the power supply and its compo-
nents are described. Afterwards the different building blocks
of the sensor node, the transmitter, the MEMS accelerometer
and the accelerometer frontend are presented.
A. Power Supply
The power supply for the sensor node inside the top layer of
the road is a critical issue. A lifetime of 10 years is targeted
for the top layer of the road. Therefore it is necessary that
the senor node can operate for an even longer period of time.
Batteries are not suitable for this application, because it is not
possible to operate the sensor nodes for the required lifetime
with affordable and small enough batteries inside the top layer
of the road. Especially the high temperature differences during
a year shorten the lifetimes of batteries and make their use in
this application impossible [4].
Since primary batteries are not an option energy harvesting
has to be used for the power supply. In [5] different energy
sources like solar cells, vibration or temperature energy har-
vesting have been compared to ﬁnd the optimal energy source
for this application. Solar cells have been selected, because
they offer the highest energy density for this application.
Furthermore they are well studied and available for low cost.
Their only drawback is the need for a transparent package with
low reﬂection to maximize the irradiated power for the solar
cell. To keep the sensor node operating during night or times
when the solar cell is covered with e. g. snow an energy storage
is required. In addition a power management unit is needed to
control the electronics to maximize the harvested energy and
the operation time of the sensor node. This section describes
the structure of the power supply and its components.
1) Photovoltaic Cell: Today different types of solar cells
based on different materials like monocrystalline silicon or
organic polymers are available. In comparison to the other
types silicon thin ﬁlm solar cells offer medium efﬁciency of
more than 10 %, low price and long term stability [6]. Fur-
thermore the efﬁciency of amorphous silicon is quite constant
even for weak irradiated powers [7]. To consider the life time
degradation an efﬁciency of only 7.8 % is assumed for the
power supply.
2) Energy Storage: The output power of the photovoltaic
cells depends on the irradiated power which varies strongly.
Therefore an energy storage is needed to supply the sensor
node with enough energy if the solar cell cannot power
it alone. For this application the speciﬁc energy and the
number of charge-discharge cycles are the most important
parameters for the energy storage. The speciﬁc power is not
important because the sensor node needs less than 1 mW. Li-
ion rechargeable batteries and supercapacitors are the most
promising energy storage technologies for this demands [8].
Due to the harsh temperatures between -40 and 80°C in this
applications batteries are not suitable because their capacity
would drastically decrease within the ﬁrst years of operation
[4]. That is why supercapacitors have been selected as energy
storage technology. They do not limit the lifetime of the sensor
node nor lose much capacity due to the temperature range.
3) Power Management System: Besides the energy source
and storage DC/DC-converters are needed to improve the
available power for the sensor node. A direct connection of the
solar cell to the ASIC with the supercapacitor in parallel would
not work, because the supply voltage would change between
0 V and the open circuit voltage of the solar cells. Therefore
the power supply concept depicted in Fig. 7 was developed.
Instead of one large solar cell, 6 smaller ones with the same
area are connected in series to increase the output voltage. A
multiplexer can connect the supercapacitor or the solar cells to
a charge pump. Instead of directly connecting the solar cells
to the load, a charge pump is used to keep the cells in their
maximum power point. This can increase the harvested energy
by more than 25 % despite the losses in the charge pump
[9]. The output energy from the charge pump can be used to
charge the supercapacitor or directly power the LDO. Using
the Multiplexer (MUX) and Demultiplexer (DEMUX) lowers
the efﬁciency for the direct connection due resistive losses.
Since the blocks only switch infrequent the transistors can be
quite large minimizing the resistive losses. These multiplexers
are used to enable four different operation modes. The ﬁrst
one is used to charge the supercapacitor with the energy out
of the solar cells. In this mode the charge pump performs the
maximum power point tracking and can increase the output
voltage of the solar cells to utilize the full voltage range
(up to 5 V) for the supercapcitor and maximize the stored
charge. The ASIC is powered in the second operation mode
from the supercapcitor. A LDO is used to stabilize the power
supply voltage. Since the losses in the LDO are proportional
to the voltage drop across it, the charge pump is used to
minimize it. The ASIC can also be direct powered via the
charge pump and the LDO if the output power of the solar
cells is sufﬁcient. Furthermore a mixed supply from the solar
cells and the supercapacitor for the ASIC is possible, too.
The power supply of the sensor node has been designed
for an operation in Germany but by adapting the solar cell
area and supercapacitor size it can by used all over the world.
3
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Charge
Pump
SC
SC
ASIC
PMU
DEMUX
MUX
LDO
SCap
Fig. 7.
Power Supply Sensor Node.
The ASIC has to be active every 20 ms for 2 ms to be able to
detect passing vehicles with a speed up to 180 km/h. During
its active phase the ASIC needs less than 3.3 mW. Therefore
it consumes maximal 248 mW per month. Using the method
described in [10] for the area around Aachen in Germany an
average irradiated power of 0.69 kWh/m2 per day can be
calculated for an availability of 95 %. For an efﬁciency of
7.88 % an area of 3 cm2 of the solar cells is enough for the
operation of the sensor node. The efﬁciency of the charge
pump is assumed to be 90 % with a quiescent current of
2 µA. Taking the production variations and degradation over
the lifetime into account the supercapacitor size has been
set to 106 mF which is 40 % larger than needed. The size
of the energy storage enables the sensor node to operate in
total darkness for 31 days which should ensure operation even
during winter with a lot of snow. A more detailed design based
on exact data will lead to a drastic size reduction for the solar
cell and the energy storage, which will lower the price per
sensor node.
B. Transmitter
The transmission of the senor data from the sensor node to
the base station has to be wireless since a wired transmission
would be too complex and expensive. For an approximation
of the required energy for the data transmission the data
packets and the attenuation have to be estimated. One data
packet needs to consists of an ID, the sensor data and a
checksum. It can be dimensioned to be less than 256 bit.
The frequency band for the data transmission should be
selected below 1 GHz due to the better propagation prop-
erties. Therefore the frequency ranges 869.40 − 869.65 MHz
or 869.70 − 870.00 MHz have been selected for the data
transmission. The attenuation for the radio wave could be
calculated to be less than 61 dB for a German highway
with three lanes per direction. This calculation assumes the
absorption coefﬁcient inside the top layer of the road to be
1.67. Since the base station will have more power available
a transmitted power of 0.5 mW is sufﬁcient for a stable data
transmission. For this application the data transmission can be
achieved with less than 2.4 J per data packet and ﬁts well in
the calculated power budget of 3.3 mW for 1 ms [11].
C. MEMS Accelerometer
Acceleration can be detected with different techniques like
capacitive, piezoelectric or piezoresistive sensing. For this
application capacitive MEMS accelerometers are most suit-
able, because they offer a small outline, low cost, low power
consumption and constant quality. Due to their small size they
have a low seismic mass which causes a high mechanical noise
ﬂoor limiting the achievable resolution. The initial measure-
ments on the test track have shown that the required resolution
for the sensor nodes is 1 mg, which can be achieved with
MEMS accelerometers [12]. The challenge for this application
is to maintain the required resolution with as little power con-
sumption as possible and for a competitive price. Therefore the
MEMS accelerometer have to be optimized for the structure
born sound detection and for lowering the requirements for
the readout circuits and its power consumption.
D. Accelerometer Readout Circuit
One main challenge of sensor node design for the ”intel-
ligent” road infrastructure is the power efﬁcient readout of
the capacitive MEMS accelerometer. For a small parasitic
capacitance at the readout node of the sensing element contin-
uous time voltage sensing (CTV) is superior to other readout
techniques like switched capacitor [13]. Furthermore it shows
a better performance for low power readout circuits, because
the resolution is not limited due to noise folding. In [5], [14] a
special readout circuit was designed to meet the requirements
for this application.
The accelerometer readout circuit is based on [12], [15] and
uses dual-chopper stabilization for noise and offset reduction
as well as power saving. As depicted in Fig. 8 the frontend uses
energy efﬁcient square wave stimulation with the frequency
PHH ± PHL on port 1 and 2 of the sensing element. The
acceleration dependent charge variations are evaluated on the
middle port (M) of the sensing element. The ﬁrst operation
ampliﬁer converts the charge into a voltage and adds ﬂicker
noise and offset to the signal. Its gain can be selected with the
gain0 and gain1 switches. A passive mixer is used to mix the
signal down from PHH ± PHL to PHL. Since the ﬂicker noise
and offset is around DC it is mixed up to PHL and apart from
the signal. The second operational ampliﬁer further boosts the
signal and is more energy efﬁcient since it operates at lower
frequencies. After the second mixer the signal is mixed to
DC and the noise is at PHL and PHH ± PHL, respectively.
Therefore the noise can be reduced with a lowpass ﬁlter. The
signal is digitized with an analog to digital converter.
To increase the resolution different calibration cycles are
intended in the readout circuit. The sensor offset, which can
drive the sensor frontend into saturation, is coarse reduced with
an capacitor array at the middle port of the sensing element. A
ﬁne reduction is achieved with an DAC in the input stage of the
second operation ampliﬁer (not depicted in Fig 8). Furthermore
the gain and offset for other building blocks are calibrated. To
achieve the needed resolution of 1 mg a gain of more than
4
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Mixer
A1
A2
Logic
control
Mixer
PHL
C1
C2
Cp
Sensor
LPF
A
D
Digital Output
BGR
Vref,p
Vref,n
Cfb0
Cfb0
Vref,cm
Vref,cm
Vb
PH3
calb0
calb1
cal0
Ccal0
Ccal3
cal3
Ccal4
Ccal7
cal7
cal4
Cfb1
Cfb1
gain0
gain1
gain0
gain1
PHH
1
2
M
temp.
sense
Vref,n
Vref,p
Mod
sense
Vref,n
Vref,p
Mod
Fig. 8.
Accelerometer Frontend.
60 dB is required which limits the input acceleration range
to less than 1 g. The gains of both operational ampliﬁers are
controlled by the logic to keep the frontend from saturating
and therefore increase the acceleration input range.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper a promising concept study of an ”intelligent”
road has been shown. With this road the trafﬁc situation can
be determined without having special equipped cars. Due
to the absolute and accurate position information of each
car the exact trafﬁc situation can be derived. Traditional
navigation systems extended with a receiver can be used as
vehicle on-board units. The system can not only be used for
optimal routing but also to enhance security by giving drivers
assistance and warnings.
It could be shown in a measurement series that structure
born sound can be used to detect vehicles and their speed. The
proposed sensor net can easily and at low cost be integrated
into an industrial fabricated ”rollable” road. We have shown
the sensor node on block level and listed the speciﬁcations.
These speciﬁcations have been veriﬁed by reported circuitries
listed in literature or by own transistor level simulations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. Dirk Droste et al.
from the Robert Bosch GmbH for help and fruitful discussions
concerning MEMS sensors and sensor frontends. The authors
would also like to thank Dr. Christian Lank, who has been
formerly with RWTH ISAC, for a lot of work in the project
proposal.
REFERENCES
[1] L. J. M., J. van der Kooij, R. W. M. Naus, and P. D. Bhairo,
“Apt testing of modular pavement structure rollpave and comparison
with conventional asphalt motorway structures,” Accelerated Pavement
Testing, pp. 1–24, 2004.
[2] J. Groenendijk and G. Westera, “Proefvak rollpave a35. ﬁnal report.”
Innovatieprogramma geluid voor weg- & spoorverkeer (iPG).
[3] S. Deutschle, G. Kessler, C. Lank, G. Hoffmann, M. Hakenberg,
and M. Brummer, “Einsatz elektronisch gekoppelter LKW-Konvois auf
Autobahnen,” ATZ - Automobiltechnische Zeitschrift, 2010.
[4] M. Perrin, P. Malbranche, E. Lemaire-Potteau, B. Willer, M. Soria,
A. Jossen, M. Dahlen, A. Ruddell, I. Cyphelly, G. Semrau, D. Sauer,
and G. Sarre, “Temperature behaviour: Comparison for nine storage
technologies: Results from the investire network,” Journal of Power
Sources,
vol.
154,
no.
2,
pp.
545–549,
2006.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6TH1-4HRMV24-
3/2/b0f09324ad0941ab3d304fa05ef7de14
[5] S. Strache, “System approach for an embedded accelerometer read-out
circuit,” Master’s thesis, RWTH-Aachen University, 2009.
[6] M.
A.
Green,
K.
Emery,
Y.
Hishikawa,
and
W.
Warta,
“Solar cell efﬁciency tables (version 36),” Prog. Photovolt: Res.
Appl., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 346–352, 2010. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/pip.1021
[7] N. Reich, W. van Sark, E. Alsema, S. Kan, S. Silvester, A. van der
Heide, R. Lof, and R. Schropp, “Weak light performance and spectral
response of different solar cell types,” in 20th European Photovoltaic
Solar Energy Conference, 2005.
[8] P.
J.
Hall
and
E.
J.
Bain,
“Energy-storage
technologies
and
electricity
generation,”
Energy
Policy,
vol.
36,
no.
12,
pp.
4352
–
4355,
2008,
foresight
Sustainable
Energy
Management and the Built Environment Project. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6V2W-4TPND6D-
1/2/ba98bed46553588697697d0b58c0a80f
[9] F. Simjee and P. Chou, “Efﬁcient charging of supercapacitors for
extended lifetime of wireless sensor nodes,” Power Electronics, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1526–1536, May 2008.
[10] P. Wagner, Photovoltaik Engineering: Handbuch fr Planung, Entwick-
lung und Anwendung (VDI).
Springer, Berlin, August 2008, vol. 2.
[11] D. Daly and A. Chandrakasan, “An energy-efﬁcient ook transceiver for
wireless sensor networks,” Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Journal of, vol. 42,
no. 5, pp. 1003–1011, May 2007.
[12] D. Fang, H. Qu, and H. Xie, “A 1 mw dual-chopper ampliﬁer for a
50-µg
√
Hz monolithic cmos-mems capacitive accelerometer,” in VLSI
Circuits, 2006. Digest of Technical Papers. 2006 Symposium on, 0-0
2006, pp. 59–60.
[13] N. Yazdi, H. Kulah, and K. Najaﬁ, “Precision readout circuits for
capacitive microaccelerometers,” in Sensors, 2004. Proceedings of IEEE,
Oct. 2004, pp. 28–31 vol.1.
[14] S. Strache, R. Wunderlich, D. Droste, and S. Heinen, “Matlab/simulink
model of a mems accelerometer read-out circuit,” in Proceedings of the
EUROSENSORS XXIV September 5-8, 2010, Linz, Austria.
Elsevier
BV, September 2010, pp. 1–4, iSSN 1877 7058.
[15] J. Wu, G. Fedder, and L. Carley, “A low-noise low-offset capacitive
sensing ampliﬁer for a 50-µg/
√
Hz monolithic CMOS MEMS ac-
celerometer,” Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Journal of, vol. 39, no. 5, pp.
722–730, May 2004.
5
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

