Mobile Sensor System for Alcohol Control and Numerical Signal Analysis 
 
 
Rolf Seifert and Hubert B. Keller 
Institute of Applied Informatics (IAI) 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 
D-76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany 
e-mail: rolf.seifert@kit.edu, hubert.keller@kit.edu 
Thorsten Conrad and Jens Peter 
3S GmbH 
D-66121 Saarbrücken 
e-mail: conrad@3S-ing.de, peter@3S-ing.de
 
 
Abstract—An innovative mobile sensor system for alcohol 
control in the respiratory air is introduced. The gas sensor 
included in the sensor system is thermo-cyclically operated. 
Ethanol is the leading component in this context. However, 
other components occur in the breathing air which can 
influence 
the 
concentration 
determination 
of 
ethanol. 
Therefore, mono-ethanol samples and binary gas mixtures are 
measured by the sensor system and analyzed with a new 
calibration 
and 
evaluation 
procedure 
which 
is 
also 
incorporated in the system. The applications demonstrate a 
good substance identification capability of the sensor system 
and a very good concentration determination of the 
components.  
Keywords-alcohol control; mobile sensor system; thermo-
cyclic operation; data analysis; substance identification; 
concentration determination. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
There is a broad field of applications for chemical 
analysis of gases and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) 
like discriminated monitoring of toxic gas leakages, online 
monitoring of volatile components in chemical and 
biochemical 
processes, 
quality 
monitoring 
in 
food 
processing, etc. In this context, metal oxide gas sensors 
(MOGs) are well introduced as gas sensing devices. This is 
due to the fact that they are very sensitive, have good long-
term stability and are low in price. But on the other hand, 
when these sensor devices are operated isothermally, they 
are not at all selective. That means that they cannot be used 
for sophisticated analysis of gas mixtures. Therefore, other 
approaches are necessary like a gas sensor array of MOGs 
[1] [2] or by thermos-cyclic operation of the MOG and 
simultaneous sampling of the conductance which leads to 
so-called “conduction over time profiles” (CTPs) [3] [4] [5]. 
These profiles give a fingerprint of the surface processes 
with the gas and represent the gas mixture under 
consideration. The gas specific features of the CTPs can be 
used for component identification and concentration 
determination. At the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 
(KIT), many procedures were established to evaluate such 
signal patterns [6] and also for source localization [7]. 
In this report, we will introduce an innovative mobile 
sensor system for alcohol control in the respiratory air. In 
this context, ethanol is the leading component. But because 
also other components like acetone can occur in the 
breathing air, we consider not only mono-ethanol samples, 
but also binary gas mixtures. The analysis of these samples is 
performed with the calibration and evaluation program 
ProSens2, which is an integral component of the sensor 
system. 
In Section 2, the mobile sensor system is described. A 
short outline of the calibration and evaluation procedure 
ProSens2 is given in Section 3. In Section 4, the data 
analysis is performed, including the ethanol investigation and 
the investigation of binary ethanol-acetone mixtures as well. 
Section 5 summarizes the results of this report. 
II. 
MOBILE SENSOR SYSTEM 
A. 
Sensor System Platform And Adapter 
For breath control in the respiratory air, especially for 
alcohol control, an innovative sensor system platform was 
developed. Based on this platform, an adapter for 
smartphones was developed for mobile monitoring of the 
breathing air.  
This adapter consists of a combined and modular 
hardware- and software system, which runs an embedded 
metal oxide gas sensor in a thermos-cyclic mode and which 
determines the alcohol content on the basis of the 
measurement results via an innovative calibration- and 
evaluation procedure ProSens2 in real time. The analysis 
results will then be displayed on the smartphone. 
B. 
Electronics for Heater Control And Data 
Acquisition 
In order to characterize and operate semiconducting gas 
sensor elements with respect to the application, a sensor 
platform was developed which ensures a robust functioning 
of hard- and firmware. This platform supports a variety of 
commercially available metal oxide gas sensors. In this 
investigation, the sensor MLV from Applied Sensors [8] 
was used. Via its graphical user interface different 
parametrizable temperature cycles can be configured.  
The core unit of the platform is a base-board with a 
powerful micro-controller communicating with external 
modules in a master-slave-configuration. The base-board is 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

able to manage up to four gas sensor modules and features 
ambient condition monitoring.  
The platform outputs the sensor raw data (basically the 
measured voltages), which can easily be transformed into 
resistances or conductances or pre-calculated values for a 
reduced data stream. Via USB, the platform is connected to 
a standard PC where the data live visualization and the 
storage is carried out. Via Bluetooth the platform can be 
connected to mobile applications running on smart phones.  
For the measurements in this paper, a platform with the 
following specifications was used: 
 
 
The temperature control allows a set-point accuracy 
of 2°C within an overall temperature range of 100 to 
500 °C. The set-point can be updated every 10ms. 
 
The read-out circuit features a sampling time of 
better than 1ms. 
 
Measurement voltage accuracy is around of 5 mV 
(by using a 10-bit-ADC). 
 
The dynamic range of the read-out circuit is 
between 1k and 100M. 
 
C. 
Temperature Cycle 
Based on the above-explained electronics, several 
temperature cycles have been applied to the sensors while 
being exposed to the gas mixtures.  
 
Figure 1.  Thermo-cyclic (step-wise) temperature cycle. 
For the experiments carried out in the scope of the 
publication, the temperature cycle in the following Figure 1 
has been considered. 
III. 
CALIBRATION- AND EVALUATION PROCEDURE 
PROSENS2 
As mentioned above, the calibration- and evaluation 
procedure ProSens2 is included in the mobile sensor system. 
ProSens2 is an updated version of ProSens [9] to meet the 
requirements of this sensor system. ProSens2 consists like 
ProSens of a calibration part and an evaluation part.  
Using the calibration part of ProSens2, the mathematical 
calibration model is calculated based on calibration 
measurements. The mathematical calibration model is a 
parametric model and only the parameters will be transferred 
to the evaluation part of ProSens2.  
If an unknown gas sample is measured, the evaluation 
part of ProSens2 performs a substance identification and 
concentration determination of the sample, based on the 
calibration 
parameters. 
For 
substance 
identification, 
ProSens2 calculates a so-called theoretical CTP and 
compares this CTP with the real measured CTP. Only if the 
distance of theoretical CTP and measured CTP is smaller 
than a pre-determined decision threshold, ProSens2 
recognizes the unknown sample with the gas sample under 
consideration. In this case, the concentration determination 
will be performed. 
Substance identification is very important to avoid 
misleading analysis results like false alarms.  
IV. 
DATA ANALYSIS 
Ethanol is the leading component for alcohol control in 
the respiratory air. To investigate the performance of the 
sensor system, pure ethanol samples were analyzed in a first 
application.  
But there can be also further components in the 
respiratory air which have to be considered to avoid 
misleading results. One of these components is the acetone in 
the breathing air. Acetone is an indicator for diabetes. 
Therefore, binary ethanol-acetone gas samples were 
investigated in a second application.  
The measurements were performed with the above 
described sensor system using the cyclic variation of the 
working temperature in Figure 1. The determination of the 
mathematical calibration models and the data analysis were 
performed with the included program ProSens2. 
A. 
Application 1: Ethanol Investigation 
To establish the mathematical calibration model with the 
calibration part of ProSens2, three gas samples of ethanol gas 
with concentrations 50ppm, 100ppm and 175ppm were 
measured.  
To investigate the performance of the sensor system and 
the embedded evaluation procedure, three further gas 
samples were measured: ethanol with 135ppm, acetone with 
2ppm and H2 with 10ppm. 
As mentioned above, ProSens2 calculates the so-called 
theoretical CTP and compares this CTP with the real 
measured CTP. In Figure 2, the theoretical CTP and 
measured CTP of the ethanol sample is plotted. It can be 
clearly seen, that the difference between the two curves is 
very small. This means that ProSens2 recognizes that this 
sample is an ethanol gas. 
Theoretical CTP and measured CTP for acetone rsp. H2 
are shown in Figure 3 rsp. Figure 4. In both cases, the 
difference between the two curves is very large. So ProSens2 
recognizes that in both cases the measured sample is not an 
ethanol gas. 
Of course, the decision for substance identification is not 
based on the visual impression. Therefore, a “difference 
value” is calculated from the sum of quadratic differences of 
every sample point of the measured CTP and the theoretical 
CTP. Only if this difference value is smaller than a 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

predetermined decision value, ProSens2 identifies the 
unknown gas sample with the related calibrated gas mixture. 
Table 1 shows the difference value for the gas samples.  
 
Figure 2.  Comparison of measured CTP and theoretical CTP based on the 
ethanol calibration model for sample ethanol 135ppm. 
 
Figure 3.  Comparison of measured CTP and theoretical CTP based on the 
ethanol calibration model for sample aceton 2ppm. 
 
Figure 4.  Comparison of measured CTP and theoretical CTP based on the 
ethanol calibration model for sample H2 10ppm. 
It can be clearly seen that the difference values in the 
blue marked fields of Table I, which correspond not to an 
ethanol gas, are significantly larger than the difference value 
in the other field which corresponds to an ethanol gas. This 
means that ProSens2 is able to perform very good substance 
identification.  
TABLE I.  
DIFFERENCE VALUES FOR THE GAS SAMPLES 
Ethanol 135ppm 
Acetone 2ppm 
H2 20ppm 
2.1e-05 
7.8e-04 
5.9e-04 
 
After substance identification, ProSens2 calculates the 
concentration of the ethanol sample. Table II demonstrates 
the very good analysis result. 
TABLE II.  
ANALYSIS RESULTS OF THE ETHANOL INVESTIGATION 
Dosed 
Concentration 
Analyzed 
Concentration 
Relative Analysis 
Error 
135ppm 
140,2ppm 
5,3% 
 
B. 
Application 2:Binary  Ethanol-Acetone Mixture 
In a second application, binary ethanol-acetone mixtures 
were considered because additional components in the 
respiratory air can influence the ethanol concentration 
determination.  
To establish the mathematical calibration model with the 
calibration part of ProSens2, the gas samples of an ethanol-
acetone gas mixture given in Table III were again measured 
using thermo-cyclic operation of the sensor system. 
TABLE III.  
ANALYSIS RESULTS OF THE ETHANOL INVESTIGATION 
Ethanol-Acetone 
in ppm 
Ethanol-Acetone 
in ppm 
Ethanol-Acetone 
in ppm 
50-0,5 
50-1 
50-2 
100-0,5 
100-1 
100-2 
175-0,5 
175-1 
175-2 
 
This means that only 9 samples were required for the 
establishing of the calibration model. This is a very good 
aspect because calibration measurements are very time 
consuming and expensive. 
To investigate the performance of the sensor system with 
the evaluation procedure ProSens2, three further binary 
ethanol-acetone gas mixtures and two non-binary ethanol-
acetone gas mixtures were measured in the same manner as 
the samples for calibration and analyzed together with the 
samples of the calibration process. The samples are given in 
Table IV. 
The blue marked lines in this table refer to non-binary 
ethanol-acetone gas mixtures based on the calibration model 
of the binary ethanol-acetone mixture. 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

TABLE IV.  
GAS SAMPLES FOR EVALUATION 
Ethanol-Acetone 
in ppm 
Ethanol-Acetone 
in ppm 
Ethanol-Acetone 
in ppm 
50-0,5 
50-1 
50-2 
100-0,5 
100-1 
100-2 
135-0,5 
135-1 
135-2 
175-0,5 
175-1 
175-2 
Acetone in ppm 
1 
 
H2 in ppm 
20 
 
 
The following figures show again the comparison of 
theoretical CTP and measured CTP on the basis of the 
ethanol-acetone calibration model. In Figure 5, the two 
curves are quite together. This means that the sample is 
identified as a binary ethanol-acetone mixture. In Figures 6 
and 7, the difference between the two curves is very large. 
That means they are not identified as the binary gas mixture 
under consideration. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Comparison of measured CTP and theoretical CTP based on the 
ethanol-acetone calibration model for sample ethanol 175ppm acetone 
2ppm.  
Figure 6.  Comparison of measured CTP and theoretical CTP based on the 
ethanol-acetone calibration model for sample H2 20ppm. 
 
Figure 7.  Comparison of measured CTP and theoretical CTP based on the 
ethanol-acetone calibration model for sample acetone 1ppm. 
The following Table V shows the difference values 
between measured CTP and theoretical CTP. 
TABLE V.  
DIFFERENCE VALUES FOR THE GAS SAMPLES 
Ethanol/Aceton 
0,5ppm 
1ppm 
2ppm 
50ppm 
0.0001 
0.0004 
0.0007 
100ppm 
0.0007 
0.0006 
0.0023 
135ppm 
0.0044 
0.0018 
0.0013 
175ppm 
0.0002 
0.0007 
0.0007 
Acetone 1 ppm 
0.2508 
 
 
H2 20 ppm 
0.2955 
 
 
 
It can be clearly seen that the difference values in the 
blue marked fields of Table V, which do not correspond to 
ethanol-acetone gas mixtures, are significantly larger than 
the difference values in the other fields which correspond to 
ethanol-acetone samples. This means that ProSens2 is able 
to perform also in this application very good substance 
identification. 
TABLE VI.  
ANALYZED CONCENTRATION VALUES OF THE ETHANNOL 
COMPONENTS IN PPM 
Ethanol/Acetone 
(dosed values) 
0,5ppm 
1ppm 
2 ppm 
50ppm 
49,5 
50,5 
50,0 
100ppm 
101,0 
100,0 
99,2 
135ppm 
141.6 
140,0 
140,1 
175ppm 
175,5 
175,4 
174,1 
 
After substance identification, ProSens2 calculates the 
ethanol concentration of the ethanol-acetone sample. Table 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

VI demonstrates the very good analysis results even in the 
case of a binary gas mixture with relative analysis errors 
smaller than 4%. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this report, a test platform for alcohol control as a pre-
release of the later mobile electronics was developed which 
ensures a robust functioning of hard- und firmware. This 
platform supports a  sariety of commercially available metal 
oxide gas sensors. A specific aspect of the targeted 
application of breath alcohol detection is the reproducible 
generation of ethanol at nearly condensing gas atmosphere 
like it is assumed for breath monitoring. Operating the sensor 
system in a special thermo cyclic operation mode leads to 
CTPs which can be used for substance identification and 
concentration determination of the components of the gas 
mixture. Therefore, a calibration and evaluation procedure 
called ProSens2 was established. As shown in the 
application, ProSens2 is able to identify pure ethanol 
samples as well as binary ethanol-acetone mixtures in a very 
good manner and is also capable to determine the 
concentration of the ethanol samples and of the components 
of the ethanol-acetone mixtures with relative errors lower 
than 5%. 
In future work, the influence of further interfering 
components in the breathing air will be checked, including 
the interference of moisture in the respiratory air. 
Furthermore, the capability of the mobile sensor system for 
other applications will be investigated. Areas of research 
could be monitoring of diabetes, where acetone is the leading 
component, or the supervision of asthma with NO as the 
leading component.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is financially supported by the Central 
Innovation Program for small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SME) of the German Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft 
und Technologie (BMWi).  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] P. Althainz, J. Goschnick, S. Ehrmann, and H. J. Ache, 
“Multisensor Microsystem for Contaminants in Air”, Sens. 
Actuators, B33, 1996, pp. 72-76. 
[2] V. V. Sysoev, I. Kiselev, M. Frietsch, and J. Goschnick, 
“Temperature Gradient Effect on Gas Discrimination Power 
of a Metal- Oxide Thin-Film Sensor Microarray”, Sensors 
4, 2004, pp. 37-46. 
[3] K. Frank et al., “Metal oxide gas sensors for field analysis: 
Novel SnO2/La2O3 sensor element for analysis of 
dissolved toluene/ethanol binary mixtures”, Sensor 2005: 
12th Internat. Conf., Nürnberg, May 2005, Proc. Vol. 2, 
AMA Service GmbH, Wunstorf, 2005, pp. 207–209. 
[4] K. Frank et al., “Improving the analysis capability of tin 
oxide gas sensors by dynamic operation, appropriate 
additives and an advanced evaluation procedure”, Sensor 
2007: 13th Internat.Conf., Nürnberg, May 2007, Proc. Vol. 
1, AMA Service GmbH, Wunstorf, 2007, pp.139–144. 
[5] K. Frank, V. Magapu, V. Schindler, H. Kohler, H. B. 
Keller, and R. Seifert, “Improving the analysis capability of 
tin oxide gas sensors by dynamic operation”, Sensors 
Letters 6, 2008, pp. 908-911. 
[6] R. Seifert, H. Keller, and J. Matthes, “A Review on 
Innovative Procedures for the Analysis of Data from Gas 
Sensor Systems and Networks”, Sensors & Transducers, 
Vol. 184, Issue 1, 2015, pp. 1-10. 
[7] J. Matthes, L. Gröll, and H. B. Keller, “Source localization 
based on pointwise concentration measurements”, Sensors 
and Actuators A 115, 2004, pp. 32–37. 
[8] http://ams.com/eng/Products/Environmental-Sensors/Gas-
Sensors/AS-MLV-P2 
[9] R. Seifert, H. B. Keller, K. Frank, and H. Kohler, “ProSens 
- an Efficient Mathematical Procedure for Calibration and 
Evaluation of Tin Oxide Gas Sensor Data”, Sensor Letters, 
Vol. 9/1, 2011, pp. 7-10. 
 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

