Carrier Photogeneration During UV-Vis Irradiation on Horizontal and Vertical 
Metal-Semiconductor Structures Based on Rutile-Phase TiO2 Nanoparticles 
 
Joel Molina, Carlos Zuniga, Edmundo Gutierrez 
Electronics Department, 
National Institute of Astrophysics, Optics and Electronics 
Santa Maria Tonantzintla, Puebla, Mexico 
E-mails: jmolina@inaoep.mx, czuniga@inaoep.mx, 
edmundo@inaoep.mx 
Eunice Mendoza, Jose Luis Sanchez, Erick R. Bandala 
Energy and Environment Research Group, 
Universidad de las Americas, Puebla 
San Andres Cholula, Puebla, Mexico 
E-mails: edith.mendozaco@udlap.mx, 
jluis.sanchez@udlap.mx, erick.bandala@udlap.mx
 
 
Abstract—In this work, rutile-phase TiO2 nanoparticles (np-
TiO2) are embedded within a Spin-On Glass oxide matrix 
(using a simple and economic Sol-Gel method) and the final 
TiO2/SiO2 mixture is directly deposited on stripes of aluminum 
so that the electronic, physical, chemical and photocatalytic 
characteristics of the final dielectric structure are obtained and 
correlated when irradiated with UV-Vis light sources. The I-V 
characteristics of this simple structure present a reduction in 
its total resistance when irradiated with UV light (compared to 
dark conditions), thus revealing a very simple photoresistor 
with relatively-low quantum efficiency. 
Keywords-TiO2; nanoparticles; photoresistor; UV light; 
photogeneration; sol-gel processing; metal-semiconductor. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Even though rutile-phase TiO2 is considered as a very 
inefficient material in terms of its photocatalytic activity 
(ability for carrier photogeneration) [1-2], the use and 
development of this semiconductor material is quite 
important since the synthesis of TiO2 usually produces a 
rutile phase quite easily, with relatively low concentration of 
impurities and also, economically. On the other hand, the 
synthesis of anatase-phase TiO2 is more complicated, usually 
involving complex chemistry and/or doping with some metal 
or non-metal elements in order to increase its photocatalytic 
activity when exposed to UV or visible irradiation [3-6]. 
Also, using TiO2 nanoparticles instead of dense TiO2 thin 
films is useful in order to increase the contact surface area so 
that a higher density of photogenerated carriers is expected. 
In this work, we embed rutile-phase TiO2 nanoparticles 
(np-TiO2) within an organic SiO2 matrix and the final 
mixture of this dielectric structure is deposited on a thin film 
of aluminum. The final “horizontal” metal-semiconductor 
structure is then electrically characterized under dark and 
light conditions (I-V-light) so that the total resistance of a 
simple aluminum stripe is measured and correlated before 
and after UV irradiation. Compared to dark conditions, 
excess carriers are photogenerated within the TiO2 
nanoparticles after light exposure and they are directly 
transferred to both ends of the aluminum stripe after 
applying a low potential difference. The highest density of 
photogenerated carriers is obtained when the TiO2/SiO2/Al is 
irradiated with UV-B light so that the total aluminum 
resistance is reduced by about 43%. Therefore, this initial 
device acts like a very simple “photoresistor”. Additionally, 
we also fabricate so-called “vertical” metal-semiconductor-
metal structures in order to obtain a solar energy conversion 
device with the intrinsic ability to self-store must of the 
converted energy in the form of a rechargeable capacitor. 
This device then acts like a very simple “photocapacitor” [7-
8]. The state-of-the-art regarding these latest structures 
makes use of complex layered structures going from photo-
rechargeable textiles for wearable power supplies [9], up to 
dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) connected in series with 
Li-ion batteries, metal oxides and/or TiO2 nanotube arrays in 
order to increase energy conversion efficiency [10-12]. 
However, because of increasing fabrication complexity and 
use of a third additional electrode (in order to switch between 
the functions of energy conversion, storage and output) 
which consumes extra energy and increase cost of 
fabrication, a simpler two-electrode device is needed and that 
requirement is met by our proposed device structures. 
This paper is arranged as follows: in Section I, we gave 
an introduction about the importance of testing simple 
“horizontal” and ”vertical” metal-semiconductor structures 
which make use of TiO2 nanoparticles in order to promote 
energy conversion in “photoresistor” and “photocapacitor” 
devices. Section II presents the experimental conditions used 
for fabrication of these structures as well as details about the 
measurement setup that is used for their physical and photo-
electrical characterization. Section III presents and discusses 
the main experimental results that are found for these 
structures, thus confirming the ability of np-TiO2 to act as 
photocatalytic material for both energy conversion and 
storage. Finally the main conclusions drawn from all results 
are highlighted in Section IV, from which we state that it is 
possible to use the “vertical” structure as a photocapacitor, 
thus enabling direct storage of solar energy. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
A. Preparation of Thin FilmsBased on np-TiO2 
We have used low-organic content or silicate-type spin-
on glass (SOG)-based SiO2 (700B from Filmtronics, Corp.) 
as a matrix for immobilization of np-TiO2 (Dupont, R-706 
with 93% purity and having an average diameter of 360 nm 
before embedding). Initially, specific amounts of commercial 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

np-TiO2 are suspended in deionized water by hydrolyzing 
this TiO2:H2O mixture in a hot water bath (baine marie, 
45°C, 30 min) and then, adding SOG-based SiO2 so that the 
final TiO2:SiO2:H2O mixture is again subjected to a final hot 
water bath (baine marie, 80°C, 1 hr) in order to obtain an 
homogeneous suspension. The concentration ratios of TiO2 
(solute) to SiO2:H2O (solvent) are 200, 100, 50 and 10 
mg/mL and these solutions are labeled as A, B, C and D 
respectively. The solute concentrations were measured with 
an analytical balance AG285 from Mettler-Toledo. The final 
TiO2:SiO2:H2O solutions were directly applied on the surface 
of clean glass slides (Corning glass 2947, size of 75 mm X 
25mm), that were previously metalized with aluminum 
stripes, and sequentially spinned first at 3000 rpm, 30 sec, 
and then 4000 rpm, 15 sec in order to obtain uniform layers 
of np-TiO2 embedded in SiO2. After spinning, all films (A-
D) were baked for 2 hours using a hot plate at 250°C in N2 
flow (99.99% purity) in order to evaporate mostly water and 
some of the organic solvents present in the SOG-based SiO2 
matrix. For FTIR characterization, the same processing 
sequence was followed and the final solution was applied on 
prime-grade P-type silicon wafers (100) with resistivity of 5–
10 cm in order to eliminate most of the organic and 
impurity elements present within the Corning glass slides. In 
order to fabricate “vertical” structures, an additional ultra 
thin film layer of Titanium (100 Angstroms) is directly 
deposited atop the already described “horizontal” structures 
by E-beam evaporation under ultra high vacuum conditions 
(10-7 Torr) and with a very slow deposition rate of 1 Å/sec. 
Given the ultra low thermal budget required for fabrication 
of these simple structures, their introduction into large area 
flexible substrates is expected, thus promoting wide spread 
use of optimized devices. The fabrication process flows for 
both structures are briefly summarized, as shown in Fig. 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Process flow for fabrication of “horizontal” and “vertical” Metal-
Semiconductor structures using np-TiO2 as photoactive material. 
It is important to notice that we did not chemically 
synthesize the np-TiO2 used for fabrication of the proposed 
structures. Instead, we decided to use readily available 
commercial np-TiO2 (with rather low purity of 93% and 
large average diameter of 360 nm) in order to test the ability 
of this material for carrier photogeneration under light 
irradiation. 
B. Characterization of Materials and Aluminum-Stripes 
DLS measurements (Nanotrac Wave, from Microtrac) 
[13] were done in order to determine the final size 
distribution of TiO2 nanoparticles after the embedding 
process. By using DLS measurement technique, we are able 
to determine both the size and size distribution profile of 
TiO2 nanoparticles in the final suspension before deposition 
on the glass surfaces. In particular, the size distribution 
profile for np-TiO2 is obtained with high accuracy by this 
system (close to 100% signal intensity), thus giving a direct 
estimation of the homogeneity of the pn-TiO2 in the final 
suspension. Also, thicknesses for all films were measured by 
profilometry (DEKTAK, V200-SI) after partially etching the 
TiO2/SiO2 film using a strong acid solution composed of 
diluted HF (HF:H2O with 1:2 ratio). The crystalline phases 
of the resulting TiO2-based films were obtained after XRD 
measurements using an X-ray diffractometer (Empyrean, 
from PANalytical), with a scanning step of 0.02°, using Cu-
K radiation with = 1.5406 Å as an X-ray source. The 
band-gap energies Eg of the resulting films were calculated 
using optical transmittance data measured with an UV-Vis 
absorption spectrometer (LAMBDA 3B with double beam 
from Perkin Elmer, with Corning glass used as substrate) and 
the Tauc method [14]. Chemical compositional analyses for 
all films were obtained by FTIR spectrum measurements in 
absorbance mode with a Bruker Vector-22 system after 5 
min of purge in N2. The samples were measured against 
crystalline silicon substrate or SOG based silicon dioxide on 
glass (both were used as references). Finally, the I-V-light 
characteristics for the Al-stripes (covered with the TiO2/SiO2 
structure) were obtained using an HP4156B semiconductor 
parameter analyzer at 300 K. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Structure’s Schematics and Energy Band Diagrams 
Fig. 2 shows the 3-D and top view schematics for the 
first np-TiO2/SiO2 structure deposited on Aluminum/Glass. 
Because of the preparation method (previously discussed), 
we promote a uniform distribution of the np-TiO2 within the 
oxide matrix so that these nanoparticles should have almost 
the same diameter size and separation in between as well. 
The aluminum stripes are 18X3 mm2 in area with thickness 
of 400 nm. Fig. 3 shows the idealized energy-band diagrams 
for TiO2 and TiO2/SiO2/Al systems during photogeneration 
of carriers after irradiation with energies hEg(TiO2). In the 
first band diagram, all physical mechanisms during light 
irradiation, (1) excitation, (2) relaxation and (3) diffusion are 
also shown while a small potential difference is developed in 
the second diagram so that carriers are injected in the metal. 
 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 2. 3D and top views for np-TiO2/SiO2 deposited on Aluminum/Glass. 
 
 
Figure 3. Idealized energy-band diagrams for TiO2, TiO2/SiO2/Al systems. 
 
B. Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) and Profilometry 
Fig. 4 shows the averaged particle size for TiO2 before 
and after sonication. The dotted arrow shows the nominal 
average diameter as stated by the manufacturer 360 nm.  
 
 
Figure 4. DLS and profilometry data showing the nanoparticle diameter size 
(before and after sonication) and TiO2/SiO2 thin film thickness respectively. 
 
The as-prepared samples present larger particle diameter 
because of their tendency to agglomerate or aggregate after 
dispersion and settling within a liquid solution. During bath 
ultrasonication, dispersion of TiO2 agglomerates is promoted 
by overcoming their weaker attractive forces, the final result 
being smaller np-TiO2 diameters. The average physical size 
for sonicated np-TiO2 is 300 nm. Fig. 4 also shows the final 
np-TiO2/SiO2 film thickness after spinning deposition and 
thermal treatment of the prepared suspensions. We notice 
that thicker np-TiO2/SiO2 films are obtained for the more 
concentrated solutions as expected. 
C. X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) 
Fig. 5 shows the XRD diffraction patterns for all thin 
films including sample 0 (only SOG-based SiO2 on glass). 
 
 
Figure 5. XRD data show existence of rutile phase for TiO2 nanoparticles. 
 
Samples A-B clearly present the characteristic sharp 
diffraction peaks for rutile phase TiO2 including the broad 
amorphous phase from both the SiO2 matrix and the glass 
slide (used for np-TiO2 immobilization and as mechanical 
support respectively). Given the relatively high concentration 
density of np-TiO2 embedded within the SiO2 matrix for the 
A-B samples, it is clear that sharper diffraction peaks will be 
obtained possibly because of nanoparticles’ agglomeration. 
This effect could be triggered during spinning, which make 
use of high speed centrifugal forces during step 4 of the 
process flow; see Fig. 1. 
D. Fourier-Transformed InfraRed (FTIR) Spectroscopy 
Fig. 6 shows typical chemical-bond vibration energies in 
absorption mode, found in samples A-D for all the range of 
interest (wavenumbers from 4000 down to 400 cm-1). 
 
 
Figure 6. IR spectra (absorbance mode) of TiO2/SiO2/glass samples (A-D). 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The IR spectra for SOG-based SiO2 is also included and 
whose absorption peaks for the Si-O bonds are detected at 
1070, 943, 801, 570, and 443 cm-1 (peaks 1-5). In order to 
analyze only the contribution of TiO2 in the films, the IR 
spectra of A-D samples must be obtained using only the 
SOG-based oxide film as reference (SiO2/glass) at 
wavenumber between 1600 and 400 cm-1 approximately 
(data in preparation). This way, we are able to eliminate the 
influence of the highly absorbent peaks related to Si-O bonds 
(especially those found at 1070 and 443 cm-1). 
E. UV-Vis Transmittance Spectroscopy 
 
 
Figure 7. UV-Vis spectra (transmittance) of TiO2/SiO2/glass samples (A-D). 
 
Fig. 7 shows the UV-Vis spectra from 190 up to 900 nm 
region for different np-TiO2 concentrations (A-D samples), 
including the spectrum for only the glass substrate. It can be 
seen that strong absorption occurs at wavelengths <290 nm 
(UV-B regime) for all samples and that transmittance is 
reduced in direct proportion to the np-TiO2 concentration as 
expected. Even though the physical thicknesses for all 
samples are different (see fig. 4), minimum variations in 
their optical band gap are expected if we consider different 
densities for these films. The calculated optical band gap Eg 
for all A-D samples is at 3.11-3.12 eV. This band gap energy 
Eg corresponds well with the reported Eg for anatase or 
rutile TiO2, between 3.0 and 3.2 eV respectively [15]. 
F. I-V-Light Characterization 
Fig. 8 shows the I-V-Light characteristics of the structure 
shown previously in fig. 2 (A sample only). Dark, sunlight, 
sunlight+lamp and UV-B light (300 nm) conditions were 
all applied on top of the structures so that surface np-TiO2 
were the first to absorb all possible irradiation coming from 
these sources. Compared to dark conditions, photogeneration 
of excess carriers (both electrons and holes) within the TiO2 
nanoparticles is greater after UV-B light exposure and these 
carriers are directly transferred to both ends of the Al-stripe 
after applying a low potential difference. During UV-B light 
irradiation, the total aluminum resistance is reduced by about 
43% which represent a moderate change in resistance given 
by rather low quantum efficiency presented by this structure. 
 
Figure 8. I-V-Light characteristics of Al-stripes before/after light irradiation. 
 
G. Vertical Ti/np-TiO2/SiO2/Al/Glass Structure 
Previously, I-V-Light characterization for horizontal 
structures produced a moderate photogeneration of carriers 
so that the total resistance of an aluminum strip was reduced. 
However, given that some of the photogenerated carriers will 
be trapped, recombined or “lost” within the SiO2 matrix or at 
its interface with np-TiO2 (any annihilation mechanism), the 
“horizontal path” followed by carriers in the initial structure 
would reduce their lifetime once they are photogenerated in 
the np-TiO2. In order to increase photocarrier lifetime before 
recombination and thus, increase quantum efficiency during 
UV-B irradiation, vertical structures are proposed, see fig. 9. 
 
 
Figure 9. 3D view for a vertical Ti/np-TiO2/SiO2/Al/Glass structure where 
the titanium electrode is 100 Å in thickness, thus being optically transparent. 
 
These vertical structures use Titanium as a gate electrode 
(only 100 Å in thickness) so that a capacitor in the form of a 
Metal-Insulator-Metal (MIM) structure is formed. Because 
of the ultra-thin titanium layer, this gate electrode is highly 
transparent to all UV-Vis irradiation so that when all carriers 
are being photogenerated, a vertical transition of these 
carriers between bottom/top electrodes (by an applied 
external electric field) would require a shorter distance thus 
increasing their lifetime before recombination as compared 
to the horizontal structures. In short, these vertical structures 
should be able to photogenerate carriers more efficiently and, 
in contrast with the photoresistor previously described, this 
MIM structure should be quite similar in function to that of a 
so-called “photocapacitor” [7-8], where all carriers could be 
efficiently stored within the dielectric itself right after 
photogeneration. Thus, a light-driven self-charging capacitor 
having an efficient storage mechanism of solar energy could 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

be obtained. The fabrication and testing of this final device is 
already going on and all results will be soon presented. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Photocarrier generation during UV-B exposure of rutile-
phase np-TiO2 (embedded within a SiO2 matrix) in a 
horizontal 
np-TiO2/SiO2/Al/Glass 
structure 
enables 
a 
reduction of the total resistance of an aluminum stripe by 
about 43%. These structures can be fabricated using simple 
and economic processing techniques, so that immobilization 
of TiO2 nanoparticles in a suitable organic matrix for 
photocarrier generation can be also implemented in vertical 
Ti/np-TiO2/SiO2/Al/Glass MIM structures for more efficient 
generation of carriers. The vertical structure would act as a 
photocapacitor, thus enabling direct storage of solar energy. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was fully supported by the National Council of 
Science and Technology (CONACyT-Mexico). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Z. Ding, G.Q. Lu, and P.F Greenfield, “Role of the Crystallite 
Phase of TiO2 in Heterogeneous Photocatalysis for Phenol 
Oxidation In Water”, J. Phys. Chem. B, vol. 104, April 2000, 
pp. 4815-4820. 
[2] T.A. Kandiel, R. Dillert, A. Feldhoff, and D. Bahnemann, 
“Direct Synthesis of Photocatalytically Active Rutile TiO2 
Nanorods Partly Decorated with Anatase Nanoparticles”, J. 
Phys. Chem., vol. 114, February 2010. Pp. 4909-4915. 
[3] M.A. Behnajady, N. Modirshahla, M. Shokri, and B. Rad, 
“Enhancement of photocatalytic activity of TiO2 nanoparticles 
by silver doping: photodeposition versus liquid impregnation 
methods”, Global NEST Journal, vol. 10-1, 2008, pp. 1-7. 
[4] D.H. Kim, D.K. Choi, S.J. Kim, and K.S. Lee, “The effect of 
phase type on photocatalytic activity in transition metal doped 
TiO2 nanoparticles”, Catalysis Communications, vol. 9, 
March 2008, pp. 654–657. 
[5] C.D. Valentin, G. Pacchioni, and A. Selloni, “Origin of the 
different photoactivity of N-doped anatase and rutile TiO2”, 
Phys. ReV. B., vol. 70, August 2004, pp. 085116-1, 085116-4 
(2004). 
[6] O. Diwald, L. Thompson, E.G. Goralski, S.D. Walck, and J.T. 
Yates, “The Effect of Nitrogen Ion Implantation on the 
Photoactivity of TiO2 Rutile Single Crystals”, J. Phys. Chem. 
B, vol. 108, January 2004, pp. 52-57. 
[7] T. Miyasaka and T.N. Murakami, “The photocapacitor: An 
efficient self-charging capacitor for direct storage of solar 
energy”, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 85, October 2004, pp. 3932-
3934. 
[8] C.W. Lo, C. Li, and H. Jiang, “A photoelectrophysical 
capacitor with direct solar energy harvesting and storage 
capability”, Optical MEMS and Nanophotonics (OPT 
MEMS), 2010 International Conference on, August 2010, pp. 
65-66. 
[9] T. Song and B. Sun, “Towards Photo-Rechargeable Textiles 
Integrating Power Conversion and Energy Storage Functions: 
Can We Kill Two Birds with One Stone?”, ChemSusChem, 
vol. 6, January 2013, pp.408–410. 
[10] X. Zhang, X. Huang, C. Li, and H. Jiang, “Dye-Sensitized 
Solar Cell with Energy Storage Function through PVDF/ZnO 
Nanocomposite Counter Electrode”, Adv. Mater., June 2013, 
pp. 1-4. 
[11] W. Guo, X. Xue, S. Wang, C. Lin, and Z.L. Wang, “An 
Integrated Power Pack of Dye-Sensitized Solar Cell and Li 
Battery Based on Double-Sided TiO2 Nanotube Arrays”, 
Nano Lett., vol. 12, no. 5, April 2012,  pp. 2520–2523. 
[12] M.S. Nuckowska, K. Grzejszczyk, P.J. Kulesza, L. Yang, N. 
Vlachopoulos, L. Häggman, E. Johansson, and A. Hagfeldt, 
“Integration of solid-state dye-sensitized solar cell with metal 
oxide charge storage material into photoelectrochemical 
capacitor”, J. of Power Sources, vol. 234, no. 15, July 2013, 
pp. 91-99. 
[13] “Microtrac: Total Solutions in Particle Characterization, 
NanotracWave”, App Note, Microtrac. October 2012, pp. 1-4. 
http://www.microtrac.com/MTWP/wp-content/uploads/2012/ 
10/Nanotrac-Wave-Temp-Brochure-Ver-9.pdf 
[14] J. Tauc, “Optical properties and electronic structure of 
amorphous Ge and Si”, MRS Bulletin, vol. 3, January 1968, 
pp. 37-46. 
[15] J. Dharma and A. Pisal, “Simple method of measurement the 
band gap energy value of TiO2 in the powder form using 
UV/Vis/NIR spectrometer”, App Note, Perkin-Elmer Inc. 
January 2009, pp. 1-4. 
 
 
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

