 Acoustic Emission Sensor Module 
 
 
Irinela Chilibon 
National Institute of Research and Development  
for Optoelectronics, INOE-2000, 
Bucharest-Magurele, Romania 
e-mail: qilib@yahoo.com 
Marian Mogildea, George Mogildea 
Institute of Space Sciences, ISS 
Bucharest-Magurele, Romania 
e-mails: marian_mogildea@yahoo.com; 
georgemogildea@yahoo.com 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a wireless acoustic emission 
sensor module with microcontroller for monitoring systems of 
structures under stress, prevailed by a piezoelectric AE sensor 
on the investigated material surface. The module performs the 
analogue/digital conversion of signals, the microcontroller 
commands the wireless interface, may send and receive 
information from other emitting - receiver wireless modules. 
The microcontroller could vary the amplifier gain and make 
the appropriate analogue / digital conversion. Many wireless 
modules with acoustic emission sensors could be successfully 
applicable to the AE monitoring systems of complex 
construction structures in the civil engineering, using a 
dedicated software. 
Keywords-AE; acoustic emission; non-destructive testing; 
NDT; µC; microcontroller 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Acoustic emission (AE) techniques [1] draw a great 
attention to the diagnostic applications, material testing and 
study of deformation, fracture and corrosion, because they 
give an immediate indication of the response and behavior 
of materials under stresses, intimately connected with 
strength, damage, fracture and failure. Also, AE technology 
involves the use of ultrasonic sensors (20 kHz - 1 MHz) to 
listen to the sounds of failure occurring in materials and 
structures.  
The roughest localization method is guessing the source 
origin using the “first hit” technique. The advantage of first 
hit techniques is that no sensor arrays and no data analysis 
are necessary. The sensor which detects an AE first defines 
a radius or a half sphere, respectively, in which the signal 
originated. The utilizer’s experience denotes whether that 
technique is accurate enough. This can be done for some 
cases in combination with other techniques or knowledge 
from bridge inspectors to “localize” the source of failures. 
More sophisticated methods use planar techniques by 
recording AE signals at more than two sensors at the same 
time [2]. 
Also, 3D-Localization of acoustic emission [1] events is 
a powerful tool in quantitative AE techniques. Signal-based 
procedures, such as accurate 3D localization of damage 
sources, solutions for fault plane orientation, and moment 
tensor inversion, are applied in civil engineering. Other 
promising options are methods based on array techniques 
[3]. 
3D-Localization [4] of acoustic emission events is the 
basis 
of 
advanced 
signal 
interpretation 
and 
the 
discrimination between signal and noise. The more 
quantitative analysis of the signals is based on a 3D 
localization of AE sources (hypocenters) and the recordings 
obtained from a sensor network. Using moment tensor 
inversion methods, the radiation pattern of acoustic 
emission sources and the seismic moment (as an equivalent 
to the emitted energy) as well as the type (Mode I, Mode II, 
and mixed modes) and orientation of the cracks, can be 
determined [4]. 
During the long-term experiments of materials fatigue 
tests a great amount of signals, including the noises from the 
load-chain, can be detected by the sensitive AE sensors. 
According to the time sequence for the guard and main 
sensors to receive the signals, the signals originating from 
outside the test section can be detected and discarded.  
Crack initiation is determined by the first appearance of 
the AE signal at low stress levels. This stage has a steady-
state dislocation motion that will eventually result in 
microvoids and initiate microcracks. In the next AE-active 
stage cracks start to grow and propagate. Many AE signals 
can come from the crack-tip plastic deformation, fracture of 
hard inclusions, microcrack coalescence, transgranular 
cleavage, and fracture along grain boundaries, each 
producing an acoustic emission [5]. Ultrasound wave 
propagation in construction materials is presented in [6]. 
The structure of this paper is based on: 4 chapters, 
Conclusion and future work and References. 
II. 
ACOUSTIC EMISSION TECHNIQUE APPLICATIONS  
AE techniques have been widely used in the domain of 
non-destructive testing of material structures, such as: metal 
and composite pressure vessels for the local plastic 
deformation of ductile pressure vessels [7], [8], piping for 
locating the position and estimating the severity of leaks in 
pipeline networks [9], the detection of failures in various 
types of equipment in the petroleum industry (pressure 
vessels, tanks and pipelines) [10].  
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Also, AE generated during fatigue mechanism of steel 
was widely use as gas pipeline materials testing [11].  
A new method to detect leakage in a water-filled plastic 
pipe through the application of tuned wavelet transforms to 
Acoustic Emission signals was proposed [12]. 
Acoustic Emission generated during fatigue mechanism 
of steel showed that AE Count gives a significant value 
during cyclic softening effect. Crack initiation was indicated 
by a rapid increase of AE count values at positive peak 
stress, followed by high AE count values around zero stress 
which indicated the crack closure phenomena [11]. 
Acoustic emission techniques (AET) are an alternative 
monitoring method to investigate the status of bridges or 
some of their components, because it has the potential to 
detect defects in terms of cracks occurring during the 
routine use of bridges [5].  
Monitoring techniques based on wireless AE sensors for 
large structures in civil engineering [5] were developed, 
basing on a new kind of sensors using MEMS (Micro-
Electro-Mechanical-Systems) techniques. These sensors 
should be intelligent, self-networking, asynchronous, 
wireless, adaptive, dynamically reprogrammable, cheap and 
small. The implemented wireless communication techniques 
will reduce the application and maintenance costs 
significantly [5]. 
Some techniques work as a maintenance monitoring 
system sending data (alarm data) via intranet to a data centre 
or alarm messages per SMS automatically to the monitoring 
engineer. Therefore, the public safety is assured as unseen 
structural damage is identified without costly and dangerous 
deconstruction. 
Modern acoustic emission (MAE) techniques have 
applications in aviation industry, fully digital AE apparatus 
with low noise, high speed of data transmission and accurate 
AE source locating capability [13]. 
Acoustic 
emission 
techniques 
are 
an 
additional 
monitoring method to investigate the status of a bridge or 
some of its components. It has the potential to detect defects 
in terms of cracks propagating during the routine use of 
structures. However, acoustic emissions recording and 
analysis techniques need powerful algorithms to handle and 
reduce the immense amount of data generated. These 
algorithms are developed on the basis of neural network 
techniques and by array techniques [14]. 
III. 
NON-DESTRUCTIVE TECHNIQUE EXAMPLES 
Some of AE application types are: Crack detection, 
Fatigue testing – collect data and give notification to a 
cyclic fatigue event occurrence in order to determine the 
plastic deformation, Chip detection - Detect the presence of 
a chip in a tool, also detect chipping as it occurs, Tool 
Breakage Detection - Instantly shut down a process when 
the tooling breaks, Deep Drawing – determine defects when 
they occur during drawing, stop draw press during 
“necking”, Stamping - Determine Good vs. Bad stamping 
operation, Piercing - Indicate the presence of a missing or 
malfunctioning punch, Scoring - detect scratches and 
gouges as they occur in metal. 
Nondestructive techniques were not accepted long time 
for the testing of bridges, and other components of the 
infrastructure because of two primary reasons: the difficulty 
in separating valid signals from extraneous noise and the 
inability of the AE technique to determine the size of the 
crack [15]. The acoustic emission (AE) signal can be 
divided into successive type signal and sporadic type signal, 
in order to be analyzed through the signal processor in the 
form of variables such as the existence of a signal 
generation or the shape of signal [1].  
Locating of monitored fatigue cracks, destructive NDE 
technique has indicated that the first crack has run into a 
flange and the second crack is in both the weld and web and 
is growing at both ends. These cracks are referred to here as 
the "flange crack" and the "weld crack," respectively (Fig. 
1). 
 
Figure 1. Example of location of fatigue cracks monitored [15]. 
In the location of fatigue cracks monitored experiment, it 
is confined only to the case that the direction of force is 
vertical applied to the surface of the test piece. 
Other method of Acoustic Emission based on expert 
system for evaluating the structural integrity of the metallic 
pressure vessels, spheres, columns and tanks utilizes the 
Multichannel Acoustic Emission Systems and Sensors, 
which detect the high-frequency signals resulting from 
deterioration in the structure when the sample is stressed. 
The systems have sufficient speed and resolution to ensure 
real-time, on-screen indications of the development of any 
defects. 
Structural health monitoring (SHM) deals with the more 
or less continuous recording of data obtained from several 
parts of the structure. Based on the experience of the 
constructor, owner, or inspector the damaged regions where 
data are obtained can be restricted and in many cases it is 
necessary to just detect a deviation of the “usual” behavior 
of the structure [14]. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL MODULE 
The AE sensor converts the mechanical vibration 
propagated through the material into electrical signal.  The 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

amplifier magnifies the electrical signal, making useful for 
the dedicated software. The microcontroller (µC), as the 
central unit of the module, commands the amplifier gain and 
makes the appropriate analogue – digital conversion 
The sensor was designed to be used with an amplifier, of 
40 dB maximum gain, which can be controlled by the µC.  
The wireless acoustic emission sensor module with 
microcontroller for monitoring systems of structures under 
stress, processes signals received from a piezoelectric AE 
sensor on the investigated material surface. The module 
performs the analogue / digital conversion of signals, the 
microcontroller commands the wireless interface, may send 
and receive information from others emitting - receiver 
wireless modules. The microcontroller could vary the 
amplifier gain and makes the appropriate analogue/digital 
conversion. As remark, this module could be applied to 
complex AE monitoring systems of structures.  
The experimental wireless module of acoustic emission 
sensor is composed by a piezoelectric AE sensor, a signal 
amplifier, a PIC 18F452 microcontroller (µC), a pair of 
emitting - receiver wireless modules (ES and RS wireless, i. 
e. TX2-433-5V and RX2-433-5V), and a whip antenna of 
433 MHz. The block diagram of the experimental wireless 
module of acoustic emission sensor is presented in Fig. 2.  
 
Figure 2. Block diagram of the experimental wireless module for acoustic 
emission sensor.  
The output signal from µC is converted by the ES wireless 
module and transmitted in air by Antenna (433 MHz) to 
another antenna of 433 MHz (under the control of the 
monitoring system with µC) at distance. Also, the Antenna 
may receive signals from another antenna in order to 
command the µC and the amplifier gain of this wireless 
module (Fig. 2).  
Three types of antennae for the wireless transmission 
module which could be used for RF propagation, namely: 
helical antenna, loop antenna and whip antenna (Fig. 3). For 
this experimental module, we have chosen the RF whip 
antenna of 15.5 cm length and 433 MHz work frequency. 
 
Figure 3. Three types of antennae for wireless module. 
The piezoelectric sensor realizes the mechanical to 
electrical energy conversion, revealing the AE signals from 
the material samples, under mechanical stretches (Fig. 4). 
Mounting to the test specimen is typically achieved using 
silicon rubber or epoxy adhesives in order to realize the 
optimum electroacoustical transmission between the studied 
material and the sensor active surface.  
 
Figure 4. AE piezoelectric sensor. 
The main characteristics of some broadband AE 
piezoelectric sensors are presented in the Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
 
PROPERTIES OF SOME AE PIEZOELECTRIC SENSORS 
 
Properties 
AE sensor 
Outer dimension 
Diameter: 20.5 mm x 14 
mm 
Effective sensing area 
Around 230 mm2 
Total  mass (g) 
12 
Piezoelectric mass (g) 
5 – 6 
Capacitance (pF) 
350 
Piezoelectric charge 
coefficient d 31 (10-12 
m/V) 
-150 
Frequency range (kHz) 
100 - 450 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 5. Experimental wireless module for acoustic emission sensor. 
The experimental wireless acoustic emission sensor 
module with microcontroller for monitoring system has 
small size and is protected by a metallic case (Fig. 5). 
Fig. 6 presents the AE signals prevailed by the sensor in 
the breaking moment of a concrete sample at the maximum 
stretch. A large data base, which contains information about 
different kind of construction materials (metals, concrete, 
rocks, minerals, etc.), referring to the AE signal parameters 
(amplitude, duration, number of pulses, etc.) could be then 
used in order to predict the material failure or the moment of 
the cracks initiation into material. 
 
 
Figure 6. AE signals from a concrete sample at breaking point at mechanical 
stretch. 
Also, the pulses calibration is necessary to be introduced 
to the test specimen under the control of the monitoring 
system. The generated acoustic signal is collected during the 
press or streched work. A preset filter ensures the optimum 
response from individual channel by matching the amplifier 
and transducer responses. 
The ratio filtering techniques are used for eliminating 
outer noise signals, as well as observing the ratios of valid 
signals to estimate crack depth of the growing crack. 
A digital memory oscilloscope type Tektronix TDS 2022 
was used to the experimental researches. Fig. 7 shows AE 
signal converted by AE piezoelectric sensor, prevailed from 
an outstretched metallic bar and Fig. 8 present the processed 
signal from AE piezoelectric sensor by the microcontroller 
software, displayed on TDS Tektronix oscilloscope, which is 
limited at 2.0 V level. 
 
 
Figure 7. AE signal converted by AE sensor, prevailed from an 
outstretched metallic bar. 
 
Figure 8. Processed signal from AE sensor by microcontroller software, 
displayed on TDS Tektronix oscilloscope. 
The microcontroller software is able to realize the 
processing of signal received from the AE sensor, such as: 
the magnification in the case of a small AE level signal or to 
realize the sensor calibration, function of material 
characteristics (type, metal or nonmetal, acoustic velocity, 
density, structure, porosity, etc.).  
For instance, we chosen to set the tension threshold at 1.0 
V (above the reference line), in order to form the pulses, 
which exceed 1.0 V and correspond to the AE events, arisen 
in material under mechanical efforts (Fig. 8). The master 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

system is positioned at 100 m distance from the wireless AE 
module. It collects all these pulses received from the 
wireless AE module, counts the number of these events 
and/or determines their duration. Further, this information 
can indicate the starting crash or braking into material or a 
possible irreversible material deterioration. This algorithm is 
preordained by the special software of PIC 18F452 
microcontroller.  
TABLE II.  
MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOME METALLIC MATERIALS 
Material 
Longitudinal 
elasticity 
module, E, 
daN/cm2 
Transversal 
elasticity 
module G, 
daN/cm2 
Poisson 
Coefficient µµµµ 
Soft steel 
(2.0-2.15) ·106 
(7.8-8.5)·105 
0.24-0.28 
Hard steel  
(2.0-2.2) ·106 
8.5·105 
0.25-0.29 
White 
wrought iron 
(1.0-0.6)·106 
4.5·105 
0.23-0.27 
Tin 
0.2·106 
0.7·105 
0.42 
 
Table II presents some mechanical properties of metallic 
materials, which could be used in the specialized software 
data processing, as material constants. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Crack initiation of structures could be determined by the 
appearance of the AE signal at low stretch stress levels. 
After the crack initiated, the AE signals around the zero 
stress were thought to be caused by crack-face grinding 
when the cracks were closed. More experimental wireless 
modules with acoustic emission sensors could be well used 
into complex AE monitoring systems of important 
structures, such as bridges, buildings, metallic rails or 
underground. Inspection methods can be applied more 
efficiently by monitoring systems with many wireless AE 
sensor modules for large structures in the civil engineering. 
Next researches will be dedicated to obtain complex 
software 
around 
PIC 
18F452 
microcontroller, 
for 
controlling several AE modules of an AE monitoring 
system. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported in part by the National 
Authority for Scientific Research (ANCS) and the Executive 
Agency 
for 
Higher 
Education 
and 
RDI 
Funding 
(UEFISCDI). 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. H. Kim, W. K. Lee, and S. W. Kim, “Analysis of Acoustic 
Emission Signal for the Detection of Defective Manufactures 
in Press Process”, World Academy of Science, Engineering 
and Technology, Vol. 53, pp. 1301-1305, 2009. 
[2] ADVANCED 
ULTRASONIC 
FLAW 
SIZING 
HANDBOOK, 1998 Edition J. Mark Davis, DAVIS NDE, 
INC., http://www.ndt.net/article/1198/davis/davis.htm 
[3] C. U. Grosse, Acoustic emission localization methods for 
large structures based on beamforming and array techniques, 
NDTCE’09, 2009 
[4] C. U. Grosse, H. W. Reinhardt, and F. Finck, “Signal-Based 
Acoustic Emission Techniques in Civil Engineering”, Mat. in 
Civ. Engrg., Vol. 15, pp. 274, 2003. 
[5] C. Grosse, F. Finck, J. H. Kurz and H. W. Reinhardt, 
“Monitoring techniques based on wireless AE sensors for 
large structures in civil engineering”, Proc. EWGAE 2004, 
BB 90-CD, Sept. 2004, pp. 843-856. 
[6] I. Chilibon and S. Velizar, “Ultrasound propagation in 
asphalt”, B.H.V. Topping and M. Papadrakakis, (Editors), 
Civil-Comp 
Press, 
Stirlingshire, 
Scotland, 
paper 
91, 
Reference CST91, 10 pages, 2008. 
[7] F. Rauscher, ”Defect Detection by Acoustic Emission 
Examination of Metallic Pressure Vessels”, Proc. EWGAE 
2004, BB 90-CD, Sept. 2004, pp. 83-90.  
[8] P. Tscheliesnig, ”Corrosion testing of ship building materials 
with acoustic emission (AE)”, Proc. EWGAE 2004, BB 90-
CD, Sept. 2004, pp. 51-59. 
[9] M. Taghvaei, S.B.M. Beck, and W.J. Staszewski, “Leak 
detection in pipeline networks using low-profile piezoceramic 
transducers”, Structural Control and Health Monitoring, Vol. 
14 (8), pp. 1063-1082, 2007. 
[10] Z. H. Hanafi, N. Jamaludin, S. Abdullah, M. F. M. Yusofd, 
and M. S. M. Zain, Acoustic emission study of corrosion 
fatigue and fatigue for API 5L X70 gas pipeline steel, Applied 
Mechanics and Materials, Vol. 138-189, pp. 635-639, 2012. 
[11] M. F. M Yusof, C. K. E Nizwan, N. Jamaludin, and S. 
Abdullah, “Acoustic emission behavior during fatigue crack 
of API5LX70 gas pipeline steel”,  Applied Mechanics and 
Materials, Vol. 80-81, pp. 148-152, 2011. 
[12] M. Ahadi and M. S. Bakhtiar, “Leak detection in water-filled 
plastic pipes through the application of tuned wavelet 
transforms to Acoustic Emission signals”, Applied Acoustics, 
Vol. 71, 634–639, 2010. 
[13] R. Geng, “Modern acoustic emission technique and its 
application in aviation industry”, Ultrasonics, Vol. 44 Suppl 
1, e1025-9, Dec. 2006. 
[14] C. U. Grosse, M. Krüger, and S. D. Glaser, ”Wireless 
Acoustic Emission Sensor Networks for Structural Health 
Monitoring in Civil Engineering”, ECNDT 2006 - Tu.1.7.3, 
2006, pp. 1-8. 
[15] S. Uppal, D. Yoshino, and H. L. Dunegan, “Using Acoustic 
Emission to Monitor Fatigue Cracks on the Bridge at FAST”, 
Technology Digest, February 2002. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

