PCB Integration of Dye-sensitised Solar Cells for
Low-cost Networked Embedded Systems
Jens Eliasson and Jerker Delsing
Dept. of Computer science, space and electrical engineering
Lule˚a University of Technology
Lule˚a, Sweden
Email: jens.eliasson@ltu.se
Simon J. Thompson and Yi-Bing Cheng
Dept. of Materials Engineering
Monash University
Melbourne, Australia
Email: simon.thompson@eng.monash.edu
Abstract—Wireless sensor networks are envisioned to
make a large impact on how sensor data from physical
phenomena can be utilized by millions of users on the
Internet. However, one concern in deploying a large
number of real-world physical sensors is that replacing
spent batteries might not be feasible. One solution to
this issue may involve energy harvesting technology, e.g.
solar panels. Solar panels are currently relatively expensive
because they require a time-consuming and therefore costly
assembly process. As an alternative, this paper suggests a
new approach to powering networked sensors: the direct
integration of a solar cell onto the sensor nodes printed
circuit board. This approach eliminates the need for
manual assembly and the use of expensive connectors. This
article presents test results and a feasibility analysis of the
direct integration of a dye-sensitised solar cell onto a circuit
board. Preliminary results indicate that this approach is
feasible for networked sensors. The aim of this work is to
develop a method for the assembly of complete systems,
consisting of a printed circuit board, components, and
power supply, using a single production process. The ﬁrst
steps towards this aim have been taken, and the authors
believe that the proposed approach may be one enabling
technology for future large-scale, low-cost wireless sensor
networks.
Keywords-Dye sensitised solar cells, energy harvesting,
networked sensors, wireless sensor networks
I. INTRODUCTION
A wireless sensor network (WSN) is composed
of a large number of heterogeneous sensor nodes,
or sources, that sense phenomena in the physical
world [1]. A sensor network also includes one
or several gateways, or sinks, which forward sen-
sor data from nodes in the internal network to
an external network [2]. Research on WSN tech-
nology originally focused on military applications,
such as battleﬁeld surveillance, land mine detection,
and soldier monitoring [3]. Current wireless sensor
network research is additionally motivated by an
increasing number of civil usage scenarios, such
as environmental and habitat monitoring, seismic
and volcanic monitoring, structural monitoring, and
industrial applications [4], [5].
Wireless sensors are expected to have a drastic
impact on how measurements of the physical world
will be presented to users on the Internet. A vision,
in which Internet-connected wireless sensors are
deployed in the vicinity of users, named the Internet
of Things [6] is also projected to enhance both safety
and quality of life for future generations. For this
vision to be realized, a number of issues must be
resolved. Three of these issues, addressed by this
article, are:
• Reducing power consumption
• Enabling wireless power
• Lowering the cost of the sensor nodes
Reducing power consumption can be achieved
using a number of methods, such as using more
efﬁcient components, integrating more intelligent
routing protocols [7], or developing energy-aware
computing. Wireless power requires power harvest-
ing, power storage, and an appropriate power usage
architecture at the sensor node; see for example
[8], [9], [10]. A node’s cost will be reduced with
the use of more integrated components, and the
price of printed circuit boards (PCB), integrated
circuits (ICs), and other components will drastically
decrease with increased production volumes. How-
ever, the costs of certain node components, such
215
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

as batteries and power supplies, do not scale as
effectively as circuit board production volumes. The
cost of packaging a complete node with a circuit
board, batteries, solar panels, and enclosure will
not be reduced by the same order of magnitude
as that of the electronics. This is a major obstacle
for realizing the vision of massive wireless sensor
networks.
One consideration for energy harvesting relates
to the energy density from different sources. It is
clear that solar cells are superior to other energy
harvesting approaches such as vibrations and ther-
moelectric power, as reported by Yang et. al [8].
Therefore, the focus of our work was to investigate
direct, low-cost solar cell technology integration
with a sensor node.
When comparing different solar cell technolo-
gies, both power efﬁciency and cost must be con-
sidered. Two main candidate technologies: silicon
based solar cells and dye sensitised solar cells
(DSC), sometimes called Gr¨atzel cells [11], have
been selected for further investigation. A compar-
ison between silicon based solar cells and DSC
can be found in [12]. Regarding energy capability
a traditional silicon-based solar cell offers about
43mA/cm2 at 0.7V, whereas current DSCs offer
about 22mA/cm2 at about 0.6V [13]. Regarding
cost, DSCs are considered superior because material
cost and manufacturing cost is clearly lower than for
silicon-based cells.
This paper presents a novel approach aimed at
further reducing manufacturing and integration cost
for DSCs that power wireless sensor nodes. The
approach is to manufacture a solar panel directly on
a sensor node’s circuit board, thus reducing the cost
of manufacturing the cell separately and eliminating
the assembly cost. This has several beneﬁts, as the
resulting device consists of an integrated solution
that effectively eliminates costly silicon-based cells,
cables and connectors, and an additional integration
step. The proposed approach also increases the
system’s robustness because there are no connectors
or cables that can disconnect due to mechanical
phenomena, e.g., vibrations or impacts. The goal
of this research is to develop a holistic method
for producing complete low-power systems, where
assembly of the PCB, components, and an energy-
harvesting device can be completed with a single
process. The ﬁrst steps have been taken - a solar
cell has been integrated with a PCB - and the
authors believe that, in the future, a solar cell will
be directly printable on a PCB using a sequential
build-up (SBU) technique. For example, Blackshear
et al. reported in 2005 [14] the advantages of using
SBU for chip assembly onto circuit boards.
The paper is outlined as follows: this section has
presented related work and a background of wireless
sensor networks and solar cell technologies. The
next section gives an overview of DSCs. Section
III presents the new method of integrating a DSC
directly onto a circuit board, and Sections IV and V
show the experimental setup, and results from real-
world tests, respectively. Finally, suggestions for
future work are presented in Section VI, followed
by conclusions in Section VII.
II. DYE SENSITISED SOLAR CELLS
The dye sensitised solar cell (DSC) is currently
being investigated as a low cost method of harvest-
ing the abundant energy of sunlight into electricity
[11]. It offers the advantages of low cost and better
light harvesting in low and/or diffuse lighting, which
are more realistic conditions than would be optimal
for other photovoltaic devices, such as silicon-based
cells.
The DSC operates by light exciting an electron
in a dye molecule adsorbed onto a mesoporous
semiconductor to an energy level above the con-
duction band of the semiconductor. The electron is
quickly transferred to the conduction band of the
semiconductor and transported through the network
of interconnected nanoparticles to the electrode.
The electron passes through the external circuit and
then reduces an electrolyte at the counter electrode
which in turn reduces the dye, returning it to its
ground state. This type of solar cell exhibits an
efﬁciency of over 11 %, as shown by Han et. al [15].
The operation of the DSC allows for cheap, abun-
dant materials to be used for device components,
combined with less energy-intensive processes used
for manufacturing. This offers the potential for
signiﬁcantly lower production costs compared to
more traditional silicon solar cells, in turn reducing
the energy and cost payback times signiﬁcantly.
These factors make the DSC an attractive renewable
energy source for the future.
216
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

The drawbacks for DSCs are related to lower
performance compared to silicon devices, a corro-
sive electrolyte that limits material selection options
and shorter device lifetimes, primarily due to the
volatile electrolyte used in the most efﬁcient de-
signs. It is difﬁcult to construct devices with long
lifetimes when encapsulating a volatile, corrosive
solvent. To this end alternative electrolytes have
been investigated - generally highly viscous, non-
volatile ionic liquids. Solid state hole conductors
have also been considered and are a more elegant
solution, as they also remove corrosive iodine from
the system, expanding materials selection options
within the cell as well as eliminating any solvent
leakage issues. The leading organic hole conductor
is 2,2,7,7-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxypheny-amine)-
9,9-spirobiﬂuorene (spiro-MeOTAD) [16], with re-
ported device efﬁciencies up to 4.4% [17]. A solid
state device is typically constructed onto ﬂuorine
doped tin oxide (FTO) glass with a titania (TiO2)
layer coated on top, which is dyed and then inﬁl-
trated with the hole conductor. The counter elec-
trode is a gold layer evaporated onto the coated
titania layer and connected to an electrically isolated
section of the FTO glass. This architecture is ideal
for integration with circuit boards, shown in Fig. 1.
The circuit board may be physically contacted to
the gold contacts on the back of the DSC module,
as shown in Fig. 3. The connections will be made
such that each cell is independently measurable and
bi-passable if necessary.
III. PCB WITH INTEGRATED DYE SENSITISED
SOLAR CELL
DSC modules were created using the screen print-
ing technique, on pre-etched 100 mm × 100 mm
13 Ω/square FTO coated conducting glass (Nippon)
masterplates. The etching to separate the contacts
for the individual cells was performed using a laser
engraving system, a Versa laser VL3.50 unit, which
produced ﬁne lines (∼150µm) with high spacial
precision. Following this procedure the glass was
cleaned and a dense blocking layer of TiO2 was
deposited by spray pyrolysis, with the areas for
electrical contacts by solder and the gold layer being
masked by ﬂattened aluminium rods.
The screen printing paste for the active layer,
provided by JGC Catalysts and Chemicals Ltd,
Fig. 1.
Layout of the PCB with integrated dye-sensitised solar cell
contained 18 nm particles of anatase titania and was
diluted by terpineol at a ratio of 2:1 paste (Fluka).
The thickness of the titania layer was determined
by a Veeco Detak 150 stylus proﬁlometer, to be ∼2
µm. The titania layer was incrementally heated to
450◦C for 30 min and then to 500◦C for 15 min.
The master plates were cut into 50 mm × 50 mm
modules and reheated to 500◦C for 30 mins before
being placed into the dye solution of 30 mM Z907
(Dyesol) in an acetonitrile/tert-butanol 1:1 mixture.
for approximately 24 hours. The electrolyte was a
solid state hole conductor, namely Spiro-MeOTAD,
which was deposited by spin-coating using a solu-
tion that consisted of 180mg/mL of Spiro-MeOTAD
(Merck) in chlorobenzene (Sigma) with additives of
4-tertbutylpyridine (TBP) (Sigma) (17.6ul/mL) and
Li-TFSI (Sigma) (19.5mM). Chlorobenzene was
used on a cotton bud to remove excess Spiro-
MeOTAD from the glass were series interconnects
were to be formed. The gold charge collecting
layer was deposited onto the module via thermal
evaporation, and the areas not to be coated with
gold were masked with Kapton tapeTM (3M).
An attempt was made to integrate these devices
onto a PCB using conductive epoxy however, this
had a detrimental effect on the DSC leading to dye
desorption. Therefore, this approach was abandoned
in favour of using a soft compressible conductor.
The material used was a polymer mesh substrate
with copper deposited onto it. The copper mesh was
cut into pieces of the same width as the pads, but
slightly longer such that they could be laid over the
pads and adhered using Kapton tape. The module
was placed on top of the PCB such that the gold
contacted the copper mesh and no shorting occurred
between cells. The PCB and DSC module where
217
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Fig. 2.
Prototype board layout
Fig. 3.
PCB DSC solar panel prototype board, ready for integration
with sensor node
then clipped into place using bulldog clips. During
these alignment and clipping processes care was
taken not to damage the fragile gold layer. Wires
were soldered onto the board such that the entire
module could be used or individual cells could be
measured and/or bypassed if faulty. Fig. 2 shows the
PCB that serves as the base for the new solar cell.
The board, which is composed of four copper stripes
each 49 mm wide and 6 mm long, was manufactured
using a milling machine from an Eagle CAD design.
Fig. 3 shows a board produced with a DSC on a
PCB. This board was used for initial tests and for
5-month degradation tests.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Several experiments were performed to investi-
gate the performance of the PCB-based cell. To
evaluate the performance of the module under stan-
dard conditions a solar simulator was used. The
modules were tested under 1 Sun illumination, 100
mWcm−2 AM1.5G, using a 1000 W solar simulator
xenon lamp (Oriel) ﬁtted with an appropriate ﬁlter to
achieve spectral match and a Keithley 2400 source
meter. Illumination intensity was varied by the use
of ﬁne wire mesh and calibrated using a silicon
diode. The active area was 10.5 cm2, while the
size of the glass was 25 cm2, this shows a poor
active area to device area ratio. In future work this
will be increased with 80% coverage, which is a
challenging, but achievable, target for an intercon-
nected module of this size. No masking was used;
efﬁciencies may therefore be over estimated due to
light piping within the glass.
To investigate the real world performance and
feasibility for practical use, tests were performed
both indoors and outdoors using different light
sources.
A. Measurement system
A measurement system was created to capture
characterization measurements for the PCB solar
cell. The measurement system, shown in Fig. 4, con-
sists of a 24-bit analog-to-digital converter (ADC)
that measures the voltage drop over a 5 ohm resistor,
which is used to measure current. To obtain an I-
V curve, a digitally programmable potentiometer
was also used so that different loads could be
presented to the cell. A Mulle v3.1 networked sensor
node equipped with a Bluetooth 2.0 transceiver was
connected to the measurement system. Using this
approach, the PCB cell can be tested outdoors by
having a wireless connection to a laptop or PC,
which can be placed indoors. The measurement
system will be used also to measure the temper-
ature dependency of the cell during winter tests. In
addition, the measurement system also serves as a
building block in the power supply unit (PSU) that
may be used together with the PCB-cell. The PSU
includes a boost converter that generates a 5.0V
output used to charge a super capacitor. A switch is
used to select whether the Mulle should be powered
by the super capacitor or by a battery. The Mulle
v3.1 also features a battery monitor chip, capable
of measuring battery voltage, power consumption,
available energy, and estimated lifetime. Combined
with the Mulle’s on-board features, the PSU can
enable true energy- and power-aware operation.
Fig. 5 shows the measurement system. The sys-
tem can measure voltages up to 6.5V, and current
with a resolution around 20µA. The load can be
programmed to any value between 100Ω and 100kΩ
in 256 steps.
218
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Fig. 4.
Measurement system overview
Fig. 5.
Measurement system implementation
The measurement system is completely wireless,
which allows remote monitoring of the PCB cell.
A dedicated software written in C was used to
retrieve data from the Mulle and store the results
to ﬁle. In future implementations, the measurement
system should also be integrated with the solar
panel to enable true energy- and power-aware sensor
node operation. By measuring available stored en-
ergy, power harvesting output and power usage, the
software can be used to make intelligent decisions
regarding how energy-consuming tasks should be
managed.
B. Performed measurements
The following experiments were performed in
order to test the cell’s performance under in a real-
world setting. The different tests that the cell was
tested in are typical application locations where a
networked embedded system can be deployed.
1) Measurement of the PCB DSC module’s per-
formance initially and after 5 months
TABLE I
MULLE V3.1 POWER CONSUMPTION
Mode
Delay
Current
All systems sleep
-
0.004 mA
MCU 10.0 MHz, BT off
-
7.6 ma
MCU 5.0 MHz, BT off
-
5.1 mA
MCU 2.5 MHz, BT off
-
3.1 mA
MCU 1.25 MHz, BT off
-
2.2 mA
MCU sleep, BT listen
2-12 s.
1.0 mA
MCU sleep, BT active
-
40.3 mA
MCU sleep, BT sniff (210 slots)
131 ms.
8.4 mA
MCU sleep, BT sniff (2010 slots)
1256 ms.
2.8 mA
MCU sleep, BT parked (18 slots)
13 ms.
7.5 mA
MCU sleep, BT parked (200 slots)
130 ms.
2.7 mA
MCU sleep, BT parked (4094 slots)
2560 ms.
1.8 ma
2) Measurement of the PCB DSC’s current re-
sponse at various light incident angles
3) Measurement of the effect of varying light
intensity on the current output of the PCB
DSC module.
4) Tests of power generation at indoor and out-
door locations and different lighting condi-
tions
The cell was tested for long term degradation
effects and different light sources at different angles.
However, no temperature tests were performed. It is
considered as future work to investigate the cell’s
performance in low temperature environments.
C. Real-world energy usage
The feasibility of using the prototype solar cell,
with the power characteristics presented in the pre-
vious section, for a real-world networked sensor
is presented here. The Mulle node [18] has been
used in a number of WSN and BSN applications
[19], which will be used as an example for cal-
culating operational lifetimes when combined with
the PCB cell. Table I shows examples of the current
consumption of a Mulle v3.1 in different operating
modes.
V. RESULTS
The initial performance of the PCB DSC module
was 1.47% efﬁcient initially, degrading to approx-
imately 1% after 5 months, as shown in Fig. 6.
The aging of the module was performed with no
encapsulation and at ambient conditions. The drop
in performance is due to reduced current most likely
caused by the degradation of the dye molecules by
219
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

oxygen and water. This suggests good stability and
may be signiﬁcantly improved with encapsulation of
the device. Figure 7 shows the performance of the
PCB DSC at varying incident light angles. Here 0◦
corresponds to the light beam being perpendicular to
the surface of the module. The module demonstrates
good performance with the PCB DSC maintaining
80% of current at a 45◦ tilt. Figure 8 shows the
variation of the output current with varied input
light intensity, which remains linear for lower light
intensities, but slightly decreases upon approaching
full illumination, showing the cell is approaching
it’s photocurrent limit. This data may help determine
the illumination intensity from the photocurrent
produced by the module although this will exhibit
a signiﬁcant spectral mismatch for artiﬁcial light
sources.
Fig. 6.
PCB DSC current-voltage performance, initially and after 5
months
Fig. 7.
PCB DSC short circuit current response for different light
incident angles
To evaluate the module’s output in real world
Fig. 8.
Short circuit current response for the PCB DSC with light
intensity varying between 1 and 100%
scenarios the short circuit current was measured at a
number of locations that reﬂect typical applications
for the sensor node which can be placed either
outdoors or indoors. The following locations were
tested:
i) Ofﬁce with ceiling ﬂuorescence lightning and
ambient light from shaded windows; cell hor-
izontal
ii) Corridor with ceiling ﬂuorescence lightning
and no ambient light from windows, cell
horizontal
iii) Workshop well lit with with ceiling ﬂuores-
cence lightning and some ambient light from
shaded windows; cell horizontal
iv) Ofﬁce desk with 23W desk ﬂuorescent lamp;
cell horizontal
v) Near a closed window with no direct sunlight;
cell horizontal
vi) Near an open window with no direct sunlight;
cell horizontal
vii) Near a closed window with some direct sun-
light; cell horizontal
viii) Near a closed window with direct sunlight;
cell horizontal
ix) Near a closed window with no direct sunlight;
cell tilted for maximum illumination
x) Outside in full sun light; cell horizontal
xi) Outside in full sun light; cell tilted for maxi-
mum illumination
The resulting data is in Table II. For a number
of practical usage scenarios assuming no real-time
radio communication, a small dye solar cell should
be sufﬁcient to provide the necessary power for
220
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

making wireless power a reality.
TABLE II
CURRENTS FROM PCB DYE SOLAR CELL IN TYPICAL USAGE
SCENARIO LOCATIONS.
Location
distance to source [m]
Current [µA]
i
2
6
i
0.3
60
i
0.1
220
ii
1
6
ii
0.1
90
iii
2
50
iv
0.2
240
iv
0.01
3000
v
-
220
vi
-
330
vii
-
800
vii
-
2650
ix
-
3700
x
-
6800
xi
-
8000
When comparing the power output from the PCB
DSC cell with Table I, it is clear that the generated
power is sufﬁcient for powering a Mulle sensor
node as long as low-power modes are utilized.
Since the peak power of a Mulle is higher than the
maximum power output of the PCB DSC cell, some
storage will always be required. A super capacitor,
a rechargeable battery, or a combination of both can
be used for energy storage. Performed tests indicates
that the presented approach is feasible for powering
low-power electronics such as sensor nodes.
VI. FUTURE WORK
The ﬁrst steps towards an integrated manufac-
turing process for solar-powered embedded systems
have been successfully completed. In the next step,
the authors will continue to investigate printing a
dye sensitised solar cell directly onto a printed
circuit board using mass production techniques. The
ultimate aim is to develop a method for assembling
and manufacturing a complete system that includes
a PCB, components, and a solar cell, using a single
process.
Another performance-enhancing approach worth
investigating requires interconnecting a number of
cells in a matrix-style framework using MOSFET
transistors. This is possible because all connec-
tions can be made by vias, instead of wires. This
would enable the system to identify cells with bad
performance, and to allow them to be bypassed.
The system would thereby dynamically reconﬁgure
itself for maximum performance depending on: light
irradiation, work load, and properties of the cells.
This approach requires software-support for full
performance advantages.
Another issue that needs further investigation is
how the system should be encapsulated in a trans-
parent package. One method is the embed the entire
system in optically transparent glue, as shown in
[20]. How low temperatures are affecting the cell’s
performance must also be investigated. Finally, the
use of a more low powered device, such as the Mulle
v5.2 with an IEEE 802.15.4 radio, should be used
to test the true performance in a wireless sensor
network.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper has presented a novel approach for
powering low-power electronic devices, such as
networked embedded systems and sensor nodes.
The approach integrates a dye sensitised solar cell
directly onto a device’s circuit board thereby reduc-
ing the material and assembly costs. A prototype
device has been manufactured to demonstrate the
feasibility of this approach and to enable the cells’
real-world performance to be evaluated. Test results,
both initial and after ﬁve months of degradation,
have been presented to support the claims.
By integrating the power supply directly onto a
circuit board, the authors envision that networked
sensors may be manufactured at a greatly reduced
cost in the future. When combined with new tech-
nologies for energy storage and transparent encap-
sulation, the presented approach can be an enabling
technology for future low-cost, large-scale wireless
sensor networks, in support of the vision of the
Internet of Things.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Mikael Larsmark
for help with manufacturing the circuit boards and
JGC Catalysts and Chemicals Ltd, Kitakyushu-Shi,
Japan, for their generous donation of the titania
pastes.
221
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

REFERENCES
[1] D. Culler, D. Estrin, and M. Srivastava, “Overview of sensor
networks,” Computer, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 41–49, Aug 2004.
[2]
¨Ozg¨ur B. Akan and I. F. Akyildiz, “Event-to-sink reliable
transport in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 1003–1016, 2005.
[3] T. Bokareva, W. Hu, S. Kanhere, B. Ristic, N. Gordon,
T.
Bessell,
M.
Rutten,
and
S.
Jha,
“Wireless
sensor
networks for battleﬁeld surveillance,” 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://www.cse.unsw.edu.au/∼tbokareva/papers/lwc.html
[4] N. Xu, S. Rangwala, K. K. Chintalapudi, D. Ganesan, A. Broad,
R. Govindan, and D. Estrin, “A wireless sensor network for
structural monitoring,” in SenSys ’04: Proceedings of the 2nd
international conference on Embedded networked sensor sys-
tems.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2004, pp. 13–24.
[5] A. Mainwaring, D. Culler, J. Polastre, R. Szewczyk, and J. An-
derson, “Wireless sensor networks for habitat monitoring,” in
Proceedings of the 1st ACM international workshop on Wireless
sensor networks and applications.
ACM Press, 2002, pp. 88–
97.
[6] “IPSO Alliance,” 2010, http://www.ipso-alliance.org/.
[7] K. Zeng, K. Ren, W. Lou, and P. J. Moran, “Energy aware
efﬁcient geographic routing in lossy wireless sensor networks
with environmental energy supply,” Wireless Networks, vol. 15,
pp. 39–51, Jan 2009.
[8] R. Moghe, Y. Yang, F. Lambert, and D. Divan, “A scoping study
of electric and magnetic ﬁeld energy harvesting for wireless
sensor networks in power system applications,” in Energy
Conversion Congress and Exposition, 2009. ECCE 2009. IEEE,
sept. 2009, pp. 3550 –3557.
[9] V.
Raghunathan,
A.
Kansal,
J.
Hsu,
J.
Friedman,
and
M.
Srivastava,
“Design
considerations
for
solar
energy
harvesting wireless embedded systems,” IPSN ’05: Proceedings
of the 4th international symposium on Information processing
in sensor networks, vol. 64, p. 64, 2005, cited By (since
1996): 9. [Online]. Available: www.scopus.com
[10] J. Eliasson, P. Lindgren, J. Delsing, S. J. Thompson, and Y.-B.
Cheng, “A power management architecture for sensor nodes.”
Kowloon: IEEE, feb 2007, pp. 3008 – 3013.
[11] B. O’Regan and M. Gr¨atzel, “A low-cost, high-efﬁciency solar
cell based on dye-sensitized colloidal tio2 ﬁlms,” Nature, vol.
353, no. 6346, pp. 737–740, 1991.
[12] B. A. Gregg and M. C. Hanna, “Comparing organic to inorganic
photovoltaic cells: Theory, experiment, and simulation,” Journal
of Applied Physics, vol. 93, no. 6, pp. 3605–3614, 2003.
[Online]. Available: http://link.aip.org/link/?JAP/93/3605/1
[13] M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, and W. Warta, “Short
Communication Solar cell efﬁciency tables,” Progress in Pho-
tovoltaics: Research and Applications, vol. 17, 2009.
[14] E. Blackshear, M. Cases, E. Klink, and S. Engle, “The evolution
of build-up package technology and its design challenges,” IBM
journal of research and development, vol. 49, pp. 641–661,
2005.
[15] L. Han, A. Fukui, N. Fuke, N. Koide, and R. Yamanaka, “High
efﬁciency of dye-sensitized solar cell and module,” in IEEE 4th
World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion.
IEEE,
2006, pp. 179–182.
[16] U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel,
J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer, and M. Gr¨atzel, “Solid-state dye-
sensitized mesoporous tio2 solar cells with high photon-to-
electron conversion efﬁciencies,” Nature, vol. 395, pp. 583–558,
2009.
[17] S.-J. Moon, J.-H. Yum, R. Humphry-Baker, K. M. Karlsson,
D. P. Hagberg, T. Marinado, A. Hagfeldt, L. Sun, M. Gr¨atzel,
and M. K. Nazeeruddin, “Highly efﬁcient organic sensitizers
for solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells,” Journal of Physical
Chemistry C, pp. 16 816–16 820, 2009.
[18] “Eistec AB,” 2010, http://www.eistec.se/.
[19] J. Eliasson, P. Lindgren, and J. Delsing, “A Bluetooth-based
Sensor Node for Low-Power Ad Hoc Networks,” Journal of
Computers (JCP), pp. 1–10, May 2008.
[20] J. Eliasson and W. Birk, “Towards road surface monitoring :
experiments and technical challenges,” in IEEE International
Conference on Control Applications : CCA ’09, St. Petersburg,
Russia, July 2009, pp. 655 – 659.
222
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

