Immersion Discriminated from Browsed Information
in Writing Document Referring Web Pages
Takahisa Oe
Shinya Yonekura
Hiromitsu Shimakawa
Graduate School of
Graduate School of
College of
Information Science
Information Science
Information Science
and Engineering
and Engineering
and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University
Ritsumeikan University
Ritsumeikan University
Shiga, Japan
Shiga, Japan
Shiga, Japan
Email: oe2002
Email: shinya
Email: simakawa
@de.is.ritsumei.ac.jp
@de.is.ritsumei.ac.jp
@de.is.ritsumei.ac.jp
Abstract—This study proposes a method to distinguish student
immersion in writing on computers without physical sensors. To
improve the work efficiency of writing, students need support,
such as warning when they have been distracted a long time from
writing.
A
model
using
the
Random
Forest
algorithm
discriminates
the
immersion,
examining
windows
of
their
operation target on the top of the display. In our experiment, the
model discriminates the immersion of 5 subjects with the
accuracy of 0.65 or higher in the F-measure, where placement of
a specific window on the top of the screen turns out to be the
most
important
feature.
Various
kinds
of
information
is
presented on the screen of the PCs of students. It includes not
only information necessary for writing, but also entertainment
information such as movies and games. The experiment result
indicates that students tend to exclude entertainment information
from their vision when they are under immersion in writing. It
suggests that the student distraction from writing can be warned
without extra effort from students, if we examine the top of the
screen.
Keywords–Sensorless detection; Immersion; Distraction; Ma-
chine learning.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The popularization of the Internet has brought us the
power of easy access to a wide variety of desired information.
At the same time, we can also access information related to
entertainment, which disturbs our concentration on works or
activities. Students often write documents, such as technical
reports and presentation materials using computers. They
usually collect information necessary for the writing, using
Web browsers. At the same time, their concentration is
disturbed by Web-based information related to entertainment.
A method to distinguish their immersion in the writing task
from distraction is required to help students keep their
concentration.
For
example,
when
a
student
has
been
distracted from writing for a long time, a self-management
tool should send a warning to the student. Physical sensors are
indispensable in existing methods to distinguish student
immersion in their writing tasks [1]–[4]. However, it is not
practical to use physical sensors for every writing task.
This study proposes a method to distinguish student immer-
sion in writing, using only data which can be acquired without
physical sensors. To achieve it, the method pays attention to
the type of digital documents opened on the computers where the
students engage in writing. Based on the bag-of-words algorithm,
the proposed method figures out a document vector for each one
of the documents used in the writing. They involve not only the
target document, but also the ones accessed by Web browsers.
We refer to the latter as browsed documents.
The association degree of browsed documents with the
target one is calculated using the vectors. Browsed documents
are categorized into 2 groups based on the degree of asso-
ciation. One group contains reference information, which is
related to the target document. Students write a target docu-
ment using information a from reference document. The other
group contains supplemental information, which facilitates the
writing of the target document, and entertainment information,
which
is
unrelated
to
the
writing.
The
contents
of
supplemental information are not directly related to the
contents of the target document. However, they promote the
writing,
because
they
explain
the
knowledge
to
write
comprehensive documents, such as how to organize technical
documents in a general way, and how to write mathematical
expressions in digital documents.
The proposed method distinguishes immersion of a student
in writing by features of interactions the student is taking. The
first feature is whether the student provides the computer with
inputs, such as moving mouse cursor, clicking the mouse, or
typing on the keyboard. In this feature, it is also important to
know whether the inputs are used for the target document, the
first group of browsed documents, or the second group. The
second feature is related to windows handling documents. On
the top of the display, the student places a window for either
the target document, the first group of browsed documents, or
the second group. The feature gives importance to what
window is placed on the top of the display.
This study assumes students keep a specific behavior dur-
ing their immersion. For example, they are typing characters
in the target documents to write down their ideas. Others may
stop the typing to consider their plans on target documents, or
continue to search relevant information. This study examines
if students engaging in writing keep one kind of behavior in
terms of the above features of interaction during their
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

immersion in writing.
To distinguish between their immersion in the writing and
their distraction from the writing with the method, we conducted
an experiment where five students worked on a task to summarize
a
specific
technology.
The
method
discriminated
student
immersion with an accuracy exceeding 0.65. The method trained
the discriminator taking student interaction with computers and
the continuity of the specific behavior as their explanation
variables. The method discriminates the immersion of students,
using
a
machine
learning
method.
The
method
trains
a
discriminator with data sampled from students. The data consists
of student interaction with computers and the continuity of the
specific behavior in the interaction. This paper discusses which
explanation variables are effective for the discrimination from the
viewpoints of machine learning.
In Section 2, we describe the necessity to determine the
concentration in writing and existing methods to determine
concentration. In Section 3, we describe how to determine
concentration in writing without a physical sensor. In Section
4, we describe the procedure of the experiment and the
experimental result. In Section 5, we discuss experimental
results. In Section 5, we describe the conclusion and future
research tasks.
II.
THE JUDGEMENT OF CONCENTRATION OF STUDENTS
ATTENTION ON WRITING
Here,
we
present
the
necessity
to
determine
the
concentration in writing and existing methods to evaluate
concentration.
A. Problem of writing on PC
Nowadays, we can easily obtain the information we want
using the Internet. At the same time, we can also access
information
related
to
entertainment,
which
disturbs
our
concentration on the work or activity. The survey of the Ministry
of Internal Affairs and Communications in Japan says about 40%
of college students are netaholic [5]. They are caught by Web-
based videos, social media, or net games for an excessively long
time. Coker’s study proved that extreme Web-surfing during work
time degrades the progress of the work [6]. The use of the Internet
prevents them from concentrating on their tasks. Focusing their
attention on specific target tasks, people would enter into a state
where they can show the best performance on their tasks. In this
study, we refer to this state as immersion [7][8]. On the contrary,
we refer to states where people cannot concentrate on their target
tasks as distraction.
Using computers, students make documents, such as tech-
nical reports and presentation materials. During the writing,
their concentration is disturbed by Web-based information re-
lated to entertainment. Focus of student attention on tasks
other
than
writing
degrades
the
efficiency
to
finalize
documents, because the students run into distraction from the
writing. It is not desirable for students to run into the
distraction from writing. Students struggle with entertainment
information on the Internet, trying to concentrate their
attention on the writing. If we can detect the distraction from
the writing, we can avoid the inefficiency problem students
suffer from. The distraction from writing corresponds to the
immersion in information related to entertainment. It is
difficult to distinguish which information the students focus
their
attention
on.
This
paper
addresses
a
method
to
distinguish student immersion in writing from the distraction.
B. Necessity to evaluate concentration
Students engage in writing when they make technical
reports, presentation materials, and so on. This study assumes
the following tasks as writing. Students edit documents on a
computer, using text editors, authoring tools for presentation
materials, and so on. Students collect information necessary
for the writing, using Web browsers on a computer. In the
following, we refer to students engaging in the writing as
users. The users gather necessary information for the writing
from the Web. The Internet is full of Web pages related to
entertainment. Since they are attractive to the users, the users
are likely to be prevented from concentrating on the writing.
When the users are prevented from concentrating, the work
efficiency decreases. They might use up the time for other
tasks, such as extra-curricular activities.
Users should be supported so that they can immerse into
writing. For example, when a user has been distracted from
writing for a long time, a self-management tool should send a
warning to the user. It is necessary to determine whether the users
concentrate their attention on the writing or they are distracted
from it. This study aims to increase the learning efficiency of
students, having them concentrate on writing. Writing is a really
common task for students. To get high practicability, it is
preferable to minimize efforts and costs in the method to evaluate
concentration. We should avoid any method which imposes extra
effort and costs on students, such as wearing physical sensors, to
determine the concentration of their attention on writing.
C. Existing methods
Sarrafzadeh et al. measured emotional states from bio-signals
like facial expressions [9]. Jang et al. identified human intention
by eyeball movement patterns and pupil size variation [10].
Kapoor et al. predicted students’ quit puzzle by facial
expressions, dermal activity, posture, and mouse pressure [11].
Jraidi et al. proposed a method to presume human immersion
in a task using the skin conductance, the heart rate and the
electroencephalography [1]. Nacke and Lindley also used
physical sensors measuring from orbicularis oculi and zygo-
maticus major to know human immersion [2]. Leelasawassuk
et al. tried to identify the target of attention using a Google
Glass and an Eye Tracke [3]. Lee et al. measured emotional
state from bio-signals like EGG signals [12]. They also mea-
sured the degree of human immersion from pupil movement
and eye blinks using a webcam and an Eye Tracker. All of
these methods need to use physical sensors [4]. Mello detected
students who were bored, disengaged or zoning out by an eye
tracker [13]. However, the necessity of physical sensors for
every writing imposes extra efforts and costs on users. These
methods should be avoided for the evaluation of immersion in
writing. A method free from physical sensors is required to
easily evaluate immersion into writing.
III.
CONCENTRATION JUDGMENT USING BEHAVIOR LOGS
Here, we present how to evaluate concentration on writing
without physical sensors.
A. Method overview
This study proposes a method to distinguish user immer-
sion in writing without physical sensors. Figure 1 illustrates a
use case of the method. The system gets a behavior log, which
consists of applications and Web pages displayed on the
screen, as well as inputs from the mouse and the keyboard
along
with
their
targets.
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. A use case of the method.
The discrimination model takes behavior logs of users to
examine whether they get immersed at every constant period.
Users may take a long time for writing. However, it is useless
to provide discrimination results for them in a long period. It
is desirable for the users to get immersed during the writing
task as much as possible. To achieve it, the study proposes a
method to provide a discrimination result at every short
constant time. It enables provision for users while writing task
to get discrimination results at every constant time. For
example, when users have been distracted from writing tasks
for the time being, the method warns it of them.
The data flow in the discrimination model is shown in
Figure 2.
Figure 2. Discrimination Model.
A user usually makes a target document, referring to
various kinds of information, such as Web pages. The dis-
crimination model first clusters browsed information with its
association degree with the target document. A behavior log is
composed of results of the clustering, inputs with the mouse
and the keyboard. It also contains what applications and Web
pages are placed on the top of the screen, which indicates
information the user is referring at the time point.
This study assumes users keep the same behavior during
their immersion. For example, some users may go on typing
characters in target documents to embody specific ideas in
their minds. Others may stop the typing to consider their plans
on target documents, or continue to search relevant
information. Even if they are immersed into tasks other than
writing, such as enjoying movies, they keep the same
behavior. Based on this assumption, the discrimination model
evaluates if users get immersed when they keep the same
behavior. To distinguish immersion in the writing from that in
other
tasks,
the
discrimination
model
examines
the
information they refer to. Through the process above, it can
detect distraction from writing without physical sensors.
B. Classification of browsed information
The study regards a target document as an electronic docu-
ment being edited. It assumes only one document is addressed in
a writing task. Browsed information means the information
browsed by the Web browser. In this study, it is categorized into
3 types: reference information, supplemental information, and
entertainment information, Reference information means any
information, which contributes to the contents of a target
document. In the study, it is assumed to be written in the same
language as the target document. Taking a report assignment to
explain the multiple regression analysis as an example, Web
pages explaining the multiple regression in the same language as
the target document, are examples of reference information.
Supplemental information corresponds to information which is
helpful to form the target writing, but not related to its contents.
Back to the example of the report assignment on the regression
analysis, supplemental information are Web pages explaining
how to write a reference list, how to denote mathematical
expression with TEX, and so on. Entertainment information
involves unnecessary information for the writing. It is usually
browsed by users’ preference. In the report assignment example,
Web pages on news article unrelated to the multiple regression,
videos for users’ entertainment and so on are categorized into
entertainment
information.
For
the
writing
task,
reference
information
and
supplemental
information
are
necessary
information, while entertainment information is unnecessary
information. If we examine words, the association of reference
information with the target document seems to be high, because
reference information seems to have words similar to the target
document. The association of supplemental information or
entertainment information with the target document would be
low,
because
supplemental
information
and
entertainment
information seem to have few words related to the target
document. Measuring the degree of the association based on
words, browsed information can be classified into the two groups:
the group of reference information and the group of supplement
information and entertainment information. This study classifies
supplemental information and entertainment information into one
group,
because
it
is
difficult
to
distinguish
supplemental
information from entertainment information by the word-based
degree of association.
At a regular interval, the proposed method analyzes mor-
phologically the target document at a specific time point and
all documents browsed in the interval. It categorizes the
browsed documents in the following way.
1)
With the bag-of-words method, it generates the doc-
ument vectors of the target document and each of the
browsed ones using nouns other than pronouns, non-
autonomous words, suffixes, and numerals.
2)
It calculates the degree of the association with the
cosine similarity between the document vector of the
target document and that of the browsed ones.
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

3)
It clusters browsed documents into 2 clusters based
on the degree of the association with the k-means
method [14]. It regards the cluster of high degree of
the association as the group of reference information,
while the one of low degree of the association as the
group of supplemental information and entertainment
information.
Pronouns,
non-autonomous
words,
suffixes,
and
numerals are removed from elements of document vectors,
because these nouns do not seem to represent the peculiarity
of the target document and browsed ones. The bag-of-words
considers
the
peculiarity
of
sentences
from
only
the
occurrence of specific words in the sentence [15][16]. In this
study, each element of a document vector corresponds to a
specific noun. It takes 1 if the noun appears in the document,
otherwise 0 [See Figure 3].
Figure 3. The bag-of-words.
The cosine similarity is calculated with (1), where the
document vector of the target document is m⃗, while that of
the browsed one is ⃗r.
cos(⃗r; m⃗) = ⃗r m⃗
(1)
j⃗rjjm⃗j
The proposed method classifies browsed documents into 2
clusters based on the degree of the association in the following
k-means method.
a).
It assigns each browsed document into 2 clusters
randomly.
b).
It calculates the centroid in each cluster.
c).
It reclassifies each browsed document into the new
cluster whose centroid is nearest to the browsed
document.
d).
It repeats b) and c) until the result of reclassification
are the same.
C. Behavior log
The proposed method detects users’ immersion in writing
using the behavior log. At a regular interval, it examines the
target document, documents in the group of reference infor-
mation, and the ones in the group of supplemental information
and entertainment information. It tests whether the user
provides something for what is examined as its input, as well
as whether the user places what is examined on the top of the
screen. A behavior log contains binary values, which indicate
the test results, as depicted in Figure 4.
To discriminate the user immersion in a short period, the
duration to figure out the behavior log is far shorter than that
to classify browsed information. The method regards the target
document or the browsed information takes something as its
Figure 4. Behavior log.
input, if the user gives it typing with the keyboard, moving the
mouse cursor or clicking the mouse. The method regards the
target document or the browsed information is placed on the
top of the screen, if any part of the window tool presenting it
appears on the top of the screen. The target document or the
browsed information is regarded not to be placed on the top,
when the whole part of the tool has been hidden with other
windows, or when the tool has been closed throughout the
duration.
D. Similarity of behavior logs
The method addresses the 3 kinds of documents: the target
document, a group of reference information, and a group of
supplemental information and entertainment information. To
make behavior logs, it examines 2 characteristics in each of
them: their input and their appearance on the top of the screen.
The behavior logs consist of 6 kinds of binary data items.
The method distinguishes users’ immersion in writing
using each of the similarity of behavior logs under the
assumption that users keep the same behavior during their
immersion. To figure out the similarity of behavior logs, the 2
characteristics of the 3 groups of the information is examined,
which means the proposed method consider 6 kinds of binary
data items for the similarity. The similarity of each binary data
item is the number of matching behavior logs within a time
window of a fixed length. The similarity for the k-th binary
data item is figured out with (2).
m 1
m
∑i
∑
(2)
similarityk =
(a
i;k; a
j;k)
=1 j=i+1
where ai denotes the i-th behavior log, and ai;k denotes the
k-th binary data item inside ai. Function is defined as (3).
(ai;k; aj;k) = {
1
(a
i;k=a
j;k)
(3)
0 (otherwise)
Apparently, this value gets large when the user keeps the
same behavior.
IV.
EXPERIMENT TO EVALUATE THE PROPOSED METHOD
Here, we present the procedure of the experiment and the
experimental results.
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

A. Purpose and procedure of experiment
The experiment was conducted to verify whether it is possible
to distinguish users’ concentration for the writing from the
similarity of behavior logs. Five students in a university worked
on the task where they summarized investigation results on the
will power [17] in a report for 150 minutes. They worked under a
dual display environment in order to bring it closer to their usual
working
environment.
Every
10
seconds,
their
computers
recorded both of the windows, which become the input target and
the windows, which are placed on the top of the screen even a
moment during the period. The intermediate state of the target
document is also recorded every 1 hour. The working of the
subjects was recorded with a video camera during the experiment.
After the experiment, the subjects answered the questionnaire,
which asked the period during which they were immersed in the
writing, watching the video.
B. Results of the experiment
The length of time window to calculate the similarity of
behavior logs was set to 120 seconds. The discrimination
models are constructed by the random forest, support vector
machine and gradient boosting to distinguish whether the
subjects get immersed in the writing. Figure 5 illustrates the
explanatory variables in these models.
Figure 5. The explanatory variables.
5-fold cross validation was used for the evaluation. The
precision, the recall, and the F-measure of the evaluation result
for the 5 subjects are shown in Tables I, II, and III.
TABLE I. THE DISCRIMINATION RESULT BY THE RANDOM FOREST
distraction from
immersion in
writing task
writing task
precision
0.63
0.71
recall
0.80
0.51
F-measure
0.70
0.59
Note that the F-measure value the distraction from the
writing is 0.70 in all of these discrimination. The study to pre-
sume human immersion from the skin conductance, the heart
rate and the electroencephalography using physical sensors [1]
reported the accuracy of the discrimination of the distraction
was 0.76, though the experimental environments and the
situations are different. The result suggests that it is possible
TABLE II. THE DISCRIMINATION RESULT BY THE SUPPORT
VECTOR MACHINE
distraction from
immersion in
writing task
writing task
precision
0.65
0.74
recall
0.82
0.53
F-measure
0.72
0.62
TABLE III. THE DISCRIMINATION RESULT BY THE GRADIENT
BOOSTING
distraction from
immersion in
writing task
writing task
precision
0.70
0.66
recall
0.73
0.60
F-measure
0.72
0.63
to distinguish the distraction from the writing using the above
explanatory variables instead of physical sensors, although the
accuracy decreases slightly. We can detect users who do not
concentrate on the writing for a long time.
C. Important factors in discrimination
It is necessary to investigate whether the discrimination is
caused by the similarity of behavior logs. The variable
importance of the Random Forest algorithm indicates which
explanatory variable is important in the discrimination. It says
that the most important explanatory variable is not the
similarity
of
behavior
logs,
but
the
binary
variable
representing
whether
supplemental
information
or
entertainment information is placed on the top of the screen
during the period of 10 second. To confirm the importance of
the variable, let us regard the user runs into distraction from
the writing when supplemental information or entertainment
information is placed on the top of the screen, while he stays
in the immersion in the writing when the information is not
placed on the top of the screen. The data set collected in the
experiment was discriminated again based on the simple
criterion. The precision, the recall, and the F-measure of the
discrimination are shown in Table IV.
TABLE IV. THE DISCRIMINATION RESULT BY SUPPLEMENTAL
INFORMATION AND ENTERTAINMENT INFORMATION
distraction from
immersion in
writing task
writing task
precision
0.67
0.72
recall
0.76
0.63
F-measure
0.71
0.67
Both of the F-measure values of the immersion and the
distraction are higher than those of Section 4.B. Whether sup-
plemental information or entertainment information is placed on
the top of the screen is quite important among the explanatory
variables in the experiment. On the contrary, the similarity of
behavior
logs
is
not
as
important
as
the
placement
of
supplemental information or entertainment information.
V.
DISCUSSION
The experimental result suggests the placement of supple-
mental information or entertainment information on the top of
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

the screen is important to distinguish whether concentration of
users leads to their immersion in writing. Users who want to
concentrate on the writing seem to exclude entertainment
information from their vision under their immersion. On the
contrary, they place entertainment information on the top of
the screen when they are distracted. The following tendency
was
manually
confirmed
from
the
videos
during
the
experiment. The subjects displayed entertainment information
when they got distracted when they cannot concentrate on the
writing any more. Meanwhile, they hid the entertainment
information, switching the tabs on their browsers, or placing
other windows covering the entertainment information when
their mode changes from distraction to immersion.
Since supplementary information is not related to the
distraction, the simple criterion assumed in Section 4.C may
lead to erroneous discrimination. After the experience, the
subjects manually classified browsed information into 3 cat-
egories: reference information, supplemental information, and
entertainment information. The total number of entertainment
information browsed by each subject in the experiment is 299,
while that of supplemental information is 99. Accordingly, the
entertainment information is approximately 3 times larger than
the
supplemental
information.
Since
the
supplemental
information is far less than the entertainment information on
this experiment, the accuracy of the discrimination is high,
although the supplemental information is treated in the same
group of the entertainment information. It is expected the
accuracy
is
improved,
distinguishing
supplemental
information from entertainment information.
The significance of the experiment results should be
proved by increasing the number of the subjects. Also, the
accuracy of the discrimination should be improved more for
the practical usage. It would be improved, adding explanatory
variables, such as the frequency of typing and clicking, the
contents of the typed information, and so on. Additionally, it is
necessary to confirm the validity of the questionnaire to form
training data. They were determined through the answers of
the subjects for questions asking the period where they were
immersed into the writing. It is necessary to improve the
validity of the questionnaire and the method of evaluation by
using existing research to measure human immersion.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed a method to distinguish
user immersion in writing without physical sensors. The
method has been suggested to distinguish users’ immersion in
writing using each of the similarity of behavior logs under the
assumption that users keep the same behavior during their
immersion. It has turned out the most important explanatory
variable
is
the
binary
variable
representing
whether
supplemental information or entertainment information is
placed on the top of the screen during the period of 10
seconds. From the videos during the experiment, it has been
manually confirmed the subjects would display entertainment
information when they have run into a distraction from
writing. It implies they are likely to place entertainment
information on the top of the display, when they cannot
concentrate on the writing any more. Meanwhile, they would
hide the entertainment information, switching the tabs on their
browsers, or placing other windows covering
the entertainment information, when their mode changes from
distraction to immersion.
In the future, the significance of the experimental results
should be proved by increasing the number of the subjects.
Additionally, in actual environments, it may be possible for
users to engage in multiple tasks at the same time. For
example, while they are engaging in writing, they also have to
handle interrupts of their work, such as responding to
incoming calls. The range of adaptation of the method should
be expanded to deal with such multitasking.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We gratefully appreciate the
help
of Prof. Yusuke
Kajiwara who gave us a lot of advice and suggestions for
conducting this research and writing this paper. We also
express our gratitude to all members and colleagues of Data
Engineering Laboratory from Ritsumeikan University who
supported us and cooperated with the experiment.
REFERENCES
[1]
I. Jraidi, M. Chaouachi, and C. Frasson, “A Dynamic Multimodal
Approach for Assessing Learners’ Interaction Experience,” ICMI ’13
Proceedings of the 15th ACM on International conference on multi-
modal interaction, 2013, pp. 271–278.
[2]
L. Nacke and C. A. Lindley, “Flow and Immersion in First-Person
Shooters: Measuring the player’s gameplay experience,” Future Play
’08 Proceedings of the 2008 Conference on Future Play: Research,
Play, Share, 2008, pp. 81–88.
[3]
T. Leelasawassuk, D. Damen, and W. Mayol-Cuevas, “Estimating Visual
Attention from a Head Mounted IMU,” ISWC ’15 Proceedings of the 2015
ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers, 2015,
pp. 147–150.
[4]
G. Lee, A. Ojha, and M. Lee, “Concentration Monitoring for Intelligent
Tutoring System Based on Pupil and Eye-blink,” HAI ’15 Proceedings
of the 3rd International Conference on Human-Agent Interaction, 2015,
pp. 291–294.
[5]
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications Institute for In-
formation and Communications Policy, “Survey findings report on
Internet use and dependency trend among young people,” 2013, URL:
http://www.soumu.go.jp/iicp/chousakenkyu/data/research/survey/
telecom/2013/internet-addiction.pdf [accessed: 2016-12-21].
[6]
B. L. S. Coker, “Workplace Internet Leisure Browsing,” Human Perfor-
mance, vol. 26, 2013, pp. 114–125.
[7]
M. Csikszentmihalyi, Finding Flow: The Psychology of Engagement
with Everyday Life. Basic Books, 2008.
[8]
J. Saiki and E. Inoue, “Relationship between Concentration and
Tempo-ral Duration Estimation: Implications for Flow Experience,”
Psycholo-gia, vol. 54, 2011, pp. 206–221.
[9]
A. Sarrafzadeh, S. Alexander, F. Dadgostar, C. Fan, and A. Bigdeli,
““How do you know that I don’t understand?” A look at the future of
intelligent tutoring systems,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 24,
no. 4, 2008, pp. 1342–1363.
[10]
Y.-M. Jang, R. Mallipeddi, S. Lee, H.-W. Kwak, and M. Lee, “Human
intention recognition based on eyeball movement pattern and pupil size
variation,” Neurocomputing, vol. 128, 2013, pp. 421–432.
[11]
A. Kapoor, W. Burleson, and P. Rosalind W, “Automatic prediction of
frustration,” International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 65,
2007, pp. 724–736.
[12]
G. Lee, M. Kwon, S. K. Sri, and M. Lee, “Emotion recognition based
on 3D fuzzy visual and EEG features in movie clips,” Neurocomputing,
vol. 144, 2014, pp. 560–568.
[13]
S. D ’Mello, A. Olney, C. Williams, and P. Hays, “Gaze tutor: A gaze-
reactive intelligent tutoring system,” International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, vol. 70, 2012, pp. 377–398.
[14]
J. MacQueen, “Some Methods For Classification and Analysis of
Multivariate Observations,” Proc. Fifth Berkeley Symp. on Math.
Statist. and Prob, vol. 1, 1967, pp. 281–297.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[15]
S. Dumais, J. Platt, D. Heckerman, and M. Sahami, “Inductive
Learning Algorithms and Representations for Text Categorization,”
CIKM ’98 Proceedings of the seventh international conference on
Information and knowledge management, 1998, pp. 148–155.
[16]
S. M. Weiss, C. A. andFred J. Damerau, D. E. Johnson, F. J. Oles, T.
Goetz, and T. Hampp, “Maximizing Text-Mining Performance,” IEEE
Intelligent Systems archive, vol. 14, 1999, pp. 63–69.
[17]
K. McGonigal, The Willpower Instinct: How Self-Control Works, Why
It Matters, and What You Can Do To Get More of IT. Avery, 2011.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

