ReCal – an Innovative Mathematical Procedure to Determine the Date of Timely 
Recalibration for Sensor Systems with Metal Oxide Gas Sensors 
 
Rolf Seifert 
Institute of Automation and Applied Informatics (IAI) 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 
D-76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany 
e-mail: rolf.seifert@kit.edu 
Hubert B. Keller 
Institute of Automation and Applied Informatics (IAI) 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 
D-76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany 
e-mail: hubert.keller@kit.edu
 
Abstract— Sensor systems with Metal Oxide Gas (MOG) 
sensors with tin oxide as base material are well established as 
gas sensing devices for threshold applications like the 
monitoring of hazardous materials and dangerous situations. 
However, MOGs have one inherent disadvantage; they are 
subject to unavoidable aging processes. Therefore, the sensor 
systems have to be recalibrated regularly. This paper presents 
an innovative mathematical procedure called ReCal, which is 
able to determine the proper time for recalibration of the 
sensor system. The method of ReCal is demonstrated by 
simulation calculations and it is shown how to determine the 
parameters in real applications.  
Keywords-sensor system; metal oxide gas sensors; threshold 
apllications; 
timely 
recalibration; 
date 
of 
recalibration; 
simulation calculations. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
There is a broad field of economic online and in-situ field 
analysis applications like the online monitoring of volatile 
components in chemical and biochemical processes, quality 
monitoring in food processing, discriminated monitoring of 
toxic gas leakages, etc. In the field of monitoring hazardous 
materials and situations, metal oxide gas (MOG) sensors 
with tin oxide as base material are especially well established 
as gas sensing devices due to their high sensitivity and low 
costs. These MOGs can be operated either isothermally or, 
for example, in a thermo-cyclical mode [1][2]. In the first 
mode, only one single measurement result is available and 
thus no substance identification can be performed. In the 
second mode, a series of measurement results is sampled, 
which leads to so-called “Conduction over Time Profiles” 
(CTPs) [3]-[6]. These CTPs can be considered as a 
“fingerprint” of the substance under consideration and enable 
substance 
identification 
as 
well 
as 
concentration 
determination, by applying a sophisticated calibration and 
evaluation procedure like ProSens, which is explicitly 
described in [7]. As could be shown, ProSens is a powerful 
tool 
for 
substance 
identification 
and 
concentration 
determination for multi-component gas mixtures even in the 
case of varying environmental conditions like varying 
humidity or varying environmental temperature. Figure 1 
shows examples of some CTPs of different gases. Figure 1 
also clearly shows the specific fingerprints of the various 
gases.  
In previous investigations it was shown that this 
approach is a very powerful tool for monitoring hazardous 
materials, for example in the detection of ammonia leakages 
[8] or cable fires [9]. 
Other approaches in the field of monitoring hazardous 
materials in the environment are described in detail in [10].  
 
 
Figure 1.  CTPs of different samples at the same concentration level. 
Although the MOGs are very powerful gas sensing 
devices, they have one disadvantage: their long-time stability 
is often very poor. One possibility to improve this 
disadvantage is to pre-age the sensors before field 
application. However, this approach does not solve the 
problem; it only reduces the rate of decay. The aging process 
of the sensors may additionally lead to misleading results, 
causing e.g. no alarm being given in case of hazardous 
situations. Therefore, the sensor has to be recalibrated from 
time to time. This raises the issue of choosing the proper 
time for recalibration.  
The necessary recalibration can be easily performed by a 
recalibration procedure like ProCal, which is explicitly 
described in [11]. 
In this paper, we introduce ReCal, a procedure which 
finds the appropriate time for recalibration of the sensor 
system. Measurement results are regarded as random 
variables and simulation calculations will demonstrate the 
efficacy of this approach. 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the mathematical calibration model and the feature 
values, which correspond to the gas concentrations. Section 
III describes the general application scenario. Section IV 
addresses the mathematical model used in this paper. Section 
V describes an application of the method using simulation 
calculations. The conclusions and a section “Future Work” 
close the article. 
II. 
CALIBRATION MODEL AND FEATURE VALUES 
To apply calibration and evaluation procedures for 
monitoring and alarming, if necessary, in real field 
applications, the substance under consideration has to be 
calibrated using calibration measurements. Based on these 
measurements, the mathematical calibration model can be 
calculated using calibration procedures like ProSens. In this 
calibration model, feature values are extracted from the 
calibration measurements, which allow the evaluation 
procedure to determine the concentration of a measured 
sample. The feature values correspond to concentration 
values and vice versa. For example, there is a feature value, 
the alarm feature value, for the alarm level that corresponds 
to a concentration value where an alarm must be given. On 
the other hand, there is also a feature value, the zero feature 
value, for the “zero-situation”, when no hazardous gas under 
consideration is present and only the ambient air is 
measured. 
III. 
APPLICATION SCENARIO 
In so-called threshold applications requiring monitoring 
hazardous 
materials 
and 
situations, 
the 
gas 
under 
consideration is continuously or frequently measured by the 
sensor system and an alarm is raised, when the concentration 
of the gas exceeds a determined value, the threshold value. 
As mentioned above, there is a one-to-one relation between 
concentrations and feature values. However, due to the aging 
process of the sensor, the sensitivity of the sensor will drop 
over time. That means that the feature values will become 
lower and will no longer represent the actual gas 
concentration. When the features have been significantly 
reduced in amplitude, the sensor has to be recalibrated to 
guarantee that an alert is still raised when the actual gas 
concentration exceeds the alarm threshold.  
 Even though the ambient air does not change, the 
sensor’s measurement of the ambient air changes due to 
aging. This gradual reduction of the zero feature values goes 
in hand with the features value reduction for the alarm case, 
potentially failing to detect dangerous situations. 
This reduction of the zero feature values enables the 
determination of the proper time for recalibration of the 
sensor system as will be shown in the following chapter.  
Of course, varying environmental conditions may also 
influence the sensor drift. If they are incorporated in the 
calibration model, sophisticated calibration and evaluation 
procedures like ProSens can recognize this source of drift. 
Otherwise, the sensor system has to be recalibrated and the 
relevant varying conditions have to be incorporated in the 
calibration model.  
IV. 
MATHEMATICAL MODEL 
As mentioned above, features are an appropriate mean to 
determine the concentration of a gas under consideration. 
Features are the results of measurements, which are subject 
to measurement errors. Therefore, features can be considered 
as random variables F. It is common and, in most cases 
realistic, to consider these random variables F as normally 
distributed around the actual concentration with mean μ, 
variance σ2 and standard deviation σ, respectively. 
That means:  

F∼μσ

In case of the “zero-situation”, the mean of the random 
variable is denoted as μ0 and the corresponding standard 
deviation as σ0. In case of an “alarm-situation”, the mean of 
the random variable is denoted as μa and the corresponding 
standard deviation as σa. 
From the mathematical theory, it is well known that in 
case of normally distributed random variables, 95% of all 
realizations (here measurements and the resulting features) 
of the random variables are within the interval (μ-2σ, μ+2σ). 
In other words, 5% of the realizations are outside this 
interval, especially 2.5% of the realizations are lower than μ-
2σ. That means that if the zero future value is in 2.5% of the 
measurements smaller than μ0-2σ0 , the sensor system should 
be recalibrated, because a significant drift of the sensor has 
likely occurred. 
V. 
APPLICATION AND SIMULATION CALCULATIONS 
To demonstrate the application and performance of the 
procedure ReCal, simulation calculations were performed.  
The following assumptions were chosen: the zero feature 
value F, which corresponds to the zero-measurement, is 
normally distributed with mean μ0 = 0 and standard deviation 
σ0 = 1.  
In a first step, random variables F were simulated 
according to the zero measurement case. Next, a drift of -
0.01 per measurement was added to these random variables 
F to simulate a drift of the sensor system. Figure 2 shows the 
simulated values of random variables in time (Features Zero, 
pink curve). These values fluctuate around the mean zero 
line μ0 (Mean Zero, blue line) and are in mostly within the 
interval (μ0-2σ0, μ0+2σ0), which is between the lower 
threshold and the upper threshold.  
In addition, the values of the “manipulated” features 
(Features Drift, green curve) are also plotted in Figure 2. 
They fluctuate around the drift line (Mean Drift, black line) 
and often fall below the lower threshold. This is clear 
evidence of the sensor drift.  
Of course, if the values of the zero feature are lowered, 
the values of the alarm features are also lowered. This results 
in the fact that the determination of the gas concentration is 
too small and an alarm will not be given, even if the alarm 
level is reached.  
Therefore, a timely recalibration must be performed to 
ensure that the secure applicability of the sensor system can 
be guaranteed.   
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

In this example, 100 measurements are assumed to be 
performed over the time. 2.5% of 100 realization are 2,5. 
That means that if 3 realizations are lower than the lower 
threshold, the sensor system has to recalibrated to give a 
timely alarm. 
The mathematical procedure ReCal recognizes that in the 
55th measurement the according feature value falls for the 
third time below the lower threshold and indicates that the 
sensor system should be recalibrated (see Figure 3). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Features and manipulated features of measurements over the 
time. 
 
Figure 3.  Features and manipulated features of measurements till the  time 
of recalibration. 
In real applications, first, it is necesarry to determine the 
mean μ0 and the standard deviation σ0, which is the square 
root of the variance σ0² of the zero future value F.   
As known from the mathematical theory, the mean value 
of a random variable can be estimated from a population of n 
identically and independent random variables using the 
following equation:  

μ   n  xi 

where xi are the realizations of the random variables and 
the sum runs from 1 to n.  
The variance σ2 can be estimated using the following 
equation (2): 

σ2   n  xi – μ)².

where again the sum runs from 1 to n. 
To be able to calculate the mean and the standard 
deviation, samples only containing the ambient air have to be 
measured by the sensor systems n times.  
This is not very costly and time-consuming in respect to 
the gain of timely detection of a hazardous situation. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Sensor systems with metal oxide gas sensors with tin 
oxide as base material are well established as gas sensing 
devices especially for threshold applications. However, there 
is an unavoidable drift in the MOG sensors due to their aging 
process. Therefore, the sensor systems have to be 
recalibrated from time to time. The mathematical procedure 
ReCal, introduced in this paper, allows to determine the 
proper time for recalibration, as was shown by simulation 
calculations. This is a very important result, because it 
assures that the sensor systems are suitable for reliable 
alerting in dangerous situations. 
 
VII. FUTURE WORK 
The very promising results obtained by simulation 
calculations will be tested in a long-term investigation with 
real measurement data from a real sensor system.  
Additionally, a mathematical model will be elaborated, 
which allows to estimate the drift of other feature values 
based on the drift of the zero feature values. This approach 
would enable to recalibrate the sensor system without further 
calibration measurements. This would be an important 
progress in the application of sensor systems, because 
calibration measurements are very time-consuming and 
costly.  
Of course, this approach has also to be verified in a long-
term investigation with real measurement data. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] H. Kohler, J. Rober, N. Llink, and I. Bouzid, “New 
applications of tin oxide gas sensors – I. Molecular 
recognition by cyclic variation of the working temperature 
and reasonable numerical analysis”, Sensors & Actuators B: 
pp. 163-169, 1999. 
[2] H. Kohler, M. Bauer, and I. Bouzid, “Gas Recognition Using 
SnO2 Gas Sensors: Analysis of volatile organic substances 
dissolved in water”; Proceedings Sensor Congress Nürnberg, 
Vol. I AMA Service, Wunstorf. Germany: pp. 125-128, 1999. 
[3] A. Jerger, H. Kohler, F. Becker, H. B. Keller, and R. Seifert, 
“New applications of tin oxide gas sensors II. Intelligent 
sensor system for reliable monitoring of ammonia leakages”, 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, 81, 2-3, pp. 301-307, 
2002. 
[4] K. Frank et al., “Metal oxide gas sensors for field analysis: 
Novel SnO2/La2O3 sensor element for analysis of dissolved 
toluene/ethanol binary mixtures”, Sensor 2005: 12th Internat. 
Conf., Nürnberg, May, 2005, Proc. Vol. 2, AMA Service 
GmbH, Wunstorf, pp. 207–209, 2005. 
[5] K. Frank et al., “Improving the analysis capability of tin oxide 
gas sensors by dynamic operation, appropriate additives and 
an advanced evaluation procedure”, Sensor 2007: 13th 
Internat.Conf., Nürnberg, May, 2007, Proc. Vol. 1, AMA 
Service GmbH, Wunstorf, pp. 139–144, 2007. 
[6] K. Frank et al., “Chemical Analysis with Tin Oxide Gas 
Sensors: Choice of Additives, Method of Operation and 
Analysis of Numerical Signal”, Sensors Letters 6, pp. 908-
911, 2008. 
[7] R. Seifert, H. B. Keller, K. Frank, and H. Kohler, „ProSens – 
an Efficient Mathematical Procedure for Calibration and 
Evaluation of Tin Oxide Gas Sensor Data”, Sensor Letters, 
Vol. 9/1, pp. 7-10, 2011. 
[8] A. Jerger, H. Kohler, F. Becker, H. Keller, and R. Seifert, 
“New applications of tin oxide gas sensors II. Intelligent 
Sensor System for Reliable Monitoring of Ammonia 
Leakages”, Sensors and Actuators B, 81, pp. 301-307, 2002.  
[9] R. Seifert, H. Keller, N. Illyaskutty, J. Knoblauch, and H. 
Kohler, “Numerical Signal Analysis of Thermo-Cyclically 
Operated MOG Gas Sensor Arrays for Early Identification of 
Emissions from Overloaded Electric Cables”, Sensors & 
Transducers journal, Vol. 193, Issue 10, pp.74-79, 2015. 
[10] A. D. Wilson, “Review of electronic-nose technologies and 
algorithms to detect hazardous chemicals in the environment”, 
Procedia Technol. 2012, 1, pp. 453-463, 2012 
[11] R. Seifert, H. B. Keller, K. Frank, and H. Kohler, “Batch-wise 
Mathematical Calibration of Thermo-CyclicallyOperated Tin 
Oxide Gas Sensors”, Sensor Letters, Vol. 9/2, pp. 621-624, 
2011. 
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

