Figuring Out Conscientious Degree from Brightness Distribution in IADL
Shota Shimayoshi, Shun Okamura
Graduate School of Information Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University
Shiga, Japan
Email: shimayoshi@de.is.ritsumei.ac.jp
shun_kamu@de.is.ritsumei.ac.jp
Yusuke Kajiwara, Hiromitsu Shimakawa
College of Information Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University
Shiga, Japan
Email: kajiwara@de.is.ritsumei.ac.jp
simakawa@de.is.ritsumei.ac.jp
Abstract—Because of the rapid increase of the elderly, the lack
of helpers to take care of the elderly has become a serious
problem in Japan.. A way should be found to enable the
elderly to be independent as long as possible. The paper refers
to the motivation to keep the quality of life high as living
willingness. The elderly with living willingness would keep their
living environments comfortable. On the contrary, the elderly
losing their living willingness are likely to make disorder in
their house keeping, such as lazy cleaning and skipping of dish
washing. The detection of the disorder of their daily activities
makes it possible to ﬁnd the decline of their living willingness
early, because the disorder implies their physical and mental
health get worse. Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL)
plays an important role to ﬁnd the disorder. The activities are
conducted to improve the quality of life. The laziness of the elderly
in IADL implies they are losing their motivation to improve
the quality of life. The paper proposes a method to recognize
IADL, preserving the privacy of the elderly. It also ﬁgures out
conscientious degree the elderly take IADL. The method uses the
brightness distribution sensor. It provides a classiﬁer of IADL
from the brightness distribution. In an experiment for the elderly,
the f-measure with which the method has recognized activities
of cleaning, cooking, and washing are 0.975, 0.912, and 0.927,
respectively. The experiment shows 0.599 in Nagelkerke R2, which
indicates how well the method ﬁgures out conscientious degree in
the activities. It reveals the method is precise enough to measure
the decline of the elderly in the living willingness.
Keywords–Elderly; Daily Living; Privacy; Brightness; Sensor;
I.
INTRODUCTION
Japan is suffering from a rapid progress of declining birth
rate and increasing an aging population. As a result, it is
worried that Japan will be short of nursing care staff by 2025.
It is highly required to take measures to improve the self-
supporting degree of each of the elderly, which means how an
elderly person can spend his or her daily life independently [1].
Especially, it is essential to prevent the elderly from running
into a condition where they require long-term and constant care
in daily activities. To achieve the goal, it plays a vital role to
ﬁnd symptoms of the decline of their health condition from
their daily activities. We should pay special attentions to the
elderly living alone, because it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd symptoms
of their decline. As one of the symptoms of the decline, the
elderly tend to lose their motivation to keep high quality of
their life. The paper refers to the motivation to keep the quality
of life high as a“ living willingness. ”The decrement in the
living willingness of the elderly appears in their daily life.
It is veriﬁed that the elderly could be in unhealthy condition
physically and mentally when a living rhythm changes into
disordered manner. Moreover, a lazy lifestyle negatively affects
the self-supporting degree and the health of the elderly [2].
If we could notice that one ’s lifestyle is becoming disor-
dered manner, various measures can be taken to recover their
living willingness. Lawton [3] has pointed out the Instrumental
Activities of Daily Living (IADL) are effective to judge the
self-supporting degree of the elderly. IADL are not essential to
keep our life. However, if we carry out them, we can improve
the quality of our life. Examples of IADL include cleaning and
washing. Let us consider to measure the degree of carrying out
IADL in terms of not only the frequency of the execution, but
also the conscientiousness in the execution. If the degree of
a speciﬁc elder person is high, we can estimate he or she is
willing to enjoy daily life. On the contrary, an elderly person
whose degree is getting worse is worried to lose the living
willingness. The degree of carrying out IADL is considered to
imply symptoms of the decline of the elderly. It is expected
that we can ﬁnd the elderly who have just started losing their
living willingness. Furthermore, it is also expected to provide
some measures to recover their living willingness. There are
many works that apply IADL to detect the changes of the
elderly such as abnormality in health conditions [4][5]. They
examine the frequency and the execution time in each IADL
action. This paper proposes to use IADL as an index of the
living willingness of the elderly. It examines the conscientious
degree of IADL in addition to the frequency and the execution
time. It is thought that the elderly who carry out IADL less
conscientiously is going to stop IADL actions eventually.
The examination of the conscientious degree of IADL will
contribute to the detection of the declines of the elderly in the
earlier stage with higher accuracy.
This paper focuses on cleaning actions among the IADL
actions. First, cleaning action is identiﬁed with the machine
learning and extracted from many living daily activities. The
conscientious degree of a cleaning action is ﬁgured out from
the characteristics of the action during the cleaning period.
This paper proposes a model to identify the conscientious
degree. The method uses the brightness distribution sensors
[6] to collect movement logs in order to protect the privacy of
the elderly. The brightness distribution acquired by the sensors
brings information signiﬁcant enough for a machine to discern
living activities, while it makes no meanings for humans to
perceive what the elderly are doing.
This study ﬁgures out the conscientious degree with the
difference of the body trunk movement of the person carrying
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

out of the living activities. The method can discover symptoms
of the decline in the early stage, using both of the execution
degree and the conscientious degree.
The remainings of the paper are organized in the following
way. Section II describes the related works. Section III explains
the method to discern the living activity, using brightness
distribution sensors. It also states how to ﬁgure out the
conscientious degree of discerned cleaning actions. Section
IV illustrates the process of an experiment to evaluate the
proposed method along with its result, followed by discussion
of the result in Section V. Section VI concludes this paper.
II.
RELATED WORKS
There is a method to automatically recognize activities of
the elderly in daily life with cameras set up in their house [7].
The camera acquires a lot of information unrelated to activities
of them from their daily life. Since the method pays little
attention to the privacy of the elderly, it causes the elderly
to be stressed. It is not preferable to set up a camera in a
house. A method to recognize living activities with a Kinect
sensor [8] also has the problem in the viewpoints of the privacy
protection, because it acquires a lot of irrelevant information
as well as the camera. Techniques to recognize actions at
home protecting the privacy are proposed with acceleration
sensors [3], infrared sensors [9], and laser range ﬁnders [10].
Acceleration sensors measure the movement of persons who
wear them in their body. They cannot acquire any data unless
they are worn. Some of the elderly feel resistance to wear
them, while others forget to wear them. The amount of data
infrared sensors acquire is small and its accuracy is poor. It is
difﬁcult to ﬁgure out living willingness with the sensors due to
the poor accuracy. Though they can be applied to the detection
of emergency such as accidents and spasms, it costs high to
set up many of them in various places to overcome their poor
accuracy. Laser range ﬁnders implement data acquisition in a
wide range. However, it is unrealistic to install many of the
sensors to detect actions, because they are expensive sensors.
III.
FIGURING OUT CONSCIENTIOUS DEGREE
FROM BRIGHTNESS DISTRIBUTION
A. Brightness Distribution Sensor
The method uses brightness distribution sensors [6] to
protect privacy of the elderly. Figure 1 shows the difference
of the acquired data between a Web camera and a brightness
distribution sensor. The brightness distribution sensor acquires
Figure 1. Difference between Web camera and brightness distribution sensor.
only the brightness value in the horizontal dimension. It rec-
ognizes a person, utilizing the fact a brightness value changes
largely at the position where the person moves. Two brightness
distribution sensors are settled so that the center lines of
the data acquisition areas of each sensor should cross almost
orthogonally. The volume of information of the sensors is less
than that of cameras because they acquire only brightness.
Privacy is threatened with malaise of the acquired information
by outsiders. Even if outsiders get the brightness information
showing activities of a speciﬁc person, they do not understand
what the person does. Brightness distribution sensors can be
set up inexpensively, because we can covert commercial web
cameras into brightness distribution sensors, exchanging their
lenses into rod lenses. A lot of sensors are not required because
they acquire as wide range data as the web cameras. The
sensors save space, because a small sensor covers a wide rage.
B. Activity Classiﬁcation from Local Features
The method uses the Bag-of-Features method [11] to
extract a peculiar feature from the brightness data of each
living activity. Each pixel of ﬁgures has various properties.
First, the Bag-of-Features method clusters pixels of ﬁgures
into several groups, based on the properties. It ﬁgures out
the histogram of each ﬁgure, counting points in every cluster.
The distinguishes images with the features in the shape of
the histogram. The proposed method calculates the three local
features for each pixel, consisting of background difference
values, pixel difference values, and frame difference values.
Three local features are the main elements that can be taken
from the brightness data. The background difference values
are picked up from the difference of the target image from an
image containing no living activity. The pixel difference values
and the frame difference values are derived from special dif-
ference and temporal difference of the background difference
value. These local features compose a three dimensional space.
Let a brightness value be b(f, p), where p and f denotes the
pixel number and the frame number, respectively. Let us denote
the background difference value, the pixel difference value,
and the frame difference value with Bs(f, p), Ps(f, p), and
Fs(f, p), respectively. Three local features can be expressed in
(1)-(3), when the number of the frame showing the background
is assumed to be 0.
Bs(f, p) = b(f, p) − b(0, p)
(1)
Ps(f, p) = Bs(f, p) − Bs(f, p − 1)
(2)
Fs(f, p) = Bs(f, p) − Bs(f − 1, p)
(3)
The background difference value is a feature corresponds to the
existence of a person. The pixel difference value expresses the
edge of position where a person exists. The frame difference
value shows the movement of a person. Pixels represented
with the three values are plotted in the three dimensional
space. All points are clustered using k-means++ [11]. The
histogram indicating the number of points included in each
cluster is constructed to show the distribution of points for
each image. The histogram does not provide any location
information, which is important to identify living activities.
For instance, the information is important when we want to
distinguish living activities in which a person moves around
the entire room like cleaning from living activities executed
at speciﬁc locations like washing. The method reﬂects the
location information dividing the image into parts equal in
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 2. Constructing histogram from division brightness data.
their width. A histogram is constructed from each of them
[12]. Figure 2 depicts the outline when the division is applied
to the original brightness data. The original brightness data cor-
responding to the whole of the acquisition area are bisected and
trisected in the proposed method. Eventually, six histograms
are constructed from a single sensor. The method acquires 12
histograms from one living activity because it uses two sensors.
Due to the division of brightness data, features representing
person movement appears in all of the six histograms in living
activity where a person moves around the entire room like
cleaning, while those features appears in speciﬁc histograms in
case of washing in which a person stays in a speciﬁc location.
The proposed method constructs a model to identify features
of each living activity with the Random Forest method [13].
The model calculates which living activity has been executed,
given features in an actual living activity.
C. Figuring Out Conscientious Degree from Flow Line
The proposed solution pays attention to the conscientious
degree in the living activity to ﬁnd a smaller change in the
living willingness. Each living activity has its own index to
represent its conscientious degree. The method ﬁgures out
the conscientious degree of each living activity where the
person would move around in the room. Among various kinds
of living activities, it focuses on cleaning, because it is an
essential activity to improve the quality of the life. It pays an
attention on the body trunk, which is the most important part
for human beings in various living activities.
First, the method presumes the location of the body trunk
of a target person from the brightness value in each sensor.
Since the brightness value greatly changes at the position the
person exists within the range of the sensor, the location of
the body trunk is estimated at the position where the change
of the brightness value is largest, that is, the position with the
maximum background difference value. The position of the
body trunk, T, is given by (4).
T = arg max
0≤p≤639
|Bs(f, p)|
(4)
Next, the ﬂow line of the body trunk is constructed,
arranging the position of the body trunk all over the frames
in the time series order. The proposed method ﬁgure out the
conscientious degree of the living activities where a person
moves around in the room like cleaning. Using the Hidden
Markov Model (HMM) [14], the method derives a state change
diagram to consider staying and movement of the person in a
Figure 3. State change diagram converts from ﬂow lines.
ﬂow line. The example of the state change diagram the HMM
converts from ﬂow lines is shown in Figure 3. The graph of
a ﬂow line in the ﬁgure indicates the position of the body
trunk in the course of the time, assuming the horizontal axis
and the vertical axis are the time line and the pixel number,
respectively. The state change diagram implies the ﬂow line in
the ﬁgure roughly has three states. The change of the mean and
the variance expresses a signiﬁcant state change. The change
of the mean means the body trunk moves to another position,
while that of the variance corresponds to the change in the
width of operation of the body trunk. The conscientious degree
of the living activity is ﬁgured out from the two kinds of
state changes. The transition probability is used to examine the
relevance among states. The transition probability to a different
state is considered to represent the movement order and the
work procedure in the living activity, because it is inﬂuenced
by the position of the body trunk and the change in the width
of operation. It is not considered as the feature of each person,
because it varies easily with the order and the combination of
living activities. The proposed method values the transition
probability from one state to the same state, which is referred
to as the self transition probability. When the person stays in
a speciﬁc point, the self transition probability is considered to
indicate the location and the time period of the stay, because
it gets little inﬂuence from the position of body trunk and the
change in the width of operation.
Regarding the self transition probability as the feature
of the living activity of each person, the proposed method
calculates the self transition probability of each state from the
two state change diagrams associated with the two sensors.
A model is constructed to ﬁgure out the conscientious degree
of a speciﬁc cleaning activity where the person move around
the room. The model assumes the self transition probability in
each state is the explanatory variable while the conscientious
degree is the objective variable. The model uses the logistic
regression [15], because the objective variable is a qualitative
variable. The combination that minimizes the Akaike Infor-
mation Criteria (AIC) [15] is selected from two or more
explanatory variables, to construct a model which predicts the
conscientious degree of the living activity.
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 4. Experimental environment.
IV.
EXPERIMENT
A. Purpose and Process
We have veriﬁed living activities can be identiﬁed with
the brightness distribution with an experiment. Using the data
collected in the experiment, we examine whether the consci-
entious degree is able to be estimated from the difference of
the body trunk. Figure 4 shows the experimental environment,
which is an actual dining-and-kitchen space. The photograph
in the left side shows the view taken from the exit and entrance
of the ﬂoor plan in the right side. The movable space of the
experimental environment is a 3 meter square. To decrease the
blind spot, a brightness distribution sensors is installed at each
of the 2 corners of the space. Each of them is mounted at a
point of 80 centimeters in height. Subjects of the experiment
are 20 elderly people consist of 8 men and 12 women whose
ages range from 60 to 70 years old. In the experiment, subjects
conduct three living activities: cleaning, cooking, and washing,
according to the standard of IADL. In the cleaning, each
of them wipes the entire ﬂoor with a mop, after sweeping
with a broom. In the cooking, each of them breaks an egg
into a bowl to mix with favorite seasonings. The subject ﬂies
it and dishes it up. The washing makes each of them keep
washing tablewares at the sink. Each of the subjects repeats
every living activity 3 times, each of which is ﬁnished within
3 minutes. A whole experiment for one subject is organized
within 60 minutes so as to prevent the conscientious degree
of the activities from varying with their tiredness. The number
of times and the length of the activity time is determined in
consideration of the load of the subjects.
B. Evaluation
With the Bag-of-Features method, we detect living activi-
ties from features in the brightness distribution values sampled
in the experiment. We have determined to classify the bright-
ness distribution values into 25 groups after the examination
of all combinations. We have used the 20 fold cross validation
so that all 20 experiment participants may become test data
to evaluate the generalization performance. The algorithms
used for the detection are the Random Forest [13], the Naive
Bayes classiﬁer [16], and the linear Support Vector Machines
[17]. These algorithms are suitable for the detection of living
activities because they are known to provide high performance
under a lot of objective variables. The performance of the
proposed method is evaluated by the f-measure, which is the
harmonic average of the precision and the recall. The precision
is an index that shows the accuracy of the result because it is
the ratio of target actions in actions detected by the method.
Recall is an index that shows the coverage of the result because
it is the ratio of detected target actions in target actions to be
detected by the method. We should take a good balance of the
precision and the recall. Even if the precision is high, we are
not sure how many target actions to be detected are covered
by the detected actions. The f-measure presents the balance of
the precision and the recall.
We have paid a special attention to the cleaning to know
the conscientious degree of each subject, because it is one
major instance of IADL a lot of people take in daily life. It is
thought that the cleaning is effective to judge the conscientious
degree for almost all persons. In the experiment, cleaning of
each subject is recorded with as a video movie to ask people
watching it on the conscientious degree of the subject as a
questionnaire. The questionnaire asks 15 twenties consisting of
12 males and 3 females to evaluate the conscientious degree of
the cleaning of each subject with 5 ranks. Based on the rounded
average of their evaluation, we regard the elderly ranked at 4
or more as highly conscientious, while ones ranked 2 or less as
poorly conscientious. We have also examine common features
for subjects of high conscientious degree and ones of low
conscientious degree, to ﬁnd a criterion to distinguish subjects
with the conscientious degree. Focusing on the movement of
subjects in the experiment space, we apply the HMM to ﬁnd
the criterion. The HMM decides the state transition in the time
series with the Viterbi algorithm after presuming parameters
concerning to the state with the Baum-Welch algorithm [14].
Applying the Baum-Welch algorithm to all subject ﬂow line,
states are identiﬁed in the ﬂow lines representing the movement
of subjects. The transition of identiﬁed states in each ﬂow
line is ﬁgured out with the Viterbi algorithm to each ﬂow line
of all participants. In the HMM, when we assume too few
states, we cannot see any difference among subjects, because
each subject stays in speciﬁc states too long. On the contrary,
too many states make subjects stay in every state too short.
In both case, we cannot ﬁnd any difference among subjects.
After trials for all combinations, we have determined 5 is the
best number of states to ﬁnd difference in each subject. If
many subjects of high conscientious degree stay in a speciﬁc
state, the state indicates the feature of the high conscientious
degree. The proposed method examines the self transition
probability of each state. To predict whether each subject is
conscientious or not, it builds a Logistic regression model
whose explanatory variables are the self transition probability.
It selects combinations of two or more explanatory variables
which minimize AIC. The combination of the explanatory
variables provides the laergest inﬂuence on estimation of
the conscientious degree. We calculate Nagelkerke R2 [18],
which shows the degree of ﬁt of the model made by Logistic
regression. Nagelkerke R2 takes the value between 0 and 1.
The more it approaches to 1, the better the degree of ﬁt of the
model.
C. Result
Table I shows the f-measure values in the detection using
the three Supervised learning algorithm. As the table shows,
Random Forest is superior to the others. In all kinds of the
living activities, the f-measure values exceeds 90 percent when
Random Forest is used. The conscientious degree is high in 6
subjects and low in 3 subjects from the result of the question-
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. F-MEASURE VALUES IN THE DETECTION USING THE THREE
SUPERVISED LEARNING ALGORITHM.
Cleaning
Cooking
Washing
Random Forest
0.975
0.912
0.927
Naive Bayes classiﬁer
0.830
0.793
0.705
Linear Support Vector Machines
0.942
0.897
0.874
TABLE II. CRITERIA OF THE CONSCIENTIOUS DEGREE IN THE
QUESTIONNAIRE.
Number
of cases
Fineness in movement of hands
10
How to put force
8
Area within the range of action
7
Fineness in movement of body trunk
7
Repetition degree within the area of action
4
Length of time
3
How to wash mop
3
Presence of periodicity
1
Good quality of posture
1
Dustpan after sweeping with broom
1
Whether the cleaned place is seen or not
1
naire to 15 twenties. Table II shows the summary of the result
in the criteria of the conscientious degree in the questionnaire.
The table indicates the ﬁneness of movement of hands and
the body trunk are adopted as the criterion a lot of people.
The conscientious degree decreases when the movement is too
large. It justiﬁes the proposed method uses the self transition
probability to ﬁguring out the conscientious degree, because
the amount of movement inﬂuences on the staying time of
each point. 5 states are derived, applying the HMM to the
movement of each subject. The brightness distribution sensors
used in the experiment represent the position of the body trunk
with the angle ranging from 0 to 639, where 0 corresponds to
the left side while 639 to the right side. Table III shows the
mean and the variance of the position in each state for Sensor
1 and Sensor 2. We build several Logistic regression models to
calculate the conscientious degree, specifying various combi-
nation of the self transition probability in states as explanatory
variables. Among the models, the AIC gets minimum for the
one in which we specify only the self transition probability of
State 4 of Sensor 2 as an explanatory variable. It means the
conscientious degree is best discriminated when subjects stay
in State 4 of Sensor 2. The model ﬁgures out the conscientious
degree, Pri, with
Pri =
1
1 + exp(107.4 − 113.4si)
(5)
where si is the explanatory variable. The ﬁtting degree of the
model is fairly good because Nagelkerke R2 is 0.599. For each
of subjects with the high and the low conscientious degree,
Figure 5 shows the difference of the self transition probability
of each state derived from Sensor 1, when the subject stay
in State 4 of Sensor 2. In ﬁgure, a horizontal axis shows the
IDs of the status of Sensor 1. The vertical axis shows the
average probability of the subject staying in each state for
both of the high and the low conscientious degree. In State 1
and State 5, there is a big difference of the average probability
between subjects of the high and the low conscientious degree.
Suppose a subject stays in State 4 of Sensor 2. From Table III,
the subject staying State 1 derived from Sensor 1 should be
located around B in Figure 5, while the location of the subject
staying State 5 of Sensor 1 should be around A. These results
TABLE III. MEAN AND VARIANCE OF THE POSITION IN EACH STATE FOR
SENSOR 1 AND SENSOR 2.
Sensor 1
Sensor 2
Mean
Variance
Mean
Variance
State 1
231
540
120
672
State 2
303
406
174
140
State 3
366
281
222
294
State 4
444
792
337
1507
State 5
551
1845
489
3777
Figure 5. Difference of the self transition probability of each state derived
from Sensor 1, when the subject stay in State 4 of Sensor 2.
imply subjects with the high conscientious degree are likely to
stay around A, while ones with the low conscientious degree
often stay around B. It can be said that the conscientious degree
is judged high for subjects cleaning corner spots emphatically,
while that of subjects staying in spacious parts is regarded low.
The conscientious degree is understood from the length of the
staying time in speciﬁc locations.
V.
DISCUSSION
From the f-measure, it is thought that Random Forest is the
best machine learning algorithm to be applied to detect living
activities. The f-measure with Random Forest has reached over
90 percent for any examined activities. The method measures
the living willingness from the transition of the execution
degree calculated from actual living activities for the long term.
For instance, suppose the elderly have engaged in speciﬁc
activities regularly. It is thought that their living willingness
decreases, if they get lazy for the activities for some time.
The laziness is expected to be found without loss, because the
detection accuracy exceeds 90 percent. The proposed method is
practical enough. Among the examined activities, the cleaning
is detected with the highest f-measure, 0.975. The cooking and
the washing are inferior to the others, because the location
of the subjects is similar in the activities. Since people cook
or wash tablewares in the location far from the sensors, it is
difﬁcult for the sensors to recognize small movement of hands
and arms in the activities. The activities might fail to match
with pre-acquired features of any activity. It is necessary to
select better sensor positions to make them recognize the small
movement in the cooking and the washing.
In the model to discriminate the conscientious degree,
we found State 4 of Sensor 2 has the best self transition
probability. In the questionnaire, the conscientious degree of
the cleaning is low when the movement of body trunk is too
large. There are a lot of answers which value the width of
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

the movement area to judge the conscientious degree. It is
thought the high conscientious degree is related to the staying
time in the corner of the room. In the mean time, the time
length of the cleaning is not mentioned as a criterion to
judge the conscientious degree. It does not work as a criterion
because we have speciﬁed the time length of each activity in
the experiment, which makes the difference among subjects
small. Nagelkerke R2 of the model is 0.599. We can expect
the improvement of its value, if we can add factors which are
picked up as the criteria, but not incorporated in explanatory
variables of the model. For example, we can incorporate the
force subjects put during the cleaning, as shown in the second
line of Table II, if we can sense it. It has been revealed subjects
with the high conscientious degree differ from those of the
low conscientious degree in terms of the location they stay.
Subjects with the high conscientious degree stay longer in the
corner of the room, because they clean the room carefully.
On the contrary, subjects low in the conscientious degree stay
longer in a spacious part of the room. It implies we can ﬁgure
out the conscientious degree from the location subjects stay
longer.
The proposed method assumes to learn the ﬂoor plan of the
room beforehand. Even in the case the ﬂoor plan is changed,
the method is applicable without trouble, if we specify the
ﬂoor plan to the algorithm.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The paper has proposed to detect living activities with
brightness distribution sensors. It has also presented a method
to ﬁgure out the conscientious degree of the detected activities.
An experiment to evaluate the method reveals it can detect
cleaning, cooking, and washing with 0.975, 0.912, and 0.927
in the f-measure, respectively. The method implies the consci-
entious degree can be ﬁgured out from the location of cleaning
people. Our future work is to apply the method to more kinds
of living activities in various places, to expand the coverage
of the method.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Kanai, G. Tsuruma, T. Nakada, and S. Kunifuji, ”Notiﬁcation of
Dangerous Situation for Elderly People using Visual Cues,” IUI ’08
Proceedings of the 13th international conference on Intelligent user
interfaces, Jan. 2008, pp. 345-348.
[2]
F. Portet, M. Vacher, C. Golanski, C. Roux, and B. Meillon, ”Design and
evaluation of a smart home voice interface for the elderly: acceptability
and objection aspects, ” Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 17,
no. 1, Jan. 2013, pp. 127-144.
[3]
M. P. Lawton and E. M. Brody, ”Assessment of older people: Self
maintaining and instrumental activities of daily living,” Gerontologist,
vol. 9, 1969, pp. 179-186.
[4]
S. M. Hwang, et al., ”Multi-modal sensing smart spaces embedded
with WSN based image camera, ” PETRA ’10 Proceedings of the
3rd International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to
Assistive Environments, no. 63, Jun. 2010.
[5]
R. Jain, L. Jalali, and M. Fan, ”From health-persona to societal
health, ” WWW ’13 Companion Proceedings of the 22nd international
conference on World Wide Web companion, May. 2013, pp. 1329-1334.
[6]
S. Nakashima, Y. Kitazono, L. Zhang, and S. Serikawa, ”Deveropment
of privacy-preserving sensor for person detection, ” Procedia Social and
Behavioral Sciences, vol. 2, Jan. 2010, pp. 213-217.
[7]
Z. Zhou, et al., ”Activity Analysis, Summarization, and Visualization
for Indoor Human Activity Monitoring,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits
and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 18, no. 11, Nov. 2008, pp.
1489-1498.
[8]
T. Banerjee, J. M. Keller, and M. Skubic, ”Building a Framework
For Recognition of Activities of Daily Living from Depth Images
Using Fuzzy Logic,” 2014 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy
Systems(FUZZ-IEEE), Jul. 2014, pp. 540-547.
[9]
J. H. Shin, B. Lee, and K. S. Park, ”Detection of Abnormal Living Pat-
terns for Elderly Living Alone Using Support Vector Data Description,
” IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, vol.
15, no. 3, May. 2011, pp. 438-448.
[10]
T. Matsumoto, M. Shimosaka, H. Noguchi, T. Sato, and T. Mori, ”Pose
Estimation of Multiple People using Contour Features from Multiple
Laser Range Finders, ” The 2009 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems(IROS 2009), Oct. 2009, pp. 2190-
2196.
[11]
M. R. Abid, P. E. Meszaros, R. F. d. Silva, and E. M. Petriu, ”Dynamic
Hand Gesture Recognition for Human-Robot and Inter-Robot Com-
munication, ” 2014 IEEE International Conference on Computational
Intelligence and Virtual Environments for Measurement Systems and
Applications(CIVEMSA), May. 2014, pp. 12-17.
[12]
Y. Peng, Y. Yan, W. Zhu, and J. Zhao, ”Vehicle Classiﬁcation Using
Sparse Coding and Spatial Pyramid Matching, ” 2014 IEEE 17th
International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems(ITSC),
Oct. 2014, pp. 259-263.
[13]
L. Breiman, ”Random Forests, ” Machine Learning, vol. 45, no. 1, Oct.
2001, pp.5-32.
[14]
A. Mohamed and K. N. R. Nair, ”Continuous Malayalam Speech
Recognition Using Hidden Markov Models, ” A2CWiC ’10 Proceedings
of the 1st Amrita ACM-W Celebration on Women in Computing in
India, no. 59, Sep. 2010.
[15]
H. Chen, L. Chen, T. P. Albright, and Q. Guo, ”Improved Lo-
gistic Regression Approach to Predict the Potential Distribution of
Invasive Species Using Information Theory and Frequency Statis-
tics,” Sixth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining - Work-
shops(ICDMW’06), Dec. 2006, pp. 873-877.
[16]
G. H. John and P. Langley, ”Estimating Continuous Distributions in
Bayesian Classiﬁers,” UAI’95 Proceedings of the Eleventh conference
on Uncertainty in artiﬁcial intelligence, Aug. 1995, pp. 338-345.
[17]
T. Joachims, ”Training Linear SVMs in Linear Time, ” KDD ’06
Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining, Aug. 2006, pp. 217-226.
[18]
N. J. D. Nagelkerke, ”A Note on a General Deﬁnition of the Coefﬁcient
of Determination,” Biometrika, vol. 78, no. 3, Sep. 1991, pp. 691-692.
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

