High-precision Time Synchronization Digital Sensing Platform Enabling 
Connection of a Camera Sensor 
 
Narito Kurata 
Faculty of Industrial Technology 
Tsukuba University of Technology 
Tsukuba City, Ibaraki, Japan 
e-mail: kurata@home.email.ne.jp 
 
 
Abstract - The authors are conducting research and 
development of different types of sensor systems for the 
maintenance of civil infrastructures, such as aging bridges and 
highways, and buildings. Highly accurate time information is 
added to measurement data, and a set of sensing data that 
ensures time synchronization is acquired and used for 
multimodal analysis of risk. In research so far, as a first step, a 
sensor device was developed that uses a digital high-precision 
accelerometer to perform highly-accurate time-synchronized 
sensing of civil infrastructure, such as bridges and highways, 
and buildings. A vibration table test was performed on the new 
sensor device, and its time synchronization performance was 
verified by comparing the measurement results with multiple 
sensor devices and a servo-type accelerometer. In this paper, a 
different type of digital sensing platform has been developed 
that allows a camera sensor to be connected in addition to a 
digital accelerometer. By adding a unified time stamp 
synchronized with the absolute time to data from the digital 
accelerometer and the image from the camera sensor when data 
is acquired, the vibration and the image can be measured 
synchronously. First, a Chip-Scale Atomic Clock (CSAC), 
which is an ultra-high-precision clock, is mounted on the sensor 
device, and a mechanism is implemented whereby a time stamp 
is added to the outputs of the digital accelerometer and the 
camera sensor with timekeeping precision. Since the 
timekeeping precision of the CSAC is too high, a delay occurs 
when a time stamp is added by the CPU of the sensor device. 
Therefore, a Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) 
dedicated to adding time stamps is prepared. In this paper, the 
results of a performance verification experiment on a camera 
sensor mounted on the platform, are described.  
Keywords-Time Synchronization; Chip Scale Atomic Clock; 
Earthquake Observation; Structural Health Monitoring; Micro 
Electro Mechanical Systems; Camera Sensor 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As civil infrastructure, such as bridges and highways, and 
buildings deteriorate over time, it has become important to 
automate inspections for maintenance of these structures. In 
addition, since there are many disasters, such as earthquakes 
and typhoons in Japan, it is necessary to detect damage to 
structures immediately after a disaster, and to estimate the 
damage situation. Data collection and analysis by sensor 
groups is effective for automating the detection of such 
abnormalities, but to analyze data sets measured by multiple 
sensors and evaluate structural safety, time synchronization 
between sensors is required.  
The authors applied wireless sensor network technology 
to develop sensors for seismic observation and structural 
health monitoring, and demonstrated their performance in 
skyscrapers [1][2]. In this system, time synchronization was 
achieved by sending and receiving wireless packets between 
sensors [1]. However, it is impossible to target multiple 
buildings, long structures, such as bridges, and wide-area 
urban spaces with wireless sensor network technology. On the 
other hand, if sensors installed in various places can 
autonomously retain accurate time information, this problem 
can be resolved. The method of using GPS signals is effective 
outdoors, but it cannot be used inside buildings, underground, 
under bridges, or in tunnels, etc.  
Therefore, the author developed a sensor device that 
autonomously retains accurate time information using a Chip-
Scale Atomic Clock (CSAC) [3]-[5], which is an ultra-high-
precision clock [6]-[8]. In order to apply the developed sensor 
device to earthquake observation, a logic was implemented 
that detects the occurrence of an earthquake and saves data on 
earthquake events, and its function was verified in a vibration 
table experiment [9]. The developed sensor device was also 
installed in an actual building and on an actual bridge, and 
used for seismic observation and evaluation of structural 
health [10]. However, as the developed sensor device had an 
analog MEMS accelerometer, it was difficult to measure 
minute vibrations accurately, and there was a risk of noise 
being mixed with the analog signal. The risk of noise was 
therefore eliminated by making the accelerometer mounted on 
the sensor device a digital type. In this paper, a different type 
of digital sensor platform is further developed wherein a 
camera sensor can be connected to the sensor device. The 
details of the digital sensing platform and a mechanism 
whereby ultra-high-accuracy time information is added to 
sensor data by the CSAC, are described. The results of 
experiments performed to verify the time synchronization 
performance of the camera sensor are also reported. 
In this paper, Section II shows the existing time 
synchronization methods and describes their problems and 
achievement of the development of digital sensing platform 
proposed in this research. Section III describes the 
configuration of digital sensing platform and the development 
of the actual sensor device. Further, Section IV describes the 
performance 
verification 
experiments 
on 
the 
time 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

synchronization of developed camera sensor device, and it is 
confirmed that time synchronization among the developed 
digital sensor devices with camera is achieved. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
A time synchronization function is indispensable for 
sensor devices used to monitor structural health and make 
seismic observations of civil infrastructure, such as bridges 
and highways, and buildings. This is because time series 
analysis using phase information cannot be performed unless 
a data set is obtained in which time synchronization is 
achieved. Regarding time synchronization of sensing, many 
studies have already been performed, such as the use of GNSS 
signals from artificial satellites and the Network Time 
Protocol (NTP) for time synchronization on the Internet [11]. 
There are also studies where time synchronization is achieved 
by utilizing the characteristic of wireless sensor networks that 
propagation delay is small. For example, time synchronization 
protocols, such as Reference Broadcast Synchronization 
(RBS), Timing-sync Protocol for Sensor Networks (TPSN), 
and Flooding Time Synchronization Protocol (FTSP) are 
being studied [12]-[16].  
However, although time synchronization using wireless 
technology is highly convenient, wireless communication 
may not always be possible. Particularly, if wireless 
communication is interrupted during an earthquake, it will not 
be possible to perform sensing where time synchronization is 
guaranteed. A technology that realizes highly accurate time 
synchronization in a room includes IEEE1588 Precision Time 
Protocol (PTP). PTP uses an Ethernet cable in a general Local 
Area Network (LAN) as a transmission line, and achieves 
accurate synchronization within one microsecond using time 
packets. However, it has many problems. For example, it is 
difficult to achieve stable synchronization accuracy due to 
packet delay fluctuation and packet loss due to congestion in 
the LAN. Moreover, since the delay is corrected by packet 
switching, the PTP devices that can be connected to the master 
device are limited, and it cannot be deployed in a Wide Area 
Network (WAN) environment where the delay amount varies 
drastically.  
To obtain a set of sensor data that guarantees long-term, 
stable time synchronization even when GPS signals are not 
available, wireless transmission/reception is unstable, and 
wired network connection is not possible, it would be ideal if 
different sensors autonomously retain accurate time 
information. If accurate time information could be added to 
the data measured by each sensor, a sensor data set that 
guarantees time synchronization would be obtained. It was 
therefore decided to develop a sensing system that 
autonomously retains accurate time information by employing 
a CSAC [4]-[6], which is a clock with high timekeeping 
accuracy. The CSAC is a clock that achieves ultra-high-
accuracy time measurement to several tens of picoseconds (5 
x 10-11 seconds), while having an ultra-small external shape 
that can be mounted on a board. Development began in 2001 
with the support of the US Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA), and consumer products were 
launched in 2011.  
Applications include measures against GPS positioning 
interference by jamming signals, high-precision positioning 
by installing on smartphones, etc., and high-level assessment 
of disaster situations, and further price reduction is expected 
as it becomes more widespread. CSAC has a small error of 
about 4 to 8 orders of magnitude less than that of timekeeping 
by a crystal oscillator, and time synchronization by NTP or 
GPS signals. If this CSAC is installed in each sensor device 
and a mechanism is implemented that gives a highly accurate 
time stamp to sampling of the data to be measured, sensor data 
sets that guarantee time synchronization can be collected even 
if GPS signals cannot be used, wireless transmission/reception 
is unstable, and wired network connection is unavailable. In 
development so far, the sensor device had a MEMS 
accelerometer, and the system configuration allowed for any 
analog sensor to be connected via an external input interface.  
However, as the accuracy of the analog MEMS 
accelerometer is not high, noise might still be mixed with the 
analog signal, and it was desired to be able to connect a camera 
sensor, which is a type of digital sensor, it was decided to 
develop a new platform with full digital sensing. Specifically, 
a technology was developed to mount a digital accelerometer 
on the sensor device to enable high-precision acceleration 
measurement without the risk of noise contamination, connect 
a camera sensor, and assign accurate time stamps by CSAC to 
both digital outputs. Data sets obtained by the sensor device 
described in this paper, where time synchronization is 
guaranteed, can be used to analyze the structural health of civil 
infrastructure and buildings, and understand seismic 
phenomena. 
III. 
DIGITAL SENSING PLATFORM AND CIRCUIT 
CONFIGURATION  
An ordinary sensor device consists of a CPU, a sensor, a 
memory and a network interface, and a crystal oscillator is 
used for the CPU. If a CSAC is mounted on such a sensor 
device to correct the time information of the CPU and perform 
measurement, a delay will occur because the timing accuracy 
of the CSAC is too high. Therefore, in order to directly add 
time information by the CSAC to the measurement data of the 
sensor in terms of hardware, a mechanism utilizing a Field-
Programmable Gate Array (FPGA), which is a dedicated 
integrated circuit, was contrived. As a result, the CPU of the 
sensor device is not overloaded, and it became possible to save 
measurement data to which time information is added by the 
FPGA in a memory, and to collect the data via a network. 
Moreover, since the FPGA is programmable, it can not only 
handle CSAC time information, but also incorporate logic, for 
example to detect abnormalities, etc., using the measurement 
data. In this paper, a mechanism is developed whereby 
accurate time stamps by the CSAC are added to the outputs of 
the digital accelerometer and camera sensor. 
 
3.1 System Configuration 
As shown in Figure 1, the sensor device in this research 
consists of an oscillator board that synchronizes GPS Time 
(GPST) with the CSAC and supplies a stable reference signal, 
a sensor board on which a digital accelerometer and external 
analog sensor input interface are mounted, a signal processing 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

board on which a CPU and FPGA are mounted, and a camera 
that captures images. A high-precision 10 MHz reference 
clock and one Pulses Per Second (PPS) signal are supplied by 
the oscillator board, and a time stamp and trigger signal for 
acquiring data are generated by the FPGA. The sensor board 
is provided with the digital accelerometer and external analog 
sensor input interface. Any analog sensor can be connected to 
the external analog sensor input interface. 
The digital accelerometer outputs data according to the 
trigger 
signal 
via 
a 
Universal 
Asynchronous 
Receiver/Transmitter (UART). The data of the sensor 
connected to the external analog sensor input interface is 
converted by an A/D converter according to the trigger signal, 
and output as a 16-bit serial value. The camera sensor can 
release the shutter according to the trigger signal, and outputs 
it as an RGB value. The data thus acquired is saved in a 
connected storage (SSD). The sensor device is operated via a 
wired LAN, Wi-Fi, or USB. 
 
3.2 Oscillator board 
The configuration and external appearance of the 
oscillator board are shown in Figures 2 and 3. The oscillator 
board has a function to synchronize the CSAC with 1 PPS 
output by the GPS module or 1 PPS input from outside. When 
time synchronization is required between multiple sensor 
devices, all the sensor devices are designated as "master", or 
one sensor device is designated as a "master" and the other 
sensor devices are designated as "slave". When the sensor 
device is a master, GPS and the CSAC are synchronized by 
receiving GPS signals, and inputting 1 PPS obtained from the 
GPS module to the CSAC. When the sensor device is a slave, 
the master and slave are synchronized by inputting 1 PPS 
output by the master. In addition, commands for setting the 
CSAC synchronization cycle or resetting the phase value, as 
well as signal selection commands, are executed by the signal 
processing board through the connector. The 10MHz and 1 
PPS output by this board are clock sources for this system. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  System configuration. 
 
Figure 2.  Oscillator board configuration. 
 
Figure 3.  External appearance of the oscillator board. 
3.3 Sensor board 
The configuration and external appearance of the sensor 
board are shown in Figures 4 and 5. The sensor board is 
provided with a digital accelerometer and an external analog 
sensor input interface. The data obtained by the digital 
accelerometer can be sampled at the timing of the trigger. For 
the external analog sensor input interface, three channels are 
provided assuming that a servo-type analog accelerometer is 
connected for comparison with the digital accelerometer. 
Depending on the measurement purpose, any analog sensor 
can be connected in addition to an analog accelerometer. 
The signal input from the external analog sensor interface 
is converted by the A/D converter to output as a 16-bit serial 
value. Note that the signal is split into two paths, and one of 
them is amplified 64 times. Therefore, even with an A/D 
converter having a resolution of 16 bits, a resolution 
equivalent to 22 bits can be obtained. The data obtained by the 
digital accelerometer is output by the UART, and the data 
obtained by the sensor connected to the external analog sensor 
input interface is output by a Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI), 
both to the signal processing board. 
 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 4.  Sensor board configuration. 
 
Figure 5.  Sensor board. 
3.4 Signal processing board 
The configuration and external appearance of the signal 
processing board are shown in Figures 6 and 7. The FPGA 
shown in Table 1 is mounted on the signal processing board. 
As shown in Table 1, Ubuntu is installed as the OS of the CPU 
and Cyclone V is installed in the FPGA, enabling the use of 1 
GB of SDRAM. Also installed is a USB On-The-Go (USB 
OTG), and it is possible to be connected to an SSD and a Wi-
Fi antenna which are extension devices. The Samba function 
can be used to acquire and browse built-in data via a LAN, 
and Secure Shell (SSH) allows to perform operations, such as 
settings and starting measurement. In addition, since it has a 
USB slave function, it can be operated via USB even when a 
LAN cannot be used. In addition to the above functions, the 
CPU mainly performs time setting, sorting of acquired data, 
format conversion, and filing. The FPGA adjusts the internal 
RTC (real-time clock), and generates the trigger signal based 
on the clock obtained from the oscillator. It also constitutes a 
data acquisition block for the various sensors and camera. 
 
3.5 Digital accelerometer 
The external appearance and specifications of the digital 
accelerometer mounted on the sensor board are shown in 
Figure 8 and Table 2, respectively. The on-board digital 
MEMS has a built-in 3-axis crystal accelerometer with high 
precision and stable performance manufactured by finely 
processing a crystalline material with superior precision and 
stability. As shown in Table 2, high-resolution vibration 
measurement with low noise and low power, is possible. 
 
Figure 6.  Signal processing board configuration. 
 
Figure 7.  Signal processing board. 
TABLE I.  
SPECIFICATIONS OF MAIN FPGA AND DE10-NANO(CPU) 
Model 
DE10-NANO 
OS 
Ubuntu 16.04.6 LTS 
(GNU/Linux 4.5.0-00185-g3bb556b armv7l) 
CPU 
800MHz Dual-core ARM Cortex-A9 
Memory 
1GB DDR3 SDRAM 
LAN 
1 Gigabit Ethernet PHY with RJ45 connector 
USB 
USBOTG×1, USBUART×1 
UART 
UART×2 
FPGA 
CYCLONE V 
FPGAROM 
EPCS64 
Storage 
16GB (MicroSD) 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Digital Accelerometer. 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

TABLE II.  
SPECIFICATIONS OF DIGITAL ACCELEROMETER 
Model 
EPSON M-A351AS 
Range 
±5 G 
Noise Density 
0.5 μG/√Hz (Average) 
Resolution 
0.06 μG/LSB 
Bandwidth 
100 Hz (selectable) 
Output Range 
1000 sps (selectable) 
Digital Serial Interface 
SPI 
Outside Dimensions (mm) 
24 × 24 × 18 
Weight 
12 grams 
Operating Temperature 
-20 ℃ to +85 ℃ 
Power Consumption 
3.3 V, 66 mW 
Output Mode Selection 
Acceleration, Tilt Angle, or Tilt 
Angle Speed 
 
 
3.6 Camera sensor 
The external appearance and specifications of the camera 
sensor are shown in Figure 9 and Table 3, respectively.  
 
 
Figure 9.  Camera sensor. 
TABLE III.  
SPECIFICATIONS OF CAMERA SENSOR 
Model 
OmniVision OV5642 
Active Array Size 
2592 x 1944 
Power Supply 
core: 1.5VDC±5%, analog: 2.6-
3.0 V, I/O: 1.7-3.0 V 
Temperature Range 
operating: -30 ℃ to +70 ℃ 
stable image: 0 ℃ to +50 ℃ 
Output Formats (8-bit) 
YUV(422/420)/YCbCr422, 
RGB565/555/444, CCIR656,    
8-bit compression data,         
8/10-bit raw RGB data 
Lenz Size 
1/4” 
Input Clock Frequency 
6-27 MHz 
Shutter 
rolling shutter 
Maximum Image Transfer 
Rate 
5 megapixel (2592x1944): 15 fps 
1080p (1920x1080): 30 fps 
720p (1280x720):60fps 
VGA (640x480): 60 fps 
QVGA (320x240): 120 fps 
Scan mode 
progressive 
Maximum Exposure Interval 
1968 x tROW 
Pixel Size 
1.4 μm x 1.4 μm 
Image Area 
3673.6μm x 2738.4 μm 
OmniVision OV5642, which is a CMOS camera module, 
is used as the camera sensor. It is compact, has low power 
consumption, supports digital data (YUV422) output, 
performs very well in poorly lite environments, and can 
acquire images at the timing of a trigger by inputting an 
external trigger. 
IV. 
PERFORMANCE VERIFICATION EXPERIMENT ON THE 
TIME SYNCHRONIZATION FUNCTION OF CAMERA SENSOR 
A performance verification experiment was carried out on 
the time synchronization function of the camera sensor. The 
experimental system configuration is shown in Figure 10. 
The trigger signal generated by the signal processing board is 
transmitted to the camera sensor and the FPGA of the LED 
control simultaneously. Since the shutter of the camera sensor 
and the lighting of the LEDs are synchronized, if the image 
can be acquired when the LEDs light up, it is considered that 
the image acquired is synchronized with the trigger. The 
FPGA for LED control shown in Figure 11 is configured to 
control the lighting of the LEDs at the clock timing of the 
trigger signal. As shown in Figure 12, 5×5 matrix LEDs light 
up one by one from upper left to lower right according to the 
rise of the trigger signal. As shown in Figure 13, the matrix 
LEDs are photographed with the camera sensor fixed.  
Figure 14 shows the result of imaging by the camera 
sensor. Time elapses from the upper left to the lower right. 
Since the LEDs in the image light up one by one, images can 
be acquired according to the signal input to the FPGA for 
LED control. In the images, the LEDs light up two at a time, 
and it can be seen that the camera sensor has a certain delay 
with respect to the trigger. As shown in Fig. 14, it was 
verified that images could be continuously acquired in 
synchronization with the trigger. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Camera data measurement system. 
 
Figure 11.  FPGA for LED control. 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 12.  Matrix LEDs. 
 
Figure 13.  Imaging arrangement. 
 
Figure 14.  Continuous images from the experimental result. 
 
The performance verification experiment on the time 
synchronization of developed camera sensor device was 
carried out as shown above. It is confirmed that time 
synchronization among the developed digital sensor devices 
with camera is achieved. The development of this digital 
sensing 
platform 
has 
enabled 
time-synchronized 
measurements between digital accelerometers, camera 
sensors, and many types of external input analog sensors, as 
well as multimodal analysis between measurement data. 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, research and development relating to a 
digital sensing platform that autonomously retains highly 
accurate time information by applying a CSAC, was reported. 
First, a system based on a digital sensor and autonomous time 
synchronization by a CSAC was described, in which the 
development of a mechanism and a sensor device that add 
ultra-high-accuracy time information to sensor data using the 
CSAC were explained in detail. A function was added to 
assign the same time stamp as that of the output of the built-
in digital accelerometer, to the output of the camera sensor. 
The results of an experiment carried out to verify the time 
synchronization performance of the camera sensor were also 
reported. In the future, the author plan to apply this new, 
different type of digital sensing platform to actual structures 
to acquire acceleration and video data that retain accurate time 
information. One possible problem is that although the timing 
accuracy of the CSAC is high, aging will occur in the long 
term, so it may be necessary to consider how to operate the 
sensing system according to the purpose and object of 
measurement. Further, as CSAC are currently expensive, it is 
hoped that they will be used more extensively in many fields. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by the New Energy and 
Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) through 
the Project of Technology for Maintenance, Replacement and 
Management of Civil Infrastructure, Cross-ministerial Strategic 
Innovation Promotion Program (SIP). This research was also 
partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP19K04963. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Kurata, M. Suzuki, S. Saruwatari, H. Morikawa, “Actual 
Application of Ubiquitous Structural Monitoring System using 
Wireless Sensor Networks,” 14th World Conference on 
Earthquake Engineering (14WCEE) IAEE, Oct. 2008, Paper 
ID:11-0037, pp. 1-8. 
[2] N. Kurata, M. Suzuki, S. Saruwatari, H. Morikawa, 
“Application of Ubiquitous Structural Monitoring System by 
Wireless Sensor Networks to Actual High-rise Building,” Fifth 
World Conference on Structural Control and Monitoring 
(5WCSCM) IASCM, July 2010, Paper No. 013, pp. 1-9. 
[3] N. Kurata, “Disaster Big Data Infrastructure using Sensing 
Technology with a Chip Scale Atomic Clock,” World 
Engineering Conference and Convention (WECC2015) WFEO, 
Dec. 2015, pp. 1-5. 
[4] N. Kurata, “Basic Study of Autonomous Time Synchronization 
Sensing Technology Using Chip Scale Atomic Clock,” 16th 
International Conference on Computing in Civil and Building 
Engineering (ICCCBE2016) ISCCBE, July 2016, pp. 67-74. 
[5] N. Kurata, “An Autonomous Time Synchronization Sensor 
Device Using a Chip Scale Atomic Clock for Earthquake 
Observation and Structural Health Monitoring” The Eighth 
International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and 
Applications (SENSORDEVICES 2017) IARIA, Sep. 2017, 
pp.31-36, ISSN: 2308-3514, ISBN: 978-1-61208-581-4 
[6] S. Knappe, et al., “A Microfabricated Atomic Clock,” Applied 
Physics Letters, vol. 85, Issue 9, pp. 1460-1462, Aug. 2004, 
doi:10.1063/1.1787942. 
[7] Q. Li and D. Rus, “Global Clock Synchronization in Sensor 
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 55, Issue 2, 
pp. 214-226, Jan. 2006, ISSN: 0018-9340. 
[8] R. Lutwak, et al., “The Chip-Scale Atomic Clock - Prototype 
Evaluation,” 39th Annual Precise Time and Time Interval 
(PTTI) Meeting, Nov. 2007, pp. 269-290. 
[9] N. Kurata, “Improvement and Application of Sensor Device 
Capable 
of 
Autonomously 
Keeping 
Accurate 
Time 
Information for Buildings and Civil Infrastructures,” The Ninth 
International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and 
Applications (SENSORDEVICES 2018) IARIA, Sep. 2018, pp. 
114-120, ISSN: 2308-3514, ISBN: 978-1-61208-660-6 
[10] N. Kurata, “A Sensing System with High Accurate Time 
Synchronization for Earthquake Observation and Structural 
Health Monitoring of Structures,” 17th World Conference on 
Earthquake Engineering (17WCEE) IAEE, Oct. 2021, Paper 
No. 9a-0008, pp. 1-9. 
[11] D. Mills, “Internet Time Synchronization: the Network Time 
Protocol,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 39, 
Issue 10, Oct. 1991, pp. 1482-1493, doi:10.1109/26.103043. 
[12] M. Maroti, B. Kusy, G. Simon, and A. Ledeczi, “The Flooding 
Time Synchronization Protocol,” Proc. the 2nd International 
Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (SenSys 
'04) 
ACM, 
Nov. 
2004, 
pp. 
39-49, 
doi:10.1145/1031495.1031501. 
[13] J. Spilker Jr., P. Axelrad, B. Parkinson and P. Enge, “Global 
Positioning System: Theory and Applications,” Vol. I, 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), 
1996, ISBN: 978-1-56347-106-3. 
[14] J. Elson, L. Girod, and D. Estrin, “Fine-Grained Network Time 
Synchronization using Reference Broadcasts,” Proc. 5th 
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation 
(OSDI’02), 
Dec. 
2002, 
pp. 
147-163, 
doi:10.1145/844128.844143. 
[15] S. Ganeriwal, R. Kumar, and M. B. Srivastava, “Timing-sync 
Protocol for Sensor Networks,” Proc. the 1st International 
Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (SenSys 
'03) 
ACM, 
Nov. 
2003, 
pp. 
138-149, 
doi:10.1145/958491.958508. 
[16] K. Romer, “Time Synchronization in Ad Hoc Networks,” Proc. 
the 2nd ACM International Symp. on Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networking & Computing (MobiHoc’01) ACM, Oct. 2001, pp. 
173-182, doi:10.1145/501436.501440. 
 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

