Abstract— The touchpad is a typical 2D gesture detection 
example of interface devices used on wearable technology. 
In this work, a textile touchpad based on a diamond pattern 
design has been developed by using screen-printing technology. 
In order to obtain the best conﬁ guration, two diﬀ erent 
architectures have been used. Prototypes have been tested by 
using a speciﬁ c controller for projected capacitive (pro-cap) 
technologies. We show a simple device, inexpensive, easy to 
make and use with textile.
Keywords-wearable sensing; touchpad; textile; screen-
printing technology.
I. 
 Iඇඍඋඈൽඎർඍංඈඇ
Wearable devices are increasingly being developed 
due to their ﬂ exibility and portability. Among all wearable 
devices, the interface devices can be considered as essential 
tools for allowing the user to interact with other devices both 
external and wearable [1]. Buttons, touchpads, keyboards 
are example of interfaces. The common characteristics of 
all of them are the requirement of a large sensor area and a 
stretchable or ﬂ exible format; the ﬁ rst in order to detect the 
ﬁ ngers [2] and the second in order to follow the movement 
of human body [3]. Several designs and techniques have 
been used but these can be divided into two main techniques: 
by using ﬁ bers and weaving the pattern or by using a printing 
technique for drawing the pattern on the fabric. Regarding 
ﬁ bers, in the last years, Jian Feng Gu et al. [4] presented a 
highly ﬂ exible capacitor ﬁ ber having a multilayer periodic 
structure of dielectric and conductive polymer composite 
ﬁ lms, fabricated by drawing technique; Stephan Gorgutsa et 
al. [5] reported on soft conductive-polymer-based capacitor 
ﬁ bers being used to build a fully woven 2D touchpad 
sensor and a 1D slide sensor. Regarding transfering a 
pattern on the textile, Seiichi Takamatsu et al. [1] present 
a stretchable keyboard based on capacitance sensors made 
of PEDOT:PSS electrodes patterned on a knitted textile 
by using spin-coat technique;  Nur Al-huda Hamdan et al. 
[6] present Grabrics, a two-dimensional textile sensor that 
is manipulated by grabbing a fold and moving it between 
ﬁ ngers by using sewing techniques;  Dong-Ki Kim et al. [7] 
present the design and fabrication model of a touchpad based 
on a contact-resistance-type force sensor fabricated by using 
a simple screen printing technique.
The content of the paper is organized as follows: Section 
II presents the working principle of pro-cap sensors; Section 
III describes the textile touchpad design; Section IV presents 
the experimental results and discussion. Finally, Section V 
closes the paper with conclusion and future work.
II. 
Dൾඌං඀ඇ ൺඇൽ ඐඈඋ඄ංඇ඀ ඉඋංඇർංඉඅൾ
Touchpad developed in this work is based on projected 
capacitive (pro-cap) technologies [8]. Projected capacitive 
technologies detect touch by measuring the capacitance at 
each addressable electrode. When a ﬁ nger approaches an 
electrode, it disturbs the electromagnetic ﬁ eld and alters the 
capacitance. This change in capacitance can be measured by 
the electronics and then converted into X,Y locations that the 
system can use to detect touch. There are two main types of 
sensing methods, self-capacitance and mutual capacitance, 
where each has its own advantages and disadvantages. 
There are several pro-cap controllers, many of which 
oﬀ er both self-capacitance and mutual-capacitance types. 
Microchip [9] uses a hardware sensing method called 
Capacitive Voltage Divider (CVD), which requires only an 
Analog-to-Digital Converter (ADC) to preform capacitive 
touch sensing. Microchip has a wide range of devices which 
have embedded a CVD acquisition engine as MTCH6102. 
This device is a turnkey projected capacitive touch controller 
which allows designers, through of self-capacitive scanning, 
to quickly and easily integrate projected capacitive touch 
into their cost-sensitive, low-power application. Capacitive 
sensors are connected directly to the device and the 
capacitance will be continuously polled for a signiﬁ cant shift 
to occur. The shift must be appreciably higher than the noise 
level in the worst-case conditions. 
CVD is a charge/voltage-based technique to measure 
relative capacitance on a pin using only the ADC module. 
There are several beneﬁ ts to use this technique: low 
temperature dependence, low power supply dependence, 
minimal hardware requirements and low-frequency noise 
rejection. Theory of operation is as follows: two capacitors 
are charged to opposite voltages, in a ﬁ rst phase on the 
sample A and the second on the sample B (Figure 1). 
Printed Textile Touchpad
Jose Vicente Lidón-Roger, Eduardo Garcia-Breijo
Instituto Interuniversitario de Investigación de 
Reconocimiento Molecular y Desarrollo Tecnológico 
(IDM), Universitat Politècnica de València, Universitat de 
València-Valencia, Spain
e-mail: jvlidon@eln.upv.es, egarciab@eln.upv.es
Josue Ferri, Jorge Moreno, Gabriel Martinez
Smart Textiles and ICT Solutions Research Group
Textile Research Institute (AITEX)-Alicante, Spain
e-mail: josue.ferri@aitex.es, jmoreno@aitex.es,
gmartinez@aitex.es  
Figure 1. Theory of Operation: precharge state [9]
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Then, the two capacitors are connected in parallel and the 
charges are allowed to settle. The ﬁ nal voltage on Chold is 
determined by the size of the external capacitance in relation 
to the size of internal capacitance. Finally, the operation is 
performed again, but this time the precharge voltages are 
reversed. The diﬀ erence between the two results (VB-VA) is 
used as the currents sensor reading (Figure 2 left). If there is 
an user’s ﬁ nger capacitance, the analysis is the same but with 
an additional capacitor (Figure 2 right).
A. Sensor
The capacitance of touch is dependent on sensor design, 
namely, on front panel thickness, electrode geometry and 
pitch, X-Y layer-to-layer spacing and shielding. Therefore, 
sensor pattern is a very important aspect of capacitive sensor 
design. Linearity, accuracy and resolution of touch position 
are greatly dependent on the sensor pattern. Commonly the 
design consists of a set of electrodes in row and columns 
to form a matrix. Several touchpad-sensor pattern designs 
exist, commonly referred to by names that are indicative of 
the shape or construction of the pattern, such as triangles, 
diamonds, snowﬂ akes, streets and alleys, and telephone 
poles. 
Diamond pattern [10]-[13] is one of the most commonly 
used, it consists of diamonds interconnected with a narrow 
neck sections (Figure 3). The sensors nodes are formed by 
rhombus shaped electrodes. The construction consists of two 
layers and each having a multitude of conductive electrodes 
organized parallel to each other. An individual sensors node 
is formed by the region between the edges of the X and Y 
electrodes (Figure 3).
Diamond elements are used to maximize the exposure 
of sensor electrodes to a touch.  The distance between the 
electrodes is referred to as the pitch (Figure 3). The pitch 
determines the range of ﬁ nger sizes that can reliably be 
detected; typical dimensions of the pitch are as minimum 
of 4 mm and maximum of 10 mm.  The gap (Figure 3) 
between the X and Y electrodes determines how far a signal 
is projected as well as the level of noise in the measured 
signal.  A sensor with a larger gap is able to detect a user 
further away but it will have more noise than a sensor with 
a smaller gap. A minimum of 0.1 mm and maximum of 0.5 
mm have been reported. 
The layers are distributed in close proximity to each other 
and electrically isolated from each other. The Y electrodes are 
arranged among rows on the top layer and the X electrodes 
are arranged along columns on the top layer or bottom layer 
(Figure 4), forming a two-dimensional array of sensors. 
In order to reduce the electromagnetic interference (EMI) 
to the active sensor area, a ground ring around the touchpad 
can be placed. 
An example of diamond patten capacitive sensor can 
be found in the low power projected capacitive touch 
pad development kit (Microchip DM160219) based on 
MTCH6102 Microchip device. A matrix of 9 X-electrodes 
and 6 Y-electrodes is used (Figure 5). Dimensions of this 
design are: 

Pitch (Row and Column): 6.2 mm.

Gap: 0.3 mm. 
The capacity measure between electrodes is 20 pF [1 
kHz] (Agilent U1731A LCR Meter). 
The signal recorded on the RX0 line without ﬁ nger 
touching (Figure 6 left) shows a diﬀ erence of 60 mV and on 
the same line but touching (Figure 6 right) is 70 mV.
III. 
Tൾඑඍංඅൾ Tඈඎർඁඉൺൽ Dൾඌං඀ඇ
A. Screen-printed Technology
Manufacturing technology used to implement this type 
of sensor was based on serigraphic technology of thick 
ﬁ lm. The screen printed process consists of forcing pastes 
of diﬀ erent characteristics over a substrate through some 
screens using scrapers. Openings in the screen deﬁ ne the 
Figure 2. (Left) Diﬀ erential CVD waveform; (Right) Diﬀ erence between pressed and released diﬀ erential values  [9] 
Figure 3. Diamond pattern.
Figure 4. 2D array sensors in single layer or two layers.
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

motif that will be printed on the substrate by serigraphy. The 
ﬁ nal thickness of the pastes can be adjusted by varying the 
thickness of the screens.
B. Two Layers Design [TLD]
A 9x6 sensor matrix has been designed developed with 
two layers of conductive tracks and one layer of dielectric. 
Figure 7 shows the three patterns: X layer (a), dielectric layer 
(b), Y layer (c) and the whole design (d).
The main dimensions of pattern are:

Pitch (Row and Column): 8 mm.

Gap: 0.4 mm.
C. One layer Design [OLD]
A 9x6 sensor matrix has been designed developed 
with one layer of X-Y conductive tracks and one layer of 
dielectric. Figure 8 shows the three patterns: Conductive 
shield and through hole layer (a), dielectric layer (b), X-Y 
layer (c) and the whole design (d).
The main dimensions of pattern are:

Pitch (Row and Column): 8 mm.

Gap: 0.5 mm.

Through hole diameter: 1.6 mm
D. Development
In order to build the indicated sensors matrices, three 
screens were made, corresponding to the three deﬁ ned layers 
in each design. The screen for the conductors was made 
with a polyester material of 230 mesh PET 1500 90/230-48 
(Sefar) and the screen for dielectric layer was made with a 
polyester material of 137 mesh PET 1500 54/137-70 (Sefar). 
Next, a UV ﬁ lm Dirasol 132 (Fujiﬁ lm) was used with a ﬁ nal 
screen thickness of 10 µm for screen for conductors and 15 
µm for screen for dielectric. The patterns were transferred to 
the screen by using photomaks UV light source.
The substrate used was the textile Mediatex TT ACQ 
120 µm (Technohard).
The conductive paste used was the C2131014D3 Silver 
paste-58,85% (Gwent Group) and the dielectric paste was 
the D2081009D6 Polymer dielectric (Gwent Group)
Printing was carried out by using Ekra E2 XL screen-
printer with a 75º shore squeegee hardness, 3.5 bar force, 
and 8 mm/s. 
Figure 5. (Left) One layer PCB 9x6 sensor matrix; (Right) Gap and pitch size.
Figure 6. (Left) “released” signal ; (Right) “pressed” signal.
Figure 7. Two Layers Design: a) X Conductive layer ; b) Dielectric layer; 
c) Y Conductive layer; d) Complete Design.
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Finally, the inks were cured in an air oven at 130ºC for 
5 min.
To protect the surface, a new dielectric layer was added.
Short-circuits were detected between conductive layers 
due to the dielectric’s thickness, to avoid this a total of three 
passes were made with dielectric ink in order to increment 
the dielectric’s thickness. 
E. Electronic System
A MTCH012 based system was designed, using 
PIC16LF1454 as master controller. 
A Bluetooth module was used in order to make the 
system portable (Figure  9).
IV. 
Rൾඌඎඅඍඌ ൺඇൽ Dංඌർඎඌඌංඈඇ
A. Physical Parameters
Figure 10 shows the magniﬁ cation view of the two 
designs  with the dimension. Figure 10 left shows the TLD 
and ﬁ gure 10 right the OLD.
B. Electrical Parameters
The capacitance of the sensors has been measured by 
using a RCL meter to 1 kHz (Agilent U1731A). Figures 11 
and 12 show the capacitance distribution in each sensor. The 
TDL has an average of 13 pF and OLD of 50 pF. 
Regarding TLD, the signal recorded on the RX0 line 
without ﬁ nger touching (Figure 13 left) shows a diﬀ erence 
of 54 mV and on the same line but touching (Figure 13 right) 
is 88 mV.
Respecting OLD, the signal recorded on the RX0 line 
without ﬁ nger touching shows a diﬀ erence of 160 mV and 
on the same line but touching is 168 mV.
C. Operation
Both sensors were connected to the electronic system 
and tested with MTCH6102 utility, which allows to check 
all  gesture detection of this device: Single Click, Click and 
Hold, Double Click, Right Swipe, Right Swipe and Hold, 
Left Swipe, Left Swipe and hold, Up Swipe, Up swipe and 
Hold, Down Swipe and Down Swipe and Hold. In both 
cases the operations were perfect and all possible gestures 
could be checked  (Figure 14).
D. Discussion
The capacitance obtained in both cases was pretty 
similar to Microchip’s PCB design, lower in the case of 
TLD. Capacitors in both cases have the same size, the 
diﬀ erence lies in the dielectric; in TLD there is a dielectric 
layer between the two conductive layers whereas that in 
OLD there is not a dielectric layer. In spite of the technology 
used, the distribution of capacitance along the sensors is 
quite uniform. Due to its low capacitance, the diﬀ erential 
voltage obtained with TLD is higher than that obtained with 
OLD even than Microchip’s PCB design.
V. 
Cඈඇർඅඎඌංඈඇඌ ൺඇൽ Fඎඍඎඋൾ Wඈඋ඄
A touchpad based on projected capacitive (pro-cap) 
technologies has been developed to be used with textile 
substrates and using techniques of low cost and habitual in 
the textile industry as the screen-printing. The system works 
on both ﬂ at and curved surfaces, which allows it to be used 
in parts of clothes, such as sleeves, trouser legs or textiles 
Figure 8.  One Layer Design: a) Shield and through hole layer ; b) Dielec-
tric layer; c) X-Y Conductive layer; d) Complete Design 
Figure 9. Electronic System Block Diagram.
Figure 11. Capacitance distribution on TLD.
Figure 12. Capacitance distribution on OLD.
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

for furniture  such as sofas, armchairs, etc. When using the 
microchip MTCH6102 it is veriﬁ ed that the capacity should 
not be greater than hundreds of picofarad; the structure and 
type of dielectric have a great inﬂ uence on the value of the 
capacity of the capacitive sensor used. An extension of this 
work should focus on the thickness and type of dielectric as 
well as the study for diﬀ erent types of fabrics.
Aർ඄ඇඈඐඅൾൽ඀ආൾඇඍ
This work was supported by Spanish Government/
FEDER funds (grant number MAT2015-64139-C4-3-R 
(Mineco/Feder)). The work presented is also funded 
by the Conselleria d’Economia Sostenible, Sectors 
Productius i Treball, through IVACE (Instituto Valenciano 
de Competitividad Empresarial) and co-funded by ERDF 
funding from the EU. Application no: IMAMCI/2017/1.
Rൾൿൾඋൾඇർൾඌ
[1] S. Takamatsu et al., “Wearable keyboard using conducting 
polymer electrodes on textiles,” Advanced Materials, vol. 28, 
no. 22, pp. 4485-4488, 2015.
[2] J. A. Fan et al., ”Fractal design concepts for stretchable 
electronics,” Nature communications, vol. 5, pp. 3266, 2010.
[3] J. A. Rogers, T. Someya and Y. Huang, “Materials and 
mechanics for stretchable electronics,” Science, vol. 327, no. 
5973, pp. 1603-1607, 2010.
[4] J. F. Gu, S. Gorgutsa, and M. Skorobogatiy,”A fully woven 
touchpad sensor based on soft capacitor ﬁ bers,” arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1106.3881.
[5] S. Gorgutsa, J. F. Gu, and M. Skorobogatiy, “A woven 2D 
touchpad sensor and a 1D slide sensor using soft capacitor 
ﬁ bers,” Smart Materials and Structures, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 
015010, 2011.
[6] N. A. H. Hamdan,  F. Heller, C. Wacharamanotham, J. Thar, 
and  J. Borchers, “Grabrics: A foldable two-dimensional 
textile input controller,” In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI 
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, ACM,  pp. 2497-2503, 2016.
[7] D. K. Kim, J. H. Kim and H. J. Kwon, ”A touchpad for force 
and location sensing,” ETRI journal, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 722-
728. 2010.
Figure 10. Magniﬁ cation view of the two design: (left) Two layers design, (right) One layer design.
Figure 13.  Two Layers Design: (Left) “released” signal ; (Right) “pressed” signal.
Figure 14. The function on a curved surface touching two diﬀ erent points.
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[8] G. Barrett and R.Omote, “Projected-capacitive touch 
technology,” Information Display, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 16-21, 
2010
[9] Microchip Technology Inc., mTouchtm sensing solution 
acquisition methods capacitive voltage divider. Application 
note, AN1478. 2012.
[10] Atmel. Qtouch surface design guide. Application note, 
AT11849.
[11] Azoteq.  A short guide on trackpad layout. Application note, 
AZD068. 2016
[12] Microchip Technology Inc. FAQs-Sensor design guidelines. 
Application note, AD120007-001. 2012.
[13] J. Lee, M. T. Cole, J. C. S. Lai and  A. Nathan, ”An analysis of 
electrode patterns in capacitive touch screen panels,” Journal 
of Display Technology, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 362-36, 2014.
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

