Acoustic Emission Sensing of Materials and Structures 
 
Irinela Chilibon* 
*National Institute of Research and Development for Optoelectronics, INOE-2000 
Magurele, Romania 
E-mail: qilib@yahoo.com 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Acoustic Emission (AE) sensing is used in the field 
for the testing of metal and composite, as non-destructive 
techniques. The AE technique allows to determine the size of 
the cracks, damages, fractures and failures into materials. 
Possible causes of the internal-structure changes are crack 
initiation and growth, crack opening and closure, dislocation 
movement, twinning, and phase transformation in monolithic 
materials and fibre breakage and fibre-matrix debonding in 
composites. Most of the sources of AEs are damage-related to 
the detection of these emissions. AE technology involves the use 
of ultrasonic transducers (20 kHz - 1 MHz) to listen for the 
sounds of failure occurring in materials and structures. The 
experimental works can determine practical information 
concerning the AE response of different materials and 
structures at mechanical strength and predict their behaviour 
and maximum strengths. As novelty, monitoring the stability 
of important construction structures, by AE technique makes 
possible to detect the onset and evolution of stress-induced 
cracks and prevent the structural failures. 
Keywords-Acoustic Emission (AE); Acoustic Emission 
technique (AET); non-destructive testing (NDT); Structural 
Health Monitoring (SHM). 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Acoustic Emission (AE) techniques have attracted 
attention to the diagnostic applications, material testing and 
study of deformation, fracture and corrosion, because they 
give an immediate indication of the response and behavior of 
materials under stresses, intimately connected with strength, 
damage, fracture and failure. AE technology involves the use 
of ultrasonic sensors (20 kHz - 1 MHz) to listen to the 
sounds of failure occurring in materials and structures [1]. 
The roughest localization method is guessing the source 
origin using the “first hit” technique. The sensor which 
detects an AE first defines a radius or a half sphere, 
respectively, in which the signal originated. For instance, this 
can be done for some cases in combination with other 
techniques or knowledge to “localize” the source of failures. 
Fibre breakage, matrix cracking, and delaminating are 
three mechanisms that can produce AE signals when stress is 
applied to the material or structure.    
The continuous research evolution in this field may be 
useful for a targeted diagnosis of the corrosion-induced 
damage severity and the recognition of corrosion sources 
through the AE online inspection and monitoring [2]. Also, 
integrated 
with 
additional 
information, 
such 
as 
metallography, AE technique can provide a valid tool for 
identifying specific features related to crack initiation and 
propagation mechanisms. 
AE technology uses ultrasonic transducers in the 
frequency range (20 kHz - 1 MHz) to detect sounds emitted 
by defects that occur in materials and structures, which are 
subjected to mechanical pressure or temperature variations. 
Determining the degree of degradation of mechanical 
properties and the residual life of metal structures under 
complex dynamic deformation demands has various 
applications related to bending, static and dynamic tensile 
loads and defect initiation processes [3].  
In case of metal structures, fatigue failure occurs due to 
cyclic stress from operating conditions. The main 
mechanisms of failure occur from mechanical fatigue or 
thermal fatigue, such as: mechanical fatigue failure is due to 
cyclic stresses and thermal fatigue failure is due to cyclic 
temperature changes. The tipping point for failure is when 
the material fails at loads lower than the yield strength of the 
material. The acoustic emission as a monitoring tool has 
capabilities to detect fatigue crack initiation and propagation 
in mooring chains [4]. 
Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) allows the early 
detection of potential damages resulting from the natural 
deterioration of structural materials and the optimization of 
decisions over maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of the 
bridge asset [5].  
The structure of this paper is organized as follow: Section 
II describes the Acoustic Emission sensors. Section III 
describes the Acoustic emission monitoring methods. The 
acknowledgement and conclusions close the article. 
II. 
ACOUSTIC EMISSION SENSORS 
The future market for electronic devices will focus on 
miniaturized flexible electronic devices with low power 
consumption. The development of piezoelectric films with 
excellent piezoelectric responses and low coercive voltages 
would therefore be advantageous [6]. Acoustic emission 
sensors are usual piezoelectric receiver transducer, having as 
active elements discs made by piezoceramic lead titanate 
zirconate (PZT), lead titanate (PT), barium titanate (BP) [7], 
PVDF materials, copolymers, and composites. Piezoelectric 
materials are among the most important new materials in this 
century because of their excellent performances.  
Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), also known as 
polyvinylidene difluoride and PVF2, is part of the 
fluoropolymers family, a group of specialised, versatile 
polymeric materials with distinct properties that result from 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

the strong bond between their carbon atoms and fluorine 
atoms and the fluorine shielding of the carbon backbone. 
PVDF is a polymer with pyroelectric and piezoelectric 
properties and is used in the manufacturing of diverse high-
purity, high-strength, and high-chemical-resistance products 
for applications in electrical, electronic, biomedical, 
construction, etc., PVDF has a similar structure to poly 
(tetrafluoro-ethylene) PTFE, except that the hydrogen atoms 
are only replaced by fluorine on every alternate carbon [8]. 
Piezoceramic-based AE sensors measure the acoustic 
emissions and are sensitive to the flexural wave motion 
(vertical motion to the surface). The acoustic emissions due 
to impact hammering, fatal failure, large disturbances, and 
glass fracture had a high-amplitude vertical component of 
wave motion, detected by AE sensors. Attempts were made 
to capture the in-plane component of the wave motion using 
fiber-Bragg grating sensors. Coupled piezoelectric film strain 
sensors, monolithic piezoceramic patches were used to 
measure the acoustic waves [9]. The schematic of the cross-
section of a typical commercial AE sensor is shown in 
Figure 2. It has several components inside a steel housing. It 
has a backing plate, PZT material, electrodes, and damping 
material inside the housing. The top electrode of the PZT 
material is connected to the center conductor of the 
connector and the bottom electrode is grounded to the 
housing. A bonding agent is used to connect the AE sensor 
to the host structure [9]. Piezoelectric elements inside the 
sensor convert this pressure into current, which then 
converted to a voltage signal.  
 
Figure 1. Cross-section of a typical commercial AE sensor which measures 
out-of-plane wave motion [9]. 
 
Figure 2. Image of an AE sensor 
Figure 1 presents a cross-section of a typical commercial 
AE typical commercial AE sensor which measures out-of-
plane wave motion [9], and Figure 2 is the image of a usual 
AE sensor. 
 
Figure 3. AE sensor placed on a metal bar 
As an application, a piezoceramic AE sensor was fixed on 
the surface of a metal bar by means of a silicone Vaseline-
type coupling material (Figure 3), which ensures the 
maximum coupled transmission coefficient of the acoustic 
elastic waves at the piezoelectric element of the sensor. 
 
Figure 4. Block diagram of a module with acoustic emission sensor (SEA) 
[10]. 
More sophisticated devices were constructed as 
intelligent modules with AE sensor (SEA), used to pick up 
the acoustic emission signals. For example, an intelligent 
module with AE sensor (MSEA) is composed by: Acoustic 
emission sensor (SEA), Wireless transmitter (ES), Wireless 
receiver (RS), Stabilized voltage source with battery, 
Amplifier, PIC 18F452 microcontroller (µC) (Figure 4) 
[10]. 
III. 
ACOUSTIC EMMISION MONITORING METHODS 
For historical buildings, Non-Destructive Evaluation 
(NDE) techniques are used for several purposes: (1) 
detecting hidden structural elements, such as floor 
structures, arches and piers; (2) determining masonry 
characteristics, mapping the heterogeneity of the materials 
used in the walls (e.g., use of different bricks during the life 
of a building); (3) evaluating the extent of the mechanical 
damage in cracked structures; (4) detecting voids and flaws; 
(5) determining moisture content and rising by capillary 
action; (6) detecting surface decay phenomena; and (7) 
evaluating the mechanical and physical properties of mortar 
and brick, or stone [11]. The choice of a technique for 
controlling and monitoring reinforced concrete or masonry 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

structures is strictly correlated with the kind of structure to 
be analyzed and the data to be extracted. 
A general approach for AE data analysis, which will be 
followed here is stepwise: (a) evaluating AE activity, e.g.,  
the rate or cumulative number of selected AE hits or located 
events and noting their correlation with time or applied load; 
(b) evaluating AE intensity, e.g., the burst signal peak 
amplitude, burst signal energy, or continuous signal 
parameters and their behavior with load; (c) AE source 
location, if more than one AE sensor has been used, e.g., 
spatial or spatio-temporal clustering of AE event sources; 
and finally (d) looking for indications of different damage 
mechanisms, e.g., from AE intensity or waveform analysis 
[12]. 
Delamination behaviour of composites is a standard 
reference for all those researching laminated composites and 
using them in such diverse applications as microelectronics, 
aerospace, marine, automotive and civil engineering. In 
(AE) small amounts of elastic energy are released within a 
structure by a mechanical mechanism. Such energy release 
may arise from a variety of mechanisms, such as crack tip 
advance, plastic deformation, or other mechanical behaviour 
like friction and rubbing. This energy radiates from its point 
of release, known as the source, in all directions, 
propagating as an elastic wave [13]. The nature of this 
technique means that a source mechanism must be active 
(i.e. damage must be growing) in order for it to be detected, 
making it ideal for in-service structural health monitoring 
(SHM) and non-destructive testing (NDT).  
AE monitoring appears to be a promising technique that 
can be used for bridge inspection to quantify the condition 
of steel-reinforced concrete, where corrosion is occurring, 
and where repair is needed. 
Material study is another field of acoustic emission 
application. Particularly, acoustic emission is used for 
studies of: 
• 
Environmental 
cracking 
including 
stress 
corrosion cracking, hydrogen embrittlement. 
• 
Fatigue and creep crack growth. 
• 
Material 
properties 
including 
material 
ductility or embrittlement, inclusions content. 
• 
Plastic deformation development. 
• 
Phase transformation, and many other. 
Acoustic emission is a very versatile, non-invasive way 
to gather information about a material or structure.  
Acoustic Emission Testing (AET) can be applied to inspect 
and monitor pipelines, pressure vessels, storage tanks, 
bridges, aircraft, and bucket trucks, and a variety of 
composite and ceramic components. It is also used in 
process control applications such as monitoring welding 
processes. Acoustic Emission Testing is a non-destructive 
testing method that "listens" for transient elastic-waves 
generated due to a rapid release of strain energy caused by a 
structural alteration in a solid material. 
Piping inspection is another common application, and 
Acoustic Emission is used efficiently and fast for detection 
of cracks, corrosion damage and leaks. There are multiple 
advantages of the method in case of piping inspection.  
For example, in case of buried or insulated pipelines 
(Figure 5), there is no need to open the entire surface of the 
pipe but just a small opening for installation of sensors, 
while a distance between sensors can be from few meters to 
100 meters. Acoustic emission testing is applied also for 
inspection of high pressure and temperature piping systems 
during their normal operation. 
 
Figure 5. AE sources related to corrosion development and a leak in an 
underground pipeline. 
As example, inspections of concrete and reinforced 
concrete bridges are applications where acoustic emission is 
used for detection of cracks, other concrete flaws, rebar 
corrosion, failure of cables and other. The method allows an 
overall inspection of a structure and long-term condition 
monitoring when it is necessary providing important 
information for bridge maintenance. 
An elastic wave is a combination of longitudinal, 
transverse, and reflected waves, with a broadband frequency 
range from kHz to MHz. The AE is a phenomenon in which 
transient elastic waves are generated by rapid release waves, 
and a monitoring system requires a source and crack 
propagation or a tendon failure (Figure 6) [5]. 
Figure 6. Working principle of an AE monitoring system [5]. 
The evaluation by AE monitoring of the complex 
mechanisms acting during stress corrosion crack (SCC) is 
still far from a clear, well accepted interpretation [2]. SCC is 
one of the most critical corrosion types and can also cause 
premature failures of structural components and should not 
be neglected in damage risk managements. 
Monitoring a structure by means of the AE technique 
makes it possible to detect the onset and evolution of stress-
induced cracks. Crack opening, in fact, is accompanied by 
the emission of elastic waves that propagate within the bulk 
of the material (Figure 7) [2]. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 7. Schematic of an Acoustic Emission event and related parameters 
[2]. 
These waves can be captured and recorded by 
transducers applied to the surface of the structural elements 
[11]. The signal identified by the transducer (Figure 8) is 
preamplified and transformed into electric voltage; it is then 
filtered to eliminate unwanted frequencies, such as the 
vibrations caused by the mechanical instrumentation, which 
are generally lower than 100 kHz. In the Ring-Down 
Counting method, the signal is analyzed by a threshold 
measuring unit, which counts the oscillations exceeding a 
certain voltage value.  
Non-destructive techniques were not accepted for long 
time for the testing bridges and other components of the 
infrastructures, because of inability of AE technique to 
determine the size of cracks [14].  
 
 
Figure 8. Counting methods in AE technique [11]. 
For example, one of the major issues in offshore 
equipment design is preventing the accumulation of fatigue 
damage over a long period of time. A full-scale fatigue test 
rig and the monitoring setup were arranged to perform the 
AE measurements [4]. The chain failure most likely occurs 
at the point of the intrados (the lower or inner curve of an 
arch) (KT point) and crown positions, due to higher 
localized stresses in these areas (Figure 9). Four sensors 
were used on links and a water-based couplant was used to 
facilitate the transmission of the sound signal between the 
transducer and the link’s surface. Also, each sensor was 
equipped with an integrated 34 dB pre-amplification. 
 
 
Figure 9. Test rig illustration: the chain is fixed at one end (right) and the 
loading (strain) is applied at the other end (left) [4]. 
After careful evaluation of the different AE signal 
features and all possible correlations, it appears that the 
frequency content of the AE signals is the most promising 
parameter. An increase of the average frequency is observed 
with the growth of the crack in the chain [4]. 
AE sensor manufacturers typically provide a sensitivity 
curve based on face-to-face calibration. This calibration 
procedure has been treated as proprietary information and 
described only inadequately. Calibration curves are usually 
in reference to the reference level of 1 V/µbar, but this 
reference remains undefined [15].  
AE technique (AET) has found applications in 
monitoring the health of aerospace structures because 
sensors can be attached in easily accessed areas that are 
remotely located from damage prone sites.  AET has been 
used in laboratory structural tests, as well as in flight test 
applications. 
By signal graphic representation analysis in time and 
frequency can be determined the attenuation coefficient of 
the pulse into material. Figure 10 shows an aluminum pipe 
structure subjected to the mechanical stretching after its 
rupture [16]. 
 
 
Figure 10. Broken aluminium pipe at maximum mechanical stretch. 
Figure 11 presents prevailed AE signals by the sensor in 
the breaking moment of aluminium pipe at the maximum 
stretch. Therefore, one can detect these emissions and 
predict the moment of material failure, and causing damage 
to the overall structure.  
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 11. AE time spectrum for aluminium pipe (ϕ20x150 mm, and 
thickness 1 mm) subjected to the mechanical stretching [16]. 
The use of the phenomenon of acoustic emission during 
deformations of tension and bending makes it possible to 
predict the onset of critically dangerous states of loss of 
working capacity of metal structures. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Monitoring structures by AE techniques could detect the 
onset and evolution of stress-induced cracks into materials 
(metals, non-metals, composites) and the crack opening is 
accompanied by the acoustic emission of elastic waves that 
propagate within the bulk of the materials and structures. 
These waves (AE) can be captured and recorded by 
transducers, type AE sensors, applied to the surface of the 
structural elements and provide the material behavior at 
mechanical stresses, fatigue and vibrations. 
Crack initiation into material was determined by the 
appearance of the AE signal at low stretch stress levels. After 
the crack initiated, the AE signals around the zero stress 
were thought to be caused by crack-face grinding when the 
cracks were closed. 
By these experimental works one can determine practical 
information concerning the strength of different type of 
materials, their mechanical limits at different stretch values. 
More, it can obtain practical information about AE of 
monitories complex construction structures, such as: bridges, 
containers fulfilled with liquids, etc., in order to prevent their 
possible breaking due to hostile environmental (shocks, long 
time vibrations, bending, temperature differences, etc.). 
The internal stress redistribution of the materials caused 
by the changes in the internal structure can be predicted by 
the monitoring the acoustic emissions of the stress waves 
generated by the structures.  
Possible causes of the internal-structure changes are 
crack initiation and growth, crack opening and closure, 
dislocation movement, twinning, and phase transformation in 
monolithic materials and fibre breakage. A number of 
challenges related to accurate localisation and classification 
of sources still remain, which must be addressed in order to 
exploit the full potential of the AE technique. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Romanian Ministry of 
Research, Innovation and Digitalization (MRID), Core 
Program PN 18N/2019 and by the MRID through Program I 
– Development of the National R & D System, Subprogram 
1.2-Institutional 
Performance-Projects 
for 
Excellence 
Financing in RDI, contract no. 18PFE/2021. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. H. Kim, W. K. Lee, and S. W. Kim, “Analysis of Acoustic 
Emission Signal for the Detection of Defective Manufactures in Press 
Process,” World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology, 
vol. 53, pp. 1301-1305, 2009. 
[2] L. Calabrese and E. Proverbio, “A Review on the Applications of 
Acoustic Emission Technique in the Study of Stress Corrosion 
Cracking,” Corros. Mater. Degrad. vol. 2, pp. 1–30, 2021, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/cmd2010001. 
[3] P. Louda, A. Sharko, and D. Stepanchikov, “An Acoustic Emission 
Method for Assessing the Degree of Degradation of Mechanical 
Properties and Residual Life of Metal Structures under Complex 
Dynamic Deformation Stresses,” Materials, vol. 14, pp. 2090, 2021, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ma14092090. 
[4] Á. Angulo, et al. “Acoustic Emission Monitoring of Fatigue Crack 
Growth in Mooring Chains”, Appl. Sci., vol. 9, pp. 2187, 2019; 
doi:10.3390/app9112187. 
[5] D. Tonelli, M. Luchetta, F. Rossi, and P. Migliorino, “Structural 
Health Monitoring Based on Acoustic Emissions: Validation on a 
Prestressed Concrete Bridge Tested to Failure,” Sensors, vol. 20, pp. 
7272, 2020, doi:10.3390/s20247272. 
[6] J-X. Chen, J-W Li, C-C. Cheng, and C-W. Chiu, “Piezoelectric 
Property 
Enhancement 
of 
PZT/Poly(vinylidenefluoride-co-
trifluoroethylene) Hybrid Films for Flexible Piezoelectric Energy 
Harvesters,” ACS Omega, vol. 7, pp. 793−803, 2022. 
[7] R. Lay, G. S. Deijs, and J. Malmstrom, “The intrinsic piezoelectric 
properties of materials –a review with a focus on biological 
materials”, RSC Adv., vol. 11, pp. 30657, 2021. 
[8] J. E. Marshall, et al. “On the Solubility and Stability of 
Polyvinylidene Fluoride,” Polymers, vol. 13, Issue 9,  pp. 1354, 2021, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13091354. 
[9] Y. Bhuiyan, B. Lin, and V. Giurgiutiu, “Characterization of 
piezoelectric wafer active sensor for acoustic emission sensing,” 
Ultrasonics, vol. 92, pp. 35-49, 2019. 
[10] I. Chilibon, M. Mogildea, and G. Mogildea, “Wireless acoustic 
emission sensor device with microcontroller,” Edited by: R. Walczak, 
J. Dziuban, Conference: 26th European Conference on Solid-State 
Transducers (Eurosensors), September 2012. 
[11] A. Carpinteri, S. Invernizzi, and G. Lacidogna, “Historical brick-
masonry subjected to double flat-jack test: Acoustic emissions and 
scale effects on cracking density,” Construction and Building 
materials, vol. 23, Issue 8, pp. 2813-2820, August 2009. 
[12] J. Bohse, “Acoustic emission characteristics of micro-failure 
processes in polymer blends and composites,” Composites Science 
and 
Technology, 
vol. 
60(8), 
pp. 
1213–1226, 
2000,  
doi:10.1016/S0266-3538(00)00060-9. 
[13] K. M. Holford, M. J. Eaton, J. J. Hensman, R. Pullin, S. L. Evans, N. 
Dervilis, and K. Worden, “A new methodology for automating 
acoustic emission detection of metallic fatigue fractures in highly 
demanding aerospace environments: An overview,” Progress in 
Aerospace 
Science, 
vol. 
90, 
pp. 
1-11, 
April 
2017, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paerosci.2016.11.003. 
[14] S. Uppal, D. Yoshino, and H.I. Dunegang, “Using Acoustic Emission 
to Monitor Fatigue cracks on the Bridge at FAST,” Technology 
Digest, February 2002. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[15] K. Ono, “Calibration Methods of Acoustic Emission Sensors,” 
Materials, 
vol. 
 
9(7), 
pp. 
508, 
2016, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ma9070508. 
[16] I. Chilibon, “Metallic Structures Behaviour under Mechanical 
Stretches” 17th International Congress on Sound and Vibration 
(ICSV17), pp. 1-5, July 2010. 
 
 
 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

