A Miniaturized 4-Channel, 2KSa/sec Biosignal Data Recorder With 3-Axis 
Accelerometer and Infra-red Timestamp Function 
 
Jim Austin, Chris Bailey, 
Anthony Moulds,  
Garry Hollier, Michael Freeman 
Department of Computer Science 
University of York, UK 
jim.austin@york.ac.uk 
chrisb@cs.york.ac.uk 
anthony.moulds@york.ac.uk 
garry.hollier@york.ac.uk 
mike.freeman@york.ac.uk 
Jim Austin, Alex Fargus, 
Thomas Lampert 
Cybula Ltd, 
York, UK 
austin@cybula.com 
alex.fargus@york.ac.uk 
tom.lampert@hotmail.com 
 
 
 
Bettina Platt, Gernot Riedel 
University of Aberdeen,  
Institute of Medical Sciences 
Aberdeen, UK 
b.platt@abdn.ac.uk 
g.riedel@abdn.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we describe a miniature biosignal data 
sensor and recorder device, (NAT-1) with 3-axis accelerometer, 
and a 2KSa/sec all-channel recording capacity of 24 hours or 
more with a single zinc-air battery cell. The device measures 
less than 18x22mm and weighs less than 2.3 grams, including 
the battery. The device is evaluated in several contexts, 
including electroencephalography data collection, forearm 
electromyography capture, and in use as an accelerometer for 
movement capture in sport. We describe the device, its use, 
and show examples of some monitoring applications; in all 
cases, data is collected in an untethered stand-alone mode. The 
NAT-1 has already achieved translation to commercialization 
and is the first of a new family of sensors. 
Keywords-Neurophysiology; 
EEG 
Recorder; 
Bio-signal 
sensors;  Medical sensors. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The use of biosignal data acquisition is increasingly 
important in many applications spaces, not least of which is 
biomedical applications. The use of devices to record EEG 
(Electroencephalography), EMG (Electromyography), ECG 
(Electrocardiography) and movement is of particular interest. 
Often, these measurements are taken in wired or wireless 
umbilical modes, in other words, within a clinical evaluation 
setting, with data captured and analyzed over relatively short 
time windows, and in unnatural settings.  
The ability to perform ambulatory monitoring of patients, 
on the other hand, provides the possibility of long-duration 
data capture of bio-parameters in a normal living-condition 
or work-place. This has been an aim for many decades, and it 
is interesting to contrast how this has been achieved in past 
and present technologies; ranging from early magnetic tape 
based data capture [1], digital systems [2], Custom Integrated 
Circuits [3,4] and medical data recorders [5,6]. Such 
capabilities are identified by many clinical researchers as 
being desirable, and the opportunity to learn more about 
medical conditions, as well as the condition of individual 
patients themselves is seen as a major motivator for 
developing suitable devices.  
The motivation of our project “NAT” (Neural Activity 
Tracker) is to produce a multi-purpose data sensing and 
recording solution that is extremely small, lightweight and 
having a recording capacity of days to weeks, dependent 
upon the selection of parameters such as sample frequency. 
The NAT is such a device, and it is this which we describe in 
the remainder of this paper. We believe that the device, even 
in its current implementation, is capable of being used in 
many applications, including non-obtrusive use in wearable 
patient monitoring.  
This paper presents the NAT in detail in Sections 2, 3 
and 4, whilst Section 5 documents some initial experimental 
applications of the device. Section 6 highlights the additional 
resources developed alongside NAT, including docking 
station, control software and data analysis tools, and the 
infra-red data signature time-stamp daughterboard. A brief 
state-of-the-art context is given in Section 7, and conclusions 
in Section 8. 
II. 
A SMALL FORM-FACTOR DATA-RECORDER 
The Neural Activity Tracker (NAT) is a device only 
18x22mm in size, less than 10mm in height (primarily due to 
the battery module), and weighs less than 2.3 grams, which 
means it is attractive in applications where regulatory 
constraints apply (e.g., use with small animals). It is so light 
in weight that it is almost unnoticeable in normal use as a 
human-subject wearable body-sensor. This low-weight 
attribute also means that multiple devices can be worn 
individually or in small groups where appropriate, without 
causing encumbrance of the subject's normal movements and 
behavior. The NAT is shown in the image of Fig. 1, with a 
ball-point pen of normal size for scale.  In the photograph 
provided in Fig. 1, one can see some interesting features. 
First of all, the major part of the device has a profile of less 
than 4 mm. Also visible in Fig. 1 is a specially designed 
battery clip for housing a zinc-air cell (as used in hearing 
aids). This is the gold-plated metal structure. The use of 
flatter button cells can be envisaged to make a smaller profile 
possible, though this has weight implications.   
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 1. Top-view of NAT-1 device 
 
Figure 3a. Analogue Connector Port on NAT-1 Underside. 
 
Near the tip of the ball-point pen, one can see a small 
low-profile connector socket, which is actually a mezzanine 
daughterboard connector port. This permits a range of 
possible extension modules. Fig. 2 shows the system level 
block diagram.  
The NAT device comprises of three key components – a 
flash memory chip (largest chip in Fig. 1), a proprietary CPU 
(mid-sized chip of Fig. 1), and a proprietary MEMS 
(MicroElectroMechanical System) device for accelerometer 
(smallest chip of Fig. 1).  Additional analogue front-end 
components provide appropriate signal conditioning for the 
signal ranges typically encountered in a range of biosensor 
and biomedical applications. 
 
III. 
ZINC-AIR POWER CELL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 
A particular feature of NAT-1 is the use of a single zinc-
air power cell. Such cells are widely used in hearing aids, 
and have an active power-delivery life-span of around two 
weeks, after which the cell begins to lose its effectiveness. 
This degradation begins as soon as the air-seal is removed 
from the cell, but allows for long-duration continuous power 
delivery from a very small and light power cell.  
  
 
Figure 2. NAT Device – Sub-component Block Diagram. 
Figure 3b. Overhead view of NAT-1 and close-up of Daughterboard  
 
Because of the zinc-air reaction mode of power generation in 
the specific cell mentioned, it is not possible to draw power 
above a certain ceiling, which is limited by the capacity for 
air circulation into and out of the cell rather than its lifetime 
power delivery capacity. Consequently, it is necessary to 
spread power utilization to avoid frequent peak-power 
drainage. Failure to do so results in cell depletion and CPU 
brown-out. This is unlike a standard power-cell such as a 
button-cell, where current is limited by the device's ability to 
operate within a safe discharge rate rather than by a 
continuous power availability driven by an external reaction 
factor. Nonetheless, we have developed the NAT-1 with a 
continuous recording capacity in excess of 24 hours at full 
design-spec sample rates (see later power data for details).   
 
IV. 
DEVICE SPECIFICATIONS 
The NAT-1 has the specifications as outlined in Table 1. 
The device has a wide range of possible sample rates, 
ranging from 100Sa/sec to 2KSa/sec via the user interface 
software application. At 2KSa/sec, the device consumes 
4.8mA of current from a single 1.4-volt cell, and can record 
for up to 12 hours. An 8-GBit flash option is possible and 
would have up to 24 Hours of recording capacity at 
maximum rates. At lower sample rates, the capacity of the 
 
 
 
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

flash is extended to many days, and power consumption 
reduces to allow for longer recording times. This compares 
well with reported state of the art [3,4], given that the 
system is comprised of readily available commodity 
integrated circuits. The device has three important 
connection mechanisms, these being the analog input 
connector (angled connector block to left of device in Fig. 
3a), the daughterboard extension socket (Fig.3b) and the 
docking-shoe connectors (seen in Fig. 3a as small gold 
contacts at the board corners). 
V. 
DEVICE USEAGE EVALUATIONS 
To date, most of the testing of the device has been limited 
to engineering development contexts, but using live EEG 
and EMG data collection with additional test scenarios. This 
does not include validation in a clinical certification context.  
Three 
test 
scenarios 
are 
reported. 
EEG 
and 
Accelerometer data collection from mice in live test 
scenarios has been undertaken by researchers at the 
University of Aberdeen. This work continues and will build 
a validation case for clinical use. We have undertaken 
preliminary EMG testing scenarios at the University of 
York, mainly to evaluate the signal range suitability for gel-
electrode signal capture. 
 
TABLE I.  NAT-1 SPECIFICATIONS 
Parameter 
Limits 
Units 
Analogue inputs 
4 
channels 
Bits per channel 
recorded 
11 
bits 
Accelerometer 
3 
Axis 
Bits per Accel. Axis 
8 
bits 
Sample rate (max) 
2000 
Sa/Sec x 4 ch 
Max Current   2KSa/s 
 500Sa/s 
4.8 
2.4 
mA 
mA 
Data Capacity 
4 or 8 
Gbits 
Recording Time   
at 2KSa/Sec 
12 or 24 
Hours 
Analogue Range 
± 1000 
± 4000 
uV  (NAT-1) 
uV  (NAT-2) 
Accelerometer range 
Selectable 
2 or 8 
G (G-force) 
Accelerometer 
sensitivity 
18 
72 
mG at 2G range 
mG at 8G range 
To test the accelerometer capabilities, the device has been 
used as a golf-club attachment to capture golf swing 
behaviors in terms of club rotation, side-movement and 
swing-path motion. In all cases, the device was used 
untethered and powered exclusively with a single zinc-air 
cell. These cases are shown in our test data of Figs. 4a, 4b, 
4c and 4d, and are described in the following sub-sections. 
A. EEG Measurements 
Data has been captured with a wide range of sample 
rates, ranging from below 200Sa/sec to 2000Sa/sec. Whilst 
it is generally accepted that useful frequency ranges for 
EEG are in the region below a few hundred Hertz, the 
advantage of a higher frequency sampling regime comes 
from the ability to determine precise timing and time-
separation of events, either within the EEG and 
Accelerometer data streams, or from an external trigger 
action. The NAT-1 has an extension board that can record 
Infra-Red-Timecodes within the data stream and this can be 
used to record trigger events and subsequent EEG responses 
with high accuracy in the time domain. Higher frequency 
sampling also allows for improved noise performance, since 
downsampling and digital filtering can be applied to the data 
stream after capture.   
Experimentally, it has been found that the device 
performs well with mice as subjects, as expected. Rats 
however have a larger EEG signal range, and the NAT-1 
device was originally not designed for this purpose. 
However, the NAT team is currently implementing a new 
programmable gain function to permit a wider range of 
signal input ranges to be captured without saturation or 
clipping artifacts. This NAT-2 device is undergoing testing 
at the time of writing and is not reported here.  Examples of 
mouse EEG data captured with NAT-1 are given in Fig. 4a, 
which also shows accelerometer and IR-event code side 
channel. It can be seen that the IR event code correlates to 
regions of increased EEG activity. This NAT-evaluation 
data was provided by a well-established team with a long 
experience of using rodent EEG data recorders [7,8,9]. 
B. EMG Measurements 
Initial experimentations with EMG measurement are 
promising. The device was attached to a subject's forearm 
and used to measure repeated muscle contraction-relaxation 
cycles and simultaneously record 3-axis accelerometer 
readings. The device was connected directly to standard 
clinical Ag/AgCl disposable adhesive surface electrodes. 
Again, the NAT-1 was not originally intended for this 
application, but we wished to evaluate its potential and 
identify improvements required.  For this experiment, no pre-
amplification or attenuation was applied to the electrode 
feeds, and as would be expected this means that the signal 
range captured does not perfectly match the analogue input 
range of the NAT-1 device in this initial setup. Nonetheless, 
it can be seen in Fig. 4a, that the muscle contraction results 
in repeatable EMG signals. It is also seen in Fig. 4a that 
clipping occurs frequently.  
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure-4a. Electromyography test case, repeated bicep contraction regime, with gel-electrode contact. 
Figure 4b. EEG data collection in tandem with 2-Axis Accelerometer. And Infra-Red Pulse Code Recording.  
(top trace – IR channel, mid - 2 axes of accelerometer , and bottom – 4 EEG channels) 
In this experimental set-up with no attempt to pre-scale 
the input signal to the NAT-1 input range, it is not surprising 
to see this effect. The revised device, which incorporates 
programmable gain features, will allow for such signal 
measurements to be properly scaled and ranged to permit 
full-scale capture without clipping. The combination of 
accelerometer, and EMG recording in a very small 
lightweight package make this an attractive device for 
monitoring of symptoms such as essential tremor,  
Parkinson's disease, and other symptoms. That application 
will be a high priority for the York group’s future focus. 
C. Golf-Swing Accelerometry 
This experiment was conducted in order to gather 
accelerometer data with a full-scale and saturation 
condition, including under extreme-G conditions. The 
device survived intact and retained battery supply integrity 
throughout the testing, due to the specially designed battery 
retaining clip. It might have been expected that the extreme 
forces of impact might lead to physical battery disconnects. 
However, no evidence was observed in the test data, 
indicating that the clip was highly effective. 
 
 
 
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. Top-view of NAT-1 device  
Figure 4c. Accelerometer data collection for Golf Club Swing Test (Sample rates set to 1500 Hz, with (right) Spectral Plots using Welch function) 
   The sensor was attached to a golf club at the mid-point of 
the club shaft (not at the head). This provides a good 
measurement point to permit shaft-rotation to be measured 
on one axis, the back/forward swing on a second axis, and 
any side motion to be captured by a third axis. The data was 
gathered from 100 golf-swings of varied competence. 
Examples are shown in Fig. 4c.  
The golf data can be examined and can be seen to 
represent a back-swing and drive, followed by impact. This 
data was further analyzed using a spectral analysis method to 
yield the spectral time-series graphs shown in Fig. 4d. The 
data was processed using a Welch algorithm [10] and Hann 
windowing function [11]. 
VI. 
DOCKING STATION, ANALYSIS TOOLS, AND 
EXTENSION DAUGHTER BOARDS 
The NAT device has the advantage of being provided 
with a bespoke docking station, for download of data from 
flash via USB. This is illustrated in Fig. 5. Once 
downloaded, the data can be processed using Cybula Ltd 
Signal Data Explorer software suite, which can be trained to 
perform auto detection and classification of signal behaviors 
and events (see screenshot in Fig. 6). The device 
programming tool is shown in Fig. 7, and shows a screenshot 
of the user interface allowing programmability of a wide 
range of device features. 
 
 
 
 
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

A final aspect of the current NAT-1 system suite is the 
infra-red time-code recording daughterboard. This extremely 
small add-on (see Fig. 8 for a picture of devices with coin for 
scale) allows recording of an infrared pulse code stream 
along-side the analogue channels and accelerometer.  
For NAT-1 devices, one accelerometer axis is sacrificed 
to permit IR time-stamping data recording. The pulse codes 
recorded are generated from a custom IR key-coding 
terminal or from triggered sensors in a maze, for example. 
These may be decoded later by software data analysis.  
Future developments for the daughterboard connector 
could include RF telemetry functions. It is also possible to 
use the daughterboard connector to act as a micro-backplane 
to permit multiple NAT-1 devices to be ganged and 
synchronized to perform something like 16 or 32 channel 
acquisition, by linking multiple NATs in a synchronization.  
 
VII. BRIEF CONTEXT AND STATE OF THE ART 
The use of ambulatory EEG monitoring, be it in animal 
behavior studies or in human patients, is increasingly 
valuable. This has importance for the role of extended out-
patient monitoring of EEG as a diagnostic aid and guide to 
treatment [12,13]. Recent work in this field includes many 
wireless approaches to ambulatory monitoring, but these are 
effectively 'tethered' via a secondary monitoring or 
recording station [14,15]. Recent literature reports an 8-
channel EEG sensor node which “measures 35mm x 30mm 
x 5mm excluding Li-ion battery” [14], and power 
consumption in the range of 27-42mW, implying around 
35mW for a four-channel system. The NAT, in contrast, 
consumes 
approximately 
3.4mW 
with 
a 
4-channel 
500Sa/sec sampling regime. This is in part due to the 
elimination of wireless connection, though the use context 
of the two devices do not completely overlap – NAT is 
primarily designed for offline data analysis. Meanwhile, a 
full-ASIC dedicated solution can outperform NAT in terms 
of power consumption [15]; but, again, this generally 
requires a wirelessly tethered auxiliary system in the locale 
of the patient at all times to receive data. On-board 
classification and signal event detection has been used to 
reduce the RF overhead in some devices and systems, such 
as on-board seizure detection [4]. However, there is 
significant benefit in having a continuous recording of live 
data and especially where the purpose is to gather data to 
inform the development of such diagnostic/classification 
approaches. 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND ONGOING WORK 
We believe that the NAT-1 is a versatile and very 
compact device, with a low weight and long-duration high 
frequency recording capacity. Its application in areas such as 
EEG, EMG and in more complex monitoring scenarios,  
such as tremor-motion and EMG signaling in patients with 
conditions, such as Parkinson's disease, are the areas of 
greatest interest for this project.  
 
Figure 5. NAT USB docking station 
Figure 6. SDE (Signal Data explorer) Software toolset developed by 
York/Cybula 
Figure 7. Control Panel Umbilical software showing typical device 
configuration parameter entry panel. 
 
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 8. NAT Infra-red Receiver Daughter-Board 
 
The York team [16] and partners CYBULA Ltd. [17] are 
very interested in developing collaborative partnerships and 
would welcome enquiries from prospective evaluators and 
end-users. 
Current improvements are focusing upon a revised device 
design with individually programmable channel gain 
capabilities. This will allow a wider range of applications 
and signal ranges to be accepted by the device without the 
clipping observed in our preliminary EMG tests for example. 
It also allows for the possibility of multi-sensor recording, 
with for example scalp electrode EEG on several channels 
and EMG input with different gain settings on another 
channel. 
The device has also been operated in a live-streaming 
mode, and to date this has allowed the development of a 
monitoring station for observing signal behaviors acquired 
by the device in situ.  
Finally, the use of multiple devices is an area we have 
further interest in expanding. Ganging of multiple devices 
with synchronization via the expansion connector would 
allow arbitrary channel combinations, whilst in a live 
streaming mode, acquiring and logging data from multiple 
devices simultaneously is possible (though the device is 
ultimately intended as an untethered ambulatory system 
unit). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The NAT-1 device has been developed through a number of 
collaborative activities, including Cybula Ltd, University of 
York, and University of Aberdeen.  We are also grateful for 
the support of the UK Government’s Technology Strategy 
Board funding agency in supporting the development of the 
device.  
REFERENCES 
[1]  J. R. Ives and J. F. Woods, “4-Channel 24 hour cassette recorder for 
long-term EEG monitoring of ambulatory patients,” Journal of  
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 39.1, 1975, 
pp. 88-92. 
[2]  A. L. Vyssotski, A. N. Serkov, P. M. Itskov, G. Dell'Omo, A. V. 
Latanov, D. P. Wolfer, and H. P. Lipp, “Miniature neurologgers for 
flying pigeons: multichannel EEG and action and field potentials in 
combination with GPS recording,” Journal of Neurophysiology, vol. 
95, no. 2, 2006,  pp. 1263-1273. 
[3]  R. F. Yazicioglu, P. Merken, R. Puers, and C. Van Hoof,  “A 200μW 
eight-channel acquisition ASIC for ambulatory EEG systems,” Solid-
State Circuits Conference, 2008. ISSCC 2008, San Francisco.  IEEE 
International Digest of Technical Papers, Feb 2008,  pp. 164,603. 
[4]  N. Verma, A. Shoeb, J. V. Guttag, and A. P. Chandrakasan, "A 
Micro-power EEG acquisition SoC with integrated seizure detection 
processor for continuous patient monitoring,", Symposium on VLSI 
Circuits, Kyoto, Japan,  2009,  pp. 62,63. 
[5] 
E. 
Waterhouse, 
“New 
horizons 
in 
ambulatory 
electroencephalography,” IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Magazine, vol. 22, no. 3,  2003,  pp. 74-80. 
[6] 
J. Fu-Shan, Y. Tseng, and J. Jang, “Modular design of a long-term 
portable recorder for physiological signals,” Measurement, vol. 43, 
no. 10, 2010,  pp. 1363-1368. 
[7]  A. Jyoti, A. Plano, G. Riedel, and B. Platt, “EEG, Activity, and Sleep 
Architecture in a Transgenic AβPP swe/PSEN1 A246E Alzheimer's 
Disease Mouse,”  Journal of Alzheimer's Disease, vol. 22, no. 3, 
2010, pp. 873-887. 
[8]  B. Platt, B. Drever, D. Koss, S. Stoppelkamp, A. Jyoti, A. Plano, A. 
Utan, G. Merrick, D. Ryan, V. Melis, H. Wan, M. Mingarelli, E. 
Porcu, L. Scrocchi, A. Welch, and G. Riedel, “B, PLB1,” PloS one, 
vol. 6, no. 11, 2011,  pp. 1-13. 
[9]  B. Platt, B. Drever, D. Koss, S. Stoppelkamp, A. Jyoti, A. Plano, A. 
Utan, G. Merrick, D. Ryan, V. Melis, H. Wan, M. Mingarelli, E. 
Porcu, L. Scrocchi, A. Welch, and G. Riedel, “Epidural EEG 
Recordings Using Microchips in Behavioral Context,” Proceedings of 
Measuring Behavior 2010, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, August  
2010,  pp. 26-29. 
[10]  P. D. Welch, "The Use of Fast Fourier Transform for the Estimation 
of Power Spectra: A Method Based on Time Averaging Over Short, 
Modified 
Periodograms," 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Audio 
Electroacoustics, (AU-15,1967),  pp.70–73. 
[11]  F. J. Harris, "On the use of windows for harmonic analysis with the 
discrete Fourier transform," Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 66, no. 1, 
January 1978,  pp. 51,83. 
[12]  S. A. Rizvi, J. F. Téllez-Zenteno, S. L. Crawford, and A. Wu, 
“Outpatient ambulatory EEG as an option for epilepsy surgery 
evaluation instead of inpatient EEG telemetry,” Epilepsy & Behavior 
Case Reports, vol. 1, 2013, pp. 39-41. 
[13]  H. J. Faulkner, H. Arima, and A Mohamed, “The utility of prolonged 
outpatient ambulatory EEG,” Seizure, vol. 21, no. 7, 2012, pp. 491-
495. 
[14]  S. Patki, B. Grundlehner, A. Verwegen, S. Mitra, J. Xu, A. 
Matsumoto, R. F. Yazicioglu, and J. Penders, “Wireless EEG system 
with real time impedance monitoring and active electrodes,” IEEE  
Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS), Hsinchu, 
Taiwan, 2012,  pp. 108,111. 
[15]  S. Mitra, X. Jiawe, A. Matsumoto, K. A. A. Makinwa, C. Van Hoof,  
and F. Yazicioglu, “A 700µW 8-channel EEG/contact-impedance 
acquisition system for dry-electrodes,” 2012 Symposium on VLSI 
Circuits (VLSIC), Honolulu, Hawaii,  2012,  pp. 68-69 
[16] Advanced 
Computer 
Architectures 
Group 
(ACAG). 
www.cs.york.ac.uk/arch  , last accessed  07/29//2013. 
[17] Cybula Limited. UK Limited Company. www.cybula.com , last 
accessed  07/29/2013. 
 
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

