Sensor Based Risk Assessment for the Supply of
Dangerous Products
Laurent Gomez
SAP Research France
Sophia Antipolis, France
Email:laurent.gomez@sap.com
Omar Gaci
ISEL
Le Havre, France
Email: omar.gaci@gmail.com
Jean Pierre Deutsch
LogPro Conseil
Paris, France
Email: jpdeutsch@logpro.fr
Elie El-Khoury
3Cap Technologies
Stuttgart, Germany
Email: elie.el-khoury@3cap.de
Abstract—As a consequence of globalisation, supply chain
systems recently evolved toward a dynamic network of ﬁrms
and industries. This complexiﬁcation of supply chain processes
raises several challenges in particular with respect to compliance
to regulations (e.g., safety, security). With the multiplication of
intermediate actors, a single non-compliant actor might jeopar-
dize the safety of population and actors involved in supply chain
process. There is, therefore, a clear need for risk management
in order to mitigate the occurence of potential threats due to
non compliance to regulation at the execution of the supply
chain process. Traditionnal approaches tend to rely on human
operators checks, or collection of contextual information from
sensors locally (e.g., warehouse, truck). Therefore, there is risk
of a disruption of regulation checks along the process execution.
In this paper, we propose the delegation of risk assessment to
sensor nodes, attached to the supplied products, for an automatic
risk assessment all along the supply chain execution. Empowered
with monitoring capabilities, sensor nodes are meant to trigger
alert in case of contextual constraint violation along the supply
chain. Our goal is to raise the awareness of the supply chain
players with an early alerting service to enforce the regulations.
Index Terms—Supply Chain Management, Sensor Networks,
Security.
I. INTRODUCTION
The globalization of trade has been accompanied by a
growth of the number of intermediate partners involved in the
supply chain. Those intermediate partners are mainly in charge
of transportation or storage of products. As a consequence, the
risk of disruption of the supply chain increases. For example,
the supply of chemical substances raises risks of ﬁre, explosion
and environmental pollution. In order to mitigate those risks,
and prevent any serious impact on population safety, safety
regulations are in place, at international and national levels.
Those risks might have a strong impact on population safety, or
on the environment. Supply chain players have to be complaint
with those regulations which impose them handling, transport
and storage constraints on chemicals.
A. Disruption of compliance checks
There is, therefore, a clear need for compliance check at
the execution of the supply chain. It is common practice in
supply chain that each actor performs local regulation checks,
in particular within storage unit, for example for SEVESO
[1] classiﬁed sites. Measures for risk of ﬁre, gas emission,
detection of theft are already put in place locally. But, those
measures only concern local checks since tracking and mon-
itoring information are pushed to local supply chain systems
only. We have therefore a disruption of regulation checks, as
tracking and monitoring information are not forwarded to all
the supply chain actors. For example, in the case of ambient
temperature reaches chemical ﬂash point during transportation,
the storage unit receives the asset, without being informed of
the inherent risk of explosion. Depending on the actors, those
regulation checks, on temperature for example, are strongly
dependent on the certiﬁcation of the actors. For a site classiﬁed
SEVESO II, like the K+N’s [2] warehouse, strong measures on
over heating, gas emission, or chemical leaking monitoring are
put in place. But, this is not the case for all the actors involved
in the supply chain. Therefore, we observe a disruption of
the regulation checks, while each actor is focusing on its
own compliance with regulations, with a different degree of
implication, depending on their certiﬁcation. To that extent,
non compliance of a single actor might have a direct or
indirect impact on the safety of the overall supply chain. For
example, for a chemical, we might have a risk of explosion of
a product which has been exposed to high temperature during
transportation. When stored in the K+N’s warehouse, the
explosion risk remains for a while, until the temperature of the
product goes back to normal. As a conclusion, it is difﬁcult for
supply chain management systems to evaluate continuously,
without any disruption, the risk of incident occurrence.
B. Delegation of risk assessment to sensor nodes
Any disruption of regulation check might jeopardize the
execution of the supply chain process. Therefore continuous
risk assessment is critical for supply chain management sys-
tems. But, so far, risk assessment have been addressed only
locally, within each unit of the supply chain. Meaning that
non compliance of previous actor of the process can have a
direct or non direct impact of the compliance with regulations.
In order to cope with the disruption of risk assessment at the
execution of the supply chain process, we propose to delegate
risk assessment to sensor nodes attached to the products. Em-
powered with monitoring capabilities, wireless sensor nodes
can evaluate continuously, and at runtime, the compliance with
regulations. Sensor nodes are therefore capable of continuous
evaluation of any mismatch between product’s context and the
constraints deﬁned by regulations. To that extend, they support
342
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

us with early detection of risks.
C. Outline
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: in
Section II, we describe a supply chain scenario motivating
our approach. In Section III, we discuss related work with
respect to regulation compliance at the execution of the supply
chain. Section IV is dedicated to our approach: delegation of
compliance checks to sensor nodes. In Section V, we evaluate
our approach. Finally, we conclude in Section VI.
II. IMPORTATION OF DANGEROUS PRODUCTS FROM CHINA
TO EUROPE
In order to illustrate our approach, we propose to use a
supply chain scenario deﬁned in the scope of the RESCUEIT
[3] project. Related to the importation of dangerous products
from China to Europe, this scenario has been elaborated and
validated by end users such as Kuehne and Nagel (K+N) and
the group Casino [4].
Chemicals are imported from a Chinese harbour toward
the harbour of Le Havre, in France. Shipped products are
household and gardening chemicals. These products are meant
to be shipped by boat from a Chinese harbour. When received
at the Le Havre harbour, the merchandise is checked by
customs against REACH [5] regulations.
REACH is the European Community Regulation on chem-
icals and their safe use (EC 1907/2006) [5]. It deals with
the registration, evaluation, authorisation and restriction of
chemical substances. The aim of REACH is to provide an
additional layer of protection for humans and the environment
through the better and earlier identiﬁcation of the intrinsic
properties of chemical substances. To that extend, REACH
introduces speciﬁc constraints on chemicals along the supply
chain. They include the ﬂash point, incompatibilities between
products, and humidity conditions for chemicals.
At the Le Havre harbour, French customs with the support
of an Approved Economic Operator [6] proceed to a merchan-
dise integrity check. After a check of administrative document
describing the content of the cargo, customs verify the quantity
and quality of the products received.
Once quality checks have been performed at Le Havre
harbour, and customs have veriﬁed that the merchandise is
compliant with safety regulations, products are shipped by
pickup trucks toward the warehouse located close to Savigny
le Temple. This K+N warehouse,dedicated to the storage of
dangerous products, is classiﬁed SEVESO II. This classiﬁca-
tion deﬁnes a set of safety management systems, emergency
planning and land-use planning and a reinforcement of the
provisions on inspections to be carried out by classiﬁed sites.
In this case, speciﬁc safety measures are implemented on site,
such as storage rules (e.g. limited quantity of chemical stored
at the same place). Finally, household and gardening products
are distributed to retailers (e.g., Casino supermarket).
A. Identiﬁed products constraints
In the scope of this scenario, we identify three gardening
and household products ICPE-classiﬁed. ICPE [7] is a French
nomenclature for ”Installation Classee pour la Protection de
l’Environnement”. This classiﬁcation deﬁnes a set a measures
to be enforced for the handling, storage and transport of dan-
gerous products. Each of the identiﬁed products has speciﬁc
normative ICPE constraints: ICPE 1412, 1432, 1172.
Inﬂammable liquids are classiﬁed under ICPE 1412. In order
to manipulate this product, gloves, glasses, a protective cloth-
ing, helmet and eye wash are mandatory. Products classiﬁed
1412 are a harmful and polluting products. Its ﬂash point
is 66 Celsius degrees. The ﬂash point of a volatile liquid
is the lowest temperature at which it can vaporize to form
an ignitable mixture in air. In addition, this type of product
must not be mixed with acids, bases or oxidizing. In addition,
it is self ﬂammable in large quantity at high temperatures.
Therefore, in addition to risks of pollution along the supply
chain, this product represents a signiﬁcant risk of ﬁre, if
exposed to high temperature. In order to mitigate this risk,
monitoring of ambient temperature is crucial.
ICPE 1432 products are liqueﬁed gas inﬂammable. To
manipulate this type of product, gloves, classes, protective
clothing, wash eye, are mandatory. With respect to transport,
they are classiﬁed UN 1950 or aerosol, with the mention of the
restricted quantity, and a tag code 2.1-5F. Their ﬂash point is
between 13 and 13,4 Celsius degrees. It must not be in contact
with acids and metal. Same as for ICPE 1412 products, in
order to mitigate risk of ﬁre, it is important to monitor ambient
temperature.
Products classiﬁed as ICPE 1172 are dangerous for environ-
ment, extremely toxic for aquatic organisms. Gloves, classes,
mask, and eye wash are required for the handling of Ronstar.
Ronstar is classiﬁed UN 3007. In addition, this is irritant.
Packaging of Ronstar is classiﬁed type III.
For transport, those dangerous products are classiﬁed UN
3082 [8], meaning dangerous products for the environment.
UN code is four digit used for the transport of dangerous
products. As this type of products is considered as slightly dan-
gerous, packaging of type III is mandatory, with the mention of
the restricted quantity. We therefore identiﬁed three additional
constraints: shock, falling, opening. Shock and fall deal with
any shock, falls occuring to the product, pallet or container,
which might damage the product. Regarding opening, it refers
to any attempt to product theft with the opening of container
or packaging.
Table I summarizes identiﬁed constraints per ICPE classiﬁ-
cation. Those constraints are meant to be monitored by sensor
nodes.
B. Impacts
In case of accidents along the supply chain, the impact on
population safety, and on the environment can be disastrous.
We identiﬁed three major impacts: ﬁre, gas emission, disper-
sion of extinction waters.
343
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Classiﬁcation
Shock
Falling
Opening
Flash Point
ICPE 1412
X
X
X
13C
ICPE 1432
X
X
X
66C
ICPE 1172
X
X
X
-
TABLE I
IDENTIFIED CONSTRAINTS PER CLASSIFICATION
Depending on its intensity, ﬁre can have more or less serious
impact on individual health (e.g., slightly burning to death). In
addition, merchandises and their packaging are combustible.
They both have a strong caloriﬁc potential. In case of ﬁre,
the combustion of stored products would cause an important
radiation of heating ﬂux through the other storage areas in
the warehouse. Toxic gases are also emitted in case of ﬁre.
Depending on the quantity of emitted gas, the effects on
individuals can be lethal. In addition, under the effect of heat,
dangerous products can cause the emission of toxic gas such as
hydro-cyanic acid, oxides of sulphur. Fire ﬁghters use speciﬁc
products in order to extinguish ﬁre. Those products (e.g., water
plus chemical, powder, foam) contains chemical which aim at
either decreasing the heat, or stiﬂing the ﬁre. Nevertheless
those products drain polluting products which must not be
thrown into the environment (e.g., river). Such incident may
cause pollution of ground, underground or surface waters. It
is therefore important to handle properly liquids used for ﬁre
extinstion in order to avoid them to be thrown outside of the
building.
III. RELATED WORK
Automatic risk evaluation and propagation is currently an
active topic in research institutions and industries alike. How-
ever, few works have been done over the automation of risk
assessment for reasons related to human and technological
limitations.
Aagedal et al.
[9] introduced the CORAS project, which
aims to provide methods and tools for precise, unambiguous,
and efﬁcient risk assessment of security critical systems. The
focus of this project is on the tight integration of viewpoint-
oriented modelling in the risk assessment process. Risk eval-
uation is done by determining the level of risk, categorize
it, determine the interrelationships between risk themes, and
prioritize the resulting risks themes. Although the CORAS
addresses security-critical systems in general, it is interesting
to note the risk assessment methodology used. In fact the
authors use a model-based risk assessment.
Ivanov and Sokolov [10] focused their work on assessing
and controlling the risks related to container supply chains
(CSCs). However, due to the complexity of the risks in
the chains, conventional quantitative risk assessment (QRA)
methods may not be capable of providing sufﬁcient safety
management information, as achieving such a functionality
requires enabling the possibility of conducting risk analysis
in view of the challenges and uncertainties posed by the
unavailability and incompleteness of historical failure data.
Combining the fuzzy set theory (FST) and an evidential rea-
soning (ER) approach, the paper presents a subjective method
to deal with the vulnerability-based risks, which are more
ubiquitous and uncertain than the traditional hazard-based ones
in the chains.
Wagner and Neshat [11] discussed the disruptions that
occur more frequently and with more serious consequences.
During and after supply chain disruptions, companies may lose
revenue and incur high recovery costs. If the capability of
measuring and managing supply chain vulnerability existed,
they could reduce the number of disruptions and their impact.
In this paper the authors developed an approach based on
graph theory to quantify and therefore mitigate supply chain
vulnerability. Although the approach seems promising, its
applicability depends heavily on the availability of quantiﬁed
data for the drivers of supply chain vulnerability. Without
grounded data this method will not work. Additionally, the
graph theoretical approach may not fully take into account
the dynamic nature of supply chain vulnerability. Graphs are
perhaps too static to be able to answer the dynamic changes
in the supply chain at runtime.
IV. OUR APPROACH
A. Integration of Wireless Sensor Netwroks into Supply Chain
As depicted in Figure 2, whereas RFID are used for products
tracking, sensor nodes can be used at different levels of the
supply chain. Depending on the product value, sensor node
can be used either at product level, packaging or pallet. In the
scope of the RESCUEIT project [3], we have validated this
assumption with end users of the project, K+N and the Casino
Group. As we are addressing only low valuable products (e.g.,
household, gardening products), tagging RFID and sensor
monitoring is done at pallet level.
Whereas RFID is rather focusing on identiﬁcation of prod-
ucts (e.g., identiﬁcation, classiﬁcation), WSNs (Wireless Sen-
sor Networks) are meant to monitor and control the supply
chain environment. To some extent, RFID are not restricted to
unique identiﬁcation of products along the supply chain, but
can be associated to information related to the classiﬁcation,
and dangerousness of products. Based on those classiﬁcations,
and with regards to the regulations (e.g., safety, quality), the
handling, storage, and transport constraints are identiﬁed. In
this context, WSNs are meant to enforce those constraints
(e.g., incompatibilities with other products, ﬂash points).
Based on the sensed supply chain context at runtime, sensors
tend to evaluate mismatches between the constraints deﬁned by
regulations and the current context. Any violation of constraint
is therefore reported to the supply chain management system
as a risk of incident.
B. Terminology
Supply chain management systems are in charge of the
delivery of products, or assets, to ﬁnal customers. Depending
on its classiﬁcation, speciﬁc regulations deﬁne constraints
along the supply chain, based on the activity on the assets (e.g.,
storage, transport, transformation). Therefore, regulations vary
from one activity to another. A constraint on the stability of
344
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 2.
Integration of RFID and WSN into Supply Chain
rack is only applicable in storage location for example. The
non-compliance with regulations might lead to risky situation.
For example, considering the ﬂash point of product classiﬁed
ICPE 1412, the following constraint is deﬁned: temperature
must not exceed 13 Celsius degrees. Whenever this constraint
is fullﬁlled, then the risk of explosion increases. This example
illustrates the relationship between the constraint and the
context. Context is any kind of information which characterizes
the environment of the asset. For the sake of clarity, we
deﬁne the notation of asset, classiﬁcation, constraint, activity,
context, and risk as follows:
• asset is any product, or merchandise manipulated along
the supply chain toward ﬁnal customer. Assets are char-
acterised by their classiﬁcation.
• constraint is a representation of regulations over a speciﬁc
asset, based on its classiﬁcation.
• An activity is any steps in the supply chain, from pro-
duction to delivery to ﬁnal customer, including transfor-
mation, loading in palett, trucks, or rack.
• context is any type of information characterising the
environment of an asset along the supply chain.
• risk is the probability that an incident occurs in the supply
chain, due to a non compliance with regulations.
In Figure 1, we identify the following relationships: con-
straints, based on regulation, depend on asset classiﬁcation
and activity along the supply chain execution. For example,
constraints on the stability of palett containing chemicals is
to be fullﬁled during storage activity. In addition, risk is
depending on mismatch betwen constraints on products and
their context in the supply chain. If a constraint on temperature
is deﬁned, the probability of incident occurence is depending
on a violation with the context of the asset.
C. Methodology
As depicted in Figure 3, our approach is organised around
the four following steps: (i) constraints extraction, (ii) node
conﬁguration, (iii) in-node risk evaluation, and (iv) node
alerting. At (i) constraint extraction, constraints over product
classiﬁcation and supply chain activity are deﬁned. For that
purpose, regulations (e.g., safety, quality) are evaluated in
order to extract per asset classiﬁcation (e.g., chemicals, food),
and per supply chain activity (e.g., transportation, storage) a
set of constraints. For efﬁciency reasons, this task is meant to
be performed outside of the node. At (ii) node conﬁguration,
the identiﬁed constraints are therefore pushed to sensor nodes
attached to assets. Once pushed on nodes, those constraints
are evaluated in real time by the sensor nodes during the (iii)
in-node risk evaluation step. Whenever a sensor observes a
mismatch between the current context and its set of constraints,
it triggers an alert ((iv) node alerting).
D. Constraint deﬁnition
In Section II-A, we identify a set of constraints to be moni-
tored depending on products’ classiﬁcation. Those constraints
can be related to temperature, shock and container opening
as depicted in Table I. While extracted from regulation, there
are represented in an XML format. That XML representation
is mapped product’s classiﬁcation, extracted from the regula-
tions. In that context, we distinguish two types of constraints:
monitoring and alerting ones. Monitoring constraint deals with
regular monitoring of a given type of information, such as
temperature.
<event>
<name>Monitoring</name>
<description>Monitoring Temperature every second</description>
<monitoring>
<sensorType>TEMPERATURE</sensorType>
<sampleRate>00:00:01</sampleRate>
</monitoring>
</event>
Alerting constraints deﬁne threshold over given sensor data
type. Whenever that threshold is reached, an alert is triggered
by the node. In addition, we deﬁne a notion of temporality on
alert. An alert is triggered by the node only if the constraint
is violated for a given time, for example light above threshold
for 15 seconds in a raw.
<event>
<name>CO</name>
<description>Container opened.</description>
<alert>
<delayBetweenNotifications>00:00:30</delayBetweenNotifications>
<constraintType>TEMPORAL</constraintType>
<timePeriod>00:00:15</timePeriod>
<expression>
<constraint>
<sensorType>LIGHT</sensorType>
<compareOperator>GREATERTHAN</compareOperator>
<value>1900</value>
</constraint>
</expression>
</alert>
</event>
Finally, we enable combination of constraints. Combination
of simple constraints enables an abstract of a constraint on the
node. In the following example, we deﬁne a constraint, that
if it is violated, trigger an alert for container overturn. This
abstract constraint is based on acceleration monitoring.
<event>
<name>PO</name>
<description>Container has overturned.</description>
<alert>
<delayBetweenNotifications>00:00:30</delayBetweenNotifications>
<constraintType>NONTEMPORAL</constraintType>
<expression>
<expression>
<expression>
<constraint>
<sensorType>ACCELX</sensorType>
<compareOperator>GREATERTHAN</compareOperator>
<value>1000</value>
</constraint>
</expression>
<binaryOperator>OR</binaryOperator>
<expression>
345
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 1.
Terminology
Fig. 3.
In-node risk evaluation process
<constraint>
<sensorType>ACCELX</sensorType>
<compareOperator>LOWERTHAN</compareOperator>
<value>-1000</value>
</constraint>
</expression>
</expression>
...
</alert>
</event>
E. Constraint evaluation
Sensor nodes have restricted resources available. XML
processing is barely performed on such devices. For that
reason, we need a speciﬁc representation of an constraint on
the node. On the one hand, the representation must have a
low memory cost and, on the other hand, its representation
must be easily executable on an embedded device. A set of
constraints is therefore represented on the node with:
• a set of simple constraint: Each constraint follows the
template
[SensorType]
[Operator]
[Value]
[TypeofConstrainst]
[<TemporalValue>]
(e.g., A = ”Alert if Temperature GreaterThan 20”,Alert
if Alert if Temperature GreaterThan 20”,Alert if Temper-
ature GreaterThan 20”, B = ”Alert if Tilt LowerThan 50
for more than 5 seconds” ).
• bytecode: that describe the execution of simple con-
straints.
The bytecode is inspired from the RPN (Reverted Polish
Notation). Each operator follows their operands. (e.g., if A
and B are simple constraint, the evaluation of ”A AND B”
will be written as ”A B AND”). The interpretation is stack-
based; that is, operands are pushed onto a stack, and when an
operation is performed, its operands are popped from a stack
and its result pushed back on. In the bytecode, we support
three operands: AND, OR, and NOT.
On regular basis, the monitoring node collects all available
ambient information (e.g., noise, temperature). It evaluates
each simple constraint, and afterwards executes the loaded
bytecode. If a violation in the combination of simple constraint
is identiﬁed, an alert is sent to the SCM system.
F. Architecture
Figure 4 depicts our overall architecture. It is organised
around three layers: supply chain management, mediation
layer, and wireless sensor networks.
Supply chain management systems aim at monitoring assets
along the execution of the supply chain. They have to be
alerted in case of any incident which might disrupt the supply
chain process. In our case, we use the container tracking
system from SOGET [12].
As described previously, a WSN hosts a set of wireless
nodes, attached to speciﬁc assets.
A mediation layer ﬁnally eases the integration of sensor
nodes with supply chain. Within the mediation layer, we distin-
guish two services: the sensor broker and the crossbow agent.
The sensor broker serves as a dispatcher for the subscription
coming from the SCM system. The crossbow agent is in charge
of the interface with the crossbow nodes [13] used for our
evaluation.
As mediation layer, we use a mediation layer called the
Middleware for Device Integration (MDI). MDI is a mediation
layer developed by SAP Research for the integration of smart
items (e.g., WSNs, RFID) into business applications. Based on
an OSGi Service Platform, MDI is an agent-based middleware
which enables both monitoring and controlling of smart items.
G. Message ﬂow
In Figure 5, we depict the subscription to asset monitoring.
Therefore, SCM systems have to subscribe to MDI for any
346
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 4.
Architecture
asset monitoring or occuring alerts (e.g., temperature exceeds
ﬂash point, shocks on the pallets).
As depicted in Figure 5, the SCM subscribes to monitoring
or alerting for a given product, uniquely identiﬁed with its pro-
ductid. In addition, the SCM provides the ICPE classiﬁcation
of the product to be monitored.
This classiﬁcation is mapped to a set of contraints to be pro-
grammed on the nodes. This mapping is done at sensor broker
level, with a dedicated database. The XML representation is
pushed to the crossbow agent which generates a dedicated
set of simple constraints and a bytecode to be executed on
the crossbow node. The set of constraints and bytecode is
speciﬁc to the type of sensor nodes used. Finally, the node
is programmed over the air, with new constraints mapping
monitored product’s classiﬁcation.
On regular basis, constraints and the bytecode are evaluated.
If a constraint violation occurs, the sensor node triggers an
alert. The MDI then notiﬁes the subscriber.
V. EVALUATION
In order to validate our approach, we propose an imple-
mentation of risk assessment on Crossbow sensor nodes [13].
Our goal is to evaluate the overhead on battery and memory
introduced by our mechanism.
For the evaluation of our in node risk assessment approach,
we used MICAz (MPR2400) processing unit equipped to a
MTS310CAsensor board. Energy has been provided by two
1.2V rechargeable batteries with a capacity of 2200mAh. Each
battery has been charged to a voltage of 2.65V before test start.
For the evaluation we propose four scenarios :
• Continuous packet sending every 30 seconds
• Monitoring of sensor data and continuous transmission
every 30 seconds
• Monitoring of sensor data, evaluation of constraints vio-
lation and continuous transmission every 30 seconds
• Monitoring of sensor data, evaluation of constraints and
Alerting only in case of constraint violation.
Fig. 6.
Battery Evaluation
A. Battery overhead
Figure 6 depicts the consumption of energy for the four
scenarios identiﬁed previously. We can observe three majors
facts from that ﬁgure:
• Comparing Monitoring and Monitoring+Evaluation, we
clearly demonstrated that the negligible overhead of eval-
uation of constraint violation.
• Comparing Packet Sending and Alerting, we observe that
constraint evaluation do have a negligible overhead on
energy consumption.
• Comparing Monitoring+Evaluation and Alerting, we con-
ﬁrm the fact that packet sending is main source of energy
consumption. Following alerting strategies, we observe a
gain in energy consumption of almost 60%.
B. Memory overhead
The sensors memory is limited. The used MICAz processing
unit is equipped with an Atmel ATmega128L processor (8 bit
347
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 5.
Message Flow
architecture), 128 K bytes of program is available in memory
(ROM) and 4 K bytes for the runtime (RAM). The code
in charge of constraint evaluation occupies 50.868 bytes in
the ROM over 496.758 bytes available (10%), while using
3.737 bytes of RAM over 36.494 bytes available (10%). Those
measurements are provided by the NesC, after source code
compilation. Overall the memory consumption of our approach
is relative limited.
VI. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
With the shift towards a global open market in the recent
decade, optimising production life-cycle of products is key to
gaining the maximum proﬁt. Ensuring safety of the products
throughout the supply chain is a main aspect of the optimi-
sation. The supply chain is typically made up of multiple
companies who coordinate activities to set themselves apart
from the competition.
Risk analysis techniques have emerged as a way to evaluate
the potential risk inherent along the supply chain, and the
identiﬁcation of several different options in how to proceed.
Often, these options are designed to minimize the risk while
obtaining the most beneﬁt, or at least ﬁnding ways to protect
the product while taking the risk.
We discussed the current techniques for risk analysis. We
show that current techniques lack the autonomy at execution
time therefore, whenever an error occurred, a human interven-
tion was always required to locate the problem and trigger a
mitigation plan to prevent further propagation. we showed that
this technique is not portable and scalable.
In this paper, we proposed to go a step further, with the
delegation of risk assessment to sensor node attached to the
supplied products. We identiﬁed a set of constraints mapped
to the products classiﬁcation. Those constraints represent the
risk conditions of the item in question.
In addition, we propose the implementation and evaluation
of our approach in the scope of the RESCUEIT [3] project.
As future work we foresee the improving of the calculation of
the risk value, to take into account the values from previous
executions of the same supply chain. In addition, the issue
related to the conﬁdentiality of the generated alerts is still
opened.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The research was partially funded by the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research under the promotional
reference 01ISO7009 and by the French Ministry of Research
within the RESCUE-IT project [3]. The authors take the
responsibility for the content.
REFERENCES
[1] ECD,
“European
council
directive
-
control
of
major-accident
hazards involving dangerous substances,” 1996. [Online]. Available:
eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31996L0082
[2] Kuehne and Nagel, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.kn-portal.com/
[3] L. Gomez, M. Khalfaoui, E. El-Khoury, C. Ulmer, J. Deutsch, O. Chet-
touh, O. Gaci, H. Mathieu, E. El-Moustaine, M. Laurent, H. Schneider,
C. Daras, and A. Schaad, “Rescueit : securisation de la chaine logistique
orientee service depuis le monde des objets jusqu’a l’univers informa-
tique,” Workshop Interdisciplinaire sur la Securite Globale, 2011.
[4] Casino, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.groupe-casino.fr/
[5] {European {Chemicals {Agency, “Guidance for identiﬁcation and nam-
ing of substances under reach,” 2007.
[6] DGDDI,
“Direction
des
douanes
et
droits
indirects,
approved
economic
operator,”
2005.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.douane.gouv.fr/page.asp?id=3421
[7] IPCE,
“Installation
classiﬁee
pour
la
protec-
tion
de
l’environnement,”
2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.installationsclassees.developpement-durable.gouv.fr/
[8] UNECE,
“United
nations
economic
commission
for
eu-
rope,
recommendations
on
the
transport
of
dangerous
goods
-
model
regulations,”
2005.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.unece.org/trans/danger/publi/unrec/12e.html
[9] J. Aagedal, F. den Braber, T. Dimitrakos, B. Gran, D. Raptis, and
K. Stolen, “Model-based risk assessment to improve enterprise security,”
in Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference, 2002. EDOC
’02. Proceedings. Sixth International, 2002.
[10] D. Ivanov and B. Sokolov, “Handling uncertainty in supply chains,”
in Adaptive Supply Chain Management.
Springer London, 2010, pp.
81–91.
[11] S. M. Wagner and N. Neshat, “Assessing the vulnerability of supply
chains using graph theory,” International Journal of Production
Economics, vol. 126, no. 1, pp. 121–129, July 2010. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2009.10.007
[12] SOGET, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.soget.fr/
[13] Crossbow, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.xbow.com/
348
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

