SAT406M. Physiological Status Determination of a Wrist-Worn Personal Locator
Beacon User:
Preliminary Results
Alejandro de Miquel, Pere Molina,
Ismael Colomina and Marta Bl´azquez
GeoNumerics S.L.
Castelldefels, 08860 Barcelona, Spain
Email: {alejandro.demiquel,
pere.molina, ismael.colomina,
marta.blazquez} @geonumerics.com
Daniel Katz
and Ohad Barak
Mobit Telecom ltd.
Kiryat Ono, 55451 Israel
Email: dan@mobitcom.com
jo@traveling-jo.com
Michel Monnerat
and Thibaud Calmettes
Thales Alenia Space France
Toulouse, 31100 France
Email: {michel.monnerat,
thibaud.calmettes}
@thalesaleniaspace.com
Abstract—This paper presents the concept, developments and
preliminary results of the Horizon 2020 project named SAT406M.
The goal of this project is to develop an application based on
a wrist-worn device, conceived to be a maritime application,
and the use of European Global Navigation Satellite Systems,
particularly the Galileo system. It provides an end-to-end solution
based on the Galileo Search and Rescue service, using its
unique Return-Link-Message function, improving the mobility
and safety of citizens. In particular for this paper, we focus on
the development and the ﬁrst testing results of a physiological
monitoring component included in the device. This component
will provide the Search and Rescue services with additional
information about the SAT406M user’s physiological status once
the distress alarm is triggered. The algorithm implemented
uses some stochastic techniques to deduce the SAT406M user’s
physiological status, encoded in two bits, from sensor inputs. The
results here presented, which are still preliminary results from an
intermediate stage of the project, show a good accuracy in most
of the cases, but not all of them yet. The proposed improvements,
clear and easy to implement in the algorithm, make us conclude
that it has the potential to end up determining the SAT406M
user’s physiological status with a signiﬁcantly higher accuracy,
improving this way the user’s safety.
Keywords-Galileo; Personal Locator Beacon; Search and rescue;
IMU.
I. INTRODUCTION
Over the last few years, the market of the wearable smart
devices, and in particular the smartwatches market, has experi-
enced a huge growth. This has been possible, to a large extent,
thanks to the development in sensor technology. Sensors
are steadily becoming smaller, cheaper and more precise,
driven in particular by the microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS) technology. Inertial sensors, among others, have been
miniaturized, resulting in small, wearable devices suitable for
measuring the motion of its carrier. This has boosted research
and development in various ﬁelds such as robotics [1], satellite
technology [2], optics [3], human motion analysis [4], [5], [6],
[7] and many more. Taking the market of smartwatches and
smartbands as example, one can nowadays easily ﬁnd wrist-
worn devices that measure the user’s heart rate [8], or track
and analyse one’s daily activity, [9].
One of the ﬁelds whose applications have the potential to
take beneﬁt from these technologies is Search and Rescue
(SAR). In particular, the use of sensors in Personal Locator
Beacons (PLB) can still be broadly enlarged. PLBs are devices
carried by sailors, hikers and all kind of adventurers as a
safety tool. If they are in a distress situation, the PLB can
be activated, sending an alert via satellite communications.
Once the alert is sent, the PLB provides periodically the user’s
position to a SAR team, whose goal is to rescue the person in
distress as quickly and efﬁciently as possible. With the advent
of the Galileo technology, some unique Global Navigation
Satellite System (GNSS) features will be available for the
use of PLBs, such as the Return-Link-Message (RLM) or the
ability of sending some additional information, apart from the
user’s position.
Nowadays, PLBs are too expensive and bulky for mass
market. Moreover, it is not easy to ﬁnd a wearable PLB;
the Breitling watches [10] are an example. Wearable PLBs
do not only have the advantage to be attached to the user;
they also have the possibility to include additional sensor
technology. Therefore, there is a clear opportunity for the
advent of smaller, wearable PLBs that may beneﬁt from the
miniaturization trend of technology. In addition, given the
future multi-constellation GNSS panorama, PLBs are likely
to feature world-wide coverage for positioning and distress
message reporting. It is needless to say that this potential has
a direct impact on the quality of SAR services and safety of
distressed people.
In this paper, we present the SAT406M, a research and
development project in progress that aims to develop a wrist-
worn PLB. In particular, we focus on the PLB’s physiological
monitoring component. This component will consist of an
algorithm deducing the PLB user’s physiological status from
Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) and GNSS inputs. MEMS
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

IMUs have already been used to analyse human motion in
many contexts, that range from pedestrian dead reckoning
using one several sensors attached to the body [5], [7], to
qualitative motion analysis with the IMU placed in a pocket
[4], [6]. However, the approach of using of an IMU to deduce
the physiological status of a wearable-PLB user is new.
To present this research, we ﬁrstly explain the project in
Section II, providing insights on its foundations and key
innovative features. Secondly, in Section III, we describe
one of the innovative components of the proposed PLB, the
Physiological Monitoring component. In this same section, we
also present and interpret the preliminary results obtained at
the current stage of the project. Finally, some conclusions are
drawn in Section IV.
II. THE SAT406M CONCEPT
SAT406M is a Horizon 2020 project that aims at developing
a wrist-worn PLB, specially targeting at marine environments
and users. This beacon will be a 406MHz Cospas-Sarsat [11]
compatible one, and will integrate a Digital Selective Calling
(DSC) transceiver compatible with marine Very High Fre-
quency (VHF) radios. This H2020 project started in February
2015 and is expected to ﬁnish in February 2018.
The SAT406M concept is based in Mobit Telecom’s
SAT406 [12] (Figure 1), the world’s ﬁrst affordable wrist-
worn PLB. It will make use of Thales Alenia Space MEOLUT
technology for SAR satellite solutions [13]. Even though it is
conceived to be used mainly by boaters and sailors, it can
also be a life-saving tool for travellers, pilots and all kind of
adventurers that run a constant risk and can, at some point,
be in need of the SAR services. If a SAT406M user considers
that he or she is in a critical situation, the PLB alarm can be
triggered. The alarm triggering procedure is complex enough
to avoid false alarms, but also easy enough to be executed in a
distress situation. Once this has been done, the distress alarm
is sent with an Ultra High Frequency (UHF) 406 MHz Cospas-
Sarsat compatible transmitter and a VHF DSC transceiver.
Figure 1. SAT406 PLB
Thanks to the VHF signal, the nearby boats will be aware
of a potential distress situation notiﬁed by the user, providing
them the means for assistance if necessary. Moreover, thanks
to the UHF signal located on the 406MHz frequency for
GNSS, such as Galileo, this alarm will be sent to the SAR
services. Once received, a notiﬁcation of acknowledgement
will be sent to the PLB via the RLM service.
In the project, an innovative communication method is
being developed that will enhance the standard communication
between the PLB and the SAR/Galileo system, using an uplink
solution compatible with the Cospas-Sarsat standards and the
Galileo SAR downlink. In this way, the SAR data throughput
between the beacon and the SAR/Galileo system will be
increased.
One of the innovative features to be included in the up-
graded PLB device is the capability of automatically interpret
and notify distress situations. Since the PLB user may be
in a situation in which no manual alarm triggering is pos-
sible (loss of consciousness, high stress, etc.), the goal of
the physiological monitoring component is to autonomously
provide information to the SAR services about the status of
the person based on the PLB built-in sensors. This will be
done automatically each ﬁve minutes once the alarm has been
triggered for the ﬁrst time.
III. PHYSIOLOGICAL MONITORING
The physiological monitoring in SAT406M is based on
motion and positioning sensor inputs. The current approach is
to deduce the user’s physiological status from IMU and GNSS
data, and to encode it in a minimal data structure to be easily
transmitted. The result of the physiological monitoring will
be then reported to the SAR services, who can take proﬁt of
this additional information when executing the SAR operation.
No other sensors are implemented due to design and power
consumption limitations.
The selection of the physiological features to be monitored
by the algorithm is one of the crucial steps. Many aspects
deﬁne the potential distress of a person, ranging from vital
signs or motion of the body, to environmental or weather
conditions. Given the particular requirements gathered along
the project, two status worlds are deﬁned: the ’health status’
and the ’qualitative positioning status’. These two categories
set a clear distinction about the personal user condition and
his/her whereabouts; in addition, many states can be deﬁned
for each of these categories. At this stage of the project
development, we have deﬁned two possible states for the
’health status’, namely ’alive’ and ’unknown’, and two pos-
sible states for qualitative positioning, namely ’in water’ and
’unknown’. Far from being exhaustive and complete for all the
potential applications, this selection of states is derived from
the SAT406M context and requirements. The deﬁnition of the
health status world’s states follows from trying to determine
the probably most valuable information for the SAR services:
knowing if the user is alive. Since the product is speciﬁcally
thought to be a maritime application, it also makes sense to
consider the states of the qualitative positioning status in the
way proposed.
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

A. Input/Output
The input consists of IMU and GNSS measurements, ac-
quired in a modality conditioned by the current PLB. During
about 20 seconds each 5 minutes, these sensors will be
turned on to collect measurements. The sensors cannot be
constantly turned on because of the Cospas-Sarsat battery life
requirements. Each 5 minutes, once the data has been collected
by the sensors, they will be analysed by the physiological
monitoring algorithm, and the user’s physiological status will
be deduced. This information will then be sent to the SAR
services.
The speciﬁc IMU to be integrated in SAT406M is Bosch
Sensortech’s BMI160 [14]. Table I shows the speciﬁcations of
this IMU. If some parameter accepts several options, only the
one chosen for the project is speciﬁed. The measurements are
collected at an output data rate of 25Hz from three accelerom-
eters, measuring linear accelerations, and three gyroscopes,
measuring angular velocities. Figures 2 and 3 show examples
of accelerometer and gyroscope data respectively, collected by
an IMU on different motion situations.
TABLE I. BIM160 speciﬁcations
Accelerometer
Gyroscope
Parameter
Value
Units
Value
Units
Resolution
16
bit
16
bit
Range
±4
g
±1000
◦/s
Sensitivity
8192
LSB/g
32.8
LSB/◦/s
Sens. temperature drift
±0.03
%/K
±0.02
%/K
Sens. change over voltage
±0.01
%/V
±0.01
%/V
Zero offset
±150
mg
±3
◦/s
Nonlinearity
±0.5
%FS
±0.1
%FS
Output noise
180
µg/
√
Hz
0.007
◦/s/
√
Hz
Figure 2. Accelerometer. User swimming
Figure 3. Gyroscope. IMU on a boat
Figure 2 corresponds to the measurements taken by an
accelerometer placed on a person’s wrist while swimming,
breaststroke style. Figure 3 corresponds to the measurements
taken by a gyroscope placed on a boat, while it was advancing
at a speed of about 10 knots. In both cases, periodicity
is a clear feature, but the signal’s shape suggests that the
periodicity is produced by different kinds of motion. With
the information given by such features and other ones, also
provided not only by an IMU but also a GNSS receiver, the
goal is to determine the user’s physiological status, in terms
of the deﬁned states.
Indeed, the IMU is the primary sensor used in SAT406M,
and its measurements clearly provide meaningful information
about the experienced motion. Parameters such as the mag-
nitude of the measurements, the periodicity (if any) and its
related frequency, or the amplitude of the observed signal, can
be signiﬁcantly distinct when acquired in various platforms
(pedestrian, vehicle, etc.) and types of motion (standing,
swimming, walking, etc.). Additionally, GNSS data might also
be helpful to describe the context of the PLB user.
Regarding the output, it is a goal of the algorithm to
generate a minimal data structure to express the target outputs
describing the health and qualitative positioning status of the
user. Actually, the amount of information given by the output is
limited by the Cospas-Sarsat message standards, and it is only
thanks to the innovative communication method developed
by Mobit Telecom ltd. that we can send two bits encoding
the user’s physiological status. In line with this goal, the
output of two bits encodes the states ’alive’, ’unknown’ and
’immersed in water’, ’unknown’. This seems to be the most
relevant information to be given to the SAR services about
the user’s status encoded in only two bits. One can easily
deduce that there exist four possible outputs: ’Alive/In water’
(A/W), ’Alive/Unknown’ (A/?), ’Unknown/In water’ (?/W)
and ’Unknown/Unknown’ (?/?).
In fact, since the number of deﬁned states is ﬁnite, con-
cretely set to four, one can think of the whole physiological
status determination concept as a directed graph with four
vertices. In this graph, each vertex represents one of the
possible outputs, i.e. one of the states the user can be in. At
each point in time, a probability is associated to each vertex,
representing the probability of the user being in that state. The
directed graph edges represent the possible transitions from a
state to another one. This concept can be generalized to any
number of states, and is known as ”qualitative navigation” or
”graph navigation”.
B. Algorithm
The physiological monitoring algorithm’s output is deduced
from a set of four probabilities. In order to express this, a
probability vector is deﬁned:
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

vt =




vt
1
vt
2
vt
3
vt
4



 =




PA/W
PA/?
P?/W
P?/?



 , where
X
i
Pi = 1, Pi ≥ 0.
(1)
Here, the t stands for a timestamp, meaning that this is the
probability vector representing the user’s state at time t. Hence,
each element vt
i represents the probability of the SAT406M
user being in state i at time t.
In order to compute the ﬁnal probability vector at time t,
not only the sensors’ data is considered, but also the user’s
state at time t − 1. This is done by multiplying a stochastic
transition matrix M t by the probability vector at time t − 1:
vt = M tvt−1 =





P4
j=1 m1jvt−1
j
P4
j=1 m2jvt−1
j
P4
j=1 m3jvt−1
j
P4
j=1 m4jvt−1
j




 =




vt
1
vt
2
vt
3
vt
4



 .
(2)
Here, the term ’stochastic matrix’ refers to the fact that the
conditions P4
i=1 mij = 1,
mij ≥ 0 hold for each j. It
is apparent that each probability vector is conditioned by its
estimation on a previous epoch, leading to an iterative process.
Like the elements of the probability vector, the elements of the
transition matrix also have a clear interpretation: the element
mij represents the probability of transitioning from state j to
state i.
The determination of each of these elements depends on a
sensor-dependent contribution, determined by the values of the
parameters deduced from the raw sensor data, and a sensor-
independent contribution: a priori, if the user is in a given state,
the probability of transitioning to a different (or the same) state
may not be equal for each state.
This is expressed with the equation
mij = Wαi + (1 − W)βij.
(3)
In this equation,
• The αi are the sensor-dependent coefﬁcients. They
change from time t − 1 to time t, and represent the
probability of the user being in state i according to
the data acquired between these two times. Clearly, the
equality P4
i=1 αi = 1 must hold.
• The βij are the data-independent (and thus also time-
independent) coefﬁcients, and represent the probability
of the user transitioning from state i to state j a priori.
For these coefﬁcients, the equality P4
i=1 βij = 1 holds.
• W is a weight, a real number between 0 and 1, that allows
to control the importance given to the information coming
from the sensors’ data.
C. Preliminary testing and results
Due to the restrictions related to the PLB’s computational
capacity, a light implementation of the algorithm described
above has been written in C++. In the next stages of the
project, this algorithm will be migrated to the ﬁnal platform.
In order to validate this algorithm in realistic situations,
some test cases have been performed involving a person in a
marine environment and experiencing different situations. The
platform used to acquire IMU measurements was an iPhone
6, which includes an InvenSense MP67B IMU. This IMU
presents very similar speciﬁcations to the IMU to be integrated
in the ﬁnal version of SAT406M. A smartphone platform was
selected due to the ease of use and the already available
apps to acquire measurements from the built-in sensors. The
smartphone was attached to the wrist of the person with a
water-proof case.
We acquired data in a range of situations that basically
include standing on a small boat and being immersed in water,
either swimming, slightly moving or not moving at all. For
the cases on the boat, we also collected data of the IMU not
worn by the person, but steady on a table. With these tests,
we target at the situations when the user is not wearing the
device, is sleeping, dead or unconscious lying on the ﬂoor.
Finally, we note that no GNSS data was considered at this
stage of the project. Figure 4 shows a representative sample of
the results obtained when running the algorithm with different
sets of data. The green cells correspond to true positives, i.e.
the output corresponds to the reality. For false positives, we
highlight in red the algorithm output, and we use blue to
indicate the truth. The initial probability vector has been set
to (0.25, 0.25, 0.25, 0.25) in all cases here presented. These
results correspond to one or more iterations of the algorithm
considering IMU measurements during 20.48 seconds. Again,
the algorithm will execute one iteration each 5 minutes.
Figure 4. Preliminary results
We start analysing the correct preliminary results obtained
during these tests. Looking at the table, it can be seen that
the software clearly relates the situation of the IMU being
motionless on a boat (that is, not worn by the user) to the state
(?/?), which is the desired output. The software also correctly
detects if the user is swimming. Actually, the outputs (A/W)
and (A/?) feature high, almost equal probability leading to
potential false positives -yet, the software yields a correct and
necessary information, which is the user being alive.
On the other hand, in three situations the software output is
(?/?), while the real output should be another one. Firstly, in
the case in which the user is just moving arms to avoid sinking,
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

some activity is clearly detected, but since the user is moving
the arms slowly and the sea was calm, it is not clear which
kind of activity it is. Secondly, in the case where the user
simulated to be dead on water, the algorithm tends to the (?/?)
state. Yet, it must be noticed that the probability corresponding
to (?/W) is signiﬁcantly higher than in the other cases. And
ﬁnally, in the case where the user was standing on a moving
boat, the software detects some activity, if we compare it to
the other cases. But since the user was almost not moving, this
small activity is still not detected by the software as (A/?). As
we can see, the current algorithm outputs tend to the states
with ’?’ if the contrary is not clear.
It is also to be noted that, in general, in the cases where
there are more than a single iteration, each iteration reinforces
the output given by the algorithm.
It must be remarked that determining the SAT406M user’s
physiological status is a challenging task. In particular, if the
user is hardly moving, being able to discern between situations
in which the user is immersed in water and situations where the
user is on some kind of boat or platform can be considerably
difﬁcult. This is basically due to the effect of the waves, whose
range of different signals that can generate is very large, and
depends mainly on the sea conditions.
IV. FURTHER RESEARCH AND CONCLUSIONS
We have introduced the SAT406M project, which is one of
the ﬁrst approaches to this kind of technology. It makes use
of the whole constellation of SAR-ready GNSS, including the
in the future full operational Galileo, that has the RLM as
remarkably useful feature.
We have focused on the algorithm determining the user’s
physiological status, information that will be sent to the SAR
services for them to act as efﬁciently as possible. This, in
addition to the fact that the PLB is wrist-worn, is a clear
advantage for improving the user’s safety with respect to other
PLBs. On the other hand, the small size of the PLB restricts
the memory and the computing capacity. Also, the amount
of information given to the SAR services is restricted due to
communication standards.
The algorithm for the physiological monitoring has been
designed following a rigorous mathematical approach based in
stochastic theory and state estimation techniques. Additionally,
its implementation is modular and extensible, enabling other
sources of information i.e. new sensors to be also included in
the process with low effort and minimal modiﬁcations.
The software’s performance is acceptable considering that
it is a prototype version, but it still tends excessively to the
output ’unknown’ if the contrary is not clear. This indicates
the need for ﬁne tuning based on multiple sets of data, with
high repeatability of the simulated situations, and varying the
test person and the sea conditions.
Also, GNSS data, which is still not considered in the
software’s current version, will be considered in the future.
This kind of data will contribute mostly to the determination of
the qualitative status world. For example, if the user is moving
at high speed on a boat, he or she will probably be alive, which
might not be clearly detectable only with the IMU data. All
this will yield the identiﬁcation of further parameters, and the
improvement of the currently considered ones, contributing to
the determination of the PLB user’s physiological status and
the robustness of the system.
Next steps of the project also include testing, working
and obtaining results with the ﬁnal platform. In addition,
dissemination and commercial activities will be executed, to
launch this product to the mass market.
In conclusion, the product under development in the
SAT406M project has the potential to improve signiﬁcantly
the safety of the PLB users, and might open the door to the
implementation of other new technologies in such devices.
V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research leading to these results has been funded by
the European Community Horizon 2020 Programme under
grant agreement no. 640387 managed by the European GNSS
Agency (GSA).
REFERENCES
[1] L.
Ferranti
and
F.
Cuomo,
“Nano-wireless
communication
for
microrobotics: Bridging the gap,” in Proceedings of the Second Annual
International Conference on Nanoscale Computing and Communication,
ser. NANOCOM’ 15.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2015, pp. 31:1–
31:6. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2800795.2800803
[accessed: 2016-06-13]
[2] D. Tithi and D. Ravishankar, “Role of MEMS Technology in Improv-
ing the Satellite and Space Communication System: A Review,” in
Proceedings of the Manipal International Conference on Technology
Management, MiCTM 2015 March 25–26, 2015, Dubai, UAE.
[3] F. Chollet, “Devices based on co-integrated mems actuators and optical
waveguide: A review,” Micromachines, vol. 7, no. 2, 2016, p. 18.
[Online]. Available: http://www.mdpi.com/2072-666X/7/2/18 [accessed:
2016-06-13]
[4] P. Molina, I. Colomina, M. Troger, B. Hofmann-Wellenhof, and
C. Aguilar, “Non-conventional INS/GNSS integration for qualitative mo-
tion analysis in caregiving applications,” in ION GNSS 2010. Portland,
Oregon, USA., Sep. 2010, pp. 542–555.
[5] Y. Qilong and C. I-Ming, “Localization and velocity tracking of human
via 3 imu sensors,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 212, 2014,
pp. 25–33.
[6] E. Lockhart, R. Soangra, J. Zhang, and X. Wu, “Wavelet based auto-
mated postural event detection and activity classiﬁcation with single imu
(tempo),” Biomed Sci Instrum, vol. 49, 2013, pp. 224–233.
[7] A. R. Jimnez, F. Seco, C. Prieto, and J. A. Guevara, “A comparison of
Pedestrian Dead-Reckoning algorithms using a low-cost MEMS IMU,”
in Proceedings of the Intelligent Signal Processing 2009, WISP 2009
26-28 August 2009 Budapest, Hungary, pp. 37–42.
[8] “Apple Watch,” URL: http://www.apple.com/watch/ [accessed: 2016-06-
13].
[9] “Fitbit,” URL: http://www.ﬁtbit.com/ [accessed: 2016-06-13].
[10] “Breitling,” URL: http://www.breitling.com/en/ [accessed: 2016-06-13].
[11] “Cospas-Sarsat,” URL: http://cospas-sarsat.int/en/ [accessed: 2016-06-
13].
[12] “SAT406,” URL: http://www.sat406.com/ [accessed: 2016-06-13].
[13] “TAS MEOLUT,” URL: https://www.thalesgroup.com/en/worldwide/
space/news/meolut-next-breakthrough-technology-search-rescue-
satellite-solutions [accessed: 2016-06-13].
[14] “Inertial
Measurement
Unit
BMI160,”
URL:
https://www.bosch-
sensortec.com/bst/products/all products/bmi160
[accessed:
2016-06-
13].
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

