Turning submarine telecommunications cables into a real-time multi-purpose global 
climate change monitoring network 
 
Yuzhu You 
Institute of Marine Science  
University of Sydney  
NSW 2006, Australia 
yuzhu.you@gmail.com 
Bruce Howe 
Department of Ocean and Resources Engineering  
University of Hawaii at Manoa  
Honolulu, HI 96822 , USA 
bhowe@hawaii.edu
 
 
Abstract— Climate change impacts polar water mass 
formation and its subsequent sinking and spreading along the 
ocean floor, thus affecting oceanic storage of greenhouse gases. 
Currently, there is no low cost way to monitor the polar and 
other abyssal water masses. Here we propose to use submarine 
cables by integrating sensors and node functionality into 
repeaters to form a real-time global climate change monitoring 
network that also includes tsunami warning capability and 
provides for multipurpose connections.  
Keywords- Submarine cables; Cable repeaters; Climate 
change monitoring; Global climate monitoring network, Sensors; 
Node functionality. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Oceans govern climate and climate variability since they 
store more than 90 per cent of the heat and 50 times as much 
carbon as the atmosphere in the Earth’s climate system. 
Global warming causes polar ice to melt and sea-level to 
rise, consequently reducing the ocean’s capacity for 
greenhouse gas storage in the abyssal ocean and further 
reinforces atmospheric greenhouse warming. The deepest 
water mass covering the world’s ocean floor originates from 
polar regions such as the Greenland Sea, Labrador Sea, 
Weddell Sea, Ross Sea and around Antarctica. These polar 
water masses have the highest densities in the world ocean. 
The densest water plunges along the polar continental slopes 
and spreads along the ocean floor to fill up the global ocean 
bottom waters (Figure 1). While doing so, it carries a large 
amount of atmospheric greenhouse gasses into the deep 
ocean with residence times on the order of a millennium. 
Temperature and salinity are basic state variables of 
ocean climate. They govern the density and thus, along with 
wind and solar forcing, the overall circulation of the world 
ocean. The polar bottom water is formed at the surface of 
polar seas through air-sea interaction as warm, salty water is 
cooled and sinks. This process is being affected by climate 
change, impacting water temperature and salinity as a 
function of time and space. Consequently, this would affect 
the formation of the oceans’ bottom water and its volume 
transport, and thus overall ocean circulation. Under a 
warming environment, polar water masses can absorb less 
gas and are less capable of sinking. Consequently, the 
transport decreases and less atmospheric greenhouse gases 
are brought into the deep ocean. If the ocean-bottom water 
temperature, salinity and pressure could be measured on the 
ocean floor at many locations including “choke points”, 
changes of the planet’s climate could be monitored in this 
crucial part of the Earth climate system. One of the major 
results from the recent OceanObs09 conference 21-25 
September 
2009 
in 
Venice, 
Italy 
(http://www.oceanobs09.net), was the need for abyssal 
measurements below 2000 m since the current Argo program 
can measure temperature and salinity only above 2000 m. 
It is generally understood that climate change monitoring 
requires very long-term observations from decades to 
centuries. These observations need sustainable technical and 
financial support. Currently, there is no low cost way to 
effectively monitor the ocean climate in the long run. 
Particularly, the high pressure at abyssal depth (~6000 m) 
and complicated bottom topography cause instrumentation to 
be 
extremely 
difficult 
and 
costly. 
In 
traditional 
oceanographic measurements from ships, the sea bottom is 
intentionally avoided for possible damage of the instruments 
in case they hit the bottom. Due to its vast extent and 
volume, the measurement of the layers of polar water mass 
on and just above the ocean floor is virtually nonexistent. 
However, submarine telecommunications cables typically 
with repeaters (optical amplifier) 40-120 kilometers apart, lie 
on the ocean floor and can fill this gap (Figure 1). They can 
be used to measure the bottom water flowing by on a 
continuous, sustained basis for many decades – something 
that cannot be done by other means. At the same time, 
electric signals from the cables can yield information about 
the ocean currents crossing the cables and as well as average 
temperature. Importantly, the cables and the repeaters can 
provide power to transmit data from general purpose 
observatory nodes on the sea floor. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. From a 
historical appoint of view, Section 2 emphasizes the 
importance of turning submarine telecommunications cables 
into a real-time multipurpose global climate change 
monitoring network. Such an opportunity was missed and 
should not be missed again. Section 3 calls for facilitating 
the usage of retired and in-service submarine cables for 
ocean climate monitoring. This section also describes the 
technical feasibility of designing future generation of cables 
and repeaters, which enable climate measuring sensors to be 
integrated into repeater housing and to allow for node 
functionality. The technologies have been developed in 
184
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

oil/gas industry and ocean observatory in the last decade and 
are ready to be implemented into the global climate 
monitoring network. Perspective of realizing the network is 
given in Section 4 to meet the demand for real-time global 
tsunami warning, sea-level rise observation and climate 
change monitoring. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Schematic of polar water formation. It sinks and spreads across 
the ocean floor, which is affected by global warming and ice melting at its 
polar source formation region. The change of water properties such as 
temperature and salinity can be measured with sensors installed in the 
repeaters (optical amplifiers) of a submarine cable [1] [2]. 
II. 
A MAJOR OPPORTUNITY 
Since 1850, over a million kilometres of submarine 
cables have been laid on the ocean floor, covering a 
significant part of the global oceans [2]. Thousands of 
repeaters in these cable systems are currently serving only 
the single purpose of amplifying communication signals 
(Figure 2). Slight modification of these repeaters – plugging 
in only one pressure sensor into their housing, for example – 
could turn the single purpose telecommunication network 
into multipurpose, real-time global tsunami warning and sea-
level rise monitoring network [4] [1]. Such a global network 
could quickly locate the source of the tsunamis triggered by 
an earthquake or other factors from most of the ocean floor. 
The very dense repeater stations – typically about 100 
repeaters for a transatlantic cable and 200 repeaters for a 
transpacific cable – can provide tsunami-wave travel times, 
amplitudes and speeds for early warning in real time. Such a 
network can be sustained for decades at low cost. The long-
term bottom pressure time series data has also important 
scientific value for oceanographers to study tides far from 
land [5]. 
If more sensors – such as sensors for measuring 
temperature and salinity – are installed with the repeaters, the 
telecom cables can be turned into a much-needed real-time 
global climate change monitoring network. Those repeaters 
can also be used as nodes for multipurpose connections, 
using, for instance, inductive power and communications 
transfer through the repeater pressure case. In the long run, a 
robust design enables even more channels to measure 
additional climate data such as ocean currents (using an up-
looking acoustic Doppler ocean current profiler), oxygen, 
greenhouse gasses, seismicity, large-scale temperature using 
acoustic 
tomography, 
geophysical 
and 
biochemical 
properties, and underwater video and acoustics. This very 
useful resource has been overlooked. This is a major 
opportunity that should be taken advantage of. 
III. 
PLUG SENSORS INTO NEW GENERATION OF CABLE 
REPEATERS 
At present, only a tiny fraction of the existing cables 
(about a thousand kilometres or 0.1 per cent) is used for 
measuring climate change data such as the Florida Current 
cable that has been used to take daily measures of the 
volume of water transported by the Florida Current over the 
past 25 years (derived from the voltage fluctuations 
measured at the shore station; [4] [2]; [6]). In particular, 
repeaters have not been modified for this potential of climate 
monitoring capacity. This is a significant opportunity for 
telecommunication companies to design the new generation 
of cable repeaters and to provide additional climate data to 
stakeholders other than their usual telecoms services. The 
new repeaters that are integrated with integrated sensors and 
nodes will enable us to measure the major climate variables 
of temperature, salinity and pressure and in a cost-effective 
long-term 
climate 
change 
monitoring 
network. The 
designing cost of the new generation of repeaters is 
estimated at several to ten million US dollars [7]. This non-
recurring engineering cost is regarded as modest when 
amortized over thousands of units for many years to come. 
Telecom companies can make additional profit by serving 
the additional stakeholders (e.g., government science 
agencies) and the broad community with very much needed 
climate data and relevant products. 
Modern technologies enable the new type of repeaters to 
be assembled into one cable body but two operation systems, 
one for telecommunication and one for other purposes such 
as oil/gas, local ocean observatory and science in general, 
without interfering with each other. The dual-conductor 
cable and four-cable branch unit recently developed by Tyco 
Electronics Subsea Communications [8] and the Modular 
Connecterized 
Distribution 
Unit 
by 
Ocean 
Design 
Incorporation (Flynn, personal communication, 2010) enable 
independent power and fibre connectivity in a layered 
network allowing three power path and nodes for multiple 
connections. The currently used repeaters have space to 
install the temperature, salinity and pressure sensors (Figure 
3). The measured signals can be transmitted to shore via the 
dual-conductor cable with two coloured fibres, one for 
telecommunication and one for scientific data. As a result, 
the chain of repeaters in a cable can be turned into a densely 
sampled 
mooring-like 
time-series 
with 
instant 
data 
availability spanning seconds to several decades. Using just a 
fraction of the new cable systems being constantly installed 
would provide thousands of time series stations to form a 
truly real-time global network. Such a network will 
185
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

effectively monitor global climate change including long-
term sea-level rise as well as short term tsunami detection 
and warning at low cost. 
To make the network more useful, future technical 
development 
should 
consider 
inductive 
(transformer) 
transferring of power and communication through a pressure 
case without connectors. Even power of a watt and 
communications rate of bits per second is useful. With the 
inductive capability of power and communication, horizontal 
electric field (HEF) pressure –inverted echo sound (HPIES) 
can be placed next to the repeater using a remotely operated 
vehicle (ROV). A repeater can support an acoustic modem 
for communications (acomms) [4]. This allows instruments 
to be placed a farther distance away from the repeater with a 
large battery. 
At present, many of the available technologies are first 
developed in the oil/gas industry a beneficial situation 
towards achieving the global climate change monitoring 
network. As more and more of these technologies are 
moving to fully instrumented and widely distributed fields 
for production such as command, control, power and 
communication as well as 4-D tomographic monitoring of 
the fields, they, if extensively qualified, can then be migrated 
to telecommunications. 
 
IV 
PERSPECTIVE 
 
The recent great earthquakes and resulting tsunamis 
(Sumatra 2004, Chile 2010, Japan 2011) show yet again how 
vulnerable our civilization can be to natural disasters. As part 
of the global effort to build a tsunami warning system, USA 
has deployed a total 39 Deep-ocean Assessment and 
Reporting of Tsunamis (DART) tsunami stations (or buoys) 
in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans and Caribbean Sea by 
2008 (Figure 2). More buoys have been planned in other 
parts of the world oceans. At the same time, many other 
coastal countries have deployed or planned to deploy their 
tsunami buoys as well. The cost for purchasing a DART 
buoy is typically about US$250,000, and maintaining cost 
for a buoy is about US$125,000/year excluding ship-time; 
the latter typically costs much more than the buoy itself [9]. 
Tsunami buoys are usually deployed as close to potential 
source locations (e.g., along the entire “rim of fire” in the 
Pacific) as possible for achieving longer lead and evacuation 
time. But there are still many gaps, for instance, the current 
system has not covered the mid-ocean ridges and vast open 
ocean area which are far from land and would be more costly 
to maintain with ships.  On 11 March 2011 Japanese tsunami 
crossed the open Pacific and caused damage and casualty in 
west coast of America. Due to lack of buoys in vast open 
Pacific, insufficient information is provided to public on 
tsunami travel time, speed and amplitude. 
The principal of the DART (or other types) buoys, for 
example, developed by US National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), is the ocean bottom 
pressure sensor which can record tsunami wave amplitude of 
less than 1 cm in open ocean. As depicted above, if the 
pressure sensors are integrated into submarine cable 
repeaters, harnessing telecoms cable repeaters can form a 
global real-time tsunami warning network with less cost than 
the present system. That is because the cabled measurements 
can save the maintenance/ship costs. Further, tsunami buoy 
life times are limited to a maximum of 4 years because they 
are powered by batteries. In contrast, cable systems can 
power the sensors for decades. The harsh sea-surface 
environment, possible device failure and potential vandalism 
reduce the tsunami buoys’ effective availability. Cables lie 
on the ocean floor avoiding the harsh sea surface condition. 
The designed operation time for DART buoys is typically 80 
per cent but actual available up-time is less than 70% [10]. A 
cabled tsunami warning network is more reliable in terms of 
its better global ocean coverage and highly dense sensors. 
Because warming water expands, sea-level rise is an 
integrating measure of global ocean heat content, and global 
warming. Current sea-level observations rely on tide gauges 
and satellites. Tide gauge records are affected by land rising 
and sinking, showing considerable variations in the long 
term. The estimated sea level rise measured with satellite 
altimetry is greater than with tide gauges. It is still unclear 
how much the precision of the satellite measurement is 
affected by orbital decay and the difference between 
assumed orbit and the Earth geoid. Cabled measurements of 
sea-bottom pressures are expected to provide more reliable 
and accurate sea-level data as they measure the whole water 
column pressure change and better cover the ocean-basins 
with less effects of vertical ground movement for decades. 
With regard to polar climate change condition, the polar 
region has been warming stronger than global average. In 
2007, the summer minimum sea ice in the Arctic was an 
unprecedented 40 per cent below the minimum sea ice 
content of the 1980s. Autumn temperatures were 6°C higher 
than the 1958-98 mean. The Greenland ice sheet has been 
melting with a 16 per cent increase from 1979-2002. In 
Antarctica, a significant temperature anomaly of more than 
+2°C has been found in the Antarctic Peninsula. In 
responding to the warming, a collapse of the Antarctic ice 
shelf and drifting of icebergs away from Antarctica are 
frequently reported in recent years. The polar region’s 
augmented warming may have already impacted the polar 
water-mass formation, transport and greenhouse gas 
carriage. Details are unknown as no effective monitoring is 
being performed. With the aforementioned temperature, 
salinity and pressure sensors, submarine cables and repeaters 
can effectively contribute to the monitoring of polar and 
global climate change at a low cost. Since the demand for 
internet usage continues to grow exponentially, telecom 
cables will only expand. With little additional cost, a new 
generation of cable repeaters can meet the requirement of 
very much needed climate change monitoring system. For 
example, in January 2010, Kodiak Kenai Cable Co. 
announced plans for a fibre optic cable on the Arctic Ocean 
seabed to connect Europe and Asia [7]. Australian Telstra 
also announced recently it would lay a new cable from 
Sydney to Oakland and then to Los Angeles using more than 
500 repeaters with 40 km spacing. These cables and 
repeaters are still going to serve only a single purpose, i.e., to 
amplify the communication signal. Telecommunication 
companies and scientists are urged to work together to 
186
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

realize the much-needed global climate change monitoring 
network in future cable systems. 
These business opportunities for telecommunication 
companies are obvious and should not be missed. The 
current services in tsunami warning and sea-level monitoring 
are mainly financed by governments. In the future model of 
invest-outcome/invest-profit for efficiently using tax-payer 
money, governments should work with and persuade and 
encourage telecom companies to incorporate the new 
technologies as part of in the overall emission and mitigation 
strategy. By encouraging technical standardization, the 
United Nation (UN) agent, International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU), as well as non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs) can facilitate the implementation of the capability. 
To determine the next step, a workshop has been organized 
to be held in Rome on 5-9 September 2011 including 
scientists, engineers, governments and legal experts, in 
cooperation with relevant organizations and UN agencies. 
The workshop aims to facilitate the use of retired and in-
service submarine cables and encourage the development of 
new technologies and standards for layered systems and of 
ocean observing subsystems at each repeater. 
At the UN Copenhagen Climate Conference in December 
2009, all nations unanimously agreed to curb global warming 
not to exceed 2 °C. Since human-induced global greenhouse 
warming will soon cross the 1 °C mark and approach 2 °C 
[11], the next decades will be crucial for monitoring climate 
change. As the ocean is one of the most important factors in 
governing the worldwide warming process and climate 
variability, they must be closely observed. Without other 
effective means for long-term climatic measurements, 
harnessing telecom cables for ocean observation is expected 
to play a major role in monitoring global climate change for 
the next decades. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Y. You, “Multipurpose submarine cable repeaters required to 
monitor climate change,” Submar. Tele. Foru. Mag. London, 
vol. 54, pp. 7–11, 2010. 
[2] Y. You, Using Submarine Communications Networks to 
Monitor The Climate, vol. 15. Intern. Tele. Union: Geneva, 
2010, pp.11. 
[3] L. Carter, D. Burnett, S. Drew, G. Marle, L. Hagadorn, D. 
Bartlett-McNeil, and N. Irvine, Submarine Cables and The 
Oceans: Connecting The World, UNEP-WCMC Biod. Series, 
vol. 31, ICPC/UNEP-WCMC, 2009, pp. 64. 
[4] Y. You, “Harnessing telecoms cables for science,”Nature, vol. 
466, pp 690-691, 2010.  
[5] W. H. Munk, Afairs of the Sea, Ann. Rev. Ear. Plan. Sci., 
1980, pp 1-17.  
[6] . C. Larsen and T. B. Sanford, “Florida Current volume 
transport from voltage measurements,” Science, vol. 227, pp. 
302-304, 1985.  
[7] Y. You, “Telecom ompanies could help create global 
monitoring network,” Sea Tech. Mag., vol. 51 (11), pp. 73, 
2010. 
[8] M. E. Kordahi, “Dual-conductor cable and a four-cable 
branching unit meet evolving needs for transoceanic 
underseas cable networks,” Sea Tech. Mag., vol. 51 (7), 2010. 
[9] E. N. Bernard, F.I. Gonzalez, C. Meinig, H.B. Milburn, M.C. 
Eble, S.E. Stalin, and E.F. Burger, “DART buoys provide 
real-time reporting of tsunamis,” Tsuna. Newslett., vol. 
XXXIV, No. 2, pp 3-8, 2002. 
[10] National 
Research 
Council, 
Tsunami 
Warning 
And 
Preparedness: an Assessment of the U.S. tsunami program 
and the nation’s preparedness effort, The National Academies 
Press, 2010, pp.350. 
[11] IPCC AR4, Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science 
Basis (Summary for Policy Makers), IPCC, 2007. 
 
 
 
 
187
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

 
 
 
Figure 2.  Submarine cables repeaters (blue dots) are symbolically plotted overlapping the cables (in red). The actual number of repeaters is about 4 times 
more than that plotted with a distance of about 40-150 km apart. For example, a typical transpacific cable would contain about 200 repeaters. Other plotted 
symbols are tsunami buoys (open circles in orange) and ocean observatories (stars in light blue). The source of background cable distribution is from the 
cable map of Global Marine Systems Ltd. 
188
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

 
189
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Figure 3.  Cable and repeaters are being laid down in the ocean (upper panel), a view of open Alcatel-Lucent repeater (middle panel) and the diagram of a 
submarine cable repeater (lower panel). Climate monitoring sensors could be integrated into the equipment and the measured signals transmitted back to a 
shore station via the repeater’s transmission device. 
 
190
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

