Review of Capacitive Atmospheric Icing Sensors
Umair Najeeb Mughal1, Muhammad Shakeel Virk2, Mohamad Yazid Mustafa3
High North Technology Center, Department of Technology
Narvik University College
Narvik, Norway
Email: unm@hin.no1, msv@hin.no2, myfm@hin.no3
Abstract—The application of capacitive sensing technique
is widely distributed in different physical domains primarily
because of the diversity in dielectric permittivity and due to its
minimum loading error and inertial effects. Atmospheric ice
is a complex mixture of water, ice and air which is reﬂected
in its complex dielectric constant. There are many existing
atmospheric icing sensors but only few are based on their
complex dielectric permittivity measurements. This technique is
very suitable because the capacitive variation in this mixture is
due to the reorientation of water dipole in the electromagnetic
radiation’s oscillating ﬁeld. Depending on the frequency, the
dipole may move in time to the ﬁeld, lag behind it or remain
apparently unaffected. This variation is clearly reﬂected on
the cole cole diagram which is a measure of the relaxation
frequency. This paper is a review of some capacitive sensing
technique in general but based upon dielectric variations and
some existing capacitive based atmospheric ice sensing tech-
niques. It is emphasized that the capacitive method proposed
by Jarvenin provides maximum atmospheric icing parameters
hence future atmospheric icing sensors may utilize the proposed
technique with some modiﬁcations to further reduce the loading
errors.
Keywords-Atmospheric ice; Sensor; Polar molecule; Dielectric.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Atmospheric icing
Atmospheric icing is the term used to describe the ac-
cretion of ice on structures or objects under certain condi-
tions. This accretion can take place either due to freezing
precipitation or freezing fog. It depends mainly on the
shape of the object, wind speed, temperature, liquid water
content (amount of liquid water in a given volume of air)
and droplet size distribution (conventionally known as the
median volume diameter).
The major effects of atmospheric icing on structure are the
static ice loads, wind action on iced structure and dynamic
effects.
Generally an icing event is deﬁned as period of the
time when the temperature is below 0◦C and the relative
humidity is above 95%. Ice accretion can be deﬁned as, any
process of ice build up and snow accretion on the surface of
objects exposed to the atmosphere’ [6]. Atmospheric icing is
traditionally classiﬁed according to two different processes
[6] and are shown in Fig. 1(a).
Table I: TYPICAL PROPERTIES OF ACCRETED ATMOSPHERIC ICE [5]
Type of ice
Density (kg/m3)
General appearance
Colour
Shape
Glaze
900
transparent
evenly distributed/icicles
Wet snow
300-600
white
evenly distributed/eccentric
Hard rime
600-900
opaque
eccentric, pointing windward
Soft rime
200-600
white
eccentric pointing windward
(a) Ice types
(b) Ice as a function of wind speed and air temperature
Figure 1: Ice types and their dependence [6]
(a) Precipitation icing (including freezing precipation and
wet snow),
(b) In-cloud icing (also called rime/glaze, including fog),
Fig. 1(b) shows the type of accreted ice as a function of
wind speed and temperature. In this ﬁgure, the curve shifts
to the left with the increasing liquid water content and with
decreasing object size. A classiﬁcation of atmospheric ice is
shown in Table I.
B. Atmospheric icing sensors
A robust technique to detect icing and ice accretion rates
has not yet been reported in the published literature. It is
a challenging task to devise a measurement technique that
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

can deal with both rime and glaze icing and can measure
icing rate, load and duration without being affected by the
icing event. Currently, all the ice detectors available are
capable of measuring either one or both phenomenon such
as detecting the icing event and measuring the rate of icing.
As ice sensors can be integrated with ice mitigation systems,
it is important for these sensors to deliver the necessary
information timely enough so as to be able to operate
anti-icing and de-icing mitigation strategies effectively. To
distinguish between snow and ice can be considered to
be an important factor for the determination of deicing
power requirements. Hence, measurement of an icing event
or related phenomena bounds a set of requirements which
include the ability of a sensor/probe to detect icing with high
sensitivity without being inﬂuenced by the icing incident.
Icing measurement techniques can be classiﬁed into direct
and indirect methods as follows:
Indirect Methods: The indirect methods of ice detection
involve measuring weather conditions such as humidity, and
temperature that lead to icing or detecting the effects of
icing, for example, reduction in the power generated by
the wind turbine, reduction in the speed of anemometers
or measuring the variables that cause icing or variables that
correlate with the occurrence of icing, such as cloud height
and visibility [5] . Empirical or deterministic models are then
used to determine when icing is occurring. Also Homola et.
al. [7] have outlined ﬁve indirect measurement methods. The
reduction in the speeds of anemometers method of Craig
and Craig [2] and the noise generation frequency method of
Seifert [14] are typical examples of indirect methods.
Direct Methods: The direct methods of ice and snow
detection are based on the principle of detecting property
changes caused by accretion such as mass, dielectric con-
stants, conductivities, or inductance. Although Homola et.
al. [7] outlined twenty four direct measurement methods but
they still need to be more categorized for further exploration.
The categorization of these direct methods can be,
1) Capacitive techniques
2) Microwave techniques
3) Inductance techiques
4) Ultrasonic techniques
5) Acoustic techniqes
6) Infrared techniques
7) Resonance techniques
II. CAPACITIVE SENSING TECHNIQUE - IN GENERAL
From the above categories, the capacitive technique is
the main focus of this review. The capacitance depends
on the geometrical arrangement of the conductors and on
the dielectric material between them, C = C(ϵ, G). For
example, for a capacitor formed by n equal parallel plane
plates having a geometry G depending upon area A, with
a distance d between each pair, and an interposed material
with a relative dielectric constant ϵr, the capacitance is
C = ϵ◦ϵr
A
d (n − 1)
where ϵ◦ = 8.85pF/m is the dielectric constant for vacuum
mentioned by Pallace and Webster [13]. Therefore, any
measurand producing a variation in ϵr, A, or d will result
in the change in the capacitance C and can be in principle
sensed by that device.
A. Dielectric constant from electronic polarization
The electron orbiting a nucleus is like a harmonic oscilla-
tion with a natural frequency ωo mentioned in Kao [9]. The
dynamic equation can be deﬁned as,
md2∆x
dt2
= −γ∆x − ZqFloc
(1)
where ∆x is the electrons displacement, m is the electron
mass, q is the electronic charge, Z is the number electrons
involved, Floc is the local ﬁeld acting on the atoms, and γ is
the force constant. Also the natural oscillation frequency is
given as ωo =
p γ
m. Also oscillating electron is equivalent
to an electric dipole and would radiate energy according
to electromagnetic theory of radiation. This energy can be
taken as a damping mechanism and β dx
dt is a retarding force,
hence our dynamic equation is,
md2∆x
dt2
+ mω2
o∆x = −β dx
dt − ZqFloc
(2)
From Bohr’s Model, we have the potential of electron given
as,
E = ¯hωo =
mq4
(4πεo)2¯h2
(3)
where ¯h =
h
2π and h is plank’s constant. Also when Z = 1
we have electronic polarization, αe = 4πεoR3 where R is
radius of the ground state orbit of Bohr’s atom.
Similarly, electronic susceptibility and dielectric constant is
given as,
χe = Nαe
εo
= N
εo
h
(Zq)2
mω2o
i
εr = 1 + χe = 1 + N
εo
h
(Zq)2
mω2
o
i
(4)
B. Complex dielectric constant
When a time varying electric ﬁeld is applied across a
parallel plate capacitor with the plate area of one unit and
a separation of d between the plates, then the total current
is given by,
JT = J + dD
dt = J + ε∗ dF
dt
(5)
where J is the conduction current and ε∗ is deﬁned as
complex permittivity which is introduced to allow for di-
electric losses due to friction accompanying polarization and
orientation of electric dipoles. This may be written as,
ε∗ = ε − jε
′ =

εr − jε
′
r

εo
(6)
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

where εr is dielectric constant and ε
′
r is the loss factor. Also
loss tangent is deﬁned as, tan δ = εr
ε′
r where δ is loss angle.
We can use the instantaneous energy absorbed per second
per cm3 is given by JT (t)F(t). Thus, on average, the amount
of energy per cm3 per second absorbed by the material is
W = ωε
′
rεoF 2
m
2
(7)
The discrete nature of matter, and the behavior and
interaction of those particles, can be manifested through their
response to time varying electric ﬁelds with wavelengths
comparable the distances between the particles. To measure
the dynamic response, we can use either use,
Time Domain Approach: We measure the time depen-
dent polarization immmediately after the application of a
step function electric ﬁeld or we meausre the decay of the
polarization from an initial steady state value to zero after
the sudden removal of an initial polarizing ﬁeld. This decay
is generally referred to as dielectric relaxation.
Frequency Domain Approach: We mainly measure the
dielectric constant at various frequencies of alternating ex-
citation ﬁelds. From the viewpoint of measuring techniques,
the time domain approach is simpler than the frequency
domain approach, but from the viewpoint of data analysis,
the time domain approach is more complex. However, both
approaches should be intimately connected and should yield,
in principle, the same results.
1) Dielectric relaxation - Time Domain Approach: This
is a time domain approach which provides conspicuous
information abouth the nonlinearity of the dielectric behavior
simply by varying the amplitude of the applied step function
held. Experimental arrangement for the measurements of
the time domain response (i.e., the transient charging or
discharging current, resulting from the application or the
removal of a step DC voltage) is given in Fig. 2.
In this circuit, the switch S1 has 2 positions: one for
turning on the step DC voltage to start the ﬂow of charging
current, the other for short circuiting the specimen to allow
the discharging current to ﬂow after the specimen has been
fully charged to a steady state level. The switch S2 is used
to short circuit R1 to provide a path for surge currents for
a very short period of time to protect the circuit; it also
gives a chance to adjust the ampliﬁer to a null position
before recording the transient current. It is important to
make the time constant of the ampliﬁer which depends on
the stray capacitance in shunt with R1, much smaller than
the time during which the transient current is ﬂowing. The
specimen has the guard and the guarded electrodes, the
outer guard electrode being connected to ground to eliminate
surface leakage currents from the specimen. The charging
or discharging current is measured as a voltage appearing
across R1 by means of a DC ampliﬁer. The voltage drop
from point A to ground is made zero by a negative feedback
in the ampliﬁer circuit, which produces a voltage across R2
(a) Basic experimental arrangement
(b) The step voltage and responses
Figure 2: Setup for the measurements of the charging and the discharging
current from the application and removal of a step voltage [9]
equal and opposite to that across R1 thus making the applied
step voltage across the specimen only. The step voltage and
the charging and discharging current as a function of time
are also shown in Fig. 2(b) in which I◦ is the steady DC
compoent of the charging current and the width of the step
voltage is 63 seconds.
2) Frequency Domain Approach: No material is free
of dielectric losses and therefore no material is free of
absorption and dispersion which reﬂects that no material
is frequency independent εr and ε
′
r. Now, using Debye
Equations for a varying electric ﬁeld Fmejωt we have the
relationships as,
εr = εr∞ + εrs + εr∞
1 + ω2τ 2
0
(8)
ε
′
r = (εrs − εr∞) ωτ0
1 + ω2τ 2
0
(9)
tan δ = ε
′
r
εr
= (εrs − εr∞) ωτ0
εrs + εr∞ω2τ 2
0
(10)
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Eq(s). 8, 9, 10 equations can also be written as,
εr − εr∞
εrs − εr∞
=
1
1 + ω2τ 2
0
(11)
ε
′
r
εrs − εr∞
=
ωτ0
1 + ω2τ 2
0
(12)
Now, the Eqn(s). 11, 12 are the parametric equations of
a circle in the εr − ε
′
r plane. By eliminating ωτ0 from Eq.
11 and 12 we obtain,

εr − εrs + εr∞
2
2
+ ε
′2
r =
εrs − εr∞
2
2
(13)
Only the semicircle of Eqn(s). 13 over which ε
′
r is positive
has physical signiﬁcance. In this Argand Diagram shown in
Fig. 3(b), frequency is not explicitly shown. The variation
of εr and ε
′
r due to the variation of ω is shown in Fig.
3(a) which illustrates schematically the typical dispersion
behavior for polarization in the relaxation regime. Also, the
Eq(s). 8, 9, 10 are based on the following assumptions for
simplicity: the local ﬁeld is the same as the applied ﬁeld
F; the conductivity of the materials is negligible; all dipoles
have only one identical relaxation time τ◦. For more details
on the mathematical description of the various forms of
Debye relations for the detection of atmospheric ice, see
Mughal et. al. [11].
III. CAPACITIVE ICING SENSORS
Capacitive ice sensors generate an electric ﬁeld to detect
the presence of dielectric materials. Such electric ﬁeld radi-
ates outward around the probe and a dielectric material in
close proximity of the ﬁeld affects the measured capacitance,
Mughal et. al. [10]. This attribute enables non-invasive
measurements. In Tiuri et. al. [15], the results indicate that
the complex dielectric constant is practically independent
of the structure of snow. It is also mentioned that for dry
snow, the dielectric constant is determined by the density
and for wet snow, the imaginary part and the increase of the
real part due to liquid water have the same volumetric wet-
ness dependence. The static dielectric constants, ε0 of both
polycrystalline and single crystals of ice have been carefully
determined Auty and Cole [1]. Also, application electrical
properties to the measurement of ice thickness, temperature,
crystal orientations are presented in Evanes [4]. Weinstein
[16], Kwadwo [12] and Jarvinen [8] proposed three different
capacitive based ice detection methods, Mughal et. al. [10],
which are discussed in the following sections.
A. Capacitive ice detector by Weinstein
This ice sensor proposed by Weinstein [16] as given
in Fig(s). 4a(a) can be used for the determination of the
thickness of ice (22) on the outer surface (12) of an
object independent of temperature and the composition of
(a) εr , ε
′
r and tanδ as functions of ω
(b) Argand diagram of εr − ε
′
r relations for cases with one one
relaxation time τ◦
Figure 3: Frequency domain approach for measurement of dielectric con-
stants [9]
the ice (22). First capacitive guage (16), second capacitive
guage (18), and the temperature guage (20) are embed-
ded in embedding material (14) located within a hollow
portion of outer surface (12). First capacitive guage (16),
second capacitive guage (18), and temperature guage (20)
are respectively connected to ﬁrst capacitance measurement
circuit (24), second capacitance measurement circuit (26),
and temperature measuring circuit (28). The geometry of
ﬁrst and second capacitive guages (16) and (18) is such that
the ratio of voltage outputs of ﬁrst and second capacitive
guages (24) and (26) is proportional to the thickness of
ice (22), regardless of ice temperature or composition. This
ratio is determined by offset and dividing circuit (29). First
capacitance measuring circuit (24) and second capacitance
measuring circuit (26) are connected to offset the dividing
circuit (29). The output voltage Vout of this offset and
dividing circuit (29) for ice conditions is determined by the
relation,
Vout = (V − Vo)2
(V − Vo)1
(14)
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

(a) Construction
(b) Ratio of capacitance gauge as a function
of thickness
Figure 4: Weinstein ice detector [16]
where V is the voltage output for the ice conditions and
Vo is the initial voltage for no ice conditions. Subscripts
(1) and (2) refer respectively to capactive measurements
from ﬁrst capacitance measuring circuit (24) and second
capacitance measurement circuit (26). Vout is independent
of both temperature and ice decomposition since both ef-
fects results in identical scaling factors for both V −Vo
2
and
V − Vo1, thereby resulting no changes in Eq(s). 14. The
variation of capacitance as a function of thickness is shown
in Fig(s). 4a(b). This sensor is capable of predicting ice and
its thickness on a planar surface.
B. Two cylinder capacitive icing probe
Kwadwo [12] has used two-cylinder probes to act as a
capacitive ice sensor, based on the principle that as ice
accretes on two electrically charged parallel-arranged cylin-
drical probes, the measured capacitance increases, while the
resistance decreases. As the super cooled water droplets
collide with the cylindrical probes and stick on the surface,
they freeze and ice begins to grow as shown in Fig 5b. The
accreted ice affects the electric ﬁeld generated by the elec-
trically charged cylindrical probes resulting in an increase in
the capacitance due to the higher dielectric constant of the
accreted ice compared to air. The electric ﬁeld originating
from the polarization charges on the surface of the ice partly
shields the external electric ﬁeld generated by the charged
cylindrical probes leading to a reduction in the overall
electric ﬁeld. The overall voltage decreases simultaneously,
because the electric ﬁeld is directly proportional to the volt-
age. The resistance between the cylindrical probes is large
at the start of the icing event because of the air gap between
the cylinders. However, as ice builds up on the cylindrical
probes, the air gap between the cylindrical probes decreases
and the resistance begins to decrease exponentially. The rate
of decrease is sensitive to the presence of water on the
surface of the ice formed on the cylindrical probes and this
phenomenon is used to distinguish between different types
of ice .
(a) Trajectory of supercooled water drops and air
moving towards two cylindrical probes
;
(b)
Ice
formation
at
the
windward side of the cylin-
drical probes
Figure 5: Cylindrical capacitive sensor
C. Total impedance and complex dielectric property ice
detection system
In this sensor, Jarvinen [8] used the method for detecting
the presence and the accretion of ice by ﬁrst measuring the
properties of the contaminant layer overlying the ice sensor.
The contaminant layer’s temperature, thermal conductivity
and variation of total impedance versus ice sensor electrical
excitation frequency are measured. The complex dielectric
property subsystem monitors the dielectric property locus in
dielectric space as the excitation frequency is varied from
near dc to higher frequencies (using Cole-Cole plot) and
compares the measured results for magnitude and shape with
laboratory property data taken at the same temperature and
stored in the processor. It double checks using external ice
(based upon the complex dielectric measurements) sensor
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

whether it is ice or rain water or deicing ﬂuid or snow. If
the measured results form a semicircular shaped locus of
dielectric properties in complex dielectric space during the
frequency scan and those measurements are also determined
to be in agreement with on board stored laboratory ice data,
ice is conﬁrmed to be present. The presence of ice is also
conﬁrmed if a particular vector can be constructed from
the measured data taken at a single preselected excitation
frequency and found to have a vector angle in agreement
with the vector angle from stored laboratory results taken
at the same measurement conditions. In addition, complex
dielectric measurement algorithms identify whether cracks,
ﬂaws or voids or increased electrical conductivity exist in
the ice covering and sensor from their effects on the shape
and size of the measured complex dielectric locus or from
the length of the vector at the pre selected frequency. The
presence of ﬂaws, cracks or voids or enhanced electrical
conductivity are determined from the values for the low
frequency and high frequency intercepts and the value for
diameter of the complex dielectric locus if these values are
found to differ from those calculated for ice based on stored
ice data. These differences, if found to exist, are used to
correct the initially chosen ice thickness value based on the
assumption of normal ice: ice with no ﬂaws, cracks or voids
or higher electrical conductivity. For more details on the
mathematical principle of this type of sensing technique see
Mugal et. al. [11].
Figure 6: Cole Cole plot for glaze ice experimental results
This sensor is capable to identify the presence of ice, its
thickness, thickness rate, and can identify glaze ice, rime
ice, rain water, deicing ﬂuid, snow or air. In addition it is
redundant in conﬁrming the icing event.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The mere existence of a permanent dipole moment in
water provides structural information about the molecule. It
is found that the dielectric variations in different types of ice
can be very effective in ﬁnding the parameters such as ice
type, ice thickness and icing rate. The patent of Jaravinen [8]
can be considered as a benchmark as it is able to sense all
the above paramters, hence the direct approach mentioned by
Homola et. al. [7] is able to deliver maximum information.
Also due to the variation in response of ice and snow by
varying the electrical ﬁeld; the application of Cole-Cole
Diagram for complex dielectric constant of snow and ice is
adequately proved. It is stressed that a simulation study and
analytical study on the capacitive variations of atmospheric
ice be carried out to compare the numerical and theoretical
results with the experimental variations. These results can
further be utilized for the determination of atmospheric ice
type and measurement of its rate and thickness. A hybrid
measurement technique may also be considered in future
for robust results.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The work reported in this paper was partially funded by
the Research Council of Norway, project no. 195153/160
and partially by the consortium of the ColdTech project -
Sustainable Cold Climate Technology.
REFERENCES
[1] Auty R. P. and Cole R. H., “Dielectric properties of ice and solid D2O”, Journal
of Chemical Physics, Vol. 20, Issue 8, pp. 1309-1314, 1952.
[2] Craig D. F. and Craig D. B., “An investigation of icing events on haeckel hill”,
Proceedings of Boreas III Conference, Finland, 1995.
[3] Eisenberg D. and Kauzmann W. “The Structure and Properties of Water”,
Oxford University Press, 1969.
[4] Evanes S., “Dielectric properties of ice and snow - a review”, Journal of
glaciology, Vol. 5, Issue 42, pp. 773-792, 1965.
[5] Fikke S., et. al., “Cost 727 - Atmospheric icing on structures; measurement
and data collection on icing”, ISSN 1422-1381, MeteoSwiss, 2007.
[6] Foder H. F., “ISO 12494 - Atmospheric icing on structures and how to use it”,
Proc. of the 11th International Offshore and Polar Engineering Conference,
ISBN 1-880653-51-6, June 2001.
[7] Homola M. C., Nicklasson P. J., and Sundsbo P.A., “Ice sensors for wind
turbines”, Cold Regions Science and Technology, 46: pp. 125-131, 2006.
[8] Jarvinen P. O., “Total impedience and complex dielectric property ice detection
system”, US Patent 7439877, 2008.
[9] Kao K. C., “Dielectric phenomena in solids”, Elsevier Academic Press, ISBN
0-12-396561-6, 2004.
[10] Mughal U. N., Virk M. S., and Mustafa M. Y., “Review Of Atmospheric Ice
Detection Techniques”, unpublished.
[11] Mughal U. N., Virk M. S., and Mustafa M. Y., “Dielectric Based Sensing Of
Atmospheric Ice”, 38th International Conference on Application of Mathemat-
ics in Engineering and Economics, AIP Conference Proceedings, in press.
[12] Owusu K. P., “Capacitive probe for ice detection and accretion rate mea-
surement: proof of concept”, Masters thesis report submitted at University of
Mannitoba, 2010.
[13] Pallas-Areny R. and Webster J. G., “Sensors and signal conditioning”, 2nd
Edition, John Wiley and & Sons, 2001.
[14] Seifert H., “Technical Requirements for Rotor Blades Operating in Cold
Climates”, Proceedings of the BOREAS II conference, Pyhatunturi, Finland,
2003.
[15] Tiuri M., Sihvola A., Nyfors E., and Hallikaiken M., “The complex dielectric
constant of snow at microwave frequencies”, IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engi-
neering, Vol. 9, Issue 5, pp. 377 - 382, 1984.
[16] Weinstein L. M., “Ice sensor”, US Patent 4766369, 1988.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

