Chalcogenide Glass-based Chemosensors
Winfried Vonau, Ute Enseleit, Monika Berthold
Kurt-Schwabe-Institut für Mess- und
Sensortechnik e.V. Meinsberg
Waldheim, Germany
e-mails: {vonau, enseleit, mberthold}@ksi-meinsberg.de
Claudia Feller, Uwe Partsch, Stefan Körner
Fraunhofer Institut für Keramische Technologien
und Systeme
Dresden, Germany
e-mails: {claudia.feller, uwe.partsch, stef-
an.koerner}@ikts.fraunhofer.de
Abstract – A number of chalcogenide glasses for the fabrica-
tion of potentiometric electrodes selective for heavy metal ions
were melted and characterized. The focus was directed on the
detection of Cu2+ and Pb2+ ions. In addition to the preparation
of conventional rod electrodes, the purpose of the research was
the realisation of corresponding planar electrodes in thick film
technology. Until now, for measurements, only rod-electrodes
were available. Miniaturized electrodes were achieved for the
case of copper ion determination, whereupon several glass
compositions were tested. The sintering behavior of the inves-
tigated lead ion selective glasses hitherto did not allow the fab-
rication by the thick film process. The requirement to add AgI
to the initial mix is associated with light sensitivity of corre-
sponding sensors.
Keywords-determination of heavy metals; potentiometric
sensor; chalcogenide glasses; thick film technology; copper;
lead.
I. INTRODUCTION
Commonly used analytical procedures to detect heavy
metals are Atom Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS), Optical
Emission Spectrometry using Inductive Coupled Plasma
(ICP-OES), Polarography and Ion Chromatography (IC) [1-
4]. However, the devices needed are highly complex and
require experienced operators. Measurements to be taken
directly on-site are not possible by means of these methods.
Other disadvantages are their high operational and equip-
ment costs. A substantially more cost-effective alternative
delivers the use of Ion Selective Electrodes (ISE) that allow
continuous measurements in liquids [5]. Because of a sim-
ple experimental setup and a miniaturized sensor membrane,
ion selective potentiometry is becoming increasingly im-
portant for the determination of ion activities and integrated
sensor arrays [6]. For heavy metal ions, selective mem-
branes chalcogenide glasses represent promising base mate-
rials. In the 1970s, Trachtenberg and Baker [7] introduced
Ion-Selected Electrodes (ISEs) based on Chalcogenide
Glasses (CG) to determine Fe3+ and Cu2+ ions.
At the end of the 1980s, Vlasov et al. [8]-[13] devel-
oped a systematic synthesis and carried out physical and
electrochemical investigations at new CG-materials for the
detection of Fe3+, Cu2+, Cd2+, Pb2+, Ag+ and Sn2+ ions in
solutions. Further research results of CG for the analysis of
liquids were presented by Vassiliev and Boycheva [14] in
the year 2005. Conde Garrido investigated CG based on Ag-
Ge-Se for the development of ISEs [15].
For the fabrication of such materials, in general, the re-
quired chemical compounds are heated in evacuated quartz
ampoules and quenched, subsequently. In the process of
making conventional potentiometric ISEs, the CG-bulk ma-
terial is removed from the ampoules, cut into thin slices,
mounted in a waterproof rod-shaped body and afterwards
contacted. Pollrich [16] und Kloock [17] describe the fabri-
cation of glasses. With regard to on-site analysis, currently,
miniaturization of such as ISEs is at the core of research.
During the on-site analysis, measurements can be carried
out fast and easy at the sampling location with only reason-
able effort and without equipped laboratory tests. Thus,
quantitative and semi-quantitative statements about pollu-
tant contents, e.g., in water, soil and solid waste, can be
made. Therefore, especially small and robust sensors are
required. For the miniaturization, several thin-film technol-
ogies are in use to deposit the CG-bulk material as thin
membrane on, e.g., potentiometric or field effect based sen-
sor structures. In the 1980s, Vlasov et al. [18] carried out
first experiments to realize thin Cu2+-ion sensensitive CG-
membranes by means of Radio Frequency (RF) Co-
Sputtering
on
Ion
Sensitive
Field
Effect
Transistors
(ISFETs). Further procedures to produce thin film sensors
for heavy metal analysis in liquids are RF Magneton Sput-
tering, Sputtering in combination with Ion Implementation,
Evaporating, Flash Evaporating with Photo Doping as well
as Electrochemical Deposition. All mentioned physical pro-
cedures have problems with respect to a stoichiometric dep-
osition of thin CG-membranes based on multi-component
mixtures. However, maintaining of the stoichiometry is of
importance for the functionality of the CG-based ISEs. A
method that realizes the stoichiometric deposition of glass
membranes is Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD). It was used
by Schöning and Kloock [19]-[22]. In the PLD process, CG
is rapidly removed from the bulk material and deposited on
a transducer structure with remaining stoichiometry. Signif-
icant disadvantages of the procedure are high equipment
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

costs and enormous amount of time for the realization of the
CG-thin film membrane.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, advantages of thick-film (TF)-technology as possible
fabrication method of CG electrodes are highlighted. Sec-
tion III contains the description of all experiments in con-
nection with fabrication and characterization of the elec-
trodes. In Section IV, the achieved results are presented and
discussed. We conclude in Section V.
II. OBJECTIVE
The goal of this work is the development of a cost-
effective process for the manufacture of miniaturised CG-
ISEs. This is given by thick-film (TF)-technology. Sensors
for the determination of heavy metals fabricated by means
of this technology would have the decisive advantage over
those prepared with physical processes (like, e.g., PLD),
namely, that they can be produced cost-effectively in small
quantities.
The great potential that is offered by TF-technology,
regarding market and technology, can be utilised for the
development of electrochemical sensors. Advantages of a
ceramic-TF based heavy metal sensor are its mechanical
robustness, high chemical resistance and tightness, as well
as the associated low susceptibility to cross influences.
Thus, the aim is to create a TF-sensor for heavy metal ions,
e.g., to be used in environmental analysis. In this paper,
Cu2+ and Pb2+ ions are the focus of interest. One challenge is
the material and process development for the realisation of
CG-membranes in TF-technology on ceramic substrates.
From CG-bulk material, a submicron powder has to be pro-
duced for the realisation of a sinterable TF-paste. This re-
quires fundamental tests of the sintering behaviour of chal-
cogenide glasses under inert conditions.
III. EXPERIMENTS
Ag, Pb, Cu, As, S, As2S3, As2S5, As2Se3 and AgI, as
well as PbS powders have been used for the fabrication of
the glasses and Cu, Pb, K, Ca and Na nitrates for the prepa-
ration of the calibration solutions, in each case in a purity
>99.99 wt.-% obtained from Alfa Aesar GmbH Co. KG and
Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH. For melting the CG, the
individual glass components were inserted in a cylindrical
quartz ampoule. This was filled with nitrogen in a reaction
chamber, evacuated (<10-3 mbar) and hermetically sealed.
The powder containing body was transferred in a quartz
glass reactor, which then was placed in a tube furnace
(B180, max. temperature: 1300°C, see Figure 1).
Figure 1. Tube furnace with laboratory stirrer
For the slow movement of the ampoule during the heat-
up phase with 100-110 K/h until temperatures of 1000-
1100°C and a melting process duration of 8-9h, a stirrer was
used. Immediately after the melting process, the ampoule
was quenched in cold water and destroyed for the collection
of the glass. In particular, following heavy metal ion selec-
tive CG-glass systems of different stoichiometry were melt-
ed: CuAsS, CuAsSe, CuAgAsSe (Cu2+ sensitive) and
PbAgIAsS (Pb2+ sensitive)
Surface, structure, qualitative and quantitative compo-
sition as well as thermal expansion coefficient of the glasses
and pastes that were later prepared for the screen printing
process were characterised by means of following methods:
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) with Energy Disper-
sive X-ray Spectrometer (EDX), Microwave Digestion of
the glasses with MARS 6 (CEM GmbH) and determination
of the elements with Atom Absorbtion Spectralphotometer
novAA400, X-ray Diffraction (XRD) by means of D8 ad-
vance from Bruker, Dilatometry and other thermoanalytic
methods
using
several
equipment
from
NETZSCH-
Gerätebau GmbH.
As mentioned above, for the specific purpose of evalu-
ation of TF-technology as manufacturing procedure for CG-
glass electrodes, the determination of the sintering behav-
iour under inert conditions is important, for which several
thermoanalytical investigations by means of Thermome-
chanical Analysis (TMA) were performed.
For orienting measurements of the electrochemical
functionality of the glasses, initially the conventional elec-
trode design, according to Figure 2a, was realised. There-
fore, glass disks (thickness: 2mm) split by a diamond saw
and embedded in epoxy resin were mounted in a liquid-tight
polymer-pipe and encapsulated with epoxy resin. The elec-
trical contact was realised by means of conductive silver
lacquer via Ag or Cu wires. Later, impedance measurements
were carried out to determine the internal electrode re-
sistances using a GAMRY Electrochemical Measurement
System. The determination of response times and slopes of
the electrodes was performed in calibration solutions in the
measuring range of 10-2 M-10-7 M Cu2+ and Pb2+ with a 0.1
M KNO3 amount to adjust the ionic strength. The cross-
sensitivity of the glasses was determined in the calibration
solutions specified above by adding of 10-3 M interfering
cation in each case. After having examined the electrode
functions of the sensors, the CG that was found particularly
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

appropriate (sensitivity: >25 mV/pX, X = Cu2+, Pb2+; meas-
uring range: >10-5 M; lower detection limit: <10-5 M, pH-
range: pH = 2- 7; response time: < 3 min) was chosen for
the later fabrication of the TF-electrodes (Figure 2b). There-
fore, the CG–bulk materials are milled to glass powder and
brought into an organic vehicle, which is added to achieve
screen printability. Afterwards, the pastes were processed on
a three roll mill to make sure the particles were finely-
dispersed. The pastes have been screen printed on Al2O3
substrates over a metallised layer (Au). The CG layers were
fired according to the sintering temperature of the respective
glass.
Potentiometric measurements with conventionally pro-
duced rod-shaped CG-electrodes, as well as with prepared
TF-sensors were carried out by means of the multiple chan-
nel measuring instrument KM 3000 of Sensortechnik
Meinsberg GmbH usually in connection with a saturated
silver/ silver chloride reference electrode. On a specific oc-
casion, the influence of light on the electrode potential of
individual electrodes was determined, too.
a
b
Figure 2. Heavy metal ion sensitive chalcogenide glass electrodes (a rod-
shaped electrode, b thick film electrode)
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The results presented below relate to the relevant mate-
rial science tests and to the investigations in connection with
the use of the electrodes.
In Figure 3, an EDX measurement of a Cu2+ ion selec-
tive glass suitable for the thick-film process is presented; it
shows a uniform distribution of the elements within the se-
lective material. However, from AAS analyses, it can be
concluded that there is a slight stoichiometric difference
between weighed crystalline starting mixture and glass.
In particular, pulverisation of bulk glasses necessary
for the preparation of TF-pastes causes sometimes unwanted
partial recrystallisation for materials without silver. This
becomes clear in the XRD diagrams of the relevant copper
and lead ion selective materials shown in Figure 4.
Knowledge of the sintering behaviour of the glass
powder is of great importance for the realisation of glass-
based TF-sensors. By means of TMA, the shrinkage was
measured of glass powder compacts (of cylindrical shape).
During sintering, the glass powder should compress without
crystallisation.
Figure 3. EDX-recordings of distribution of the elements copper, silver,
arsenic, selenic in a chalcogenide glass with the composition:
Cu12.5Ag12.5As37.5Se37.5
Figure 4. X-ray diffraction diagrams of Cu2+ and Pb2+ sensitive chalco-
genide glasses
As a result of all orienting investigations on CG-bulk
material and on CG-powder including Differential Thermal
Analysis (DTA), Thermogravimetry (TG) and sintering be-
haviour, it could be concluded that all proposed systems of
copper ion selective CG with copper contents >10 at.-%
should be suitable for paste preparation. Due to phase for-
mation/crystallisation of the investigated lead selective glass
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

(see Figure 5) at 190°C, it should be sintered at tempera-
tures <190°C what is possible in air and nitrogen, in princi-
ple. Using a heating rate of 10 K/min, an end of the sinter-
ing would be expected at 355°C. This corresponds to suffi-
cient material shrinkages of 17% (see Figure 6).
Assuming a sintering temperature of 180°C that is rele-
vant in the present case to prevent crystallisation, it would
lead to shrinkage of only 4%; then, the glass is not suffi-
ciently compressed. The available lead ion selective CG is,
therefore, unsuited for the TF-process.
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
tem perature /°C
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
DTA /(µV/m g)
¯ exo
air
nitrogen
phase formation,
crystallisation,oxidation
decomposition, melting
phase transformation
190°C
350°C
300°C
Figure 5. DTA investigations for a chalcogenide glass system PbAgIAsS
start of sintering
end of sintering
sinter blockade by
cristallisation
Figure 6: Linear shrinkage vs. temperature of PbAgIAsS-powder compact
For impedance measurements carried out with all rod-
shaped and TF-electrodes, a 3-electrode arrangement was
chosen, consisting of CG-working electrode, platinum-sheet
counter electrode and saturated silver/ silver chloride refer-
ence electrode. The internal resistances are presented in
Figure 7. Since conventional ion-meters have input re-
sistances of about 1013 Ω, no measurement problems are
expected.
Figure 7. Impedance measurements with chalcogenide glass electrodes
Rod-shaped and TF-electrodes based on the glass sys-
tems CuAsS, CuAsSe and CuAgAsSe have been used for
the potentiometric determination of Cu2+ ions. Lead anal-
yses were performed only by means of rod-shaped sensors.
It was ascertained that glass compositions with Ag content
and the use of Se instead of S resulted in improved proper-
ties concerning the lower detection limit of the correspond-
ing electrodes. The slopes of the measuring chains in the
linear measurement range from 10-2 M- 10-8 M Cu(NO3)2,
0.1 KNO3 with 28.7 ± 0.5 mV/pCu2+ were in good agree-
ment with the Nernst equation for bivalent ions. The calibra-
tion curve of a corresponding TF-electrode is shown in Fig-
ure 8. The electrode sensitivities of lead selective rod-
shaped electrodes obtained in calibration solutions of 10-
2 M- 10-8 M Pb(NO3)2, 0.1 M KNO3 had with 28.6 ± 0.5
mV/pPb2+ similar values. Furthermore, an extreme influence
of light on the electrode potential of these (silver iodide con-
taining) electrodes (see Figure 9) was detected. Strong re-
sponses of the potential of a corresponding electrode located
in a black box under the influence of light with varying in-
tensity were observed. This circumstance should be consid-
ered for practical measurements.
Figure 8. Calibration curve of a copper electrode in thick film technology
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 9. Light sensitivity of a lead ion selective chalcogenide glass elec-
trode with AgI as component of the membrane
Finally, for the favoured copper ion selective TF-
electrode the selectivity coefficients were determined ac-
cording to the method of mixed solutions (see Table 1).
TABLE 1. SELECTIVITY COEFFICIENTS OF A Cu2+ CG-ISE
cation
BKpot
A, B
Cd2+
3.5 · 10-4
Pb2+
5.0 · 10-4
Na+
4.5 · 10-1
Ca2+
3.0 · 10-4
V. CONCLUSION
CGs of different stoichiometric compositions were melt-
ed. They were characterised by a number of physico-chemi-
cal methods with the aim to fabricate copper and lead ISEs
in TF-technology. The focus was on the material systems
CuAgS, CuAsSe, CuAgAsSe and PbAgIAsS. In a first step,
rod-shaped electrodes were fabricated in conventional man-
ner from these glasses. While the material properties of the
lead selective glasses did not allow a preparation of pro-
cessable TF-pastes, corresponding screen printedcopper
selective electrodes could be realised. Their measuring per-
formances were comparable with those known from rod-
shaped electrodes. By an optimisation of the glass composi-
tion, the electrode properties were improved.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The financial support by the German Federal Ministry of
Economics and Technology in the context of the AiF project
(grant number KF2218321KM4) is acknowledged.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. J. Koester, B. K. Esser, and S. L. Simonich, “Environmental
analysis”, Analytical Chemistry, vol. 75, pp. 2813-2829, 2003.
[2]
C. H. Hamann and W. Vielstich, Electrochemistry. Wiley-VCH.
Weinheim, 1998.
[3]
G. Harsanyi, Sensors in biomedical applications. Technomic Pub-
lishing Company. Lancaster, 2000.
[4]
C. J. Koester and A. Moulik, “Trends in environmental analysis”,
Analytical Chemistry, vol. 77, pp. 3737-3754, 2005.
[5]
K. Cammann and H. Galster, Working with ion sensitive electrodes.
Springer-Verlag Berlin, 1996.
[6]
J. Bobacka, A. Ivaska, and A. Lewenstam, „Potentiometric ion
sensors“, Chem. Rev., vol. 108, pp. 329-351, 2008.
[7]
C. Baker and I. Trachtenberg, “Ion Selective Electrochemical Sen-
sors-Fe3+, Cu2+”, Journal of the Electrochemical Society, vol. 118,
pp. 571-576, 1971.
[8]
Y. G. Vlasov and E. A. Bychkov, “Ion-selective chalcogenide glass
electrodes”, Ion-Selective Electrode Rev., vol. 9, pp. 5-93, 1987.
[9]
Y. G. Vlasov, E. A. Bychkov, and A. M. Medvedev, “Copper ion-
selective chalcogenide glass electrodes: Analytical characteristics
and sensing mechanism”, Analytica Chimica Acta, vol. 185, pp. 137-
158, 1986.
[10]
Y. G. Vlasov and E. A. Bychkov, “Electrochemical ion-selective
sensors based on chalcogenide glasses”, Sensors and Actuators, vol.
12, pp. 275-283, 1987.
[11]
Y. G. Vlasov and E. A. Bychkov, “Sodium ion-selective chalco-
genide glass electrodes”, Analytical Letters, vol. 22, pp. 1125-1144,
1989.
[12]
Y. G. Vlasov, E. A. Bychkov, and B. L. Seleznev, “Silver ion sen-
sors based on Ag-As-Se-Te glasses II. Surface studies and tracer
measurements of ion response”, Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical,
vol. 2, pp. 43-49, 1990.
[13]
Y. G. Vlasov, E. A. Bychkov, and A. V. Legin, “Chalcogenide glass
chemical sensors: Research and analytical applications”, Talanta,
vol. 41, pp. 1059-1063, 1994.
[14]
V. S. Vassilev and S. V. Boycheva, “Chemical sensors with chalco-
genide glassy membranes”, Talanta, vol. 67, pp. 20-27, 2005.
[15]
J. M. Conde Garrido, F. Macoretta, M. A. Urena, and B. Arcondo,
“Application of Ag-Ge-Se based chalcogenide glasses on ion-
selective electrodes”, J. Cryst. Solids., vol. 355, pp. 2079-2082,
2009.
[16]
S. Pollrich, Chalcogenide glasses as ion sensitive membranes for
potentiometric sensors. Hochschule Mittweida (FH), Fachbereich
Mathematik/Physik/Informatik, Diplomarbeit, 2004.
[17]
J. P. Kloock, Fabrication and characterisation of sensor membranes
of chalcogenide glass films for heavy metal sensors in liquids. TU
Ilmenau Universitätsbibliothek, Auflage 1, 2009, mv-Verlag, ISBN:
978-3-939473-43-5.
[18]
Y. G. Vlasov, “Sensor R&D in the former Soviet Union”, Sensors
and Actuators B, vol. 15-16, pp. 6-15, 1993.
[19]
M. J. Schöning et al., “Innovative thin film techniques for microfab-
ricating electrochemical sensors”, Biocybernetics and Biomedical
Engineering, vol. 21, pp. 107-119, 2001.
[20]
J. P. Kloock, Y. G. Mourzina, J. Schubert, Y. Ermolenko,
and M. J. Schöning, “Pulsed laser deposition: A tool for fabricating
thin-film microsensors”, Biomedizinische Technik, vol. 49, pp.
1032-1033, 2004.
[21]
J. Schubert et al., “Chalcogenide-based thin film sensors prepared by
pulsed laser deposition technique”, Applied Physics A: Materials
Science and Processing, vol. 69, 803-805, 1999.
[22]
M. J. Schöning et al., “Can pulsed laser deposition serve as an ad-
vanced technique in fabricating chemical sensors?”, Sensors and Ac-
tuators B: Chemical, vol. 78, pp. 273-278, 2001.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

