Application of Cavity Enhanced Absorption Spectroscopy  
in Detection of Selected Gas Pollutants  
Zbigniew Bielecki, Jacek Wojtas, Janusz Mikołajczyk, Sylwester Chojnowski 
Institute of Optoelectronics  
Military University of Technology 
Warsaw, Poland 
email: zbigniew.bielecki@wat.edu.pl 
 
Abstract— The paper presents applications of cavity enhanced 
absorption spectroscopy in detection of nitrogen dioxide (NO2), 
nitrous oxide (N2O), nitric oxide (NO) and carbon monoxide 
(CO). In the constructed portable sensor of nitrogen dioxide, 
blue-violet laser was used. The sensor sensitivity reaches a level 
of single ppb. Additionally, successful monitoring of N2O, NO 
and CO was demonstrated in the laboratory air. These sensors 
required high precision mid-infrared spectroscopy. All of the 
developed sensors are able to measure concentration at the ppb 
level using quantum cascade lasers.  It makes it possible to 
apply these instruments in monitoring the atmosphere quality. 
Keywords-laser absorption spectroscopy; cavity enhanced 
spectroscopy; CEAS; gas sensors; QCL. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Detection of various gases and measurement of their 
concentration are very important for monitoring of industrial 
processes and investigation of their environmental impact. 
Within the last decades, many methods were developed for 
stand-off and in-situ detection of volatile substances. They 
are dominated by mass spectrometry, gas chromatography, 
chemiluminescence, 
semiconductor 
gas 
sensors 
or 
electrochemical devices. Their main inconveniences are size 
and cost of the apparatus, complicated maintenance, drifts 
and cross-response issues, e.g., high-sensitive to humidity, 
poor detection limit and limited lifetimes. 
Optoelectronic sensors employing cavity enhanced 
absorption spectroscopy (CEAS) are very useful in the effort 
to minimize the level of the environment contamination [1]. 
These sensors use the phenomenon of optical radiation 
absorption to detect and measure the concentrations of the 
molecules, provide achieving low detection limits and high 
selectivity. For this purpose, it is necessary to apply 
radiation, the wavelength of which is matched to the spectral 
range characterized by strong absorption of the tested 
molecules. Such sensors are more sensitive and selective 
than many other detection techniques [2]. The rest of this 
paper is organized as follows. Section II describes CEAS in 
atmosphere monitoring. Section III describes experiments 
results. The acknowledgement and conclusions close the 
article. 
II. 
CAVITY ENHANCED ABSORPTION SPECTROSCOPY IN 
ATMOSPHERE MONITORING 
In practice, nitrogen oxides together with sulfur dioxide 
are the main gas air pollution. They cause strong 
acidification of precipitation, the formation of photochemical 
smog and highly toxic secondary pollutants (ozone, aromatic 
hydrocarbons). They also rapidly accelerate corrosion of 
stone buildings and metal structures, threaten human health, 
irritate the respiratory system and general weaken the body's 
resistance to infectious diseases. That is why, the preliminary 
research was focused on the development of nitrogen oxides 
sensors providing the detection limit as low as possible. 
Detection limits at the ppb-level and short measurements 
time (< 3 s) were demonstrated.  
CEAS was proposed by R. Engeln in 1998. The principle 
of its operation is very similar to cavity ring down 
spectroscopy one (CRDS). In both setups there is applied an 
optical cavity with a high quality factor that is made up of 
two concave mirrors with very high reflectivity R. This 
results in a long optical path, even up to several kilometers 
[5]. The idea of the CRDS method is shown in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1.   Cavity ring down spectroscopy idea 
A pulse of optical radiation is injected into the cavity 
through one of the mirrors. Then inside the cavity multiple 
reflections is observed. After each reflection, part of the 
radiation exiting from the cavity is registered with a 
photodetector. The output signal from the photodetector 
determines the intensity of radiation propagated inside the 
optical cavity. If the laser wavelength is matched to the 
absorption spectra of gas filling the cavity, the cavity quality 
decreases. Thus, parameters of the photodetector signal are 
changed. Thanks to this, the absorption coefficient and 
concentration of gas can be determined. These calculations 
will be discussed in a subsequent section. 
The main difference relates to the laser beam and the 
optical cavity alignment. In this technique the light is 
injected at a very small angle in respect to the cavity axis 
(Figure 2). As a result, dense structure of weak radiation 
modes is obtained or modes do not occur due to overlapping. 
Sometimes, a piezoelectric-driven mount that modulates the 
cavity length (position of the output mirror) is used in order 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

to prevent the establishment of a constant mode structure 
within the cavity [3]. 
 
Figure 2.  The scheme of CEAS setup 
The weak mode structure causes that the entire system is 
much less sensitive to instability in the cavity and to 
instability in laser frequencies. Additionally, due to off-axis 
illumination of the front mirror, the source interference by 
the optical feedback from the cavity is eliminated. CEAS 
sensors attain the detection limit of about 10-9 cm-1 [4]. 
Therefore, this method creates the best opportunity to 
develop a portable optoelectronic sensor of nitrogen oxides. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTS 
In the applied methods, determination of the gas 
concentration is performing by measuring the decay time of 
the photodetector signal [2][3]. If the laser pulse duration is 
negligibly short and only the main transverse mode of the 
cavity is excited, then exponential decay of radiation 
intensity can be observed. The decay time of signal in the 
cavity (τ) depends on the reflectivity of mirrors, diffraction 
losses and the extinction coefficient α:  


L
R
c
L





1


where L is the length of the resonator, c - speed of light. 
Determination of the examined gas concentration is a two-
step process. First, measurement of the decay time (τ0) of 
radiation in the optical cavity without tested gas is 
performed. During next step, the same measurements is 
made (decay time ) for the cavity filled with the gas. 
Knowing the absorption cross section (σ) of the examined 
gas, its concentration can be calculated from the formula 









0
1
1
1


c
C
where

R
c
L


1
0


In our experimental setups, we applied visible and mid-
IR semiconductor lasers. The first one was constructed using 
a blue-violet semiconductor laser (414 nm) developed at the 
Institute of High Pressure of the Polish Academy of 
Sciences. It was applied in outdoor tests consisting in 
determination 
its 
applicability 
for 
measuring 
NO2 
concentrations in the atmosphere. During the test, the 
developed sensor demonstrated a low detection limit (1 ppb) 
and a short measurement time (~ 3 s).  
The mid-IR lasers were applied to investigate gases, the 
absorptions lines of which are located in the infrared region 
of spectrum [5]. There were applied quantum cascade lasers 
(4.53 µm and 5.27 µm) from Alpes Lasers SA, Switzerland 
and the prototype quantum cascade laser (4.78 µm) from the 
Institute of Electron Technology, Poland. The achieved 
results using the constructed CEAS systems in some gas 
pollutants detection are summarized in Table 1. The 
developed setups were enabling laboratory research a few 
gases: nitric oxide, nitric dioxide and carbon monoxide. 
TABLE I.  
THE TEST RESULTS OF OUR SENSORS 
Type of 
sensor 
Operation 
Wavelength 
Detection 
Limit 
Measurement 
Uncertainty 
Comments 
NO2 
414 nm 
1 ppb 
5% 
Outdoor 
tests 
N2O 
4.53 µm 
45 ppb 
13% 
Laboratory 
tests 
NO 
5.27 µm 
70 ppb 
12% 
Laboratory 
tests 
CO 
4.78 µm 
Approx. 
150 ppb 
- 
Under 
laboratory 
tests 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
CEAS sensors are able to measure concentration of 
atmosphere gases at ppb level. Their sensitivity is 
comparable with the sensitivities of instruments based on 
other 
methods, 
e.g., 
gas 
chromatography 
or 
mass 
spectrometry. Observation of NO2 molecules can be done at 
electronic transitions which are characterized by a broad 
absorption spectra providing a relatively large mean 
absorption cross section within the range of several 
nanometers. Therefore, using broadband multimode lasers it 
is possible to detect this gas. However, for other compounds 
(like N2O, NO and CO) mid-IR absorption lines are also very 
promises. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The presented work was supported by The National 
Centre for Research and Development in the scope of Project 
ID: 179616. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Miczuga, K. Kopczyński, J. Pietrzak, and R. Owczarek, 
“Measuring system for detection and identification of 
hazardous chemicals,” Proc SPIE, 2012, vol. 8703, doi: 
10.1117/12.2010663 
[2] T. Stacewicz, J. Wojtas, Z. Bielecki, M. Nowakowski, J. 
Mikołajczyk, R. Mędrzycki, and B. Rutecka, “Cavity ring 
down spectroscopy: detection of trace amounts of substance,” 
Opto-Electron. Rev.,  2012, vol. 20,  pp. 34-41. 
[3] J. B. Paul, L. Lapson, and J. G. Anderson, “Ultrasensitive 
absorption spectroscopy with a high-finesse optical cavity and 
off-axis alignment,” Applied Optics, 2001, vol. 40, pp. 4904-
4910. 
[4] I. Courtillot, J. Morville, V. Motto-Ros, and D. Romanini, 
“Sub-ppb NO2 detection by optical feedback cavity-enhanced 
absorption spectroscopy with a blue diode laser,” Appl. Phys. 
B, 2006, vol. 85, pp. 407–412.  
[5] J. Wojtas, J. Mikolajczyk, and Z. Bielecki, “Aspects of the 
Application of Cavity Enhanced Spectroscopy to Nitrogen 
Oxides Detection,” Sensors, 2013, vol. 13, pp. 7570-7598.  
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

