Monitoring of Hazardous Scenarios using Multi-Sensor Devices 
 
M. Bartholmai, E. Koeppe, P. P. Neumann 
Sensors, Measurement and Testing Methods 
BAM Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing 
Berlin, Germany 
matthias.bartholmai@bam.de 
 
 
Abstract— The combination of different types of sensors to 
multi-sensor devices offers excellent potential for monitoring 
applications. This should be demonstrated by means of four 
different examples of actual developments carried out by 
Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing (BAM): 
monitoring and indoor localization of relief forces, a micro-
drone for gas measurement in hazardous scenarios, sensor- 
enabled radio-frequency identification (RFID) tags for 
safeguard of dangerous goods, and a multifunctional sensor for 
spatially resolved under-surface monitoring of gas storage 
areas. Objective of the presented projects is to increase the 
personal and technical safety in hazardous scenarios. These 
examples should point to application specific challenges for the 
applied components and infrastructure, and it should 
emphasize the potential of multi-sensor systems.  
Keywords-monitoring; 
multi-sensor 
device; 
hazardous 
scenarios; data-fusion 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The 
safe 
operation 
in 
hazardous 
scenarios 
(conflagrations, chemical incidents, etc.) and handling of 
dangerous substances (toxic, explosive, harmful for human 
and/or the environment) often requires the usage of sensor 
systems, e.g., to measure the status of a process, to enable 
early warning in case of an accident, or to evaluate the 
situation after an accident happened. In many cases not only 
one measuring variable is sufficient for a comprehensive 
evaluation of such scenarios, demanding for technical 
solutions with integration of multiple types of sensors. 
Technical 
enhancements 
like 
miniaturization, 
data 
processing, and wireless communication are the basis for 
application specific multi-sensor solutions. Data-fusion 
offers sophisticated possibilities to analyze and clarify the 
hazard potential of relevant situations – in many cases quasi 
in real-time. 
The following examples present multi-sensor concepts 
applied to different scenarios of condition monitoring and 
safety management. Often similar issues and requirements 
must be taken into account, regardless of whether the 
monitoring object is a firefighter, a cask for radioactive 
material or a subsurface storage area.  
The paper is structured in 6 sections. The sections II till 
V describe the above mentioned examples on basis of the 
physical principle, functionality and application. Section VI 
gives a short summary and the most relevant conclusions. 
II. 
MONITORING AND INDOOR LOCALIZATION OF RELIEF 
FORCES 
Rescue forces often operate in dangerous scenarios and 
situations in which their localization can be crucial for safe 
operation and return. Fire, landslip-, or flood scenarios pose 
hazards like suffocation, burn, or undercooling. The 
localization and quick recovery raise the survival chance 
clearly. The use of Global Positioning system (GPS) 
technology allows the exact localization of persons or objects 
everywhere a sufficient satellite reception is possible. 
However, in many hazardous scenarios no or only 
insufficient GPS reception is available. This may be the case 
in underground, indoor, or fire scenarios, making GPS 
localization complicated or impossible. 
 Objectives of the ongoing project “Localization and 
monitoring of relief forces in hazardous scenarios” with 
acronym OMEGa are the development and validation of a 
monitoring system, which complements GPS localization 
with indoor navigation [1] and in addition measures the most 
important vital functions. The overall system consists of two 
units, which operate spatially separated and communicate via 
radio with each other. The first unit are portable multi-sensor 
devices, which serve as personal protective equipment (PPE-
Device) of the rescue force and should be implemented, e.g., 
by integration in the clothes. The second unit consists of the 
components of the control station for data processing and 
display (Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1: Scheme of the OMEGa units. 
 The multi-sensor device (Figure 2) should consist of an 
outdoor localization system (GPS), an inertial navigation 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

system (INS) for indoor localization, and sensors for 
monitoring of vital functions like pulse, temperature and 
humidity at the body surface. The communication between 
both units should be implemented through a redundant 
solution of two radio modes, based on mobile phone network 
and ISM band, the latter with multihop routing. Principal 
elements of the control station are analysis tools for 
calculating motion sequences from the sensor data and a 
geographical information system (GIS) to track and monitor 
the equipped persons in map-based software. 
 
 
Figure 2: Prototype of the OMEGa multi-sensor device. 
Indoor localization on basis of an INS is the most 
sophisticated challenge in the OMEGa project. The INS 
itself is a multi-sensor microelectromechanical systems 
(MEMS) device consisting of 3-axes accelerometers, 
gyroscopes, magnetic field, and barometric pressure sensors, 
partly redundant. The calculation of motion sequences from 
the combined sensor data is performed by data-fusion 
algorithms, which are currently under development [1, 2].  
III. 
MICRO-DRONE FOR GAS MEASUREMENT IN HAZ-
ARDOUS SCENARIOS 
A research project was carried out at BAM with the 
objective to develop a flying remote-controlled measuring 
system. The system is capable of operating in a variety of 
scenarios of gas emission, e.g., exhaust gas from a chimney, 
flue gas in case of a fire, gas emission in case of an accident 
of chemical or hazardous goods [3]. Another addressed field 
of application is spatially resolved emission control of 
geodynamic active regions, waste disposals, stockpiles, 
landfills, CO2 storage areas (carbon capture and storage, 
CCS), industrial sites and pollution critical areas. Due to its 
mobility the system can measure the gas concentration in the 
immediate vicinity of the object, which causes the emission. 
A further stage of extension is the enhancement of the 
system for identification of gas source locations, and gas 
distribution 
modeling/mapping 
(GDM). 
The 
latter 
applications are implemented based on the combined 
analysis of position dependent gas concentrations and wind 
vector data. 
 
Figure 3: Micro-drone with multi-sensor equippment in flight. 
Gas concentration measurement from an air-borne platform 
(AR 100-B, Airrobot, Germany, Figure 3) is demanding in 
terms of weight, dimensions, energy consumption, influence 
of the rotors, and speed of the sensing device. A gas-sensing 
payload was developed on basis of a commercially available 
gas detector (X-am 5600, Draeger, Germany), which was 
originally designed as personal safety equipment. The device 
features low weight and compact design. The modular 
concept allows the ad hoc exchange of four sensors in the 
gas detector, which enables users to customize it for their 
specific application. 
Due to the weight restrictions imposed by the platform 
(max. payload 200 g), the micro-drone does not carry any 
wind sensing modalities. Instead, wind measurements are 
estimated by fusing the different on-board sensors of its 
inertial measurement unit to compute the parameters of the 
wind triangle [4].  
The wind triangle is commonly used in navigation and 
describes the relationships between the flight vector, the 
ground vector, and the wind vector. The micro-drone can be 
operated manually or in GPS mode, e.g., by autonomous 
waypoint following. 
Both, gas distribution modeling and plume-tracking were 
enabled using data-fusion algorithms. For plume tracking 
three promising algorithms were implemented and adapted 
accordingly to meet the system characteristics of the micro-
drone: the surge-cast algorithm (a variant of the silkworm 
moth algorithm), the zigzag/dung beetle algorithm, and a 
newly developed algorithm called “pseudo gradient-based 
algorithm”. First successful tests were performed in real-
world experiments [5].  
To build a predictive gas distribution model, the Kernel 
DM+V/W algorithm introduced by Reggente and Lilienthal 
[6] was used. The input to this algorithm is a set D = 
{(xi,ri,vi)}1≤i≤n of gas sensor measurements ri and wind 
measurements vi collected at locations xi. The output is a grid 
model that computes a confidence estimate, as well as the 
distribution mean and variance for each cell k of the gridmap 
(Figure 4).  
Additional sensors for temperature and humidity are 
integrated into the gas-sensing payload but so far not taken 
into account. It is conceivable to use these data for sensor 
compensation algorithms or to correlate the environmental 
conditions, e.g., in the case of fire. Integration of optical or 
IR data is another viable aspect. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 4: GDM Experiment: Predictive mean (top) and variance map 
(middle) of the gas distribution and the corresponding mean airflow map 
(bottom) and the path of the micro-drone created using Kernel DM+V/W. 
The gas source was located approx. at position (2, 6) m and is denoted by 
the cross. The concentration value of CO2 is given in % by volume. 
IV. 
SENSOR-ENABLED RFID TAGS FOR SAFEGUARD OF 
DANGEROUS GOODS 
The project “Sensor-enabled RFID tags for safeguard of 
dangerous goods” with acronym SIGRID investigates and 
assesses possibilities to improve safety and security of 
dangerous goods transports through the use of the latest 
RFID technology [7]. This technology can be used to greatly 
enhance the transparency of the supply chain and aid 
logistics companies in complying with regulations. In the 
context of SIGRID custom RFID sensor tags (Figure 5) were 
developed to monitor dangerous goods during transport and 
help to prevent hazards by allowing timely countermeasures. 
This requires the combination of communication technology 
and sensor functionality with low power consumption and 
small design. 
To achieve long battery-life, the use of very energy 
efficient sensors is mandatory. Other desirable properties of 
the sensors include high accuracy, long lifetime, and short 
response time. For gas sensors a high selectivity is also very 
important. Currently four types of sensors are integrated in 
the RFID tag, which are a combined humidity and 
temperature sensor, gas sensors for carbon monoxide (CO) 
and oxygen (O2), and a tilt sensor. Other interesting sensor 
options that might be tested in future include sensors for 
detecting the filling level and sensors for monitoring the 
operation of equipment that is built into the container like a 
stirring unit. 
 
Figure 5: Prototype of the sensor enabled RFID tag 
The integrated sensors enable the system for recognizing 
and evaluating of different scenarios. Adequate gas sensors 
indicate an emission from the containments via measured 
concentrations. If a possible gas release from the transported 
substance cannot be detected because of lacking the proper 
sensor, the O2-sensor can indicate a leakage through 
decreasing oxygen values. For numerous dangerous goods a 
maximal transport temperature is defined to prevent any 
chemical reaction. Temperatures can be measured and 
compared periodically to substance specific values. If that 
value or a tolerance is exceeded an alarm or countermeasure 
can be activated. The tilt sensor can be triggered on heavy 
vibrations or tilting of the containment. In case of a 
dangerous good accident the available information about the 
type, amount, and condition of the dangerous goods can be 
used to accurately inform the relief forces. Unavailable or 
inaccurate information represents a significant problem. This 
often leads to a delay of the rescue operation, because relief 
forces must be aware of the involved substances and their 
condition to effectively protect themselves against them.  
Sensor-Tags, data communication, and software are 
combined to an interactive solution, which can tackle various 
scenarios during dangerous goods transports. The underlying 
information is provided by a data base with expert 
knowledge, in this case the BAM dangerous goods database 
"GEFAHRGUT" [8]. Possible extensions of the system take 
into account vehicle data or GPS information in terms of 
route planning and geo-fencing. 
V. 
MULTIFUNCTIONAL SENSOR FOR SPATIALLY RE-
SOLVED UNDER-SURFACE MONITORING OF GAS STORAGE 
AREAS 
One of the main unsolved issues of under-ground storages 
for, e.g., carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and natural gas 
(primarily methane) is the comprehensive surveillance of 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

these areas with reasonable effort and costs. Conventional 
sensors, such as soil air probes or borehole probes, can only 
be used for punctual or locally limited measurements. 
Further they require invasive application, which causes 
structural influences. 
  
  
Figure 6: Prototype of the sensor enabled RFID tag. 
BAM in cooperation with the company MeGaSen UG 
carries out a research project to enhance and validate an 
innovative approach for distributed subsurface monitoring of 
gas storage areas. The concept combines different 
measurement technologies to one multifunctional sensor: 
membrane-based gas measurement technology for in-situ 
monitoring of gases in soil [9] and fiber optical sensing of 
temperature and strain as a measure for structural change 
[10]. 
The gas sensor (Figure 6) is based on the principle of 
selective permeation of gases through a membrane. The 
measuring method combines the gas specific diffusion rates 
through a membrane with Dalton’s law of partial pressures. 
It enables the calculation of gas concentrations with the ideal 
gas law using measurements of pressure, time, and 
temperature. The sensor is implemented in form of a flexible 
tube. The synthetic material allows a variable subsurface 
installation, e.g., in meander or network form (Figure 7). So 
far the gas concentration measurement is implemented for 
carbon dioxide and oxygen, further gases should follow, e.g., 
methane and hydrogen sulfide. 
 
Figure 7: Spatially distributed gas monitoring built up of several membrane 
sensors. The brown and yellow areas indicate CO2 hotspots underground. 
The red and grey curves display the averaged measurements of the partial 
CO2 pressure over x and y. 
Glass fiber optical sensors use the effects of stimulated 
Raman scattering (SRS) and stimulated Brillouin scattering 
(SBS) for spatially resolved measuring of temperature and 
strain. Distributed strain measurements can also be 
performed with polymer optical fibers using optical time-
domain reflectometry (OTDR). BAM develops, validates 
and uses such sensor systems in different areas of 
application, such as geotechnics, structural engineering, and 
physical protection. 
Combining these two sensor types (membrane sensor and 
fiber sensor) to a multifunctional sensor offers an innovative 
and promising approach for spatially resolved monitoring of 
large-scale areas. Both technologies offer advantageous 
specifications, 
which 
support 
and 
encourage 
their 
combination: 
• 
Distributed, area-wide applicable measuring system 
with spatially resolution of all variables 
• 
Scalable and adaptable form of application, 
depending on monitoring object and problem 
• 
Non-invasive 
system 
(no 
influence 
on 
the 
monitoring object, due to permanent presence of the 
sensor in the ground) 
• 
No sensitivity against electro-magnetic fields (e.g., 
lightning and high-voltage lines) 
• 
Applicable in explosive surroundings (no electrical 
components at the measuring locations) 
• 
High thermal and chemical robustness 
• 
Comparatively reasonable components 
The structural combination is accomplished by linkage of 
the sensitive elements membrane sensor and optical fiber. 
For this purpose, geogrid materials (Figure 8) act as a carrier 
material. 
Combined data analysis should be investigated and 
further developed to attain synergy effects, increase the 
sensitivity and informational value, and address new fields of 
application. Using sensor data fusion allows in-depth 
analysis of soil processes and early detection of relevant 
changes. For instance, the combined analysis of gas 
concentration, temperature, and strain can enable an 
indication of very small crack formation and gas emission, 
with significant higher reliability compared to sole gas 
measurements. 
 
Figure 8: Geogrid with integrated fiber optical sensors. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Two immediate fields of application are addressed: 
Landfills produce greenhouse gas and warmth. The 
combination of both measurement methods should allow a 
potent landfill monitoring by containment of chemical active 
areas and leakages. 
Underground storage of CO2 as part of CCS as well as 
extraction and production of gases from geological areas can 
lead to mechanical changes of the deck rock (lowering / 
elevation), with which a regional tension field is build up. 
Thus gas-leading gaps can be induced, which cause local 
ground structure changes. The simultaneous measurement of 
spatially resolved gas concentrations and strain allows the 
development of an efficient early warning system.  
The validation, optimization, and practical demonstration 
of the overall system are carried out on the BAM Test Site 
Technical Safety (BAM TTS) [11]. For this purpose, a test 
field in application relevant scale of 20 x 20 m² is under 
construction. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Safety related monitoring often is necessary in complex 
scenarios. It requires distinct information to evaluate the 
situation and to determine the further operation. The 
combination of several measurands can improve the 
informative value of a monitoring system in terms of 
measuring diversity and accuracy.  
To present the great potential of such systems, four 
examples for monitoring in safety relevant scenarios are 
presented in this paper, which combine multiple application 
specific sensor techniques. An important result considering 
each of the examples and multi-sensor systems in general is 
that data processing and display of the results with focus of 
the relevant information is crucial. The experiences gained 
from these projects show that the focus should lay on the 
final application and end-users should be involved already in 
the conception of multi-sensor systems. Data-fusion offers 
broad possibilities, but conditions and objectives should be 
well defined and expediently applied. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank all participating colleagues from BAM 
and their project partners. The authors also express their 
gratitude to the German Federal Ministry of Economics and 
Technology for funding the research (MNPQ Program; file 
numbers 28/07 and 17/11 and ZIM Program File 
KF2201041SM1). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Koeppe, M. Bartholmai, A. Liehrs, and J. H. Schiller, 
“Radio-based multi-sensor system for person tracking and 
indoor positioning”, Proceedings of WPNC 2012 - 9th 
Workshop on positioning, navigation and communication, pp. 
180-186, doi: 10.1109/WPNC.2012.6268761 
[2] E. Koeppe, D. Augustin, A. Liehrs, and J. H. Schiller, 
“Automatic 3D Calibration for a Multi-Sensor System”, 
Proceedings of Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation 
(IPIN), 2012, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/IPIN.2012.6418870 
[3] M. Bartholmai and P. Neumann, “Adaptive Spatial-Resolved 
Gas Concentration Measurement Using a Micro-Drone”, tm - 
Technisches Messen, 78, 10, 2011, pp. 470-478, doi: 
10.1524/teme.2011.0158 
[4] P. P. Neumann, S. Asadi, J. H. Schiller, A. J. Li-lienthal, and 
M. Bartholmai, “Autonomous Gas-Sensitive Microdrone – 
Wind Vector Estimation and Gas Distribution Mapping”, 
IEEE Robotics and Automation Magazine, 19, 1, 2012, pp. 
50-61, doi: 10.1109/MRA.2012.2184671 
[5] P. Neumann, V. Bennets, and M. Bartholmai, “Adap-tive Gas 
Source Localization Strategies and Gas Distribution Mapping 
using a Gas-sensitive Micro-Drone”, Proceedings of 16. 
GMA/ITG-Fachtagung Sensoren und Messsysteme 2012, pp. 
800-809, doi: 10.5162/sensoren2012/P5.4 
[6] M. Reggente and A. J. Lilienthal, “Using Local Wind 
Information for Gas Distribution Mapping in Outdoor 
Environments with a Mobile Robot”, Proceedings of IEEE 
Sensors 
2009, 
pp. 
1715-1720, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICSENS.2009.5398498 
[7] T. Goedecke, A. Pettelkau, S. Hohendorf, D. Damm, M. 
Bartholmai, and M. Farahbakhsh, “Securing of Dangerous 
Goods Transports by RFID-Tags with Sensor-Functionality 
and integrated 
Database 
“GEFAHRGUT” 
Information 
(SIGRID)”, Proceedings of the 17th IAPRI World Conference 
on Packaging 2010, pp. 639-642, ISBN-13: 978-1935068365 
[8] http://www.dgg.bam.de 
[9] D. Lazik, S. Ebert, M. Leuthold, J. Hagenau, and H. 
Geistlinger, “Membrane Based Measurement Technology for 
in situ Monitoring of Gases in Soil”, Sensors, 9, 2, 2009, pp. 
756-767, doi: 10.3390/s90200756 
[10] S. Liehr, P. Lenke, M. Wendt, K. Krebber, et al., “Polymer 
Optical Fiber Sensors for Distributed Strain Measurement and 
Application in Structural Health Monitoring”, IEEE Sensors 
Journal, 
9, 
11, 
2009, 
pp. 
1330-1338, 
doi: 
10.1109/JSEN.2009.201835 
[11] M. Bartholmai, P. P. Neumann, and D. Lazik, “Multi-
functional Sensor for Monitoring of CO2 Underground 
Storage by Comprehensive and Spatially Resolved Measuring 
of Gas Concentrations, Temperature and Structural Changes”, 
Energy 
Procedia, 
37, 
2013, 
pp. 
4033-4040, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.egypro.2013.06.303
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

