Tree-Based Organization for Very Large Scale Sensor Networks 
 
Moran Feldman 
Faculty of C.S. Technion  
Israel Institute of Technology  
Haifa, Israel 
moranfe@technion.ac.il 
Sharoni Feldman 
  
ATC Consulting 
Haifa, Israel 
feldsh@netvision.net.il
 
 
Abstract— One of the major challenges in deploying large scale 
sensor networks is the ability of the sensors to weave 
dynamically and autonomously into a sensing plan. In this 
paper 
we 
present 
a 
novel 
algorithm 
with 
certain 
characteristics. It is applicable for thousands of sensors and 
uses a tree based organization to present an aggregation 
method that aggregates discrete events into compound ones. It 
presents a set of security levels to ensure that events are 
transmitted to the control center (sink) and also presents 
backup layers to ensure maximal connectivity. Furthermore, it 
is applicable for sensors with no GPS. The algorithm was 
successfully tested using the dedicated simulator on a terrain 
containing 10,000 sensors. Our results show that the sensors 
perform the process of weaving into a sensing plan, the task of 
identifying multiple intruders, reporting the events to the sink 
in a short time and comply with the other demands.     
Keywords- 
Large 
Scales 
Sensor 
network; 
Routing; 
Localization; Data aggregation.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The evolution of microelectronics and communication 
technologies facilitates the manufacturing of miniature 
sensors comprising a small transmitter/receiver, a processor, 
memory components and a low-power battery [1], [2]. Most 
often, the sensor, or node, is a Boolean sensing device that 
detects an event within a given sensing range, and is able to 
inter-communicate using wireless protocols with adjacent 
nodes, creating a wireless sensor network (WSN). 
 
There are a few common methods to categorize the 
network organization in a WSN according to the network 
structure [3]. The first category is flat routing, wherein all 
nodes have an identical role. The routing of events from the 
sensing nodes to the sinks can use any node in the network 
without any limitations and without interacting with any 
centric nodes [4][5][6][7][8][9]. In hierarchical routing 
protocols, part of the sensors possesses additional tasks. In 
this case, the sensors are grouped into clusters. One of the 
sensors in every cluster is designated as the cluster-head. If 
needed, it is possible to group cluster heads into new clusters 
[10][11] [12][13]. This organization method delegates 
routing responsibilities to the cluster heads rather than the 
regular nodes. Hierarchical routing is considered as an 
efficient way to reduce energy consumption by transferring 
the aggregation process to the cluster head. A third method is 
location-based routing. The sensors are aware of their 
position in the theater. This location information can be 
exploited in order to route data over the network more 
efficiently. The sensor location can be obtained from a GPS 
receiver installed in every sensor [14]. Another method uses 
relative coordinates that are based on information gathered 
from neighboring sensors. The distance between neighboring 
sensors can be estimated according to the strength of the 
incoming signals [15][16][17]. An interesting approach is 
presented in [18]. The traffic is divided into two types: high 
priority traffic and low-priority traffic. High priority data is 
routed using a dedicated congestion zone arranged as a 
spanning tree with the sink as a root and the low priority 
traffic is routed via other nodes and longer paths. This model 
enables every node to be connected to several trees 
according to the number of sinks.  
 
In this paper, we present the Very Large Scale Sensor 
Network Algorithm (VLSSNA).  The VLSSNA presents a 
novel routing technique for a very large network composed 
of 10,000 sensors. This number is significantly higher than 
the number presented in literature [19]. This algorithm 
creates a flat network. Moreover, the algorithm enables the 
network operators to assign an "importance level" to events 
and to transmit important events on parallel layers of the 
network. This feature increases significantly the probability 
that events will not get lost even if some intermediate nodes 
malfunction.  
The sensors dissemination process is totally random 
without any prior definitions in the sensors. The organization 
of the network is an autonomous procedure without any 
external intervention. In our research, we assume a sensor 
density that prevents an object from crossing the sensing 
field without being detected [20]. Energy economization is 
achieved using a communication method that combines 
broadcasting and sensor-to-sensor communication and an 
aggregation process used to minimize the number of 
messages. 
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 presents the theater and the network elements, 
Section 3 presents the sensors control and management, 
Section 4 deals with energy saving methods, Section 5 
presents the simulator used for evaluation of the sensor 
network and Section 6 presents the simulations and results. 
Conclusions follow in Section 7.  
45
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

II. 
THEATRE AND NETWORK ELEMENTS 
A. The Theater 
Fig. 1 presents a schematic view of a typical theater on 
which the sensors are dispersed. The sensors are dispersed so 
that their density ensures that every target will be detected by 
one or more sensors. At the edge of the theater, three base 
stations (BSs) are placed, arranged in an equilateral triangle. 
The BSs are connected by a high-speed communication link. 
At least one sink controls and monitors the events.  
B.  Network Elements 
a)Base Stations  
The BSs are identical, and they are controlled by the sink. 
Every BS is required to know its exact position in space (x, 
y, z) coordinates. This information can be obtained manually 
when the BS is installed or via a GPS. In addition, all BSs 
clocks are synchronized.  
A BS is constructed of the following units: (a) A long-range 
downstream transmitter that covers the whole theatre. (b) A 
short-range downstream transmitter and upstream receiver 
that cover the adjacent sensors. (c) A high speed LAN that 
connects all BSs and the sink. This LAN is used to transfer 
synchronization data among the BSs and the sink, alarms 
received from the sensors to the sinks and messages from the 
sink to the BSs and the sensors.  
b) Sensors  
The sensors are scattered in the terrain. The distribution of 
the sensors in the theater is not required to be uniform. 
However, it is assumed that some connectivity between a 
sensor and its surrounding sensors can always be found. A 
sensor has a limited life expectancy, and as a dispensable 
device the whole network will continue to function with a 
certain decrease in the number of active sensors. The design 
of the network allows the operators to add periodically new 
sensors to the field to overcome the natural decrease in the 
number of sensors.  A sensor is composed of the following 
major units: (a) A binary Omni sensing device like a 
microphone. The sensor is unable to detect the direction of 
the event. (b) Short range Transmitter/Receiver. We can 
assume that the transmission range is greater than the sensing 
range. Fig. 1 presents a sensors field. The dashed lines 
present the sensing range while the full lines present the 
transmission range. A sensor can receive messages 
transmitted from other sensors within their transmission 
range or from the BSs. (c) Processor and Battery.  
 
III. 
SENSORS CONTROL AND MANAGEMENT  
A. First Network Activation 
The network activation process starts after completing 
scattering the sensors in the field. The sensors in the field 
will not start to work until the activation process ends. Note 
that all sensors clocks will be synchronized during the 
activation process. The activation process has 3 steps and is 
coordinated by the BSs: 
1. BS1 sends a beacon that covers the whole field. This 
beacon carries the following data elements: (a) Time 
stamp used to synchronize the internal clock of every 
sensor and the other BSs. (b) The name and 
geographical location (XBS1, YBS1, ZBS1) of BS1 (c) 
Wait time (tw) in milliseconds. 
Every sensor receiving this beacon will update its 
internal clock with the BS1 time and its internal database 
with the coordinates of BS1. The other BSs will update 
their internal clock according to BS1 clock.  
 
 
Figure 1: A typical sensor theater. Three base stations organized as an 
equilateral triangle and a single sink monitor the wireless sensor netwrok. 
2. 
BS2 waits predefined tw milliseconds (a) value known to 
all network elements) before broadcasting a beacon. This 
beacon which covers the whole field carries the following 
parameters: (a) The name and geographical location 
(XBS2, YBS2, ZBS2) of BS2. (b)Time stamp.  
Every sensor receiving this beacon will update its internal 
database with the coordinates of BS2.  
3. BS3 will wait tw milliseconds after BS2 transmission 
before broadcasting a beacon. This beacon parameters 
and the process are identical to these of BS2.  
Every sensor receiving this beacon will update its 
internal storage with the coordinates of BS3.  
After receiving the 3 beacons, every sensor starts its 
localization 
algorithm 
(based 
on 
trilateration). 
The 
termination phase of this algorithm is a set of sensors spread 
in the field when every sensor has identified the BSs, the BSs 
geographical locations and its own location. In the current 
state, the sensors stay dormant and do not initiate any 
activity. 
The network activation process runs periodically and is 
used to join new sensors that were added to the field or 
remap old sensors that were moved inside the field. 
B. Messages and Data transfer  
The communication among the network elements is 
performed by messages. The network elements exchange 
broadcast messages addressed by all listening nodes within 
the transmission range and directed messages that address a 
specific node within the transmission range. Another type of 
46
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

classification is based on the transmission range of the 
message originator. A BS can transmit short range and long 
range messages while a sensor is capable to transmit only 
short range messages. Tab. 1 summarizes combinations 
between the message types and message transmission range. 
While a BS can send directly a long distance message to 
every node in the terrain, a node which is required to send an 
event to the BS, is required to use intermediate nodes to 
bridge the distance. The process of transferring the 
information from the node to the BS is based on a “store and 
forward” mechanism. A node that received a message will 
forward the message to the next leg in the chain only after it 
was received completely.  
Special attention was given to energy saving. As will be 
described in details later in this paper we implemented 
“energy saving” methods in critical and demanding 
procedures.  
C. Trees formation processes  
During the trees formation phase, every sensor builds its 
connections in the field. All BSs initiate stimulatingly the 
trees formation process although the processes are 
independent. It starts after the localization process and 
terminates when the sensors complete joining the spanning 
trees. After completion, every node is connected to n trees 
when n is the number of BSs.  
Fig. 2 presents 2 trees in the theater. The tree of the root 
node BS1 and the nodes addresses is presented in continuous 
lines in black and the tree of root node BS3 is presented in 
dashed lines. The addresses of the nodes that belong to root 
BS1 start with <1.> and the addresses of nodes that belong to 
BS3 start with <3.>.  We skip the tree formation process due 
to lack of space.  
IV. 
DETAILED DESCRIPTION – TFA ALGORITHM 
The trees formation algorithm (TFA) organizes the nodes 
in the field in rooted trees. Only nodes that belong to the 
same tree can transfer events to the BS which is also the tree 
root and the sink. To ensure the maximal connectivity, all 
nodes will try to organize themselves in a single tree. Every 
node in the field has a unique and fixed node-id and a virtual 
coordinate (of the type x.y.z..) that may change depending on 
the changes in the tree structure. Every tree is identified by a  
Table 1: Messages Definition and Types of Messages 
       MSG 
Range 
Type 
Long Range Message 
Short Range Message 
Directed 
Message 
A message sent by a BS, 
directed to a specific sensor 
in the theater. The addressed 
sensor 
is 
identified 
by 
unique sensor-id within the 
terrain. 
A message sent by sensors or the 
short-range transmitter of the 
BS. This message is addressed a 
specific sensor identified by 
unique sensor-id within the 
transmission range. 
Broadcast 
Message 
A message transmitted only 
by a BS. This message is 
targeted to all sensors in the 
terrain 
A message sent by sensors or the 
short-range transmitter of the 
BS. All receiving nodes within 
the short transmission range 
address this message. 
 “tree name” which is the id of the root node, which is the 
BS. The metrical join (referred also as join) protocol should 
satisfy the following properties: 
Eventually all nodes within transmission area must fuse 
into a single tree. When two trees are being fused, most 
updates should be made to the nodes of the smaller tree (in 
the number of nodes). The protocol should maximize the 
number of nodes that joins the tree in every step (yielding a 
parallel fuse). Nodes periodically attempt to balance the tree 
by shortening their distance to the root of the tree by 
improving their position in the tree and joining higher-level 
nodes.  
The protocol is fully distributive with no “central'' 
control.  
Running alarms will not be affected (i.e. will not break) in 
any way from the ongoing trees join process or 
rearrangement of an existing tress. The parallel process of 
creating the trees (with the roots BS1, BS2…) is fully 
independent. When all processes terminate, every node is a 
member in all trees. 
The TFA algorithm runs when the stability of the 
network is violated. Every time this algorithm runs, it will 
bridge the “holes” created by faulty sensors and will add new 
sensors that were added to the terrain. 
A. Events, Events aggregation and Delivery Verification 
In our model, every sensor has a circular events detection 
area around itself. An intruder that enters the sensors field 
will stimulate every node whenever it enters its detection 
radius.  
Every node that detects an intruder sends an event 
message to its father. Fig. 3 presents a section of the sensors 
field and the intruder path within it. The circle around each 
sensor presents the detection zone of the sensor. Our 
assumption is that every sensor is able to perform basic 
filtering of the detected noise, i.e. a sensor programmed to 
detect a noise of a car will not respond to a noise created by a 
walking animal 
 
Figure 2: Trees in the terrain 
 
or barking of a dog. In Fig. 3 the intruder triggers 4 sensors 
located on his path.  
The tree structure creates a natural organization of the 
nodes, which allows the network to “aggregate” events from 
each subtree in the subtree root and minimize the amount of 
events transferred towards the sink. For example, node <1.1> 
is able to aggregate the events detected by its children 
<1.1.X> and send it as a unified event to its father. A 
47
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

managing automaton runs in every node and enables the 
node to act in one of two possible ways: Detect an event or 
receive and handle event messages from its children and 
transfer them either transparently or with some updates 
toward the sink.   
The automaton is composed of 3 states.  
1) Idle. This is the stable state of the node. In this state, 
the node is waiting for an event created by the intruder or 
to a message from one of its children. When the node 
detects an intruder, it sends the message “event-report-
message” with the event details to its father. The main 
event details are the geographical location of the node and 
the event timestamp. After detecting an event, the node 
will not report any additional event for a short time span. 
This prevents the node from creating a flood of messages 
toward the sink caused by a single short timed stimulation.  
2) Store information – open timer. As soon as the node 
receives an “event-report-message” from one of its 
children, it assumes that his other children may detect this 
same event. The node stores the event data and waits for 
additional messages from the other children. A short wait 
timer is activated in order to limit the wait time. If the node 
receives an “event-report-message” from all its children, 
the timer is redundant, and it is cancelled. 
3) Calculate direction. This state is activated once the 
node decides to stop waiting for additional “event-report-
messages”. The node tries to calculate the local direction 
of the intruder, based on the messages it received. The 
results are then sent towards the root using the message 
“aggregated-event-message”. It is possible to calculate the 
direction only if two or more children reported the event. 
In case that only a single child detected the event, the 
aggregated message will carry the location of the detecting 
node. In the case that 2 or more nodes have detected the 
event, the message will carry the locations of the two most 
distant detecting nodes. 
Sensors Detection Zone
Intruder Path
Sensor
1
1.1
1.1.2
1.1.1
1.1.3
1.2
1.2.1
Intruder path
1.2.1.1
 
Figure 3: Sample Intruder Path 
When a node receives a message “aggregate-event-
message” from its subtree, it acts as a router and sends it to 
its father.  
B. Data Aggregation 
The purpose of the aggregation process is to reduce the 
amount of data transferred from the detecting nodes toward 
the root. However, as will be explained later, this process 
slows the speed in which events are transferred toward the 
sink. The aggregation process can be nested, for example, 
node <1> in Fig. 3 can aggregate the data from its children 
<1.1> and <1.2> into a single message. A k-level aggregation 
process performs the aggregation process in the k lowest 
levels of the tree (starting from the leaves). The aggregation 
level can be adjusted according to the required performance 
of the network and the type of expected intruders  
The need to aggregate messages requires that inbound 
messages will be delayed in the node for a period of time. 
This delay enables other inbound event messages to arrive 
during the delay and to be aggregated into a single 
aggregated message.  
C. Event Delivery Verification  
The verification feature enables the network to ensure 
with high level of certainty that a reported event has been 
transferred successfully from the sensing nodes via the 
routing nodes to the BSs and the sink. The network 
architecture enables the use of two types of verification 
levels. The basic method is "Report & Forget" which does 
not require a BS to acknowledge the acceptance of the event 
report. The enhanced method "Report & Acknowledge" 
requires the receiving BS to send an acknowledgement to the 
reporting nodes. The acknowledgement does not use the 
sensors network to transfer the acknowledgement to the 
sender but broadcasts a "Shout" message over the air from 
the BS with the sensor-id and event details. In case that the 
event originator has not received the acknowledgment 
message within a predefined period, it will resend the event 
report.  
 
Another capability of the architecture is to use two levels 
of energy saving delivery methods. The economized method 
uses a "Load-Sharing" mechanism where the reporting node 
selects cyclically one of the trees and sends the event report 
over the tree to a single BS. The "Active-All" mechanism is 
more energy consuming. Using this method, the node sends 
in parallel the event report over all possible trees by 
replicating the event report over all trees. The replicated 
events are propagated to the BSs and the sink. According to 
the events time and locations, the sink will fuse the 
replicated events into one single event.  
V. 
ENERGY SAVING METHODS   
The energy resources of the nodes are very limited. A 
critical factor in the design of the VLSSNA algorithm was 
to reduce the energy utilization as much as possible and to 
enable the network operators to select an operation mode 
that fits the needs and will meet the energy resources of the 
nodes. The following methods are used by the network. (a) 
In case that a node is able to control its transmission power, 
and it has more than a single candidate to become its father, 
it will select the most “economical” father that is not too 
close. (b) Optional Acknowledge (Ack) via “shouting” and 
not via the network. (c)Using adjustable replicated 
transmissions. A node can generate an Ack message that 
will be transmitted in parallel on one or more trees 
48
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

according to its importance. (d) The ability of the initiating 
sensor to select randomly a tree contributes also to an even 
utilization of energy in the network.  
VI. 
THE INTERACTIVE FLEXIBLE AD HOC SIMULATOR 
For testing and evaluating the protocols described in this 
research (VLSSNA and TFA) we used the interactive 
Flexible Ad-Hoc Simulator (IFAS) [7]. The IFAS simulator 
was originally developed for evaluating the performance of 
ad-hoc protocols; it was adapted for sensor networks and can 
handle successfully thousands of sensors. In this section, we 
shall describe the simulator and the simulation scenarios. 
Special attention was given to the following aspects: (a) 
enhanced visualization tools that give a full visual of the 
theater, zooming of selected zones, node movements and 
voice channels in ad hoc networks, and specific node status 
including queue status; (b) tracing the formation of trees; (c) 
tracing the events transfer and sessions in real time; (d) 
configuration and simulation definition via online screens; 
(e) definition and tracking of intruders paths and pace; (f) 
support of logging, debugging and analysis tools. 
The enhanced visualization capabilities, unique to this 
simulator, contributed to the understanding of the protocols 
behavior, as we were able to view the progress in the field 
and detect unexpected behavior.  
The simulator enables the user to get detailed online 
reports. These capabilities set afloat disruptions in specific 
nodes behavior as a result of their location in the field. It is 
possible to “kill” nodes, zoom in and out selected areas and 
trace explicitly certain events. Fig. 4 presents one of the trees 
on a terrain with 3000 sensors (the black points) placed 
randomly in the field. 
 
 
Figure 4: Sample Tree with BS-2 as a root 
 
The root tree is BS2. The intruders which are not seen in this 
view are crossing the field and activating the sensors. In the 
bottom of the screen we see the events received by the BS.  
 
Table 2: Quantities details 
Parameter 
Value 
Number of sensors 
3000 sensors (except for the scalability tests) 
Field size 
1Km x 1Km 
Sensor transmission range 60 meters 
Event detection range 
10 meters 
 
 
Figure 5: Base stations Organization 
 
VII. SIMULATIONS AND RESULTS 
The simulation environment creates the infrastructure to 
analyze the following directions: (a) the efficiency and 
scalability of the TFA algorithm. (b) The performance of the 
network in the following aspects: The contribution of the 
aggregation process to reduce the number of messages and 
the delay created by nodes as a result of the aggregation 
process. The tests were performed using the parameters 
presented in Tab. 2. 
Fig. 5 presents the BSs organization. BS1, BS2 and BS3 
act as the trees roots and are able to broadcast "shout" 
messages that cover the whole terrain. In addition, the 
events are received via these BSs.   
The localization algorithm requires using a minimum of 
three synchronized beacons that broadcast periodically a 
time event. The best organization for the beacons is in an 
equilateral triangle. To show an applicative possibility, we 
combined the functionality of two beacons with BS1 and BS2 
and created a Support Basestation (SBS) that participates 
only on the localization process. The distance between BSs, 
BS1 and BS2 is d. Note that it is possible to use the SBS as a 
replacement for BS3. 
  
Scalability and connectivity  
The basic requirement from the TFA algorithm is to 
connect all sensors in the field into one single network. This 
set of tests is comprised of two groups: 
1) Scalability tests. We run the TFA algorithm on a 
field with a minimal population of 1000 sensors and a 
maximal population of 10,000 nodes. The trees creation 
process succeeded to fuse all sensors into a single tree 
without any measurable impact on the performance.  
2) Connectivity tests. The connectivity tests included 
two groups of tests – the first group verified that all nodes 
dispersed in the tree are merged into a single tree. The 
second group of tests checked what happens if sub-tree 
nodes within the tree die. In this case, the tests show that 
the nods that belong to the subtree of the faulty node 
discover the fault, and declare themselves as standalone 
trees. This declaration initiated the fusion process that 
results in a new fully connected field.  
   
Average nodal delay 
Intuitively, two factors contribute to the efficiency of the 
aggregation process – the nodal delay time and the number 
49
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

of the tree levels that participate in the aggregation process.   
Fig. 6 presents the impact of the nodal delay time on the 
aggregation process. In this test, we measured the percentage 
of aggregated messages out of all event messages triggered 
by the intruder as a function of the nodal delay time. In this 
test, every inbound message received by a sensor on its way 
to the sink is delayed for a fixed period before it is 
outbounded to the next tree level. We expect the number of 
aggregated messages to grow as the internal delay grows. As 
presented, the number of aggregated messages grows 
significantly to 33% when the delay grows to 700ms. A 
small increase to 40% is achieved when the delay grows to 
1200ms. Additional delay time greater than 1200ms does not 
contribute to the performance. Note that the increase in the 
performance costs a significant delay in the arrival of the 
alarm message to the sink.  
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
The tree based connection between sensors presents a very 
efficient and practical way to connect between very large 
numbers of sensors in a sensor network. The method 
presented in this paper depicts also a replication tree 
mechanism that increases the redundancy of the network and 
ensures a very high level of connectivity.  
The aggregation algorithm is targeted to reduce the 
number of events that are transferred from the network to the 
sinks. The main purpose of this algorithm is to save 
transmission energy. A major consideration in the decision 
of the quality of this algorithm is the usage of extra energy 
required in implementing more sophisticated algorithms, the 
extra requirements from the processing unit and the memory 
size of the sensor. In addition, transmitting more data that is 
required to improve the algorithm increases significantly the 
energy consumption. The savings should be balanced against 
the cost of transferring all raw events to the sinks. 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000 1100 1200 1300 1400
node internal delay
percentage
aggrigation percentage
 
Figure 6: Average Aggregation percentage Vs. Nodal Delay 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Pottie and W. Kaiser, "Wireless integrated network sensors," 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 43, May 2000, pp. 51-58. 
[2] J. Kahn, R. Katz, and K. Pister, "Mobile networking for smart 
dust," In preceedings of The Annual ACM/IEEE International 
Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (MobiCom), 
1999, pp. 271-278. 
[3] J. N. Al-Karaki and A. E. Kamak, "Routing Techniques in 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks: 
A 
Survey," 
IEEE 
Wireless 
Communications Vol. 11 Issue 6, 2004, pp. 6-28. 
[4] Y. Ben-Asher, M. Feldman, S. Feldman, and P. Gurfil. IFAS: 
Interactive flexible ad hoc simulator. Simulation Modeling Practice 
and Theory, 15(7), 2007, pp. 817–830. 
[5] Y. Fan, A. Chen, L. Songwu, and Z. Lixia, “A scalable solution to 
minimum cost forwarding in large sensor networks”. Proceedings 
of Tenth International Conference on Computer Communications 
and Networks, 2001, pp. 304-309. 
[6] C. Intanagonwiwat, R Govindan, and D. Estrin, “Directed 
diffusion: a scalable and robust communication paradigm for 
sensor networks”, Proceedings of the ACM MobiCom, Boston, 
Ma, 2000, pp. 56-67. 
[7] J. Kulik, W. R. Heinzelman, and H. Balakrishnan, "Negotiation-
based protocols for disseminating information in wireless sensor 
networks", ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. on Mobile Computing and 
Networking, Seattle, WA, Aug. 1999, pp. 174-175. 
[8]  D. Braginsky and D. Estrin", "Rumor Routing Algorithm for 
Sensor Networks", in proceedings of the First Workshop on Sensor 
and Applications (WSNA), Atlanta, GA, Oct. 2002, pp. 1-12.  
[9] J. Kulik, W. Rabiner, and Hari Balakrishnan", "Negotiation-Based 
Protocols for Disseminating Information in Wireless Sensor 
Networks", Wireless Networks, vol. 8, Num. 2-3, 2002, pp. 169-
185. 
[10] W. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, "Energy 
Efficient Communication Protocol for Wireless Mi-crosensor 
Networks," Proceedings of the Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS '00), Jan. 2000, pp 323-327. 
[11] L. Subramanian and R. H. Katz, "An Architecture for Building 
Self Configurable Systems", in the Proceedings of the  IEEE/ACM 
Workshop on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and Computing, Boston, 
MA, August 2000, pp. 63-73. 
[12] Q. Fang, F. Zhao, and L. Guibas, "Lightweight Sensing and 
Communication 
Protocols 
for 
Target 
Enumeration 
and 
Aggregation", Proceedings of the ACM international symposium 
on Mobile ad hoc networking and computing (MobiHoc), 2003, 
pp. 165-176. 
[13] F. Ye, H. Luo, J. Cheng, and S. Lu, L. Zhang, "A Two-tier data 
dissemination model for large-scale wireless sensor networks”, 
proceedings of the annual ACM/IEEE MobiCom, 2002, pp 148-
159. 
[14] Y. Xu, J. Heidemann, and D. Estrin, "Geography-informed Energy 
Conservation for Ad-hoc Routing," In Proceedings of the Seventh 
Annual 
ACM/IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Mobile 
Computing and Networking, 2001, pp. 70-84. 
[15] A. Savvides, C-C Han, and M. Srivastava, "Dynamic fine-grained 
localization in Ad-Hoc networks of sensors," Proceedings of the 
Seventh ACM Annual International Conference on Mobile 
Computing and Networking (MobiCom), July 2001, pp. 166-179. 
[16] N. Bulusu, J. Heidemann, and D. Estrin, "GPS-less low cost 
outdoor localization for very small devices", IEEE Personal 
Communications Magazine, vol. 7. no. 5, Apr. 2000, pp 28-34. 
[17] S. Capkun, M. Hamdi, and J. Hubaux,"GPS-free positioning in 
mobile ad-hoc networks", Proceedings of the 34th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, 2001 pp. 3481-3490. 
[18] R. Kumar, R. Hosam, and C. Guohong, A. Farooq, Y. Aylin and T. 
La Porta, "Conestion Aware Routing in Sensor Networks", 
Technical 
Report, http://nsrc.cse.psu.edu/tech_report/NAS-TR-
0036-2006.pdf, 2006.  
[19] F. Y. Alvin Chen, S. Lu, and L. Zhang, "A scalable Solution to 
Minimum, Cost Forwarding in Large Sensor Networks," in 
Proceedings of the 10th international conference on Computer 
Communications and Networks, , 2001, pp 304-309. 
[20] B. Liu and D. Towsley, " A Study of the Coverage of Large-scale 
Sensor Networks," in IEEE International conference on Mobile 
Ad-Hoc and Sensor Systems, , 2004, pp. 475-483.  
 
 
 
50
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

