Recent Advances in IoT-Based Wearable Systems for Biosignals Monitoring – 
Application to Elderly Care 
Emmanouel T. Michailidis, Panagiotis Pikasis, and Grigoris Kaltsas 
microSENSES Laboratory, Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, University of West Attica, Ancient Olive-
Grove Campus, 12243 Athens, Greece 
e-mail: emichail@uniwa.gr, mscres-1@uniwa.gr, G.Kaltsas@uniwa.gr 
 
 
Abstract—The evolution of the Internet of Things (IoT) 
ecosystem has been based on the advances of miniaturized, 
cheap, but powerful wearable sensors that can be used in 
various applications, including the real-time monitoring of 
elderly people’s health condition. The sensing capabilities of 
wearable devices along with the communication capabilities 
offered by sophisticated wireless techniques and protocols 
intend to improve the quality of elderly people’s life. This 
paper aims to review recent research work on sensor 
deployments 
and 
wearable 
technologies 
for 
biosignals 
monitoring for elderly care. Emphasis is also given on the 
advanced wireless technologies that are used for relevant 
healthcare IoT applications. 
Keywords-Communication 
protocols; 
elderly 
people 
monitoring; Internet of Things (IoT); wearables; Wireless 
Sensor Network (WSN). 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, the number of smart devices, wireless 
technologies, networking protocols, and wearables has 
rapidly increased and the Internet of Things (IoT) has 
emerged as a key enabler for the provision of challenging 
healthcare applications [1]. As the healthcare IoT will 
significantly affect the IoT-driven healthcare industry, the 
wearable technology has been widely adopted by the 
scientific community [2], in order to fabricate assisting 
devices that focus on various categories, such as elderly 
people, athletes, workout users, workers, and patients.  
The wearable systems contain non-invasive sensors, 
which are used to measure physiological or biomechanical 
signs and strongly support welfare and critical healthcare IoT 
applications for elderly people [3], [4]. Typical examples of 
these 
sensors 
are 
bioelectric 
sensors 
(e.g., 
Electrocardiography (ECG), Photoplethysmography (PPG), 
Electromyography 
(EMG)), 
acoustical 
sensors 
(e.g., 
microphones) mechanical sensors (e.g., accelerometer 
gyroscope), chemical sensors (e.g., PH, perspiration), and 
thermal sensors (e.g., thermistor). Various physiological 
information can be extracted from biosensors analysis. 
Specifically, skin temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, 
respiration rate, and oxygen saturation are some of the 
parameters that can be determined. 
On the other hand, wearable monitoring systems and IoT 
have been directly linked to wireless communication 
technologies [5], [6], which enable the data interaction of 
devices worn by elderly people in real time with other 
proximate or remote wireless nodes, thus creating Wireless 
Sensor Networks (WSNs) that collect physical data (e.g., 
body temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, oxygen 
saturation (SpO2), and ECG). More importantly, adoption of 
advanced 
communication 
technologies 
facilitates 
the 
efficient, flexible, and cost-effective data collection from 
biomedical sensors and then the transmission of health data 
to central IoT nodes. Using wireless communication 
protocols, elderly people’s vital signals can be remotely 
monitored [7] and aging population can be served by medical 
diagnosis and telemonitoring via IoT-powered In-Home 
Healthcare (IHH). Moreover, medical personnel and patients 
can interact though videoconferencing, whereas real-time 
medical imaging and remote robotic surgery are viable by 
exploiting high bandwidth wireless communication links.  
Motivated by the aforementioned observations, this paper 
focuses on shedding light on recent advances on IoT-based 
wearable systems for biosignals monitoring of elderly people 
in a remote manner. In this direction, wearable healthcare 
devices, sensors deployments and various IoT based bio-
monitoring systems are reviewed, mainly focusing on the 
field of elderly care. In addition, relevant communications 
technologies and wireless standards that can be used in 
healthcare monitoring applications are described and the 
main open issues in the field are underlined. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes recent advances on wearable systems and devices, 
followed by a presentation on their application on elderly 
care. Section III presents the advanced wireless technologies 
that intend to enrich the capabilities of IoT-based wearable 
systems for biosignals monitoring. Finally, conclusions and 
future research directions are drawn in Section IV. 
II. IOT WEARABLE SYSTEMS FOR BIOSIGNALS MONITORING 
Recently, new sensing elements came up in biosensing 
technology and monitoring of vital signs through wearable 
systems to predict the physiological state of elderly people. 
In [8], a system that can store and monitor vital signs was 
demonstrated. This system (‘Abuelometro’) was used in an 
elderly care facility to help caregiving staff monitor elderly 
residents. Moreover, a biometric wearable device from 
Hexiwear was used in [9], capable of measuring skin 
temperature, oxygen saturation, and heart rate. Based, on this 
device, a platform was fabricated that storage vital signs with 
extra information, such as exercise time, sleep time eat time, 
etc. In addition, an abnormal condition detection system was 
proposed in [10] with the aim of helping the elderly. The 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

system observed ECG, triaxial acceleration and skin 
temperature featured in a wireless wearable biosensor 
developed by Medical electronics Science Institute (MESI). 
The device communicated with a personal computer (PC) 
and the corresponding data was analyzed by a custom-made 
software. In case of abnormal conditions being detected, 
caregivers and relatives were notified by email. The ECG 
circular pads had to be placed near the heart, in order to 
determine heart rate with the required precision. The 
embedded triaxial accelerometer was used to examine body 
position. Also, fall detection algorithms that analyze 
accelerometer measurements were responsible for alerting 
users in an abnormal fall case.  
In [11], a device that can monitor vital signs in real time 
was fabricated. The sensor device included an optical sensor 
using the Photoplethysmography (PPG) method, in order to 
monitor the blood change of the vessels [12], as well as a 
printed Radio Frequency (RF) antenna. The communication 
protocol used was the Mi-Wi. All data derived from the 
sensors, travel through the gateway to the smartphone app 
and are uploaded to the cloud. Furthermore, in [13], a 
wearable device was implemented that was able to record 
blood pressure via ECG electrodes along with body and 
environmental temperature. Both measurements were 
transmitted wirelessly using a Bluetooth module. By 
processing the measured data various parameters were 
extracted, such as heart rate, breath frequency, blood 
pressure, air, and skin temperature. Additionally, hand and 
arm movements could be determined by the accelerometer 
response. In [14], a system capable of monitoring vital signs 
and alerting caregivers in case of an emergency was 
presented in [14]. This system consists of a health watch 
with an attached optical sensor for PPG measurements, smart 
clothes (vest) constructed of conductive fiber, in order to 
collect the ECG signals and a body tag, incorporating a 3-
axis accelerometer and gyroscope for body movements 
monitoring. Moreover, this system can communicate through 
a Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) to Wi-Fi gateway and send 
the raw data from sensors to cloud. The system can provide 
daily data on user sleep quality, heart rate, change in blood 
oxygen concentration change, and walking steps.  
An optical cuffless PPG sensor was fabricated in [15], in 
order to continuously monitor blood pressure and heart rate 
in real time consists of a Light-Dependent Resistor (LDR) 
and a circuit with a Light Emitting Diode (LED) enclosed in 
an elastic material held to the user’s finger by Velcro. The 
device achieved an accuracy of 5% in the determination of 
real arterial blood pressure. In [16] a vital signs collector and 
a wearable device called “smart clothing” were proposed. 
More specifically, a T-shirt with embedded a Negative 
Temperature Coefficient (NTC) thermistor for temperature 
monitoring was fabricated. In addition, an optical sensor was 
used to capture oxygen saturation, whereas an ECG sensor 
was used to measure the heart rate using dry textile dry 
electrodes. Additionally, using Machine Learning (ML), the 
ECG signals were analyzed, in order to emotionally detect 
the user’s mood. In [17], the SMARTA project was 
demonstrated. This project developed and tested a personal 
health system by integrating environmental sensors and 
wearable devices, in order to telemonitor vital signs and 
detect anomalies. In this regard, a wearable with an ECG 
sensor and an accelerometer was used that could monitor 
arterial pressure, oxygen saturation, and detect anomaly 
cases (e.g., user fall, immobility, etc.). Also, a wearable 
device for the purpose of monitoring the elderly people was 
presented in [18]. This device could be worn by the 
individual to collect physical activity data in a memory card. 
An accelerometer, a gyroscope and a heart rate sensor were 
used to track activities and vital signs. The heart rate device 
consisted of an acoustic sensor to pick up the beating sound 
of the heart. The device is worn in a belt and placed close to 
the heart. Figure 1 illustrates the aforementioned wearable 
devices, while Table I provides details about them. 
 
III. WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES FOR BIOSIGNALS MONITORING 
In order to transmit the acquired information and obtain a 
reliable wireless connection between wearables and other 
IoT entities, various communication mechanisms can be 
implemented, such as Device-to-Device (D2D), device to 
human and vice versa, and device to distributed storage [6]. 
However, the wearables inherently have constraints in terms 
of computation, memory, energy, and operational cost. Thus, 
appropriate 
lightweight 
protocols 
(e.g., 
Constrained 
Application Protocol (CoAP), Message Queue Telemetry 
Transport (MQTT), and Extensible Messaging and Presence 
Protocol (XMPP)) have been adopted to enable the 
interaction among devices. On the other hand, signal 
attenuation, fading, and interference may affect signal 
propagation, whereas spectrum regulatory restrictions may 
exist. Thus, choosing the proper wireless technology and 
frequency band is of paramount importance. Generally, the 
local connectivity in IoT-based wearable systems is provided 
by means of a Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) or 
short-range wireless networks, such as the Wireless Personal 
Area Network (WPAN). In this respect, one or multiple 
appropriate radio access technologies can be used, e.g., BLE, 
ZigBee, and IPv6 over Low-Power Wireless Personal Area 
Networks (6LoWPAN).  
In recent years, various works have been various works 
adopting wireless technologies for biosignal monitoring. In 
[19], 
an 
Arduino-based deployment with 
Bluetooth 
capabilities for ECG measurement was described, whereas a 
low-cost and energy-efficient TI MSP430 microcontroller 
with a ZigBee/Bluetooth module was exploited in [20] to 
monitor heart rate, temperature, humidity and accelerometric 
data. Additionally, a Raspberry Pi was employed in [21] for 
remote elderly care and the health information was 
transferred using a WLAN or a PAN and a Bluetooth 
modem. Extended connectivity for measuring ECG, heart 
rate, body temperature and blood pressure was obtained in 
[22] using IEEE 802.11 Wi-Fi, Global Positioning System 
(GPS) 
and 
Radio-Frequency 
Identification 
(RFID) 
technologies along with the ThingSpeak IoT platform. In 
[23], a large number of patients was connected to the 
computer systems using a nRF24L01+ low power 
transceiver and the Enhanced ShockBurst protocol, whereas 
the measured data was visualized using the NI LabVIEW. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Several wireless technologies (i.e., 6LoWPAN, ZigBee, 
BLE) and protocols (i.e., CoAP and MQTT) were combined 
in [24] to obtain reliable sleep apnea diagnosis. In this 
respect, experiments were conducted and the results 
underlined that the 6LoWPAN protocol had the highest 
latency values, compared to ZigBee and Bluetooth. 
As far as wearable systems are concerned, the WPANs 
are transformed into Wireless Body Area Network 
(WBANs), which have been recently evolved because of to 
the advances in microelectronics, System on Chip (SoC) 
design, and intelligent low-power sensors. By using WBANs 
consisting of in-body and on-body area networks, affordable 
and smart health care systems can be developed that support 
diagnostic procedures and the collection of sensitive and life-
critical data without constraining the normal life of elderly 
people. To enable data transmission, the WBANs utilize the 
Wireless Medical Telemetry Services (WMTS), Ultra-
wideband (UWB) and Medical Implant Communications 
Service (MICS) bands. Besides, the licensed Medical 
Implant Communication System (MICS) band (402-405 
MHz) can be used for implant communications, whereas the 
wireless standard IEEE 802.15.6 represents the international 
standard for WBAN. A monitoring system for elderly care 
was implemented in [25] using a Zigbee-based Body Sensor 
Network (BSN) as well as the patients’ smartphones to store 
and send the measured health information to remote servers. 
On another front, long-range wireless connectivity can be 
achieved using conventional, i.e., Fourth Generation (4G) 
and Fifth Generation (5G) cellular networks, satellite 
networks, and Low-Power Wide Area Network (LPWAN) 
technologies, e.g., Long Range (LoRa), Sigfox, and 
Narrowband-IoT (NB-IoT). A Global System for Mobile 
Communications (GSM)/GPS-based module was utilized in 
[26] to enable mobile monitoring and attribute in real-time 
the stress levels of patients by measuring the heart rate, skin 
resistance and body temperature. Moreover, a cost-effective 
IoT system and a LoRa-based gateway were used in [27] to 
monitor the health condition of elderly people located in 
their residence, thus improving their quality of life. Also, the 
combination of LoRa and the MQTT protocol was studied in 
[28]. Figure 2 depicts wireless technologies for ubiquitous 
health and activity monitoring of elderly people. Although 
current technologies can facilitate the provision of healthcare 
IoT services, there are several issues that require further 
investigation, 
such 
as 
mobility, 
heterogeneity, 
interoperability, scalability, security, and privacy. 
a)
b) 
 
c) 
 
d) 
 
e) 
 
f) 
 
g)                      h) 
 
   i) 
 
Figure 1.  A simple representation of  the described wearable devices        
a) [8] b) [10] c) [11] d) [13] e[14] f) [15] g) [16] h) [17] i) [18] 
Sensor
Gateway
WPAN
WLAN
WBAN
ZigBee
BLE
4G/5G Cellular Networks
Internet
Physician
Medical Server
Emergency
6LoWPAN
LoRa
 
Figure 2.  A simple representation of a wearable sensor network and 
relevant short-range and long-range wireless communication technologies 
for biosignals monitoring of elderly people. 
TABLE I 
DEVICES FOR IOT-BASED WEARABLE SYSTEMS 
Ref. 
Sensors 
Monitoring Parameter
Housing 
Communication Protocol
[8] 
PPG optical sensors, temp. sensor 
body temperature, oxygen saturation
strap
BLE
[10] 
ECG electrodes temp. sensor 
body temperature, heart rate
suction cup 
USB
[11] 
PPG optical sensor 
pressure, heart rate, oxygen saturation
strap
Mi-Wi
[13] 
ECG electrodes, temp. sensor 
blood pressure, body temperature
Cuff
Bluetooth
[14] 
PPG optical sensor, ECG electrodes 
heart rate, oxygen saturation
vest
BLE
[15] 
PPG optical sensor 
blood pressure, heart rate
finger Velcro 
Bluetooth
[16] 
PPG optical sensor, ECG dry textile 
electrodes, thermistor
blood pressure, skin temperature, oxygen saturation
T-shirt 
Bluetooth
[17] 
ECG electrodes 
blood pressure, oxygen saturation
belt- patch 
BLE
[18] 
Acoustic sensor 
heart rate
belt
memory card
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, the role of advanced wearables and wireless 
technologies in the IoT-based biosignals monitoring area for 
effective elderly care has been described. Additionally, the 
system implementation of various wearable devices was 
presented, including the sensors, measurement techniques, 
vital signs detection methods, communication process, and 
fabrication forms. Since reliable and ubiquitous short- and 
long-range connectivity is required, both conventional and 
low-power wireless technologies can drastically change the 
landscape of medical industries and strongly support the 
evolution of IoT-based wearable systems.  
Evolution of IoT and biosensors will radically change the 
perspective of wearables usage as a major tool for biosignals 
monitoring. Thus, aiming to foster more developments 
towards implementing advanced wearables, further work 
should be conducted in the future. An interesting research 
area stands for the application of ML algorithms to 
accurately predict risk and dangerous or harmful situations 
for elderly people. Also, jointly adopting D2D and Mobile 
Edge Computing (MEC) to enhance the computation 
capacity of the network is also envisioned. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. A. Akkaş, R. Sokullu, H. Ertürk Çetin, “Healthcare and patient 
monitoring using IoT,” Internet of Things, vol. 11, 2020, 100173. 
[2] 
R. De Fazio, M. De Vittorio, and P. Visconti, “Innovative IoT 
Solutions and Wearable Sensing Systems for Monitoring Human 
Biophysical Parameters: A Review,” Electronics, vol. 10, no. 14, p. 
1660, Jul. 2021. 
[3] 
T. 
G. 
Stavropoulos, 
A. 
Papastergiou, 
L. 
Mpaltadoros, 
S. 
Nikolopoulos, and I. Kompatsiaris, “IoT Wearable Sensors and 
Devices in Elderly Care: A Literature Review,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 
10, p. 2826, May 2020. 
[4] 
L. A. Durán-Vega, et al., “An IoT System for Remote Health 
Monitoring in Elderly Adults through a Wearable Device and Mobile 
Application,” Geriatrics, vol. 4, no. 2, p. 34, May 2019. 
[5] 
D. G. Kogias, E. T. Michailidis, S. M. Potirakis, and S. Vassiliadis, 
“Communication Protocols for Vital Signs Sensors Used for the 
Monitoring of Athletes,” in V. Koncar, Smart Textiles and their 
Applications, Elsevier, 2016. 
[6] 
D. G. Kogias, E. T. Michailidis, G. Tuna, and V. C. Gungor, 
“Realizing the Wireless Technology in Internet of Things (IoT),” in 
K. V. Arya, R. S. Bhadoria, and N. S. Chaudhari, Emerging Wireless 
Communication & Network Technologies: Principle, Paradigm and 
Performance, Springer, 2018. 
[7] 
Al-khafajiy, et al., “Remote health monitoring of elderly through 
wearable sensors,” Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 78, pp. 
24681–24706, 2019. 
[8] 
L. A. Durán-Vega, et al., “An IoT System for Remote Health 
Monitoring in Elderly Adults through a Wearable Device and Mobile 
Application,” Geriatrics, vol. 4, no. 2, p. 34, May 2019. 
[9] 
Hexiwear 
Complete 
IOT 
Development 
Solution. 
https://www.mikroe.com/hexiwear (accessed on 17 Oct. 2021). 
[10] S. Yazaki and T. Matsunaga, “A proposal of abnormal condition 
detection system for elderly people using wireless wearable 
biosensor,” in Proc. 47th Annual Conference of the Society of 
Instrument and Control Engineers (SICE) of Japan, pp. 2234-2238, 
2008. 
[11] S. Kumar, et al., “A Wristwatch-Based Wireless Sensor Platform for 
IoT Health Monitoring Applications,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 6, p. 1675, 
Mar. 2020. 
[12] S. Chatterjee and P. Kyriacou, “Monte Carlo Analysis of Optical 
Interactions 
in 
Reflectance 
and 
Transmittance 
Finger 
Photoplethysmography,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 4, p. 789, Feb. 2019. 
[13] T. Klingeberg and M. Schilling, “Mobile wearable device for long 
term monitoring of vital signs,” Computer Methods and Programs in 
Biomedicine, vol. 106, no. 2, pp. 89-96, May 2012. 
[14] P. Huang, C. Lin, Y. Wang and H. Hsieh, "Development of Health 
Care System Based on Wearable Devices," in Proc. Prognostics and 
System Health Management Conference (PHM-Paris), Paris, France, 
pp. 249-252, 2019. 
[15] Z. Cohen and S. Haxha, "Optical-Based Sensor Prototype for 
Continuous Monitoring of the Blood Pressure," IEEE Sensors 
Journal, vol. 17, no. 13, pp. 4258-4268, Jul. 2017. 
[16] L. Hu, J. Yang, M. Chen, Y. Qian, and J. P. C. Rodrigues, “SCAI-
SVSC: Smart clothing for effective interaction with a sustainable vital 
sign collection” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 86, pp. 
329-338, Sep. 2018. 
[17] L. Pigini, et al., “Pilot Test of a New Personal Health System 
Integrating Environmental and Wearable Sensors for Telemonitoring 
and Care of Elderly People at Home (SMARTA Project),” 
Gerontology, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 281-286, 2017. 
[18] A. Dinh, et al., “A Wearable Device for Physical Activity Monitoring 
With Built-in Heart Rate Variability,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. on 
Bioinformatics and Biomedical Engineering, pp. 1-4, 2009. 
[19] B. Apsara, S. Bashyam, and B. Ramachandran, “Development of 
Low Power Wearable Physiological Signal Monitoring System”, in 
Proc. Int. Conf. on Nextgen Electronic Technologies: Silicon to 
Software, Chennai, India, pp. 92-96, 2017. 
[20] S. Warbhe and S. Karmore, “Wearable Healthcare monitoring 
system: A survey,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. on Electronics and 
Communication Systems (ICECS), Coimbatore, India, pp.1302-1305, 
26-27 Feb. 2015. 
[21] F. Luna-Perejón, L. Muñoz-Saavedra, J. M. Castellano-Domínguez, 
and M. Domínguez-Morales, “IoT garment for remote elderly care 
network, Biomedical Signal Processing and Control,” vol. 69, 2021, 
102848. 
[22] F. Shanin, et al., “Portable and Centralised E-Health Record System 
for Patient Monitoring Using Internet of Things (IoT)”, in Proc. Int. 
CET Conf. on Control, Communication, and Computing (IC4), 
Thiruvananthapuram, India, pp. 165-170, 5-7 Jul. 2018. 
[23] E. Baba, A. Jilbab, and A. Hammouch, “A Health Remote Monitoring 
Application based on Wireless Body Area Networks,” in Proc. Int. 
Conf. on Intelligent Systems and Computer Vision (ISCV), Fez, 
Morocco, 2-4 Apr. 2018. 
[24] D. C. Yacchirema, D. Sarabia-JáCome, C. E. Palau, and M. Esteve, 
“A Smart System for Sleep Monitoring by Integrating IoT With Big 
Data Analytics,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 35988-36001, Jun. 2018. 
[25] M. S. H. Talpur, W. Liu, and G. Wang, “A ZigBee-based elderly 
health monitoring system: design and implementation,” International 
Journal of Autonomous and Adaptive Communications Systems 
(IJAACS), vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 393-411, 2014. 
[26] A. G. Airij, R. Sudirman, and U. U. Sheikh, “GSM and GPS based 
Real-Time Remote Physiological Signals Monitoring and Stress 
Levels Classification”, in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. on BioSignal Analysis, 
Processing and Systems (ICBAPS), Kuching, Malaysia, 24-26 Jul. 
2018. 
[27] J. P. Lousado and S. Antunes, “Monitoring and Support for Elderly 
People Using LoRa Communication Technologies: IoT Concepts and 
Applications,” Future Internet, vol. 12, no. 11, p. 206, Nov. 2020. 
[28] A. Lachtar, T. Val, and A. Kachouri, “Elderly monitoring system in a 
smart city environment using LoRa and MQTT,” IET Wireless Sensor 
Systems, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 70-77, Apr. 2020.   
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

