Node Mobility Scheme for IP and Non-IP Wireless Personal Area Network Nodes
using 6LoWPAN
Gopinath Rao Sinniah, Zeldi Suryady, Usman Sarwar, Kar Hoey Teo
IoT Lab, Wireless Communication Cluster
MIMOS Berhad
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
{gopinath.rao, zeldi.suryady, usman.sarwar, kh.teo}@mimos.my
Abstract—The rapid growth of technology has enabled more
devices (IP and Non-IP, high powered and low powered) to be
connected to the Internet and these devices are expected to
be mobile. However, the existing IP mobility protocol is not
suitable for devices that have low resources, such as Wireless
Sensor Networks (WSNs). This paper proposes a mobility
scheme using 6LoWPAN, targeted for any LoWPAN devices
that may or may not have IP stack capability. It uses a
combination of host-based and network-based mobility. In the
scheme, the mobile device would be conﬁgured to store the
home edge router IP address that would be given to new
edge router to establish communication with the home edge
router. The paper analyses the signaling messages in setting up
communication once mobile node moves to a new network. The
theoretical and analytical results show that the performance of
the scheme is better than the existing methods.
Keywords-Mobile IPv6; Network Mobility; Proxy based Mobile
IPv6; Wireless Personal Area Network; 6LoWPAN
I. INTRODUCTION
The proliferation of devices in recent years has enabled
people to expect services to be seamless even when they are
moving from one network to another. Knowing this would
be required, IETF has proposed MIPv6 [1] that provides
IP layer handover. Since then, few more standards have
emerged to cater for different solutions. Some of the mobility
solutions that emerged after the introduction of MIPv6 are
Fast MIPv6 [3], Network Mobility [2] and Proxy Mobility
[4]. These different types of mobility solutions uses different
network setup and for different use cases. It has been proven
by some studies that implementations of these standards
results in poor handover latency and excessive signaling
[12]. This lead to a number of new schemes to improve
handoff performance. It was expected that the original
mobility standards could be used for wireless personal area
network (WPAN) [1]; but due to its excessive signaling, new
frameworks have been established.
WPAN usually consists of large number of end devices,
which has very low processing, low memory and depends on
battery for operation. Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) end
devices, which is part of WPANs, have two components;
one is the sensor used to sense some parameters and the
other component is the communication interface. Once the
parameter is sensed, the data is forwarded to a border router
either in single hop transmission or using multihop. Single
hop implementation is simple and doesn’t require routing
protocol as in multihop. In multihop implementation, the
intermediate nodes would consume more power than end
nodes because they need to route packets received from
multiple end nodes. Hence, reducing the number of overhead
messages would reduce some amount of power consumption.
IPv6 over low power personal area network (6LoWPAN)
working group [5] was established so that these LoWPAN
devices would be able to communicate with other Internet
devices using IPv6 protocol. This breaks the traditional way
of communication for LoWPAN that was thought incapable
to connect to the Internet. Two initial proposed standards
under the working group that uses adaptation layer between
the MAC and Network layer have changed the way WPAN
communicate with external networks. This was considered
as one of the main standards to be used in the Internet of
Things (IoT) technology. It is anticipated that devices in IoT
would be highly mobile compared to most of the existing
deployment. Thus a better mobility solution is required for
both IP and non-IP devices in IoT.
Since the nodes in WPAN would have limited resources,
the large code size of existing MIPv6 would be unjustiﬁable.
Besides that, the trafﬁc exchanges caused by MIPv6 would
be very high and it would be too much for low-bandwidth
wireless links. Hence, the existing methods have to be
updated. There are various solutions proposed that uses
either host-based or network-based mobility. This paper
proposes a new way of communication for mobile WPAN
devices that reduces the number of signaling in the system.
The problems being tackled in this paper are:
• Existing mobility solution is not suitable to be used
for LoWPAN devices hence a new approach has to be
devised.
• Signaling overhead between the mobile node and the
gateway is high and is not suitable for WSN nodes
which depends on battery power and has low processing
capability.
83
Copyright (c) The Government of Malaysia, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The objectives of this paper are:
• To design a method for low power personal area
network (LoWPAN) devices that will have mobility
support.
• To deﬁne the communication mechanism between edge
routers to enable mobility for the nodes that would
reduce the number of signaling messages.
The paper is organised as follows. Section II provides an
overview of mobility models. Section III discusses the exist-
ing solutions speciﬁcally focusing on mobility for WPAN.
Section IV provides the proposed framework and method.
Section V provides the theoretical and analytical analysis
while Section VI gives the implementation scenarios. Fi-
nally, conclusion and future work is presented in Section
VII.
II. IPV6 MOBILITY
Mobility protocol for IPv6 has been divided into two
broad categories, based on the role of the Mobile Node
(MN) and the Edge Router. There are host-based mobility
and network-based mobility.
• Host-based mobility: There are three components in
host-based mobility; the MN, gateway (edge router) and
Home Agent (HA). In this approach, the MN must have
mobility stack that informs the gateway of its presence
as speciﬁed in RFC6275 [1]. MN is conﬁgured to have
global IPv6 address and whenever it moves to a new
network, it would be conﬁgured with new address (care-
of-address (CoA)) based on the preﬁx advertised in
the network. This new address is registered at the HA
so that packets destined to MN would be forwarded
appropriately. HA, which resides in the home network
of the MN, will intercepts packets that are destined
to MN and forwards it to the new CoA of MN. MN
would then directly communicates with the CN. The
signaling for this host-based mobility is given in Figure
1. Since WPAN devices are resource constraint, this
solution would not be appropriate as it involve lots of
signaling between MN and the gateway.
• Network-based mobility: In this approach, the MN is
not required to have mobility stack. Instead, an agent
would help to inform the other components about MN’s
movement. This agent usually placed together with the
gateway, so that whenever a new node registers, the
gateway can immediately process the required informa-
tion. One of the standard in this category is Proxy-based
MIPv6 [4]. Few components are involved in PMIPv6;
Mobile Access Gateway (MAG) that is the gateway that
provide all the signaling on behalf of the MN, Local
Mobility Anchor (LMA) maintains the movements of
MN. When MN moves to a new network, MAG would
forward MN’s information to the LMA. LMA acts like
the HA, which intercepts packets and forwards to the
appropriate MAG using a tunnel, which was created
earlier. The MAG would then sends the packet to the
MN.
Figure 1.
Signaling ﬂow of inter-domain handover using MIPv6 [6]
Mobility of MN can also be categorized as micro mobility
or Intra Personal Area Network (PAN) mobility and macro
mobility or referred as Inter PAN Mobility in WPAN. In
micro mobility, there is no change in the network layer
address of the MN while in macro, the MN would have
a new address.
Currently, there are many issues in Mobility solutions,
such as high percentage of packet loss, excessive signaling,
long handoff latency, high power consumption and topology
issues [10]. In wireless personal area network, the issues
maybe different for various types of implementations and
have to be tackled on a case by case basis.
III. EXISTING MOBILITY SOLUTIONS
Due to the characteristics of WPAN nodes, the existing
host-based mobility solutions are not suitable to be used.
These protocols requires excessive control signals from MN
to the edge router and also to the home agent. Since
communication uses large amount of energy, these host-
based mobility protocols are not used as it is in 6LoWPAN.
To reduce the role of MN in mobility, PMIPv6 [4] was
created. The mobile anchor gateway (MAG) process the
control messages on behalf of the MN. When a MN moves
to a new network, MAG sends the MN information to the
local mobility anchor (LMA). This is achieved by using
the network layer and an additional tunnel between LMA
and MAG has to be established. In this way, MN does not
involve in the mobility process. Each LMA would serve
multiple MAGs and the same preﬁx can be used by MN
while roaming under the same LMA. It was stated that the
design of a new protocol for mobility remained an open issue
84
Copyright (c) The Government of Malaysia, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

and further research is required to provide mobility support
for resource constrained devices in WPAN [7].
Under the IETF 6LoWPAN working group, there was a
proposal that provides the mobility scenarios, the main chal-
lenges and security issues [8]. There was another proposed
IETF draft that provides mobility support in 6LoWPAN [9].
There are few solutions proposed for WSN based on
the existing mobility stacks. In Sensor Proxy Mobile IPv6
(SPMIPv6) [12], few new components has been added to
the existing PMIPv6, which are sensor LMA (SLMA) and
sensor MAG (SMAG). SLMA is a powerful device that
acts as topological anchor for its entire groups of SMAGs
and sensor nodes, which reports to LMA. SLMA keeps
binding cache entry for each sensor node in its domain and
information of SMAGs table. SMAGs acts like a sink node
and responsible to detect the movement of sensor nodes and
handle mobility related signaling with the SLMA on behalf
of the nodes. In this solution, extra devices have to be conﬁg-
ured and added into the architecture. Another solution, based
on PMIPv6 and an enhanced architecture for SPMIPv6, is
cluster-based proxy mobile IPv6 for IP-WSNs [13]. In the
proposed solution, the MAGs are grouped into clusters, each
with a distinguished cluster Head MAG (HMAG). The new
layer in the existing PMIPv6 is to reduce the load on LMA
by performing intra-cluster handoff signaling and providing
an optimized path for data communications.
Inter-MARIO [11], designed with a make-before-break
method, is another solution that requires many static nodes
in the network. In the solution, the partner node, which
serves as an access point for the MN, pre-conﬁgures the
future handover of the MN by sending MN’s information
to candidate neighbor PANs and providing neighbor PAN
information to the MN. In this schemes, MN movement has
to be predicted so that information pertaining to the MN can
be send to the appropriate access points.
A network-based mobility that was proposed for WSN
is LoWMob [15]. Similar to Inter-MARIO setup, LoWMob
also uses static nodes to relay MN movement information
to the gateway. Another solution that uses cluster tree that
only uses the node ID to communicate with the head cluster
is given in [14]. The control information interaction for
both the mobility handoff and the tunnel establishment is
performed at the link layer, hence it is claimed that the
control information is smaller and the delay time taken to
transmit this information is shorter.
IV. SYSTEM DESIGN OF NODE MOBILITY
The proposed system uses less devices to make it easier
for implementation and would have lesser signaling. Design
of the new proposed system is based on the combination
of host-based mobility and network-based mobility. It is
because both the mobile node (MN) and the Edge Router
(ER) or border router has to work together to provide
mobility support but the mobile node would have reduced
functionality compared to system in pure host-based mo-
bility, but unlike PMIPv6 in which MN doesn’t involve in
signaling. Because of this, signaling from the MN to ER
would be reduced and this results in lesser power usage by
the MN compared to MIPv6.
Our solution consists of MN and ERs and involves both
link layer and network layer communication. Network dia-
gram for the proposed solution is given in Figure 2.
In our solution, it is assumed that the ﬁrst connected
network is the home network and nodes information is stored
in the Home Edge Router (HER). When a mobile node
discovers its HER and associates to it, the HER will send its
IP address to the MN. The HER will update its PAN table
and record the details of the node. MN would also keep
HER address to be used when it moves to new network.
Both HER and visited ER keep all the information of MNs
in a table, which consists of the followings:
• Node ID: ID of the MN within the PAN related to the
Edge Router. Since the solution is for various types of
standards, the node ID has to be unique and a method
for node identiﬁcation and naming is being researched
separately. We may combine this ﬁeld and MAC ﬁeld
in the future as both can be used for identiﬁcation and
addressing.
• MAC: MAC address of the mobile node within the
PAN related to the Edge Router. Since the solution is
for IP and non-IP devices, some other identiﬁcation
system would be used such as RFID identiﬁcation for
RFID devices. For non-IP devices, the MAC address
or unique identiﬁcation would be mapped to the global
IPv6 address that was given to it by the HER.
• Edge Router IP: The visited/home Edge Router’s
IPv4/IPv6 address.
• Home Edge Router IP: The Home Edge Router’s IPv4
/ IPv6 address, which the mobile node has recorded.
• Corresponded Node: A node address that communicates
with the MN through HER or ER.
• MN IP: MN IP is generated by attaching the MAC
address to the preﬁx used for LoWPAN network. The
process of registering of creating this is explained
6LoWPAN Gateway given in [16].
An example of updated table at HER is given in Table I.
HER also acts as the home agent as in MIPv6, that is to
capture packets from corresponding node and tunnel it to
the new edge router the MN connected.
Table I
HOME EDGE ROUTER INITIAL TABLE
Node ID
MAC
ER IPv6
HER IPv6
MN IP
CR
MN 1
a:a:a:a
b:b:b:b
b:b:b:b
z:z:z:z
x:x:x:x
When the MN moves to a new PAN (visited PAN) and
associate to the ER, the ER of the visited PAN will record
85
Copyright (c) The Government of Malaysia, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure 2.
Overall Network consists of MN, HER, ER and CN
the details of the mobile node. This is executed using
the methods available now, which is using layer two node
association and neighbor discovery messages. Once the MN
associated to the new ER, it will send the IP address of
its HER to the visited ER. The ER will update its table
and at the same time send an update to the HER informing
that MN is now attached to the new ER. The HER will
update its PAN table with the updated information. Table II
shows the new information updated in new ER, while Table
III shows the updated information in HER. The network
diagram is represented in Figure 3 and the proposed new
message ﬂow is given in Figure 4. As shown in Figure 4,
the MN attaches to new ER using the same registration as in
when the MN attaches to HN. Once the link layer attachment
is completed, MN would registers its HER address to the
new ER. New ER, which has the HER address, would then
send the location of MN and get it updated in the HER
database. If there is a packet destined for MN from a CN,
the HER would intercept, encapsulate the packet and then
forwards it to the new ER. New ER would then decapsulate
and forwards the packet to MN. This new ﬂow of messages
eliminates the binding update from AR to HA as in MIPv6.
When the MN moves to another new ER, the same process
is executed. Since HER already has the ER entry in the table,
HER would ﬁrst inform the previous ER to remove the MN
entry and then update the table with the new ER address
information.
The CN will send the request messages destined for the
mobile node to the HER. HER will encapsulate the request
message and forward the request message to the visited PAN
ER based on the details in the PAN table. The ER of the
visited PAN will send all the messages from the mobile node
Figure 3.
MN moves to new PAN
Figure 4.
New Mobility Message Flow
Table II
EDGE ROUTER 2 TABLE AFTER NODE MOVED
Node ID
MAC
ER IPv6
HER IPv6
MN IP
CR
MN 1
a:a:a:a
c:c:c:c
b:b:b:b
p:p:p:p
x:x:x:x
Table III
HOME EDGE ROUTER TABLE AFTER NODE MOVED
Node ID
MAC
ER IPv6
HER IPv6
MN IP
CR
MN 1
a:a:a:a:a
c:c:c:c
b:b:b:b
p:p:p:p
x:x:x:x
to the correspondent node of the mobile node based on the
PAN table.
The MN address will change every time it moves to new
network, however the permanent address to outside world
would be the one registered at HER. The network diagram
with the address for each is given in Figure 5.
86
Copyright (c) The Government of Malaysia, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure 5.
Network Diagram with Addressing conﬁguration
V. THEORETICAL AND ANALYTICAL MEASUREMENT
The solution that we propose is analysed in terms of
signaling and scalability and compared with MIPv6 and
PMIPv6.
Comparison between our solution with MIPv6:
• In MIPv6, all the signaling is from the MN starting
from registration in the new network until binding
to the HA as shown in Figure 1, whereas in our
solution, MN only registers to the new network and
all other signaling is executed by the ER on behalf
of the MN. This reduces the involvement of MN in
exchanging messages, which further reduces the power
comsumption.
Comparison between our solution with PMIPv6:
• In PMIPv6, MN’s movement is registered to the MAG,
which then informs the LMA. Packets are intercepted
at the LMA before being tunneled to MAG. In our
solution, the ER would directly informs the HER of
the MN attachment, so it can be deployed in any
network and easily scalable. PMIPv6 cannot support
inter-domain handover, but in our solution, new ER
directly communicates with the HER in any domain
it operates.
We use a simple analytical model to analyze the signaling.
The following notations and assumptions are used:
ta = the signal message from MN to ER or MAG
tb = signal from ER to HER or HA or LMA
With the assumption that the signaling weight is the same
and there is no authentication involved, the total signaling
cost (sc) from the time the MN attached to new edge router
until acknowledgment received from the HA or LMA or
HER for MIPv6, PMIPv6 and our solution are given below.
Some of the signaling cost has been combined as one unit
such as for MN association.
MIPv6sc = signal from MN to AR (Association) + signal
from AR to HA (Binding Update)+ signal from HA to
Figure 6.
Comparison of Signaling Messages
AR (Binding Acknowledgement)+ signal from AR to MN
(Binding Acknowledgement)
MIPv6sc = 2ta + 2tb
(1)
PMIPv6(sc) = signal from MN to MAG (Association) +
signal from MAG to LMA (Node update) + signal from
LMA to MAG (Acknowledgement) + signal from LMA to
MAG (Tunnel creation)
PMIPv6sc = ta + 3tb
(2)
Our solutionsc = signal from MN to ER (Association) +
signal from ER to HER (Node update) + signal from HER
to ER (Acknowledgement)
Oursolutionsc = ta + 2tb
(3)
Based on the signaling messages given, the total number
of signaling messages is lesser in our proposed solution
compared to the MIPv6 and PMIPv6. This is shown in
Figure 6 with the value of ta and tb as 1 each.
VI. IMPLEMENTATION
The system has been implemented as proof of concept
for patient movement monitoring. For that, a testbed was
created. We used the WSN node as the MN for patients.
The nodes that are used are Sensinode WSN node which is
loaded with Nanostack OS. The nodes are conﬁgured with
the signaling format that was detailed earlier. Three laptops
were used as the home router and edge routers. These laptops
are conﬁgured to run on Ubuntu OS with Nano Router.
Nano Router is an USB device that is attached to one of
the available USB port in the laptop. The testbed for this
implementation is given in Figure 7 .
The out patient treatment room could be the MN’s home
network. Edge routers can be placed in each room and
whenever the patient moved out to another room, the MN
87
Copyright (c) The Government of Malaysia, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure 7.
Testbed for validating the mobility scheme
Figure 8.
Implementation of Mobility solution in Logistics
would attach to the new ER, which would then inform the
HER.
The mobile node successfully communicated with the
correspondent node even when the MN attaches to New ER1
and New ER2. Measurements are not discussed in this paper.
Another use case that this system can be used for is
for tracking goods in a warehouse until it is transported as
shown in Figure 8.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, the new method of handling WPAN nodes
mobility was introduced. The solution proposed is for both
IP and non-IP devices and this would be suitable to be used
in IoT scenarios, which comprises of multiple standards. The
non-IP devices such as RFID, are given unique IP addresses
at the gateway.
Based on the theoretical and analytical studies, the signal
messages is lesser compared to MIPv6 and PMIPv6. The
differences of these signaling messages is same as the total
number of nodes in the network if the value for ta and tb
are 1 each.
Future work consists of implementation of authentication
between the MN and the edge router and QoS of packets.
Besides that, the node ID and MAC address would be
combined and used as one ﬁeld with the inclusion of
identiﬁcation and naming method. Handover delay need to
be measured as well to determine if it is better than other
solutions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Science Fund project (Project
number: 01-03-04-SF0012) from Ministry of Science, Tech-
nology and Innovation (MOSTI), Malaysia.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Johnson, C. Perkins, and J. Arkko, “Mobility Support in
IPv6,” RFC6275 (Obsoletes RFC3775) (Proposed Standard),
2004.
[2] V. Devarapalli, R. Wakikawa, A. Petrescu, and P. Thubert,
“Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol,” IETF
RFC3963 (Proposed Standard), Jan 2005.
[3] R. Koodli, “Mobile IPv6 Fast Handover,” IETF RFC5268
(obsoletes RFC4068), June 2008.
[4] S. Gundavelli, K. Leung, V. Devarapalli, K. Chowdhury, and
B. Patil, “Proxy Mobile IPv6,” IETF RFC 5213 (Proposed
Standard),2008.
[5] IPv6 over Low Power Personal Area Network (6LoW-
PAN)
IETF
Working
Group.
Retrieved:
March,
2013.
http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/6lowpan/
[6] K. Chaehwan, H. Hyunwoo, B. Jung-Woo, and L. Kyung-
Geun,
“Multicast
based
Proxy
Mobile
IPv6
for
inter-
domain handover. Mathematical and Computer Modelling,”
Available
online
10
September
2012,
ISSN
0895-7177,
10.1016/j.mcm.2012.08.014.
[7] L. M.L. Oliveira, A. F. de Sousa, and J.P.C. Rodrigues,
“Routing and mobility approaches in IPv6 over LoWPAN mesh
networks,” International Journal of Communication Systems,
Wiley, 2011.
[8] G. Mulligan, C. Williams, and D. Huo, “Mobility considera-
tion for mobility,” Internet Engineering Task Force, Internet-
Draft, draft-williams-6lowpan-mob-03.txt, July 2010, work in
progress.
[9] M-K. Shin, T. Camilo, J. Silva, and D. Kaspar, “Mobility Sup-
port in 6LoWPAN,” Internet Engineering Task Force, Internet-
Draft, draft-shin-6lowpan-mobility-01, November 2007.
88
Copyright (c) The Government of Malaysia, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[10] Teo Kar Hoey, S. Gopinath Rao, K. Reza, A. Azizol, and S.
Shamala, “Mobility management schemes and mobility issues
in low power Wireless Sensor Network,” In Telecommunica-
tion Technologies (ISTT), 2012 International Symposium on,
IEEE, 2012, pp. 65-70.
[11] H. Minkeun, K. Daeyoung, K. Seong Hoon, and H. Sungmin,
“Inter-MARIO: a fast and seamless mobility protocol to sup-
port Inter-PAN handover in 6LoWPAN,” In proceedings IEEE
Globecomm 2010, IEEE press, New York, 2010, pp. 1-6.
[12] M.M. Islam and E.N. Huh, “Sensor proxy mobile IPv6 (SP-
MIPv6) - a novel scheme for mobility supported IP-WSNs,”
Sensors, 11(2), 2011, pp. 1865-1887.
[13] J. Adnan, K. Shamala, Z. Zuriatu, and Nor Asilah, “A Cluster-
based proxy mobile IPv6 for IP-WSNs,” EURASIP Journal on
Wireless Communications and Networking, 2012.
[14] W. Xiaonan, Z. Shan, and Z. Rong, “A mobility support
scheme for 6LoWPAN,” Computer Communications, Volume
35, Issue 3, 1 February 2012, pp. 392-404, ISSN 0140-3664,
10.1016/j.comcom.2011.11.001.
[15] B. Gargi, R. Mumammad Taqi, K. Ki-Hyung, and Y. Seung-
Wha, “LoWMob: Intra-PAN Mobility Support Schemes for
6LoWPAN,” Sensors, 9, pp. 5844-5877, 2009.
[16] S. Gopinath Rao, S. Zeldi, S. Usman, and A. Mazlan, “A
Gateway Solution for IPv6 Wireless Sensor Network,” Ultra
Modern Telecommunication & Workshops, St. Petersburg,
Russia, October 2009, pp. 1-6.
89
Copyright (c) The Government of Malaysia, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

