Development of Sensor Devices for Structural Health Monitoring of Buildings and 
Civil Infrastructures 
Narito Kurata 
Faculty of Industrial Technology 
Tsukuba University of Technology 
Tsukuba City, Ibaraki, Japan 
e-mail: kurata@home.email.ne.jp 
Abstract - This paper reports the results of health monitoring 
of a building in Battleship Island and a structure of Angkor 
Wat, registered as World Heritage Sites. In addition, necessary 
functions for structural health monitoring of World Heritage 
are listed, and research on desirable sensor device is described. 
Specifically, the development of an autonomous time 
synchronization sensor equipped with a Chip Scale Atomic 
Clock (CSAC) that can hold accurate time information is 
reported. 
Keywords-Time Synchronization; Chip Scale Atomic Clock; 
Earthquake Observation; Structural Health Monitoring; Micro 
Electro Mechanical Systems; World Heritage 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Hashima Island in Nagasaki City in the south of Japan 
was registered as a World Cultural Heritage in 2015 [1]. The 
island was an offshore city that prospered as an undersea 
coal mine from the 1800s, and had a population density 
higher than that of Tokyo. The shape of the island resembles 
that of a battleship, so it is also referred to as “Battleship 
Island”. Also, the World Heritage Site of Angkor Wat is part 
of the Angkor Ruins located in the northwestern part of 
Cambodia [2]. The structures registered as heritage sites are 
expected to be maintained and managed for centuries. 
However, heritage sites are subject to serious crises that 
damage these universal values, including armed conflict, 
natural 
disasters, 
large-scale 
construction, 
urban 
development, 
tourism 
development, 
and 
commercial 
poaching. To maintain and manage World Heritage 
Structures, an understanding of the condition should be 
obtained by monitoring heritage sites. Monitoring should be 
performed in accordance with the environmental needs and 
circumstances of each site. 
In this paper, we develop an autonomous time-
synchronization sensing system on which a Chip Scale 
Atomic Clock (CSAC) is mounted as an ideal sensing system 
to maintain high-precision absolute time information [3] [4]. 
Even if the CSAC-mounted sensor module/data logger is 
installed over a wide area and at high density, it is possible to 
acquire measurement data with time synchronization without 
relying on a network or a GPS signal. In this paper, examples 
of health monitoring at Battleship Island and Angkor Wat 
and the research and development of the CSAC-mounted 
sensor module are introduced. 
 Section II and Ⅲ show the results of structural health 
monitoring of a building in Battleship Island and a structure 
of Angkor Wat, respectively. Further, Section IV describes 
necessary functions for structural health monitoring of World 
Heritage are listed, and research and development of 
desirable sensor device is described. 
II.
MONITORING OF A BUILDING IN BATTLESHIP ISLAND
A.
No.3 Building of Battleship Island 
No. 3 Building on Battleship Island, shown in Figure 1, is 
a 4-story reinforced concrete housing complex constructed in 
1959. It is located at the highest point on Battleship Island, 
and is a symbolic building that has a silhouette similar to that 
of a battleship. The building is relatively new on the island, 
with little sign of aging and damage. On the rooftop of No.3 
Building, 
a 
wireless 
antenna 
for 
maritime 
radio 
communication with the Battleship Island Museum on the 
opposite shore, a solar panel, a storage battery, and cameras 
that capture images of the surrounding area, are installed. 
These serve as communication bases for the monitoring 
system. 
Figure 1. No.3 Building in Battleship Island. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

B.
Vibration Measurement System 
Figure 2 shows the locations of the accelerometers in No. 
3 Building. No. 3 Building has a flat, rectangular shape, with 
a total of 10 acceleration sensors installed on both sides of 
each floor. The accelerometers used are JA-70SA 
manufactured by Japan Aviation Electronics Industry. This 
accelerometer can measure a wide range of vibrations from 
microtremors, to strong vibrations during a typhoon or large 
earthquake. For vibration measurement, a data acquisition 
device (referred to as a DAQ) having a 16-channel A/D 
conversion module is used, and synchronization is performed 
to within 5 μsec by a multiplexer at the preceding stage. 
Time synchronization is performed by GPS, and the 
sampling frequency is set to 100Hz. A continuous 
measurement function that saves 10 minutes of measurement 
data every 2 hours and a trigger function that stores 
measurement data when more than a certain level of 
vibration occurs due to a typhoon or an earthquake are 
installed. The data stored in the data recorder is transmitted 
to a data server in the Battleship Island Museum on the 
opposite shore by a maritime radio communications antenna 
installed on the rooftop. This data server is accessible via the 
Internet. Solar panels and storage batteries are installed on 
the rooftop of the structure to serve as a power source for the 
vibration measurement system. PCs, the DAQ and 
accelerometers consume higher power, but they use system 
power efficiently to provide constant remote monitoring and 
continuous measurement. 
Acceleration Sensor 
(a)
Elevation
(b)
Roof Plan
Figure 2. Sensor location. 
C.
Analytical Results of vibration 
Figure 3 and 4 show amplitude ratios of Fourier 
acceleration spectra on the rooftop and the first floor 
calculated from acceleration data measured for 10 minutes 
from 12:00 every day, from June 1 to October 18, 2019. As 
can be seen from the figures, some parts of the data from 
August 12 to 19 and August 27 to 28 during the 
measurement period are missing. In each figure, the 
measurement dates, frequencies, and ratios of Fourier spectra 
are displayed in 3D and 2D. In addition, the dates of 
occurrence of three typhoons that caused strong vibrations in 
No. 3 Building during the measurement period are shown. 
Figure 3 shows the analysis results of the long-side 
components of the sensors installed on the south sides of No. 
3 Building. From these figures, it can be seen that the first 
characteristic frequency clearly appears around 6 Hz during 
strong winds or a typhoon. In addition, characteristic 
frequencies of higher-order modes can be observed near 17 
Hz. Further, if vibration of the building increases due to 
strong winds or a typhoon, vibration in the high frequency 
region of 10 Hz or more increases on the south side. 
(a) South side (3D) 
(b) South side (2D) 
Figure 3. Fourier amplitude spectrum ratios of the acceleration data 
(Long-side component) 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

(a) South side (3D) 
(b) South side (2D) 
Figure 4. Fourier amplitude spectrum ratios of the acceleration data 
(Long-side component) 
Figure 4 shows the analysis results of the short-side 
components of the sensors installed on the south sides of 
No. 3 Building. From these figures, it can be seen that 
characteristic frequencies appear at around 9 Hz and 14 Hz 
in addition to 6 Hz during strong winds or a typhoon. 
Further, when vibration of the building increases due to 
strong winds or a typhoon, the vibration on the south side is 
larger than that on the north side, and on the south side, 
vibration in the high frequency region of 10 Hz or more 
increases. 
III.
MONITORING OF A STRUCTURE OF ANGKOR WAT 
A.
Angkor Wat 
The World Heritage Site of Angkor Wat (Figure 5) is 
part of the Angkor Ruins located in the northwestern part of 
Cambodia. The structure is a Hindu temple, and is regarded 
as a masterpiece of Khmer architecture. An image of the 
structure is displayed in the center of the Cambodian flag. 
The premises are surrounded by moats that are 1,500 meters 
in length from east to west, 1,300 meters in length from 
north to south, and 190 meters wide. The premises were 
mainly constructed from sandstone and laterite, and the 
temple was built by utilizing steelmaking technology in a 
nearby area. The structures are surrounded by a three-storied 
corridor. The first story corridor is 200 meters in length from 
east to west, and 180 meters in length from north to south. 
The second story corridor is 115 meters in length from east 
to west, and 100 meters in length from north to south. The 
third story corridor is 60 meters long on each side, and 13 
meters higher than the second story corridor. To enter the 
third story corridor, it is necessary to climb a steep set on 
stone steps. In this corridor, five ancestral halls are located in 
each of the four corners and in the center; the central 
ancestral hall is 65 meters high. 
Figure 5. Angkor Wat World Heritage Site. 
B.
Measurement of Vibration 
As shown in Figure 6, a constant tremor was measured 
every 10 minutes at each location point (●) of the first, 
second, and third corridors of Angkor Wat. Measurements 
were taken with the single portable high-sensitivity 
acceleration sensor shown in Figure 7. The sampling 
frequency is 100 Hz. Measurements at the first and third 
story corridors are shown in Figure 8. 
Figure 6. Floor plan and measurement points of Angkor Wat. 
①
②
④
③
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 7. P
ortabl
e 
accele
ration 
senso
r. 
(a) The third corridor 
(b) The first corridor 
Figure 8. Measurement at the third and first corridor. 
C.
Measurement at the Thrid Story Corridor 
Figure 9 shows the Fourier spectrum of the accelerogram 
as measured in the southwestern part of the central tower in 
the third story corridor (Figure 6, ④ part). Each figure is 
comprised of north-south (NS), east-west (EW), and up-
down vertical direction(UD) components. Frequency peaks 
are indicated by blue and yellow arrow marks in each figure. 
Vibrations of 7-8 Hz are considered to be caused by tourist 
traffic on the stairs externally attached to the third story 
corridor, and local vibrations. It has been inferred that the 
structures in the third story corridor of Angkor Wat have a 
natural frequency of around 3 Hz. Structures resembling a 
rigid rocky mountain can be seen in the three-storied corridor. 
Figure 9. Fourier spectrum of the measured acceleration. 
If the natural frequency moves to the lower side, rigidity 
will be lost, and structural deterioration and damage can be 
evaluated. In order to accurately evaluate this kind of 
natural frequency, a time synchronous measurement 
between the structure and the ground surface should be 
performed; a division of the frequency domain is required. 
Measurements should also be taken at the tops of the five 
ancestral halls (at each of the four corners and the center of 
the corridor). 
IV.
FUTURE DIRECTION ON WORLD HERITAGE 
MONITORING AND THE NEED FOR DEVELOPMENT OF SENSER 
DEVICE
Battleship Island and Angkor Wat are typical sightseeing 
spots that bustles with tourists throughout the year. 
Therefore, there is heavy damage from tourist traffic in 
addition to age and deterioration. In order to evaluate the 
damage, data acquisition and accumulation by constant 
monitoring or periodic measurement is required. However, 
under the circumstances, it is not practical to bring in a large 
energy supply system or to wire the site for the purpose of 
taking measurements. Therefore, battery-driven sensor 
devices and data collection methods that are performed 
without wires are necessary. As well, Micro Electro 
Mechanical System (MEMS) based sensors that pursue low 
power consumption and involve high precision will be 
essential [5].  
Furthermore, in order to carry out a highly accurate 
analysis, it is desirable to take multipoint measurements on 
the ground surface, at all three stories of the corridor, and on 
the ancestral halls for Angkor Wat. By simply installing 
sensors, it is possible to obtain autonomously accurate time 
information; the technology is expected to perform activities 
such as acquiring a data group that ensures time 
synchronization [3, 4]. These measures are also useful for 
monitoring the site for the management and maintenance of 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

general building structures and social infrastructure. With 
the application of these methods to World Heritage 
monitoring in mind, research on the development of an 
autonomous time synchronization sensor module that holds 
highly accurate time information has been carried forward 
by using the CSAC.  In order to acquire measurement data 
that secures time synchronization by installing the sensor 
devices in a wide area of high density, the sensor module 
itself should autonomously hold accurate time information 
without relying on a network or GPS signal. Therefore, a 
sensing module that autonomously holds accurate time 
information by mounting the CSAC has been developed 
(Figures 10 and 11).  
Figure 10. CSAC and sensor board. 
Figure 11. Sensor module. 
The CSAC is an ultrahigh precision atomic clock that 
features ultra-low power consumption and ultra-small size, 
and can be mounted on-board. The module includes the 
CSAC in addition to the CPU, memory, storage, 3-axis 
MEMS acceleration sensor, external part analog sensor 
input interface, temperature sensor, anti-aliasing filter, and 
A/D converter. It is also equipped with a Field-
Programmable Gate Array (FPGA), which is a dedicated 
integrated circuit that is used so time information from the 
CSAC can be directly sent to the sensor’s measurement data. 
Although an Ethernet network interface has been provided 
for data communication, Wi-Fi and 3G/LTE communication 
functions have been separately added to improve the 
module’s convenience as a sensor device. By developing 
this kind of autonomous time synchronization sensor 
module, a health monitoring application has been added to 
the structure. Furthermore, the developed sensor device was 
installed on actual buildings and bridges, and applied to 
seismic observation and evaluation of structural health.  
Figure 12. Digital sensing platform. 
Figure 13. Autonomous time synchronization sensing system. 
However, the MEMS acceleration sensor was mounted 
in the developed sensor device, so it was difficult to 
measure down to microtremors with high accuracy. The 
developed sensor device is equipped with an external analog 
input interface, through which any analog sensor can be 
connected. High-performance servo acceleration sensors can 
also be connected, but the risk of noise being mixed into the 
analog signal remains. Therefore, it was decided that a fully-
fledged digital sensing platform (Figure 12) was developed. 
Specifically, a high-accuracy digital acceleration sensor was 
mounted in the sensor device to enable accurate acceleration 
measurements with no risk of noise being mixed in, and 
technology has been developed to add an accurate time 
stamp to the digital sensor output using CSACs. 
In order to properly maintain and manage World 
Heritage for centuries by collecting, accumulating, and 
analyzing the measurement data, it is necessary to develop a 
sustainable database that copies the entire structure and ruins 
area from real space to cyberspace in addition to the 
development of a sensor and communications research 
Main control part 
Sensor part 
MEMS acceleration 
sensor 
Chip-Scale Atomic 
Clock (CSAC) 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

(Figure 13). Ultimately, it will be required to construct a 
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) of a World Heritage. The 
CPS of this sort can perform real-time sensing, event 
analysis, and prediction by big data assimilation, and can 
also control the real space of a site based on those results.  
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, the results of vibration measurement and 
data analysis of the structures at Battleship Island and 
Angkor Wat were reported. Structures registered as World 
Heritage Sites are expected to require maintenance and 
management for centuries. To maintain and manage a World 
Heritage structure, it is necessary to obtain knowledge of its 
status by suitably monitoring the environment in accordance 
with the structure’s circumstances. Furthermore, the future 
direction on World Heritage monitoring and the need for the 
development of sensor device were discussed and research 
and development relating to a sensor device that 
autonomously retains highly accurate time information by 
applying a CSAC, was reported.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Nagasaki City cooperated with the installation and 
measurement on the Battleship Island. The photos were 
taken with the special permission of Nagasaki City. 
Measurements at Angkor Wat were supported by Mr. Mitsuo 
Ishizuka of the JASA/UNESCO project office. This research 
was partially supported by the New Energy and Industrial 
Technology Development Organization (NEDO) through the 
Project of Technology for Maintenance, Replacement and 
Management of Civil Infrastructure, Cross-ministerial 
Strategic Innovation Promotion Program (SIP). This research 
was also partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number JP19K04963 and ROIS NII Open Collaborative 
Research 2022-22S0602. 
REFERENCES
[1]
World Heritage Committee, Decisions adopted by the World 
Heritage Committee at its 39th session (Bonn, 2015).
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://whc.unesco.org/document/139179 2015.11.19 
[2]
Charles River Editors, Angkor Wat: The History and Legacy 
of the World’s Largest Hindu Temple, Createspace 
Independent Pub, 2017. 
[3]
N. Kurata, “An Autonomous Time Synchronization Sensor 
Device Using a Chip Scale Atomic Clock for Earthquake 
Observation and Structural Health Monitoring” The Eighth 
International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and 
Applications (SENSORDEVICES 2017) IARIA, Sep. 2017, 
pp.31-36, ISSN: 2308-3514, ISBN: 978-1-61208-581-4 
[4]
N. Kurata, “High-precision Time Synchronization Digital 
Sensing Platform Enabling Connection of a Camera Sensor” 
The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device 
Technologies and Applications (SENSORDEVICES 2021) 
IARIA, Nov. 2021, pp. 98-104, ISSN: 2308-3514, ISBN: 978-
1-61208-918-8 
[5]
N. Kurata, S. Saruwatari, and H. Morikawa, “Ubiquitous 
structural monitoring using wireless sensor networks” 2006 
International Symposium on Intelligent Signal Processing and 
Communications (ISPACS 2006), Dec. 2006, pp. 99-102, 
ISBN: 0-7803-9733-9 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

