Ocean Space Surveillance - Network Beployment Based on Hydrodynamic Modeling 
 
Tor Arne Reinen, 
Knut Grythe 
SINTEF 
Trondheim, Norway 
Tor.A.Reinen@sintef.no 
Knut Grythe@sintef.no 
Dag Slagstad,  
Morten Omholt Alver 
SINTEF Fisheries and Aquaculture 
Trondheim, Norway 
Dag.Slagstad@sintef.no 
Morten.Alver@sintef.no 
 
 
Abstract—The use of hydrodynamic modeling to optimize the 
placement of sensor nodes with respect to reduction of uncertainty 
in sea current modeling is demonstrated. This is done under the 
additional constraint that the nodes should constitute a connected 
underwater 
acoustic 
communication 
network. 
For 
the 
connectivity analysis a sound propagation model is employed, 
based on detailed sound speed data produced by the 
hydrodynamic model. It is found that such a detailed sound speed 
field is very attractive for obtaining sufficient precision in acoustic 
modeling. This is particularly important in regions of significant 
variability in bathymetry and sea currents. In such regions it 
would be very demanding to obtain sufficiently detailed data by 
physical measurement, and the use of a hydrodynamic model is 
virtually the only alternative. In general the model based 
approach is important for up-scaling the geographical extent of a 
network, and has a large impact on the economy of its deployment 
and operation.  
Keywords— hydrodynamic modeling; underwater acoustic 
network; network deployment; ray tracing;  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Under the constraint of limited number of nodes in a sensor 
network it is of high importance to optimize the placement of 
the nodes. Underwater acoustic sensor networks typically need 
to obey such limitations, due to high costs of sensors, 
communication modems and of deployment and maintenance 
operations. To optimize with respect to the measurement task, 
knowledge about the process is needed. To optimize with 
respect to communication, knowledge about sound propagation 
conditions is needed. The present paper aims to demonstrate 
the use of hydrodynamic modeling to guide deployment based 
on both of these criteria together. This is carried out by a 
simple case study. Though the availability of hydrodynamic 
model tools is quite widespread, this opportunity seems to have 
been exploited quite scarcely in the literature, in particular for 
the joint measurement and communication design. 
Our work contributes to the development of an ocean space 
surveillance concept [1], i.e., to combine underwater sensor 
networks and ocean modeling in order to obtain improved 
surveillance capabilities with respect to both real-time situation 
awareness and model based predictions and assessments. The 
system architecture is composed of an underwater sensor 
network, communication links to computers running ocean 
models, and the ocean models themselves. The latter assimilate 
measured data from the sensor network in a manner similar to 
what is done in meteorology.  
The measurements that we want to optimize are those that 
will be used for data assimilation: Time series of current 
velocity vertical profiles, obtained by upwards-looking 
profiling sensors close to the sea floor, at geographically fixed 
locations. In regions of variable bathymetry and external 
currents, especially coastal region, the process (the current) is 
very far from uniform in space and time.  
In our realization of the concept, and in many related 
scenarios, cost issues lead to strict limitations in the number of 
underwater nodes. An optimal deployment is therefore 
essential to obtaining a sufficient system performance. 
There is a considerable body of publications on sensor 
array design for meteorology and metocean purposes. Our 
work is based on [2], with extensions according to [3]. Good 
further references can be found in [2].  
Sound propagation is mainly governed by the spatial 
variability of the speed of sound, together with boundary 
conditions at the sea surface and bottom. Sound speed 
variability causes sound rays to curve in space, which may 
enhance or preclude propagation. In our case, sound 
propagation translates to connectivity between sensor nodes. 
Many references consider modelling of propagation based on 
the assumption that the sound speed field is known [4][5]. This 
is, however, often only approximately true, and the resulting 
lack of precision can produce unfortunate deployments if the 
number of nodes must be limited, with lack of connectivity as a 
result. Solving the sound speed data issue by using 
hydrodynamic models seems scarcely studied, in particular in 
connection with network technology. A few references 
investigate general sound speed variability prediction from 
hydrodynamic models [6][7], in [7] including acoustic ray 
tracing as a means to evaluate the modeling output. Reference 
[8] combines local hydrodynamic modeling and a parabolic 
equation model for sound propagation. Reference [9] is an 
example of the inverse problem: Assimilating tomographic 
sound propagation measurements in hydrodynamic models. 
Hardly any references seem to use hydrodynamic models in the 
context of network connectivity. This is not fundamentally 
different from the above examples, but the focus largely 
determines how the hydrodynamics results are exploited. In 
[10] we consider this topic, but do not include the issue of 
where to place nodes for optimal benefit of the sensor 
measurements. 
Joint deployment design of sea current sensors and 
communication network is investigated in [11], but only local 
254
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

sea current dynamics and a uniform bathymetry are considered. 
In the present paper a full scale hydrodynamic model is 
introduced, 
in 
combination 
with 
detailed 
bathymetry 
information. The subsequent sound propagation analysis is 
considerably influenced by these inputs. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section II describes our 
deployment-design 
strategy, 
including 
hydrodynamic 
modelling, optimization of node localization and sound 
propagation modelling. Section III presents our case-study and 
section IV the corresponding simulation results. Finally 
Section V gives a summary and conclusions from our work. 
II. 
DEPLOYMENT-DESIGN STRATEGY 
Our 
strategy 
is 
entirely 
model based: 
First the 
hydrodynamic model is used to (i) identify sensor node 
locations and (ii) provide detailed spatial and temporal sound 
speed fields. The latter are then input to an acoustic 
propagation model that evaluates connectivity of the 
underwater acoustic communication network. If necessary, 
node locations are slightly modified to ensure connectivity. If 
larger position-modifications are necessary, relay nodes are 
added (it is then an issue of incremental benefit and cost 
whether or not to include sensors also at such locations). 
A. Hydrodynamic modeling 
Our hydrodynamic model (SINMOD) is based on the 
primitive Navier-Stokes equations and is established on a z-
grid [12]. Each model level has a fixed thickness except for the 
surface levels and the one close to the bottom. Turbulent 
vertical mixing is calculated as a function of the Richardsons 
number and horizontal mixing is calculated according to [13]. 
The model uses a nesting technique to allow high resolutions in 
targeted areas. Usually a basin scale model setup having coarse 
horizontal grid resolution (~20 km)  in nested in several steps 
down to 30-50 m. Usually 8 tidal components are forced on the 
open boundaries of the basin scale model. The models are then 
forced by atmospheric fields (wind, pressure and heat flux) and 
river run-off. 
High resolution versions (800 and 160 m) of the model 
have been applied for various parts of the Norwegian coast. 
Skill assessment of the model against a data set consisting of 9 
Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler moorings placed on the 
Vesterålen-Lofoten shelf showed that the model was doing 
well [14]. 
B. Optimization of node localization 
Optimization of the localization of the measuring nodes is 
carried out so as to minimize uncertainty of the states (current 
field) 
of 
the 
hydrodynamic 
model, 
when 
including 
measurement input. This criterion is integrated over a chosen 
region of interest. Localization of the impact of each sensor is 
enforced, i.e., influence on geographically distant states is 
blocked. The procedure starts with a greedy search based on 
[2], i.e., the nodes are optimized in sequence, at each step 
considering the others to be fixed. The procedure is iterated, 
but inevitably produces a suboptimal result. The final output is 
improved by a tabu search according to [3]. In essence, this 
strategy systematically searches in the neighbourhood of a sub-
optimal solution to find the best measurement locations. 
C. Sound propagagation 
Sound propagation is modeled by ray tracing, This is the 
preferred method for frequencies of interest for acoustical 
communication, above some 10 kHz. Rays have been 
calculated by direct integration (see [4] ch.3.5). Amplitudes 
along rays have similarly been directly integrated by the 
simplified dynamic ray tracing equations of [15]. This is in 
effect a classical ray tracing system, including (non-physical) 
infinite amplitudes at caustics. The caustics artifacts are not 
removed from the results, but caustics are detected in each ray 
and an ad hoc number of range steps (10) around them are 
removed from the results.  Boundary conditions have been 
implemented in accordance with [16]. Hence, scattering losses 
at the rough boundaries are generally lower than the classical 
coherent reflection coefficient. This, however, means that the 
reflected arrivals at the receiver are a time spread sum of 
incoherent contributions.  
Rays 
are 
terminated 
when 
a 
maximum 
selected 
transmission loss (TL) is reached. This termination is the only 
amplitude information in the present paper: TL is less than the 
chosen maximum everywhere on the plotted rays. For the 
present simulations, the selected TL maximum is chosen from 
a simple transmission budget assessment (corresponding to the 
sonar equations of [17]): With a source level SL and a receiver 
noise level NL, the signal to noise ratio at the receiver is given 
by SNR = SL – TL – NL. The SNR is then required to be at 
least equal to a detection threshold, DT. The transducers used 
are assumed to be omni-directional due to the orientation 
robustness usually required in sensor networks. At 1 m 
reference distance this gives SL = 10log10(ρcP/4π), where P is 
acoustically radiated power, c is sound velocity and ρ is the 
medium density.  Expressed in dB re. 1 μPa rms sound 
pressure, this amounts to SL = 170.8 + 10log10(P).  The noise 
level is NL = 10log10(N0B), where N0 is the spectral density of 
the ambient noise and B is the system's noise bandwidth. Here 
omni-directional transducers are again assumed. For the 
present simulations the system is assumed to operate at 12.5 
kHz, with B = 300 Hz and N0 = 48 dB re. 1 μPa/√Hz. The 
latter corresponds to open sea wind generated noise at Sea 
State 5 [17]. Furthermore, P = 20 W and DT = 20 dB are 
assumed. These parameters, then, give a maximum TL of 90 
dB (and this value is reached at range 7.7 km for the uniform 
free space case). The same TL requirement would result for 
any combination of P, B and N0, as long as P/(BN0) is constant. 
 
III. 
THE CASE STUDIED 
The case selected for our study is the area around the 
Tristeinen islets at the coast of Trøndelag, Mid Norway, see 
Figure 1.  
255
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 1 Bathymetry of the deployment area. The color scale shows depth 
(m).  Gray areas are dry land. The yellow coordinates are true north and east. 
Axis labels refer to these coordinates. The model grid orientation is rotated 48 
degrees in relation to true north. Text in red refers to a network deployment 
case of which Segment 1 is studied in the present paper. 
 
The area is inside the main coastal currents and the currents 
are relatively weak. This has been confirmed in measurements 
as well as in the model simulations. The coastal water warms 
up in the surface during the summer and increases the sound 
speed compared to deeper waters. In autumn and winter when 
strong cooling of surface water takes place, the sound speed 
will decrease towards the surface. Low salinity water near the 
surface amplifies this cooling as vertical mixing is inhibited. 
The location has been used as a test site for aquaculture in 
exposed areas. The sensor network deployment investigated in 
the present paper is part of a potential extension of the 
experimental setup described in [1]: We study in some detail  
Segment 1 of the two-branch (three segment) configuration in 
Figure 1. One end of the segment is the hub of the two-branch 
network. This is identified as r = 0 in the following. The other 
end is 5.2 km away, beyond a shallower saddle point 
approximately at the midpoint of the segment. 
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULT 
A. Sensor node placement optimization. 
In the present model setup, a basin scale model for the 
Northeast Atlantic and the Arctic Sea was established with a 
horizontal resolution of 20 km [18]. High resolution models 
were nested in 4 steps down to 32 m.   
Optimalization of sensor node placement, as described in 
section II.B is shown in Figure 2. Three nodes were included in 
the search. White crosses in the figure indicate the output of the 
greedy algorithm search, while black circles indicate the final 
locations output from the tabu search (note that the lower-left 
circle and the upper-right cross overlap). The entire region in 
the figure was included in the optimization criterion. The result 
emphasizes the importance of the saddle point region on 
Segment 1 of Figure 1. This is a region where the basic 
hydrodynamic 
model 
predicts 
strong 
currents. 
The 
optimization output, then implies that this current is highly 
correlated with the lower intensity flow in other parts of the 
region, so that reduction of uncertainty at the sensor locations 
contribute to a reduction over a wider region. 
B. Network connectivity analysis 
Sound speed fields were simulated in 3D as described in 
section IV.A for the period August 21st-December 23rd 2010. 
Sound propagation analyses based on this were then carried out 
to evaluate connectivity between network nodes along Segment 
1. It was decided to keep only one of the nodes in Figure 2 and 
place a second one at the far end of Segment 1, in order to 
capture currents that are of general interest, but that do not 
contribute significantly to the flow in the region of interest for 
optimization (not providing further information once the 
currents at the saddle point are known).  
A pair of nodes is considered to be connected if there is at 
least one ray between them with a TL that does not exceed our 
chosen maximum. This has not been tested by an explicit 
eigenray search, but simply by checking whether or not a node 
is enclosed in a fan of rays transmitted from the other one. 
Sound propagation analysis for the entire network in Figure 1 
can be found in [10], using a somewhat more conservative 
connectivity definition. 
Sound speed time variability at the hub is shown in Figure 
3. A clear transition from summer to winter conditions is seen 
in the middle of the period. Figure 4 shows vertical sections 
along Segment 1 at the start, approximate midpoint and 
endpoint of the time series in Figure 3. Here spatial variability 
in the sound speed profile (SSP) is clearly demonstrated. Note 
that this would be very demanding to measure physically. 
 
Figure 2 Optimization of sensor node localization: Three nodes included. 
White crosses are the result of the greedy search. Black circles are final 
locations after tabu search. Note that the lower-left circle and the upper-right 
cross overlap. The line from the lower left cross to the upper right circle is 
approximately the first half of Segment 1 in Figure 1. 
 
 
256
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 3 Simulated SSP at network hub. August 21th December 23th 2010. 
One profile per day 
 
We will now simultaneously demonstrate (i) the use of 
sound propagation simulations based on modeled sound speed 
fields – to supplement the above node placement result, and (ii) 
that very detailed sound speed data are sometimes needed, so 
that measurement is generally very demanding and the use of 
modeled input data very attractive.  
 To this end, vertical sound speed profiles at the hub-
location (r = 0) in Figure 4 can be claimed to represent either 
single point local physical measurements or quite good 
historical data from the same time of the year. Simulations 
using such profiles can then be compared to simulations using 
the complete modeled sound speed field, which is much closer 
to a true sound field. Hence the differences in simulation 
results illustrate in a conservative manner the advantage gained 
by using detailed SSP modeling. The comparison is 
conservative due to the fact that the single range vertical 
profiles chosen represent quite good data. Much larger 
differences would be found if generic, season specific data 
were used. 
Now, consider the connectivity between the hub, the 
optimal saddle point location and the far end of Segment 1 
under winter conditions (see the lower part of Figure 4). Figure 
5 shows this connection: Ray tracing from the middle node to 
each end using the vertical sound speed profile at r = 0. Both 
end points are required to be located maximum 5 m above the 
bottom, while middle node is elevated to the minimum height 
above the bottom that ensures connectivity to the end points. 
These requirements are introduced due to mechanical 
robustness and stability issues. The two magenta lines in the 
figure show all points located 5 m and 10 m above the sea 
floor. Connectivity in the directions oposite to those shown is 
given by reciprocity.  
The same ray tracing is repeated in Figure 6, now using the 
full range dependent sound speed field of Figure 4. We observe 
that the middle node placement is problematic: There is no 
connectivity between this node and the far end at 5.2 km.  
 
Figure 4 Sound speed range dependent profile. Segment 1. Upper: August 
21st. Middle: October 1st.. Lower: December 23rd. 
 
To obtain a connection the middle node is moved around in 
the vicinity of the position given by the measurement 
optimization, looking for a position with connectivity. The 
result is shown in Figure 7, where connectivity in both 
directions is found. 
'
 
 
 
257
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 5 Relay and sensor node 30 m above the bottom. Ray tracing (right) 
using SSP (left) from hub location, r = 0,  December 23rd. Colored rays: From 
relay-towards endpoints, the part before scattering. Black: Ray continuation     
after scattering in surface or bottom. 
 
Figure 6 Relay and sensor node 30 m above the bottom. Ray tracing (right) 
using range dependent SSP (left) – December 23rd. Colors as in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 7 Relay and sensor node moved 300 m right relative to Figure 6. Range       
dependent SSP from  December 23rd. Colors as in Figure 5. 
The node in Figure 7 has been moved 300 m away from the start 
point, a result that is deemed acceptable for the measurement 
task. The analysis has been repeated for the other two sound 
speed datasets in Figure 4, with the same positive outcome. 
Hence, the node location is our final result, and we have 
demonstrated the two points (i) and (ii) above. 
 
V. 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 
Our case study has demonstrated the use of hydrodynamic 
modeling to optimize the placement of sensor nodes with 
respect to uncertainty reduction in sea current modeling, under 
the additional constraint that the nodes should constitute a 
connected underwater acoustic communication network. For 
the connectivity analysis a sound propagation model has been 
employed, based on detailed sound speed data produced by the 
hydrodynamic model. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated 
that such a detailed sound speed field is very attractive for 
obtaining sufficient precision in acoustic modeling, especially 
in regions of significant variability in bathymetry and sea 
currents. It would be very demanding to obtain sufficiently 
detailed data by physical measurement, and the use of a 
hydrodynamic model is virtually the only alternative. In 
general the model based approach is important for up-scaling 
the geographical extent of a network, and has a large impact on 
the economy of its deployment and operation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work has been part Ocean Space Surveillance – OSS, 
an internally funded strategic research initiative in the SINTEF 
group, aiming to combine wireless sensor networks and ocean 
models to obtain high quality real time situation awareness and 
predictions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Grythe et. al.,"Ocean space surveillance system – OSS" in Proc. 
IEEE Oceans'13, Bergen, Norway, June 10-13 2013. ISBN 978-1-4799-
0000-8. Paper 130118-063 
[2] P. Sakov and P.R. Oke, Objective Array Design: Application to the 
Tropical Indian Ocean. Journal of atmospheric and oceanic technology, 
2008. 25: pp. 794-807. 
[3] F.S. Hillier and G.J. Lieberman, Introduction to operations research. 
McGraw-Hill, 2005. 
[4] F. B. Jensen, W. A. Kuperman, M. B. Porter, and H. Schmidt., 
Computational Ocean Acoustics. New York: AIP Press, 2000. 
[5] M. Stojanovic and J. Preisig, "Underwater acoustic communication 
channels: 
Propagation 
models 
and 
statistical 
characterization," 
Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 47, pp. 84-89, 2009. 
[6] M. Sadrinasab and K. Kenarkohi, "Three-Dimensional Numerical 
Modelling Study of Sound Speed in the Persian Gulf," Asian Journal of 
Applied Sciences,, vol. 2, 2009,  pp. 232-239. 
[7] I. Church, J. Hughes Clarke, S. Haig, and R. Toodesh., "Modelling the 
estuarine circulation of the Port of Saint John: Visualizing complex 
sound speed distribution.," in Canadian Hydrographic Conference, 
Niagara Falls, 2012. 
[8] S. Finette, T. Evans, and C. Shen, "Sub-Mesoscale Modeling of 
Environmental Variability in a Shelf-Slope Region and the Effect on 
Acoustic Fluctuations," in Impact of Littoral Environmental Variability 
on Acoustic Predictions and Sonar Performance N. Pace and F. Jensen, 
Eds., ed: Springer Netherlands, 2002, pp 401-408. 
 
 
 
258
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[9] J. K. Lewis, J. Rudzinsky, S. Rajan, P. J. Stein, and A. Vandiver, 
"Model-oriented ocean tomography using higher frequency, bottom-
mounted hydrophones," The Journal of the Acoustical Society of 
America, vol. 117, 2005,  pp. 3539-3554. 
[10] T.A. Reinen and D. Slagstad, "Connectivity prediction in underwater 
acoustic networks based on hydrodynamic modeling", in Proc. IEEE 
Oceans'13, Bergen, Norway, June 10-13 2013. ISBN 978-1-4799-0000-
8. Paper 130118-068. 
[11] D. Pompili, T. Melodia, and I. F. Akyildiz, "Three-dimensional and two-
dimensional deployment analysis for underwater acoustic sensor 
networks," Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 7, 2009, pp. 778-790. 
[12] D. Slagstad and T. McClimans, "Modelling the ecosystem dynamics of 
the Barents Sea including the marginal ice zone: I. Physical and 
chemical oceanography. Journal of Marine Systems, 58, 2005, pp. 1-18. 
[13] J. Smagorinsky, "General circulation experiments with the primitive 
equations. I. The basic expriment", Monthly Weather Review, 91, 1963, 
pp. 99-164. 
[14] Annon, "LOfoten and VEsterålen CURents (LOVECUR). Comparison 
of Hindcast with Measurements". Revison 2.Rep., Forristall Ocean 
Engineering, Inc, 2011. 
[15] M. B. Porter and Y.-C. Liu, "Finite-Element Ray Tracing," in Proc. 
Theoretical and Computational Acoustics, 1994. 
[16] APL, "APL-UW high-frequency ocean environmental acoustic models 
handbook," Univ Washington, Applied Phys Lab APL-UW TR 9497 
APL-UW TR 9407, 1994. 
[17] R. J. Urick, Principles of underwater sound for engineers. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1975 (also Peninsula Publishing 1995). 
[18] D. Slagstad, I. H. Ellingsen, and P. Wassmann, "Evaluating primary and 
secondary production in an Arctic Ocean void of summer sea ice: An 
experimental simulation approach", Progress In Oceanography, 90(1-4), 
2011, pp. 117-131. 
 
 
259
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

