Multichannel NDIR Methane Sensor for Soil Probes 
 
Mariusz Duk, Andrzej Kociubiński, Tomasz Lizak 
Institute of Electronics and Information Technology 
Lublin University of Technology 
Lublin, Poland 
e-mail: m.duk@pollub.pl, akociub@semiconductor.pl, 
tomasz@lizak.pl 
Michał Borecki 
Institute of Microelectronics and Optoelectronics 
Warsaw University of Technology 
Warsaw, Poland 
e-mail: borecki@imio.pw.edu.pl
 
 
Abstract—The goal of this study was to examine a multichannel 
device using five commercial Non-Dispersive Infra-Red 
(NDIR) heads for the sensing of methane concentration 
changes in soil probe. The presented device consists also of a 
temperature and humidity sensing unit, a gas chamber 
equipped with a micro-fan, automated gas valves and a 
microcontroller that controls the measuring procedure. The 
temperature and humidity sensors are used to control working 
conditions. A redundant sensor unit is used to improve the 
measurement accuracy. The device worked in maintenance-
free mode installed on soil probe for six hours. The main 
development of the proposed sensor included measurement 
procedures and proposition of errors corrections. 
Keywords- methane sensor; NDIR sensor. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The analysis of methane concentration in natural systems 
is becoming an important task for environmental research. Its 
leakage will result in explosion and fire disaster. Methane is 
the main constituent of natural gas, the fuel which is supplied 
to many domestic homes and industries. It is often released 
from the walls of coal mines and, when un-monitored, it can 
accumulate, causing dangerous explosions. The soil 
examination for methane emission is important from 
property owners’ point of view, as well as from gas and oil 
field parameters investigation. 
Several techniques have been successfully used to detect 
methane. Optical methods can produce very precise results 
[1][2]. But, at present, the main problem of methane 
measurement is reliability and precision of medium and long 
term detecting in maintenance-free mode [3]. In order to 
improve the available methane sensor, a new methane 
detection device based on a five non-dispersive infrared 
heads was set up and examined. 
The paper consists of 4 sections. The first section is the 
introduction, 
where 
the 
problems 
of 
the 
methane 
measurement are discussed. The second section describes the 
measurement system construction. The experiment and the 
results of the methane concentration measurements are 
presented in section three. The conclusion is gathered in 
section four. 
II. 
MEASUREMENT SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION 
The measurement system (Fig. 1) consists of a methane 
sensing unit integrated in the gas chamber with humidity and 
temperature sensors, a micro-fan, a microprocessor controller 
and an RS485 transmitter. The measuring chamber is closed 
on both sides by shut-off servos [4]. The sensor head (Fig. 2) 
includes a set of five methane concentration units (TDS0034 
type MSH-P/HC/5/V/P from Dynament Limited). The 
TDS0034 heads operate by using the non-dispersive (NDIR) 
principle. The concentration of the gas is obtained from the 
head output voltage using the equation: 
C[ppm] = 25·(S[mV] – V0), 
where: S is the output voltage, V0 is the reference value of 
the concentration (0 ppm), under factory adjustment 
V0=400 mV. 
 
 
Figure 1.  External view of sensor [4]. 
 
Figure 2.  Sensor head: microprocessor unit, NDIR heads, and temperature 
plus humidity sensing unit. 
The microprocessor module was built using the Texas 
Instruments MSP430F5529. The microprocessor controls the 
operation of the sensors, the air inlet and outlet and the 
micro-fan that can be used for equalization of concentration 
of gases in the chamber, gas chamber ventilation or gas 
pumping. 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

III. 
EXPERIMENT AND RESULTS 
The developed measurement system was justified in 
horizontal position then installed on a soil probe in the 
village of Lublin. 
A. System justification  
System justification was performed with gas chamber 
positioned horizontally, with two ends gas valves open and 
with working micro-fan. The micro-fan enables movement 
of air compared to human breath speed. The indicative value 
of V0 was 500 mV. The measured in 6 hours concentrations 
and temperature in gas chamber are presented in Figure 3.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Results of system justification at free air where methane 
concentration is close to 0ppm. 
The 
simple 
error 
concentration 
of 
correction 
measurement was performed using accepted results from 4 
heads discarding the least likely one of a measurement result. 
The average signal was calculated for 5 heads. The 
calculated distance between each head in set and average 
signal was used to select 4 heads from which data are used 
for subsequent averaging and then for presentation. The raw 
data shows that heads are characterized with ±1000 ppm 
accuracy. The accuracy of the system with the proposed data 
analysis procedure is in ±400 ppm range. Because the range 
of humidity didn't exceed the permissible levels, the results 
of the measurement of the humidity was not used in the 
presentation data. The temperature compensation of the 
heads works well. But, the correlation of the signal 
concentration with temperature is visible. 
 
B. System testing with forced air movement in soil probe 
For system testing, the sensor was installed on a soil 
probe. The initial situation with open valve of the gas 
chamber to air and working micro-fan was used to set V0 
values of each sensor. Then, the valve to air was closed and 
the valve to soil was opened. The analysis of the results of 
this experiment (presented in Figure 4) shows that an initial 
dose of methane released into chamber at the beginning of 
the measurement was at a level of 130 ppm. 
The increase of methane concentration in probe may be 
measurable on the interpolation base. In the presented case, 
the concentration is of 50 ppm during 6 hours.  
 
Figure 4.  Results of system testing. 
C. System testing with initial CH4 dose at air inlet system 
The last system test was performed with initial methane 
dose given from the cloud at sensor air inlet. At the 
beginning of the procedure, the sensor valves were opened 
and the micro-fan was working. Next, the small methane 
cloud was generated at the small distance from soil probe. 
Then, the air inlet valve was closed and the micro-fan 
stopped. The registered values are presented in Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5.  System testing with initial CH4 dose at air inlet system. 
The classical exponential concentration damping is 
visible. Therefore, the examined soil can work as a gas 
absorber, what is quite usual phenomenon. The measured 
concentration dispersion increases when absolute value of 
the concentration decreases. 
IV. 
SUMMARY 
The soil probe installation procedure may affect the 
examination of methane concentration in a short time. The 
correction of the initial value for data processing of the 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

methane concentration (0 ppm) has to be confirmed before 
tracking of the environment concentration. The medium-term 
examination of the methane concentration is possible with a 
multichannel NDIR methane sensor when it is based on error 
correction procedures and data analysis. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by the NCN grant 
2012/06/A/ST700398 “Oxide nanostructures for electronic, 
optoelectronic and photovoltaic applications”. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J.Y. Wong and R.L. Anderson, “Non-Dispersive Infrared Gas 
Measurement”, IFSA Publishing, 2012. 
[2] Z. Zhu, Y. Xu, and B. Jiang, “A one ppm NDIR methane gas 
sensor with single frequency filter denoising algorithm,” 
Sensors, vol. 12, 2012, pp. 12729-12740. 
[3] L. Jun, et al., “Miniature low-power ir monitor for methane 
detection,” Measurement, vol. 44, 2011, pp. 823–831. 
[4] M. Borecki, M. Duk, A. Kociubiński, and M.L. Korwin-
Pawlowski, 
“Multiparametric 
methane 
sensor 
for 
environmental monitoring,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 10175, 2016, pp. 
101750M-1 - 101750M-9. 
 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

