Standard VHDL Modeling and Top-Simulation for the Development of an 
Integrated Smart-Bolometer 
 
M. Denoual 
GREYC-ENSICAEN 
University of Caen Basse Normandie 
Caen, France 
mdenoual@greyc.ensicaen.fr 
P. Attia 
NXP Semiconductors 
Colombelles, France 
patrick.attia@nxp.com 
 
Abstract—An event-driven modeling technique in standard 
VHDL is presented in this paper for the high level simulation 
of a resistive bolometer operating in closed-loop mode and 
implementing smart functions. The closed-loop mode operation 
is achieved by the capacitively coupled electrical substitution 
technique. The event-driven VHDL modeling technique is 
successfully applied to behavioral modeling and simulation of 
such a multiphysics system involving optical, thermal and 
electronics mechanisms. The modeling technique allows the 
high level simulations for the test of the smart functions 
algorithms of the future integrated smart-device.  
Keywords- top simulation, standard VHDL, smart sensor, 
bolometer 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Smart sensors defined according to the IEEE 1451.2 as 
sensors “that provide functions those necessary for 
generating a correct representation of a sensed or controlled 
quantity” [1] are more and more common on the market. 
These devices integrate on a single chip or in a single 
package the sensor, its analogous conditioning electronics, 
some digital electronics for control and data transmission, 
feedback means, and possibly RF means [2]. The 
development of such devices combining analogous, digital 
electronics and physical transducers implies the availability 
of tools for the design and the validation. Especially, high-
level simulation tools are required for the validation of the 
algorithms implementing the smart functions. Smart 
functions are for instance self-calibration, identification, or 
self-test. 
From the sensor side, multiphysics design and simulation 
softwares exist that allow this type of simulation. From the 
electronics or algorithm side, modeling using VHDL-AMS, 
Verilog-AMS has been proposed [3]. As far as top validation 
is concerned, i.e. test of embedded algorithms in their 
operating context, these modeling techniques exhibit huge 
simulation times that are not compatible with the tuning and 
optimization of the algorithms and usually suffer from 
convergence issues. For complex mixed analogous-digital 
electronics circuits, some designers have an unusual use of 
the standard VHDL language combined with mathematical 
packages to model such mixed systems, and proceed to 
event-driven simulation. Such simulations prevent the 
convergence issues and drastically reduce the simulation 
time [4, 5].  
In this work, for the first time to our knowledge, we use 
the standard VHDL modeling and event-driven purely digital 
simulations during the design and development of a smart-
bolometer for the validation of algorithms implementing 
smart functions. This work takes place at the beginning of 
the design and the development of integrated smart-
bolometers. The smart-sensors considered consist in 
uncooled resistive bolometers and the implementation of the 
capacitively coupled electrical substitution [6, 7] that enables 
the closed loop operation of the bolometers and the 
implementation of smart functions.  
Uncooled resistive bolometers are one kind of infrared 
sensors. Among the thermal detectors, resistive bolometers 
are the most commonly met due to the simplicity of their 
fabrication process, compatible with the semiconductor 
industry. Uncooled bolometers represent more than 95% of 
the market of infrared imaging systems in 2010 and the sales 
volume is expected to triple by 2015 [8]. In that context, our 
work is to develop bolometers with self-test, self-calibration 
and identification function, i.e. smart-bolometers. 
The paper is organized as follows. The first section 
describes the detection principle of a resistive bolometer and 
the capacitively coupled electrical substitution for the 
feedback. The second section presents the standard VHDL 
modeling of the system. The result section exhibits some 
simulation results that illustrate the potential of the standard 
VHDL modeling technique to validate the functional 
behavior of multi-domain systems. The results also show that 
this modeling technique answers the need for high level 
simulation tools to test the algorithms implementing smart 
functions. The purpose of such simulations is to validate the 
functionality of the device not the performances; that is why 
neither noise nor linearity have been modeled in this work 
but both could be added if necessary in the future. 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE SYSTEM 
The device is a closed-loop system composed of a 
resistive bolometer, its conditioning electronics and the 
capacitively coupled electrical substitution feedback part. 
A. Uncooled Resistive Bolometer 
The operating principle of an uncooled resistive 
bolometer is illustrated in Fig.1. An uncooled resistive 
bolometer converts absorbed infrared (IR) radiation into 
heat, which in turn changes the resistance of a sensing 
resistor. The sensing resistor is current biased. A bolometer 
91
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

can be modeled as an IR-sensitive element of thermal mass 
Cth linked via a thermal conductance Gth to a substrate acting 
as a heat sink. The performance of the bolometer is 
characterized by figures of merit such as the temperature 
coefficient of resistance (TCR or α) of the temperature 
sensing resistor, its responsivity (R), its specific detectivity 
(D*) and its effective time constant (τeff=Cth/Geff, Geff is the 
effective thermal conductance and depends on Gth) [9]. The 
responsivity describes the variations of the output voltage 
signal (vTbolometer) depending on the IR input radiation 
(pradiation(ω)) and it is expressed by the transfer function of the 
bolometer  as follows 
th
eff
B
BIAS
radiation
T
C
j
G
R
I
p
v
V W
R
bolometer
ω
αη
ω
ω
ω
+
=
=
)
(
( )
]
( )[ /
 (1) 
where η is the absorption coefficient of the absorption 
layer of the device, IBIAS is the bias current, RB is the 
bolometer resistance (sensing resistor). The design of a 
resistive bolometer results from a tradeoff between 
responsivity and time constant, under fabrication constraints. 
Improved responsivity is obtained with small thermal 
conductance, but this negatively impacts the time constant.  
 
 
Figure 1.   Schematic of a resistive bolometer. The incident IR power is 
absorbed and converted into heat. The heat rises the temperature of a 
temperature sensitive resistor thermally coupled to a heat sink at T0. The 
resistance change of the sensing resistor is measured. 
B. Feedback technique 
A way to overcome this trade-off is to operate the 
bolometer in closed-loop mode. In that case, usually Joule 
heat is used as feedback means and technique is referred to 
as electrical substitution [10, 11]. Three techniques of 
implementation exist for the closed-loop operation:  
(i) Direct feedback [12, 13] suffering from stability issues,  
(ii) Feedback using an extra heating source [10, 11],  
(iii) Capacitively coupled feedback on the sensing resistor 
[6, 7] that combines the advantages of the two previous 
solutions. The digital implementation of the capacitively 
coupled feedback technique, used in this work, is illustrated 
in Fig.2 and described in details in [6, 7].  
The principle is to dissociate the electrical and thermal 
working points according to a frequency basis. It consists in 
the use of a high frequency modulated signal for the heat 
feedback voltage applied to the sensing resistor. This 
implementation can be applied to any kind of uncooled 
resistive bolometer. The digital implementation, involving 
pulse width modulation (PWM) or Sigma-Delta modulation, 
enables the linearization of the feedback path as well as a 
direct digital output power reading [7].  
 
 
Figure 2.   Digital implementation of the capacitively coupled electrical 
substitution feedback. RB represents the sensing resistor. The feedback is a 
PWM signal of duty cycle a, translated at high frequency. 
C. Smart functions 
In addition to the benefits of the operation in closed-loop 
mode (e.g. reduction of the time constant, operation at a 
defined working point, improvement of the measurement 
dynamics), the feedback path enables smart functions. This 
has been extensively studied for in the case of accelerometer 
or pressure sensor [14]. The basic smart functions of a smart 
sensor 
are 
self-test, 
self-calibration 
or 
autorange. 
Identification in open and closed-loop is another smart 
function that enables the monitoring of the aging of the 
sensor. It consequently allows the update of the feedback 
controller. Those smart functions correspond to algorithms 
implemented in the digital part of the smart sensor. The main 
objective of the standard VHDL modeling is to dynamically 
test and validate algorithms in their operating context, i.e. the 
mixed analogous-digital and multi-domain high level 
context.  
III. 
MODELING TECHNIQUE 
Advantages of the presented modeling technique come 
from: (i) the event-driven nature of the simulation using 
purely digital environment and (ii) the properties of the 
standard VHDL language. The event-driven nature of the 
simulation results in drastically shorter simulation times 
compared to time-driven simulation using for instance Spice 
or Matlab-Simulink [15]. Using existing digital simulation 
software (ModelSim, NCSim,…), this modeling technique 
does not suffer from the convergence issues usually observed 
with other techniques. The standard VHDL syntax with 
user’s defined types enables implicit connectivity check 
between the parts of the designed system as in VHDL two 
connected signals must have the same type.  
The basic principle of this modeling technique is the 
digitalization of the analogous parts of the design. The 
appropriate modeling of the analogous parts of the design 
enables to overcome the problematic induced by different 
time scales. It is the case in this work involving low 
frequency thermal phenomena (< kHz), and high frequency 
92
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

electronics signals due to the modulated feedback signal of 
the capacitively coupled electrical substitution (MHz range). 
Those frequency ranges are represented in Fig.4. In the 
model developed, the phenomena are treated differently 
depending on their frequency range. Low frequency 
phenomena such as power/temperature variations or voltage 
variations due to the temperature variations are considered as 
signals. On the contrary, high frequency phenomena, 
essentially the modulated feedback voltage, are not treated as 
signals. That means no signals at those high frequencies are 
generated. The model only takes into account the effective 
feedback power generated by this high frequency modulated 
signal, which in case of PWM modulation is proportional to 
the duty cycle [7]. The effective feedback power applied to 
the sensing resistor varies in the low frequency range related 
to the thermal phenomena (system bandwidth in Fig. 4). This 
modeling enables drastic simulation time reduction. In 
practice the simulation time step corresponds to the digital 
sampling period of the system (TS=1/fS). This sampling 
period is chosen as a tenth of the closed-loop time constant. 
Consequently, it allows a one-thousand reduction of the 
simulation time compared to a simulation that would take 
into account the high frequency feedback signal.  
 
 
Figure 4.  : Frequency domains 
All the elements of the system are modeled using 
standard VHDL. Those elements are schematically presented 
in the figure Fig.3 corresponding to the testbench. The 
testbench also includes the optical power stimuli and the 
stimuli process. In this example, the smart function simulated 
is open-loop identification.  
The model for the bolometer corresponds to the VHDL 
transcription of the digitalized transfer function (1). The 
digitalization is achieved using the bilinear transformation. 
The conversion process is divided into two consecutive 
steps: (i) the thermal process dealing with power inputs and 
temperature, (ii) the electrical process corresponding to the 
temperature measurement. This structure would enable to 
take into account the electrothermal feedback phenomenon 
[9] of the bolometer itself if needed in the simulation. At the 
present time, this phenomenon is taken into account through 
the use of the effective thermal conductance (Geff) rather than 
the physical thermal conduction (Gth).  
The model for the filter and amplifier block only consists 
in a gain since the bolometer voltage output signal is in the 
bandpass range of the filter. 
The model of the controller in this case implements the 
equations of a digital proportional integral (PI) controller. 
The op_mode input enables to choose the operation mode of 
the controller (open/closed loop).  
The model for the feedback shaping block consists in a 
gain and saturations corresponding to the PWM modulation. 
As mentioned earlier, the high frequency carrier that 
translates the feedback bandwidth is not taken into account. 
Only the feedback duty cycle is considered. 
The identification block implements a least-mean-square 
adaptative fitting algorithm which role is to extract 
parameters in order to optimize the feedback controller 
and/or to monitor the aging of the device. 
The optical source generates stimuli with parameterized 
frequency, amplitude and shape. 
 
IV. 
EXAMPLE OF SIMULATION RESULTS 
This section illustrates the type of simulation that can be 
done with this modeling technique. The simulations were 
performed using the ModelSim Altera 6.3 Quartus II 8.1 
 
Figure 3. : Block diagram of the complete testbench. The filled box with dotted border represents the smart-bolometer to be integrated, i.e.: the sensor 
itself, the conditioning electronics, the heat feedback and here, as an example of smart function, an open-loop identification function. The circle marked 
arrows indicate the signals observed in the simulations 1 and 2 presented in the figure Fig.5. All the boxes correspond to standard VHDL files. Sclock is 
the sampling signal at frequency fS. 
93
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

software. Parameters for the sensor and the electronics were 
taken from [7] and correspond to a macro-scale device.  
The figure Fig.5 shows two simulation results. Fig.5(1) 
corresponds to open and closed-loop simulation of the 
system. The results are in good agreement with experimental 
results previously obtained [7]. Simulations in either open or 
closed-loop are performed without convergence issues 
within a few seconds. This enables fast parameter 
optimization for the control through series of simulations.  
Fig.5(2) corresponds to simulation of a smart function: 
the identification of the system. An adaptative least-mean-
square algorithm is implemented using standard VHDL to 
extract the characteristic parameters of the bolometer while 
stimuli are applied. This simulation underlines the ability of 
the modeling technique to validate algorithm supporting 
smart functions in their operating context by top simulation.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
An event-driven modeling technique in standard VHDL 
is presented for the high level simulation of a resistive 
bolometer operating in closed-loop mode and implementing 
smart functions. This behavioral modeling technique is 
successfully applied to the simulation of such a multi-
domain system. It enables fast simulations without any 
convergence issues. The modeling technique allows the test 
and validation of algorithms supporting smart functions. It is 
therefore a useful tool for the development of integrated 
smart sensors. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Frank, Understanding smart sensors: control techniques 
Artech House publisher, 2000, ch. 7, pp. 149-171.  
[2] K.D. Wise, Integrated sensors, MEMS, and microsystems: 
Reflections on a fantastic voyage, Sens. & Act. A, 2007, vol. 
136, pp. 39-50. 
[3] Y-A. Chapuis, L. Zhou, H. Fujita, Y. Hervé Multi-domain 
simulation using VHDL-AMS for distributed MEMS in 
functional environment: Case of a 2D air-jet micro- 
manipulator, Sens. & Act. A, 2008, vol. 148, pp. 224-238. 
[4] M. Schubert, Mixed-Sginal Event-Driven Simulation of a 
Phase-Locked Loop, BMAS, 1999. 
[5] R.B. Staszewski, C. Fernando, P.T. Balsara, Event-Driven 
Simulation and modeling of phase noise of an RF oscillator, 
IEEE Trans. Circ. and Syst., 2005, vol. 52(4), pp 723-733. 
[6] M. Denoual, G. Allègre, S. Delaunay, D. Robbes, 
Capacitively coupled electrical substitution for resistive 
bolometer enhancement, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2009, vol. 20, 
doi: 015105. 
[7] M. Denoual , S. Lebargy, G. Allègre, Digital implementation 
of the capacitively coupled electrical substitution for resistive 
bolometers, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2010, vol. 21, doi: 015205. 
[8] Yole Développement, Uncooled IR Cameras & Detectors for 
Thermography and Vision, Tech. & Market Report, 2010. 
[9] P. L. Richards, Bolometers for infrared and millimeter waves, 
J. Appl. Phys., vol. 76, 1994, pp. 1–24 
[10] J. P. Rice, S. R. Lorentz, R. U. Datla, et al., Active cavity 
absolute radiometer based on high-Tc superconductors, 
Metrologia, 1998, vol. 35(289). 
[11] M. Galeazzi, An external electronic feedback system applied 
to a cryogenic micro-calorimeter, Rev. Sci. Instr., 1998, vol. 
69(5), pp. 2017-2023. 
[12] C. D. H. Williams, An appraisal of the noise performance of 
constant temperature bolometric detector systems, Meas. Sci. 
Technol., 1990, vol. 1(322).  
[13] R. C. S. Freire, S. Y. C. Catunda, B. A. Luciano, Applications 
of Thermoresistive Sensors Using the Electric Equivalence 
Principle, IEEE Trans. Instr. Meas., 2009, vol. 58(6), pp. 
1823-1830. 
[14] L. Zimmermann, J. Ebersohl, F. Le Hung, et al., Airbag 
application: a microsystem including a silicon capacitive 
accelerometer, CMOS switched capacitor electronics and true 
self-test capability, Sens. & Act. A, 1995, 46-47 pp. 190-195. 
[15]  J. Zhuang, Q. Du, T. Kwaniewski, Event-Driven Modeling 
and Simulation of a Digital PLL, BMAS, 2006, pp. 67-72
(1) 
(2) 
Figure 5. : Examples of digital simulations of the VHDL modelized system.  
(1) Open/closed-loop simulation. The simulation begins in open-loop. The square applied optical stimuli (Popt) induces temperature changes in the 
bolometer (Tbolometer) which is the open-loop ouput. In closed-loop mode, the temperature is regulated as the feedback power (Pfb) compensates the 
incoming optical power. The closed-loop operation of the bolometer enables a direct power reading of the incoming power through the variations of Pfb.  
(2) Open-loop identification process. A least-mean square adaptative algorithm is implemented for the extraction of parameters in order to identify the 
bolometer characteristics. The predicted output is evaluated with the estimated parameters and the electrical stimuli (VPbias) converted into power stimuli 
by the feedback path. The prediction error corresponds to the difference between this predicted ouput and the open-loop ouput signal (VT). According to 
the error the estimated parameters are adjusted. The stimuli is a pseudo random binary sequence (PRBS) in order to optimize the identification process. 
94
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

