Efficient Suboptimal Detectors for Maritime Surface Surveillance High-Resolution 
Radar 
Blas Pablo Dorta-Naranjo#1, Jaime Calvo-Gallego+2, Cristina Carmona-Duarte#3, Félix Pérez-Martínez*4 
+ Instituto para el Desarrollo Tecnológico y la Innovación en Comunicaciones (IDeTIC), University of Las Palmas de G. C. 
Campus de Tafira s/n, E-35017, Las Palmas, Spain 
1 pdorta@dsc.ulpgc.es 
3 ccarmona@idetic.eu 
#Department of Computing and Automatics, University of Salamanca 
E.P.S. de Zamora, Campus Viriato, Av. Requejo, 33, E-49022, Zamora, Spain 
2 jaime.calvo@usal.es 
* Department of Signals, Systems and Radio Communication, Polytechnic University of Madrid 
E.T.S.I. de Telecomunicación, Av. Complutense s/n, E-28040, Madrid, Spain 
4 felix@gmr.ssr.upm.es 
 
Abstract— This paper presents some efficient suboptimal 
detectors, based on statistical descriptors, which take advantage 
of the high-resolution characteristics of the high-resolution 
radars (HRR). Which are one of the first stages of the sensor-
based localization and tracking technologies. The detection 
performance has been studied under noise and sea clutter 
conditions, with non-coherent data from both real and synthetic 
extended targets. We have also made an adaptation of the 
classical moving window detection technique for the high-
resolution radars, making use of it as a reference technique to 
evaluate the results obtained with the detection techniques that 
we present. The experimental results were obtained with the 
ARIES radar, a maritime surface surveillance LFM-CW HRR 
operating in X-band. 
 
Keywords-HRR radar; detectors; statistical descriptors. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The specific characteristics of high-resolution radars 
(HRR) [1] suggest the interest to analyze the possibilities of 
new detection algorithm for global detection purposes of the 
extended targets (composed of a number of scatterers, where 
the target extent in any dimension is greater than the radar 
resolution in that dimension) [2]. This means, the 
development of detection algorithms oriented to the radar 
images, and not just to perform the detection process in each 
one of the resolution cells, as conventional radar detection 
techniques do. This paper presents detectors based on 
statistical descriptors, widely used in the field of digital image 
processing [3]. 
Nowadays, the operating HRR typically have the sliding 
window technique built in [4], [5], (also called moving 
window, depending on the references) originally developed 
for conventional radar, without any adaptation to the 
characteristics of the high resolution. The sliding window 
detector [4], [5] has been chosen as reference in this paper to 
compare with the results provided by the proposed 
algorithms. 
In order to explore the possibilities for some of these 
detectors, a comparative study has been obtained in terms of 
probability of detection (Pd) for a given probability of false 
alarm (Pfa) using the of Neyman-Pearson criterion [6], widely 
accepted and widely used in radar. This work has been carried 
out through a theoretical and experimental analysis with real 
and synthetic targets. Since from the operational point of 
view, the significant parameter is the time between false 
alarms (the inverse of the product of the Pfa by the number of 
decisions per second the sensor should take), image sensors 
work with probabilities of false alarm several orders of 
magnitude higher than the pixel-oriented sensors, as a direct 
result due to the fact that the radar requires a smaller number 
of decisions made per second. 
Some synthetic targets have been generated to verify the 
quality of the presented algorithms in this article for the 
detection of extended targets in two dimensions. The HRR 
targets have multiple scattering (individual targets) not 
fluctuating. Each resolution cell (or pixel, in the radar image) 
is well defined by its Cartesian coordinates (x, y), and its 
amplitude level. Thus non-fluctuating targets have been 
modelled (according to bibliography: Marcum model, or 
Swerling 5 or 0) [7], which correspond with the HRR real 
targets. In addition, in order to corroborate the reliability of 
the algorithmic developed operating in real-world scenarios, 
real targets have been processed, which have been captured 
with the ARIES HRR [8], a maritime surface surveillance 
linear frequency modulated continuous wave (LFM-CW) 
HRR, operating in X–band, in scanning mode, and non-
coherent detection, which data are range–azimuth matrices. 
In this paper, first the problem statement is presented, then 
the suboptimal efficient detectors based on statistical 
descriptors for HRR are introduced, after that the results vs. 
noise and results vs. clutter are described and finally the 
conclusions are exposed. 
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT 
Based on the classical statement of the problem, the 
problem is dealt starting with the analysis of a point target 
(where the size of the target is smaller than the resolution cell 
of the radar system). The second step of the analysis deals the 
generalization for extended targets.  
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

In order to provide a comparison of the results provided 
by the techniques presented in this article, we make use of the 
sliding window detector as a reference technique [7], which 
has been adapted to the HRR characteristics. This paper 
presents the results obtained with three significant targets: 
• 
Point target: the Fig. 1 shows the range–azimuth 
matrix obtained at the envelope detector output 
in conventional surveillance radars, in which the 
size of the target is smaller than the range 
resolution cell. The level of the clutter 
considered is far below the thermal noise of the 
system. This assumption is a quite common 
situation and it is according to the real operation 
of the HRR, due to the small surface inside the 
considered resolution cell. In most of the 
resolution cells the radar signal is a Rayleigh 
random variable [7]. The target amplitude shape 
is affected by the antenna radiation pattern, 
which can be considered as a Gaussian 
distribution. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Range–azimuth data matrix of a synthetic point target, 
synthesized according to the operating parameters of the ARIES radar 
• 
Extended targets: Fig. 2 presents the range–
azimuth data matrix from a HRR for a simple 
model of extended target, a linear target. Fig. 3 
shows a real extended target (with a high enough 
signal-to-noise ration, SNR, and also large 
enough) captured with the ARIES HRR, which 
demonstrates the extended targets can be 
considered as a collection of single point targets, 
provided that the range resolution cell is small 
enough (e.g. close to 1 m), compared to the size 
of the target. 
In all considered cases, the data matrices, containing each 
of the targets, are of the same size, and have a large enough 
number of bins in order to have a sufficient statistic [9], in 
order to provide an accurate results. 
The main ARIES radar operating parameters for both real 
and synthetic targets are shown in Table I. The specific 
parameters to synthesize the point target and the linear 
extended target, Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, are shown in Table II.  
The simulation results were obtained making use of the 
Monte Carlo method, widely accepted in the radar simulation 
field [10]. The adopted relative accuracy was 10% to reach 
probabilities indicated in each case. 
The thermal noise model is an additive white Gaussian 
noise (AWG) with zero mean. Therefore, it can be calculate 
the receiver operating characteristics curves (ROCs). 
 
TABLE I 
MAIN ARIES RADAR OPERATION PARAMETERS 
Parameter: 
Value: 
Center frequency: 
9 GHz 
Period of the sawtooth wave (also can be 
considered as 1/PRF for pulsed radars): 
 
2,0384ms 
Angular velocity of the antenna: 
15 rpm 
-3 dB antenna beamwidth: 
1,2º 
Azimuth resolution: 
0,2º 
Antenna beam shape: 
Gaussian distrib. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Range–azimuth data matrix of a synthetic linear extended target, 
synthesized according to the operating parameters of the ARIES radar 
 
 
Figure 3.  A real extended target, the Boughaz ship: raw range-azimuth data 
matrix, and the photo (inset right). Inset left: radar ARIES 
range (m) 
azimuth (º) 
range (m) 
azimuth (º) 
range (m) 
azimuth (º) 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Many models of sea clutter statistical distributions have 
been considered over the years, including Weibull, K 
distribution, etc. [11]–[15]. Experimentally, for the operation 
parameters used in the capture of targets with the ARIES 
radar, and for moderate sea conditions, the best suited 
statistical model of this sea clutter has been a log-normal 
distribution with a shape factor σ= 0.8 (standard deviation), 
which corresponds to the 3 Beaufort number, on the Beaufort 
scale, according to [16]. This result is consistent with [13]. In 
this way, the ROC, Pd against signal to clutter ratio (SCR) 
have been computed. 
TABLE II 
SPECIFIC RADAR PARAMETERS FOR THE SYNTHESIZED TARGETS 
Parameter: 
Value: 
The operation range of the ARIES radar: 
11112m (6nmi) 
The target's position in range: 
5000m 
The target's position in azimuth: 
0º 
Aspect angle: 
0º 
Maximum target relative amplitude: 
1 
 
III. SUBOPTIMAL EFFICIENT DETECTORS BASED ON 
STATISTICAL DESCRIPTORS FOR HRR 
The vast amount of information obtained by the HRR, 
leads to develop simple detectors which are able to work with 
2-dimensional image (2D), instead of analyse pixel by pixel, 
and they must also computationally very efficient, producing 
results in the extended target detection at least comparable 
with conventional techniques working with point targets. 
Based on this goal, we have developed the detectors shown in 
the Fig. 4. This group of techniques process 2D radar raw 
images, instead of processing each range profile individually 
(in contrast to classical techniques). Basically the input data 
to the proposed detectors directly are the range–azimuth 
matrices of raw video from the output of the FFT stage of the 
FM–CW radar sensor. The proposed techniques can be 
applied to any other type of HRR, and even to other kind of 
sensors. 
 
Figure 4.  Block diagram of the detectors based on integration and 
descriptors extraction 
For each range row the Integrator performs a sum of all 
resolution cells in azimuth weighted by the considered 
number of elements, resulting in an improved signal to noise 
ratio (in other words, it is possible to detect a target with a 
lower level of SNR, with the same Pfa and the same level of 
the Pd), and causing the clutter becomes Gaussian. 
From the resulting vector, the Descriptors Extractor gets 
the statistical descriptor, which compares with a threshold 
descriptor (U) in the Comparator block, which carries out the 
detection of the target. According to [7], the threshold 
descriptor is calculated to ensure a detection process with a 
constant probability of false alarm. 
The integrator used is not the optimal one and there is a 
loss (i.e. it is needed a higher value of SNR to detect a target) 
due to the shape of the antenna radiation pattern. A real 
system, in which is known the shape of the beam, makes use 
of an integrator well matched to it to minimize such loss. 
Thus, the optimal integrator has not been introduced into the 
simulation model because it does not provide additional 
information for the intended purpose: to compare the 
characteristics of different detectors. In any case it should be 
noted that the antenna radiation pattern is a given parameter 
in many applications and it should be considered. 
Among the evaluated descriptors have been found to have 
a performance suitable for use as detectors: the mean (Med), 
the contrast (Con), the fourth-order central moment (M4O), 
and the entropy (Ent). The analytical expression of the mean 
and the fourth-order central moment descriptors can be found 
in [3], and the equations for the contrast and the entropy 
descriptors are presented in [17]. 
IV. RESULTS VS. NOISE 
Fig. 5 shows the comparative results of the behaviour of 
the proposed detectors vs. the Sliding Window detector, in 
terms of the Pd and under conditions of zero-mean AWG 
noise for each one of the targets presented above. The results 
are presented separately for each of the two considered Pfa 
(10-3 and 10-4). 
Under noise conditions, the behaviour of the detectors, 
based on integration and extraction of descriptors, is nearly 
identical to the behaviour of the sliding window technique. 
This statement is well suited in the cases of the detectors 
based on the contrast descriptor and based on the fourth-order 
moment descriptor, and this is not true in the case of the mean 
descriptor. This latter is sensitive in both cases the point 
target and the extended targets. Thus, for point targets, the 
mean descriptor works worse than the sliding window 
detector. This is a reasonable fact since the mean detector 
integrates all of the noise of an image in which there are very 
few cells containing the target. On the other side, this is not 
consistent with the fact of working with HRR systems. 
Assuming the situation of working with extended targets, 
the detector based on the integration and the extraction of the 
mean descriptor, is better because of its extreme simplicity 
and computational efficiency (about one order of magnitude). 
Although the results provides by this detector are worst than 
the results obtained with the sliding window detector 
(between -2dB and -5dB, depending on relative size of the 
target with regard to the image size), the proposed detector is 
well suited for some applications where the aforementioned 
limitations are not significant. 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Sliding window (CFAR+VD) vs. presented detectors (Int+: Med, Con, M4O, Ent), under noisy conditions. On the top: for the point target; on the 
middle: for the linear extended target; on the bottom: for the real extended target, the Boughaz ship. Left side:  for a Pfa = 10-3; and right side: for Pfa = 10-4. 
V. RESULTS VS. SEA CLUTTER 
The performance of the presented descriptors under high-
resolution sea clutter conditions has been evaluated in the 
same way as the sliding window with a lognormal distribution 
with shape parameter σ=0.8, previously indicated. 
Fig. 6 shows the comparative results of the behaviour of 
the proposed detectors vs. the Sliding Window detector 
behaviour, in terms of the Pd, under sea clutter conditions, for 
each of the three targets. The results are presented separately 
for each of the two considered Pfa (10-3 and 10-4). 
Under sea clutter environments, the effect of the 
Integrator block is a significant performance improvement of 
all descriptors, and corrects the malfunction of some 
descriptors in these settings, as the case of the contrast 
descriptor. This is a direct result of increasing its near-
Gaussian shape of its statistical distribution obtained from the 
statistical distributions of the sea clutter at the output of the 
Integrator stage. Moreover, for all the descriptors, the 
integrator makes comparable the number of false alarms to 
that number obtained with the sliding window detector, being 
slightly worst to the case of the entropy descriptor. 
In all cases, the number of false alarms increases rapidly, 
in sea clutter environments. Obviously, in the presence of 
impulsive clutter, such as modelling, you cannot keep the 
detection thresholds (in order to maintain a constant values of 
Pfa and Pd), but they should be amended to set the detector 
into reasonable rates of false alarms. If this is done, it is 
straightforward to check that the mean descriptor is the best 
one (with a loss of 3 dB with respect to sliding window 
detector, while maintaining an approximately equal Pfa). 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Sliding window (CFAR+VD) vs. presented detectors (Int+: Med, Con, M4O, Ent), under sea clutter conditions. On the top: for the point target; 
on the middle: for the linear extended target; on the bottom: for the real extended target, the Boughaz ship. Left side:  for a Pfa = 10-3; and right side: for 
Pfa = 10-4. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
It has been demonstrated that the efficiency of presented 
detectors in terms of Pd, for a given Pfa, depends on the 
relative area occupied by the target within the image, 
confirming they are particularly suitable for large extended 
targets. These algorithms have a lower computational burden 
than the conventional sliding window, allowing to maintain  
existing radar coverage even when is increased by several 
orders of magnitude the number of resolution cells, as is the 
case of HRR systems, in which the technological 
developments (with the ability to transmit and process the 
higher bandwidth RF signals) involves reducing the size of 
the resolution cells in range, and therefore increasing the size 
of processed matrices. 
The used clutter model is especially difficult for the 
parametric detectors, which are matched to the thermal noise, 
due to the strong impulse (spiky, typically) character of the 
clutter, characteristic of HRR’s real operation scenarios. 
Furthermore, one of the main characteristics of the HRR 
systems that the cell resolution is much lower than in a 
conventional radar, which means that the received clutter 
levels are much lower, in many situations below the level of 
the noise of the system itself. In summary, the curves shown 
above have been obtained as a function of the SCR, and our 
experience is that the HRR systems easily handle high SCRs 
for most of the targets. 
Finally we must remark that the techniques discussed in 
this paper can also be applied, with minor adjustments, to 
range-Doppler radar images, which are not affected by the 
shape of the antenna radiation pattern, and the most 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

significant difference, due to its operating principle, is that 
they are able to separate the targets from the clutter, so that 
the presented detectors may offer, in any real situation, 
similar results to the sliding window detector, providing 
computational advantages. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the National Board of 
Scientific 
and 
Technology 
Research 
under 
Projects 
TEC2010-21217-C02-01, 
TEC2008-02148/TEC 
and 
TEC2005-07010-C02. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. R. Wehner, High Resolution Radar. 2nd ed., Artech House 
Publishers, 1995. 
[2] R. V. Ostrovityanov, and F. A. Basalov, "Statisticheskaya 
teoriya radiolokatsii protyazhennykh tseley (Statistical Theory 
of Extended Radar Targets)," in Russian, Radio i Svyaz, 1982; 
(trans.) Artech House, 1985. 
[3] R. C. González and R. E. Woods, Digital Image Proccesing. 
3rd ed., Addison Wesley Publishing Company, 2008. 
[4] G. M. Dillard, “A Moving Window Detector for Binary 
Integration,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 
IT-13, no. 1, pp. 2–6, January 1967. 
[5] N.Levanon, “Analytic comparison of four robust algorithms 
for post detection integration,” IEE Proceedings-F, vol. 139, 
no. 1, pp. 67–72, February 1992. 
[6] J. Neyman and E.S. Pearson, “On the problem of the most 
efficient tests of statistical hypotheses,” Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series A, 231, 
pp. 289–337, 1933. 
[7] M. I. Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems. 3rd ed., McGraw 
Hill, 2001. 
[8] F. Pérez, A. Asensio, J. Gismero, J. I. Alonso, J. M. Monje, F. 
Casanova, R. Cortijo, and J. Pérez Ojeda, “ARIES: A High 
Resolution 
Shipboard 
Radar,” 
in 
Proc. 
IEEE 
Radar 
Conference, April 2002, pp. 148–153. 
[9] A. S. Kholevo, A.S., "Sufficient statistic," Encyclopedia of 
Mathematics, Springer, 2001. 
[10] M. N. Almarshada, M. Barkatb, S. A. Alshebeili, “A Monte 
Carlo simulation for two novel automatic censoring techniques 
of radar interfering targets in log-normal clutter,” Springer, 
Elsevier, Signal Processing, vol. 88, issue 3, March 2008, pp. 
719–732 
[11] D. C. Schleher, “Radar Detection in Weibull Clutter," IEEE 
Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. AES-
12, no. 6, pp. 736–743, Nov. 1976. 
[12] L. P. Roy, and R.V.R. Kumar, “Accurate K-distributed clutter 
model for scanning radar application,” IET Radar, Sonar & 
Navigation, vol. 4, issue 2, pp. 158–167, 2010. 
[13] J. Carretero-Moya, J. Gismero-Menoyo, A. Blanco-del-
Campo, and A. Asensio-Lopez, "Statistical Analysis of a High-
Resolution Sea-Clutter Database," IEEE Transactions on 
Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 2024–
2037, April 2010 
[14] F. L.Posner, "Spiky sea clutter at high range resolutions and 
very low grazing angles," IEEE Transactions on Aerospace 
and Electronic Systems, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 58–73, Jan. 2002. 
[15] M. Greco, F. Bordoni, and F. Gini, "X-band sea-clutter 
nonstationarity: influence of long waves," IEEE Journal of 
Oceanic Engineering, vol. 29, no. 23, pp. 269–28, April 2004. 
[16] A. Farina, F. Gini, M.V. Greco, L. Verrazzani, “High 
resolution sea clutter data: statistical analysis of recorded live 
data,” IEE Proceedings Radar, Sonar and Navigation, vol. 144, 
issue 3, pp. 121–130, June 1997. 
[17] J. M. Munoz-Ferreras, J. Calvo-Gallego, F. Perez-Martinez, et 
al, “Motion Compensation for ISAR Based on the Shift and 
Convolution Algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Radar Conference, 
April 2006, pp. 366–370. 
 
 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

