Embedded Sensor for Solid-State Hydrogen Storage Devices 
Denis Marcotte and Frédéric Domingue 
Institut de recherche sur l’hydrogène  
Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières 
Trois-Rivières, Canada 
E-mail: denis.marcotte@uqtr.ca , frederic.domingue@uqtr.ca  
Abstract— In this paper, we present two potential sensors 
used to monitor the state of charge of a solid-state hydrogen 
storage device. The embedded sensors are based on the 
variation of the electrical properties of the storage material 
related to the hydrogen content. Specifically, the proposed 
sensors are based on variation of the resistivity and the 
magnetic properties. We present the preliminary results. 
The measured results confirm the possibility to determine 
the state of charge of the LaNi5 hydrogen storage devices 
using the variation of the resistivity while the study of the 
magnetic properties is under progress.   
 
Keywords: Embeded sensor; hydrogen monitoring; metal 
hydride; solid-state hydrogen storage device 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The 
continuously 
growing 
demand 
in 
energy 
motivated the development of renewable energy sources. 
An interesting solution is hydrogen, an excellent energy 
carrier. Its use reduces pollution that traditional fuels emit 
[1]. There are several products on the market using this 
energy vector such as cars, buses, power generators, 
electronic devices and appliances. The hydrogen storage 
devices are clearly one of the important components in the 
portable hydrogen energy systems. The hydrogen can be 
stored in various forms such as pressurized gas, cryogenic 
liquid, solid fuel as chemical or metal hydride 
compounds. Metal hydrides provide safety advantages 
over 
high 
pressure, 
compressed 
storage 
or 
low 
temperature, cryogenic storage, as the hydrogen is stored 
in a solid metal matrix at a low pressure with a slow 
release rate. These metal hydrides are promising mediums 
for portable hydrogen-powered generators. However, an 
important challenge with the metal hydride storage 
devices concerns the hydrogen metering techniques. The 
current approach consists in estimating the remaining 
hydrogen in the storage device based on electrical energy 
consumption. This solution is not precise and needs to be 
replaced by a specific sensor. The commercial products 
need low cost and compact sensors embedded into the 
metal hydride devices for the hydrogen metering. 
 
This 
paper 
presents 
two 
approaches 
for 
the 
development of sensors embedded in the solid-state 
hydrogen storage devices to evaluate the state of charge. 
In this work, the storage material is the lanthanum nickel 
hydride (LaNi5). As opposed to the gaseous form, the 
pressure measurement cannot be used to determine the 
hydrogen content. Indeed, we propose to monitor the 
hydrogen content through the variation of the electrical 
properties of the storage material (LaNi5). Specifically, 
the proposed sensors are based on variation of the 
resistivity and the magnetic properties. The theoretical 
approach and the preliminary results are presented. 
II. 
THEORY 
The metal hydrides have phases that are named the α 
phase, where the metal begins to absorb hydrogen, and the 
β phase, where the metal is returned to its absorption 
maximum. These phases change depending on the 
substance used. Fig. 1 illustrates the variation of the 
pressure during the hydrogen absorption and desorption. 
Clearly, the pressure remains constant even if the amount 
of hydrogen changes.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Typical PCT curve for LaNi5. 
Several studies have focused on the characterization of 
intermetallic compounds. The electrical resistivity for 
various hydride compounds, such as the MmTm3, the 
MmNi4.5Al0.5 and the LaNi5, has been characterized [2-6]. 
The studies illustrate that the resistivity varies with 
hydrogen. Especially, the resistivity of the LaNi5 
decreases during the absorption of hydrogen. In other 
hand, the magnetic properties vary also with the hydrogen 
content. The susceptibility of the LaNi5 is affected by the 
concentration 
of 
hydrogen 
absorbed 
by 
the         
compound, as discussed in several researches [7-9].  
A. Proposed Sensing Principles  
The recent technologies of micromachining make it 
possible to manufacture compact and low cost sensors 
0
200
400
600
800
0
0,5
1
1,5
Pressure (KPa)  
Hydrogen Content (%) 
25
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

suitable for embedment in the hydrogen storage device. 
The mass production of these technologies helps to reduce 
the estimated cost of the sensors and measuring circuits to 
less than a few dollars per unit. The variation of the 
electrical properties of the hydrogen storage material, in 
this case LaNi5, will affect the output of the sensor. 
B. Resistivity  
The resistance of the LaNi5 changes with the 
concentration of hydrogen. The measurement device is 
based on two conductive electrodes in contact with the 
LaNi5. The state of charge is thus estimated by measuring 
the resistance between the electrodes.  
  
C. Susceptibility 
The susceptibility of the LaNi5 changes with the 
concentration of hydrogen. The state of charge is 
estimated by measuring an inductance embedded in the 
LaNi5 storage device. The susceptibility variation 
modifies the inductance value. Fig 2b presents both 
sensing approaches.  
 
 
Figure 2.  The proposed sensor device :  
a) resistive sensor and b) inductive sensor. 
III. 
SIMULATED RESULTS 
The simulations, using a finite element simulator, were 
performed with the parameters and the data presented in 
Table I. While the LaNi5 powder is presenting large 
grains, the parameters for the bulk material have been 
used. The simulated model includes the variation of the 
electrical properties of the LaNi5 according to the 
hydrogen content.  
 
TABLE I 
PARAMETERS USED FOR THE SIMULATIONS 
H2 State 
Parameter 
Unit 
Value 
Charged 
 
 
 
Resistivity [5] 
m 
430 
Susceptibility [9] 
m3/Kg  
16,3 X 10-9 
Empty 
 
 
 
Resistivity [5] 
m 
10 
Susceptibility [9] 
m3/Kg  
57,8 X 10-9 
 
 
Figure 3.  Simulated Current Density (A/m2) . 
 
TABLE II 
SIMULATED RESULTS USING A FINITE ELEMENT SIMULATOR 
H2 State 
Parameters 
Unit 
Value 
Charged 
Resistance 
 
0,018530 
 
 
 
 
Empty 
Resistance 
 
0,001307  
The resistance variation is 1,72% between the charged 
and the empty states. However, Fig. 2 shows the current 
distribution in the material. While the electrodes’ spacing 
is quite small compared to the LaNi5 volume, the current 
distribution is present only in a local region. Additional 
characterization are required to determine if longer 
electrodes are needed. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
A. Proposed Test Bench 
The PCT (Pressure, Composition and Temperature) 
test bench enables the absorption and desorption of 
hydrogen by controlling its pressure and temperature. We 
have set a Labview platform that captures the data with 
external equipment. The test devices are: a multimeter, an 
LCR meter, an oscilloscope and a function generator. This 
allows monitoring in real time of the sensor and observes 
its evolution in relation to the change of hydrogen.  
 
Figure 4.  Automated Test Bench for Electrical Characterization during 
the absorption and desorbtion of hydrogen 
26
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

B. Resistivity Measurement 
The experiment was conducted on a sample of 254 
grams of LaNi5, with a temperature controlled chamber of 
23oC. The procedure of charging the metal hydride with 
hydrogen was to: first fill an adjacent tank, then monitor 
the hydrogen pressure of the reservoir and that of the 
sample, and when the storage tank was filled to capacity 
and we had a pressure of 2800kPa, close the valve of 
hydrogen and open the valve of the sample so that the 
metal hydride would charge. The changing value of the 
resistance was collected through an automated test bench. 
Here are the data stored. 
 
Figure 5.  Variation of resistance during hydrogen absorption 
 
Figure 6.  Variation of resistance during hydrogen desorbtion 
The simulations illustrate a perfect contact between 
the block of metal and the electrodes. The resistance of 
the wire and the contact with the LaNi5 must be taken into 
account. The measured resistance of the wire used in the 
test bench is 0.325 while the contact resistance is 
estimated at 0.125. Table II presents the measured 
results and the simulated results including the correction 
for the wire and the contact. 
 
TABLE III 
COMPARISON BETWEEN EXPERIMENTAL  
AND SIMULATED RESULTS 
H2 State 
Parameters 
Unit 
Value 
Charged 
 
 
 
 Simulated Resistance 
with corrections 
 
0,4513 
Measured Resistance 
 
0,445 
Empty 
 
 
 
Simulated Resistance 
with corrections 
 
0,4685 
Measured Resistance 
 
0,464 
 
Further experimentation is necessary to determine if 
the resistive sensors are suitable for this application. The 
effects of the temperature have to be investigated. 
C. Developped Sample Holder 
The sample-holder that contains the sensor was 
assembled by stereolithography. The fabrication was done 
at the University du Québec à Trois-Rivières. In our case, 
we used polymer to achieve the coveted results. The 
circuit was glued with epoxy. An electrical feedthrough 
allowed the connection of the embedded sensor to the 
automated test bench. 
  
 
Figure 7.  Developped Sample Holder Used in the Projet 
V. 
FUTURE WORK 
A. Theory of Magnetic Properties 
Alternatively, we begin to study another phenomenon, 
which will reveal the hydrogen content in the sample. The 
other feature is the variation of the magnetic powder 
which is influenced by the presence of hydrogen. What 
will be revealed is the concentration of the entire surface 
of the cylinder and not just of a specific place. Studies 
clearly show the variation in susceptibility of LaNi5 by 
presence or absence of hydrogen [8, 9]. 
We will discuss this feature by using inductance 
directly in the sample. The inductance is not required to 
be in contact with the powder as opposed to resistivity. 
0,44
0,445
0,45
0,455
0,46
0,465
0,47
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Resistance () 
Time (s) 
0,455
0,46
0,465
0,47
0,475
0,48
0
2000
4000
6000
Resistance () 
Time (s) 
27
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

We calculate the inductance of the magnetic field in 
relation to the surface. This relationship has a direct effect 
on the value of the inductor, because it is the latter, which 
is multiplied by the number of turns of the coil and 
everything is divided by the current, see equation 1[10]. 

  
     
 


where L represents the inductance, N is the number of 
turns of the inductance, B is the magnetic field, ds is the 
variation of the surface and finally I is the effective 
current. 
B. Developped Magnetic Sensor 
We propose to fabricate the inductive sensor on an 
alumina substrate. The proposed inductive sensors will be 
fabricated using a three-mask process. First, a 40 nm layer 
of evaporated chromium and a 1 μm layer of gold are 
defined using a typical bi-layer lift-off technique. Next, a 
30 nm TiW adhesion layer and a 0.7 μm PECVD silicon 
oxide layer is deposited and dry-etched in a reactive ion 
etching chamber in the second photolithography step. 
This oxide layer is used as the insulator between the 
inductance and the LaNi5. Finally, the bridge is formed 
using a 1.0μm thick electroplated gold on a 100 nm Au 
seed layer. Fig. 8 shows the proposed inductive sensor. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Inductance Sensor 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this article, we presented the development of an 
embedded sensor in a solid-state hydrogen storage device. 
Two approaches are currently studied based on the 
variation of the electrical properties of the storage 
material. The resistive solution has been validated with 
experimental 
measurements. 
While 
the 
resistance 
decreases in the presence of 
hydrogen. Further 
experimentation is necessary to determine if the resistive 
sensors are adaptable to other metal hydride such as 
magnesium. On the other hand, the variation of the 
magnetic properties seems a good alternative. An 
inductive sensor is currently under development.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the NSERC Hydrogen 
Canada (H2CAN) Strategic Research Network. The 
authors also gratefully acknowledge Palcan Energy 
Corporation for the financial contribution. The authors are 
thankful to Dr. Jacques Huot and his team for their 
support.  
REFERENCES 
[1] U. D. of Energy, "hydrogen from coal program research, 
development, and demonstration plan for the period 2009 through 
2016," D. o. Energy, Ed., ed, 2009. 
[2] A. L. Mohana Reddy, G. Srinivas and S. Ramaprabhu, "Hydriding 
and electrical resistivity properties of MmTM3-hydrogen (TM=Fe, 
Co and Ni) system," International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, vol. 
32, pp. 3356-3362, 2007. 
[3] I. P. Jain, Y. K. Vijay and M.I.S. Dakka, "Electrical resistance 
variations with content of hydrogen in bulk MmNi4.5Al0.5," 
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, vol. 27, pp. 85-90, 2002. 
[4] A. Vashistha, P. Sharma, G. Agarwal and I.P. Jain, "Hydrogen 
absorption mechanism in obliquely deposited MmNi(4.5)Al(0.5) 
thin film," International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, vol. 33, pp. 
404-407, Jan 2008. 
[5] F. Ishikawa,H. Tega, I. Yamamoto and M. Yamaguchi, 
"Relationships between the electrical resistivity and the metal 
hydride phases," Journal of Alloys and Compounds, vol. 231, pp. 
182-187, Dec 1995. 
[6] G. Adachi,K. Niki and J. Shiokawa, "The effect of hydrogen 
absorption 
on 
the 
electrical 
resistivities 
of 
LaNi5 
and 
MmNi4.5Mn0.5 films (Mm [triple bond; length as m-dash] misch 
metal)," Journal of the Less Common Metals, vol. 88, pp. 213-216, 
1982. 
[7] L. T. Tai, B.T. Hang, N.P.Thuy and T.D. Hien, "Magnetic 
properties of LaNi5-based compounds," Journal of Magnetism and 
Magnetic Materials, vol. 262, pp. 485-489, Jun 2003. 
[8] T. P. Blach and E. M. Gray, "Magnetic properties of the LaNi5-H 
system," Journal of Alloys and Compounds, vol. 253, pp. 336-338, 
May 1997. 
[9] L. Schlapbach, "Magnetic-properties of LANI5 and their variation 
with hydrogen absorption and desorption," Journal of Physics F-
Metal Physics, vol. 10, pp. 2477-2490, 1980. 
[10] M. N. O. Sadiku, Ed., "Elements of electtromagnetics," New York: 
Saunders college 1989, p.357 
 
 
28
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

