Real-Time Failure and Reliability Analysis of Agricultural Sprayers Based on
Sensors, Arduino Architecture, and Controller Area Bus Protocol
Paulo E. Cruvinel1,2, Elmer A. G. Penãloza 1,4, Pedro B. Andrade1, Heitor V. Mercaldi1,3
1Embrapa Instrumentation Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation, Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil
2 Post-Graduation Programs in Computer Science - Federal University of São Carlos, SP, Brazil
3Department of Electrical Engineering – Federal University of São Carlos, SP, Brazil
4Engineering Center - Federal University of Pelotas, RS, Brazil
Emails: paulo.cruvinel@embrapa.br, eagpenaloza@ufpel.edu.br, pedro_borghi@hotmail.com, heitor.mercaldi@gmail.com
Abstract—In this study, a solution for the operational analysis
of agricultural sprayers based on their sensor devices for
measurements,
surveillance,
signal
conditioning,
and
interfacing circuits is proposed. The agricultural electronics-
based machinery industry has significantly expanded during
the past 10 years, and performance and cost advances have
enabled the feasibility of operations for decision-making
capabilities for food production. However, it is becoming
increasingly necessary to study the system reliability, which is
one of the major concerns in real agricultural machinery
during
field
operation.
A
method
is
presented
for
the
verification of the failure and reliability of an agricultural
spraying system using a microcontroller, operating in an
Arduino-based
architecture,
a
controller
area
network
protocol for communication and data analysis, and sensors for
pressure, flow, and temperature, which are frequently used in
such agricultural machinery for the spray quality control. All
these sensors play an important role to support the variables
control, and they must not only be operating correctly but
must also ensure the verification of the application quality,
which depends on the correct rate of pesticide application for
pest control. Such a system allows to verify, in real time and at
a low cost, the sensors’ calibration in addition to the evaluation
of the whole operation, including the indication for corrections
and sensor replacement, if necessary. In other words, it is
possible
to
periodically
check
the
sensor
and
sprayer
reliability.
Thus,
the
knowledge
of
sensors
has
become
imperative for such applications in agriculture. Furthermore,
the
establishment
of
computational
procedures
for
the
evaluation of correct operation is equally important, which
plays a strategic role, so that users can appropriate such
knowledge and decrease measurement errors in variables that
are directly related to the efficiency of pest control, as well as
reduce the impact on the environment.
Keywords—failure and reliability of sensors; calibration of
sensors;
agricultural
application
quality;
decision-making
support; CAN bus; precision farming.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Agriculture is essential for the production of food, and
this production has become even more necessary because of
the continuous growth of the world population [1]. Because
of the resource constraints and the need to feed 9 billion
people globally by 2050, it has been argued that more food
should be produced but that, at the same time, production
should become more sustainable regarding people, planet,
and profit [2]. Today, the whole world is seeking food
security, and agricultural machinery plays in this context a
very important role.
Without agricultural mechanization and its advanced
automation, it will be practically impossible to meet such
needs and provide solutions to achieve food and nutrition
safety [3]-[5]. Automation of agricultural mechanization is
an intensive area of research and development, with
emphasis on enhancement of food quality, preservation of
operator
comfort
and
safety,
precision
application
of
agrochemicals,
energy
conservation,
and
environmental
control, among others. Automation applications are today
oriented
toward
and
assist
in
the
attainment
of
environmentally friendly and more-sustainable systems of
agricultural and food production [6][7]. The mechanization
of farming practices throughout the world has revolutionized
food production, enabling it to keep pace with population
growth [8][9].
In terms of technology development for agriculture
today, there are requests for more investments, system
innovation, and a better understanding of how people and
machines must interact. In addition, almost every piece of
agricultural equipment has sensors and controls these days,
and a number of sensing technologies are used in agriculture,
providing data that help farmers monitor and optimize crops.
In such a context, the assessment of sensor failure and
reliability
is
important
for
the
machinery
designers’
engineers and researchers.
The methodology for assessing sensor reliability has
adaptive aspects and should be customized as a function of
their application. In agriculture, for instance, the design of
embedded electronic-sensor-based systems in machinery for
the field has been shown to require the inclusion of failure
and reliability. In such a way, three general approaches can
be considered: system failure because of uncalibrated
sensors, system failure-rate prediction, and physics-of-failure
reliability assessment [10]-[13].
In general, the sensors in an agricultural sprayer are
organized in sensor networks. If using redundancy, the
failure of a single device may not be critical to the
applications. However, when failures occur in sensors, the
consequences are likely to be disastrous, particularly for
critical applications, such as the application of pesticides for
pest control. The impact of an incorrect application of
pesticides is well known, not only in terms of the economic
aspects
and
on
the
plant’s
health,
but
also
on
the
environment. The cause of such a failure must be determined
as soon as possible; otherwise, the negative consequences
could become more widespread [14].
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

According to records, isolated component evaluations of
sprayers have been carried out since the 1940s, but only in
the 1970s did technical inspection programs emerge [15].
Around 1960, the implementation of the first Sprayer
Inspection Project in Germany began. In 1969, other
countries, such as Italy, began to carry out inspections and,
from there, the quality improvement and the reduction of the
negative impacts obtained through the applications [16] were
noticed. There are reports that, in Norway, agricultural
sprayers have been inspected since 1991 [17]. The periodic
inspection projects of sprayers implemented in Europe,
besides verifying the working condition and adequacy of the
equipment, show the importance of the educational process
[18]. Belgium has performed obligatory inspections on
agricultural sprayers in use since 1995, setting as main
objectives the maintenance of equipment and the education
of applicators [19][20]. In a project carried out in Spain’s
Valencia region, the inspected sprayers were divided into
operative or not operative as a function of their condition of
use [21]. In Argentina, a survey conducted in the 1990s
showed the need for technical maintenance of spraying
machines, because the majority of them were in trouble [22].
In Brazil, the first sprayer inspection was performed in 1998,
where an evaluation was done in the State of Paraná, finding
inadequate working conditions of the pressure gauges of
some sprayers [23]. Today, several countries are performing
periodic
sprayer
inspections,
and
various groups
of researchers have reported in the literature that the best
conditions of the use of sprayers are closely related to their
constant maintenance. In such a context, the uniformity of
the spray distribution applied by the sprayer boom, the
working pressure, the temperature of the mixture, and the
volume of the pesticide, which must be adjusted for effective
pest control [24]-[27], play important roles.
Currently,
through
technical-support
programs,
machinery companies have been providing such periodic
maintenance service; however, it is still based on an external
diagnostic toolkit [28].
Today, agricultural spraying is used with a focus on
precision agriculture, where control, supervision, and the
highest quality of the application process are sought, to
increase
the
safety
and
efficiency
of
the
application
processes. These aspects are also related to the minimization
of
the
environmental
impacts
resulting
from
these
agrochemical application processes. In such work, which
quantifies
the
economics
of
the
localized
application
(variable rate), it is quite common to observe improvements
in the cost/benefit relation [29][30]. Variables, such as
temperature, flow, and pressure, have a direct influence on
these results, affecting the volume and distribution of the
drops
in
the
plantation, which
directly influence
the
efficiency of the application. If there is no control of the
pesticide drops, waste can occur. Extremely fine drops can
be carried by the wind, spreading and contaminating the
environment, which characterizes the drift phenomenon.
Extremely thick droplets, although reducing the drift,
provide less coverage of the application target, because the
pesticide volume that leaves can hold is limited by their size
[31][32]. Therefore, it is important to know precisely the
values of the variables of temperature, pressure, and flow to
have a greater control of the application of these agricultural
products. For the automation of these sprayers’ processes,
embedded computer systems are currently being used.
The innovation presented in this report is based on the
inclusion of the concept of on-the-go periodic measurements
for operational surveillance based on the monitoring of flow,
pressure, and temperature of the mixture to obtain in real
time not only the information regarding the operational
failure, but also the sprayer reliability analysis.
When done properly, a periodic evaluation of the
sensors’ calibration, or even a verification of the electronics
used for signal processing, can correct mistakes, and network
robustness can be established. In addition, selection of a
reliability
assessment
approach
is
of
fundamental
importance, because it is related to the effective design of
strategies for the operation of reliable sensors.
Furthermore, research on sensors and their effects on the
reliability and response characteristics when operating in
agricultural sprayer devices is presented. The presented
concept and the results can be used in various sprayers’
modalities and make increasing reliability possible in
relation to the sensor calibration, which defines the quality of
the application of pesticides. Because the control circuits rely
on the feedback from voltage/current sensors, the whole
system for pesticide application has performance that is
likely to be affected by the sensors’ failure rates, their
dynamic characteristics, and the signal-processing circuits.
This approach proactively incorporates reliability into the
process by establishing a way to verify the calibration of the
sensors, i.e., including verification modules for important
variables of the spraying process in an unsupervised and
automated interface.
In the rest of this work, in Section 2, the materials and
methods used are described. In Section 3, the results
obtained are discussed, and the conclusions are presented in
Section 4.
II.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
To design the development of the module for the virtual
verification of the calibration of the sensors in a spraying
system, the use of a low-cost Arduino architecture was
considered. For validation, the platform developed at the
Brazilian
Agricultural
Research
Corporation
(Embrapa
Instrumentation)
in
partnership
with
the
School
of
Engineering of São Carlos University of São Paulo (EESC-
USP) was used [33]. This platform is used for sprayer
development and analyzes and operates as an Agricultural
Sprayer Development System (ASDS). It uses a National
Instruments embedded controller, NI-cRIO, which works on
the platform LabVIEW. The NI-cRIO architecture integrates
four
components:
a
real-time
processor,
a
user-
programmable field-programmable gate array, modular I/O,
and a complete software tool chain for programming
applications. This ASDS has an advanced development
system that makes possible the design of architectures
involving the connections of hydraulic components and
devices, mechanical pumps, and electronic and computer
algorithms. Such a system also has hydraulic devices used to
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

make any configuration of commercial agricultural sprays
and new prototypes of sprayers, a user interface for system
monitoring and control, and an electromechanical structure
that emulates the movement of the agricultural sprayer in the
field (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Agricultural Sprayer Development System (ASDS) dedicated to
the application of liquid agricultural inputs.
The ASDS platform has the following components: (1)
spray nozzle, (2) system that emulates the movement of the
sprayer, (3) pesticide disposal tank, (4) user interface for the
development system, and (5) spray booms. In such a
platform, the data are presented by a graphical user interface
(GUI), where the user can interact with the digital devices by
graphical elements with icons and visual indicators, thereby
being able to select and manipulate symbols to obtain the
practical result.
The Controller Area Network (CAN) bus was also used.
It is a synchronous serial communication protocol. Modules
connected to a network send messages to the bus at known
time intervals, so synchronization is done. The CAN bus was
developed by Bosch [34] as a multimaster, message
broadcast system that specifies a maximum signaling rate of
1 Mbps, where the modules can act as masters and slaves,
depending on the use [35]. This protocol works with
multicast messages, where all modules connected to a
network receive all messages sent. The connected modules
check the status of the bus and analyze whether another
module with a higher priority is not sending messages; if this
is noticed, the module whose message has the lowest priority
interrupts the transmission and allows the highest-priority
message to be sent.
For the organization of a reference database with correct
values, calibrated and high-precision sensors were used.
They were subjected to known temperature, pressure, and
flow conditions to obtain voltage values related to these
conditions.
The method to obtain and approximate the model was
based on the use of polynomial regression. In addition, such
a concept can be used to estimate the expected value of a
variable (y), given the values of another variable (x). This
type of regression is used for models that obey polynomial
and nonlinear behavior, as in the previous case. For these
types of model, it is necessary to adjust for a higher-degree
polynomial function [36]. This technique follows the same
steps of linear regression, but using a concept based on Eq.
(1).
,
(1)
where (y) is a polynomial function in which a represents real
numbers
(sometimes
called
the
coefficients
of
the
polynomial), m is the degree, and (e) represents an error. In
this case, the mathematical procedure is the same as in the
least-squares method, but the error is now represented by a
function of degree greater than 1, such as in Eq. (2).
(2)
Thus, Eq. (2) must be derived in parts from the terms that
accompany xi and be equated to zero to find a system of
equations, which makes it possible to calculate its values.
In addition, after the construction of a database with
precalibrated values together with a mathematical model
obtained as mentioned earlier, an intelligent calibration and
correction system can be applied by using such a dataset as a
reference to compare the results obtained from the sensors
operating in real time. Such sensors have their calibrations
checked periodically with the results obtained from the use
of the models. Thus, using this comparison method, the
system can identify whether a sensor is calibrated, i.e., the
same concept can be replicated for each monitored variable.
Additionally,
either
a
real-time
recalibration
can
be
performed or the sensor can be replaced, if necessary.
The
methods
of
comparison
are
relative
change,
Euclidean Distance (ED), Root-Mean-Square-Error (RMSE),
and percent error, as among others [37]-[39]. The ED and the
RMSE methods were used in the developed solution. The
ED for comparison of the measured values of the variables
takes into account the distance between two points that can
be calculated by the application of the Pythagorean Theorem.
In the algorithm, the ED is primarily calculated as the square
root of the sum of the squares of the arithmetic difference
between the corresponding coordinates of two points, as in
Eq. (3).
,
(3)
where, d(x, y) is the ED, (x) is the measured point, (xref) is the
measured variable at the reference point, (y) is the variable at
the measured point, and (yref) is the variable obtained at the
reference point. In addition, as a second verification, the
RMSE is used. It represents the standard deviation of the
residuals (prediction errors). Residuals are a measure of how
far the data points are from the regression line, and RMSE is
a measure of how spread out are these residuals values. In
other words, it indicates how concentrated the data are
around the line of best fit, as in Eq. (4).
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

,
(4)
where (xref) is the reference variable, and (x) is the measure
variable.
In addition, an accurate power supply is used, because
such a system is going to be used not only for the verification
of the sensors’ calibration, but also their possible failure and
reliability. For calibration, it is necessary to consider one
power supply that generates a precise and high-stability
reference voltage. Such a voltage serves as a parameter for
the intelligent calibration and correction system, and it is also
responsible for feeding each of the electronic devices used.
Most analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters
internally have voltage references that are used in the process
of converting the signal, either to quantize its analog signal
or to convert its digital signal to analog [40]. At this point,
the accuracy and stability of the reference directly influence
the conversion performance.
In agricultural spraying systems, the most commonly
used sensors are: (1) temperature sensors, used to measure
the temperature of the syrup, which is formed by the addition
of the pesticides to water, as well as the temperature of the
environment where the spraying occurs; (2) pressure sensors,
used to measure the pressure in the spray bar near the spray
nozzles; and (3) flow sensors, which measure the flow in the
tubes and spray bar, and are used to measure and feed back
these values to the spray quality control system.
Figure 2 shows the integration of the Arduino-based
architecture and a CAN with the sensors (temperature,
pressure, and flow) in the sprayer system. The module that
has the Arduino platform is a low-cost device, functional,
and easily programmable. The Arduino Uno is a board
consisting of an ATMEL ATMEG328 microcontroller and
input and output circuits, and it can be easily connected to a
computer via a USB cable and is programmed through free
software
called
Arduino
IDE
(integrated
development
environment) using a language based on C/C++.
Figure 3 depicts the software structure for the sensors’
monitoring, as well as the spraying process for failure and
reliability analysis. First, all sensors are tested in relation to
failure. Then, the process to monitor the operation of the
agricultural sprayer in real time starts and is repeated
periodically. The flags are used to alert the operator of the
operational status. Either the group of sensors or any single
one of them can fail during an operation. For this reason and
because of the probability of its occurrence, a previous
routine is used to verify the operation based on the use of
previously calibrated values and references of electrical
voltage. The reference modules receive an electrical signal
from the Arduino architectures using the controller area bus
protocol and determine whether they are calibrated or must
be replaced. Additionally, as a function of the measured
values of the variables, such as flow, pressure, and
temperature,
verification
is
performed
periodically
to
determine whether the sprayer is operating adequately or if
there is need for adjustments of these variables. Such
verification can also indicate whether parts of the circuits
related to each variable must be replaced when the correction
of a failure cannot be made by software. To obtain
information regarding the operational conditions, a set of
flags is used for the signaling by the GUI. In addition, if a
sensor needs to be recalibrated, the system performs the
necessary correction to deliver the appropriate information to
a CAN bus, where the control and processing unit collects
the sensors’ information of all the modules.
Furthermore, CAN has been used because its advantages
involve data communication and the use of only two wires,
which
reduces
the
cost
and
facilitates
the
physical
implementation.
To communicate between the Arduino and the CAN bus,
two important elements that are not directly found in the
standard
Arduino
Uno
were
used. For this, a
CAN
transceiver (TJA1050) and a CAN microcontroller module
(MCP2515)
dedicated
to
translating
the
signal
made
available serially by the transceiver were used (Figure 4).
The transceiver used was manufactured by NXP-Philips
Semiconductors. It was used because it is fully ISO11898
compatible and supports high-speed CAN. It also can act as
the entire interface between the network and the physical bus
[41]. The inputs/outputs (pins 6 and 7) for the transceiver can
be directly connected to the CAN L and CAN H lines of the
CAN bus used. A 5-V voltage from a power supply is used,
pin 2, and pin 3 for the ground potential (GND). Pin 8 of the
transceiver is called “silent mode,” where, if a 5-V voltage is
applied, the mode is activated, preventing the component
from sending CAN messages to the bus. If no voltage is
applied to this pin, the transceiver operates normally. Pin 5,
Reference Voltage (VREF), provides the average CAN bus
voltage, and pins 1 and 4, named Transmit Data (TXD) and
Receive Data (RXD), respectively, are responsible for
receiving or sending the serial signal that is used to decode
CAN messages by the CAN controller.
At each decoded dominant bit, the transceiver sends a 1-
bit serial via the TXD pin, and, at each recessive bit, the
transceiver sends a 0 bit. In this way, the messages are
transferred bit by bit from the transceiver to the MCP2515
CAN controller, which decodes the sequence according to
the CAN protocol. Figure 5 shows how the communication
between
the
transceiver
and
the
microcontroller
is
performed. The transceiver RXD pin receives the CAN
message sent by the microcontroller. In addition, when a full
message is received, it is passed to the CAN bus via the
CAN H and CAN L pins.
The MCP2515, manufactured by Microchip, is a stand-
alone
CAN
controller
that
implements
the
CAN
specification, Version 2.0B. It can transmit and receive
standard and extended data frames, with 11 or 29 bits as
message identifiers (frame IDs), respectively. The MCP
2515
was
used,
because
it
makes
the
serial
peripheral interface
bus
communication
with
another
microcontroller possible, and its manufacturer, Microchip,
provides necessary instructions for writing and reading the
registers. Each register has a byte for address that is used by
some instructions to make the necessary settings. The
addressing of each register is different from its content, that
is, the initial setting of the bits for a register is not equal to
the numerical value of its addressing.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 2. Block diagram of the sprayer system, in which the electrohydraulic configuration and the CAN network can be seen: in the red blocks are the
modules based on the Arduino architecture, one for each sensor’s modalities, for measurements of flow, pressure, and temperature.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 3. Software structure to monitor the sensors used for measurements, as well as the process for spraying for
failure and reliability analyses.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

(a)
Calibration Module
Arduino’s based Node
Controller
MCP2515
TJA1050
CAN H
CAN L
SPI
RXD
TXD
(b)
Figure 4. (a) Arduino CAN bus shield (MCP 2515) and (b) the structural
architecture for operation in block diagram.
Figure 5. Input and output diagram of the TJA1050 transceiver
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The sensors, which generate analog signals, were
connected directly to the calibration module, which
analyzed and corrected the data obtained through the
algorithms. Then, the data were sent to the CAN network,
which used the control and processing unit for presenting
the
information
with
the
values
calibrated
by
the
supervision
software.
The
implementation
for
the
intelligent calibration and correction was carried out by
means
of
the
Arduino-based
architecture
and
the
algorithms, which used the mathematical models. When
the algorithm started, it received the values of the sensor
with the parameter to be analyzed, or temperature,
pressure, or flow, and then this value was compared with
the reference model, which was constructed using the
database. If the result of the comparison was satisfactory,
this value was sent to the CAN bus; otherwise, this value
was corrected by the software through emulation, and only
then was the value sent to the bus. When the read values
were out of the typical range of the sensors, there was an
indication for sensor replacement, and the user was
informed by means of a flag. There was a specific flag for
each
kind
of
sensor,
i.e.,
FLAG#1,
FLAG#2,
and
FLAG#3, respectively, for the sensors being used for flow,
pressure, and temperature measurements.
Reliability is an important performance index of
agricultural sprayers. A paradigm shift in reliability
research on agricultural sprayers has left a simple
handbook based on a constant failure rate for the smart-
system sensor-based and the support real-time decision-
making approaches. Based on this, for each flag, the
structure was considered to be that presented in Figure 6.
Figure 6. Structure of the flags, in which the operational conditions of the
sprayers based on flow, pressure, and temperature, as well as
constraints, can be observed.
For the flag structure, the context of sensitivity and
specificity summarized the performance of a diagnostic
test with outcomes that determined the level of a standard
for operation. When the test was quantitative, receiver
operating characteristic curves were used to display the
performance of all possible cut points of the quantitative
diagnostic marker. Here, it was being used for both the
reference curve of the sensors and the polynomial
regression method. Attention was given to determining an
optimal decision rule, which is also called the optimal
operating point. Such a point provides a graphical
interpretation for decision making. The construction of the
databases for the three different sensors, which were
related to the calibration and correct operation of the
agricultural sprayer in a specific range of use, was
organized previously.
Table I shows results as evidence of the operation of
the algorithms applied for a commercially available
sprayer´s inspection based on the system for real-time
failure and reliability analysis.
Safety and approval tests are related to finding and
guaranteeing that an approved safety element of an
agricultural sprayer reliably or consistently functions in
accordance with manufacturer specifications. Furthermore,
the robustness margin is related to the formulation for
robustness requirements in the agricultural industry. They
do not require specific, detailed uncertainty models, and,
hence, these margins can be evaluated based on the
experience and interpretation of the analysis results. They
are, in general, evaluated in the frequency domain, or even
by using the information related to the safety margin of a
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

machine’s
operation,
without
loss
of
its
hydraulic
characteristics
and
purpose. Likewise,
the
design
specification and performance tests are typically related to
performance specifications. They are written in projects
and should be observed when implemented. The design’s
specifications for a piece of machinery are straightforward
related to its purpose and application.
TABLE I. RESULTS FOR A REAL-TIME FAILURE AND RELIABILITY ANALYSIS.
FLAG
# 1
Destruction level
(Q6 and Q7)
Design
Specification/
Performance
tests
(Q4 and Q5)
Robustness margin
(Q2 and Q3)
Safety and approval
tests
(Q1)
Optimal
operating
point
(Q0)
[l/m]
3.00 F6  6.00
19.00 F7  21.50
6.00 F4  8.25
16.90 F5  19.00
8.25 F2  10.25
14.00 F3  16.90
10.25 F1  14.00
12.25
FLAG
#2
Destruction level
(P6 and P7)
Design
Specification/
Performance
tests
(P4 and P5)
Robustness margin
(P2 and P3)
Safety and approval
tests
(P1)
Optimal
operating
point
(P0)
[bar]
0.00 P6  0.38
2.12 P7  2.49
0.38 P4  0.63
1.81 P5  2.12
0.63 P2  1.00
1.50 P3  1.81
1.00 P1  1.50
1.25
FLAG
#3
Destruction level
(T6 and T7)
Design
Specification/
Performance
tests
(T4 and T5)
Robustness margin
(T2 and T3)
Safety and approval
tests
(T1)
Optimal
operating
point
(T0)
[°C]
0.00 P2  10.00
75.00 P3  87.50
10.00 T4  22.50
65.00 T5  75.00
22.50 T2  31.25
55.00 T3  65.00
31.25 T1  55,00
42.50
Therefore, information’s contained in the structures of
the flags are used to evaluate the range of the feedback
variables used in the control of the agricultural machines
to support decision making for a correct and adequate
operation. In the same way, the concept behind the
destruction level is related to the region where one can
find risks for the machinery lifetime and that must be
avoided.
For the acquisition of a reference curve for the flow
sensor, an ORION electromagnetic flowmeter, model
Orion 4621A300000, installed at the outlet of the water
pump of the ASDS was used [42]. The electromagnetic
flowmeter had a measuring range from 5 to 100 l/min for
pressures up to 4000 kPa. The calibration constant of this
flowmeter, according to the manufacturer, was 600 pulses
per liter, and the flow rate in liters per minute was
obtained from reading a related frequency in Hertz. With
the aid of LabVIEW software, a group of reference flows
in liters per minute was sent to the sensor, and a set of
values was obtained from the sensor flow (Figure 7).
Also, for the acquisition of a reference database with
pressure values, a WIKA model A-10 pressure sensor was
used. The voltage signals of the A-10 sensor varied from 0
to 10 V, proportional to their pressure measurement ranges
from 0 to 16 bar, and this sensor had a reading error and a
maximum linearity of 0.016 bar. With the aid of
LabVIEW software, reference pressure values considering
intervals of 0.15 bar for a useful operating range from 0.5
to 3.0 bar were sent to the pressure sensor, and the values
obtained were recorded (Figure 8). In addition, to obtain a
reference database with correct temperature values, a
calibrated sensor, type PT 100 of the Mit-Exact brand, was
used, which was initially dipped in a beaker with water
and ice. This water was heated, with the aid of a mixer, to
95°C. As the temperature values increased, the internal
resistance of the sensor also increased. For a better
perception of the variation of the values of the sensor’s
resistance, a Wheatstone bridge was used. In this way, it
was possible to measure the unknown resistance of the
sensor. The values were recorded considering intervals of
5°C, i.e., taking into account an experimental range for
evaluation of different levels of the sprayer operation
(Figure 9).
According to the flag structure for each variable, it is
possible to carry out, in real time, the agricultural sprayer’s
diagnosis, as well as, if actions are required, to find its
prognostic and corrections based on the actuation by its
control circuit, or even recommendation for any sensor’s
replacement.
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Then, based on such a context, the prognostics and
fault-tolerant strategies for reliable field operation can be
obtained.
However, joint efforts from engineers and researchers
in a transdisciplinary way are still required to fulfill the
needs in
such
a
field
of knowledge and
promote
completely the new paradigm shift in reliability of
agricultural machinery.
Figure 7. Reference curve for the flow sensor (Electromagnetic
flowmeter, model Orion 4621A300000) installed at the outlet of the water
pump, and the experimental range results obtained for an agricultural
sprayer’s operation.
Figure 8. Reference curve for the pressure sensor (WIKA model A-10)
installed at the boom, and the experimental range results obtained
for an agricultural sprayer’s operation.
Figure 9. Reference curve for the temperature sensor (PT 100 of Mit-
Exact) used to measure the temperature of the syrup, which is formed by
the pesticides added to water, and the experimental range results obtained
for an agricultural sprayer’s operation.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
An intelligent system for evaluation of the failure and
reliability of agricultural sprayers, based on the sensors’
information
and
a
smart
support
decision-making
architecture, was presented.
Results showed that it is possible to observe real-time
prognostics, as well as help with robustness, to ensure
quality aggregation in pest control processes based on
agricultural spraying systems. In addition, such a system
enabled the configuration of a sensor’s recalibration using
an unsupervised algorithm considering the use of a CAN
bus protocol operating with the measurements of the flow
rate, pressure, and temperature in the controlled circuit
process of an agricultural sprayer.
Furthermore, there are opportunities for a condition of
real-time monitoring and fault-tolerant design that can
enable an extended lifetime and reduced failure rate, as
well as a better understanding of failure mechanisms,
because
more
failure-mechanism-specific
accelerated
testing can be designed, which can lead to improved
reliability
predictions
for
sensor-based
agricultural
machinery and its applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This
research
was
supported
by
the
Brazilian
Corporation for Agricultural Research (Embrapa), Process
SEG – No. 11.14.09.001.05.06.
REFERENCES
[1]
Food Security Information Network (FSIN): Global Report
on Food Crises (GRFC 2019), pp. 202, 2019. [retrieved:
August, 2019]. Available from: http://www.fsinplatform
.org/sites/default/files/resources/files/GRFC2019FullReport
.pdf.
[2]
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations:
“Global agriculture towards 2050”, FAO, Rome, 2009.
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[3]
J. K. Schueller, “Automation and control”. In: CIGR
Handbook
of
Agricultural
Engineering,
Information
Technology, vol. VI, ed. by A. Munack (CIGR, Tzukuba) 
pp. 184–195, Chap. 4, 2006. 
[4]
T. Stombaugh, E. Benson, and J. W. Hummel, “Automatic
guidance of agricultural vehicles at high field speeds”,
ASAE Paper No. 983110 (ASAE, St. Joseph), 1998.
[5]
M. Yitayew, K. Didan, and C. Reynolds, “Microcomputer
based low-head gravity-flow bubbler irrigation system
design”, Computer and. Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 22,
pp. 29–39, 1999.
[6]
F. R. Miranda, R. E. Yoder, J. B. Wilkerson, and L.
O. Odhiambo, “An autonomous controller for site-specific
management of fixed irrigation systems, Computer and.
Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 468, pp. 183–197, 2005.
[7]
S. Fountas et al.,“Farm management information systems:
current situation and future perspectives”, Computer and.
Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 115, pp. 40-50, 2015.
[8]
C. G. Sørensen et al.,“Conceptual model of a future farm
management
information
system”,
Computer
and
Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 72, Issue 1, pp. 37-47,
2010.
[9]
A. Kaloxylos et al., “Farm management systems and the
future
internet
era”,
Computer
and
Electronics
in
Agriculture, vol. 89, pp. 130-144, 2012.
[10] M. Pecht and V. Ramappan, “Are components still the
major problem: a review of electronic system and device
field failure returns”, IEEE Transaction on Components,
Hybrids, Manufacturing Technology, vol, 15, pp 1160-
1164, 1992.
[11] C.
T.
Leonard,
“Mechanical
engineering
issues
and
electronic equipment reliability: Incurred costs without
compensating benefits”, Journal of Electronic Packaging,
vol. 113, pp 1-7, 1991.
[12] A.
Bar-Cohen,
“Reliability
physics
vs
reliability
prediction”, IEEE Transaction on Reliability, vol. 37, p.
452, 1988.
[13] P. D. T. O’Connor, “Reliability prediction: Help or hoax?”,
Solid State Technology, vol. 33, pp 59-61, 1990.
[14] H. V. Mercaldi, E. A. G. Peñaloza, R. A. Mariano, V. A.
Oliveira,
and
P.
E.
Cruvinel,
“Flow
and
Pressure
Regulation
for
Agricultural
Sprayers
Using
Solenoid
Valves”, In: International Federation of Automatic Control
(IFAC), Elsevier, vol. 50, Issue 1, 2017, pp. 6607-6612,
doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2017.08.693.
[15] D. L. Reichard, H. E. Ozkan, and R.D. Fox, “Nozzle wear
rates and test procedure”, Transaction of the ASAE, St.
Joseph, vol.34, n.6, pp.2309-2316, 1991.
[16] H.
Ganzelmeier
and
S.
Rietz,
“Inspection
of
plant
protection in Europe”. In: International Conference on
Agricultural Engineering. Part II, Oslo. Proceedings...,
Eurageng, pp.597-598, 1998.
[17] N. Bjugstad, “Controlo of crop sprayers in Norway”, Oslo:
Ageng, Eurageng, 1998.
[18] M. A. Gandolfo, “Periodic inspection of agricultural
sprayers” (original title: Inspeção periódica de pulverizados
agrícolas).
Doctoral
Thesis,
Faculty
of
Agronomic
Sciences, São Paulo State University (UNESP), SP, Brazil,
92 pp., 2002.
[19] B. Huyghebaert et al., “Compulsory inspection of crop
sprayers already in use Belgium”, Selection of control
method, Madrid: Ageng, CD-ROM, 1996.
[20] P. Braekman et al., “Organisation and results of the
mandatory inspection of crop sprayers in
Belgium”,
Belgium: Ministry of Small Enterprises, Traders and
Agriculture, 9 pp., 2005.
[21] L. M. Val, “Programs for the formation of the applicators
and equipment’s maintenance” (original title: Programas de
formación de aplicadores y programa de revisión de
equipos.
In: Jornada Internacional
en
Tecnologia de
Aplicacion, 2007, Proceedings... Montevidéo: Republic
University, CD-ROM, 2007.
[22] J. C. Magdalena and A. P. Di Prinzio, “Calibration service
for fruit growing sprayers in Black River and
Neuquén”
(original title: Servicio de calibración de pulverizadoras
frutícolas
en
Río
Negro
y
Neuquén),
In:
Congreso
Argentino de Ingenieria Rural, Córdoba. Proceedings....
Argentina: National Cordoba University, vol. 2, pp. 137-
148, 1992.
[23] E. Fey, “State of the art in relation to the spray process of
the associates from the COOPERVALE” (original title:
Estado de arte do processo de pulverização junto a
associados da COOPERVALE), Supervised Internship
Report Ponta Grossa State University, Maripá – PR, Brazil,
26 pp., 1998.
[24] J. Langenakens and M. Pieters, “The organization and first
results of the mandatory inspection of crop sprayers in
Belgium”, In: Aspects of applied Biology - Optimizing
pesticide application, Agricultural Research Centre Ghent,
pp. 233-240, 1997.
[25] S.
Sartori,
“Sprayers for
tractor
ground application”
(original
title: Pulverizadores para aplicação
terrestre
tratorizada), In: Simpósio Brasileiro sobre Tecnologia de
Aplicação de Defensivos Agrícolas, Jaboticabal, SP, Brazil,
Proceedings... FUNEP, vol. 1, pp. 46-79, 1985.
[26] G. F. Dedordi et al., “Technical-operational evaluation of
bar
sprayers
in
Pato
Branco
region”
(original
title:
Avaliação técnica-operacional de pulverizadores de barras
na região de Pato Branco), Acta Iguazu, Cascavel, PR,
Brazil, vol.3, n.1, pp.144-155, 2014.
[27] J. F. Schlosser, “Application technology and machine use:
use
of
agrochemicals”
(original
title:
Tecnologia
de
aplicação e uso de máquinas: uso de agroquímicos),
Federal University of Santa Maria, Textbook - Technical
Series, Module 5, 2002.
[28] F. Olivi and A. Simão, “In order to speed up the
maintenance of sprayers, the diagnostic case provides
technical support and spare parts” (original title: Com o
objetivo de agilizar a manutenção dos pulverizadores, a
maleta de diagnóstico dá suporte técnico e na reposição de
peças). Agricultural News. [retrieved: September, 2019].
Available from: https://noticiasagricolas.com.br/videos/ma-
quinas-e-tecnologias/.
[29] K. R. Felizardo, H. V. Mercaldi, P. E. Cruvinel, V. A.
Olivei-ra,
and B.
L. Steward,
“Modeling
and
model
validation of a chemical injection sprayer system”, Applied
Engineering in Agriculture, vol. 32, Issue 3, pp. 285-297,
2016.
[30] X. Wei, S. Jian, and H. Sun, “Design and Test of Variable
Rate Application Controller of Intermittent Spray Based on
PWM”, Journal of agricultural machinery vol. 43, Issue 12,
pp. 87-129, 2012.
[31] H Liu, H Zhu, and Y Shen, “Development of digital flow
control
system
for
copy
multi-channel
variable-rate
sprayers”, Journal Transactions of the ASABE, vol. 57,
Issue 1, pp. 273-281, 2014.
[32] American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers
(ASAE) Standards: “S572 - Spray nozzle classification by
droplet spectra”, no. 99, St. Joseph USA, pp. 389-391,
2000.
[33] P. E. Cruvinel, V. A. Oliveira, H. V. Mercaldi, E. A. G.
Penaloza and K. R. Felizardo, “An advanced sensors-based
platform for the development of agricultural sprayers,” In:
Sergey Y. Yurish (Ed.). Sensors and Applications in
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Measuring and Automation Control Systems. [S. l.]: IFSA,
pp. 181-204. (Advances in Sensors: Reviews; vol. 4), 2016.
[34] K.
Etschberger,
"Controller
Area
Network.
Basics,
Protocols, Chips and Applications", IXXAT, ISBN 3-00-
007376-0, 2001.
[35] R. B. GmbH, “CAN Specification, Version 2.0”, Postfach
50, D-7000 Stuuugart 1, 1991. Imported into Framemaker 4
by Chuck Powers, BOSCH, Motorola MCTG Multiplex
Applications, April 3, 1995.
[36] J. R. Edwards, “Polynomial regression and response
surface methodology,” In: C. Ostroff & T. A. Judge (Eds.),
Perspectives on organizational fit, pp. 361–372. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2007.
[37] L. Tornqvist, P. Vartia, and Y. Vartia, “How should
relative changes be measured?” The American Statistician,
vol. 39, Issue 1, pp. 43–46, 1985.
[38] P. E. Danielsson, “Euclidean distance mapping,” Computer
Graphics Image Processing, vol. 14, pp. 227-248, 1980.
[39] T. Chai and R. R. Draxler, “Root mean square error
(RMSE) or mean absolute error (MAE)? - arguments
against avoiding RMSE in the literature,” Geoscience
Model Development, vol. 7, pp. 1247–1250, 2014.
[40] R. H. Walden, “Analog-to-digital converter survey and
analysis”,
IEEE
Journal
on
Selected
Areas
in
Communication, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 539–550, 1999.
[41] TJA 1050 Data Sheet – High speed CAN transceiver.
Product
specification,
Integrated
Circuits,
Philips
Semiconductors, pp. 18, 2003.
[42] ORION
Electro-Magnetic
Flow
Meter.
[retrieved:
November,
2019].
Available
from:
mcpheeenterprises
.com/orion-electromagnetic-flowmeter/.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

