Surface Acoustic Wave Devices Exploiting
Palladium Layer Properties for Selective Detection
of Hydrogen
Meddy Vanotti, Virginie Blondeau-Patissier, David Rabus, Loic Richard, Sylvain Ballandras
Time and Frequency Department
FEMTO-ST Institute
Besanc¸on, France
Email: meddy.vanotti@femto-st.fr, virginie.blondeau@femto-st.fr, david.rabus@femto-st.fr,
loic.richard@femto-st.fr, sylvain.ballandras@femto-st.fr
Abstract—For an increasing number of application (energy
production, car industry, space, etc.), hydrogen represents a
solution of the future as it is the most common body in the
Universe (and therefore on Earth). However, due to its unstable
properties, a particular care must be dedicated to control possible
gaseous leaks close to tanks and facilities using this resource.
In this paper, surface acoustic wave sensors are proposed for
detecting gaseous hydrogen in standard environmental conditions
(atmospheric pressure and room temperature). The proposed
SAW sensors consists in two Rayleigh-wave delay lines built on
Quartz, one equipped with a Palladium overlay and the other
exhibiting a free path between the two interdigitated transducers.
A speciﬁc gas test cell has been developed to test various sensor
conﬁgurations submitted to hydrogen-composed atmospheres. A
particular care was paid to avoid hydrogen leakage in the
working environment and to perform the regeneration of the
gas absorbing layer. The developed device allows for identifying
different concentrations of hydrogen (in the 1-4% range) diluted
in N2 and is also able to detect H2 in current atmosphere. SAW
devices exploiting hydrogen absorption capabilities of palladium
thin ﬁlms have been here used to make the detection and the
identiﬁcation of hydrogen concentrations in the 1-4% range
and the inﬂuence of outer parameters such as temperature
and relative humidity variations on the sensor operation is also
reported.
Index Terms—gas sensors; hydrogen; Palladium; SAW device;
Rayleigh waves.
I. INTRODUCTION
The raising shortage of fossil energy resources added to
the increasing concern towards environmental issues have led
to consider hydrogen as one of the most promising energy
resource. This odorless and colorless gas being highly ex-
plosive over 4% concentration in air, the availability of a
fast and accurate detection system close to storing facili-
ties and equipping hydrogen-operated machines is mandatory
for obvious security reasons. Such a system must exhibit
a signiﬁcant selectivity as it must detect the presence of
gaseous hydrogen in air with concentrations smaller than the
above-mentioned critical limit at standard conditions (room
temperature and atmospheric pressure) as well as in harsher
environment (very low or signiﬁcantly high temperature).
Although some solutions have been proposed [1] [2] [3]
[4] [5] [6] [7]. The current availability of such a detection
system meeting modern speciﬁcations of hydrogen use and
storage is still questionable. The mains improvements for such
sensors are their sensitivity, their selectivity and their reliability
together with sensor size, cost reduction, energetic needs and
response time [8]. Many methods of detection of hydrogen
and a comprehensive review can be found in the literature
[9], providing a substantial material base to try and address
the above challenges. Among the possibilities, SAW (Surface
Acoustic Wave) sensors have been widely studied in the last
decades because of their attractive capabilities. Indeed, SAW
devices exhibit high sensitivity to surface perturbation since
the quasi totality of the energy propagates in a region that
thickness is a few times the wavelength of the propagating
acoustic wave. It is also a mature technology, SAW device
do exhibit limited size (less than 1 cm²) and they allow for
wireless use [10]. Initial works were made by D’Amico et
al. [11] using the properties of palladium layer to trap the
targeted gas. Since this pioneer work, innovations concerning
the selectivity and stability of sensitive layers versus external
parameter have been proposed to improve hydrogen detection
using SAW devices [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19]. In
this paper, a SAW sensor is proposed for detecting gaseous
hydrogen in standard environmental conditions (atmospheric
pressure and room temperature). The proposed SAW sensor
consists in two Rayleigh-wave delay lines built on Quartz,
one equipped with a Palladium (Pd) overlay and the other
exhibiting a free path between the two interdigitated trans-
ducers (IDTs) used to excite and detect the acoustic wave.
These IDTs are built using aluminum electrodes, as this metal
is known to be inert versus gaseous hydrogen. An innovative
aspect of the proposed sensing system consist in the open-
loop strategy for phase changes monitoring [20]. Moreover,
delay lines are monitored in parallel using a synchronous
detection approach that provides high frequency measurement
resolution and that permits a systematic characterization of the
device before operated. Along this approach, the impact of
changes of intrinsic properties of the devices such as working
frequency drift with aging can be minimized. These sensors
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Fig. 1.
Scheme of a SAW delay line using Rayleigh surface acoustic wave
at 78MHz.
have been tested in a speciﬁc gas cell developed to experiment
with various sensor conﬁgurations submitted to hydrogen-
composed atmospheres. A particular care has been dedicated
to avoid hydrogen leakage in the working environment and
to promote the gas absorbing layer regeneration. The devel-
oped device allows for identifying different concentrations
of hydrogen diluted in N2 and is also able to detect H2 in
current atmosphere. The ﬁrst section of the paper presents
the SAW sensor as well as the exploited monitoring system.
Experimental validation of H2 detection then is reported,
with a description of the chemical test bench and detection
results for various H2 concentrations. An analysis of the
inﬂuence of H2 adsorption on SAW propagation is proposed
to provide routes for the proposed device optimization. In
the same purpose, the last section of the article is devoted
to characterizing the inﬂuence of external parameters such
as temperature and relative humidity variations on the sensor
operation, yielding conclusive discussions.
II. SAW SENSOR AND ASSOCIATED MONITORING SYSTEM
Selective detection of hydrogen at room temperature and
pressure have been achieved using SAW delay lines exploiting
Rayleigh waves on AT-cut Quartz, as the corresponding ﬁrst
order temperature coefﬁcient of frequency (TCF) is close to
zero, yielding frequency-temperature compensation for the
above-mentioned operating conditions. The sensor structure
correspond to a differential set-up in, which a sensitive track
is achieved by depositing a Pd layer in between two IDTs
whereas the reference track surface is left free to detect non-
speciﬁc gas/surface interaction. Along this approach, one can
signiﬁcantly increase the sensitivity of the device and its
robustness to correlated perturbations (temperature, vibration,
non-speciﬁc adsorption). The conﬁguration of both generation
and detection IDTs used for the sensor consist in 50 ﬁngers
pairs with a grating period of 10 µm and a center-to-center
spacing of 5mm (the reactive surface). The wavelength is
40µm, yielding a frequency operation in the vicinity of 78MHz
as the wave velocity approaches 3100m.s−1. The Pd ﬁlm
was deposited by thermal evaporation on a single run and
shaped by a lift-off technique. Its length along the propagation
path was 3mm and its thickness equal to 300nm. The device
conﬁguration is shown on Fig. 1.
Using a network analyzer, the transfer function of the device
can be easily determine and hence the phase shift induced by
Fig. 2.
Phase shift measurement principle using a dedicated instrumentation.
gas absorption has been ﬁrst monitored that way. However,
the use of a dedicated electronics has been experienced and
delivers similar information [20]. This system actually oper-
ates as a network analyzer to detect the optimal operation
condition (zero phase at maximum bandpass amplitude) and
then tracks the phase shift in a phase-locked-loop protocol
to keep the excitation frequency meeting the above condition.
The sensitivity of the set-up allows for some tens mill-degrees
resolution and is easily transportable. The response of the bare
device and the functionalized one are respectively measured.
This conﬁguration has been used so as to make a systematic
characterization of each new device used for H2 detection.
Fig. 2 illustrates the way the phase shift measurement is
achieved.
Fig. 3.
Detection of hydrogen at high concentration in air.
A. Detection of hydrogen at room temperature and atmo-
spheric pressure.
Hydrogen detection in the percent order have been achieved
at room conditions. Figs. 3 and 4 present experimental results
when using either nitrogen or air as carrier gas. As it can be
observed in Fig. 4, the detection of about 95%vol of hydrogen
in air at 35% RH and 20°C can be achieved with a response
delay of about 20 seconds considering that the determination
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Fig. 4.
Detection of hydrogen in the range 4% to 1%vol in N2.
of the H2 concentration in the melting gas is derived from
the phase shift velocity during the exposure and not from
the steady state. It is notable that this value depends on a
large part on the performance of the hydrogen generation
setup. Therefore, the intrinsic response delay of the device
is expected to be shorter. Fig. 3 shows that the device allows
for identifying different concentrations of hydrogen diluted in
a nitrogen ﬂow of 100sccm.
III. ANALYSIS OF HYDROGEN ABSORPTION ON PD FILMS
AND ITS INFLUENCE ON SAW PROPAGATION.
Absorption of hydrogen into Pd layer induce modiﬁcations
on the SAW propagation conditions. The effective physical
characteristics of the wave then varies with the amount of
absorbed H2 (especially its phase velocity). It has been shown
[21] that the two main parameters that inﬂuence the phase
velocity change of elastic waves are mass- and elastic-loading
as it can be seen on the equation bellow [21]. Since only
devices using quartz substrates have been used here, changes in
electrodes conductivity is not consider as possible origin of the
observed phase velocity drift and therefore will not be taken
in account. Electromechanical coupling of Rayleigh waves
on Quartz substrates is actually smaller enough to consider
conductivity changes negligible.
∆ν
ν
=
πh
2λ
 
−∆ˆρ
ˆρ {(A2
x + A2
y + A2
z)ˆρν2
0} mass-loading term
+ ∆ ˆC44
ˆC44
{(4A2
z + A2
x) ˆC44}elastic-loading term
+






1 − ∆ ˆ
C44
ˆ
C44
2

1 − ∆ ˆ
C11
ˆ
C11
 − 1





 
4A2
z
ˆC2
44
ˆC11
!
 elastic-loading term
In case of H2 adsorption on Pd layer that thickness is h
traversed by a SAW that wavelength is λ, the mass density ˆρ
and the elastic constants ˆC11 are both decrease, whereas the
ˆC44 constant increases. The values of normalized mechanical
displacement Ai for palladium are reported in [22] and [23].
Numerical calculations of hydrogen absorption in Pd layers
[21] predict an increase of
ˆC44 elastic constant, yielding
an increase of the phase velocity of the Rayleigh wave
propagating under such an overlay. These calculations are in
agreement with the experimental observations presented here.
IV. THE INFLUENCE OF HUMIDITY AND TEMPERATURE ON
HYDROGEN DETECTION.
As SAW devices are known to suffer from interference
due to humidity and temperature, the inﬂuence of these
parameters on the sensor operation have been investigated
and are exposed here. The observations reported in this
section are expected to provide information allowing for the
improvement of the differential acquisition setup. One can
see in Fig. 5 that an increase of the relative humidity (RH) of
the injected gas causes a mass-loading effect that results in
a decrease of the measured phase of the delay line. Indeed,
the adsorption of condensated water onto the surface of the
device leads to a raise of the mass at the surface of the device
(mass loading) leading to the decrease of the phase velocity
experimentally observed. Fig. 6 evidences the impact of
temperature variations on the capability of the SAW sensor to
detect hydrogen at atmospheric pressure. Temperature changes
lead to a shift down of the delay line synchronicity frequency
characterized by a sensitivity of −219.10−3°.°C−1. That
phase decrease totally compensates the phase shift toward
the high frequency observed when detecting hydrogen in
absence of any temperature changes. It appears that the delay
line used as a reference do not undergoes any phase shift
when exposed to heated gas since the device is temperature
compensated. However, the TCF of the Pd detection channel
notably changes as the Pd overlay tends to lower the 1st
order TCF. This behavior currently represents an obstacle
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Fig. 5.
Inﬂuence of humidity on the detection of hydrogen at constant room temperature (19.3±0.1°C).
Fig. 6.
Inﬂuence of temperature on the detection of hydrogen (RH in the 3-8% range).
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

to accurate hydrogen detection but can be avoided by the
use of an appropriate reference (covered by a layer inert to
hydrogen which induces the same TCF change as experienced
here for the detection channel). Simulations are engaged to
provide the information needed for the development of such
a device. As one can see on the second part of the graph,
the detection of H2 at 2%vol in N2 is still clearly possible
considering a stable operation temperature at room conditions.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, a differential SAW sensor based on Rayleigh
wave on quartz has been developed and successfully tested.
The sensor consist of two adjacent delay lines, one being used
as a reference and the second one being functionalized with a
Pd overlay, a metal known to be affected by gaseous hydrogen.
The observation of speciﬁc phase shifts on the sensitive track
compared to reference in presence of gaseous hydrogen using
different gas carrier did assess the operation of the sensor. The
use of the Pd overlay actually allows to segregate the nature of
the gas inserted in the reaction cell and provides quantitative
information about its composition. The impact of temperature
and humidity on the sensor operation also were analyzed.
Although the differential nature of the sensor is expected to
reject such interferences, it appears necessary to control this
parameters at very minimum. Concerning the analysis of the
sensor operation itself, some work still has to be carried out
even if strong convictions arise from the experiment that the
main change is related to the elastic properties of the Pd ﬁlm
due to hydrogen absorption. The crystalline structure of the
ﬁlm having an effective inﬂuence on the way hydrogen interact
with the metallic ﬁlm, it still has to be determined in order
to improve simulation accuracy of the leverage of hydrogen
absorption on the SAW device response. In this optic, further
work will consist in the elaboration and characterization of pal-
ladium layers with different crystalline structures. Simulation
of SAW device exhibiting different sensing layers will also be
carried out in order to validate the experimental observations
and to predict the structure of the delay-line to use in order to
improve the differential acquisition setup. These investigations
are expected to enhance the performance of our sensor in terms
of sensitivity and selectivity toward outer parameters such as
temperature and humidity.
REFERENCES
[1] V. Katti, A. Debnath, S. Gadkari, S. Gupta, and V. Sahni, “Passivated
thick lm catalytic type h2 sensor operating at low temperature,” Sens.
Actuators B: Chem., vol. 84, pp. 219 – 225, 2002.
[2] C. Ramesh, N. Murugesan, M. Krishnaiah, V. Ganesan, and G. Peri-
aswami, “Improved naon-based amperometric sensor for hydrogen in
argon,” J. Solid State Electrochem., vol. 12, pp. 1109 – 1116, 2008.
[3] I. Simon and M. Arndt, “Thermal and gas-sensing properties of a mi-
cromachined thermal conductivity sensor for the detection of hydrogen
in automotive applications,” Sens. Actuators B: Chem., no. 9798, pp.
104 – 108, 2002.
[4] T. Anderson, H. Wang, B. Kang, F. Ren, S. Pearton, A. Osinsky,
A. Dabiran, and P. Chow, “Effect of bias voltage polarity on hydrogen
sensing with algan/gan schottky diodes,” Appl. Surf. Sci., vol. 255, pp.
2524 – 2526, 2008.
[5] F. D. et al., “Mems-based hydrogen gas sensors,” Sens. Actuators B:
Chem., vol. 117, pp. 10 – 16, 2006.
[6] T. Kiefer, A. Salette, L. Villanueva, and J. Brugger, “Large arrays of
chemo-mechanical nanoswitches for ultralow-power hydrogen sensing,”
J. Micromechn. Microeng., vol. 20, 2010.
[7] Z. Zhao, M. Carpenter, H. Xia, and D. Welch, “All-optical hydrogen
sensor based on a high alloy content palladium thin lm,” Sens. Actuators
B: Chem., vol. 113, pp. 532 – 538, 2006.
[8] L. Boon-Brett, J. Bousek, G. Black, P. Moretto, P. Castello, T. Hubert,
and U. Banach, “Identifying performance gaps in hydrogen safety sensor
technology for automotive and stationary applications,” International
Journal of Hydrogen Energy, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 373 – 384, 2010.
[9] T. Hubert, L. Boon-Brett, G. Black, and U. Banach, “Hydrogen sensors
a review,” Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 157, no. 2, pp. 329
– 352, 2011.
[10] T. R´etornaz, N. Chr´etien, J.-M. Friedt, G. Martin, and S. Ballandras,
“Time reversal: a ﬂexible approach for identifying and measuring surface
acoustic wave delay lines acting as wireless, passive sensors,” IFCS
Proceeding, 2012.
[11] A. D´Amico, A. Palma, and E. Verona, “Palladiumsurface acoustic wave
interaction for hydrogen detection,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 41, p. 300,
1982.
[12] W. P. Jakubik, M. W. Urbaczyk, S. Kochowski, and J. Bodzenta, “Bilayer
structure for hydrogen detection in a surface acoustic wave sensor
system,” Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 82, no. 23, pp. 265 –
271, 2002.
[13] W. P. Jakubik, “Hydrogen gas-sensing with bilayer structures of wo3
and pd in saw and electric systems,” Thin Solid Films, vol. 517, no. 22,
pp. 6188 – 6191, 2009.
[14] D. Phan and G. Chung, “Identifying performance gaps in hydrogen
safety sensor technology for automotive and stationary applications,”
Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 161, no. 1, pp. 341 – 348,
2012.
[15] S. Ippolito, S. Kandasamy, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, and W. Wlodarski,
“Layered saw hydrogen sensor with modiﬁed tungsten trioxide selective
layer,” Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 108, no. 12, pp. 553 –
557, 2005.
[16] A. Sadek, W. Wlodarski, K. Shin, R. Kaner, and K. Kalantar-zadeh,
“A polyaniline/wo3 nanoﬁber composite-based zno/64 yx linbo3 saw
hydrogen gas sensor,” Synthetic Metals, vol. 158, no. 12, pp. 29 – 32,
2008.
[17] D.-T. Phan and G.-S. Chung, “Surface acoustic wave hydrogen sensors
based on zno nanoparticles incorporated with a pt catalyst,” Sensors and
Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 161, no. 1, pp. 341 – 348, 2012.
[18] N. Dewan, S. Singh, K. Sreenivas, and V. Gupta, “Inﬂuence of tempera-
ture stability on the sensing properties of saw nox sensor,” Sensors and
Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 124, no. 2, pp. 329 – 335, 2007.
[19] S. Fardindoost, A. Zad, F. Rahimi, and R. Ghasempour, “Pd doped wo3
ﬁlms prepared by solgel process for hydrogen sensing,” International
Journal of Hydrogen Energy, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 854 – 860, 2010.
[20] D. Rabus, J. Friedt, S. Ballandras, G. Martin, E. Carry, and V. Blondeau-
Patissier, “A high sensitivity open loop electronics for gravimetric
acousticwave-based sensors,” EFTF Proceeding, 2010.
[21] V. Anisimkin, I. Kotelyanskii, P. Verardi, and E. Verona, “Elastic prop-
erties of thin-ﬁlm palladium for surface acoustic wave (saw) sensors,”
Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 23, no. 23, pp. 203 – 208,
1995.
[22] B. Auld, “Acoustic ﬁelds and waves in solids,” Wiley, pp. 271 – 332,
1973.
[23] A. Slobodnik, E. Conway, and R. Delmonico, “Microwave acoustic
handbook,” Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories (distr. NTIS),
vol. 1A, no. Report AFCRL-TR-73-0597, 1973.
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

