Shearing Force Measurement Device 
Using an Integrated Micro Optical Displacement Sensor 
Takuma Iwasaki, Toshihiro Takeshita,  Renshi Sawada 
Department of Systems Life Sciences 
Graduate School of Systems Life Sciences Kyushu 
University 
Fukuoka, Japan 
iwasakitakuma@nano-micro.mech.kyushu-u.ac.jp 
takeshita@nano-micro.mech.kyushu-u.ac.jp 
sawada@mech.kyushu-u.ac.jp 
Satoshi Takeuchi, Masutaka Furue 
Department of Dermatology 
Graduate School of Medical Sciences Kyushu University 
Fukuoka, Japan 
takeuchs@dermatol.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp 
furue@dermatol.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp  
 
 
Abstract — In this paper, the authors propose a novel shearing 
force measurement device using an integrated micro optical 
displacement sensor and a frame. The 3 mm x 3 mm square 
and 0.7 mm thick sensor tip measures the mirror tilt angle on 
the underside of the frame caused by the shearing force 
applied to the upper surface of the frame. The authors 
obtained a linear output change for a single axis shearing force, 
and expect to be able to detect the magnitude and direction of 
the shearing force. In addition, it is possible to measure biaxial 
shearing forces and alter the measurement range and 
resolution by varying the frame material and shape. 
Keywords — sensor; robot hand; bedsore; tactile sense; 
shearing force; MEMS; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, developed countries have trended 
towards super-aging societies, and it is estimated that in 2050 
there will be 2 billion people in the world that are 60 years of 
age or older. The rate of an aging population to productive 
population will become quarter and younger citizens will 
have to bear the financial and physical burdens for the aged 
population. Therefore, in order to alleviate the burden on 
young people, robots will be needed. Various robots are 
currently in development and others participate actively in 
factories, as well as in other areas. These robots are not only 
necessary in industry, but also for medical welfare, 
agriculture, and safety system, especially social welfare and 
livelihood support in the future, as robots can replace 
humans in various areas of work [1]. However, there are still 
problems with using robots in human society. The limited 
tactile sense of robots is one of these problems. Assemblage 
robots used in factories have been set up to grip specific 
objects and therefore need only to detect vertical loads 
applied to their surfaces. However, in general, gripping 
forces must be determined instantaneously according to the 
strength of the object to be held. If the robot is unable to 
detect horizontal forces such as a shearing force, it may drop 
the object in question. In the field of nursing, it is dangerous 
to drop human beings after they have been carried to a height. 
Therefore, emulation of human perception for sophisticated 
robot manipulation is difficult with only vertical load 
sensors; a shearing force sensor is also needed.  
Certain injuries will also occur more readily in the aged 
population, one of which is bedsore: a skin lesion that may 
affect any part of the body after a long time lying in a bed; 
bony or cartilaginous areas such as elbows, knees, ankles, 
and the sacrum are the most commonly affected. It is 
estimated that there are two hundred thousand patients 
throughout Japan currently, and this number will increase as 
the population ages. Some causes of bedsores are the local 
load from the bed, the shearing force between the bed and 
skin, humidity, and so on [2]. In order to prevent bedsores 
more reliably, we must detect not only vertical load but also 
shearing force. 
For these reasons, a shearing force sensor is needed. 
There have been several reports on sensors that can measure 
both vertical and shearing forces by using electrostatic 
capacitance change [3-7] or resistance change [8-10], among 
other techniques. These are soft and thin, which is desirable, 
but they are not put to practical use as they have problems 
with hysteresis, drift, creep, and noise. Additionally, the 
sensors that can measure three axial forces are too large to be 
embedded in the fingertip of a robot hand.  
In this study, we present a new type of shearing force 
measuring device combining a metallic frame with an 
integrated micro optical displacement sensor [11] fabricated 
using micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS) technology. 
This displacement sensor can measure linear displacement 
and biaxial tilt angle of an object using one Vertical Cavity 
Surface Emitting LASER (VCSEL) and four photodiodes 
(PDs), is downsized drastically compared to the conventional 
displacement sensor owing to monolithic fabrication and can 
be utilized for many applications. We believe our sensor will 
be superior to other shearing force sensors due to its use of 
optics. In addition, our sensor can be made soft with an 
elastic frame for embedding in the robot fingertip or a bed.  
The purpose of this study is to make sure that we can 
detect single axis shearing forces using our displacement 
sensor, and compare experimental results with simulation 
results using four types of trapezoidal metallic frames. 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 1. View of displacement sensor 
 
  
 
Figure 2. Structure of displacement sensor  
 
II. 
STRUCTURE AND PRINCIPLE 
     Our shearing force measurement device applies the 
integrated micro optical displacement sensor as shown in 
Fig. 1. The structure of the displacement sensor is described 
in Section A. The principle of measurement is detailed in 
Section B. 
A. Structure of Displacement Sensor 
The sensor has area 3000 μm x 3000 µm and thickness 
700 µm. As shown in Fig. 2, a VCSEL in the center of the 
sensor and four detecting PDs, which apply electrical current 
according to the intensity received at the PD, are integrated 
monolithically and arranged in a concentric pattern. The 
diameter of each PD is 120 μm and the distance of the center 
from the VCSEL to the center of each outer PD is 800 µm. 
In addition, a monitoring PD is located near the VCSEL at a 
distance of 260 µm. This assembly is covered by glass as 
shown in Fig. 3, and there is a reflective area near the center 
of the glass. Some of the emitted beam from the VCSEL 
enters the monitoring PDs after being reflected from the 
reflective area. In this way, the sensor can obtain feedback 
for laser output according to temperature change. The 
VCSEL differs from a normal laser in that the beam is 
emitted perpendicular to the chip surface; it is superior with 
respect to production costs, power consumption, and 
integration capabilities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Operation Principle of Displacement Sensor 
      The 
displacement 
sensor 
can 
measure 
linear 
displacement and tilt of an object by using the VCSEL, four 
detecting PDs, and an external mirror attached to the object 
to be measured beforehand. VCSEL emits beams in a 
direction perpendicular to the sensor surface, with a certain 
spread angle. Fig. 4 shows side views of the sensor and 
mirror, and the corresponding reflected beam distributions 
on the sensor.  
1) Linear displacement: As the distance between the 
mirror and the sensor changes, the size of the reflected beam 
distribution — that is, the intensity received at PDs — also 
changes as shown in Figs. 4 (a) and 4 (b). Fig. 5 shows the 
relationship between the distance Z and the output S, which 
is given by (1): 
Reflected beam 
distribution 
Displacement 
sensor 
Mirror 
Photodiode 
PD-A 
PD-B 
PD-C 
PD-D 
VCSEL 
800 
120 
3000 
Monitoring PD 
260 
x 
y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Overall view of the sensor 
Unit: µm 
 (a)                                          (b)                                  (c) 
Figure 4. Principle of measurement 
3000 
Z 
θ 
1 mm 
6.5 
1.3 
0.3 
Unit: mm 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    S = PA + PB + PC + PD                         (1)      
where PA~PD are the output of PD-A~PD-D, respectively. 
     When the mirror is close to the sensor, the distribution is 
small, and only a small amount of the reflected beam enters 
the PDs. As a result, the output S is small. As the mirror 
moves away from the sensor, the laser beam distribution  
 
becomes larger and the PD areas that receive the beam 
increase proportionately. Therefore, the output S increases 
linearly and peaks when the beam completely enters the PDs. 
Following this, the output S decreases linearly as the 
intensity weakens with decreasing distance. By using two 
linear regions on the graph, the sensor can be used to 
measure linear displacement. 
2) Tilt angle: Changes in the tilt angle of the mirror 
move the reflected beam distribution directionally, as shown 
in Figs 4 (b) and 4 (c). This causes a difference in the PD 
intensity. Fig. 6 shows the relationship between tilt angle 
and the output S, which is given by (2)–(3): 
 
                                                                                        (2) 
 
  
                                                                                        (3) 
 
In the case of x- or y-axis rotations, equations (2)  or (3) 
are used, respectively. 
For example, when the mirror tilts clockwise as in Fig. 4 
(c), the intensity of PD-B increases and that of PD-D 
decreases. Therefore, the output Sy increases. By using the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
region where S changes linearly, we can determine the tilt 
angle. 
C. Structure and Principle of Shearing Force Sensor 
Our shearing force measurement device uses the above 
displacement sensor. The displacement sensor is covered by 
a trapezoidal fame as shown in Fig. 7. The mirror is attached 
on the underside of the frame. When a shearing force is 
applied to the upper surface of the frame, the frame is 
deformed and the mirror tilts as shown in Fig. 8. By 
measuring the tilt angle of the mirror with the displacement 
sensor, the shearing force can be detected. We can change 
the accuracy and resolution by varying the material and 
shape of the frame. For example, it is better to use a soft 
sensor can detect a biaxial shearing force, and by using the 
principle of measurement of linear displacement, it can 
detect both normal loads and shearing forces simultaneously. 
This leads to a reduction of the total component count, which 
cuts costs. 
 
III. 
EXPERIMENT 
In order to ensure that a single axis shearing force can be 
measured by using the principle mentioned in the previous 
sections, we conducted an experiment using metallic frames. 
The experimental system is shown in Fig. 9. The 
displacement sensor is in the center of a board, covered by 
the frame. Applying a shearing force to the upper surface of 
D
B
D
B
y
P
P
P
P
S



C
A
C
A
x
P
P
P
P
S



(a)                                                          (b) 
Figure 8. Conceptual diagram of shearing force sensor 
Frame 
Shearing force 
Figure 5. The relationship of output S and distance Z 
between mirror and sensor 
 
Figure 6. The relationship between output and mirror tilt angle 
Figure 7. View of shearing force measurement devices 
Displacement sensor 
10mm 
Figure 9. Photograph of the experimental system 
Pulled 
Displacement sensor 
Mirror 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
TABLE I.  
CHARACTERISTICS OF FRAMES USED IN THE EXPERIMENT 
 
 
the frame involved attaching a rectangle object and pulling 
it side to side with a translation stage; the applied force was 
measured with a force gauge with 10 mN resolution. 
We applied shear loads from 0 N to 20 N to each frame. 
The loads applied were in the x-axis direction (see Fig. 2); 
the output S was thus given by (3) and the outputs of PD-A 
and PD-C were not used. Before the experiment, we 
analyzed the relationship between shearing force and mirror 
tilt angle by finite element method. We obtained a linear 
relationship as shown in Fig. 10. Therefore, it is expected 
that we obtain a linear relationship between the output and 
shearing force because estimated mirror tilt angle of 20 N 
falls within the linear area completely as shown in Fig 6.  We 
prepared six types of metallic frames as shown in Fig. 11 and 
Table 1. We expected the stainless steel frame to deform 
more readily than the copper frame because the Young’s 
modulus of stainless steel is larger than that of copper. In 
addition, we expected the frames with a corner thickness of 
0.1 mm to be easier to deform than those with 0.3 mm, and 
that there would be little change in the frame with 90 degree 
lower corners. 
As shown in Fig. 12, we obtained a linear increase in S for 
a single axis shearing force as we had expected. As a result, 
we can determine the magnitude and direction of the single 
axis shearing force. In addition, we found that the output 
changes were dependent largely upon the material and shape 
of the frame. Therefore, smaller shearing forces are likely 
measurable if a softer material is used for the frame. In the 
experiment, copper frames with corner thickness 0.1 mm 
were more likely to collapse, so we did not apply up to the 
maximum 20 N. As expected, the gradient of the frames with 
corner thickness 0.1 mm (shown by the light gray points) is 
much steeper than that of the frames with corner thickness 
0.3 mm (black points). When the frame is deformed by 
applied shearing force, it is essentially identical that the sides 
and corners of the frame are bended by reaction force as 
shown in Fig. 13. Therefore, it is thought that the thickness 
of the corner affects the ease of deformation largely and the 
gradient of the frames with corner thickness 0.1 mm is much 
steeper than that of the frames with corner thickness 0.3 mm. 
Additionally, the gradient of the frame with 70 degree 
bottom corner angles (light gray points) is steeper than that 
of the frames with 90 degree bottom corner angles (dark gray 
points). 
 
 
 
Material 
Young’s 
modulus 
Thickness of 
corners H 
Angle of 
frame sides θ 
a 
SUS 
199 GPa 
0.1 mm 
70 ° 
b 
90 ° 
c 
0.3 mm 
70 ° 
d 
Cu 
117 GPa 
0.1 mm 
70 ° 
e 
90 ° 
f 
0.3 mm 
70 ° 
 
 
Figure 10. Analysis of the relationship between shearing force and tilt 
angle with frame (a) 
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0
5
10
15
20
25
Tilt angle θ[°]
Shearing force F[N]
Figure 11. Schematic showing the frame 
0.5mm 
H 
θ 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 12. Variations in the output S for (a) stainless steel,  and (b) copper 
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Output S[-]
Shearing force[N]
(a)H=0.1mm θ=70°
(b)H=0.1mm θ=90°
(c)H=0.3mm θ=70°
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Output S[-]
Shearing force[N]
(d)H=0.1mm θ=70°
(e)H=0.1mm θ=90°
(f)H=0.3mm θ=70°
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We believe there are two reasons for this. The first is that the 
angle of the side of the frame may not have been exactly 90 
degrees, which would cause the mirror to tilt slightly when 
the frame is deformed. The second is that the corners of the 
frame were deformed by the shearing force much more than 
the sides of the frame; this is shown in Fig. 14. When the 
sides of the frame deform, the upper part of the frame — that 
is, the mirror — moves in the horizontal direction and the 
mirror does not tilt. On the other hand, when the corners of 
the frame deform, the upper part of the frame tilts 
geometrically, which in turn means that the mirror is tilted. 
In the case of the frame used in this experiment, the corners 
are easier to deform than the sides because the sides of the 
frame are short. Overall, the output gradient of stainless steel 
frames is steeper than that of copper frames. As shown in 
Table 1, the Young’s modulus of stainless steel is almost 
twice that of copper; correspondingly, the results show that 
the S values for the copper frame are approximately twice 
that of those for the stainless steel frame. The outputs of (c) 
and (f) (black points) were mostly unchanged. This is 
because the shearing force of 20 N was insufficient for 
deforming the frame. The outputs of (d) and (e) (light gray 
and dark gray points) in the results of copper were in part 
non-linear. This can be explained by the yielding of the 
frames at a shearing force of about 10 N. The thickness of 
the corners affects the outputs more than both the tilt angle 
of the side part of the frame and the frame material. 
Consequently, we need to set the measurement range 
according to the strength of the frame. 
 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this work, we have successfully obtained a linear 
dependence on a single axis shearing force by combining an 
integrated micro optical displacement sensor with a metallic 
frame. The gradient of the linear change primarily depended 
on the material and shape of the frame. We therefore expect 
this sensor to be able to detect the magnitude and direction 
of a single axis shearing force. We also expect to be able to 
change its resolution and measurement range. It is possible 
that this sensor can measure biaxial and smaller shearing 
forces by using the same principle; it could then be 
embedded in robot fingertips or consumer beds.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Sasaki, T. Noritsugu, and M. Takaiwa:“Development of 
Pressure Measurement Type Tactile Soft Sensor for Life 
Assist Robot”, Transactions of the Japan Society of Mechanical 
Engineers, vol.70, no.689, 2004, pp.77-82. 
[2] http://www.mayoclinic.com/health-information (2013/04/03) 
[3] F. Zhu and J. W. Spronck, “A capacitive tactile sensor for 
shear and normal force measurements”, Sensors and 
Actuators A, Volume 31, Issues 1–3, Mar. 1992, pp. 115–120. 
[4] H. K. Lee, S. I. Chang, and E. Yoon, “A flexible polymer 
tactile sensor: Fabrication and modular expandability for large 
area deployment,” J. Microelectromech. Syst., vol. 15, no. 6,  
Dec. 2006, pp. 1681–1686. 
[5] H. K. Lee, J. Chung, S. I. Chang, and E. Yoon, “Normal and 
Shear Force Measurement Using a Flexible Polymer Tactile 
Sensor 
With 
Embedded 
Multiple 
Capacitors”, 
J. 
Microelectromech. Syst., vol. 17, no. 4, Aug. 2008, pp. 934-
942. 
[6] H. K. Lee, J. Chung, S. I. Chang, and E. Yoon, “Polymer 
tactile sensing array with a unit cell of multiple capacitors for 
three-axis contact force image construction,” in Proc. 20th 
IEEE Int. MEMS Conf., Kobe, Japan, Jan. 21–25, 2006, pp. 
623–626. 
[7] Z. Chu, P. M. Sarro, and S. Middlehoek, “Silicon three-axial 
tactile sensor,” Sens. Actuators A, Phys., vol. 54, no. 1–3, Jun. 
1996, pp. 505–510. 
[8] A. Ito, N. Tsujiuchi, T. Koizumi and H. Oshima: “Tactile 
Information Processing by Distributed-Type Tri-axial Force 
Sensor for Robot Finger’’, The Science and Engineering 
Review of Doshisha University, vol. 48, no. 3 Oct. 2007, pp. 
86-94. 
[9] E. S. Hwang, J. H. Seo, and Y. J. Kim, “A Polymer-Based 
Flexible Tactile Sensor for Normal and Shear Load Detection,” 
Proc. of IEEE International MEMS Conference 2006, Istanbul, 
Turkey, Jan. 22-26, 2006, pp. 714-717. 
[10] K. Kim et al., “3-Axes Flexible Tactile Sensor Fabricated by 
Si Micromachining and Packaging Technology,” Proc. of 
IEEE International MEMS Conference 2006, Istanbul, Turkey, 
Jan. 22-26, 2006, pp. 678-681. 
[11] T. Takeshita et al., “Characteristics and application of a 
monoli- thically integrated micro-displacement sensor” ,Joint 
International IMEKO Symposium, Germany, 2011. 
 
Figure 13. Schematic diagram of deformation 
(a)                                               (b) 
Figure 14. Schematic diagram of frame deformation 
 at (a) the sides, and (b) the corners 
90° 
θ 
Reaction force 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

