A Concept for Working Point Determination of Axial Compressors Based on Blade
Deﬂection Measurements with Optical Sensors
Rocco Reinhardt∗, Daniel M. Lancelle∗, Olaf Magnor∗, Olaf Hagendorf† and Peter D¨unow†
∗IAV GmbH, Powertrain Mechatronics, Gifhorn, Germany
Email: rocco.reinhardt@iav.de, daniel.maurice.lancelle@iav.de, olaf.magnor@iav.de,
olaf.hagendorf@hs-wismar.de, peter.duenow@hs-wismar.de
†University of Wismar, Faculty of Engineering, Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Wismar, Germany
Abstract—Today, the working point identiﬁcation of axial com-
pressors is not sufﬁcient, especially of aircraft engine compressors.
For this reason, considerable efﬁciency losses occur in certain
working points. The sensors of commonly used measurement
methods have to be placed directly in the compressor airﬂow.
This location is not desirable because the sensors are creating
vortexes. This paper shows a new method of working point deter-
mination of axial compressors. The new developed measurement
system with optical sensors provides a contactless blade deﬂection
measurement without inﬂuencing the air ﬂow. The assumption
is that blade deﬂections contain information about the actual
compressor working point. The advantage of this technique is
the minimal invasive nature. Experiments on an axial compressor
have approved the assumption and potential of this technique.
Keywords—axial compressor; optical; working point.
I.
INTRODUCTION
For many years, strain gauges were usually applied to
research blade vibration effects. New methods based on optical
sensors have been researched since the 70’s [1], [2]. These
methods are known as Blade Tip Timing (BTT) or Blade
Vibration Monitoring (BVM). In the last ﬁfteen years, the
cost for optical equipment, like laser, fast receiver and optical
ﬁbers took off rapidly. One of the main reasons for that is the
extreme expansion of optical ﬁber communication. So, optical
based blade tip timing is becoming more and more important
in compressor research. Other physical sensor principles, like
inductive and magneto resistive, microwave or capacitive [3]–
[5] are conceivable but they have to show an adequate precision
and resolution. The main advantage of BTT is the monitoring
of each individual compressor blade with the same sensor set.
In addition, BTT do not inﬂuence the blades in contrast to
strain gauges. With strain gauges, it would be necessary to
add them to each blade and implement a telemetry system
to monitor them. The time and money invested are extreme
in comparison. The tasks in which BTT is most promising
currently and in medium term are to extend maintenance
intervals on stationary compressors, compressor research in
particular stall, ﬂutter and vibration analysis [6]–[8]. A very
new approach and still in the beginning of research is the
working point determination and optimization [9].
There is a steady development on axial compressors to
increase the pressure ratio per stage. This results in a working
region which is closer to the non stable state of the axial
compressor, the surge line. Currently, accurate working point
determination is not possible. To regard the working point
uncertainty, the working lines are placed with a greater margin
to the surge line. Furthermore, it has to be considered that
a compressor aging causes a surge line movement to the
working lines. Considerable efﬁciency losses are the result of
these three facts. The sensors of commonly used principles to
measure pressure or mass ﬂow have to be placed directly into
the air ﬂow. There, they generate vortexes which induce blade
vibrations. These vibrations may cause compressor instabilities
and so it is not allowed to use intrusive measurement methods.
These restrictions lead to uncertainties with working point
identiﬁcations.
The contribution of this paper is the introduction of a
new BTT based working point determination. This method
provides a contactless and non-intrusive possibility to detect
blade deﬂections. Aerodynamic effects on compressor blades
were analyzed. This analysis leads to the assumption that blade
deﬂections are usable to identify working points. Techniques
to prevent or reduce negative inﬂuences of engine order (EO)
vibrations of blade deﬂection measurements are presented. To
approve the new method, experiments with an axial compres-
sor were done. Therefore, a compressor map was generated
to correlate blade deﬂections with actual working points.
These experiments have shown the potential and usability
of a working point identiﬁcation based on blade deﬂection
measurements.
Section 2 describes the aerodynamic effects on the com-
pressor blades to understand the idea of working point identi-
ﬁcation with blade deﬂection measurements. Section 3 shows
the used measurement principle of BTT to measure blade
deﬂections and also the technical details of the used axial
compressor. Section 4 describes preliminary investigations of
the compressor blades which allow optimal sensor positioning
around the compressor casing. This can prevent or reduce a
negative measurement effect because of EO vibration. Section
5 explains the theory of compressor map generation and
presents the generated compressor map. Section 6 discusses
the reached measurement precision of blade deﬂection mea-
surements. Furthermore, ﬁrst measurement results of blade
deﬂections in dependence of the actual compressor working
point are presented.
II.
AERODYNAMIC EFFECTS ON THE COMPRESSOR BLADE
This section provides a very short insight in the aerody-
namic effects on the compressor blades and will help to under-
stand the fundamental idea about working point identiﬁcation.
Two forces inﬂuence the compressor blades during opera-
tion, the lift FL and the drag FD (Figure 1). The drag force is
the sum of the pressure and the friction force. The lift force
is the integral in the direction of the free stream velocity of
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

the pressure differences between proﬁle top side pt and proﬁle
bottom side pb for each surface area element dA:
FL =
Z
Ablade
(pt − pb) · dA
(1)
It is usual to introduce dimensionless coefﬁcents [10]. The
dimensionless coefﬁcient for FD is:
cD =
FD
Aq∞
(2)
q∞ is the ﬂuid dynamic pressure and A a deﬁned reference
area. For a proﬁle, it is the perpendicular to the ground
projected cross sectional area. The dimensionless coefﬁcient
for FL is:
cL =
FL
Aq∞
(3)
These forces are generally generated by the airﬂow. They
are dependent on the airﬂow velocity C∞, the proﬁle shape,
the Reynolds number, the surface friction, boundary layers,
laminar and turbulent ﬂow, et cetera. Further information about
these effects are illustrated in technical literature [10], [11].
C∞
chord
FL
FD
Fr
Fu
Fn
circumferential
direction
axial
direction
γ
α
βi
camber line
tangent at the front
of the camber line
Figure 1. Aerodynamical forces on the compressor blade.
According to the Kutta-Joukowski theorem, the lift force
is orthogonal and the drag force is parallel to the direction
of ﬂow. Fr is the resulting force. It can be divided into an
axial Fn and a circumference force Fu. The angle between
the lift and the resulting force is called glide angle γ. The
ﬂow direction is described with the angle of attack α. The
incidence angle βi has a major effect on the resulting force.
When the compressor is throttled (working point moves left
in the compressor map) the pressure ratio increases, the mass
ﬂow decreases and the incidence angle increases. Each blade
proﬁle shape has a special cL and cD behavior depending on
the incidence angle [10], [12]. This information can be used to
research a working point determination with blade deﬂections.
III.
MEASUREMENT PRINCIPLE AND TECHNICAL DETAILS
OF THE AXIAL COMPRESSOR
For the BTT measurement principle, one or several blade
sensors are arranged around the circumference of the casing.
Figure 2 shows this principle. Alternative sensor positions exist
in order to prevent the inﬂuence of engine order (EO) vibration
amplitudes [6], [7]. When a blade crosses the region of one
blade sensor, an event will be created. In the absence of blade
bending, it is possible to determine the actual undisturbed
position s0 of each blade in relation to the event of the
commonly used OPR sensor or, even better, a high resolution
reference system and the actual revolution speed or, rather,
period of time. If the blade vibrates in none EO modes, the
position varies (s∆) with time. Additionally, there will be an
offset depending on the working point because s∆ correlates
with the resulting force Fr. The actual blade position of blade
w in relation to one reference mark can be calculated with (4).
sw = sw
0 + sw
∆
(4)
w : [1, h=Number blades] with w ∈ Z
blade sensors
reference sensor
axial compressor
Sref
s0
⃗v
ﬂow
Sx...S1
blade deﬂection
s∆
S1
Sx
Sref
Ref. Marks
Figure 2. BTT measurement principle on an axial compressor.
In this paper, the individual components of Fr will not
be regarded, only the effect in circumferential direction. This
will be part of further investigations. For this research, a high
resolution reference system was used. Several reference marks
are mounted on a suitable load independent position, like the
shaft or the disk. They are triggering events at constant angles
of the compressor turn. The essential velocity or period of time
is calculated with the time difference between two reference
events. More details and strategies for a high resolution refer-
ence and blade position determination are illustrated in [13].
For the investigation of compressor effects and achievable
precisions, a set of three optical blade sensors and one ref-
erence sensor is used. Figure 3 shows the principle of the
blade sensors. There is one coupling ﬁber with a core diameter
of 4 µm and one outcoupling ﬁber with a core diameter of
102 µm. Both ﬁbers are guided over a combiner module to
one integrated transmitting and receiving end. The combined
end has a long ferrule to overcome the width of the compressor
casing. The reference sensor is built similarly, except for
the ferrule. A ferrule connector for physical contact (FC/PC
connector) is used instead. The beam from a laser source with
a wavelength of λ = 780 nm and a power of 20 mW is
coupled into the sensor module. When the radiated light from
the transmitting ﬁber is reﬂected by an object, like a blade or a
reference mark, the reﬂected light is collected by the receiving
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

ﬁber and then guided to an optical receiver. The receiver
converts the optical to an electrical signal. A digital storage
oscilloscope is used to acquire the data for the following data
analysis. Considering that the differences of blade deﬂections
in several working points are often in the range of micrometers,
that makes it necessary to regard negative effects, like time
walk and time jitter. [14] describes these effects and methods
to reduce them. The complete measurement system runs with
a sampling rate of fs = 250 MHz with a 3 dB bandwidth of
approximately fBW = 200 MHz.
Single-Mode Fiber
Multi-Mode Fiber
Outcoupling
dcore = 102 µm
dclad = 122 µm
Coupling
dcore = 4 µm, λ = 780 nm
dclad = 125 µm
Multi-Mode Fiber
Single-Mode Fiber
and receiving end
combined transmitting
Sensor:
Ferrule
Figure 3. Optical blade sensor setup with special ferrule.
The axial one stage intermediate-pressure-compressor with
the internal name EB52 has h = 58 blades. It is a re-
search compressor at the Whittle Laboratory of the University
of Cambridge and is driven by a synchronous motor to a
maximum revolution speed of n = 3000 1/min. The inner
diameter from blade tip to blade tip is dc = 0.487 m. The
compressor can reach an aerodynamic power of about 6 kW
and a pressure ratio of Π = 1.02. The pressure ratio of
this research compressor is in comparison to civil engines
very small. The engine PW6124 (Airbus A318) from Pratt
& Whitney reaches Π = 1.83 per stage [10]. The one stage
compressor HP9 (report AGARD-AR-275) reaches Π = 1.24.
Additionally, the blades of EB52 are very stiff in relation to
the maximum aerodynamic power and pressure ratio, so that
the blade deﬂections will be relatively small.
IV.
PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION OF AXIAL SENSOR
POSITIONING
Usually, blade vibrations fblade have a random character
with small amplitudes, thereby averaging is permissible. But,
sometimes, varying tip clearances or stator parts lead to
excitation of the blades natural frequencies and the vibration
amplitudes are rising. For the quality of BTT measurement,
this is adverse in the case of EO vibrations. An EO vibration
is an integer multiple of the revolution frequency frev (5).
EO = fblade
frev
with EO ∈ Z
(5)
If the compressor blades vibrate with this kind of fre-
quency, the vibration is synchronized with the compressor
revolution. Figure 4 shows a blade vibration with an EO of
6 (blue line). It is deﬁned when the vibration magnitude is
negative, the blade comes later to a sensor position because the
vibration direction is opposite to the rotational direction. When
the magnitude is positive, the blade comes earlier to a sensor
position. The sensor positions are called disturbed positions
for both states. Only vibration nodes represent undisturbed
sensor positions and are usable for direct blade deﬂection
measurements. Furthermore, the blue line can be interpreted
as the delta arrival time caused by an EO blade vibration
for imaginary sensor positions. If the sensors are located on
disturbed positions around the compressor circumference, the
measurement result shows a false static blade deﬂection. If EO
vibrations are not considered, blade deﬂection measurements
for working point determination or vibration analysis for ﬂutter
or stall may be difﬁcult or impossible. Therefore, one of the
main tasks for BTT is an optimal sensor positioning.
compressor casing
blade vibration mode
vibration node
+
−
undisturbed sensor position
disturbed sensor position
Figure 4. Engine order blade vibration.
1. Bending Mode: 465 Hz
1. Torsion Mode: 1636 Hz
2. Bending Mode: 4053 Hz
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
f [Hz]
Spectrum
|X(f)|
max(|X(f)|)
Figure 5. Blade vibration eigenfrequency and eigenform analysis.
The compressor blades were surveyed and the eigenfre-
quencies (natural frequencies) and eigenforms were identiﬁed.
Figure 5 shows the resulting frequency spectrum and most sig-
niﬁcant frequencies. The mode shapes with the most inﬂuence
on BTT measurement were analyzed in detail.
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

1st Bending Mode
1st Torsion Mode
2nd Bending Mode
trailing edge
leading edge
optimal sensor
position
Figure 6. Axial sensor positioning with blade vibration analysis, green
region stands for vibration node.
Figure 6 reveals that the 1st torsion and 2nd bending
mode show nodes of vibration close to the trailing edge. This
effect is used to minimize their inﬂuence to blade deﬂection
measurements for working point determination. The sensors
are positioned close to the trailing edge. In the case of EO
blade vibration with 1st torsion or 2nd bending mode, they
should not affect the measurement. The 1st bending mode
shape makes it impossible to use an ideal sensor position.
Unfortunately, this mode has the biggest amplitude.
V.
COMPRESSOR MAP GENERATION
To correlate the acquired blade deformation data to the
corresponding working points, all important measurement
values need to be recorded. One sample of speciﬁc values
describes a speciﬁc working point. All working points span the
compressor map which describes the physical behavior of the
compressor. The test rig is equipped with a data acquisition
system which measures the revolution speed n, the torque
at the shaft M, the static inlet temperature T0, the total
temperature upstream of the rotor Tt,2, the total inlet pressure
pt,0, the pressure difference between inlet and the rotor ∆pS,1
and the differential pressure over the compressor stage ∆pS,2.
With these values, the compressor map can be determined.
Detailed information about compressor map generation are
illustrated in [10]. Additionally, the pressure difference over
the rotor ∆pS,R as well as the total temperature downstream of
the stage Tt,3 are measured. Figure 7 shows the probe positions
of the test rig.
Figure 8 shows the generated compressor map for the axial
compressor presented in this paper.
From the inlet conditions and the pressure drop between
inlet and rotor ∆pS,1 the mass ﬂow ˙m can be derived. The
pressure difference over the stages ∆pS,2 enables to determine
p0, T0
∆pS,1
∆pS,2 ∆pS,R
Tt,2
Tt,3
M
Figure 7. Overview of the probe positions of the test rig.
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Corrected Mass Flow [kg/s]
1.01
1.015
1.02
Pressure Ratio [-]
1980 2131
2478
Corr. Revolution Speed [min-1]
2910
0.84
0.84
0.85
0.85
0.85
0.855
0.855
0.855
0.86
0.86
0.86
0.865
0.865
0.865
0.87
0.87
0.87
0.875
0.875
0.88
0.88
0.885
0.885
0.89
0.895
Figure 8. Compressor map for the EB52.
the pressure ratio Π of the compressor. The power at the shaft
Pin is computed from the torque M and the revolution speed
n. The mass ﬂow and the pressure ratio allow the calculation
of the required power for the pressure rise under isentropic
conditions Pid. The ratio of the isentropic and the measured
power yields to the compressor efﬁciency η. To create the
compressor map, the compressor is throttled until it stalls.
The pressure ratio is plotted versus the mass ﬂow for different
rotational speeds. Based on the measured efﬁciency, a contour
plot is created to show lines of constant efﬁciency. As the
compressor’s behavior is dependent on the inlet conditions,
it is not convenient to use the real mass ﬂow and rotational
speed, as the compressor map would not be the same on
two different days or two different altitudes. Hereinafter, the
different conditions are described with I and II. Therefore, the
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

compressor map is transformed in a way that every point in the
map has its speciﬁc streamline pattern. This can be achieved if
the Mach number in axial (Maax) and circumferential direction
(Marad) are constant for each point in the compressor map. The
Mach number in axial direction is:
Maax = cax
a =
˙m
ρA
√
κRT
(6)
with the ﬂow velocity in axial direction cax, the sonic
velocity a, the isotropic exponent κ, the speciﬁc gas constant
R, the temperature T of the ﬂuid and the corresponding area
A [10].
By replacing the density ρ with the law of an ideal gas
and subsequently describing the static pressure and static
temperature by their total quantities, a constant axial Mach
number is achieved when the following equation is satisﬁed:
˙mI
p
Tt,I
pt,I
= ˙mII
p
Tt,II
pt,II
(7)
By deﬁning the corrected mass ﬂow as:
˙mcor = ˙mpref
pt
r
Tt
Tref
(8)
with the reference values for pressure pref and temperature
Tref. Often, the values of standard atmosphere are used. The
total values pt and Tt are the values at the compressor inlet.
It is obvious, that a constant axial Mach number is present,
when the corrected mass ﬂow is constant. The Mach number
in circumferential direction is:
Mau =
rω
√
κRT
(9)
Replacing the static temperature with the total temperature
and the angular velocity ω with the revolution speed, a constant
circumferential Mach number is given when:
nI
p
Tt,I
=
nII
p
Tt,II
(10)
Introducing the corrected revolution speed:
ncor = n
r
Tref
Tt
(11)
one can see that a constant circumferential Mach number
is achieved when the corrected revolution speed is constant.
To get a compressor map that is independent of the inlet
conditions, the pressure ratio has to be plotted vs. the corrected
mass ﬂow. The throttle lines have to be parameterized for
constant corrected revolution speeds.
VI.
BLADE DEFLECTION RESULTS
This section shows the reached measurement precision and
discusses the blade deﬂection results in comparison to the
compressor map. Figure 9 shows the single shot resolution
θ. The resolution can be calculated with (12). There is vt the
tangential velocity, dc the compressor diameter (blade tip to
blade tip), frev the revolution frequency and ts the sampling
rate. The single shot resolution is varying from 0.05 µm to
0.26 µm with the actual revolution speed. All other parameters
are constant in the equation.
θ = vt · ts = πdcfrev · ts
(12)
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
n [1/min]
σs [µm]
precision: averaged
resolution: single shot
100
200
300
number of samples k
Figure 9. Achieved precision σs for all compressor blades, variation σσs of
precision over all blades and resolution θ of the measurement system.
The resolution is only the ﬁrst part which describes the
quality of a measurement system. The reached precision de-
pending on this resolution is more important. Figure 9 shows
also the precision for the distance sw (4) between a blade
w and one reference mark. Each precision value stands for
over all compressor blades averaged standard deviation of
the arithmetic mean value of each compressor blade. This
precision σs is calculated with (13):
σs = 1
h
h
X
w=1
σw
s
(13)
with h the number of blades and σw
s the standard deviation
of the arithmetic mean value for blade w.
The arithmetic mean value σw
s is calculated with (14). σw
s
stands for the standard deviation of each individual blade and
k for the number of sampled distances sw.
σw
s = σw
s
√
k
(14)
The standard deviation is expressed with (15). For this
calculation, the i-th sampled distance sw
i of blade w to one
reference mark and the empirical expected value sw of the
sampled distance was used.
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

σw
s =
v
u
u
t
1
k − 1
k
X
i=1
(sw
i − sw)2 =
p
V AR(sw)
(15)
Additionally, in Figure 9 the variation of the standard
deviation of the arithmetic mean value over all blades (16)
is shown.
σσs =
q
V AR(σw
s )
(16)
The precision decreases slightly over the compressor revo-
lution speed and is varying between 0.25 µm and 0.4 µm. The
reason for this are the increasing amplitudes of ﬂow induced
stochastic blade vibrations. The blades rotate through a steady
ﬂow ﬁeld that is non-uniform in circumferential direction. A
forced vibration is induced due to pressure ﬂuctuations.
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
120
140
160
˙mcor [kg/s]
blade deﬂection s [µm] (solid)
1980 1/min
2131 1/min
2478 1/min
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
1.008
1.010
1.012
1.014
1.016
pressure ratio Π (dotted)
Figure 10. Blade deﬂection results for several revolution speeds in
comparison to pressure ratio Π.
The precision variation of the blades are smaller than
0.125 µm and shows the same behavior as the precision. They
are increasing with the compressor revolution speed.
Figure 10 shows the ﬁrst results of averaged blade de-
ﬂections over the mass ﬂow in comparison with the pressure
ratio Π. Each color stands for one corrected revolution speed
ncor in the range of 1980..2478
1
min. The procedure was
to set the revolution speed and change the working point
with increasing throttling of the compressor step by step. The
increased throttling leads to a reduced mass ﬂow and in the
ﬁrst part to an increased pressure ratio and blade deﬂection.
The working point moves left. Between each step several
measurements for the compressor map and the blade deﬂection
were done. The revolution speed lines 1980 and 2478
1
min
show a good correlation to the pressure ratio. The maximum
pressure ratio is very closely to the maximum blade deﬂection.
The speed line at 2131
1
min has another behavior. It could
be inﬂuenced by undetected EO’s, not sufﬁcient measurement
quality (poor blade edge quality at this working point), not
regarding the individual components of the resulting force Fr
or another unknown effects.
VII.
CONCLUSION
This paper has introduced a new method of working
point identiﬁcation with blade deﬂection determination. The
theoretical background was explained, the used measurement
equipment and several preliminary investigations were pre-
sented, and the used statistical values for the analysis were
described. The ﬁrst results were discussed and have proven
the possibility of working point identiﬁcation based on blade
deﬂection measurements. This method allows to increase the
efﬁciency of axial compressors. Further research is recom-
mended to develop more robust sensor principles. It would be
desirable to verify this new method on axial compressors with
a higher pressure ratio. It is assumed that the measurement
effect is much higher there.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Ivor Day from the Univer-
sity of Cambridge for the interesting professional discussions,
the great support and the providing of technical equipment.
This research program has been funded by IAV GmbH.
REFERENCES
[1]
I. Zablotskii, Y. A. Korostelev, and L. Sviblov, “Contactless measuring
of vibrations in the rotor blades of turbines,” DTIC Document, Tech.
Rep., 1974.
[2]
W. Nieberding and J. Pollack, “Optical detection of blade ﬂutter,” in
ASME 1977 International Gas Turbine Conference and Products Show,
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 1977, V001T01A064–
V001T01A064.
[3]
M Zielinski and G Ziller, “Noncontact vibration measurements on com-
pressor rotor blades,” Measurement Science and Technology, vol. 11,
no. 7, p. 847, 2000.
[4]
P. Proch´azka and F. Vanˇek, “New methods of noncontact sensing of
blade vibrations and deﬂections in turbomachinery,” IEEE Transactions
on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 63, no. 6, pp. 1583–1592,
2014.
[5]
R. Szczepanik et al., “Application of blade-tip sensors to blade-
vibration monitoring in gas turbines,” in Thermal Power Plants, InTech,
2012.
[6]
S Heath and M Imregun, “An improved single-parameter tip-timing
method for turbomachinery blade vibration measurements using optical
laser probes,” International journal of mechanical sciences, vol. 38,
no. 10, pp. 1047–1058, 1996.
[7]
O. Jousselin, Blade tip timing uncertainty, US Patent 9,494,491, 2016.
[8]
C. P. Lawson and P. C. Ivey, “Tubomachinery blade vibration amplitude
measurement through tip timing with capacitance tip clearance probes,”
Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 118, no. 1, pp. 14–24, 2005.
[9]
M. Koeller, O. Magnor, and D. Reitebuch, Device and method for
reliably operating a compressor at the pump threshold, US Patent App.
13/824,452, 2011.
[10]
W. J. Br¨aunling, Aircraft Engines, Flugzeugtriebwerke: Grundlagen,
Aero-Thermodynamik, ideale und reale Kreisprozesse, Thermische Tur-
bomaschinen, Komponenten, Emissionen und Systeme. Springer-Verlag,
2015.
[11]
H. Herwig, Fluid Mechanics, Str¨omungsmechanik. Springer Vieweg,
2016.
[12]
H.-A. Schreiber, W. Steinert, T. Sonoda, and T. Arima, “Advanced high
turning compressor airfoils for low reynolds number condition: Part
2-experimental and numerical analysis,” in ASME Turbo Expo 2003,
collocated with the 2003 International Joint Power Generation Confer-
ence, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2003, pp. 451–463.
[13]
R Reinhardt, D Lancelle, O Hagendorf, O Magnor, and P Duenow,
“Improved reference system for high precision blade tip timing on
axial compressors,” in Optical Fiber Sensors Conference (OFS), 2017
25th, IEEE, 2017.
[14]
R. Reinhardt, O. Magnor, P. Duenow, O. Hagendorf, and A. Rohlfs,
“Event detection methods for high resolution time measurements on
an application example,” in AUTSYM 2014, vol. 7, 2014.
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

