A Time-Domain Based Lossless Data Compression Technique for Wireless
Wearable Biometric Devices
Chengliang Dai, Christopher Bailey
Department of Computer Science
University of York
York, United Kingdom
Email: cd633@york.ac.uk, christopher.crispin-bailey@york.ac.uk
Abstract—This paper presents a promising lossless compres-
sion technique called Log2 Sub-band encoding, which is suitable
for implementing on wireless wearable biometric devices. Data
compression promises a power saving from the transceiver during
the data transmission and further extends battery lifetime on
a device. The performance of this technique is measured in
term of compression ratio (CR). Our simulations suggest a CR
that is comparable, and indeed superior to the combination of
Differential pulse-code modulation (DPCM) and Huffman coding,
whilst using minimal hardware. The simulations primarily use
electroencephalogram (EEG) data, and a estimated power saving
is given whilst the implementation issues and possible inﬂuence
of different biomedical data on technique′s performance will also
be considered.
Keywords—Wearable device; Bioelectric data; Lossless compres-
sion technique; Power consumption
I.
INTRODUCTION
It has been a long time since people realized that bioelectric
signals could reﬂect alternations inside our biological system,
and such signals now can help researchers to study many
diseases or other external and internal stimuli that cause
these alternations. As a result, wireless wearable biometric
devices have drawn much attention in recent years, and they
promise to make collecting bioelectric data more ﬂexible and
convenient. Applications and prototypes have been widely
used in medical monitoring, brain-computer interfaces (BCI),
and other relevant areas [1] [2]. Especially in medical ﬁelds,
wearable devices signiﬁcantly improved patients quality of
living whilst allowing caregivers and doctors to provide a better
healthcare for patients with various neurological and physical
diseases like epilepsy, Alzheimers, and insuring early detection
of emergency conditions for high risk patients.
With all the advantages of using wireless wearable devices,
power consumption now becomes a design obstacle to the
prevailing of these devices. A wearable device is usually
battery powered, and the limited size of the device restricts the
size and capacity of batteries, so power efﬁciency is extremely
crucial for a device to extend the operational lifetime and
further improve user experience. There are several ways to
reduce device power consumption, and since the transceiver is
one of the signiﬁcant contributors to the power consumption,
reducing the size of transmitted data might be a fruitful
objective.
Nevertheless, compressing the data increases the complex-
ity of the system and itself consumes power, such that it
is necessary to strike a balance between the power that a
compression unit is able to save and the power it consumes.
A compression technique that demands less hardware resource
but delivers high compression ratio (CR) will be a desirable
solution, particularly where large numbers of channels become
more common, and hence multiply the hardware and power
costs of compression.
Bioelectric signals are highly non-Gaussian, non-stationary
and non-linear, which make data compression a difﬁcult task.
Moreover, signals for clinical uses require a high consistency
of original data and reconstructed data that rules out several
lossy data compression techniques [3]. Various compression
methods have been tested on bioelectric signals especially on
EEG signals including entropy encoding [4] [5], predictive
encoding [4] [6], transform-based encoding [3], etc. Entropy
encoding techniques such as Huffman coding are versatile
and widely used on many kinds of data, but they require
the pre-knowledge of the signals, the probability density of
samples for instance, before conducting any compression. This
is impractical for a wireless biometric device where data
are collected, processed and transmitted in real-time. Most
predictive encoding techniques encounter the same problem.
Transform-based encoding techniques can achieve impressive
compression results, but they are either lossy or far too
complex in system level. Therefore, a new method called Log2
Sub-band encoding is developed to overcome these limitations.
In the rest of this paper, the basic idea of Log2 Sub-band
algorithm will be given in section II, and followed by an
introduction to test data in section III and the result analysis
in section IV. Preliminary hardware design will be given in
section V, and ﬁnally the conclusion in section VI.
II.
LOG2 SUB-BAND COMPRESSION
The fundamental design of this algorithm is simple: after
analog-to-digital conversion, every data sample is divided into
several bit-ﬁelds (chunks), and each chunk is compared with
the same part of the previous sample. Chunks of the current
sample will not be sent if they are identical to the parts of
previous sample. An extra header is sent with every sample
to indicate number of chunks transmitted. For instance, if
a bioelectric signal is digitalized into 12 bits, the whole
procedure can be illustrated with Fig. 1.
As it is shown in Fig.1, each data sample is chopped
into 4-bit chunks, making 3 nibbles, and there will be four
scenarios including transmitting whole sample, 2 nibbles of
the sample, 1 nibble or only the header after each comparison.
There will be a 2-bit header added before transmission to guide
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure. 1.
Log2 Sub-band encoding
the receiver to reconstruct compressed data. The procedure is
similar to the simplest predictive encoding technique, Differ-
ential Pulse-Code Modulation (DPCM) [7], which eliminates
short-term redundancies by taking the difference of adjacent
samples. However, the bit width of each sample after applying
DPCM depends on the adjacent samples that have the biggest
difference, and as for bioelectric signals in which sudden
spikes may happen because of any stimuli or pathological
reasons, the performance of DPCM is often disappointing.
Even though such problem can be partly solved by using
entropy coding unit as a second processing stage [7], it is
still not compatible enough with complex bioelectric signals.
The Log2 Sub-band algorithm, due to its encoding scheme, is
adaptive to any sudden changes of the signal with a minimum
cost of hardware, and it simply takes more bits to represent the
parts with severe ﬂuctuations and fewer bits when the signals
become stable.
Meanwhile, the algorithm only processes the signal within
the time-domain, and no information is dropped due to the
compression technique, so the raw data will be fully recon-
structed after reception, and are lossless.
III.
INTRODUCTION TO THE DATA FOR TESTING
The simulations of Log2 Sub-band encoding are conducted
with EEG signals, and they come from two sources: humans
EEG data are from a research on nonlinear deterministic
patterns of brain electrical signals at the University of Bonn
[8], and mouse EEG data from an on-going Alzheimer disease
study in Aberdeen University [9].
A. Human EEG data
All EEG signals were recorded with a 128-channel ampli-
ﬁer system, and digitized into 12 bit samples. The ﬁnal signals
were acquired at a sampling rate of 173.61 Hz, and the band-
pass ﬁlter was set to 0.53-40 Hz [8].
Data were categorized into 5 groups, which are record-
ings from healthy people with eyes open and closed, sig-
nals originated from within and outside epilepsy diagnosed
patients epileptogenic zone (seizure generating area) during
the seizure free interval, and recordings of seizures. Signals
from healthy people were recorded extra-cranially with severe
eye movement artifacts (EOG), but EOG interference was
removed manually afterwards by the research group in Bonn.
Recordings of epilepsy patients were recorded intra-cranially.
Each group has 100 data segments of 23.6 sec duration of
signals, and 4096 samples in every segment.
B. Mice EEG data
The EEG signals of mice with novel knock-in Alzheimer
were recorded intra-cranially from three areas, and then dig-
itized into 12 bit/sample at a sampling rate of 200 Hz and
1000 Hz respectively. Each data segment contains 5 minutes
of gathered EEG signals, captured using the University of
York/Cybula Neural Acquisition Tracker (NAT-1) device.
IV.
RESULT ANALYSIS
To evaluate the performance of Log2 Sub-band encoding,
the results from Huffman coding are used as a benchmark
baseline. The compression ratio (CR) in the following analysis
is deﬁned as the size of original data vs compressed data such
that:
CR = SizeOriginal/SizeCompressed
(1)
A. Huffman Coding
Optimal Huffman coding requires the probability distribu-
tion of signal samples to be known before compressing the
data, and to achieve real time compression, a ﬁle-independent
codebook was trained with 40 EEG data fragments from both
healthy people and epilepsy patients in advance using the
described data sets. To degrade the inter-channel correlation
and minimize the size of codebook, DPCM was applied before
conducting the Huffman coding, and it also renders better
results than solely using Huffman coding [7]. Twenty EEG data
fragments from healthy people with eyes closed and twenty
more from patients epileptogenic zone were tested, and a CR
of 1.82 was achieved from the former and 2.2 from the latter.
The lowest CR of 1.51 was observed with unstable seizure
signals. And the results are shown in Table I.
B. Log2 Sub-band encoding
As it is shown in Fig. 2, the type of data and sampling
frequency have signiﬁcant impacts on the performance of this
technique, but in all cases the Log2 Sub-band method is
superior to Huffman by between roughly an order of 5% to
15% better. Apparently, both Log2 Sub-band encoding and
Huffman coding perform better when processing the signals
with less ﬂuctuations and higher similarity of adjacent samples.
Huffman coding is less capable to process some bioelectric
signals with a large value range since the more values they
contain the longer the codes required for less frequent samples.
However, Log2 Sub-band encoding is adaptive to all these
signals without the need to modify the basic circuit design
for each case.
Considering different results the technique delivered, it is
worth looking into the changes of source signals that can be
reﬂected by this compression technique. For instance, Fig.
3 and Fig. 4 are the distributions of length of transmitted
data from healthy people and seizure periods. Healthy peoples
EEG signals are relatively smooth so that most data samples
were transmitted with 1 or 2 nibbles (76.5%), but there is
an apparent drop to the number of 1 nibble data samples
while compressing the seizure signals (31.0% to 22.0%). This
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure. 2.
Compression ratios
TABLE I
SIMULATION RESULTS
Data Type
CR of Log2
CR of Huffman
Sub-band Encoding
and DPCM
Healthy people
with eyes closed
1.94
1.82
Patients’ epileptogenic zone
2.58
2.20
Seizure
1.66
1.51
Mice data@1000Hz
1.55
N/A
Mice data@200Hz
1.41
N/A
Figure. 3.
The distribution of the length of transmitted healthy peoples data
samples
noticeable discrepancy could be used to warn the caregivers
that patients physical conditions might have changed. And this
preliminary pattern recognition will not add on more workload
to the system.
To reduce the power consumption is the primary purpose of
introducing this encoding method. An off-the- shelf Bluetooth
transceiver nRF8001 [10] is chosen to evaluate its effect. The
power of this transceiver is 22mW, and it takes 22nJ to transmit
1 bit data. Considering the lowest CR (1.41) reached earlier,
which is around 30% of size reduction, and if uncompressed
data were supposed to be transmitted at 64Kb/s, this encoding
method would bring at least 200µW′s power saving before
introducing the power overhead of the compression itself.
Hence, as long as the compression circuit consumes less
than 200µW a signiﬁcant saving might be obtained for each
recorded channel.
Figure. 4.
The distribution of the length of transmitted seizures data samples
Figure. 5.
Simpliﬁed Hardware Design
V.
HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION
A simpliﬁed hardware design of this encoding method for
processing the EEG signals above mentioned is shown in Fig.
5. Current sample and previous sample are loaded respectively,
and different sub-bands (chunks) are sent to logic gates to
compare, with the result used to determine the header and to
control a shifter that shifts right number of bits to transmit.
The number of bits represents the data payload of 0,4,8, or
12 bits, and the header of 2 bits in each case. In this case, it
would therefore be a total symbol length of 2 bits, 6 bits, 10
bits, and 14 bits.
VI.
CONCLUSION
As mentioned earlier, Log2 Sub-band encoding has a
better performance on EEG data and simpler hardware design
compare with other current techniques, based upon our initial
evaluations. Since bioelectric signals share many common
behaviors, we can anticipate that the Log2 Sub-Band method
can be applied widely to other signals besides EEG, and a
more diverse analysis would be very desirable. Improvements
to the system may be possible. We have already considered
the possibility of variable-sub-band encoding, such that the
width of bands can be varied in such a way as to ensure
that the distribution of changes in each band is optimized, for
instance {3,3,4,6} might be better for some signal types with
a resolution of 16-bit. Meanwhile, the possibility of switching
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

between two encodings depending upon the relative activity
or idleness of signal behavior might permit higher overall
compression rates with relatively minimal circuit changes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We are grateful for access to the mouse EEG data supplied
by the Institute of Medical Sciences, Univerysity of Aberdeen.
Mouse data was recorded using the NAT-1 device, de-
veloped by University of York and Cybula Ltd. This device
was developed with support from the UK Technology Strategy
Board.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Boquete et al., “A portable wireless biometric multi-channel system,”
Measurement, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 1587–1598, Jul. 2012.
[2]
U. Hoffmann, J.-M. Vesin, T. Ebrahimi, and K. Diserens, “An efﬁcient
P300-based brain-computer interface for disabled subjects.” Journal of
neuroscience methods, vol. 167, no. 1, pp. 115–25, Jan. 2008.
[3]
W. Optimization, L. Brechet, M.-f. Lucas, C. Doncarli, and D. Farina,
“Compression of Biomedical Signals With Mother Wavelet Packet
Selection,” IEEE transactions on bio-medical engineering, vol. 54,
no. 12, pp. 2186–2192, 2007.
[4]
G. Antoniol and P. Tonella, “EEG data compression techniques.” IEEE
transactions on bio-medical engineering, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 105–14,
Feb. 1997.
[5]
D. O’Shea and R. McSweeney, “Efﬁcient Implementation of Arithmetic
Compression for EEG,” IET Proceedings of Irish, 2011.
[6]
N. Sriraam, “A high-performance lossless compression scheme for
EEG signals using wavelet transform and neural network predictors.”
International journal of telemedicine and applications, vol. 2012, p.
302581, Jan. 2012.
[7]
Y. Wongsawat, S. Oraintara, T. Tanaka, and K. Rao, “Lossless Multi-
channel EEG Compression,” 2006 IEEE International Symposium on
Circuits and Systems, vol. 6, pp. 1611–1614, 2006.
[8]
R. Andrzejak, K. Lehnertz, F. Mormann, C. Rieke, P. David, and
C. Elger, “Indications of nonlinear deterministic and ﬁnite-dimensional
structures in time series of brain electrical activity: Dependence on
recording region and brain state,” Physical Review E, vol. 64, no. 6, p.
061907, Nov. 2001.
[9]
B. Platt et al., “Abnormal cognition, sleep, EEG and brain metabolism
in a novel knock-in Alzheimer mouse, PLB1.” PloS one, vol. 6, no. 11,
p. e27068, Jan. 2011.
[10]
“nRF8001
Bluetooth R⃝
low
energy
Connectivity
IC,”
http://www.nordicsemi.com/eng/Products/Bluetooth-R-low-
energy/nRF8001, 2012, [Online; accessed 09-April-2013].
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

