Azimuth Angle Estimation Using a Dual Accelerometer Vector Sensor with Active and
Passive Underwater Signals
Paulo Santos
Paulo Felisberto
and S´ergio M. Jesus
LARSyS
University of Algarve
Campus de Gambelas
8005-139, Faro, PORTUGAL
Email: {pjsantos,pfelis,sjesus}@ualg.pt
Friedrich Zabel
MarSensing Lda
Campus de Gambelas
8005-139 Faro, PORTUGAL
Email: fredz@marsensing.com
An´ıbal Matos
INESC TEC
Technology and Science
Porto, PORTUGAL
Email: anibal@fe.up.pt
Abstract—During decades, the direction of arrival estimation, in
terms of azimuth and elevation angles, have been obtained using
the pressure acquired with hydrophones or arrays of hydrop-
hones. More recently, the particle velocity information became
important in this research area, since the left/right ambiguity can
be canceled when Vector Sensors (VS) or VS Arrays (VSA) are
used, due to their high spatial directivity. The main objective of
this paper is to estimate azimuth angles using a prototype called
Dual Accelerometer Vector Sensor (DAVS) with active and passive
underwater signals. The DAVS consists of a pressure sensor and
two tri-axial accelerometers arranged in a compact unit. The
advantage of this equipment is its portability and autonomy.
Therefore, it can be easily deployed or embarked in a moving
platform. The experimental data results presented in this paper
were obtained during the REX’17 experiment where: 1) the
DAVS was mounted in an AUV for azimuth angles estimation
using active signals and 2) the DAVS was moored in a ﬁxed
position collecting passive signals from sources of opportunity.
The azimuth estimation results are stable during time, for both
active and passive signals, leading to the conclusion that this
compact device may be used for platforms self-localization and
in operations involving target detection.
Keywords–Azimuth angle estimation; Vector Sensor signal pro-
cessing; Intensity based method, Pressure and particle velocity
combination.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The localization of sources in terms of azimuth and
elevation angles estimation has been, traditionally, obtained
using hydrophones or arrays of hydrophones. However, the
directional information of sound ﬁeld can be easily obtained
using a Vector Sensor (VS). VSs are devices capable of
measuring the particle velocity in the three axes and also
the pressure, when a hydrophone is collocated. The particle
velocity components can be obtained from pressure gradient
for each axis or by using tri-axial accelerometers, currently the
most common device. The advantage of VS is that it captures
more information at a single point of space than a hydrophone,
providing high spatial directivity.
Theoretical works involving VS appeared in the 90’s, ﬁrst
for sound propagation in the air [1] and then for underwater
acoustic sound propagation [2], [3]. The spatial ﬁltering capa-
bilities of VS for Direction of Arrival (DOA) estimation clearly
outperforms acoustic pressure only (scalar) hydrophones. The
combination of several Vector Sensors in an Array (VSA)
can be used to estimate both azimuth and elevation angles,
eliminating the well know left/right ambiguity that exists
with linear hydrophone arrays [4]. Taking advantage of its
directionality and its high performance in DOA estimation,
the use of VS became a subject of investigation [5]–[8].
Different methods and different estimators for DOA with
arrays of hydrophones and VSs appeared in scientiﬁc commu-
nity [9]–[11], but the DOA can be achieved by using a single
vector sensor. Therefore, research on a single VS processing
has begun to appear in underwater acoustic applications. The
azimuth angle estimation based on an Intensity method using
a single VS was published in [12]. This work illustrates the
spatial ﬁltering capabilities of a single VS applied to source
localization of a known broadband source signal. In order to
reduce the complexity of arrays and taking into account the
information obtained from a single VS, a Dual Accelerometer
Vector Sensor (DAVS) was developed during the framework
of the WiMUST European project [13]. The DAVS is a
compact sensor, composed of a hydrophone (pressure sensor)
and two particle velocity sensors (tri-axial accelerometers)
aligned in a vertical axis. This compact sensor allows for easy
mounting and operation on Autonomous Underwater Vehicles
(AUV’s). The use of a dual accelerometer conﬁguration with
a single hydrophone was based on previous studies [14].
They showed that, depending on the application, particle
velocity can be combined with the pressure with advantage
for DOA estimation or with particle velocity difference for
bottom characterization improvements. This conﬁguration is
already proven to be a good solution for azimuth estimation
of active signals when mounted on AUV [15] or for bottom
characterization [16]. The novelty of this work is that the
azimuth angle estimation is determined for passive signals
when DAVS was moored.
The objective of this work is to present results for azimuth
angle estimation using active and passive signals for target
detection. The experimental data were acquired with the DAVS
system during the REX’17 Sea trial. The REX’17 experiment
was organized by the Portuguese Navy and was carried out
in the area of Lisbon Naval Base (BNL), Alfeite, Portugal,
between the 11th and the 13th of July 2017. The DAVS
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

was mounted on the MARES AUV from INESC-TEC, Porto,
and acquired signals from a Lubell source for platform self-
localization. Moreover, the DAVS was anchored to collect
passive signals for detection and to follow “intruders”.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes
the dual accelerometer vector sensor - DAVS system, used
in this work; Section 3 makes an overview of the REX’17
experiment setup and the equipment used; Section 4 presents
the experimental data analysis for one mission of the MARES
AUV trajectory and for one run of a boat passing near the
DAVS location, in terms of received and processed signals,
presenting the azimuth estimation results and, ﬁnally, Section
5 draws conclusions of this work.
II.
DAVS - DUAL ACCELEROMETER VECTOR SENSOR
The DAVS system prototype was developed in the frame-
work of the WiMUST European project [13], which aimed to
simplify and to improve the efﬁcacy of actual geo-acoustic
surveys through the use of AUV’s. Bearing in mind this
objective and in order to streamline underwater operations,
the DAVS was designed as a compact and portable equipment
for underwater parameters estimation, as for example DOA
estimation. The simplicity of this system allows it to be easily
moored or embarked in mobile platforms such as AUV’s.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1. A photo of the Dual Accelerometer Vector Sensor (DAVS) system
(a) and the internal view of the acoustic sensing part (black nose), where it
is seen the two accelerometers (gray blocks, numbered as #49 and #50) and
the hydrophone (yellow cylindrical) and their position relatively to the
Cartesian coordinate system (b). The x-axis is pointing to the front nose, the
y-axis is pointing out of the paper and the z-axis is pointing from the #49 to
the #50 accelerometer.
Figure 1 (a) shows a photo of the DAVS system where there
can be seen two main parts: the acoustic sensing part (black
nose) and the container (white tube). The total length of the
device is 585 mm and its diameter is 65 mm, having the black
nose a length of 101,5 mm, as seen in the photo. The acoustic
sensing part is constituted by two tri-axial accelerometers
from PCB Piezotronics (gray blocks) and by an in-house built
end-cupped cylindrical hydrophone made of PZT piezoelectric
material (yellow cylindrical component) between them, as
presented in Figure 1 (b). The orientation of the accelerometers
components relatively to the Cartesian coordinate system is
also shown in the insert, where the x-axis is pointing to the
front nose, the y-axis is pointing out of the paper and the z-
axis is pointing from the #49 to the #50 accelerometer. The
container houses all the electronics, the acquisition system and
the batteries. The DAVS system overview, the characteristics of
the sensors, the electronic part, the connections, the acquisition
system and the power supply are described in detail in [13].
The DAVS system could be powered by batteries, when it is
mounted on autonomous mobile platforms, or by cable, when it
is not operated autonomously. The cable is also used to connect
the DAVS to a portable computer for real-time streaming.
Depending on the application, the dual accelerometer con-
ﬁguration permits that, on one hand, the particle velocity from
each accelerometer output could be combined with the pressure
for azimuth and elevation angle estimation, or on the other
hand, the particle velocity can be combined with the particle
velocity difference for bottom characterization improvement
[16].
III.
REX’17 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The REX’17 experiment was organized by the Portuguese
Navy in collaboration with the Naval School, where the Naval
Base of Alfeite (BNL) facilities in Lisbon were made available
for research operations. The objectives of this experiment were
to evaluate the DAVS behavior when moored or mounted
on the MARES AUV from INESC-TEC, Porto [17], for
seabed exploration, bottom characterization and for intruders
detection. In this work, it will be presented experimental results
for azimuth angle estimation, using active and passive signals.
The operations were conducted in the area of BNL, bet-
ween 11th and 13th of July, 2017. Figure 2 shows a satellite
Figure 2. Satellite view of the test area where the location of the acoustic
source during event 1 and the DAVS location on event 2, as well as the
reference mark in the pier are included.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

view of the test area where the location of the source (for active
signals transmissions) and the DAVS (when is moored) were
included. The mark located on the pier was used as reference
(origin of the Cartesian coordinate system) for the positioning
and trajectories of the MARES AUV during the experiment. At
the source location, it was estimated that the water depth varied
approximately from 4.5 m to 6.5 m, while the bathymetry of
the area is mostly ﬂat. The experimental data presented herein
are related to the events:
1)
Event 1 (EV1) dedicated to platform self-localization
where the DAVS, mounted beneath the MARES AUV,
aquired signals from a sound source moored in a ﬁxed
position, as shown in Figure 2;
2)
Event 2 (EV2) reserved to port security where the
DAVS was moored in a ﬁxed position, acquiring
ambient noise produced by boats in the area.
A. Setup for Event 1
During EV1 the DAVS was mounted beneath the MARES
AUV, as shown in Figure 3 (a), such that the two accelero-
meters and the hydrophone were aligned with the vertical z-
axis, being the #50 the shallowest accelerometer. The DAVS
x-y plane is parallel to the experiment X-Y horizontal plane,
where the positive z-axis points upwards and the positive x-
axis points to the sailing direction, as drawn in Figure 3 (b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3. The MARES AUV with the DAVS attached to it in position before
deployment (a). Drawing of the DAVS orientation for EV1 when DAVS was
AUV mounted with X-Y plane (Top view of AUV trajectory) parallel to the
DAVS x-y plane and the accelerometers were aligned with the vertical
z-axis, being the #50th the shallowest one (b).
The signals were emitted by a Lubell 916C source, de-
ployed at 3 m (source location in Figure 2) from the bottom in
a variable water depth due to tide, ranging from approximately
4.5 m to 6.5 m. The emitted signals were a sequence of Linear
Frequency Modulated (LFM) in the 1-3 kHz frequency band,
with a time duration of 100 ms followed by 200 ms of silence.
In the acquisition, these signals were sampled at 10547 Hz.
B. Setup for Event 2
The objective of EV2 was to test the ability of the DAVS
system for DOA estimation to detect and to follow intruders.
For this purpose, the DAVS was moored in a ﬁxed position
(as shown in Figure 2) and acquired signals at constant height
of around 2.5 m from the bottom. In this setup, the x-axis is
pointing to the surface and the horizontal plane is deﬁned by
the DAVS y-z plane as seen in Figure 4. For this event, the
DAVS was powered by cable and the signals were sampled at
52734 Hz.
Figure 4. Drawing of the DAVS orientation for EV2 when the DAVS was
moored with x-axis pointing upward and the accelerometers were in the
horizontal plane parallel to the DAVS y-z plane.
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL DATA ANALYSIS
This section presents the azimuth angle estimation obtained
with the DAVS, considering active and passive signals. The
azimuth angle was evaluated using the Intensity based estima-
tor described in [12]. The processing steps are as follows:
1)
the acceleration components (three for each accele-
rometer) were converted to their respective pressure
equivalent particle velocity component, ﬁrst by using
the Fourier Transform to frequency domain (ω), and
then by using:
ˆVi(ω) = ρ
jk Ai(ω) = ρc
jω Ai(ω),
(1)
where ˆVi(ω) is the pressure equivalent particle velo-
city component, Ai(ω) is the acceleration component
being i = x, y or z-axis, k = ω
c is the wavenumber,
c is the water sound speed, ρ is the water density and
ρc is the scaling factor according to the deﬁnition of
acoustic impedance;
2)
back to time domain, the Intensity estimator is app-
lied [12], where the pressure p(t) is cross-correlated
at lag 0 with vx(t) and with the vy(t) particle velocity
components. Then, an estimation of the azimuthal
direction of the source signal, ΘS at large signal to
noise ratio (SNR) is given by:
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

ˆΘS = arctan 2⟨vy(t)p(t)⟩
⟨vx(t)p(t)⟩,
(2)
where ⟨⟩ stands for time averaging.
A. Azimuth angle estimation with active signals - EV1
Event 1 was dedicated to acquire data to estimate the
azimuth angle for self-localization. The MARES AUV, with
the DAVS mounted (see Figure 3 (a)), executes several paths
navigating near the surface at a constant depth of ≈1.2 m, to
cover an area near the source.
Figure 5 refers to the trajectory of the MARES during
EV1, with an insert showing the DAVS tri-axial system for an
easy observation. The red, yellow, green, cyan and magenta
paths corresponds to the time evolution sequence of almost
10 minutes of DAVS’ acquired data, each path corresponds to
2 minutes of data. As it can be seen, this trajectory is complex
since it has several turns, making it a difﬁcult task for azimuth
estimation.
Figure 5. Top view of MARES AUV trajectory relative to the pier position
at the origin of the coordinate system, marked by green cross and the source
position marked by red asterisk, with the DAVS tri-axial system insert. The
red, yellow, green, cyan and magenta paths of trajectory corresponds to the
time evolution sequence and each color corresponds at 2 minutes of data for
an easy observation.
Figure 6 (a) shows the spectrogram of part of the signal
received on the pressure sensor of DAVS for the beginning of
this trajectory (red path). There can be seen the LFM signals,
emitted by the Lubell source, in the 1-3 kHz frequency band
and also the thruster’s noise produced by the MARES AUV
for frequencies bellow 1 kHz, out of the signal frequency band.
Moreover, it can be clearly seen that the thruster’s noise level
increases, spreading in the signal band around 80 s, due to the
sharp curve in the red path of the trajectory.
The azimuth angle estimation results for this event were
obtained using (2), with an integration time of 300 ms, and
are presented in Figure 6 (b). As observed, the azimuth angle
estimations from both accelerometers (blue dots for #49 and
(a)
(b)
Figure 6. Spectrogram of the received signal on the pressure sensor of
DAVS for the red path of Figure 5 (a) and the estimation of the azimuth
angle between the source and the MARES AUV obtained for both
accelerometers (blue dots for #49 and red dots for #50) with the heading
angle (green dots, considered the ground truth) for the total duration of the
trajectory, around 10 minutes (b). The red, yellow, green, cyan and magenta
arrows of plot (b) corresponds to the paths of Figure 5 with a color
matching to facilitate the analysis.
red dots for #50) are inline and they compare almost the
time with the green dots, obtained from the heading DAVS’s
compass data (considered the ground truth). The exception take
place when the MARES AUV was coming to the surface (end
of red path and begin of green path), where some variability
on the heading angle appeared due to the compass are not in
the horizontal. Then, the projections are differents, producing
the difference between the green dots and the blue and red
dots (estimated from (2)). Despite this, in general, the results
are in line with the trajectory observed in Figure 5. For
an easy analysis of the results, the vertical bars divide the
plot in 5 temporal groups, corresponding to the 5 paths of
the trajectory with a color matching. The various turns are
detected in the results, for example, around 80 s the DAVS
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

is moving away from the source with an azimuth of around
180◦. Then, it executes the ﬁrst curve (in the red path) reducing
the angle to almost 50◦. Another example is the turn in the
cyan path, around 400 s, converging in a straight run, when the
MARES AUV approaches the source at the end of cyan path
and the beginning of magenta path. In this case, the azimuth
angles change from 100◦ to around -10◦ and then to 20◦,
remaining constant. The estimates from both accelerometers
are coincident and they match the green dots (given by the
heading DAVS’s compass data), as seen in Figure 6 (b). From
these results, it can be concluded that the DAVS has a high
directivity even in motion. The azimuth angles of arrival are
detected during long periods of time and the thruster’s noise
does not inﬂuence or disturb the stability of the estimation
results, proving that this compact device is useful for self-
localization even in curves.
B. Azimuth angle estimation with passive signals - EV2
The Event 2 was devoted to acquire signals from sources of
opportunity for port security and “intruders” detection. Since
in this event the horizontal plane is deﬁned by y-z plane, as
shown in Figure 4, equation (2) was rewritten by changing
vx and vy by vy and vz, accordingly. Figure 7 shows the
spectrogram of the received signal, on the pressure sensor of
DAVS, from noise produced by a boat passing near the DAVS
location. It can be seen that the boat passes two times near the
DAVS. After 60 s, the signal is more intense since the boat is
over the location of the DAVS.
Figure 7. Spectrogram of the received signal on the pressure sensor of
DAVS for part of time duration when the signal is detected.
Figure 8 (a) shows a satellite view of the area where the
DAVS is moored with one boat’s run. It can be seen that the
boat passes one time near the DAVS location (on the left),
then goes around and approaches the DAVS location from
south, passing over it. The respective estimation of the azimuth
angle for the run presented in plot (a) is shown in Figure 8
(b). Since the horizontal plane are deﬁned by y-z plane, the
blue dots follow the trajectory, beginning and ending at the
same value, around 50◦. The azimuth angle changes from 50◦,
increasing to 180◦ and then from -180◦ to zero. At the end of
the run, the azimuth changes from 0◦, when the boat is over the
(a)
(b)
Figure 8. Satellite view of the test area with the position of the DAVS
moored with one boat’s runs near it (a) and the estimation of the azimuth
angle for the noise produced by the boat passing near the DAVS for the
respective run (b). These estimation were obtained for both accelerometers
(blue dots for #49 and red dots for #50) for 80 s of time duration.
DAVS location, to positive angles (ﬁrst quadrant), conﬁrming
the boat’s trajectory. Due to (perhaps) the DAVS is not in the
vertical, there are differences between the results from both
accelerometers #49 (blue dots) to #50 (red dots), mainly
at the beginning, that remain constant in time. However, the
results are almost inline with the inserted y and z components
orientation in Figure 8 (a), taking into account that the heading
of the DAVS compass marked 330◦ (the z component was
assumed the origin of the heading). Although, the SNR is
low (where additive rather than multiplicative methods should
be used), the DAVS is able to follow the trajectory of the
boat proving the utility of this device also for passive signals
detection. These results show that the DAVS could be useful
for a real-time port security, where the detection and tracking
of “intruders” are relevant.
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper describes, with experimental data, the utility and
advantage of a built-in house prototype called Dual Accelero-
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

meter Vector Sensor for azimuth angle estimation. This device
was designed to contribute for bottom characterization during
the framework of WiMUST EU project. However, due to its
simplicity and compactness, it can contribute to a quick answer
on azimuth estimation, with advantage for self-localization or
for noise (passive) signals detection.
The experimental data used in this work were acquired by
the DAVS during the REX experiment 2017. The objective of
this experiment was to evaluated the DAVS directivity when it
was in motion or anchored, for self-localization or port security
respectively.
The evaluation of the DAVS directivity in motion was
achieved when the DAVS was mounted on the MARES AUV,
from INESC-TEC, Porto, while signals in the 1-3 kHz band
were emitted by the Lubell source deployed at 3.0 m height
from bottom. The experimental results on the estimation of
azimuth angle for one mission of 10 minutes were analyzed and
these estimates are very stable, equal for both accelerometers
and in line with the heading DAVS’s compass data, considered
the ground truth. Furthermore, they compare favorably the
MARES AUV trajectory, even in the several turns where the
level of thruster’s noise increases.
Moreover, the DAVS was moored, acquiring noise signals
produced by boats near the DAVS location in order to es-
timate the azimuth angle of arrival of sources of opportunity.
Although, the SNR is low and the characteristics of the signals
are unknown, the results showed that the DAVS has advantage
in real-time detection and tracking “the intruders” for port
security. The use of different methods and different approaches
(like additive methods), which combine pressure and particle
velocity for azimuth estimation with passive signals, is the
subject of ongoing research work. The characterization of the
noise in terms of direction of arrival for different frequencies
it will be the next step.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank INESC-TEC, Porto, for
the use of the MARES AUV and providing assistance in
the AUV’s data. The authors also thank the Portuguese navy
for making available the Naval Base of Alfeite facilities for
research operations and thank the support of H2020 project
WiMUST/645141, for providing the DAVS receiver. This work
was supported by FCT project UID/EEA/50009/2013.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Nehorai and E. Paldi, “Vector-sensor array processing for electro-
magnetic source localization,” IEEE Trans. Signal Processing, vol. 42,
no. 2, February 1994, pp. 376–398.
[2]
——, “Acoustic vector-sensor array processing,” IEEE Transaction on
Signal Processing, vol. 42, no. 9, September 1994, pp. 2481–2491.
[3]
M. Hawkes and A. Nehorai, “Acoustic vector-sensor beamforming and
capon direction estimation,” IEEE Trans. Signal Processing, vol. 46,
no. 9, September 1998, pp. 2291–2304.
[4]
C. Wan, A. Kong, and C. Liu, “A comparative study of DOA estimation
using vector/gradient sensors,” in Proceedings of Oceans06, Asia,
Paciﬁc, May 16–19 2007, pp. 1–4.
[5]
J. C. Shipps and B. M. Abraham, “The use of vector sensors for
underwater port and waterway security,” in Proceedings of Sensors
for Industry conference, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, January 27–
29 2004, pp. 41–44.
[6]
K. M. Krishna and G. V. Anand, “Narrowband detection of acoustic
source in shallow ocean using vector sensor array,” in Proceedings of
Oceans 2009 MTS/IEEE, Biloxi,USA, 2009, pp. 1–8.
[7]
P. Santos, P. Felisberto, and S. M. Jesus, “Vector sensor array in
underwater acoustic applications,” in Proceedings of DoCEIS 10, Doc-
toral Conference on Computing, Electrical and Industrial Systems,
L. Camarinha-Matos, P. Pereira, and L. Ribeiro, Eds., vol. 314.
Ca-
parica, Lisbon, Portugal: Springer Boston, February 22–24 2010, pp.
316–323.
[8]
P. Felisberto, P. Santos, and S. M. Jesus, “Traking source azimuth using
a single vector sensor,” in Proceedings of 4th Int. Conference on Sensor
Technologies and Applications, Venice, Italy, July 2010, pp. 416–421.
[9]
S. Miron, N. L. Bihan, and J. I. Mars, “Vector-sensor MUSIC for
polarized seismic sources localization,” EURASIP J. Appl. Signal
Process., vol. 2005, January 2005, pp. 74–84.
[10]
V. N. Hari, G. V. Anand, A. B. Premkumar, and A. S. Madhukumar,
“Underwatyer signal detection in partially known ocean using short
acoustic vector sensor array,” in Proceedings of Oceans 11 IEEE/OES
Santander Conference.
Santander, Spain: IEEE, June 6–9 2011, pp.
1–9.
[11]
K. N. Ramamohan, M. Coutinho, S. P. Chepuri, D. F. Comesa˜na, and
G. Leus, “DOA estimation and beamforming using spatially under-
sampled AVS arrays,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Workshop
on Computational Advances in Multi-Sensor Adaptive Processing.
CAMSAP’17, December 10–13 2017.
[12]
P. Felisberto, O. C. Rodr´ıguez, P. Santos, E. Ey, and S. M. Jesus,
“Experimental results of underwater cooperative source localization
using a single acoustic vector sensor,” Sensors, vol. 13, no. 7, July
2013, pp. 8856–8878.
[13]
A. Mantouka, P. Felisberto, P. Santos, F. Zabel, M. Saleiro, S. M. Jesus,
and L. Sebasti˜ao, “Development and testing of a dual accelerometer
vector sensor for auv acoustic surveys,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 1328,
2017, pp. 1–12.
[14]
P. Felisberto, P. Santos, and S. M. Jesus, “Acoustic pressure and particle
velocity for spatial ﬁltering of bottom arrivals,” IEEE Journal of Oceanic
Engineering, vol. online, March 2018, pp. 1–14.
[15]
P. Santos, P. Felisberto, F. Zabel, S. M. Jesus, and L. Sebasti˜ao, “Dual
accelerometer vector sensor mounted on an auv - experimental results,”
in Proceedings of Meetings on Acoustics (POMA), vol. 30. Acoustical
Society of America, 2017, p. 0055011.
[16]
——, “Testing of the dual accelerometer vector sensor mounted on an
autonomous underwater vehicle,” in Proceedings of 4th International
Underwater Acoustics Conference and Exhibition.
UACE’17, Sep-
tember 3–8 2017.
[17]
P.
Ramos,
N.
Cruz,
and
A.
Matos,
“The
MARES AUV,
a
modular
autonomous
robot
for
environment
sampling,”
http://repositorio.inesctec.pt/handle/123456789/5004,
last
accessed
July, 2018.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

