On The Problem of Energy Efﬁcient Mechanisms Based on Data Reduction in
Wireless Body Sensor Networks
Carol Habib, Abdallah Makhoul, and Rapha¨el Couturier
Femto-st institute,
Univ. Bourgogne Franche-Comt´e,
19 av du Marchal Juin,
90000 Belfort, France,
ﬁrstname.lastname@univ-fcomte.fr
Rony Darazi
TICKET Lab,
Antonine University,
Hadat-Baabda,
Lebanon,
ﬁrstname.lastname@ua.edu.lb
Abstract—Wireless Body Sensor Networks have emerged as a
low-cost solution for healthcare applications and telemedicine
solutions replacing unnecessary hospitalization and ensuring
continous health monitoring. Many challenges exist in such
a network, especially because the sensor nodes have limited
resources. In this paper, the energy consumption problem
due to periodic transmission is targeted. We present a work
in progress on energy-efﬁcient mechanisms based on data
reduction for body sensor networks. Many approaches have
been proposed in the literature that aim to reduce the size
and the amount of data collected and sent via the network.
Our main idea in this paper is to confront Compressive
Sensing (CS) and adaptive sampling techniques in order to
come out with a problem formulation and a comprehensive
comparison. The objective is to show if the adaptive sampling
approach which is based on on-node processing ensure a
better Performance/Energy trade-off than CS theory applied
on biosignals.
Keywords-Wireless Body Sensor Networks, Energy Con-
sumption, Compressive Sensing, Adaptive Sampling
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless Body Sensor Networks (WBSNs), a subset of
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs), have been gaining pop-
ularity in the last decade due to the potential they bring out in
telemedicine solutions. They are mainly composed of sensor
nodes deployed on the patient’s body as wearables and
a coordinator. The former sense and collect physiological
measurements such as the heart rate, the blood pressure and
the ECG etc. The latter receives the collected measurements
and signals from the sensor nodes for fusion and manages
the whole network.
The fusion process, depending on the monitoring scenario
and application needs, includes: the detection of emergen-
cies, the identiﬁcation/detection of the patient’s medical
and/or physical status, the making of a diagnosis, the making
of health decisions, the aggregation of the collected data
before transmission to a higher level such as a sink or a
server for storage and further processing.
Many challenges exist in such a network, especially
because the sensor nodes have limited power, storage and
processing resources. Energy consumption is one of the
main issues given that WBSNs are characterized by periodic
power consuming transmission of huge amounts of collected
data namely signals and measurements. Many approaches
concerning energy-efﬁcient models and mechanisms have
been proposed in the literature [1] [2] [3] [4] [5]. Data
reduction is one of the means ensuring an efﬁcient usage
of the transmission unit of the sensor nodes and energy
savings in the whole network. On the one hand, we have
proposed in previous works [6] [7] an adaptive sampling
rate model at the sensor node level. The approach aims at
periodically specifying the amount of measurements to be
collected by each sensor node depending on the variations
presented by each vital sign in the last two periods. Further-
more, the amount of transmitted measurements is reduced
by employing an early warning score system. Thus, only
measurements indicating a change in the status of the vital
sign are sent to the coordinator. On the other hand, many
approaches [3] [4] [8] [5] [9] based on Compressive Sensing
(CS) have been proposed in the literature due to its potential.
CS guarantees the reconstruction of sparse signals such as
the ECG while largely reducing the amount of sampled data.
Thus, it reduces the amount of wirelessly transmitted data
and consequently the energy consumption on the sensor node
level.
In this paper, we present a work in progress on energy-
efﬁcient mechanisms based on data reduction for body
sensor networks. Our objective is to confront adaptive sam-
pling and CS as two different approaches ensuring energy-
efﬁciency in WBSNs and come out with a problem for-
mulation. Several CS approaches and data samling methods
are compared in order to give open research issues in this
domain.
The remainder of the paper is oragnized as follows. In
Section II, the components of the sensor nodes are presented
and their energy characteristic is dicussed. In Section III, a
classiﬁcation of the energy-efﬁcient mechanisms from the
literature is given. In Section IV, a previsouly proposed
method which is based on adaptive sampling is brieﬂy
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

discussed. In Section V, compressive sensing is deﬁned and
different approaches from the literature are exlpained and
compared. In SectionVI, further discussions are presented
and the problem is formulated. Finally, Section VII con-
cludes the paper.
II. WIRELESS SENSOR NODES: COMPONENTS AND
ENERGY CHARACTERISTIC
A wireless sensor node is constituted of three components:
the sensing unit, the processing unit and the transmission
unit. All three units need power to perform their tasks (see
Figure 1) [10]. Yet, transmission is considered to be the
most power-hungry task. The sensing unit is composed of
the sensor and the ADC (Analogic-Digital Convertor) which
converts the analog signal sensed with a given frequency
(Nyquist-Shannon)[11] into a digital signal. The latter is fed
to the processing unit, including a processor and a memory,
where the digital signal processing algorithms are run.
These include: compressive sensing, traditional compression
techniques, feature extraction in the temporal and frequential
domains, vital signs extraction (calculation) such as heart
rate, classiﬁcation, and other on-node processing algorithms.
Furthermore, the processor controls the sensing and the
transmission units and it activates and/or changes their
status according to the application and the used protocol.
Many energy-efﬁcient mechanisms have been proposed in
the literature, namely for WBSNs.
Figure 1.
A wireless sensor node
III. CLASSIFICATION OF ENERGY-EFFICIENT
MECHANISMS IN WSNS
Energy-efﬁcient mechanisms dedicated to wireless sensor
networks are classiﬁed into ﬁve categories as follows [12]:
• Data reduction approaches: Aggregation, adaptive sam-
pling, compression and network coding.
• Sleep/Wakeup schemes: Duty-cycling, passive wake-up
radio, scheduled based MAC protocols and topology
control.
• Radio optimization techniques:transmission power con-
trol, modulation optimization, cooperative communica-
tion, directional antennas and energy efﬁcient cognitive
radio.
• Energy-efﬁcient routing methods: cluster architectures,
energy as a routing metric, multipath routing, relay
node placement and sink mobility.
• Battery repletion: energy harvesting and wireless charg-
ing.
These approaches can be split up into software and hard-
ware strategies [1]. In addition, some of these mechanisms
are suitable for large scale networks such as environmen-
tal monitoring, industry, public safety of military systems
etc. applications. Thus, they cannot be applied in WBSNs
where the network characteristics are different. For example,
energy-efﬁcient routing methods as well as transmission
power control and topology control approaches cannot be
directly used in WBSNs [2]. Many existing approaches
have used context-awareness based on activity recognition
to perform adaptive sampling or adaptive sensing. Some of
them applied these approaches only on WBSNs composed
of inertial detection sensor nodes such as accelerometers and
gyroscopes [2]. Others used activity recognition to adapt the
sensing rate of a vita sign of interest in the context of a give
disease [13].
IV. ADAPTIVE SAMPLING AS AN ENERGY-EFFICIENT
MECHANISM
In order to increase the network lifetime and to reduce the
huge amount of the collected data adaptive data collection
models have been proposed in the litterature [14] [15] [6].
The main idea behind these models is to allow each sensor
node to adapt its sampling rate to the physical changing
dynamics of the monitored phenomenon. In this way, the
oversampling can be minimized and the power efﬁciency of
the overall network system can be further improved.
In [6], we proposed a distributed self-adaptive data col-
lection approach in the context of WBSNs. Two contribu-
tions have been highlighted. First, a local detection system
based on an early warning score system is proposed to
be used on the biosensor node. The latter reduces the
amount of transmitted data by only sending detected changes
in the monitored vital sign measurements. Thus, reduc-
ing the amount of redundant information as well as the
overall amount of transmitted measurements. Changes in
vital signs are identiﬁed when the local detection system
detects a change in the score of the measurement indicating
a deterioration or improvement of the status of the vital
sign. Second, an adaptive sampling rate schema, having a
direct impact on the sensing task of the biosensor node,
has been proposed. Using a Quadratic Bezier Curve as a
BehaVior (BV) Function [14] [15], it takes into account two
parameters: the evolution of the monitored vital sign over
time and its monitoring importance, based on a medical
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

judgment, regarding the patient’s health condition. These
parameters are, respectively, determined by the Fisher Test
and One-way ANOVA model[15] which study the variances
of the sensed measurements over time and by a risk level
variable r0 whose values range between 0 and 1. We have
deﬁned two risk levels, pointing out the importance of a
given vital sign to be monitored knowing the patient’s health
condition:
• Low Risk: 0 ≤ r0 < 0.5
• High Risk: 0.5 ≤ r0 ≤ 1
However, the overall health condition of a patient, being
continuously and remotely monitored on a long-term basis,
changes over time. It is subject to many health events
which can be acute or even chronic. Thus, it can vary
from day to day as well as from an improvement state
into a deterioration state and vice versa. As a consequence,
the monitoring importance given to each vital sign should
be adapted with these changing conditions. This matter,
has a direct inﬂuence on the sensing and processing tasks;
therefore on the energy consumption of the WBSN and the
early detection of critical events. In another work [7], we
have proposed to dynamically adapt the risk level r0 of a
vital sign according to the health condition of the patient.
Thus, the corresponding biosensor node will be given a
higher risk level r0 when the health condition of the patient
is at a higher risk and it will be given a lower risk level
r0 when the health condition of the patient is at a lower
risk. The proposed distributed and on-node approach is a
software-based strategy and it belongs to the data reduction
category.
V. COMPRESSIVE SENSING
In the recent years, Compressive Sensing (CS) theory
emerged as an energy-efﬁcient approach for wireless
communication.
Capitalizing
on
signal
sparsity,
CS
guarantees an accurate signal reconstruction by sampling
signals at a much lower rate than the traditional Shannon-
Nyquist theorem. Thus, it has the potential to dramatically
reduce
the
power
consumption
since
the
amount
of
wirelessly
transmitted
data
is
considerably
reduced.
Furthermore, it reduces the amount of resources required
for processing and storage and it promises signiﬁcant
compression rates while using computationally light linear
encoders compared to traditional compression methods.
CS theory has been applied in diverse domains including
WSNs. Particularly, many contributions based on CS theory
have been proposed in the literature so far for WBSNs due
to the fact that biosignals such as the ECG are sparse [9],
[5], [8], [4], [3].
Mamaghanian et al. [9] have proposed compressed sens-
ing for real-time and energy-efﬁcient ECG compression.
They have demonstrated that CS extends the node’s lifetime
of about 37.1 % compared to the traditional compression
method by DWT (Discrete Wavelet Transform). This is
mainly due to the fact that the former requires less com-
putation for the code execution than the latter. The have
used Shimmer motes for the validation of their proposal.
However, they have clearly stated that they have proposed
”digital CS” which takes place after the ADC, thus raw
samples are sensed at a Nyquist rate and only digital samples
are sampled using CS theory. In accordance, the results
showed that the node’s lifetime extension is only 6 %
compared to no compression at all. This is due to the amount
of energy consumed to execute the code. Therefore, ”analog
CS” remains the ultimate goal, where the compression
occurs in the analog sensor read-out prior to ADC. It would
then reduce the energy consumption due to sampling and
running the OS. Unfortunately, it still requires extensive
work.
Faust et al. [5] have proposed to apply CS for heart
rate(HR) monitoring. They have demonstrated that the ECG
signal after the R-wave form extraction is a sparse signal
in the time domain, thus the CS theory is applicable. The
latter shows the spikes in the ECG signal which indicate a
heart beat, thus the HR can be calculated from this signal.
However, the density of the ECG signal changes from a
disease to another thus, CS does not provide a good signal
reconstruction for all types of ECG. They have concluded
by proposing an implementation of their system on sensor
nodes at the analog level.
Wang et al. [3] have proposed a conﬁgurable energy-
efﬁcient compressed sensing architecture for wireless body
sensor networks. They have focused on the effect of the
quantization in CS and studied the impact of the sampling
rate M as well as the number of quantization bits b on
the energy consumption. They have proposed an algorithm
which ﬁnds the best conﬁguration pair (M,b) meeting the
performance-energy trade-off requirement. However, the au-
thors only studied the energy consumption due to transmis-
sion and did not mention the power resources required for
sensing and processing the data. The results showed very
close energy consumption when comparing traditional CS
and conﬁgurable CS, however, the latter showed much better
reconstruction error rates. Figure 2 summarizes the three
works chosen from the literature.
VI. FURTHER DISCUSSION AND PROBLEM
FORMULATION
All the CS approaches that have been previously discussed
as well as the proposed approach contribute on the digital
signal processing level. All of them focus on reducing the
energy consumption due to transmission by reducing the
amount of wirelessly transmitted data. The CS approaches
reduce the sampling rate used to sample the digital signal,
thus reducing the amount of samples to be transmitted.
The proposed adaptive sampling approach, as described in
section IV, is twofold:
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure 2.
Compressive Sensing approaches in the context of wireless body sensor networks taken from the literature.
• Adaptation of the sampling rate: It adapts the sampling
rate at which a vital sign is extracted(calculated mea-
surement) from the digital signal.
• Local Detection: It transmits the calculated measure-
ment of a vital sign only if its score indicates a change
in the status of the vital sign.
The adaptation of the sampling rate is done based on vital
signs, which are in most of the cases calculated based on raw
sensed signals. For example the HR (bmp) is calculated from
the R-wave extraction of the ECG signal. Thus, the adapta-
tion of sampling rate indicates at what rate (time interval)
the processor should process a new vital sign measurement,
regardless the sensing frequency of the sensor node which
is usually ﬁxed by the type of the raw biosignal. However,
the adaptation of the sampling rate can be extended to
not only impact the processing of a new measurement but
also to manage the sensing task of the sensing unit. In
other words, it could allow the sensor node to control
the sensing unit by activating/desactivating the sensor each
time interval δt based on the adaptation of the sampling
rate. However, this still needs extensive work in terms of
delay and power consumption especially if it needs to be
implemented on a real architecture where some hardware
limitations might exist. Finally, none of the approaches
contribute directly on the analog raw signal aquired by the
sensor nor on the sensing frequency, thus none reduces the
energy consumption due to sensing. Nevertheless, all of the
approaches can be adapted in order to do so. However, the
CS approaches face hardware limitations as for the proposed
approach it can be extended to control the sensing tasks by
activiting/desactivating the sensor.
Since, the chosen approaches from the literature and
the proposed approach have one common goal: reduce the
energy consumption due to transmission. Furthermore, for
the following reasons:
• All of the techniques are software-based.
• All of them rely on data reduction mechanisms.
• All of them contribute on the same level: digital signal
processing.
Then, the adaptive sampling approach is comparable to
the chosen approaches from the literature. The only dif-
ference remains in that the CS theory is complemented by
a reconstructionn algorithm at the base station in order to
reconstruct the sensed biosignal for further processing.
The open question can be formalized as follows: Does
the adaptive sampling approach which is based on on-node
processing (extraction of vital signs from biosignals and
local detection) ensure a better Performance/Energy trade-
off than CS theory applied on biosignals ?
The performance metric englobes: the detection of critical
events, the detection of improving/worsening conditions,
the reduction of redundant data, execution time of the
code, complexity. The energy metric includes: the energy
consumption due to sensing (if our approach is extended),
and especially the energy consumption due to processing
(executing the code) and transmitting.
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented a work in progress on energy-
efﬁcient mechanisms based on data reduction for body
sensor networks. We reviewed compressive sensing and
adaptive sampling approaches that have been proposed in
order to reduce the amount of data collected and transmitted
over the network. We provided a discussion about the
differences and the advantages of the different techniques
and we formalized an open question concerning tha data
compression in body sensor networks.
Our main objective for future work is to reduce the
number of bits needed to represent the sensed data prior to
transmission, while taking into consideration the trade-off
between the computational cost and the compression ratio.
Then, we intend to combine the compressive data model
with an adaptive sampling technique to further reduce the
collected data prior to transmission.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is partially funded with support from the
National Council for Scientiﬁc Research in Lebanon, the
Labex ACTION program (contract ANR-11-LABX-01-01),
and the Lebanese University research program
REFERENCES
[1] M. Magno, T. Polonelli, F. Casamassima, A. Gomez,
E. Farella, and L. Benini, “Energy-efﬁcient context aware
power management with asynchronous protocol for body
sensor network,” Mobile Networks and Applications, pp. 1–
11, 2016.
[2] S.-Y. Chen, C.-F. Lai, R.-H. Hwang, Y.-H. Lai, and M.-S.
Wang, “An adaptive sensor data segments selection method
for wearable health care services,” Journal of medical sys-
tems, vol. 39, no. 12, p. 194, 2015.
[3] A. Wang, F. Lin, Z. Jin, and W. Xu, “A conﬁgurable energy-
efﬁcient compressed sensing architecture with its application
on body sensor networks,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 15–27, 2016.
[4] S. Li, L. Da Xu, and X. Wang, “Compressed sensing signal
and data acquisition in wireless sensor networks and inter-
net of things,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2177–2186, 2013.
[5] O. Faust, U. R. Acharya, J. Ma, L. C. Min, and T. Tamura,
“Compressed sampling for heart rate monitoring,” Computer
methods and programs in biomedicine, vol. 108, no. 3, pp.
1191–1198, 2012.
[6] C. Habib, A. Makhoul, R. Darazi, and C. Salim, “Self-
adaptive data collection and fusion for health monitoring
based on body sensor networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 2342–2352, 2016.
[7] ——, “Real-time sampling rate adaptation based on continu-
ous risk level evaluation in wireless body sensor networks,”
August 2017.
[8] S. Li, L. Da Xu, and X. Wang, “A continuous biomedical
signal acquisition system based on compressed sensing in
body sensor networks,” IEEE transactions on industrial in-
formatics, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1764–1771, 2013.
[9] H. Mamaghanian, N. Khaled, D. Atienza, and P. Van-
dergheynst,
“Compressed
sensing
for
real-time
energy-
efﬁcient ecg compression on wireless body sensor nodes,”
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 58, no. 9,
pp. 2456–2466, 2011.
[10] I. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci,
“Wireless sensor networks: a survey,” Computer Networks,
vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 393 – 422, 2002.
[11] A. J. Jerri, “The shannon sampling theoremits various exten-
sions and applications: A tutorial review,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 65, no. 11, pp. 1565–1596, 1977.
[12] T. Rault, A. Bouabdallah, and Y. Challal, “Energy efﬁciency
in wireless sensor networks: A top-down survey,” Computer
Networks, vol. 67, pp. 104–122, 2014.
[13] X. Qi, M. Keally, G. Zhou, Y. Li, and Z. Ren, “Adasense:
Adapting sampling rates for activity recognition in body
sensor networks,” 2013 IEEE 19th Real-Time and Embedded
Technology and Applications Symposium (RTAS), pp. 163–
172, 2013.
[14] A. Makhoul, H. Harb, and D. Laiymani, “Residual energy-
based adaptive data collection approach for periodic sensor
networks,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 35, pp. 149–160, 2015.
[15] D. Laiymani and A. Makhoul, “Adaptive data collection ap-
proach for periodic sensor networks,” 2013 9th International
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference,
IWCMC 2013, Sardinia, Italy, July 1-5, 2013, pp. 1448–1453,
2013.
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

