Study on the Performance of 
Sensitive Part of Bridge Type Ultra-Thin Film Hydrogen Sensor
Takahiro Mori, Shoki Wakabayashi, Jin Wang, Kenji 
Sakai, Keiji Tsukada, Toshihiko Kiwa
Graduate School Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering 
in Health Systems
Okayama University
3-1-1 Tsushima-naka, Kita-ku, Okayama City, Japan
E-mail: p7lz3cav@s.okayama-u.ac.jp, 
pgju8212@s.okayama-u.ac.jp, wangjin@okayama-u.ac.jp,
sakai-k@okayama-u.ac.jp, tsukada@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp,
kiwa@okayama-u.ac.jp
Kenji Kondoh, Takuya Takahashi, Makoto Nakagawa, 
Naohiro Ueda
RICOH Electronic Devices
13-1 Himemuro-cho, Ikeda City, Osaka, Japan
E-mail: kenji.kondoh@n-redc.co.jp, takuya.takahashi@n-
redc.co.jp, makoto.nakagawa@n-redc.co.jp, 
naohiro.ueda@n-redc.co.jp
Abstract
A ultra-thin film hydrogen sensor
has
been 
developed to deal with effect of the environment, such as
temperature. The performance of the hydrogen sensor was 
evaluated
from the dependence of the sensing
area, 
temperature, and the gas selectivity.
Keywords-hydrogen sensor; ultra-thin film; platinum; bridge 
circuit.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A large amount of CO2 emission of fossil fuels leads us 
to develop new clean energies, including solar, wind, and 
hydrogen energy. Especially, hydrogen energy is expected 
because hydrogen energy can be supplied stably. To develop 
more secure hydrogen gas supply and utilization technology, 
early detection of hydrogen gas leakage with high-sensitive 
hydrogen sensors is required. Recently, hydrogen sensors 
operating at room temperature, which can operate with low-
energy consumption, have been developed. In our group, we 
have developed a Pt ultra-thin-film hydrogen sensor [1][2]. 
The electrical resistance changed
by dissociation of 
hydrogen molecules on the surface of the film and injection 
of electrons into the film. In this study, the developed sensor
was diagonally aligned as two components with different 
resistances which forms a Wheatstone bridge circuit 
fabricated on the Si substrates and the output voltage of the 
brigade circuit was measured. Because the resistivity 
changes by the environmental effect, such as temperature is 
canceled, so robust detection against the environmental
change could be realized. The surface area dependence of the 
sensitives and the gas selectivity were also evaluated here. In 
addition, the effects of humidity on the hydrogen sensor were 
investigated.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL
The Pt ultra-thin-film hydrogen sensor is based on the 
catalytic reaction between Pt and hydrogen. When Pt reacts 
with hydrogen, electrical resistance is reduced. This change 
is measured as a voltage. Figure 1 shows the structure of the
Figure 1. Structure of hydrogen sensor.
TABLE I. 
SHAPE OF HYDROGEN SENSOR
Sensing area of hydrogen sensor
Width (µm)
Length (µm)
Area (mm2)
20
270
5.40×10-3
20
440
8.80×10-3
100
2650
0.265
150
2700
0.405
100
4400
0.440
hydrogen sensor. The hydrogen sensor has a Pt thin film on a 
silicon substrate with TiN layer. Thus, the Pt thin films
formed a Wheatstone bridge circuit. Two diagonal parts of 
the bridge was coated with alumina to prevent the reaction of 
hydrogens. By the wire bonding and connectors, the 
hydrogen sensor was connected to a power supply and 
measuring instruments. Table 1 shows the shape of one of 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

the four sensing area of the hydrogen sensors. Width is the 
width of the sensing area. Length is the length along the 
electric current of the sensing area. Area is the product of 
Width and Length.
The output voltage by the Wheatstone bridge circuits of 
the Pt ultra-thin-film hydrogen sensor can be given by.
V =
rE / (200 
r),                        
where V is output voltage, E is supply voltage, and r is rate 
change of resistance of the sensor without environmental 
effect, such as temperature. Both resistivities of the coated 
and non-coated parts of Pt thin film could be changed by the
direct environmental effect, therefore the output voltage of 
the bridge was canceled, while only coated parts were 
changed by exposure of hydrogen, therefore, the output
voltage was changed depends on reactions of the hydrogen.
In this experiment, hydrogen gas was balanced by 
artificial mixed air which consists of 80%-N2 and 20%-O2.
A hot plate was used to heat the copper plate on which 
the sensor was placed and sealed.
A gas divider was used to adjust the humidity by mixing 
the gas that was dipped in water and the gas that was not 
dipped in water.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The hydrogen sensor was exposed to hydrogen gas for 5
minutes. Figure 2 shows the sensor response to the hydrogen 
gas. From this result, the sensor can detect hydrogen gas with 
a concentration of above 0.1%.
The hydrogen sensor with different area of sensing 
region was exposed to 1% hydrogen gas for 5 minutes. 
Figure 3 shows the relationship between the maximum value 
of the voltage change and the sensing area. The slope 
estimated by the linear fit was approximately 2.3 mV/mm2.
The output voltages of the sensor under the temperature
between 30 and 90 °C was also and the range of dispersion 
was 0.31 mV, which was less than 2% of the voltage 
response of the sensor for 1%-hydrogen gas exposure. 
When the humidity was changed from 20% to 70%, the 
response of hydrogen sensor is significantly decreased. At 
20% of humidity, the output voltage was changed 9.5 mV. 
At 70% of humidity, output voltage of the sensor was
changed 2.8 mV.
The output voltages of the sensor for 1%-CH4, C2H6 and 
CO2 gas was evaluated to be less than 0.1 mV for all gas 
types.
IV.
CONCLUSION
We developed a highly sensitive and selectivity Pt ultra-
thin-film hydrogen sensor. The effect of temperature for Pt
could be removed by forming Wheatstone bridge circuits.
However, it is difficult to eliminate the effect of humidity. 
Therefore, we use a sensor package to reduce the effect of 
humidity.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Tsukada, H. Inoue, F. Katayama, K. Sakai, and T. Kiwa, 
Ultrathin-film hydrogen gas sensor with nanostructurally 
modified surface JJAP, Vol.51, p.015701, 2012. 
[2]
K. Tsukada, S. Takeichi, K. Sakai, and T. Kiwa
Ultrathin-
film hydrogen gas sensor with nanostructurally modified 
surface JJAP, Vol.53, p.076701, 2014. 
Figure 2. Hydrogen concentration.
Figure 3. Relationship between sensing area and sensitivity.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

