Development of Methanol Sensors: Carbon Nanotubes Blended Hydroxyapatite 
Nano-Ceramics 
S. R. Anjum and R. S. Khairnar  
School of Physical Sciences,
Swami Ramanand Teerth Marathwada University  
Nanded-431606, INDIA 
{sraanjum, rskhairnarsps}@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—The experimental study reports the performance 
of Carbon nanotubes (CNT) blended Hydroxyapatite (HAp) 
composites as a  sensing material for the detection of 
methanol vapours. The main objective of the work is to 
improve the temperature dependent sensitivity of the sensor 
for lower methanol concentration. Moreover, the sensing 
ability of native HAp and CNT blended HAp thick films is 
studied in terms of operating temperature,  response / 
recovery time, maximum detection limit. Thick films of the 
native and blended materials are fabricated via screen 
printing technique. The sensing parameters are studied 
using two probe electrical methods.  The sensor substrate is 
made by means of doping of various concentrations of CNT 
in HAp.  The sensing of methanol vapours is studied at a 
fixed concentration of 100 ppm.  Native HAp substrate 
shows good sensitivity for methanol at room temperature; 
however its sensing performance is inferior to the CNT 
blended 
materials. 
The 
blended 
composites 
exhibit 
impressive sensing ability compared with native HAp in 
terms of sensitivity, response/ recovery time and maximum 
uptake the limit. The sensing mechanism for methanol 
detection, the role of HAp as a parent material and CNT as 
an additive, is explained using a suitable sensing mechanism.   
 
Keywords- Carbon nanotubes; Gas sensor; Hydroxyapatite; 
Methanol sensor 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Methanol is a liquid petrochemical volatile organic 
compound.  It is one of the most versatile compounds 
having a variety of applications in various fields. 
Methanol is a building block for many industrial 
applications. It is used as an antifreeze, solvent, fuel, and 
also denaturant for ethanol. The chemical is also a key 
component of biodiesel production.  Like most of the 
organic volatile chemicals, methanol must be handled, 
transported and used with great care. It has significant 
toxic, flammable and reactive properties, produces 
harmful effects on human health and the environment. 
Thus, to reduce methanol exposure, one should need a 
sensor that detects these vapours at low detection limit 
with accuracy and efficiency. The present work elucidates 
the development of nano material based sensing substrate 
which works at the low operating temperatures and shows 
better sensitivity for organic vapours at the lower 
detection limit. Carbon nanotubes are the most desirable 
sensor substrate with enhanced surface to volume ratio, 
small grain size and remarkable electrical characteristics 
[1]-[4]. However, the surface of native CNT is not ideal 
for gas sensing application as it has less number of active 
reaction sites available for the adsorption of  gas 
molecules [5]-[6]. This is because it has a perfect carbon- 
carbon network. The introduction of defects via; 
vacancies, functionalization or dopant, in carbon network, 
make it a desirable surface for sensing application by 
providing many active adsorption/ reaction sites [7]-[8]. 
The presence of defects drastically modifies   the structure 
and electrical properties of this material, thus creating a 
potential sensor substrate. The sensors, which are 
developed using carbon nanotubes as a dopant or 
functionalized CNT as supportive material, show 
excellent sensing characteristics. These sensors work at 
lower operating temperature compared to metal oxide 
doped material. Also, the response / recovery time for 
such sensors are found to be less long. Calcium 
Hydroxyapatite [Ca10 (PO4)6 (OH) 2], having properties 
such as porous hexagonal network, nano grain size, and 
higher specific surface area, is utilized as sensing 
substrate [9]-[14]. The surface of HAp is considered as an 
ionic conductor.  The presence of H+ and OH- ions 
(hydroxyl group) is found to be responsible for its 
conductivity at elevated temperature [15]-[17]. At low 
temperature, the conductivity is either because of proton 
transfer among OH- ions or migration of protons from 
OH- to PO43- ion [11], [18].   
 
OH− + OH− ↔ O2− + H2O 
or 
 
OH − + PO 4 3-   ↔ O2- + HPO42- + OH ↔ O2- + PO 4 3- + 
H2O + vacancy OH 
 
The protons (H+), hydroxyl ions (OH-), and oxides 
ions (O-) control the reactivity when the adsorbed 
molecules come in contact with the surface. The 
interaction of volatile organic vapours (CxHyOz) like 
methanol, ethanol and propanol etc with HAp surface 
increases its conductivity since these vapours donate a 
proton to the surface resulting in decreasing the electrical 
resistance of the material.  The present study deals with 
the utilization of sensing ability of HAp and CNT in order 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

to get desirable sensing substrates for the detection of 
methanol vapor at 300C.  
 
 
 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
Calcium Hydroxyapatite is synthesised by following   
the path reported in our earlier publications [9]-[10]. In 
order to achieve the best sensing substrate, CNT in 
various weight concentrations is blended in HAp via 
liquid phase reinforce method under similar experimental 
condition.  A known quantity of CNT with nano HAp is 
dissolved in alcohol is and kept under magnetic stirring 
followed by sonication and allowed to dry at room 
temperature. The dried nano powder is sintered at 1000C 
for 1h in a programmable furnace to remove volatile 
compounds and water vapours.  The powder is then mixed 
mechanically in an agate mortar continually for 4-5 hours. 
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), X-Ray Diffraction 
(XRD) and Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) surface 
analysis are carried out to analyze the morphological and 
structural characterization of the material. The prepared 
composite materials along with native HAp is deposited 
in the form of thick films by screen printing technique. 
The area for each prepared film is kept constant. A 
schematic sensing setup is employed to examine the 
sensing ability of the material [19].  The variation in 
resistance in the presence of atmospheric air and tested 
vapours is measured for a preset concentration of 
methanol under similar experimental conditions. The 
sensitivity factor (gas response) is calculated by using the 
equation  
 
 
100
%



Ra
Ra
Rg
response S
Gas
 
                                                
where Ra and Rg represent the sensor resistance in the 
presence of atmospheric air and test gas respectively. 
 
 
 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Morphological Analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. SEM micrographs for  (A) Native HAp, (B) 0.5wt% CNT 
blended HAp, (C) 0.7wt% CNT bended HAp showing variations in 
surface topography due to the  presence of CNT.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. X-ray diffraction pattern of native HAp, CNT and CNT 
blended HAp material (* represents the peak for CNT): Y-axis has 
arbitrary units. 
 
The surface morphology for native HAp and  CNT 
blended HAp is shown in Fig. 1. The surface of HAp is 
covered with a large number of small grain sized 
particles. These small grains are closely arranged in a 
circular pattern over a large area. The presence of CNT in 
various concentrations significantly affects the surface 
property. 0.5wt% CNT blended HAp surface shows a 
porous structure with the small sized particle. Such 
surface increases the possibility of interaction between 
organic vapours and the sensing substrate. It seems that 
there is more compactness on the surface for 0.7wt% 
CNT, reducing the porosity. 
B. Structural Analysis 
X-ray diffraction pattern of native HAp, CNT and 
CNT blended HAp material is recorded for 2θ value 20 to 
60 degree with a scan rate 20/min on Rigaku 
diffractometer with Cu Kα1 radiation (λ=1.54À). Fig. 
2(A) shows X-rd diffractogram of native HAp synthesized 
by weight chemical precipitation method. The (2 1 1), (3 
0 0), ((0 0 2), (2 1 3), (2 2 2) planes of HAp are clearly 
observed in the diffraction pattern. All peaks exhibit 
hexagonal phase structure of HAp (JCPDS card No. 00-
009-0432) [9]-[11], [14], [15], [17]. The CNT blended 
HAp material also exhibits similar patterns. The peak for 
CNT with the plane (0 0 2) at 260 is not clearly discerned 
by diffraction pattern may be due to the small weight 
concentration of CNT in the composite material or 
presence HAp peak at the same plane. 
C. Surface area Analysis 
The adsorption-desorption isotherm along with the 
pore size distribution is displayed in Fig.3. The isotherm 
for both native HAp and 0.5wt% CNT blended HAp is 
identified as type III as it exhibits type III hysteresis loop 
having weak interaction   between adsorbent and 
adsorbate.  
A 
B 
C 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
  Figure 3. N2 adsorption/desorption isotherm (a) native HAp, (b) 0.5wt% 
CNT blended HAp and BJH pore size distribution curve (c) native HAp, 
(d) 0.5wt% CNT blended HAp. 
 
The BJH pore distribution suggests the mesoporous nature 
of the material.  The measured specific surface area of 
native HAp is 22.069 m2/g, while that of 0.5%CNT 
blended HAp is found to be 49.99 m2/g which is twice the 
surface area of HAp. 
 
D. Methanol Sensing Properties 
The response of the sensing substrate is tested at 
elevated temperature in order to select the operating 
temperature. The operating temperature is defined as the 
temperature at which the sensor has a maximum gas 
response. A profile of gas response as a function of 
temperature for a fixed concentration of methanol is 
plotted in Fig. 4(A).   
 
 
 
Figure 4(A). Sensor sensitivity (response) of native HAp and CNT 
blended HAp at variable temperature for 100 ppm concentration of 
methanol 
 
Figure 4(B). Formation of hydrogen bonding, due to dipole- dipole 
interaction between polar methanol molecule and hydroxyl ions on HAp 
surface. Electrostatic interaction between methanol and CNT molecules 
leads to enhance the sensing property of the substrate material 
 
 
Both the native HAp and CNT blended HAp materials 
show the same substrate temperature of 30 oC for getting 
maximum sensitivity in presence of 100 ppm methanol.  
The interaction of methanol molecules with HAp surface 
increases the sensitivity of the device by forming 
hydrogen bonding with HAp molecules. The methanol 
molecules interact with CNT via electrostatic interaction. 
It is believed that this interaction assists the unidirectional 
flow of electric current flowing through the tube (See Fig. 
4(B)) increasing the sensitivity of the device. The 
alteration in sensitivity as a 
function of 
CNT 
concentration in composite at room temperature (30 oC) 
for 100ppm methanol is shown in Fig 5. The response 
varies linearly with CNT concentration, attains peak value 
for 0.5wt% of CNT concentration, and afterwards, it 
decreases with increase in concentration. It shows that 
each composite material has its own impact on the 
sensitivity of the material.  However, the response of 0.5 
wt% of CNT concentration is superior with a magnitude ̴ 
600%, when exposed to methanol at room temperature 
(30 oC). This particular concentration leads to provide a 
balanced sensing layer for the gas sensing application. For 
higher concentrations, the surface modification doesn’t 
support the effective sensing phenomenon. 
 
 
Figure 5. Variation in sensitivity for different CNT concentrations in 
HAp, at room temperature (30 oC) for 100 ppm methanol 
a
) 
b 
c 
d 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

A comparative study of the response/ recovery time 
characteristics of native HAp and 0.5 %CNT blended 
HAp material at room temperature (30 oC) is carried out. 
The response of the material as a function of time is 
recorded by exposing the sample to detecting vapours and 
atmospheric air, respectively as shown in Fig. 6. The 
response time is 160 sec for native HAp substrate and 60 
sec for 0.5wt% of CNT concentration respectively. The 
material recovers more than 90% of its initial value after 
exposing to atmospheric air. Native HAp shows sluggish 
desorption rate due to the polar affinity (hydrogen 
bonding between methanol molecules and HAp surface). 
In case of CNT blended HAp composite material two 
possible types of physisorption may occur upon exposure 
to target molecule. One is a weak physisorption (van der 
Waals dispersion forces) between CNT molecules and 
target molecules. Being weak, forces such adsorption to 
be easily desorbed after exposing to atmospheric air at 
room temperature without any need for extra heat or 
energy resulting faster recovery time. The other is the 
formation of hydrogen bonding (stronger than van der 
Waals dispersion forces) due to the dipole-dipole 
attraction between polar methanol molecule and hydroxyl 
ions on HAp surface. It requires few minutes to recover 
its original state when the sensor is exposed to 
atmospheric air.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 6. Response/ recovery time plot for native HAp and 0.5wt% CNT 
blended HAp thick film in the presence of 100 ppm methanol. 
Continuous repeated cycles for response / recovery time at room 
temperature (30 0C), (a) native HAp, (b) 0.5% CNT blended HAp.  
 
Figure 7. Sensitivity of native HAp and 0.5% CNT blended HAp thick 
films for various concentrations of methanol vapours at room 
temperature (300C). 
The sensitivity of native HAp  and  0.5% CNT 
blended 
HAp 
 
material 
to 
different 
methanol 
concentrations is also recorded to compare the maximum  
methanol detecting limit of the materials. The sensor is 
held at room temperature (30 oC) and exposed to various 
concentrations of methanol ranging from 100 ppm to 
6500 ppm. The nature of the graph in Fig. 7 depicts 
significant 
changes 
with 
increasing 
methanol 
concentration. The surface area and available active 
reacting sites of the HAp and CNT play an important role 
in the deposition of methanol.  Sensitivity depends on 
adsorption of the gas molecule at the available adsorption 
sites. Therefore, 0.5% CNT blended HAp shows much 
higher uptake capacity than HAp. Saturation occurs due to 
lack of adsorption sites with increasing concentration 
since the surface is covered with methanol vapours.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The influence of CNT blending on HAp surface, for 
enhancement in sensing properties of methanol, has been 
studied. The sensing performance of the native HAp thick 
film and 0.5wt% CNT blended HAp thick film are  
compared in terms of sensitivity (maximum response), 
response 
time 
and 
reproducibility 
for 
a 
fixed 
concentration of methanol.  The response of the material 
in the presence of various concentrations of methanol is 
recorded to find out its maximum detection limit. The 
results corroborate that addition of CNT in small weight 
concentration dramatically ameliorates the 
sensing 
property of native HAp. The enhancement is attributed to 
increment in surface area and possible immobilisation of 
methanol molecules on the peripheral end corners of 
CNTs.  The study indicates the potential use of such 
blended matrix in practical sensing devices operating at 
around room temperature (30 oC). This work represents 
the first report in a series of experimentations.  This work 
will be followed by the sensing studies for higher alcohols 
such as ethanol, propanol, and butanol. In addition to this, 
oriented deposition of the CNT on HAp surface may be 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

carried out in the future for the enhancement of sensitivity 
and detecting the lowest concentration of organic vapours.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] B. S.  Dasari, W. Taube, P. Agarwal, M. Rajput, and A. Kumar, 
J. Akhtar, “Room Temperature Single Walled Nano tubes   
(SWCNT) Chemo resistive Ammonia Gas Sensor,” Sensors and 
transducer, vol. 190, Issue 7, pp. 24-30, 2015. 
[2] Joseph C. Obirai, Gray Hunter, and Prebir Dutta, “Multi-walled 
carbon nanotubes as high temperature carbon monoxide 
sensors,” Sensors and actuators B, vol. 134, pp. 640-646, 2008. 
[3] A. Ghasemi, and M. Molla, “Highly sensitive single walled 
carbon nanotubes (5, 0) for adsorption gases CO2, CO and N2: a 
DFT study,” J. Chem. Tech. Research, vol.  4(4), pp. 1302-
1308, 2012. 
[4] Y. Du, Q. Xue, Z. Zhang, F. Xia, Z. Liu, and W. Xing, 
“Enhanced hydrogen gas response of pd nano particles 
decorated single walled carbon nanotubes films/SiO2/Si hetero 
structure,” AIP Advan., vol. 5, pp. 027136, 2015. 
[5] P. Kar, and A. Chaudhury, “Carboxylic acid functionalized 
multi-walled 
carbon 
nanotubes 
doped 
polyaniline 
for 
chloroform sensor,” Sensors and actuators B, vol. 183, pp. 25-
33, 2013. 
[6] M. Humayun, R. Divan, Y. Lui, L. Gundel, P. Solomon,  and I. 
Paproty, “Novel chemo resistive CH4 sensor with 10ppm 
sensitivity 
based 
on 
multi-walled 
carbon 
nanotubes 
functionalized with Sno2 nano crystals,” J. vacuum Sci. and 
Tech., vol. 34, pp.01A131, 2016. 
[7] L. Shobin, B. Renganathan, D. Sastikumar, K. park, and S. 
Manivannan, “Pure and isobutyl methyl ketone treated multi-
walled carbon nanotubes for ethanol and methanol vapor 
sensing,” IIEEE sensor journal, vol. 14 (4), pp.1248-1243, 
2014. 
[8] Akbari, Z. Buntal, M. Ahmed, A. Enzevaee, R. Yousof, S. 
Iqbal, M. Ahmei, M. Sidik,  and H. Karimi, “Analytical 
calculation of sensing  parameters on carbon nanotubes based 
gas sensor,” Sensors, vol. 14, pp. 5502-5515, 2014. 
[9] R. U. Mene, M. P. Mahabole, K. C. Mohite,  and R. S. 
Khairnar, “Fe doped Hydroxyapatite thick films modified via 
swift heavy ion irradiation for CO and CO2 gas sensing 
application,” J. Alloys Comp., vol. 584, pp. 487-493, 2014. 
[10] R. U. Mene, M. P. Mahabole, R. C. Aiyer, and R. S. Khairnar, 
“Hydroxyapatite nano ceramics thick film: An efficient CO2 gas 
sensor,” Open Appl. Phys. J., vol.  3, pp.10-16, 2010. 
[11] Li  Huixia, Liu Yong, Tan Yanni, Luo Lantan, Zhang Qing, Li 
Kun, and Tang Hanchunl   “Room temperature gas sensing 
properties of tubular Hydroxyapatite,” New. J. Chem., vol. 39, 
pp. 3865-3874, 2015. 
[12] R. U. Mene, M. P. Mahabole, and R. S. Khairnar, “Surface 
modified Hydroxyapatite thick film for CO2 gas sensing 
application: Effect of swift heavy ion irradiation,” Radi. Phys. 
Chem., vol. 80 (6), pp.682-687, 2011. 
[13] R. U. Mene, M. P. Mahabole, Ramphal Sharma, and R. S. 
Khairnar, “Enhancement in CO gas sensing properties of 
Hydroxyapatite thick films: Effect of swift heavy ion 
irradiation,” Vacuum, vol. 86 (1), pp.66-71, 2011. 
[14] Rajendra S. Khairnar, Vanja Kokol, and S. R. Anjum, 
“Development of Hydroxyapatite nano ceramics for methanol 
and ethanol sensor,” Int. J. Pure Appl. Res. Eng. Tech., vol. 3 
(8), pp.379-86, 2015.  
[15] Lanlan Luo, Yong Liu, Tan Yanni, Li  Huixia, Zhang Qing, and  
Li Kun, “Room temperature gas sensor based on tube-like 
Hydroxyapatite modified with gold particles,” J. Cent. South 
Univ., vol. 23, pp.18-26, 2016. 
[16] S. Suresh, “Theoretical studies of solid state dielectric 
parameter of Hydroxyapatite,” Mater. Phys Mech., vol. 14, 
pp.145-151, 2012. 
[17] Qing Zhang, Yong Liu, Ying Zhang, Huixia Li, Yanni Taqn, 
Lanlan Luo, Junhao Duan, Kaiyang Li,  and Craig Banks, 
“Facile and controllable synthesis of Hydroxyapatite / graphene 
hybrid materials with enhanced sensing performance towards 
ammonia,” Analyst, vol. 140, pp.5235-5242, 2015.  
[18] R. Ramli, R. Adnan, M. Abubakar,  and S. Masudi, “Synthesis 
and characterization of nano porous Hydroxyapatite,” J. Phy. 
Sci., vol. 22 (1), pp.20-37, 2011. 
[19] Rajendra S. Khairnar, S. R. Anjum, and M. P. Mahabole, 
“Development of CNT doped nano-HAp thick film gas sensor,” 
Inter. J. Eng. Sci. Inno. Tech., vol. 3 (3), pp.3253-261, 2014. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

