New Ultrasonic Sensor for a Simultaneous Mechanical and Electrical 
Characterization for the Contact Quality of a Mechanically Loaded Interface 
 
Naima Alaoui-Ismaili, Franck Augereau, Gilles Despaux 
Institut d’Electronique du Sud (IES) 
Université de Montpellier 2, UMR CNRS 5214 
Place Eugene Bataillon (cc082) 
F-34095 Montpellier, France 
e-mail: franck.augereau@univ-montp2.fr, Naima.Alaoui-ismaili@ies.univ-montp2.fr, gilles.despaux@univ-montp2.fr 
 
 
Abstract— This ultrasonic sensor made of a copper delay line 
operates in dry coupling configuration to detect modifications 
of the contact quality between two materials under 
compressive stress by measuring the acoustic energy reflected 
on the air volumes trapped at the interface. Frequency domain 
analysis of the first delay line round trip echo is useful to 
operate with harmonics for different selectivities to the 
interface properties but, pressed on a unpolished copper plate, 
the sensitivity of acoustic reflection to contact quality vanishes 
for high roughness level. To overpass this limitation, 
measurement with the sixth delay line echo has been 
successfully performed to investigate the stress dependence of 
the contact quality between a copper plane surface and rugged 
industrial materials such as amorphous carbon and carbon-
carbon composite. This acoustic method, associated with an 
electric contact resistance measure, has given a direct insight of 
the deformability of the interface depending on the roughness 
and the mechanical properties of the two materials involved in 
the connection. Plasticity, anelasticty effects are observed. 
Acoustic waves and electromagnetic ones are also not 
perturbed in the same way by the gas interface modification 
versus mechanical loading.  
Keywords - Dry coupling; contact area; contact resistance; 
carbon composite; acoustic reflection coefficient. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The interface between two mechanically tied materials in 
service is generally difficult to access in a non destructive 
way. Yet, evaluation of the contact area can be a reliable 
parameter to detect the wear level of the connection and to 
predict its tribological behavior. For instance, in some 
industrial applications, electric contacts are obtained by 
maintaining a given mechanical load on the two materials in 
contact. At this interface, the electric contact resistance is 
controlled by current constriction effect and by the insulating 
properties of pollution layer. From a mechanical point of 
view, contact surface roughness and material elasticity are 
predominant factors. Echography measurement performed in 
dry coupling configuration may give access to these 
parameters [1][2]. For all these reasons, we developed a 
specific ultrasonic sensor to detect in a non destructive way 
the variations of the contact quality from the reflection 
fraction of ultrasounds on the gas volumes trapped within 
two contact surfaces as function of the applied mechanical 
load [3]. When the two sides of the contact are conductive 
ones, 
the 
electric 
contact 
resistance 
can 
be 
also 
simultaneously measured [4]. 
II. 
SENSOR PRINCIPLE  AND EXPERIMENTAL 
CONFIGURATION 
By definition, a contact is the association of two 
materials. The concept of our device is to use, as our sensor 
delay line, one of these two materials and to press it against 
the second one lately called “the sample”. In our 
demonstrator, a piezoelectric cell is placed in a cavity within 
a metallic rod mounted on a load cell. This piezo-ceramic 
emits the acoustic pulse and detects the reflection at the end 
of the rod acting as a delay line. For simultaneous electric 
contact resistance measurement, a source meter is used in a 4 
wires 
configuration: 
current 
injection 
and 
voltage 
measurement are done with screwed contacts on the metallic 
rod and clamped ones for the sample (cf. Fig 1). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Sensor and experimental setup descriptions 
To measure the acoustic reflection at the interface, we 
calculate the ratio of the reflected pulse energy to its value 
when the sensor is in air, since reflection coefficient between 
solid and gas is almost unity. This measurement is done from 
the first round trip echo digitized with a scope. This signal is 
recorded simultaneously with the corresponding value of the 
applied load reached during the mechanical test. To 
investigate the behavior of the contact interface versus 
mechanical stress, we chose to perform three successive 
loading and unloading cycles up to a compression strength of 
139
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

4500 N. The cross-head displacement speed is maintained 
down to a sufficiently low level in order to deal with the time 
response of our different equipments. Fast Fourier Transform 
analysis is used to get the reflection coefficient for various 
frequencies using the harmonic modes of the piezoelectric 
cell. For our demonstrator, we used a PIC155 type 
piezoceramic disc with a diameter of 16 mm and a thickness 
of 2 mm. The outer diameter of the sensor is 30 mm defining 
the geometrical size of its contact area. This last dimension 
gives only the apparent size of the sensor contact area. 
Nevertheless, the real contact area may be far smaller and 
not accurately known especially at the interface with rough 
surfaces. For this reason, we chose to present on figures the 
applied load and not the supposed stress values. 
III. 
APPLICATION TO CONTACT EVALUATION FOR 
COPPER/COPPER INTERFACE 
Copper is a material commonly used for electric 
connections and, for some applications, this is achieved by 
mechanically loading or tightening two plane surfaces. To 
investigate this kind of connection, our sensor has been made 
of a copper rod pressed against a thick copper plate in order 
to prevent time superposition of the successive round trip 
echoes in this plate with the multiple delay line echoes. 
In Figure 2, we present the variation of the reflection 
coefficient at the interface with a mirror polished sample. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Evolution versus applied load of the acoustic reflection 
amplitude measured from time or frequency analysis for a copper mirror 
polished samle 
For this test, the energy of the first delay line echo is 
measured versus applied strength. Two calculation methods 
are presented: the peak to peak amplitude or equivalently the 
RMS value of the acoustic echo and a second approach using 
the amplitudes of the modes (fundamental and harmonics) 
obtained from FFT analysis. This figure shows that the 
contact quality increases rapidly for mechanical load smaller 
than 1000 N and then reaches slowly an optimum value 
around 4000 N. Indeed, as strength increases, the air volumes 
trapped within the vicinity of the two surfaces decrease due 
to the compressive strain of the surface asperities and this 
decreases the reflection of the incident acoustic pulse. 
Compared to time domain analysis (RMS), information 
contained by FFT for the fundamental mode (2.35 MHz) is 
slightly more sensitive to the acoustic reflection evolution. 
For a given load, the acoustic reflection value measured 
using the first harmonic mode (6.7 MHz) is systematically 
higher compared to fundamental mode analysis. This is 
explained by wavelength consideration : the smaller the 
wavelength is compared to the interface defects, the worst 
wave propagation through the interface is. 
 
Next, we compare the interface behavior between the 
previous mirror polished copper sample and the same 
material unpolished with a 120 grade sandpaper (cf. Figure 
3). It can be noticed on the curve for the mirror polished 
surface that the reflection coefficient evolution is different 
for the first compression loading compared to the rest of the 
mechanical test due to surface plasticity. 
For the unpolished surface, ultrasounds remain almost 
completely reflected because the interface is too much filled 
with air even for a 4500 N mechanical load. 
This test demonstrates the sensitivity of this method to 
measure the mechanical contact quality and the roughness 
level detectable range. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Effect of roughness on the evolution of the interfacial acoustic 
reflection for a plane copper to copper contact 
With our experimental set-up, the electric contact 
resistance is measured simultaneously with acoustic 
reflection in order to give a further insight of the quality 
contact between the two copper surfaces. Electric contact 
resistance is known to depend on an electric field 
constriction effect due to the contact area delimited by the air 
volume trapped in the residual roughness. Surface pollution 
can also create an insulating layer strained by the mechanical 
load. Copper oxide has generally to be taken into account but 
we assumed that, using later samples with rough surfaces, 
their asperities should be large enough to sufficiently indent 
this insulating layer limiting its effect on electric measure. 
Despite the surface roughness created with the 120 grade 
sandpaper, the Figure 4 shows a fast decrease of the contact 
resistance down to only few fractions of milli-ohms as 
expected for a copper made contact. Secondly, its value is 
already smaller than few milli-ohms for a mechanical load of 
only few Newtons. 
140
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
Figure 4.  Evolution of the electric contact resistance versus applied load 
for the unpolished copper sample  
For the unpolished sample, comparison of Figures 3 and 4 
shows that the correct contact resistance level is achieved at 
very low mechanical load whereas the mechanical contact 
area detected by Acoustics is very poor due to the large 
amount of air trapped at the interface. Indeed, for electric 
fields, few contact spots are enough to enable a good current 
flow. At the opposite, ultrasonic waves can not travel 
through air filled surfaces and are totally reflected. So, to 
extend the application range of our sensor to rougher 
surfaces such most of industrial materials have, we have 
increased its sensitivity using higher order reflection 
coefficient measurement. 
IV. 
ACOUSITC REFLECTION METHOD DEDICATED TO 
ROUGH INTERFACE CONTATC QUALITY EVALUATION 
The aim of the following tests is to succeed in detecting 
the evolution of the contact between a plane copper surface 
and materials with a large roughness.   
A. Samples description 
For these tests, we used 30 mm wide cubes of amorphous 
carbon materials and plates of woven carbon-carbon 
composites (25 mm x 25 mm x 10 mm). These two carbon 
made materials have different surface states due to their 
fabrication process (cf. Fig. 5 a) and b)). Both materials have 
a large roughness with faults as deep as 200µm from 
topography maps obtained with a Scanning Acoustic 
Microscope using a 100 MHz acoustic focused lens (cf. Fig. 
5 c)).  
 
 
a) amorphous carbon surface  
b) carbon-carbon composite 
 
c) topography map of the amorphous carbon surface (100 MHz SAM) 
Figure 5.  Caracterisation and comparison of the samples topography 
B. Optimisation of the sensivity to the contact quality 
Thanks to material elasticity or deformability, roughness 
tends to decrease under compressive stress but this effect 
will be quite small for our carbon samples due to the large 
size of their faults. So, to amplify the variation of acoustic 
reflectance at the copper/carbon interface, we used the sixth 
delay line round trip echo. Its energy is measured and 
normalised with sensor in air configuration but this “acoustic 
reflected energy” is not the interface reflection coefficient. 
With this method, variation of contact quality has been 
successfully detected for amorphous carbon and carbon-
carbon composite (cf. Fig. 6), showing a better deformability 
of this second material. On these curves, hysteresis loops are 
visible. For each material, the upper parts correspond to 
mechanical loadings and the lower ones to unloadings. This 
effect is associated to anelasticity. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Detection of quality contact evolution for industrial carbon 
samples pressed against a mirror polished copper surface using the sixth 
round trip delay line echo 
On these materials, contact resistance measurement 
reveals that the carbon-carbon composite provides the best 
electric contact (cf. Fig. 7). Compared to amorphous carbon, 
its contact resistance is smaller and is also decreasing faster. 
141
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
Figure 7.  Electric caracterisation of the contact quality at the interface 
between carbon materials and a polished copper plane surface 
This information could be helpful to determine for 
example the optimum torque to use in order to avoid cracks 
generation due to over loading when screw-binding is used. 
C. Surface rougnhess otpimisation for amorphous carbon 
material 
In an attempt to find the best contact conditions, we 
modified the roughness of the sensor by gradually 
unpolishing its copper surface. The figure 8 shows that 
unpolishing decreases the contact quality. The use of grade 
800 sandpaper seems to increase the anelastic behaviour of 
this interface with a larger hysteresis loops. Large plasticity 
occurs for the first loading cycle when the copper surface is 
unpolished with grade 120 sandpaper. Indeed, sandpaper 
unpolishing creates sharp asperities where the mechanical 
load exceeds locally the material yield stress limit. 
 
Figure 8.  Effect of the copper surface roughness for the the contact 
quality with the amorphous carbon sample 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This ultrasonic sensor is a new approach to characterize 
simultaneously the mechanical and electrical quality of the 
contact made by a compressive stress between two plane 
conductive materials. As demonstrated in this work, this 
technique is a non destructive means to optimize the 
materials roughness, the tightening torque and potentially 
surface treatments. This measurement could be performed 
for various temperatures too. Moreover, the contact quality 
sensitivity of this ultrasonic sensor can be improved to deal 
with high roughness level by using high order delay line 
round trip echo. As function of the materials properties and 
contact size, ultrasounds frequency could be further adapted 
to any given interface: small frequency yielding to large 
diameter sensors but larger wavelength giving easier 
propagation conditions through rough interface.  
REFERENCES 
[1] J.Krolikowski, J. Szczepek, and Z. Witczak, "Ultrasonic 
investigation of contact between solids under high hydrostatic 
pressure", Ultrasonics vol. 27 (1989) pp. 45-49 
[2] B. Drinkwatter, R.S. Dwyer-Joyce, and P. Cawley, "A study 
of the interaction between ultrasound and a partially 
contacting solid-solid interface", Proc. R. Soc (London) A, 
vol. 452 (1996) pp. 2613-2628. 
[3]  J. Duwattez, F. Augereau, E. Caplain, and J.M. Saurel, "Dry 
coupling ultrasonic high frequency (10-100MHz) sensors for 
detetcion of surface and tribological properties at a 
submicrometric scale", Journal of Nondestructive evaluation, 
vol. 22 (2004) pp. 79-92. 
[4] F. Augereau, M. El Hadachi, G. Despaux, and L. Crétinon, 
“Characterizaion of copper surface alterations using a soft 
ultrsonic indenter and comparison witch contact resistance 
measurement”, Proc. 24th International Conference on 
Electrical Contacts (2008) pp. 456-460. 
142
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

