Wireless Measurement Node for Dust Sensor Integration
Mokhloss I. Khadem, Grigore Stamatescu, Valentin Sgˆarciu
Faculty of Automatic Control and Computers
University Politehnica of Bucharest
sml ka@yahoo.com, {gstamatescu, vsgarciu}@aii.pub.ro
Abstract—The presence of particulate matter of various
sizes, generally classiﬁed as dust, is an important factor
affecting air quality in outdoor and indoor scenarios. Many
industrial processes require clean rooms where dust concen-
tration has to be kept below certain thresholds in order to
assure the success of the manufacturing process or the quality
of the ﬁnished product. Applications which need precise dust
quantity measurement presently use complex and expensive
systems. In the mean time, wireless sensor networks (WSN)
have emerged as a tool which promises higher resolution
spatial measurements than conventional devices. Beside usual
sensors, many WSN producers offer data acquisition expansion
modules which supply general purpose analog and digital
inputs allowing for the connection of external sensors. This
paper proposes combining the two technologies by integration
of an optical interferometer dust sensor with a conventional
sensor networking platform through a data acquisition module.
The system design and description as well as an experimental
evaluation in a laboratory setting are presented. We evaluate
the results obtained by comparison to a high precision laser air
quality monitor for 0.5 and 2.5 micron particles. The results
are encouraging and show that our approach is viable for
testing outside the laboratory environment, in a real world
deployment.
Keywords-dust sensors; data acquisition interface; wireless
sensor networks; embedded software;
I. INTRODUCTION
Dust affects many sectors of human activity and it is
widely present in the galaxy. Ambient radiation heats dust
and re-emits radiation into the microwave band, which may
distort the cosmic microwave background power spectrum.
Dust in this regime has a complicated emission spectrum,
and includes both thermal dust emission and spinning dust
emission. Dust samples returned from outer space may pro-
vide information about conditions in the early solar system.
Also dust has effects on aviation, in the past 30 years, more
than 90 jet-powered commercial airplanes have encountered
clouds of volcanic ash and suffered damage as a result.
The increased availability of satellites and the technology to
transform satellite data into useful information for operators
have reduced the number of volcanic ash encounters. One
of the more important and common effects of dust is the
inﬂuence on environmental pollution and human health.
Most industrial dusts contain particles of a wide range of
sizes. The behavior, deposition and outcome of any particle
after entry into the human respiratory system, and the
response that it produces depends on the nature and size of
the particle. Breathable dust approximates to the fraction of
airborne material that penetrates to the gas exchange region
of the lung. The breathable fraction varies for different indi-
viduals; however, it is possible to deﬁne a target speciﬁcation
for sampling instruments that approximates to the breathable
fraction for the average person. Moreover there is a big
effect of dust in industrial environments, especially in the
case of high precision industries such as integrated circuits
and nanoelectronic fabrication. In industrial plants, where
combustible dusts or dust containing goods are produced,
processed or stored, there is a risk of explosion. Mixtures of
dust and air with concentrations above the Lower-Explosion-
Limit (LEL) and below the Upper-Explosion-Limit (UEL)
together with various modes of ignition (electric sparks, hot
surfaces) can cause an explosion.
Networks of wireless sensor devices are being deployed
to collectively monitor and disseminate information about
a variety of phenomena of interest [1]. A wireless sensor
device or mote is capable of sensing, limited amount of
computation, signal processing and data storage and wireless
communication. Advances in integrated circuits design have
led to a reduction in the size, weight and cost of sensor
devices, with an improvement in their resolution and accu-
racy. At the same time, modern wireless networking of large
number of wireless capable sensor devices can work collab-
oratively to achieve a common objective. At its core, a WSN
is meant to enable high temporal and spatial measurement
of the surrounding environment. Some of the applications
in which this technology has been deployed so far include:
environmental monitoring, military surveillance, biosensors
for health applications and smart sensors to monitor and
control manufacturing facilities. Integration work with other
systems is very important in order to provide a reliable tool
for domain specialists interested in the provided data [2].
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2
elaborates on the theory of dust measurements, with focus
on optical measurement devices and describes the context of
our work through related work. Section 3 presents the system
design along with the main components used to implement
the wireless dust measurement node. Section 4 presents the
monitoring results achieved with reference to a precision
air quality monitoring device. In Section 5 we conclude the
paper and highlight directions for future work.
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

II. OPTICAL DUST MEASUREMENT AND RELATED
WORK
The best known principles of dust measurement devices
are: gravimetric, triboelectric and optical measurement. Each
of these are best suited to speciﬁc application domains
which differ in the intensity of dust pollution, water vapor
proportion and the surface of the investigated area.
The optical dust measurement principle which we study
in this paper is based on the attenuation of the intensity of
a light beam by absorption and dispersion upon penetrating
a cloud with solid particles. It is based on the attenuation of
the intensity of a light beam by absorption and dispersion
penetrating a cloud with solid particles. Figure 1 shows a
diagram depicting the conversion from dust concentration to
useful output using a ﬁxed light emitter. Lambert-Beer’s law
[3] describes the relation between the light transmission and
the dust concentration c according to the following equation:
I = I0 · e−ε·c·l
(1)
where:
• I0 = initial intensity
• I = resulting intensity of the light beam
• ε = coefﬁcient of extinction (a speciﬁc constant ac-
counting for dust type and application)
• l = distance
• c = dust concentration
For the light source with rectangular pulses, an efﬁcient
GaAs-Luminescent-diode with its maximum spectral sensi-
tivity at 950 nm is used. Consequently, a photo diode of
the same spectral sensitivity is used for receiving. The clock
frequency should be chosen in a way that even rapid changes
or momentary peak values of the dust concentration up to
about 3 kHz are exactly reproduced [3].
Figure 1.
Optical Dust Measurement Principle Schematic
Zhang et al. [4] propose a forest ﬁre monitoring system
based on a designed ZigBee [5] wireless sensor node. The
main goal is to measure smoke and humidity levels while
beneﬁting from speciﬁc advantages of safety in data trans-
mission, network establishement and low cost and energy
requirements. The topological structure of the system is
an adaptation of a cluster-tree. Compared with a reticular
structure, a cluster-tree structure can be built more easily and
the information path takes less memory space. At the same
time, the chain structure needs to be stable and its scale is
limited, which needs to be improved in future investigations.
The proposed system is described as a ﬁrst attempt and
complement to existing forest ﬁre monitoring and prevention
methods. It provides a solid basis in terms of hardware
for the application of advanced wireless sensor network
technology. It is pointed out that, in order to extend the
potential of the system and improve forest ﬁre monitoring
technology, the problems of energy consumption, nodes
location and clock synchronization have to be addressed in
the future. These are some of the remaining problem areas
to be considered, before the level of forest ﬁre monitoring
can be improved. In comparison to our work, the focus is
rather on networking aspects of the deployed system than
on sensor integration. Also, smoke, as a type of dust, is
inferred from temperature measurement and not from actual
particulate matter detectors.
In [6], a comprehensive overview of smart home instru-
mentation systems (Figure 2) along with suitable hardware
developments are presented. The authors state that air quality
assessment and the thermal comfort sensation depend on
numerous variables which are difﬁcult to measure precisely
at low cost. They present the core of the sensor system
as a comprehensive monitoring system which continuously
measures the indoor and outdoor air quality and through
gas leakage detection and early ﬁre warnings also address
essential security matters. The conditions for indoor air
quality control and the assessment of subjective thermal
comfort are sometimes contradicting. For example, if the
CO2 concentration exceeds a certain level, commonly 1000
ppm, then the air quality control must have priority over
the adjustment of thermal comfort. In our view, the wire-
less measurement node that we developed is suitable for
hardware and software integration into such an environment.
The advantages of low power wireless communication, small
device size can be used to achieve signiﬁcant savings in
retroﬁtting existing homes and prepare them for smart house
technology.
Figure 2.
SmartHome Instrumentation Overview [6]
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

III. SYSTEM DESIGN
The high level architecture of our proposed system is
shown in Figure 3. It consists of a mesh network of wireless
measurement nodes relaying data towards the sink. At the
gateway level, the data is collected, stored and presented for
interpretation or further processing.
Node 
102
Node 
103
Gateway
Node
101
Node 
104
Radio Base Station
Figure 3.
Wireless Dust Measurement System Architecture
A wireless measurement node consists of four parts: a pro-
cessing/radio board, a mote data acquisition board, a optical
dust sensor interfaced with a microcontroller development
board. The most relevant characteristics of the hardware that
we have chosen are described next.
The IRIS XM2110 is the main processing/radio board,
which hosts an ATMega 1281 8 bit MCU and a IEEE
802.15.4 compliant RF230 radio transceiver operating in the
2.4GHz Industrial Scientiﬁc and Medical (ISM) band. This
is the newest module in the line of the original Berkeley
motes and is supported by the open- source community
under TinyOS 1.x and 2.1 an event-based, low footprint op-
erating system for resource constrained devices. Compared
to the previous iteration
MicaZ, the producer mentions
better performance in terms of radio coverage and improved
energy efﬁciency. The 51-pin connector provides stackable
expansion possibilities to connect to the MCU peripherals.
The MDA300 [7] is a generic data acquisition expansion
board for the IRIS platform. It offers analog input channels,
digital input and output channels, relays and external sensor
excitation. This opens up a whole range of new applications
such as remote process control. The complete feature list is
the following:
• 7 single-ended or 3 differential ADC channels;
• 4 precise differential ADC channels;
• 6 digital I/O channels with event detection interrupt;
• 2.5, 3.3, 5V sensor excitation and low-power mode;
• 64K EEPROM for onboard sensor calibration data;
• 2 relay channels, one normally open and one normally
closed;
• 200 Hz counter channel for wind speed, pulse frequen-
cies;
• external I2C interface.
The Sharp GP2Y1010AU0F [8] is a dust sensor with
optical sensing system. An infrared emitting diode (IRED)
and a phototransistor are diagonally arranged into this de-
vice. It detects the reﬂected light of dust in air. Especially,
it is effective to detect very ﬁne particle like cigarette
smoke. In addition it can distinguish smoke from house
dust by pulse pattern of output voltage. The features that
have recomended it are the compact size envisioned for
integration in air puriﬁers or air conditioning units which
is also suitable for our design. Very important for wireless
embedded application is the low current draw of 20mA. We
employ a popular Arduino board to handle the interfacing of
the sensor in this initial iteration. The microcontroller board
is based on the ATmega328. It has 14 digital input/output
pins, of which 6 can be used as PWM outputs, 6 analog
inputs, a 16 MHz crystal oscillator, a USB connection, a
power jack, an ICSP header, and a reset button.The board
has the task of enabling the duty cycling of the command for
the optical sensor LED according to the pattern in Figure 4.
Basically, a digital output controlling the led of the detector
has to be set to low for 0.32ms in a 10ms time period,
afterwards a analog voltage output can be read.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.
Optical Dust Sensor (a) Internal schematic (b) PWM Excitation
We place the dust sensor in our region of interest and
air starts ﬂowing naturally through the measurement space.
The microcontroller board runs the embedded software loop
to activate the light source and read the sensitive element
processed output. Once a value has been read, it is output in
the form of an analog signal captured by the ADC0 channel
of the MDA300 board and interfaced to the appropiate input
channel of the mote. The mote is tasked with broadcasting
a radio message containing this voltage value. This happens
either directly to the base station or, if the networking
protocol decides that there is no direct or poor connectivity
to the base station, via multi hop communication with
neghboring nodes acting as relays for the source of the
data. Our system communicates directly with the radio base
station but multi hop is supported without any additional
conﬁguration. The overview of the components is shown in
Figure 5. We have also employed auxiliary elements such
as resistors and capacitors to build the sensor power supply
circuit and the pulse width modulation to analog output for
the microcontroller board.
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

IRIS M2110 processing/radio board
MDA300 Data Acquisition Interface
Arduino micro controller development board
Sharp GP2Y1010AU0F Optical Dust Sensor
Figure 5.
Components Overview
IV. RESULTS: VISUALIZATION AND EVALUATION
Figure 6 illustrates the experimental laboratory deploy-
ment. As a reference system, we use the Dylos DC1100
Air Quality Monitor which is a professional grade laser
particle counter. It offers two measurement channels, one
for small particles in the range 0.5µm − 2.5µm such as
bacteria and mold and one for large particles, 2.5µm−10µm
like pollen or thick smoke. In comparison, the datasheet of
the low cost optical dust sensor states more vaguely that it
detects particles over 1µm. Our version includes an RS-232
connector to communicate with a dedicated logging software
on the host PC which records particle concentration every
minute for both channels. The device is factory calibrated
and we rely on this calibration to perform comparison to
our measurement node. The default measurement unit is a
count thousands of particles per cubic foot which has to be
converted in milligrams per cubic meter. For the wireless
node, the application handling the data is called MoteView
[9]. Data logging and display is supported via MoteView
user interface. The software is designed to be the primary
interface between a user and a deployed network of wireless
sensors. It provides an intuitive user interface to database
management along with sensor data visualization and anal-
ysis tools. Sensor data can be logged to a database residing
on a host PC, or to a database running autonomously. One
important factor to consider is that the voltage values are
scaled to adapt to the MDA300 input range of 0 to 2V
as compared to the maximum saturated output of the dust
sensor of 3.7V.
We follow the conversion procedure [10]. The assumption
it follows are:
• particles
are
spherical,
with
a
density
of
1.65E12µg/m3;
• the radius of a small particle is .44µm;
• the radius of a large particle is 2.6µm.
Figure 6.
Laboratory Implementation of the Proposed System
Table I
DYLOS DC1100 PARTICLE COUNT VALUES
Channel
Small
Large
Average
666329
95512
Low
68300
8000
High
5157300
850900
Average mg/m3
0.0139
0.4097
Low mg/m3
0.0014
0.0343
High mg/m3
0.107
3.64
so that the formula for deriving mass density from particle
count is:
c[mg/m3] =
n
0.0283 · 4 · π
3
· r3 · ρ
(2)
where n is the particle count per cubic foot, r the radius
of a particle and ρ the speciﬁc density of the particles.
Therefore, Table 1 shows particle counts per cubic foot for
the small and large channels of the air quality monitor over
the experiment period. The average, low and high values
for both channels are also converted to mg/m3 to enable
comparison with the observed peaks of the Sharp dust sensor
response.
The main experiment that we have performed consisted
of a continous 30 minute monitoring period with the results
illustrated in Figure 7. In this time span we have acquired
31 samples from the professional device and 632 wireless
measurements from our node, with a 3 second sampling
interval. We can see that the peaks are correctly identiﬁed
by the measurement node which outputs a saturated value
of around 1.72V. Comparing this to the characteristic output
curve of the sensor in Figure 8, we assimilate the voltage
output of our system for a maximum concentration of
particles of 0.55mg/m3. An interesting fact is that, over the
saturation limit we can still evaluate higher concentrations
of dust due to the prolonged width of the high output signal.
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

(a)
(b)
Figure 7.
30 Minute Particle Monitoring Results (a) Wireless Measurement Node (b) Dylos DC1100 Air Quality Monitor
In practice, after the ﬁrst smoke event the spike in the
sensor answer seems somewhat isolated but for the next two
experiments there are more similar high value readings in
the corresponding time frame.
In order to establish a dust concetration baseline, we
alternate steady periods with high particulate matter events
in the form of smoke resulting from paper incineration.
The spikes in the data analysis show the response of both
systems to such events. The increasing baseline certiﬁes that
the dust sensor we use is sensitive to the steady increase
in ambiental particulate concentrations resulting from paper
burning events. The baseline voltage ranged from 0.05V to
0.15V in the later stages of the deployment.
Fine grained analyisis can be performed only in a given
volume enclosure with a pre-measured quantity of particles.
In our case we relate to the room volume and place the two
measurement systems close together. It it to be noted that
the Dylos device uses forced supply by means of a small
fan while the measurement node relies on natural air ﬂow.
Figure 8.
Dust Sensor Output Characteristic
After this experimental evaluation, we can conclude that
initial testing has showed promising results regarding the
response and sensitivity of the Sharp optical dust sensor
and, implicitly, of our wireless measurement node. The
professional grade air quality monitor provided a trustwor-
thy calibration reference which has enable us to establish
a baseline for dust concentration and effectively measure
particle counts and equivalent mass densities.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have reported how to create a wireless
node to measure dust concentration at any industrial site or
other areas, by combining smart data acquisition technology
and wireless sensor networks. All the components in the
laboratory have been connected in one system to create a
smart node, and were adjusted according to their speciﬁc
purpose. By using specialized software we collected the
results from the nodes and we created the wireless link
with the available network by self conﬁguration with the
network. In addition to the low cost, a smart node has many
advantages: it runs on batteries which can operate for long
periods of time, it is scalable, allowing the addition of nodes
to additional features and to expand the network up to tens
or even hundreds of nodes. We have used a professional
grade air quality monitoring device in order to validate the
experimental data coming from our system in low and high
particle concentration environments.
Future work direction is two fold. First, we want to
make the microcontroller development board redundant by
implementing TinyOS components and modules directly on
the mote processing board to handle sensor reading tasks.
Its sole role as an intermediary in the current iteration of the
system can be removed and thus enable the node to operate
independently. Second, we propose to evaluate an alternative
to the Sharp sensor in the form of the Shinyei PPD4NS
particle sensor. Literature review has pointed out that in
some situations, it is better suited to certain application due
to enhanced sensitivity. Also, the pulse width modulation of
this sensor works in a more reliable manner than the analog
output voltage of the Sharp version.
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work has been partially funded by the Sectoral Oper-
ational Programme Human Resources Development 2007-
2013 of the Romanian Ministry of Labour, Family and
Social Protection through the Financial Agreement POS-
DRU/88/1.5/S/60203.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Li, My T. Thai and W. Wu (Eds.), Wireless Sensor Networks
and Applications, Springer, 2008.
[2] V. Sgˆarciu and G. Stamatescu, Distance Process Monitoring
using LabVIEW Environment, LabVIEW - Modeling, Program-
ming and Simulations, Ed. Riccardo de Asmundis, pp. 67-89,
InTech, January 2011.
[3] F. Hauert and A. Vogl, Measurement of Dust Cloud Char-
acteristics in Industrial Plants, Technical Report PL910695,
Research Center for Applied System Safety and Industrial
Medicine, January 1995.
[4] J. Zhang, W. Li, N. Han and J. Kan, Forest Fire Detection
System based on a ZigBee Wireless Sensor Network, Front.
For. China, vol.3(3), pp. 369-374, Higher Education Press and
Springer Verlag, 2008.
[5] ZigBee Alliance, ZigBee Speciﬁcation, ZigBee Document
053474R17, 2008.
[6] B. Ivanov, O. Zhelondz, L. Borodulkin and H. Ruser, Dis-
tributed Smart Sensor System for Indoor Climate Monitoring,
Proc. of KONNEX Scientiﬁc Conference, Munich, 2002.
[7] Crossbow Inc., MTS/MDA Sensor Board Users Manual, Revi-
sion A, June 2007.
[8] Sharp Corp., GP2Y1010AU0F Compact Optical Dust Sensor
Datasheet, E4-A01501EN, 2007.
[9] M. Turon, MOTE-VIEW: A Sensor Network Monitoring and
Management Tool, 2nd IEEE workshop on Embedded Net-
worked Sensors, EmNets ’05, pp. 11-17, 2005.
[10] J. Lee et al., Seasonal variations of particle size distributions
of PAHs at Seoul, South Korea, Air Quality Atmospheric
Health, vol. 1, pp. 57-68, 2008.
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

