Animal Sensor Networks: Animal Welfare Under Arctic Conditions 
Mohamad Y. Mustafa 
Department of Technology 
Narvik University College 
Narvik, Norway 
myfm@hin.no 
 
Inger Hansen, Svein Eilertsen 
Bioforsk Nord Tjøtta 
Tjøtta, Norway 
inger.hansen@bioforsk.no 
 svein.eilertsen@bioforsk.no 
 
 
 
Abstract—Animal tracking, which can be efficiently performed 
using wireless sensor networks (WSNs) is an important tool 
that provides useful information about animals’ activities. It is 
also fundamental for environmental research. Under arctic 
conditions, WSNs face many challenges, such aslogistics costs, 
accessibility, danger of animals that might eat or destroy the 
equipment, effect of low temperatures on components, battery 
durability (which is drastically affected by low temperatures), 
effect of snow and ice on antennas and moving parts and 
continuous needs for calibration and adjustment due to 
extreme seasonal changes. However, they are a very good tool 
to overcome accessibility of semi-domestic animals under 
harsh weather conditions. One possible application of WSNs is 
the identification of ownership of newly born reindeer, which 
will be presented in this work as an example on arctic 
application. 
Keywords-Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN); Animal Sensor 
Networks (ASN); RFID; Wi-Fi Enabled RFID; ZigBee 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The use of WSN to monitor animal movement and 
behaviour is increasing rapidly. WSNs can be of great value 
in managing the animals and improving their productivity 
and impact on the environment. They are also very useful 
for animal owners and researchers for acquiring useful data, 
which can be used for the welfare of the animals. 
Under arctic conditions, the environment imposes 
certain challenges on the network due to harsh weather 
conditions, such as logistics costs, accessibility, danger of 
animals that might eat or destroy the equipment, effect of 
low temperatures on components, battery durability (which 
is drastically affected by low temperatures), effect of snow 
and ice on antennas and moving parts and continuous needs 
for calibration and adjustment due to extreme seasonal 
changes. These factors are usually hard to predict by 
developers 
and 
will 
only 
appear 
through 
actual 
implementation of WSN strategies, which are much more 
closely integrated to the environment than other systems. 
On the other hand, the harsh conditions in the arctic 
region necessitate the implementation of WSNs to overcome 
the problem of accessibility and reduce logistics and cost for 
acquiring 
necessary 
data 
about 
animals 
and 
the 
environment. This is consistent with the fact that science 
contributions from the computer science community have 
always been application-driven, which remains an essential 
philosophy for (WSN) community.  Those challenges and 
contributions are presented within the Animal Sensor 
Networks (ASN) project. 
The ASN project is part of The Botnia-Atlantica 
programme, 
which 
is 
a 
cross-border 
cooperation 
programme, intended to co-fund projects within the Botnia-
Atlantica area. The programme is one of several European 
territorial cooperation programmes, co-funded by the 
European Regional Development Fund. The programme 
covers a larger area that includes the regions Ostrobothnia, 
Central Ostrobothnia and Satakunta in Finland, Västerbotten 
and Västernorrland as well as the municipality of 
Nordanstig in Sweden and the Nordland region in Norway, 
Fig. 1. The regions Southern Ostrobothnia in Finland and 
Gävleborg (except Nordanstig) in Sweden participate as 
adjacent areas in the programme [1]. Within this region, 
several research groups are working in the field of animal 
sensor networks. Some examples are Umeå University and 
the project "Digital Zoo" where a large scale testbed for 
wireless video sensor networks was built together with 
Lycksele zoo [2]. 
The Swedish university of agricultural science (SLU) 
and Centria in Österbotten, Finland, have already done 
research related to farming. The purpose of this project is to 
conduct applied research in the area of ASN so as to 
strengthen the collaboration between these groups and 
establish a knowledge cluster in this field. Specifically, the 
project will develop systems to collect information about 
individual animals in large areas. 
 
Figure 1. Interest area for the EU Botnia-Atlantica project [1]. 
231
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

This research will be applied for the tourism sector in 
the test-bed that has been developed in Lycksele Zoo [2]. 
The technology will also be applied for farming applications 
both in the SLUs experimental farm in Umeå and at Centria, 
Finland [3]. 
So far, a competence cluster around WSNs for animals 
has been established in the region and one test-bed and 
reference deployment for sensor networks applied in 
tourism application has been established in Lycksele zoo, 
together with two test-beds for sensor networks applied in 
farming applications has been established. Furthermore, 
new sensor network hardware and software platforms for 
collecting information from animals have been developed 
and long-term tests have been carried out at the test-beds for 
wireless sensor networks. The goal is to make the system 
easy to deploy and maintain. This is of high importance to 
create business opportunities from the technology. The 
project also tries to verify new innovative ideas and 
applications based on the technology developed in the 
project and develop animal tracking algorithms based on 
multi-modal sensor fusion. The project also aims at 
developing new sensor network platforms for collecting 
information from animals. One platform of particular 
interest is smart ear tags containing sensors, microcontroller, 
wireless transceiver, batteries and solar panel for energy 
harvesting. This platform can be used to collect information 
from animals both in farming and in tourism applications.  
Tracking of animal’s movement is a fundamental tool to 
provide good and efficient management of these animals. 
The study of animal’s movement is also a foundation for 
environmental research. One possible application of this 
approach is the identification of ownership of newly born 
reindeer which will be presented in this work as a study 
case. ASN also have potential applications in animal 
monitoring for farming improvement because with this 
system the farmers can systematically optimise their animal 
business [3]. 
As far as the research in Norway is concerned, the 
research teams at Bioforsk Tjøtta and Narvik University 
College will help to develop the cross-border network 
between research groups in this field within the region 
Botnia-Atlantica. Other Norwegian companies are also 
involved in this project such as  Tele Track, NoFence and 
Biocontrol/Os ID, all of which may contribute to the further 
development of electronic monitoring for grazing animals 
[4]. 
In this paper, an overview of significant WSN 
technologies for animal welfare will be discussed. The 
major WSN technologies, such as RFID, GPS, Wi- Fi and 
Wi-Fi enabled RFID will be considered with some details; 
other technologies, such as ZigBee, Bluetooth and 
GSM/GPRS will be briefly compared to the WiFi 
technology; however, the description of those technologies 
will take a qualitative approach and will not go into 
technical details. An application example of WSN for 
animal welfare will be presented to explain the use of this 
technology for ownership recognition of newborn reindeer 
calves. This application implies the implementation of 
localization algorithms, which could be material for further 
work. 
II. 
OVERVIEW OF SIGNIFICANT WSN TECHNOLOGIES FOR 
ANIMAL WELFARE  
WSNs have been used extensively for the welfare of 
animals. Various examples of their applications are reported 
in the open literature. Ranjan et al. [5] created a wireless 
sensor network for wildlife monitoring; in their system they 
utilised specially designed collars with sensor nodes, which 
are attached to the necks of wild animals. These collars 
collect data about the desired parameters from the vicinity 
of the animal and transmit it to the base station. This 
information is used by wildlife scientists for habitat 
monitoring and behavioural habits of the monitored animals.  
Kwong [6] presented a wireless communication solution 
that fulﬁlls the requirement for intensive condition 
monitoring of individual animals, aggregation and timely 
reporting of data to the farm manager designed for both 
loose house dairy cattle and free ranging beef cattle. The 
design target utilises inexpensive, low power consumption 
sensor nodes as the base elements of a data gathering and 
communication infrastructure. Laboratory experiments and 
farm trials have been carried out to evaluate the 
performance of the platform communication protocol. The 
results of experiments demonstrate that the platform 
performs efficiently while conforming to the limitations 
associated with WSN implementations.  
In the following sections, some of the potential WSNs 
technologies will be considered. A study case based on Wi-
Fi enabled RFID will be presented, as an example. 
A. RFID 
Radio Frequency IDentification (RFID) is widely used 
for electronic identification and tracking. RFID offers 
substantial advantages for businesses allowing automatic 
inventory and tracking on the supply chain. This technology 
plays a key role in pervasive networks and services [7].  
Data can be stored and remotely retrieved on RFID tags, 
enabling real-time identification of devices and users. 
However, the usage of RFID could be hugely optimized if 
identification information was linked to location [8]. RFID 
networks are composed of three different entities, RFID 
tags, readers, and servers, as represented in Fig. 2.  
All RFID tags use radio frequency energy to 
communicate with the readers. However, the method of 
powering the tags varies. An active tag embeds an internal 
battery which continuously powers it and its RF 
232
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

communication circuitry. Readers can thus transmit very 
low-level signals, and the tag can reply with high-level 
signals. 
An 
active 
tag 
can 
also 
have 
additional 
functionalities such as memory, and a sensor, or a 
cryptography module. On the other hand, a passive tag has 
no internal power supply.  
Generally, it backscatters the carrier signal received 
from a reader. Passive tags have a smaller size and are 
cheaper 
than 
active 
tags, 
but 
have 
very 
limited 
functionalities. The last type of RFID tags is semi passive 
tags. These tags communicate with the readers like passive 
tags but they embed an internal battery that constantly 
powers their internal circuitry. 
 
 
Figure 2. Structure of a typical RFID system [8]. 
RFID readers have two interfaces. The first one is an RF 
interface that communicates with the tags in their read range 
in order to retrieve tags’ identities. The second one is a 
communication interface, generally IEEE 802.11 or 802.3, 
for communicating with the servers. Finally, one or several 
servers constitute the third part of an RFID system. They 
collect tags’ identities sent by the reader and perform 
calculation such as applying a localization method. 
RFID systems can be classified in two main categories 
in accordance with their usage: monitoring and authorizing. 
Classic applications are livestock or people monitoring. The 
second class includes RFID systems where the tags are not 
permanently attached to entities. Typical usages of 
authorizing RFID systems are access control in a building 
where tags are embedded inside cards or keys [9].  
B. GPS 
The Global Positioning System (GPS) has traditionally 
underpinned the development of ubiquitous positioning 
solutions. This stems from the increasing recognition across 
society that under ideal operational conditions, GPS can 
meet the majority of attributes of ubiquitous positioning 
system i.e. accuracy, reliability and availability. However, it 
is also widely acknowledged that in certain environments 
these performance attributes can quickly deteriorate to 
unacceptable levels, with often only weak GPS signals 
available Wi-Fi [10]. 
C. Wireless-Fidelity (Wi-Fi) 
Wi-Fi signals are different in this regard. Over the last 
few years, millions of Wi-Fi access points have been have 
been established to facilitate more efficient and flexible 
access to data and communications around the world. 
However, these access points repeatedly broadcast a signal 
the strength of which can be measured and used in 
algorithms to locate a Wi-Fi enabled device. Unfortunately, 
the positioning capabilities of Wi-Fi are weakened by the 
fact that positioning performance is highly dependent on the 
strength of the signal received from nearby access points, 
which are affected by a diversity of uncontrollable 
environmental effects, e.g., people, building material, etc. 
Despite this significant limitation Wi-Fi signals continue to 
be an attractive alternative positioning technology due to the 
growing number of Wi-Fi enabled mobile devices being 
produced (over 360 million Wi-Fi handsets projected to be 
sold annually by 2011) combined with the rapid growth in 
Wi-Fi access points being installed globally (shipments of 
consumer oriented Wi-Fi access points are expected to grow 
from 6 million in 2008 to 88 million in 2013) [10]. 
D. Wi-Fi Enabled RFID 
Wi-Fi-enabled RFID is commonly used for location-
based services that track objects in a specific physical 
context, like children in a theme park, cars in a parking lot, 
equipment in a manufacturing plant, etc. It is considered a 
more accurate system than a traditional RFID network for 
determining the location of tagged objects.  A regular RFID 
system can give what is called the “choke point” location, or 
zone-based location, meaning the location of the tag is 
known only in relation to the reader detecting its presence. 
A Wi-Fi network on the other hand can determine the 
precise x,y coordinates of a tag using triangulation methods, 
similar to how GPS works [11].  
In these RFID systems, tags are Wi-Fi devices, and Wi-
Fi access points function as readers. These tags can have an 
accuracy of 3-5 meters when determining the location and a 
large number of tags can communicate simultaneously with 
a single access point without choking the Wi-Fi network. 
These tags are generally capable of bi-directional data 
exchange [12]. 
The MAC (Media Access Control) Address uniquely 
identifies each node of a network and serves as the unique 
identifier on the tag, while the location software determines 
the specific coordinates. Additional application software can 
transform coordinates in terms that are meaningful to a user 
by matching them to specific locations. A Wi-Fi application 
then can identify the tag and its location. Some tags may 
contain additional data derived from integrated sensors [13]. 
This technology has been used and proven in many 
applications [11].  
To simplify the manner of operation of the Wi-Fi-based 
active RFID tags, they simply send a wireless 802.11 signal 
at a regular interval, the signal is received by the Wi-Fi 
233
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

access points or location receivers, and is sent to a Location 
Engine which determines the tag’s location, and sends it to 
the visibility software. The visibility software uses location 
data to determine the exact location of the RFID tag [14]. 
The Wi-Fi (IEEE802.11WLAN) can support many devices 
(max. 128) within one network, it can transmit data up to 
30m distance, needs more power, and cost is more than 
Bluetooth or ZigBee [15]. 
E. Wi-Fi vs. other wireless technologies 
Table I compares Wi-Fi technology to ZigBee, 
Bluetooth and GSM/GPRS technologies. Obviously the 
ZigBee is more efficient in terms of reliability, cost, size 
and battery life compared to Wi-Fi, while Wi-Fi is 
recognised for its flexibility, speed and availability. 
TABLE I. COMPARISON OF WI-FI TECHNOLOGY WITH 
OTHER WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES [16]. 
 
Hence, for an application such as the identification of 
calf and mother reindeer, the existing Wi-Fi network at the 
premises can be used and the tags can be used for this 
particular purpose for a limited time each year which 
reduces the cost of the equipment needed, a further 
economic study of the required equipment should however, 
be performed. 
III. 
APPLICATION EXAMPLE  
Reindeer herding is the major traditional economic 
activity 
of 
the 
Saami 
people, 
who 
are 
the 
indigenous people of Finnmark, the northern most, largest 
and least populated county in Norway. Herds of Reindeer of 
mixed age and sex varying in size from 100 to 10,000 
animals are maintained on natural mountain pasture all year 
round and typically are moved between coastal summer 
pastures and inland winter pastures. Identifying the 
ownership of new-born calves is a major problem for 
reindeer herders. Recognising and matching the reindeer 
calves to the different mothers is a two-step process. First 
the animals are caught in a small pen. All female reindeer 
get individual numbers sprayed on the skin at each side of 
the animal. Each owner uses one specific colour. Calves get 
a collar each around their neck, with a unique number plate 
hanging on it. This procedure is stressful for the animals. 
Thereafter, the animals are released to larger pens to calm 
down. Several reindeer owners and herders start observing 
the reindeer with binoculars in order to identify/match 
which reindeer calf (number plate) is following which 
mothers (sprayed number). Thereafter, the reindeer owners 
compare the different observations to guaranty that the 
correct mother is matched to her calf. 
The next step is to gather the reindeer herd again in a 
small pen, catch the calves, remove the number plate and 
replace it by an ear cutting or a tag. This handling procedure 
is also stressful to the animals.  
In this study, a technique based on WSNs to identify the 
ownership of the calves is presented. It is proposed to equip 
the newly born calves with an active RFID tag, facilitated 
with receivers and gateways based on Wi-Fi network, 
usually available and accessible at the identification site and 
monitor the movement of the herd in a confined space, such 
as a fenced pen, covered by a grid of signal receivers 
corresponding to the transmitter device attached to the 
reindeer, which basically tracks the movement of the tags. 
This process is performed in a few days per year, hence the 
Wi-Fi network can be utilised for other objectives for the 
rest of the year. A suitable algorithm has to be used to 
analyse the gathered data and recognise the pairs of tags 
which keep close together most of the time, which are the 
mother and calf reindeer.  
Being a wild animal species, the reindeers tend to be 
more cautious than domestic animals; hence they tend to 
avoid confined spaces and close objects mounted by 
humans, which makes the use of passive RFIDs more 
difficult due to their low range, because the receivers have 
to be placed close to the RFIDs. This will demand the 
attachment of active RFIDs to both mothers and calves. 
In this procedure, the pen where the animals are to be 
gathered for tagging is facilitated with a Wi-Fi network, a 
group of Wi-Fi routers mounted on posts, as shown in Fig. 
3. 
 
 
Figure 3. Animal pen of area 40 x 80 m2 (dashed rectangle) covered by Wi-
Fi network, represented by the large circles, the Wi-Fi routers are the black 
dots at the centres of the larger circles.  
234
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Large and small pairs of coloured circles represent 
mother and calf. The schematic represents possible 
configuration of the Wi-Fi coverage, which covers the 
whole pen, with minor pockets of uncovered areas, which 
have to be kept to a minimum. 
The locations or the RFID tags are gathered in a 
computer programme and analysed. However, the proposed 
method suffers from a few limitations pertaining to the 
number of tags that can be covered using one Wi-Fi reader 
and coverage of the pen area, which could create further 
problems pertaining to transmission, repeatability and 
accuracy. Nevertheless, those limitations can be overcome 
using proper antennas and larger number of Wi-Fi readers.  
In the proposed set up, tags are Wi-Fi devices, which 
can have an accuracy of 3-5 meters. An advantage of this 
system is that a large number of tags can communicate 
simultaneously with a single access point without choking 
the Wi-Fi network, while a traditional RFID technology 
would have required hundreds of readers in order to 
pinpoint the location of a single tag with the same precision 
as the Wi-Fi network. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, the background of the animal sensor 
network project, which is part of the EU Botnia-Atlantica 
programme, has been presented. Various significant (WSN) 
technologies have been presented and an example 
application for animal welfare has been described.  
WSNs face many challenges under arctic conditions, but 
at the same time offer many advantages, which reflect on 
the welfare of the animals and environment in the region.  
The problem of ownership identification of newly born 
reindeer calves was presented as an example application 
from the experience of reindeer herding in northern Norway, 
which lies within the arctic region. It described the process 
of matching new-born reindeer calves to their mothers, so 
that they can be given the proper RFID tags of their relevant 
owners, based on Wi-Fi enabled RFID tags.  
This method is expected to reduce the amount of effort 
and time in performing the identification process under the 
harsh arctic conditions and paves the way for the 
implementation of Wi-Fi enabled RFID tags for animal 
welfare applications. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This research work is undertaken under the Botnia-
Atlantica programme, co-funded by the European Regional 
Development Fund. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
EU. Botnia- Atlantica Project. 2013  [retrieved, 
April 2013]; Available from: http://www.botnia-
atlantica.eu/default.asp?lid=1  
[2] 
Karlsson, J., Wark, T., Haake, J., and Björk, P., The 
digital zoo: a testbed for wireless video sensor 
networks. in 10th Scandinavian Workshop on 
Wireless Ad-hoc Networks (ADHOC ´11). 2011 
Johannesberg Castle, Stockholm. 
[3] 
Karlsson, J., Animal Sensor Network. 2013  
[retrieved, 
April 
2013]; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.tfe.umu.se/english/research/embedded-
systems-lab/projects/animal-sensor-networks/. 
[4] 
EU. Interreg Project. 2013  [retrieved, April 2013];  
http://www.interreg.no/ireg/web.nsf/ShowProject? 
[5] 
Ranjan, P., Saraswat, P., Kumar, A., Polana, S., and 
Singh, A., WildCENSE - GPS based animal 
tracking system. in IEEE Xplore 2008. 2008. 
[6] 
Kwong, K.H., Practical considerations for wireless 
sensor networks in cattle monitoring applications. 
Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 2012. 
81: pp. 33-44. 
[7] 
Want, R., An introduction to RFID technology. 
IEEE Pervasive Computing, 2006. 5(1): pp. 25-33. 
[8] 
Bouet, M.,. RFID Tags: Positioning Principles and 
Localization Techniques. in Wireless Days, WD '08. 
1st IFIP. 2008. Dubai: IEEE. 
[9] 
Hassan, T. and Chatterjee, S., A taxonomy for 
RFID. in Proc. of HICSS. 2006. 
[10] 
Kealy, A., B. Li, Gallagher, T. and A. Dempster 
(2009). Evaluation of WiFi Technologies for Indoor 
Positioning Applications. Proceedings of the 
Surveying & Spatial Sciences Institute Biennial 
International Conference, Adelaide 2009, pp. 411-
421. ISBN: 978-0-9581366-8-6. 
[11] 
Fine, C., Klym, N., Trossen, D., and Tavshikar, M.,  
The Evolution of RFID Networks: The Potential for 
Disruptive Innovation in http://ebusiness.mit.edu, 
M. Sloan School of Management, Editor MIT 
Sloan, March, 2006. 
[12] 
excITingIP.com, Location Tracking using Wi-Fi 
based RFID Tags, 2012, excITingIP.com. 
[13] 
O’Connor, M.C., RFID’s Urge to Converge. RFID 
Journal, 2006. 1 (1). 
[14] 
Lui, T., Wi-Fi-Based Active RFID Technology & 
Applications, 2007, Aeroscout Enterprise visibility 
solutions. 
[15] 
Baker, N., ZigBee and Bluetooth - strength and 
weakness for industrial applications. Computer 
control Eng, 2005. 16: pp. 20-25. 
[16] 
Lu, K. Y., A plug-and-play data gathering system 
using ZigBee-based sensor network sensor network. 
Computers in Industry, 2011. 62 (7): pp. 719-728. 
235
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

