Wireless Sensor Networks in Structural Health Monitoring: a Modular Approach
Fabio Angeletti, Mario Paoli
Department of Computer, Control and Management Engineering
University of Rome La Sapienza
Email:{angeletti, paoli}@dis.uniroma1.it
Ugo Maria Colesanti, Andrea Vitaletti
Wireless Research Laboratory
Wsense s.r.l.
Email: {ugo.colesanti, andrea.vitaletti}@wsense.it
Abstract—In this paper, we present the Modular Monitoring
System (MMS), a low-power wireless architecture dedicated to
Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) applications. Our solution
features an easily customizable modular architecture, fulﬁlling
the needs of many SHM applications. The MMS supports mesh
network topology and offers excellent coverage and reliability,
taking advantage of Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) technology.
In this preliminary work we show how the ﬂexibility of our
approach offers great advantages with respect to the current
state-of-the-art systems dedicated to SHM.
Keywords–Wireless Sensor Networks; Structural Health Moni-
toring; Modular Architecture; Wireless; Low-Power.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Detecting damages to which civil and industrial struc-
tures, such as roads, bridges, canals, buildings and aero-
space vehicles are subjected, is referred as SHM. It can
prevent collapses and breaks, avoiding permanent damages
to structures, thus simplifying their maintenance. Depending
on application scenarios, SHM requires many different types
of sensors, including pressure sensors, vibrating-wire strain
gauges, inclinometers, crackmeters, etc. Most monitoring sys-
tems dedicated to SHM are wired but, deploying a wired
system in a wide area or in a harsh environment, can pose both
economical and practical limitations. For such reasons, WSNs
were proposed as network infrastructure to support SHM,
avoiding prohibitive costs of wired systems and easing the
on-ﬁeld deployment. Nowadays, SHM supported by WSN is
an active and well-established research ﬁeld and some wireless
SHM systems are now entering the market. The preliminary
work made in this paper introduces the MMS, a wireless,
low-power, scalable architecture dedicated to SHM. The main
strength point of MMS is its high modularity that allows
easy customization of the platform depending on the number
and the type of sensors required by the speciﬁc application
scenario. In addition, MMS fully supports multi-hop wireless
communication paradigm and mesh networks. The remainder
of this paper is organized as follows: Section II is dedicated
to both wired and wireless SHM state-of-the-art systems, in
Section III we explain motivations supporting design choices
made during the development of the MMS, while in Section
IV we introduce the features characterizing our system from an
high-level perspective. In Section V, we present the hardware
prototype and the achieved results. Finally, in Section VI, we
give conclusions and directions for the future.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
Nowadays, most SHM systems available on the market,
such as the Geomonitor by Solexperts [1], are wired. However,
deploying those systems can be cumbersome: besides the
installation costs, a detailed deployment plan is required to
face evolving needs of different construction phases. Moreover,
cables are subjected to accidental cuts and damages and, in
some scenarios, their installation is unfeasible or inappropriate
(e.g., historical buildings). Along with wired systems, some
standalone data loggers dedicated to SHM are commercially
available, among the others: Solexperts SDL [1], Geokon
8002-16-1 [2] and Keller GSM-2 [3]. Those systems are
simpler to install, but they do not allow real-time remote
monitoring and require frequent in-situ access by qualiﬁed
personnel to collect data.
The introduction of wireless communications in SHM gives
immediate advantages in terms of easier deployments and
reduced maintenance and personnel costs. However, when
monitoring devices are battery-powered, the employment of
wireless communications is among the most energy demanding
feature that can signiﬁcantly limit the devices lifetime. Promi-
nent examples of wireless monitoring systems are: National
Instruments Wireless Data Acquisition (WiFi-DAQ) [4] and
MicroStrain’s wireless sensor network [5]. While the former
supports IEEE 802.11 standard, the latter is compliant with
IEEE 802.15.4. Both products adopt a conservative approach
by limiting wireless communication to 1-hop. Supporting
multi-hop wireless communications was investigated in several
research papers in the last decade [6][7][8]. Multi-hop net-
working provides a number of advantages: scalability (larger
areas can be covered), reliability (failure and multiple routing
paths without single point of failure) and ease of deployments
(the presence of multi-hop relay nodes allows to bypass
obstacles like walls and metal structures). Recently, National
Instruments presented the NI WSN [9]: a multi-hop battery-
powered WSN supporting up to 36 nodes conﬁgured in a mesh
network and up to 3 years node lifetime.
III.
MOTIVATIONS
As seen in the previous section, WSNs are slowly entering
the market of SHM applications. An attempt to develop a
robust solution and to test it in realistic application scenarios
was made in the GENESI Project [10]. The main goal of
this project was to design and implement a “novel generation
of green wireless sensor networks which can be embedded
in buildings and infrastructures at the time of construction
and be able to provide a monitoring and control intelligence
over the whole structure lifetime”. The project involved the
monitoring of a bridge construction site in Fribourg [11] and
the construction of a tunnel for the B1 underground line in
Rome [12], by means of WSNs. The outcomes highlighted
the advantages of WSN technology described in Section II
compared to old monitoring techniques. According to the
application requirements provided by the SHM experts, GEN-
ESI nodes can support a number of heterogeneous sensors.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

However, a GENESI node can manage only a single sensor
per type, while there are some applications in which multiple
instances of the same sensor are needed. As an example, in a 3-
axis deformation analysis, a single wireless node may need to
interface with three instances of a vibrating-wire strain gauge
while to monitor a concrete junction the node may need to
interface a current-loop inclinometer sensor and a resistive
displacement sensor. Other commercial solutions, such as the
NI WSN described in Section II, can handle multiple instances
of the same sensor but can not support different sensor families
simultaneously. In general, we observed that developing a
hardware platform ﬂexible enough to handle a high number
of sensor combinations required by SHM applications is not
practical both in terms of size and costs. In the speciﬁc, such
solution would require additional hardware and connectors that
could remain unused during deployments. This brought us to
propose a novel low-power slotted modular system made by a
set of modules connected through an internal communication
bus. This solution features one wireless-capable master module
managing a group of extension modules, each one designed to
interface a speciﬁc sensor setup. The ﬂexibility of the proposed
architecture, named MMS, allows to support a vast number
of SHM applications by simply plugging into each node
the required extension modules. Another important advantage
given by MMS is the possibility to easily swap between
wireless technologies by replacing the master module. This
characteristic allows to preserve the required level of wireless
performance in both indoor and outdoor scenarios, further
increasing the ﬂexibility of our system.
IV.
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
The MMS architecture is based on a master/slave com-
munication abstraction: a master module, provided with radio
capability and responsible for most of computational tasks,
communicates through a low-power shared bus with a max-
imum of four extension modules (slaves). All modules are
interconnected through a backplane following Figure 1.
Figure 1. Modular Architecture
The backplane also offers 12 external pins per module to
attach external sensors and a battery plug for different kind of
power supplies.
A. Low-Power Shared Bus
The low-power shared bus was designed to optimize the
energy consumption of the whole system. For this reason, it
uses a communication principle based on Serial Peripheral
Interface (SPI) with dedicated chip-selects, interrupts and
power lines for each extension module. This enables the master
to communicate in an exclusive way with each module, without
spurious wake-up of slave modules not involved in the com-
munication (as opposed to other shared bus communication
interfaces, i.e., the Two-Wire Interface). The drawback of this
approach is a high number of additional lines required, with a
subsequent limited number of supported extension modules.
Please refer to Section IV-D for a solution to this known
limitation.
B. Master Module
The master module is responsible for keeping wireless
connectivity with the WSN and manages extension modules.
When switched on, the master performs a discovery routine
on the low-power shared bus to detect extension modules
and their slot locations. For each discovered module, the
master retrieves its conﬁguration information and computes the
sensing schedule. The master can also update the conﬁguration
depending on the user needs. When asking for sensor data,
the master has different ways to interact with the extension
modules based on power requirements, scheduling and module
type. The typical interaction protocol of the master module
follows the steps:
1)
Optional: It enables the power line of the extension
module
2)
It pulls down the corresponding chip-select line
3)
It sends a Data Request command with all the re-
quired information
4)
Optional: It pulls up the chip-select line and perform
other tasks or goes to sleep
5)
It waits for an interrupt from the module
6)
Optional: It pulls down the chip select line
7)
It sends a Data Read command and retrieves the
response
8)
It pulls up the chip select line
9)
Optional: It disables the power line of the corre-
sponding module
C. Extension Modules
The extension modules provide the hardware interface to
external sensors. Each module communicates over the low-
power shared bus with the master by means of an SPI-capable
microcontroller. They also feature an interrupt pin for chip-
select detection and a general-purpose I/O pin to signal the
interrupt to the master. In addition, a power pin allows the
master to power-down the whole extension module. This power
line gives to the system the maximum ﬂexibility in terms of
energy management: the module can be switched off or simply
kept in a sleep state by the master. This choice varies according
to the sampling period, the start-up time and the sleep power
consumption of the extension module. The hardware interface
provided by each module depends on sensors it supports:
it can be fully digital, e.g., to interface RS-232 or RS-485
peripherals, or analog, to connect sensors such as current-
loop, vibrating wire strain gauges, resistive etc. Each extension
module can support different kinds of sensor or several sensors
of the same type.
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

D. Additional Features
Interlink Bus: As pointed out in Section IV the low-power
shared bus cannot interface more than four extension modules,
which in some rare cases might represent a limitation. To
overcome this issue, we introduced the interlink bus which
enables the MMS to support a virtually unlimited number
of extension modules. In the speciﬁc, it connects the master
modules of different MMS creating a tree structure where the
parent MMS acts as master for its children.
Figure 2. Interlink connections
To do so, the parent MMS uses the extension slots to make
a connection through the interlink plugs of its children (see
Figure 2). Hence, the parent sees its children as enhanced
extension modules. This mechanism can be replicated at each
level of the tree to support an unlimited number of sensors.
Each leaf node advertises the connected sensors together with
its identiﬁcation number to its parent which aggregates the
received information and forwards it to the upper level. This
procedure is iterated until the root MMS is reached. The root
MMS is the only one which manages wireless communica-
tions. From a WSN perspective, this makes the whole tree
resulting as a single wireless node.
Extension Module Conﬁguration Advertisement: Thanks
to the discovery procedure performed by the master during
the boot phase, extension modules attached to the backplane
exchange conﬁguration information. Hence, an operator can
add an extension module at any time by just power-cycling
the MMS, without the need of an in-situ reprogramming. This
feature eases the effort required by operators and qualiﬁed
personnel. Based on our on-ﬁeld experience, this functionality
is often required in evolving environments, such as (but not
limited to) SHM scenarios.
V.
PRELIMINARY WORK
A. Prototype development
We developed and assembled the ﬁrst prototype of the
MMS at the Department of Computer, Control and Manage-
ment Engineering of the University of Rome ”La Sapienza”.
The prototype includes a master module, a Resistance Temper-
ature Detector (RTD) extension module and a backplane. The
modules are plugged into the backplane by a standard Periph-
eral Component Interconnect Express (PCIe) edge connector.
The master module is responsible for radio communica-
tion and for managing the extension modules. It is based
on the MagoNode OEM [13], a wireless hardware platform
speciﬁcally designed for WSN applications. The MagoNode
is based on the Atmel Atmega128RFA1 (RFA1) System-On-
Chip micro-controller equipped with 128KB of ROM (Read
Only Memory), 16KB of RAM (Random Access Memory)
and an embedded 2.4Ghz radio transceiver fully compliant
with the 802.15.4 standard. The radio range is extended
through a power efﬁcient RF (Radio Frequency) front-end
which enhances radio performance while keeping the power
consumption low. The main ﬁgure in terms of power con-
sumption are: radio transmission 27.7mA @+10dBm, radio
reception 14.5mA and <2µA in sleep. The master module is
equipped with a NOR ﬂash for persistent data storage, three
status leds, a micro-usb plug and an RP-SMA (Reverse Polarity
SubMiniature version A) antenna connector.
The RTD module is the ﬁrst extension module developed
for the MMS node. It is a hardware interface made for reading
up to four PT-100 or PT-1000 RTD temperature sensors. Two
accurate 24-bit ADCs (Analog-to-Digital converter), together
with a ﬁnely tuned ﬁltering circuit, provides sensor readings
in 50ms with a maximum error of ±0,1◦C. An Atmel 8-bit
AVR micro-controller manages the communication with the
two ADCs and with the master module over the low-power
shared bus. The power consumption is 2µA in sleep and less
than 500nA when powered off.
The backplane hosts the low-power shared bus that con-
nects the master and up to four extension modules through
PCIe connectors (see Figure 3). It provides the interlink bus
header (see Section IV-D) and 12 pins per extension modules to
plug external sensors. The backplane also supplies the system
through different battery types. It supports battery holders for
2xAA, 1xC or 1xD thionyl chloride batteries (3.6V) and an
external power supply for other power sources (3 to 5.5V).
Figure 3. The MMS: master, RTD module, backplane
We developed drivers and ﬁrmware for the MMS in compli-
ance with TinyOS [14], an event-driven, open-source operating
system (OS) dedicated to Wireless Sensor Networks. TinyOS
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

is designed to cope with typical constraints imposed by WSNs
hardware: low computational capabilities, limited memories
and scarce energy resources.
B. Test Results
During our preliminary tests, we evaluated the MMS en-
ergy consumption while performing different activities. The
MMS hardware conﬁguration used during tests consisted of
a master module interconnected through a backplane to an
RTD module, which acquires samples from a temperature
probe simulated by a 100 Ohm resistor. In order to measure
current consumption, the device was powered by a 3.6V
external supply and connected to a Rigol DM3068 digital
multimeter sampling at a 10KHz rate. The prototype was
programmed to wake-up from sleep state, perform a sensor
reading (involving ADC initialization, data conversion and
retrieval), send acquired data over the wireless medium and go
back to sleep. Figure 4 shows the current measurements of the
previously cited activities while in Table I signiﬁcant current
values corresponding to different MMS states are summarized.
Figure 4. MMS Current Consumption
As expected, Table I shows how the low consumption in
sleep state of both master and RTD modules allows the MMS
to draw a negligible amount of current (4.5µA). Such a low
value would allow the system to last in this state for more than
most batteries self-discharge time. The MMS sleep current can
be further reduced by allowing the Master to power off the
RTD module. This feature, which is irrelevant in this case,
becomes important whenever there is the need to deal with
extension modules with a high sleep current consumption.
TABLE I. MMS CURRENT CONSUMPTION
State
Description
Current (mA)
Sleep
Baseline consumption
0.0045
Radio TX
Master radio transmitting
27.7
Radio LISTEN
Master radio idle listening
14.4
Radio RX
Master radio receiving
16.9
Data acquisition
RTD module ADC conversion
2.8
The radio power consumption of the MMS are strictly
related to the MagoNode platform, this is why the same values
measured in [13] are reported in Table I. Finally, the ADC of
the RTD module performs a single conversion in 50ms by
generating two 1mA bias current over the RTD sensor that,
summed with the 800µA power consumption of the chip, gives
an overall consumption of 2.8mA.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we presented a novel low-power wireless
modular architecture designed for SHM applications. Our
platform, the MMS, takes advantage of a low-power shared
bus connecting slotted extension modules that interact with
a master in a master/slave communication abstraction. The
extension modules, which can be combined as needed, allows
the MMS to face the continuously evolving needs of most
SHM scenarios. Thanks to its peculiar characteristics, the
MMS overcomes commercial state-of-the-art WSN solutions
for SHM, like the NI WSN, which do not offer enough
ﬂexibility to fulﬁll requirements of many application contexts
in a both cost-effective and efﬁcient way.
The preliminary work done toward the implementation of
this novel architecture consists of the design and the assembly
of a master module, a ﬁrst RTD extension module and a
interconnection backplane. The master module, based on the
MagoNode platform, makes the MMS a powerful wireless
node fully supporting multi-hop communications. The RTD
module gives low-power readings from up to 4 PT100 or
PT1000 temperature probes with a precision of ±0,1◦C. In the
near future, we plan the develop several additional extension
modules able to support all kinds of sensors dedicated to
SHM, such as strain wire gauges, crack meters, inclinome-
ters, displacement sensors, etc. Furthermore, additional Master
modules will be designed to support different wireless frequen-
cies (e.g., 433Mhz, 868Mhz, 915Mhz) and certiﬁed industrial
wireless protocols like Wireless Hart.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Solexperts
website,”
URL:
http://www.solexperts.com/
[accessed:
2015-03-27].
[2]
“Geokon website,” URL: http://www.geokon.com/8002-16 [accessed:
2015-03-27].
[3]
“Keller website,” URL: http://www.keller-druck.com/ [accessed: 2015-
03-27].
[4]
“NI WiFi-DAQ,” URL: www.ni.com/data-acquisition/wireless/ [ac-
cessed: 2015-03-30].
[5]
“Microstrain WSN,” 2015, URL: http://www.microstrain.com/wireless
[accessed: 2015-03-27].
[6]
N. Xu et al., “A wireless sensor network for structural monitoring,”
in Proceedings of the 2Nd International Conference on Embedded
Networked Sensor Systems, ser. SenSys ’04.
New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 2004, pp. 13–24.
[7]
J. P. Lynch and K. J. Loh, “A summary review of wireless sensors and
sensor networks for structural health monitoring,” Shock and Vibration
Digest, vol. 38, no. 2, 2006, pp. 91–130.
[8]
T. Harms, S. Sedigh, and F. Bastianini, “Structural health monitoring of
bridges using wireless sensor networks,” Instrumentation & Measure-
ment Magazine, IEEE, vol. 13, no. 6, 2010, pp. 14–18.
[9]
“National Instruments WSN,” 2015, URL: http://www.ni.com/wsn/i/
[accessed: 2015-03-27].
[10]
“GENESI project website,” URL: http://genesi.di.uniroma1.it/ [ac-
cessed: 2015-03-30].
[11]
“Structural health monitoring at the pont de la poya, fribourg,” in White
Paper, GENESI Project, 2013.
[12]
U. M. Colesanti, A. Lo Russo, M. Paoli, C. Petrioli, and A. Vitaletti,
“Structural health monitoring in an underground construction site: the
roman experience,” in Proceedings of the 11th ACM Conference on
Embedded Networked Sensor Systems.
ACM, 2013, p. 46.
[13]
M. Paoli, A. Lo Russo, U. M. Colesanti, and A. Vitaletti, “Magonode:
Advantages of rf front-ends in wireless sensor networks,” in Real-World
Wireless Sensor Networks.
Springer, 2014, pp. 125–137.
[14]
P. Levis et al., “Tinyos: An operating system for sensor networks,” in
Ambient intelligence.
Springer, 2005, pp. 115–148.
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

