Capillary Sensor with UV-Forced Degradation and Fluorescence Reading of Diesel 
and Biodiesel Fuel Chemical Stability 
 
Michal Borecki 
Institute of Microelectronics and Optoelectronics 
Warsaw University of Technology 
Warsaw, Poland 
email: borecki@imio.pw.edu.pl 
Mateusz Gęca 
Institute of Electron Technology 
Warsaw, Poland 
email: mati.geca@gmail.com 
Michael L. Korwin-Pawlowski 
Département d’informatique et d’ingénierie 
Université du Québec en Outaouais 
Gatineau, Québec, Canada 
email: michael.korwin-pawlowski@uqo.ca 
Przemysław Prus 
Blue Oak Inventions 
Wroclaw, Poland 
email: pprus@boinv.com 
 
Abstract-There 
are 
many 
standards 
set 
by 
national 
organizations and fuel producers to test and guarantee the 
diesel fuel stability under storage conditions. Traditional 
techniques for measuring fuel stability utilize oxygen–assisted 
degradation of heated sample submit the fuel sample to a 
relatively high pressure of air, temperature of the sample or a 
long time of examination. For example, American Society for 
Testing and Materials (ASTM) D4625 requires a time of up to 
24 weeks of fuel exposition to air atmosphere heated up to 
43°C. The degradation is evidenced by the appearance of 
resins and sediments. There are many different theories 
describing the mechanism of degradation of diesel fuels, as 
there are various factors that initiate and maintain the process. 
The stability of modern diesel fuel is mainly due to the 
reduction of the oxidation processes, the result of the presence 
of unsaturated components and components with oxygen as 
organic components and cetane index improvers. Therefore, 
the diesel fuel stability is related with the fuel composition. As 
a consequence of all that, fast and low-cost sensing of the 
stability of diesel and biodiesel fuel is important. The present 
paper concentrates on the construction of the capillary sensor 
which enables fast examination of fuel stability as a 
characteristic of fuel itself not of the gas atmosphere. 
Therefore, the fuel sample under examination is enclosed in a 
vessel and the degradation factor is assumed to be the UV 
radiation. The fuel samples used to develop the method are 
compositions of a classical mixture of petroleum products and 
the most widely used cetane improver (2-ethyl hexyl nitrate). 
The result is a sensor set-up based on two UV light emitting 
diodes, one used to stimulate degradation, the second used for 
signal reading. 
Keywords-biodiesel fuel stability; diesel fuel degradation; 
cetane index improvers; capillary sensor; LED excited 
fluorescence. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Diesel fuel stability may be affected by a large number of 
parameters which can be categorized to describe the effects 
of oxidation, thermal and storage conditions [1]. The 
estimated life of a diesel fuel is determined according to the 
accelerated oxidation stability test ASTM D2274. This test is 
performed with fuel of 350 mL volume is to be kept at 95 °C 
in the presence of oxygen for 16 hours, which approximately 
corresponds to one year’s storage at 25 °C. This test 
measures the ratio of the mass of settled gum and sediment 
to the mass of the diesel fuel sample. However, this method 
may not provide a prediction of the quantity of insoluble 
matter that will form in field storage conditions over any 
given period of time [2], as for example, microorganisms 
present in diesel fuel may be also the result of its storage [3]. 
Therefore, the chemical and biological stability of diesel fuel 
is under examination.  
The storage conditions can be described as exposure to 
air and/or light at the environment temperature. The diesel 
fuel storage issue seems to be nowadays recognized as an 
issue even by fuel producers, who recommend the maximum 
time of diesel fuel storage in function of temperature 
conditions [4], for example 6-12 months at an ambient 
temperature higher than 30 ºC. There are some other factors 
that accelerate diesel fuel ageing: contact with zinc or 
copper, as these metals will quickly react with diesel fuel to 
form unstable compounds; presence of water, which allows 
the growth of fungus and bacteria producing organic acids, 
which 
make the 
fuel 
unstable; exposure 
to high 
temperatures; exposure to dust and dirt, which contain trace 
elements that can destabilize the fuel; fuel composition as 
some components in diesel fuel naturally age quickly. 
 
A. Modern diesel fuels 
Classical petro-diesel fuels were made from stable 
components of straight run distillate products of crude oil 
(alkanes). The minimum cetane number of such diesel fuel 
was 40, but it has been determined that such fuel may be 
kept in storage for prolonged periods. Modern diesel fuels 
are the composition of petro-diesel products, bio-diesel 
products with an addition of improvers [5]. Modern petro-
diesel fuels include stable components (alkanes) and cracked 
material, which contains olefins (alkenes) characterized by a 
double bond chemical and aromatic content. Bio-diesel 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

components include fatty acids esters that are also 
characterized by the presence of double bonds. As the 
minimum cetane number of modern diesel fuel is 51, the 
cetane number boost of fuel composition is required. Most 
popular is the application of cetane number boosters in the 
form of 2-ethyl hexyl nitrate (2-EHN) or di-tertiary-butyl 
peroxide (DTBP). Both substances include oxygen and are 
reactive. Cetane boosters decompose rapidly and form free 
radicals when exposed to temperatures above 100 °C. These 
radicals increase the rate of main fuel components 
decomposition, therefore the ignition delay is negatively 
affected [6]. The use of cetane boosters in diesel fuel of high 
quality increases the engine durability [7]. On the other hand, 
cetane boosters are a potential source of oxygen for 
oxidation of hydrocarbons. For hydrocarbons that are 
characterized by double bonds the oxidation products are 
waxy solids and gums. Therefore, doses of cetane number 
boosters to diesel fuels have to be carefully calculated. The 
reduction of cetane number booster’s concentration is 
possible when hydro-treating of fuel products is applied. But, 
the cetane number improving method using mainly cetane 
boosters is preferred due to its low cost [8]. The 2-EHN is 
the most popular cetane index additive. The ASTM D 4046 
standard test method is used for determining the amount of 
alkyl nitrate added to diesel fuel. 
 
B. Optical sensors for diesel fuel stability testing 
The optical testing of fuel parameters is performed in 
laboratory and in-situ conditions of working engine [9]. The 
optical sensors implemented in a working engine (ICOS - 
Internal Combustion Optical Sensor) – are infrared sensors 
of air to fuel ratio, CO2 concentration, and gas temperature. 
The optical sensors of diesel fuel used in the laboratory 
enable a wide range of examination. The sequence of visible 
effects of diesel fuel instability may be described as fuel 
clouding, fuel clouding disappearance, formation of fuel 
sediments at the fuel-environment contact area (vessel walls 
and fuel surface), changes in fuel color (loss of color or 
darkening) and sediments presence on the bottom of vessel 
[10].  
The fuel components concertation may be examined with 
IR spectroscopy and UV excitation methods including 
synchronous reading fluorescence and time resolved 
fluorescence 
[11][12]. 
Despite 
spectroscopic 
method 
drawback of costs of examination of oils in quartz cuvettes 
including costs of cuvettes and reagents for sample dilution, 
dedicated components of sensors are under development [13-
15]. 
The examination of diesel fuel fit for use may be 
performed with capillary measurement methods. These 
method include measurement of characteristic points of local 
sample heating of fuel positioned in a capillary and 
measurement of the dynamical rise of fuel in a inclined 
capillary [16][17]. Also, for these methods dedicated 
components have been developed [18][19]. 
The oxidation stability of oils with spectroscopy 
measurements in VIS and UV bands were reported in the 
case of baru oil [20]. The obtained results show that UV 
absorption from 230 nm to 270 nm during thermal aging 
increases non-uniformly, while VIS absorption at 475 nm 
decreases almost linearly down to a threshold value. The 
fluorescence intensity excited at 405 nm and measured in the 
range from 450 nm to 750 nm may be a pointer of thermal 
oil degradation. In particular, the emitted signal at 500 nm 
that represents oxidation products increases almost linearly 
and then saturates during thermal aging over a dozen hours at 
110 °C. 
Nevertheless, for their routine daily work, the fuel 
distributors still demand the development of new rapid and 
low-cost sensors for reliable determination of fuel stability.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the sensor construction development including 
sensor head with optrode as well as optoelectronics system 
set-up. Section III addresses the experimental results of the 
fluorescent signal analysis. Section IV goes into short 
conclusions.  
 
II. SENSOR CONSTRUCTION 
The idea of rapid sensor of diesel fuel stability bases on 
forced UV degradation of fuels placed in a capillary vessel. 
In this case, the sample volume is reduced and the surface of 
sample increases in comparison to the standard cuvette set-
up. The inner diameter of the capillary is 700 µm while the 
diagonal of the cuvette is 1.41 cm. Therefore, UV radiation 
that is intended to stimulate the sample’s degradation 
penetrates the fuel sample volume more uniformly in the 
capillary than in the cuvette. Moreover, the use of capillary 
reduces significantly the costs of the measurement, because 
the cost of a single CV7087Q capillary is lower than the cost 
of the quartz cuvette, and is even lower than the cost of a 
cleaning and washing process of quartz cuvette.  
 
A. Light sources  for the sensor 
For practical applications one has to consider the light 
emitted diodes as a source of radiation. For excitation of 
fluorescence and degradation, two LEDs were used. The 
UVTOP265 LED emitted 250 µW at 265 nm and was 
equipped with a ball lens, provided good coupling of 
radiation to the fiber. It was connected to the set-up with 
Thorlabs SMA adapters and a SM1 tube. The M365F1 LED 
equipped with a SMA fiber connector providing about 5mW 
into a 550 nm diameter fiber was directly implemented into 
the set-up. This LED is characterized by a residual radiation 
in the band of 400-460 nm. The LEDs were controlled with a 
Thorlabs DC2100 High-Power, 1-Channel Driver. Due to 
LEDs working points set at their maximum ratings, the 
examination was performed of the stability of radiated power 
of M3651F1 LED with direct fiber coupling to Maya 2000 
pro spectrometer. The M365F1 LED is characterized by an 
increase of the coupled-to-fiber power when it is driven 
constantly with the current of 300 mA. Interestingly, the 
coupled power does not depend on the temperature of the 
LED as it increases even after LED’s resting for 5 minutes 
and a sequential reboot as presented in Figure 1. 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 1.  M365F1 LED optical power at 366nm coupled into optical fiber 
in function of time and event. 
The fiber-coupled signal of the UVTOP265 LED 
constantly driven for 30 minutes at maximum current equal 
to 30 mA recorded using the sensor head with an empty 
capillary (see Fig. 4) versus time of measurement is 
presented in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  UVTOP265 LED optical power coupled into optical fiber in 
function of time. 
The conditions described above were the worst case 
examination from the detection unit point of view, as the 
received signal was only scattered at the smooth glass 
surface of the capillary and the received signal was close to 
the sensitivity of the used spectrometer. Thus, spectral 
characteristics showed fluctuation due to high sensitivity set 
on the spectrophotometer. The examination of mid-range 
stability UVTOP265 LED showed similar results as for high 
power M365F1 LED. The signal peak present at 280nm 
represents spectrophotometer error. This signal of error 
varies versus time as presented in Figure 3. 
The experimental results show that 10 % of variation of 
maximum signal intensity is to be expected, but signal 
changes are not uniform, and also at some signal sampling 
rate spectrophotometers are characterized by middle-time 
drift. Therefore, spectral examination requires optical power 
stabilization of the source or/and mathematical signal 
correction. Unfortunately, both solutions require source 
signal monitoring with additional sensing modules. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Spectrophotometer imperfection signal at 280nm in function of 
time and event. 
Therefore, a sensor set-up with one and two UV sources 
was examined. In the case of one UV source, the source 
performs 
functions 
for 
both 
fuel 
degradation 
and 
fluorescence excitation. In the case of the set-up with two 
UV sources the mentioned functions are separated. In both 
cases, the sensor head enables the observation of the excited 
fluorescence in the sample of liquid positioned in a capillary 
vessel using optical fibers as probes. 
 
B. Sensor set-up with one UV source 
The sensor head of set-up with one UV source presented 
in Figure 4 consists of only two optical fibers. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Scheme of the capillary sensor head with two optical fibers. 
The head is coupled to the optoelectronic sensor set-up 
according to the scheme presented in Figure 5. 
The set-up is divided into two functional units, optical 
and optoelectronic, working in a conjugated manner. 
The optical unit consists of the head, the optical fiber 
divider and the monochromator. The set-up element causing 
the highest optical signal damping is the DMC1-02 
monochromator, the attenuation of which is about 1:1000 at 
analyzed 
wavelengths. 
But, 
the 
set-up 
using 
the 
monochromator enables tuning of the LED’s optical signal 
with proper accuracy. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 5.  Scheme of the capillary sensor set-up with one LED. 
The set-up is optically powered by a LED controlled with 
the hardware D2100 driver that is triggered from a PC with 
the use of software. The fiber optic divider 1:7 is used to 
produce a reference signal and monitor light source 
parameters with Maya 2000pro spectrometer connected to 
the PC. The head output is connected to Maya 2000pro 
spectrometer which is connected to PC. Both spectrometers 
are controlled by the PC with Ocean Optics software that 
enables sequential writing of data recorded for the 
fluorescence and source signals. 
 
C. Sensor set-up with two UV source. 
The sensor’s head with two UV sources is presented in 
Figure 6.  
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Scheme of the capillary sensor head with two UV sources and 
three optical fibers. 
To make allowance for UV degradation and fluorescence 
excitation signals an additional optical fiber was placed in 
head. The system set-up scheme was changed by the addition 
of a LED block for UV degradation of the sample as 
presented in Figure 7.  
 
 
Figure 7.  Scheme of the capillary sensor set-up with two LED-s. 
The hardware of the detection units was not modified. 
The changes of the degradation signal may be observed with 
the spectrometer during the degradation as a reflected signal 
from capillary walls. This LED output is directly coupled to 
the head to avoid any power losses. Also the scheme of 
system control was changed as the LED drivers for UV 
degradation and UV fluorescence excitation were switched 
alternately. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
In this section, there are presented the experimental 
procedures and the results of examination of different diesel 
and biodiesel fuels.  
The measurement procedure consists of a few steps. 
Step 1: At the initial configuration of the set-up the selected 
diode is mounted. Step 2: the background signal of for the 
empty optrode is measured. Step 3: optrode is directly filled 
from the tank and the outer optrode walls are wiped. Step 4: 
the signal of fluorescence is measured with the use of UV 
ageing procedure. Step 5: the spectra were calculated as the 
difference between the fluorescence and the background 
signals.  
The operation of the sensor was examined with fuels 
provided by the Automotive Industry Institute in Warsaw. 
The fuels were mixtures of petrodiesel with additives 
including 2-EHN – one with as bio-component 7% of fatty 
acids methyl esters (FAME) (CN=59.1) considered as the 
standard fuel, and the second with 7% of hydrogenated 
vegetable oil (HVO) (CN=59.2) considered as premium fuel.  
 
A. Set-up with one UV LED  
First examination included measurements of the 
fluorescence of fresh fuels excited with a UVTOP265 LED 
or a M365F1 LED. Results presented in Figure 8 show 
similar shapes of characteristics, while the maxima of 
excited spectra for different excitation are at slightly 
different wavelengths. Taking into account LEDs currents, 
and therefore powers, the excitation efficiency at 265 nm is 
much greater than at 366 nm. The signal of biological 
fluorescence at 675 nm is readable for excitation at 366 nm. 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 8.  Spectra of fresh fuels excited with 366nm wavelength. 
The visible fluorescence emitted signal is caused by the 
presence of the 2-EHN cetane booster. According to diesel 
fuel producers’ classification, and evidenced by the emission 
spectra signals recorded at 366 nm excitation, the premium 
fuel is characterized by a lower concentration of cetane 
booster than is the case for the standard fuel.  
The results of standard fuel degradation with the use of 
set-up from Figures 4 and 5 and with the use of one M365F1 
LED are presented in Figure 9. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Spectra of fuels degradated and examinated with the use of one 
M365F1 LED coupled to the set-up and with the use of monochromator. 
The fuel degradation is evidenced as the increase of the 
fluorescence signal. The wavelength position of the peak 
located 
about 
404 nm 
shifts 
during 
measurement. 
Fortunately at wavelengths of 475 nm the signal increase is 
almost monotonic. The constant increase of the signal is 
adequate to measure the initial stages of fuel degradation. At 
that stage the degradation is evidenced by the constant 
presence and the value of the signal of the emitted biological 
fluorescence at 675 nm.  
When the UVTOP265 LED is used in one-LED set-up 
the monochromator can be removed, as the excited spectra of 
2-EHN and gums are positioned at a range where there is no 
residual emission of LED radiation. The direct spectra of 
degradation results of standard diesel fuel with the use of 
UVTOP265 are presented in Figure 10. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Spectra of fuels degradated and examinated with the use of one 
UVTOP265 LED directly coupled to set-up - without monochromator 
using. 
The degradation of standard fuels is evidenced as the 
significant increase of fluorescence signal, which saturates 
after 10 minutes. The measured speed of the degradation 
varies. For example, the characteristics faster saturate at 
380 nm than at 395 nm peak. But, what is most interesting, 
the peak wavelengths are stable, when fuel is excited with 
265 nm, contrary to excitation results performed at 366 nm. 
 
B. Set-up with two UV LEDs 
The set-up with two UV LEDs used of two M365F1 
LEDs as their expected stable operational life time is much 
greater than of UVTOP265 LED. The direct results of fuel 
aging and fluorescence reading are presented in Figure 11. 
 
 
 
Figure 11.  Spectra of fuels degradated and examinated with the use of two 
M365F1 LEDs. 
Four signs of fuel aging are now presented. The first sign 
adequate for initial aging is the increase of fluorescence 
excited signal emitted by 2-EHN. The second sign is the 
disappearance 
of 
the 
emitted 
peak 
of 
biological 
contamination that happens faster than at 5 minutes of aging. 
The third sign is the shift of 2-EHN local emitted maxima. 
The last sign is the change of the relation of 2-EHN local 
maxima amplitudes.  
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

V.  CONCLUSIONS 
We proposed a sensor for diesel fuel stability testing 
based on the examination of fluorescence. The key of the 
method is placing the sample of the fuel in a capillary 
optrode and using UV radiation for accelerated ageing.  
The analysis of the sensor construction showed that 
366nm, as well as 265 nm wavelength radiation is sufficient 
for simulation of initial and middle states of fuel degradation. 
The conclusion for sensor examination with one LED source 
is quite obvious; the monochromator decreases significantly 
the speed of fuel aging. But, the spectra of 366 nm emitted 
wavelength LED requires positioning at some distance of an 
optical filter or monochromator to enable proper florescence 
reading. Therefore, two constructions are proposed. One, 
with UVTOP265 LED does not require additional optical 
filtering of signal. The second, with two M365F1 LEDs – 
one coupled with a monochromator and used for 
fluorescence reading, – the second directly coupled to the 
sensor head and used for high power UV fuel degradation. 
Finally, the power emitted by the LEDs used has to be 
constantly monitored and its variations taken into account in 
calculations of aging spectra. The spectral response of the 
spectrophotometer has to be checked for calibration. 
The proposed instrumentation can be further improved by 
changing 
the 
spectrophotometers 
for 
dedicated 
photodetecting devices. It may be a valuable added module 
to the capillary sensor system for diesel fuel fit-for- use 
examinations or as an independent device used at petrol 
station points of use. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by the NCN grant 
“Oxide nanostructures for electronic, optoelectronic and 
photovoltaic applications”, 2012/06/A/ST7/00398. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Jain and M. P. Sharma, “Stability of biodiesel and its 
blends: A review,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, vol. 14, 2010, pp. 667–678. 
[2] 
J. Czarnocka and M. Odziemkowska, “Diesel fuel 
degradation during storage process,” Chemik, vol. 69, 2015, 
pp. 771-776. 
[3] 
C.N. Lyles, et al. “Impact of Organosulfur Content on Diesel 
Fuel Stability and Implications for Carbon Steel Corrosion,” 
Environ. Sci. Technol., vol. 47, 2013, pp. 6052-6062. 
[4] 
BP Australia Limited, “Long Term Storage of Diesel,” BP 
Fuel News, vol. ADF1403.doc, 2005, pp. 1-3. 
[5] 
Technical Committee of Petroleum Additive Manufactures in 
Europe, “Fuel Additives: Use and Benefits,” ATC 
Document, vol. 113, 2013, pp. 1-68. 
[6] 
M. Nandi and D.Jacobs , “Cetane Response of Di-tertiary-
butyl Peroxide in Different Diesel Fuels,” SAE Technical 
Paper 952368, 1995, pp. 952368:1-18. 
[7] 
A. Kulinowski, T. Henly, and T. Stocky, "The Effect of 2-
Ethylhexyl Nitrate Cetane Improver on Engine Durability," 
SAE Technical Paper 981364, 1998, pp. 1-9. 
[8] 
T. Herold, “Next Generation Derivered Cetane Analysis: 
High Precision Enables Refineries to Operate Close to 
Specifications and Increase Profitability,” Petro Industry 
News, vol. 15, 2014, pp. 6-7. 
[9] 
R. Vanhaelst, et al, “Optical infrared-sensor inside the 
cylinder to determine the EGR- and residual gas rate in 
diesel engine,” Combustion Engines, vol. 52, 2103, pp. 3-11. 
[10] M. Borecki and M.L. Korwin-Pawlowski, “Capillary Sensor 
with UV-VIS Reading of Effects of Diesel and Biodiesel 
Fuel Degradation in Storage,” Sensors & Transducers, vol. 
205, 2016, pp. 1-9. 
[11] S. G. Wakeham, “Synchronous fluorescence spectroscopy 
and its application to indigenous and petroleum-derived 
hydrocarbons in lacustrine sediments,” Environ. Sci. 
Technol., vol. 11, 1977, pp. 272–276. 
[12] M. Wlodarski, A. Bombalska, M. Mularczyk-Oliwa; M. 
Kaliszewski, and K. Kopczyński, “Fluorimetric techniques in 
analysis and classification of fuels," Proc. SPIE vol. 8703, 
2012, pp. 87030B. 
[13] A. Kociubiński, M. Borecki, M. Duk, M. Sochacki, and M. 
L. Korwin-Pawlowski, “3D photodetecting structure with 
adjustable 
sensitivity 
ratio 
in 
UV 
– 
VIS 
range,” 
Microelectronic Engineering, vol. 154, 2016, pp. 48–52. 
[14] M. Borecki, et al., “Large-area transparent in visible range 
silicon carbide photodiode,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 8903, 2013, pp. 
89030H. 
[15] M. Borecki, J. Szmidt, P. Wrzosek, and M. Beblowska, 
“Optical fiber switch for sensor networks: design principles,” 
Proc. SPIE, vol. 6347, 2006, pp. 63471Q. 
[16] M. Borecki, et al., “Fiber Optic Capillary Sensor with Smart 
Optode for Rapid Testing of the Quality of Diesel and 
Biodiesel Fuel,” IJASM, vol. 7, 2014, pp. 57–67. 
[17] M. Borecki, et al., “Dynamical Capillary Rise Photonic 
Sensor for Testing of Diesel and Biodiesel Fuel,” Sensors & 
Transducers Journal, vol. 193, 2015, pp. 11-22. 
[18] A. Baranowska, P. Miluski, M. Kochanowicz, J. Zmojda, 
and D. Dorosz, “Capillary optical fibre with Sm3+ doped 
ribbon core,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 9662, 2015, pp. 96620Z. 
[19] M. Geca, M. Borecki, M. L. Korwin-Pawlowski, and A. 
Kociubiński, “Local liquid sample heating: integration and 
isolation of a micro-heater,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 9662, 2015, pp. 
96620E. 
[20] V.D. Silva, et al., “Oxidative Stability of Baru (Dipteryx 
alata Vogel) Oil Monitored by Fluorescence and Absorption 
Spectroscopy,” Journal of Spectroscopy, vol. 2015, 2015, pp. 
803705. 
 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

