Design, Development and Field Deployment of a Low-cost Distributed Wireless 
Sensor Network System for Real-time Hydraulic Fracturing Monitoring in Mines 
 
 
Amirali Soroush, Wen Shen (Vincent) Mow 
Onshore Gas Program, Energy 
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) 
Melbourne, Australia 
e-mails: amirali.soroush@csiro.au, vincent.mow@csiro.au  
 
 
Abstract — A low-cost Distributed Wireless Sensor Network 
(DWSN) system designed and developed for real-time 
monitoring and diagnostics of hydraulic fracturing activities 
applicable to mine preconditioning operations is introduced in 
this paper. Built on open-source electronics platforms, as well as 
XBee wireless transceiver modules, and powered by solar 
energy, the system was deployed during the preconditioning 
operation in Whitehaven’s Narrabri mine (New South Wales 
(NSW), Australia) and Luossavaara-Kiirunavaara Aktiebolag’s 
(LKAB) Malmberget iron ore mine (Norrbotten County, 
Sweden). Over a period of two years, the system successfully 
monitored the placement of more than 2000 hydraulically-
induced fractures in real-time, while providing an average 
packet delivery success rate of more than 99.995%.  
Keywords - Tiltmeter Monitoring; Surface Deformation 
Monitoring; Mine Preconditioning; Hydraulic Fracturing 
Monitoring and Diagnostics; Distributed Wireless Sensor 
Network Systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
DWSN systems are growing rapidly and being used 
extensively in various domains, such as environmental 
monitoring [1][2], agriculture [3][4], urban monitoring [5] and 
structural health monitoring [6] as a viable solution for 
monitoring various parameters of interest, such as pressure, 
temperature, humidity, strain, and acceleration in real-time 
and for long periods. The evolution of open source platforms 
for hardware and software development, along with the 
commercialization of modular low-cost and low-power 
electronics for data logging, processing, and wireless 
communication has provided developers with the opportunity 
for rapid prototyping and implementation of DWSNs for 
scientific, industrial and commercial applications.  
Hydraulic fracturing refers to the process of injecting 
pressurized fluid into a wellbore with the intention to create 
new fractures in the deep rock formations and/or increase the 
size, extent, and connectivity of existing fractures. The 
process can be applied in the mining industry, particularly to 
the underground long-wall and block-cave mines, to induce 
predictable rock caving within excavation cavities. Hydraulic 
fracturing treatments are usually applied to the undisturbed 
rock or ore-body in advance of the mining operation as a 
method to pre-weaken or pre-condition the rock for improved 
operation productivity and safety during resource extraction 
[7]–[9].  
To ensure the effectiveness of a hydraulic fracturing 
treatment, an array of high-resolution tiltmeters is placed 
beneath the ground in concentric circles surrounding the 
injection hole to measure the displacement gradient induced 
by the injected fluid and hence, map the fracture propagation 
process [10]. Flowmeters can also be used at the observation 
boreholes around the injection hole to determine any fracture 
connectivity between the injection hole and monitoring holes 
by measuring and confirming potential fluid return. The data 
recorded by tiltmeters and flowmeters provide helpful 
guidance for the operators to control the injection fluid, thus 
optimizing the fracturing treatment and ensuring its 
effectiveness where required, therefore reducing the 
operational costs [11].  
In this paper, we introduce a novel DWSN system as a 
low-cost and flexible solution for real-time monitoring of 
hydraulic fracturing activities during the preconditioning 
operation on mine sites. The system, built on the Arduino 
open-source platform and XBee wireless transceiver modules, 
aims at providing sensory information for the operators in 
real-time while allowing for remote management and control 
of the sensor array over the Internet.  
This paper is organized as follows. The overall 
architecture of the system is introduced in Section II. The 
design and development of various hardware and software 
components of the DWSN system is then detailed in Section 
III. Section IV elaborates the system optimizations in terms of 
total power consumption. Finally, the results of the field 
deployment of the system are illustrated in Section V, before 
drawing the conclusion and providing the outline for future 
work.  
II. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
The overall architecture of a DWSN system designed and 
developed for monitoring preconditioning operations is 
illustrated in Figure 1. The system comprises a number of 
surface nodes interfaced with a sensor of interest (tiltmeter 
and/or flowmeter). The sensor array is usually scattered across 
a 1000 [m] × 1000 [m] area, and the average distance between 
sensor nodes is typically 50 to 100 meters. The ground surface 
is covered by vegetation and tall trees, so line of sight is not 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

necessarily available between sensor nodes for wireless 
communication.  
Each sensor node is equipped with an XBee radio 
transceiver, as well as a microcontroller unit interfacing 
various modules, such as Global Positioning System (GPS), 
micro Secure Digital (microSD) card, voltage scaler and 
serial-to-TTL (transistor-transistor logic) converter for 
integrating multiple sensors with analog or digital output to 
the system. The base station also consists of an XBee 
transceiver, connected to a laptop using an XBee Universal 
Serial Bus (USB) shield. The XBee transceivers (sensor nodes 
and the base station) form a mesh network using DigiMesh 
communication protocol. DigiMesh is a proprietary wireless 
mesh networking topology which allows for time 
synchronized sleeping nodes and low-power operation [12].  
 
 
Figure 1. Overall system architecture. 
The main advantage of the DigiMesh protocol is that all 
devices on a network are configured the same. Therefore, no 
complex architecture is required to define different nodes on 
the network as end-nodes, routers, coordinators, border 
routers, etc. Every device is the same, and capable of routing, 
sleeping for power optimization, and communicating via a 
mesh network [12]. 
The base station is connected to the Internet via a Wi-Fi 
bridge allowing for direct access to the nearest mobile tower. 
The real-time dashboard on the base station laptop serves as 
an interface to control the DWSN system, monitor sensor 
health, record sensor data, and synchronize data with 
CSIRO’s online cloud servers in real-time. The dashboard can 
be accessed by authorized staff both on-site and off-site using 
third-party remote desktop connection software. 
III. 
DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT 
A. Sensor Node 
The sensor node is developed around the Atmel 
SAM3X8E 32-bit Advanced RISC Machine (ARM) core 
microcontroller on the Arduino Due framework. Arduino is an 
open-source electronics platform integrating commonly-used 
flexible and low-cost hardware and software for rapid-
prototyping of science and engineering projects [13]. The 
Arduino Due prototyping board offers 54 digital input/output 
pins, 12 analog inputs, 4 Universal Asynchronous Receiver-
Transmitter (UART) ports, an 84 MHz clock, a 12-bit analog-
to-digital converter (ADC), and a Serial Peripheral Interface 
(SPI). 
The Lily self-leveling borehole tiltmeter is the instrument 
used for surface deformation monitoring. The dual-axis 
tiltmeter senses the displacement gradient induced by the 
underground fluid injection in two orthogonal vertical axes 
using precision electrolytic tilt sensors with nano-radian 
resolution. The instrument’s on-board electronics samples the 
analog tilt signal and then, outputs a data string containing the 
X and Y tilts, azimuth (sensor heading with respect to 
magnetic north), temperature, power supply voltage and the 
instrument’s serial number over RS-232 or RS-485 serial 
communication protocol [14]. This output is interfaced with 
the Arduino microcontroller using a MAX485 chip on a 
UART-to-RS485 converter module and a MAX3232 on a 
transceiver breakout module.  
A u-blox NEO-M8M Global Navigation Satellite System 
(GNSS) module interfaced to each sensor node facilitates 
global geo-spatial positioning and time synchronization, 
provided antenna reception to sufficient satellites. Major 
GNSS, 
such 
as 
GPS, 
Galileo, 
and 
Globalnaya 
Navigazionnaya Sputnikovaya Sistema (GLONASS) are 
supported, and data is outputted in standard National Marine 
Electronics Association (NMEA) string format [15]. The tilt-
sensing application involves immobile assets, so geospatial 
data is not time-critical and only require a single update in 
most cases. The location and time data are used as a 
redundancy in tiltmeter installation information and also clock 
synchronization of data between various sensors. On-site 
operators can access these visualized data via the real-time 
dashboard.   
The wireless network is designed and developed based on 
a mesh topology using XBee-PRO 900HP embedded modules 
from Digi International. This radio transceiver utilizes the 
Australian Industrial, Scientific and Medical (ISM) 918-926 
MHz frequency band and offers up to 200 Kbps data transfer 
rate at maximum transmit power. It is capable of outdoor 
communication of up to 6.5 kilometers line of sight range 
using 2.1 dBi dipole antennas, and up to 28 kilometers line of 
sight range using high gain antennas [12]. XBee-PRO 900HP 
modules utilize DigiMesh networking protocol, an innovative 
mesh protocol developed by Digi International specifically for 
power-sensitive applications relying solely on batteries. 
DigiMesh is built on the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE) 802.15.4 technical standard, which 
specifies the Physical (Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK) 
modulation at the 900MHz band) and Media Access Control 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. HEXADECIMAL BYTE OUTLINE OF AN EXAMPLE FRAME TO BE PASSED TO THE XBEE TRANSCEIVER VIA UART FOR RADIO 
TRANSMISSION OF THE DATA PAYLOAD. 
Start 
Delimiter 
Frame 
Length 
Frame 
Type 
Frame 
ID 
64-bit Dest. 
Address 
16-bit Dest. 
Address 
Broadcast 
Radius 
Options 
Payload (shown in ASCII text) 
Checksum 
Tilt-data 
GNSS-data 
7E 
00 7C 
10 
00 
01 3A A2 00 
41 5B 7E 79 
FF FE 
00 
00 
$  13.232, -25.221,239.83, 21.71,10/12/18 
16:32:49,13.07,N7928 
,12/10/2018,06:33:46,-
30.5055199,+149.85530093 
87 
(MAC) layer protocols. DigiMesh offers a wide range of 
advantages, such as added network stability through self-
healing, self-discovering, and dense network operation. At the 
user-level, only the destination module serial address, 
preamble ID, and network ID are required for one-to-one 
transmission. Data transmitted are packed into frames in the 
XBee API2 format [16]. Reserved characters for frame 
formatting and an integrated checksum byte improve the 
reliability of the received data, at the cost of using more 
bandwidth. The current average size of the frames per transfer 
is approximately 127 total bytes (example shown in Table I). 
Data acknowledgments and failure retries are disabled to 
decrease network bandwidth, reduce energy consumption, and 
enforce sleep mode. Data encryption is also an available 
feature, but is currently disabled. 
 
 
Figure 2. Electronics layout for the sensor node. 
An Arduino Wireless SD shield is used to interface the 
XBee 
transceivers 
with 
the 
Arduino 
Due 
board. 
Communication between the microcontroller and the XBee, 
as well as microSD card is via UART and SPI, respectively. 
Each XBee transceiver is equipped with a Laird 3 dBi outdoor 
omni-directional antenna to enhance the communication 
range. The microcontroller firmware is developed in C/C++ 
and has the primary function of relaying the tiltmeter output 
data-string to the XBee module for wireless data transfer to 
the base station. Secondarily, it integrates all other additional 
peripherals, such as the microSD card and GPS module. 
Lastly, it performs additional housekeeping, including 
implementing a watchdog for potential software hang-ups, 
node health reporting, GNSS data refresh, and modification of 
communication parameters. Other features of the firmware are 
over-the-radio firmware updates and reset. The set-up and 
calibration commands designated for the tiltmeter are relayed 
across to the instrument, and node-specific commands are 
intercepted by the firmware.  
Over-the-radio firmware updating is achieved without the 
need for any additional electronics due to the dual partition 
memory capability of the Atmel SAM3X8E microcontroller. 
The binary file of the firmware update is transmitted, 
checksum verified, and flashed into the adjacent memory bank 
before a software reset into the correct memory boot location. 
The sensing instrument and the sensor node are powered 
indefinitely using solar power and an Absorbent Glass Mat 
(AGM) battery. The electronics layout for the sensor node is 
well illustrated in Figure 2. 
B. Base Station 
The base station consists of an XBee transceiver interfaced 
with a Panasonic Toughbook via an XBee Explorer USB 
module (USB to UART). The XBee module baud-rate at the 
base station is set to 230,400 bps to take advantage of the 
maximum bandwidth allowed by the XBee-PRO 900HP 
transceiver. The XBee receiver is equipped with an omni-
directional antenna. The electronics layout for the XBee 
receiver at the base station is shown in Figure 3.  
 
 
Figure 3. Electronics layout for the XBee receiver at the base station. 
A real-time dashboard developed in the LabVIEW 
environment is used for recording and visualizing the 
measurements. The application is hosted on a Windows-based 
laptop at the base station on-site, and receives the data from 
the XBee receiver via a USB port. The objective of the 
software is to consolidate the data collection process, the 
diagnostics needed by the on-site operators to maintain system 
health, and interaction with the instruments’ core firmware 
into a single intuitive platform. High-level functionalities, 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

such as data quality control, preliminary processing, data 
visualization, command generation, issue reporting, and 
alarms are examples of the features implemented in the 
dashboard. The recorded data are instantly synced with 
CSIRO’s online cloud service, so off-site engineers and 
scientists have real-time access to the data as required. An 
example of the application interface is shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4. Real-time Dashboard for monitoring the tiltmeter array during 
preconditioning Long Wall 108 at Narrabri mine, NSW, Australia. 
Data arriving into the dashboard is checksum verified for 
quality control, before being sorted and logged according to 
date-time and the instrument’s serial number. Charted 
tiltmeter data, mapped locations, color-coded alarms, and 
tabulated tiltmeter health allow for quick system health 
verification at a glance. Operators can use the commands’ 
panel to access the tiltmeter core utilities, such as instrument 
calibration, by sending the commands over the radio. 
Command transfer can be instrument specific or broadcasted 
to the entire array. Some special commands are reserved to be 
intercepted by the sensor node microcontrollers for radio 
module functionality, such as firmware reset and radio 
communication parameter changes. 
IV. 
POWER OPTIMIZATION 
As a preliminary prototype, the sensor node components 
were selected based on high-level compatibility and 
availability. Upon successful field demonstration, the sensor 
node firmware was revised to reduce average power 
consumption, 
with 
the 
hardware 
remaining 
mostly 
unchanged. Improvements to the microcontroller firmware 
include putting the SAM3X8E microcontroller into ‘Backup’ 
(i.e., deep sleep) mode between the sampling intervals. In this 
state, the microcontroller’s internal core voltage regulator and 
memory peripherals are powered down. The still-running 
internal real-time timer is synced to the tiltmeter output rate 
and provides the trigger to restart the microcontroller, 
effectively implementing a 20% duty cycle on-time. A 
relatively-large buffer period (approximately 15% duty cycle) 
is used due to slow startup, non-constant XBee transmission 
time, and for a command reception window. The GNSS is 
configured to run on low-power, which involves a slower 
satellite scanning rate. The microcontroller disables the GNSS 
upon the registry of valid geo-location and time data. The 
XBee module is placed in sleep mode at the same duty cycle 
as the microcontroller. 
 
 
Figure 5. Sensor node power consumption before and after optimization. 
The power consumption of the sensor node before and 
after the firmware revision is shown in Figure 5. The revised 
firmware includes algorithms that disable unused peripherals 
and enable periodic system sleep in-between sensor data 
sample. The average power consumption of the sensor node 
(at 0.1 Hz sample transmission) was reduced by 58.5% to 
approximately 500 mW through firmware optimization. At 
the moment, the majority of power is consumed to transmit 
the radio signal and store the data into the microSD card. 
V. 
FIELD DEPLOYMENT 
A total of fifty sensor nodes (radio modules) and six 
receivers were developed as part of the DWSN system 
introduced in this paper. The total cost of each sensor node 
was approximately A$250, which is low relative to similar 
products currently available on the market. An example of the 
developed sensor node is shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6. Example of developed radio module enclosure or sensor node. 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The DWSN system was first deployed in April 2017 
during the preconditioning operation of Long Wall 107 in 
Narrabri mine located in NSW, Australia. Up to 34 tiltmeters 
were used throughout the preconditioning operation, and the 
real-time dashboard was deployed on-site in 2018. The 
DWSN system introduced in this paper has been operating in 
Narrabri mine 24/7 ever since, and has successfully monitored 
the propagation of more than 2000 hydraulically induced 
fractures placed in ~500 boreholes during the preconditioning 
operation of three long-walls (LW107, LW108 and LW109) 
from April 2017 to June 2019.  
In 2017, the DWSN system was also deployed at the 
Malmberget iron ore mine in Sweden for the purpose of 
monitoring the preconditioning operation for mitigating the 
seismic hazards in the underground mine [17]–[19]. The 
deployment included 15 tiltmeters buried underground, each 
connected to a sensor node on the surface and a base station 
with a receiver for logging the data in real-time, as shown in 
Figure 7.  
 
 
Figure 7. DWSN system sensor node surface setup. Monitoring 
preconditioning in LKAB’s Malmberget iron ore mine, Sweden, July 2017. 
Overall, the DWSN system improved the quality of the 
recorded tilt data significantly by minimizing data loss across 
the network and removing data access latency problems by 
supplying the recorded data to the CSIRO’s cloud service in 
real-time. The system proved robust and reliable by providing 
an average packet delivery success rate of more than 99.995%. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, the design, development, and deployment of 
a low-cost DWSN system for real-time monitoring of the 
hydraulic fracturing operations in mines is introduced. The 
system is built on the Arduino open-source platform and XBee 
wireless transceiver modules. The sensor nodes are scattered 
around the injection borehole in a 1000 [m] × 1000 [m] area 
with ~50-100 meters spacing, and interfaced with tiltmeters 
buried underground.  
Over the course of two years, the DWSN system deployed 
in Narrabri (Australia) and Malmberget (Sweden) mines 
successfully monitored the preconditioning operation with 
real-time data delivery success rate of more than 99.995%. 
The system deployment showed great potential in automating 
the tilt monitoring operation for the purpose of fracture 
monitoring, system diagnostics, and reducing the time 
required for sensor calibration from days to minutes. The 
system has also improved the quality of the recorded tilt data 
significantly by minimizing data loss across the network and 
removing data access latency limitations by pushing the 
recorded data to the CSIRO’s cloud service in real-time.  
The successful deployment of the DWSN system 
demonstrates the advantage of developing in-house low-cost 
and low-power data collection system using open-source 
electronics platforms with modular components as compared 
to commercially available solutions which are often limited in 
offering long term reliability, flexibility, and scalability across 
various scenarios. The system has proven easy to implement, 
cheap to maintain, and simple to modify when future 
adjustments and upgrades were required. 
Future works include reducing the system bandwidth (a 
potential 70% reduction) by replacing the system data 
encoding format with binary. This, along with the second 
revision of hardware and electronics, will drastically reduce 
system power consumption, as well as physical dimensions of 
the radio module unit. Transitioning the final product away 
from the prototyping platform to fully-integrated printed 
circuit boards and electronics at scale can reduce the per-unit 
cost to below A$100. Furthermore, the implementation of the 
lower-power Long Range (LoRa) radio technology to replace 
the existing radio system can unlock the capability for the 
DWSN system to be deployed in no-recharge scenarios, such 
as in underground mines. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank CSIRO Energy for 
granting permission to publish this work.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
P. Corke, T. Wark, R. Jurdak, W. Hu, P. Valencia, and D. 
Moore, “Environmental Wireless Sensor Networks,” Proc. 
IEEE, vol. 98, no. 11, pp. 1903–1917, 2010. 
[2] 
S. Ferdoush and X. Li, “Wireless Sensor Network System 
Design Using Raspberry Pi and Arduino for Environmental 
Monitoring Applications,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 34, pp. 
103–110, 2014. 
[3] 
J. Gutiérrez, J. F. Villa-Medina, A. Nieto-Garibay, and M. Á. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Porta-Gándara, “Automated Irrigation System Using a 
Wireless Sensor Network and GPRS Module,” IEEE Trans. 
Instrum. Meas., vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 166–176, 2014. 
[4] 
J. Polo, G. Hornero, C. Duijneveld, A. García, and O. Casas, 
“Design of a low-cost Wireless Sensor Network with UAV 
mobile node for agricultural applications,” Comput. Electron. 
Agric., vol. 119, pp. 19–32, 2015. 
[5] 
J. Lee, Z. Zhong, B. Du, S. Gutesa, and K. Kim, “Low-Cost 
and Energy-Saving Wireless Sensor Network for Real-Time 
Urban Mobility Monitoring System,” J. Sensors, vol. 2015, p. 
8, 2015. 
[6] 
T. Torfs et al., “Low Power Wireless Sensor Network for 
Building Monitoring,” IEEE Sens. J., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 909–
915, 2013. 
[7] 
A. van As and R. G. Jeffrey, “Caving Induced by Hydraulic 
Fracturing at Northparkes Mines,” 4th North American Rock 
Mechanics 
Symposium. 
American 
Rock 
Mechanics 
Association, Seattle, Washington, p. 8, 2000. 
[8] 
R. G. Jeffrey and K. W. Mills, “Hydraulic Fracturing Applied 
to Inducing Longwall Coal Mine Goaf Falls,” 4th North 
American Rock Mechanics Symposium. American Rock 
Mechanics Association, Seattle, Washington, p. 8, 2000. 
[9] 
R. G. Jeffrey, X. Zhang, A. Settari, K. W. Mills, and E. 
Detournay, “Hydraulic fracturing to induce caving: fracture 
model development and comparison to field data,” DC Rocks 
2001, The 38th U.S. Symposium on Rock Mechanics 
(USRMS). 
American 
Rock 
Mechanics 
Association, 
Washington, D.C., p. 10, 2001. 
[10] R. G. Jeffrey, Z. Chen, K. W. Mills, and S. Pegg, “Monitoring 
and Measuring Hydraulic Fracturing Growth During 
Preconditioning of a Roof Rock over a Coal Longwall Panel,” 
ISRM International Conference for Effective and Sustainable 
Hydraulic Fracturing. International Society for Rock 
Mechanics and Rock Engineering, Brisbane, Australia, p. 22, 
2013. 
[11] V. Pandurangan, Z. Chen, and R. G. Jeffrey, “Mapping 
hydraulic fractures from tiltmeter data using the ensemble 
Kalman filter,” Int. J. Numer. Anal. Methods Geomech., vol. 
40, no. 4, pp. 546–567, 2016. 
[12] “XBee-PRO 900 DigiMesh RF Module User Guide.” 
[Online]. Available: https://www.digi.com. [Accessed: 23-
Sep-2019]. 
[13] “Arduino Due.” [Online]. Available: https://www.arduino.cc/
en/Guide/ArduinoDue. [Accessed: 23-Sep-2019]. 
[14] “LILY Self-Leveling Borehole Tiltmeter User Manual.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.jewellinstruments.com. 
[Accessed: 23-Sep-2019]. 
[15] “ublox NEO-M8 series.” [Online]. Available: https://www.u-
blox.com/en/product/neo-m8-series. 
[Accessed: 
23-Sep-
2019]. 
[16] “API Mode for XBee Modules.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.digi.com/resources/documentation/Digidocs/90
001942-13/concepts/c_api_escaped_operating_mode.htm?To
cPath=XBee API mode%7COperating mode configuration%7
C_____1. [Accessed: 23-Sep-2019]. 
[17] R. Jeffrey, D. Kasperczyk, K. Quinlan, R. Pandurangan, and 
A. Soroush, “Hydraulic fracturing trial in Malmberget 
Printzsköld crown pillar.” Confidential Report, 2017. 
[18] P. K. Boeg-Jensen, K. Jonsson, and R. G. Jeffrey, “Hydraulic 
Fracturing Trial Layout and Approach to Mitigate the Seismic 
Hazard at LKAB ’ s Mines in Kiruna and Malmberget,” 9th 
International Symposium on Rockburts and Seismicity in 
Mines. Santiago, Chile, pp. 1–6, 2017. 
[19] K. Jonsson and J. Martinsson, “Evaluating the effect on 
seismicity of a hydraulic fracturing trial using Bayesian data 
analysis,” Fourth International Symposium on Block and 
Sublevel Caving. Australian Centre for Geomechanics PP  - 
Perth, Perth, pp. 451–658, 2018. 
 
 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

