Performance Analysis of Commercial Accelerometers of Different Technologies 
 
Stephan Elies, Stefan Ebenhöch 
Dept. Reliable Systems 
Fraunhofer Institute for High-Speed Dynamics, Ernst-Mach-Institut, EMI 
Freiburg, Germany 
e-mail: stephan.elies@emi.fraunhofer.de 
 
 
Abstract—This paper points out the performance and limits of 
commercial resistive, piezoresistive, piezoelectric, capacitive, 
thermal and optical accelerometers and can be used as a 
reference work. Therefore, datasheets of 118 accelerometers 
from 27 manufacturers of eight countries have been analyzed. 
Focus of the analysis were the parameters overload shock limit, 
measurement range, frequency response, resonance frequency, 
volume, 
weight, 
power 
consumption 
and 
operating 
temperature of both uniaxial and triaxial accelerometers. 
Accelerometers with overload shock limits in the range of 50 g 
to 200 x 103 g and within a measurement range of 2 g to 
110 x 103 g have been analyzed. The unit g stands for the 
gravity acceleration defined as 9.81 meters per square second. 
A strict overload shock limit of 10 x 103 g for accelerometers 
with proof mass and a measurement range of less than 
2 x 103 g was found. Also, that the performance of uniaxial and 
triaxial accelerometers differs. Especially uniaxial piezoelectric 
accelerometers show a better performance with regard to 
overload shock, measurement range, resonance frequency, 
frequency response and operating temperature in contrast to 
triaxial ones. Piezoelectric accelerometers show the highest 
overload shock limits, measurement range and operating 
temperature, capacitive accelerometers the lowest power 
consumption and volume, piezoresistive accelerometers the 
widest frequency response.  
Keywords; accelerometers; measurement range; frequency 
response; resonance frequency; overload shock limit. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Within the conducted review, seven transduction 
principles used in commercial accelerometers today could be 
identified. The capacitive, piezoresistive and piezoelectric 
(with charge and with voltage output) principles are most 
common [1]-[4]. Further principles are the resistive, optical 
and thermal ones. Reviews of state of the art accelerometers 
[1][2] are mostly focused on the first three mentioned 
technologies. This fact and the general lack of reviews of 
accelerometers as stated in [1], especially comparing 
different commercial technologies with each other, have 
been the motivation of the present work. Furthermore, a 
review including the useful parameters volume, weight, 
power consumption and operating temperature is missing. 
 In this paper, we point out the performance of 
commercial accelerometers by analyzing: a number of 118 
accelerometers from 27 manufacturers of eight countries; 
piezoresistive, resistive, piezoelectric with charge and also 
with voltage output, capacitive, optical and thermal 
accelerometers; the parameters overload shock limit, 
measurement 
range, 
frequency 
response, 
resonance 
frequency, volume, weight, power consumption and 
operating temperature for both uniaxial and triaxial 
accelerometers. All parameters were stored in a database to 
identify limits of technologies and correlation between 
parameters by data mining.  
The review includes accelerometers with overload shock 
limits within the range of 50 g to 200 x 103 g and within a 
measurement range of 2 g to 110 x 103 g. The unit g stands 
for the gravity acceleration defined as 9.81 meters per square 
seconds. Our review covers commercial accelerometers used 
in numerous fields, such as consumer, automotive, railway 
and aerospace industries, with cost per unit within the range 
of between 1 and 3000 Euro, excluding restricted 
accelerometers.  
In Section 2, the transduction principles of the analyzed 
accelerometers are explained. The database and the process 
of data acquisition is addressed in Section 3. In Section 4, the 
analyzed parameters of accelerometers are discussed and 
finally, the results are summarized in Section 5.  
II. 
TRANSDUCTION PRINCIPLES OF ACCELEROMETERS 
Most accelerometers can be modelled as a spring-mass-
damper system. Acceleration applied to the accelerometer 
leads to a mass displacement or to a bending of a cantilever 
beam caused by the inertial force. There are a number of 
transduction principles to detect the displacement of the mass 
or the bending of the cantilever beam. Common commercial 
accelerometers detect the change of resistance, capacitance, 
charge, temperature or optical characteristics caused by mass 
displacement or bending. Further principles are the resonant, 
tunneling and electromagnetic principle [2]. But we found no 
manufacturer selling such accelerometers off-the-shelf.   
Each transduction principle needs electronics to convert, 
e.g., the change in resistance into a voltage signal. Also, for, 
signal amplifying and processing, electronic circuits are 
needed. Depending on the transduction principle, either 
external electronics has to be connected or is combined in 
one housing. Fundamentally, accelerometers are classified 
into two types with regard to their frequency response [3]. So 
called AC accelerometers can only measure dynamic 
acceleration. The second type that can measure static 
acceleration, such as gravity acceleration as well as dynamic 
acceleration is called DC accelerometer.  
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

A. Piezoelectric accelerometers with charge output  
They comprise piezoelectric materials as natural quartz 
crystals bonded with a proof mass. Acceleration leads to a 
mass displacement and causes stress in the crystal 
subsequently. Under stress, the piezoelectric effect causes a 
charge transfer in the crystal. The amplitude of charge can be 
measured. 
Electronics 
is 
not 
integrated 
so 
these 
accelerometers provide a charge signal which has to be 
transferred by special low noise cable. They work only for 
AC measurement [3]. 
B. Piezoelectric accelerometers with voltage output  
They work exactly the same way as piezoelectric 
accelerometers with charge output, but the electronics is 
integrated to amplify and convert the charge signal into a 
voltage signal. So they provide a voltage output signal and 
work only for AC measurement [3]. 
C. Resistive accelerometers 
They detect the change of resistance of a metal strain 
gauge bonded to a cantilever beam. An acceleration leads to 
a bending of the cantilever beam and thus to a change in 
resistance of the strain gauge. For metal foil the geometric 
effect dominates the piezoelectric effect [5]. Up to four 
strain gauges are normally configured in a Wheatstone 
bridge circuit. So they provide a voltage signal and work for 
DC measurement. 
D. Piezoresisitve accelerometers 
They work exactly the same way as resistive 
accelerometers, but the strain gauge is fabricated from 
semiconductor materials. Single crystal silicon is about 100 
times more sensitive to strain because for semiconductors 
the piezoresistive effect dominates the geometric effect [5]. 
Configured in a Wheatstone bridge circuit, they provide a 
voltage signal and work for DC measurement [1]. 
E. Capacitive accelerometers 
They detect changes of capacitance of a plate capacitor. 
The plates are composed of semiconductor material, such as 
silicon. The capacitor consists of a moveable plate in- 
between two stationary plates. The center plate deflects due 
to acceleration and leads to a change of the capacitance. 
Configured in a Wheatstone bridge circuit, they provide a 
voltage signal and work for DC measurement [2][3]. 
F. Optical accelerometers 
Usually, they detect the change of optical characteristics 
in an optical fiber. There are a variety of technics for fiber 
optical measurement [6]. The Fiber Bragg Grating (FBG) 
principle has become widely known [7] and FBG 
accelerometers seem to be the popular fiber optical 
technology. Bragg Gratings are interference filters written 
into optical fibers. The gratings reflect only a narrow 
spectral component of induced light. This characteristic is 
used for FBG accelerometers. Acceleration leads to a 
deformation of an optical fiber attached to a suspension 
beam. The deformation of the optical fiber changes the 
reflection characteristic of the Bragg gratings. This change 
can be detected by comparing the spectral component of the 
reflected with the induced light. Because usually, electronics 
is not integrated, they provide an optical signal. They work 
for DC measurement. In the present work we only analyzed 
FBG accelerometers. 
G. Thermal accelerometers 
Thermal accelerometers based on mass displacement 
have been studied in [8]. We found no manufacturer selling 
these accelerometers off-the-shelf. Thermal accelerometers 
without mass displacement have been reported among 
others in [9]. These types of accelerometers consist of a 
heater and thermocouples located around the heater in a 
hermetic chamber. Without acceleration, the heater creates a 
symmetric temperature profile. When acceleration is 
applied, the hot air in the chamber moves and the 
temperature profile gets asymmetric. The asymmetry can be 
detected by the thermocouples around the heater. There is 
one manufacturer that patented and commercialized this 
transduction principle [10]. Electronics is integrated and 
these accelerometers provide a voltage signal and work for 
DC measurement. In the present work, we only analyzed 
thermal accelerometers without moving parts.  
III. 
DATABASE AND PROCEDURE OF DATA ACQUISITION  
For this paper, we considered accelerometers worldwide 
with regard to high overload shock limit, high measurement 
range, low power consumption and low volume. Table I 
lists the number of accelerometers classified by their 
country of origin into European Union and worldwide. We 
chose the headquarters of manufacture as country of origin 
because of globalization, engineering, manufacturing, etc., 
could be distributed across several locations worldwide. For 
this review, we think the headquarters is the most suitable 
parameter to compare the performance of accelerometers by 
countries because from 27 manufactures, 15 manufacture 
their accelerometers at the headquarters, and 7 manufacture 
at the headquarters and one or more locations worldwide. 
Only for 5 manufactures, the location of manufacture is not 
explicitly specified.  
TABLE I.  
NUMBER OF ANALYZED ACCELEROMETERS CLASSIFIED BY  
HEADQUARTER OF COMPANY INTO EUROPEAN UNION AND NON EU.  
Country of 
origin 
Number of 
Accelerometers 
Classification by 
country of origin 
Germany 
35 
European Union (EU) 
UK 
11 
Denmark 
11 
USA 
37 
Worldwide (Non EU) 
Switzerland 
13 
China 
9 
Canada 
1 
Hong Kong 
1 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Table I is not exhaustive, but we found no commercial 
accelerometers with higher overload shock limit, higher 
measurement range and so on.  
Table II shows the number of analyzed accelerometers 
classified by their transduction principle and classified by 
frequency response into AC and DC measurement.  
TABLE II.  
NUMBER OF ANALYZED ACCELEROMETERS CLASSIFIED BY  
TRANSDUCTION PRINCIPLE AND FREQUENCY RESPONSE. 
Transduction principle 
Number of 
accelerometers 
Classification by 
frequency response 
Capacitive 
40 
DC 
Piezoresistive 
15 
Resistive 
7 
Optical 
4 
Thermal 
2 
Piezoelectric voltage output 
30 
AC 
Piezoelectric charge output 
20 
 
Resistive and especially optical and thermal accelerometers 
are not very common in contrast to the other transduction 
principles. Due to small samples, we will highlight only 
special characteristics of these three principles in the next 
section.  
IV. 
ANALYSES OF PARAMETERS 
In this section, we will analyze the parameters overload 
shock limit, measurement range, power consumption, 
volume, weight, frequency response, resonance frequency, 
and operating temperature of accelerometers specified on 
their datasheets.  
A. Measurement range of accelerometers 
In datasheets, the measurement range is mostly specified 
for a symmetric range of acceleration, e.g., -500 g to 500 g. 
Rarely the lower limit is restricted, e.g., -200 g to 500 g. In 
this review, the parameter measurement range stands for the 
positive upper limit of acceleration, for the last given 
example 500 g, because for 95 of 118 accelerometers, the 
measurement range is symmetric. For 24 accelerometers, the 
lower limit is not specified and only for one accelerometer, 
the lower limit is restricted. In Figure 1, the measurement 
range is plotted against the accelerometer-ID. A number of 
118 different accelerometers have been analyzed, so there 
are 118 IDs where each ID is a unique identifier. That 
means an accelerometer, e.g., with the ID 50 in Figure 1 has 
the same ID in Figure 2 to Figure 8. These figures were 
designed to correlate the analyzed parameters among each 
other. Among 118 accelerometers, there are only three 
capacitive accelerometers with two measurement axes. 
Because of that small number, they were classified into the 
class of triaxial accelerometers, annotated in Figure 1.  
Capacitive accelerometers are limited to a measurement 
range of 500 g and resistive accelerometers to 10 x 103 g. 
Only piezoelectric and piezoresistive accelerometers are 
capable of measuring more than 10 x 103 g with the 
restriction that piezoresistive accelerometers are the only 
ones capable of DC measurement above 10 x 103 g.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Measurement range of 118 accelerometers classified by 
transduction principle, number of measurement axis and sorted by 
measurement range in ascending order. 
For measuring 100 x 103 g and more, uniaxial piezoelectric 
accelerometers are capable. However, triaxial piezoelectric 
accelerometers with voltage output are limited to 10 x 103 g. 
B. Overload shock limit 
Figure 2 presents the overload shock limit against the 
ID. 
Except 
for 
piezoelectric 
accelerometers, 
most 
accelerometers cannot be used for overload shock limits 
beyond 10 x 103 g. Especially the capacitive principle is 
strictly limited to the 10 x 103 g threshold. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Overload shock limit of 118 accelerometers classified by 
transduction principle, number of measurement axis and sorted by 
measurement range in ascending order. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The review also shows that a general comparison of 
overload shock limits for different accelerometers is only 
possible to a limited degree, due to the fact that this 
parameter is only valid for a specified profile of acceleration 
and a defined period of time. Usually, the overload shock 
limit is specified as the peak of a semi sinusoidal profile of 
acceleration. But a uniform specification of the period of 
time on datasheets is missing. The period of time is 
specified as the maximum or the minimum time or the rise 
time of a semi sinusoidal profile. For altogether 85 of 118 
accelerometers, the period of time is not specified on their 
datasheets. 
C. Power consumption of accelerometers 
Figure 3 shows the power consumption against the ID. 
Note that piezoelectric accelerometers with charge output 
and optical accelerometers are excluded because electronics 
is not integrated and therefore no power is used. Of course, 
both principles also need electronics, but in this review, we 
did not focus on external electronics. Furthermore, for 13 of 
118 accelerometers, no power consumption was specified 
on the datasheet.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Power consumption of 81 accelerometers classified by 
transduction principle, number of measurement axis and sorted by 
measurement range in ascending order. 
The upper limit of power consumption is about 1 watt. 
Generally, the majority of capacitive accelerometers show 
the minimal power consumption beside some piezoelectric 
accelerometers with voltage output. Our analyses show that 
there is no significant correlation between 
power 
consumption 
and 
measurement 
range. 
The 
power 
consumption for uniaxial piezoelectric accelerometers with 
voltage output is nearly constant. 
D. Volume of accelerometers 
Figure 4 illustrates the volume plotted against the ID. 
Note that the volume for piezoelectric accelerometers with 
charge output and optical accelerometers does not comprise 
integrated electronics as explained in the section before. The 
volume of capacitive accelerometers covers a range of five 
decades, but this transduction principle has the minimal 
volume in total. Tendentially, the volume of piezoresistive 
 
 
Figure 4.  Volume of 118 accelerometers classified by transduction 
principle, number of measurement axis and sorted by measurement range in 
ascending order. 
and piezoelectric accelerometers with voltage output 
decreases by increasing measurement range. However, 
optical accelerometers have the largest volume. 
E. Weight of accelerometers  
Figure 5 shows the weight plotted against the ID. For 18 
of 33 capacitive and for the two thermal accelerometers, the 
weight is not specified on the datasheet. Note again that 
electronics for piezoelectric accelerometers with charge 
output and optical accelerometers are excluded.   
 
 
Figure 5.  Weight of 98 accelerometers classified by transduction 
principle, number of measurement axis and sorted by measurement range in 
ascending order. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Almost all transduction principles cover a range of three 
decades from 0.1 grams to 100 grams. According to the 
volume, there is a clear tendency of decreasing weight with 
increasing 
measurement 
range 
for 
piezoresistive 
accelerometers and piezoelectric accelerometers with 
voltage output.  
F. Resonance frequency of accelerometers 
Figure 6 shows the resonance frequency plotted against 
the ID. For altogether 40 accelerometers (21 capacitive and 
10 piezoresistive ones), this parameter was not specified on 
the datasheet. Due to sparse data, we exclude these two 
principles from discussion.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Resonance frequency of 78 accelerometers classified by 
transduction principle, number of measurement axis and sorted by 
measurement range in ascending order. 
Tendentially, for uniaxial piezoelectric accelerometers 
with voltage output, the resonance frequency correlates with 
increasing measurement range and is limited to a range 
between 10 kHz up to 200 kHz. For triaxial piezoelectric 
accelerometers with voltage output, the maximum resonance 
frequency is significantly lower and limited to 80 kHz.  
G. Frequency response of accelerometers 
Figure 7 presents the range of the frequency response 
plotted against the ID. Notice that the axis of ordinate 
combines a logarithmic and linear scale. A comparison of 
the frequency responses of accelerometers is only possible 
to a limited degree because a uniform specification of the 
tolerance of the output signal on datasheets is missing. For 
only 54 of 118 accelerometers, the frequency response is 
specified for a tolerance of the output signal within ±3 dB. 
For 56 accelerometers, the tolerance for the output signal is 
specified non-uniformly, e.g., for -18 %, +15 %, ±10 %, 
±7 %, ±5 %, ±10 dB, ±2 dB or not specified. For 8 
accelerometers, the specification is completely missing. 
With few exceptions, piezoresistive and resistive 
accelerometers are limited to 5 kHz and capacitive to 1 kHz. 
Most piezoelectric accelerometers are capable for a range of 
1 Hz to 20 kHz, and a few are capable for a frequency 
response 
down 
to 
0.2 Hz. 
By 
tendency, 
uniaxial 
piezoelectric accelerometers show a wider frequency 
response than the triaxial ones. The thermal accelerometers  
 
 
Figure 7.  Range of frequency response of 110 accelerometers classified 
by transduction principle, number of measurement axis and sorted by 
measurement range in ascending order.  
are limited to 17 Hz and by frequency extension circuits, 
this limit can be pushed to 100 Hz [10].  
H. Operating temperature of accelerometers  
Figure 8 presents the operating temperature against the 
ID. For piezoelectric accelerometers with charge output, the 
standard operating temperature is in the range of -54 °C to 
150 °C. But they are capable to work up to 250 °C because 
 
 
Figure 8.  Range of operating temperature of 118 accelerometers classified 
by transduction principle, number of measurement axis and sorted by 
measurement range in ascending order. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

the electronics as limiting factor is excluded. In contrast, 
uniaxial piezoelectric accelerometers with voltage output 
are limited to a standard temperature of 120 °C. For 
capacitive accelerometers, the standard temperature is in the 
range 
of 
-40 °C 
up 
to 
85 °C. 
For piezoresistive 
accelerometers, the standard temperature is only in the range 
of -20 °C up to 85 °C. By tendency, the positive operating 
temperature 
for 
the 
most 
uniaxial 
capacitive 
and 
piezoelectric accelerometers is higher than for the triaxial 
ones. 
I. 
Performance of accelerometers by country of origin 
For the last figure of this paper, we chose another design 
to illustrate two interesting facts. Therefore, a distinction 
between uniaxial and triaxial accelerometers has not been 
made. Figure 9 presents the overload shock limit plotted 
against the measurement range.  
First, accelerometers from manufacturers of the European 
Union are limited to an overload shock limit of 100 x 103 g 
and to a measurement range of 80 x 103 g.  
Second, there is a strict threshold for accelerometers 
based on a proof mass. Within a measurement range of up to 
2 x 103 g, they are strictly limited to overload shock limits 
of 10 x 103 g. Remember that the thermal principle works 
without a proof mass, so it is less fragile to overload shocks.  
 
Figure 9.  Overload shock limit versus measurement range of 118 
accelerometers. The transduction principles are highlighted by the shape of 
the symbols. Accelerometers from the EU are highlighted in orange and the 
non-EU ones are highlighted in black.  
Beside accelerometers capable of measuring more than 
10 x 103 g, it is very difficult to find such with overload 
shock limits beyond the 10 x 103 g limitation. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
A variety of commercial accelerometers have been 
analyzed. Performance and limits of accelerometers were 
presented and can be used as a reference work for choosing 
the right technology.  
The paper shows that accelerometers from manufacturers 
of the European Union are nearly state of the art with regard 
to measurement range and overload shock limit. It was found 
a strict overload shock limit of 10 x 103 g for accelerometers 
with proof mass and a measurement range of up to 2 x 103 g.  
We ascertain that the performance of uniaxial and triaxial 
accelerometers is slightly different. Especially uniaxial 
piezoelectric accelerometers show a better performance with 
regard to measurement range, overload shock, resonance 
frequency, frequency response and operating temperature 
than the triaxial ones. 
A general comparison of accelerometer parameters is not 
always easy due to a lack of uniform or missing specification 
in datasheets. In this context, important parameters, such as 
overload shock limit, frequency response and resonance 
frequency are affected. 
In summary, piezoelectric accelerometers show the 
highest measurement range, shock limits and operating 
temperature, capacitive accelerometers the lowest power 
consumption and volume, and piezoresistive accelerometers 
the widest frequency response. 
VI. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
The author thanks Mr. M. Weber for the support in 
extracting accelerometer parameters from datasheets. 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Narasimhan, H. Li, and M. Jianmin, “Mircomachined 
high-g accelerometers: a review”, Journal of Micromechanics 
and Microengineering, vol. 25 (3), Feb. 2015, pp. 1-18, 
doi:10.1088/0960-1317/25/3/033001. 
[2] G. Krishnan, C. U. Kshirsagar, G. K. Ananthasuresh, and N. 
Bhat, 
“Micromachined 
high-resolution 
accelerometers”, 
Journal of the Indian Institute of Science, vol. 87 (3), Jul.-
Sept. 2007, pp. 333-361. 
[3] A. Chu, “Choosing the right type of accelerometers”, 
Application Notes, Measurement Specialties Inc., May 2012. 
[4] O. B. Degani, D. J. Seter, E. Socher, S. Kaldor, E. Scher, and 
Y. Nemirovsky, “Comparative study of novel micromachined 
accelerometers employing MIDOS”, Sensors and Actuators 
A: Physical, vol. 80 (2), March 2000, pp. 91-99, 
doi:10.1016/S0924-4247(99)00253-8. 
[5] S. Beeby, G. Ensell, M. Kraft, and N. White, “MEMS 
mechanical sensors”, Artech House, Inc., Boston London, 
2004, ISBN 1-58053-536-4. 
[6] K. T. V. Grattan and T. Sun, “Fiber optic sensor technology: 
an overview”, Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 82 (1-
3), May 2000, pp. 40-61, doi:10.1016/S0924-4247(99)00368-
4. 
[7] A. Méndez, “Fiber Bragg grating sensors: a market 
overview”, Proc. SPIE6619, Third European Workshop on 
Optical Fibre Sensors, vol. 6619, July 2007, pp. 661905-1-
661905-6,  doi:10.1117/12.738334. 
[8] U. A. Dauderstädt, P. H. S. de Vries, R. Hiratsuka, and P. M. 
Sarro, “Silicon accelerometer based on thermopiles”, Sensors 
and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 46 (1-3), Jan.-Feb. 1995, pp. 
201-204, doi:10.1016/0924-4247(94)00890-T. 
[9] A. M. Leung, J. Jones, E. Czyzewska, J. Chen, and B. Woods, 
“Micromachined accelerometer based on convection heat 
transfer”, Proc. IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems 
Workshop 
(MEMS’98), 
Jan. 
1998, 
pp. 
627-630, 
doi:10.1109/MEMSYS.1998.659830. 
[10] J. Fennelly, S. Ding, and J. Newton, Y. Zhao, “Thermal mems 
accelerometers fit many applications”, Sensor Magazin, Mar. 
2012, pp. 18-20. 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

