Printed, Microwave-based, Transmission-line Sensor for Investigating the 
Electromagnetic Behavior of Pure Bacteria Culture and Algae in Water 
 
Study the fresh water pathogens (algae and bacterial) electromagnetic behavior using transmission-line 
printed sensor 
 
Mohammad Russel*, Li Xiaomeng, Qu Meixue 
School of Food and Environment 
Dalian University of Technology 
Panjin 124221,P.R.China 
e-mail: mrussel@dlut.edu.cn; 1875212201@qq.com; 
2574348720@qq.com 
Thomas Mascow 
Department of Environmental Microbiology  
UFZ, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, 
Permoserstr. 15,04318 Leipzig, Germany 
e-mail: thomas.maskow@ufz.de
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— Freshwater ecosystem is playing a key role for 
maintaining a green environment. It is often subject to 
anthropogenic and natural hazards, which may adversely 
affect human health, natural resources and the general 
ecosystem. Therefore, it is a social urgency to protect the 
freshwater ecosystem by monitoring the quality of fresh water 
on regular time intervals. Available methods for monitoring 
the water quality are mostly laboratory-based, which is time-
consuming, laborious and expensive. To solve this issue, we are 
proposing a printed, microwave-based, transmission-line 
sensor to better understand the electromagnetic behavior of 
pure culture of bacteria and algae cells in de-ionized water. 
This sensing technique is fast, robust, low-cost and requires a 
very simple sample preparation. We have designed a 
transmission-line, microstrip sensor that could be used for a 
wide frequency range. The sensor needs only 50µL of the 
sample and 60 seconds to analyze it. In this work, we have 
selected the fresh water algae Chlorella vulgaris GIEC-179 and 
the bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa to characterize their 
electromagnetic properties. We investigated their reflection 
coefficient (S11) resonance peak changes in both low 
(0.01GHz-1.0 GHz) and high (1.5-2.5 GHz) frequency ranges. 
The results shows that their S11 resonance peaks are identical 
with respect to the different concentrations of bacterial, algal 
and mixture of both in de-ionized water. We also have 
investigated their S11 parameters of their dead cells. The 
results indicated that for both alive and dead cells, the S11 
peak shifts are significantly different from each other. This 
method could be a potential approach to real-time monitoring 
of the pathogenic detection of freshwater quality. Our 
proposed prototype sensor is able to detect bacterial cells in the 
range of 100 Cell/mL and algae 2.04 x 10-10 g/L, which is 
sensitive and selective enough for fresh water quality 
monitoring. 
Keywords- microstrip; transmission line; printed sensing probe; 
pathogens; microwaves. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
According to Dr. Tom Waller’s quote “You only find 
what you are looking for and you only find it if it is in 
concentrations high enough to be detected by the method 
being used to analyze for it.” [1]. To evaluate the quality of 
various surface water various water management programs, 
the term “water quality” should be different in terms of 
protection and restoration of lake, river and marine 
ecosystem. Water quality is rated with respect to chemical, 
physical and biological parameters in point-source pollutants 
(e.g., 
effluents), 
non-point-source 
pollutants 
(e.g., 
agricultural runoff, urban), and ambient surface waters [2]. 
The most common and widespread health-risks associated 
with drinking-water and infectious diseases are caused by 
water contamination with pathogenic bacteria, parasites and 
algae bloom. Therefore, on-line monitoring could assist to 
understand and manage the risks, especially those associated 
with waterborne diseases [3]. 
Surface water is contaminated by pathogens due to 
multifunctional anthropogenic activity like inadequately 
treated sewage, faulty or leaky septic systems, runoff from 
urban areas, boat and marina waste, combined sewer 
overflows, and waste from pets, farm animals, and wildlife. 
Therefore, human illnesses are transmitted by drinking or 
swimming in water that contains pathogens or from eating 
shellfish harvested from such waters. Sometimes, it is costly 
and impractical to directly test for pathogens because 
pathogens are rarely found in waterbodies. Indicator species 
are usually used to confirm pathogen presence in water that 
fecal contamination may have occurred. The four most 
common indicators used today for professional monitoring 
are total coliforms, fecal coliforms, E. coli and enterococci. 
Those are commonly found in the intestine and feces of 
warm-blooded animals, including wildlife, farm animals, 
pets, and humans [4]. 
Currently, 
available 
methods 
for 
water 
quality 
monitoring are plate counting and typical cell culture 
standards to confirm the presence of pathogens, while they 
are often costly and take approximately 24-48 hours [5] [6]. 
Based on this timeline, by the time the analysis results come 
in, the population may have been already exposed to a 
serious health hazard. Therefore, there is a need for fast and 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

reliable detection of contaminants in a broad spectrum of 
water management situations. To face the current water 
management challenges, on-line monitoring seems to be the 
ideal approach for real time detection [7]. 
Electromagnetic wave sensing methods are gaining more 
popularity due to the study the materials dielectric properties 
(complex permittivity) and structural assessment. Materials' 
dielectric properties always correlate and, by comparing with 
other material characteristics, we can verify the materials 
properties, such as moisture content, bulk density, content of 
biological 
material, 
and 
chemical 
composition 
[8].  
Electromagnetic wave sensing [9]-[11] has already been 
proven to be a pragmatic tool for the evaluation of the 
biomass concentrations of many different microbial strains 
[12] [13]. It is a straightforward method to measure the 
magnitude of all intact cells with their β-dielectric dispersion 
at radio-frequency range. In that case, the cells behave like a 
tiny capacitor and the signal correlates linearly with the 
volume fraction of biomass. At the very high levels of 
biomass concentrations they may lost the linearity. 
Therefore, the accumulation of lipid droplets, bioplastics, 
etc. was found to be one of the few exceptions to the rule 
[14] [15]. 
The fundamental electrical property through which the 
interactions are described is the complex relative permittivity 
of the material (
). It is mathematically expressed as: 
 
 
(1) 
whereas the real part of relative permittivity (
) describes 
how much energy can be stored by the material from the 
electromagnetic field and the imaginary part of the relative 
permittivity (
) shows how lossy the material is under the 
electromagnetic filed, both being functions of frequency 
(
). 
The volume fraction of biomass, the cell size and the 
membrane capacitance per unit area could be the possible 
reason to dielectric increment of a cell suspension from high 
to low frequencies. Also, the conductivity of the suspension 
has an effect on the permittivity measured at a particular 
frequency [16], but this effect can be minimized by choosing 
the right frequencies. 
Correct detection and identification of waterborne 
pathogens based on conventional culturing techniques is very 
laborious, time-consuming, and must be completed in a 
microbiological laboratory. These factors make it unsuitable 
for water quality control if a timely response to possible risks 
is required. 
In this work, a quantitative way is demonstrated, to 
measure the electromagnetic properties of algae and bacterial 
cultures by a microwave based, transmission-line, printed 
sensor, at microwave frequencies. For the exemplification of 
the method, Chlorella vulgaris GIEC-179 (fresh water algae) 
and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (gram negative bacteria) were 
chosen for our experiments. 
II. 
BASIC THEORY OF THE S-PARAMETER 
 
Figure 1. A two-port network with different characteristic impedance. 
Measurement systems do not always work under the 
impedance match condition. Therefore, the general scattering 
parameter was introduced to describe an impedance 
mismatch system. A two-port network system is shown in 
Figure 1. The characteristic impedance at port 1 was 
, 
while the characteristic impedance at port 2 was 
 and we 
assume that 
. The incident power-wave 
amplitude at port 1 is 
 and the reflected power-wave 
amplitude is 
, while 
 and 
 are the incident and 
reflected power-wave amplitude at port 2, respectively. The 
incident power-wave amplitude 
 and the reflected power-
wave amplitude 
 are defined as: 
 
 
(2) 
 
 
(3) 
The scattering parameter matrix connect the incident 
wave and reflected wave and are defined as: 
 
 
(4) 
where 
, 
 and 
 
while the element in the scattering matrix can be defined as: 
 
 
(5) 
The generalized scattering parameter describes how the 
two-port network with the same impedance can be 
transformed to connect different impedance transmission-
line networks [17]. 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

III. 
FABRICATION OF TRANSMISSION LINE PRINTED PROBE 
 
 
Figure 2. Design of the printed transmission-airline sensor (Up) (L=30mm, 
W=10mm, d1 & d2 =1.6mm and the copper conductors C1 & C2 = 2.9mm 
and C3 = 1mm printed on FR4 board). 50Ω SMA connector on both sides 
to connect to the VNA (Down). 
The dual-port printed transmission-airline sensor was 
designed to be able to get the sample’s full S-parameters. 
The design details are shown in Figure 2. This strip-line 
probe contains three main sections: one samples holder and 
two adapters (35 mm SMA connector) to connect the probe 
to vector network analyzer (VNA). We have used polar 
Si9000 PCB Transmission line field-solver to design the 
prototype probe. The length of the sample holder L=30mm, 
W=10mm is the width of the probe, d1 & d2 =1.6mm of 
sample holder and conductor C1& C2=2.9mm and C3=1mm 
of 35 µm thick layer of Cu printed on FR4 board platform. 
The size of the strip-line was designed to confirm only the 
transverse electromagnetic (TEM) mode electromagnetic 
wave translating through the sample under test. To meet the 
measurement system impedance, the sample holder’s size 
was connected to a Teflon filled 50Ω transmission line 
section. A no-loss transmission line section can be described 
by two key parameters: inductance and capacitance [17]. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE  
A. Measurement Setup 
The measurement instrument VNA HP 8753D (Figure 3) 
was calibrated with the short, open, 50Ω load and through 
(SOLT Maury Microwave, model 8050CK11) calibration 
technique to move the measurement plane from the 
instrument’s ports to the end of the test cables. The printed 
strip line probe was assembled with two SMA 35mm 50Ω 
connectors and the probe was connected with the test cables 
to get the air scattering parameters (Reflection S11 and 
transmission S12). The samples were carefully layered and 
compacted in the printed probe sample chamber. A full 
frequency range from 0.01 GHz to 3GHz was used to get the 
measurement data and the full two-port S-parameter, both in 
magnitude and phase form. 201 data points were acquired. A 
32-point averaging factor was used to minimize the 
systematic measurement errors coming from noise. 
 
 
Figure 3. Measurement setup VNA HP 8753D connected to a microwave 
sensor via coaxial cable. 
B. Sample preparation 
1) Bacterial Cell sample: 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa were inoculated in Luria–
Bertani (LB) medium, culture in waterbath shock incubator 
at 30℃ （ 150 rpm ） for 36h. After that, they were 
centrifuged under 8000 rpm for 5 min and the cell was 
diluted with de-ionized (DI) water until the absorbance 
reached approximately 0.5 (CFU is about 108/mL). The 
initial concentration selected was 1x108 CFU/mL for 
preparing different concentrations of bacterial cell using 
dilution factor 1:10 with DI water. 
2) Algal Cell sample: 
The culture medium used for this Chlorella vulgaris 
GIEC-179 was BG11. The biomass concentration (dry 
weight per liter) of cultures were measured according to the 
method reported previously [18] [19]. Microalgae cells were 
collected, centrifuged and washed with de-ionized water. 
The washed microalgae pellet was dried at 105 ℃ for 10h 
and the dry weight was measured. The initial concentration 
selected 
was 
at 
2.04 
g/L 
for 
preparing 
different 
concentrations of algal cell using dilution factor 1:10 with DI 
water. 
3) Dead Bacterial and Algal Cell preparation: 
Live cells were heated in boiling water (100°C) for 5 
minutes, then centrifuged at 8000 rpm for 5 min and washed 
with DI water. 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Different concentrations of Algae and Bacterial 
reflection spectra (S11) 
Figure 4 illustrates the different concentrations of 
bacteria (1x108-1x102 CFU/mL) Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
and algal (2.04 - 2.04x 10-10 g/L) Chlorella vulgaris GIEC-
179 cell reflection-spectral distribution in full frequency 
range of 0.01-3.0GHz, when they set into DI water using the 
microwave sensor. There were two types of reflection 
resonance observed. One in lower frequency range 0.01 
GHz- 1.0 GHz and the other one in higher frequency range 
1.5-3.0 GHz. 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 4. S11 spectra with different concentration of top Bacteria 
(Pseudomonas aerugiosa) and bottom fresh water algae (Chlorella vulgaris 
GIEC-179). 
The shift of resonance peaks is quite distinguishable with 
respect to their different concentrations. If we look at around 
0.6 GHz, there is a sharp magnitude drop of almost 30dBm 
for bacteria and 22dBm for algal cell. On the other hand, in 
higher frequency range their resonance peak shift is identical 
with respect to their concentration and the decrease in 
magnitude around 12dBm for bacteria and 15dBm for algae. 
It is clear that algae cells reflection resonance peak changes 
are more unique compared to bacterial cell both in high and 
low frequency range. Therefore, the microwave sensor is 
showing significant advantage to determine the bacteria or 
algae contamination in surface water. It could be a potential 
sensing method with greater sensitivity and selectivity for 
real-time monitoring of the water quality. 
B. Mixture of both Algae and Bacterial reflection spectra 
(S11) 
Figure 5 shows the sensor’s response in a mixture of 
algae and bacterial cells. Here, the sensor’s reflection spectra 
are behaving in a similar way with the single cell reflection 
spectra. Again, the resonance of reflection spectra appeared 
as higher peak changes at lower frequency range (around 45 
dBm in 0.01-1.0 GHz) and as lower peak changes at higher 
frequency range (15dBm). The results show that the 
electromagnetic signals are dominated by 100% bacterial 
cell, 25% bacteria+75% algae and 75% bacteria+25% algae. 
However, it is difficult to understand the 100% algae and 
mixture of both (50% algae+50%bacteria) electromagnetic 
behavior. These results are leading us to a better 
understanding of the microwave sensor sensitivity and 
selectivity. 
 
Figure 5. S11 spectra with different concentration of Mixture of both 
Bacteria (Pseudomonas aerugiosa) and fresh water algae (Chlorella 
vulgaris GIEC-179). 
C. Dead and alive of Algae and Bacterial Cell reflection 
spectra (S11) 
Another aspect of this work was to understand the 
differences in electromagnetic behavior of the dead and alive 
cells. The same experiment was ran with both dead and alive 
cells. Figure 6 shows the reflection spectra in the full 
frequency range. It is clearly depicted that there are major 
differences in the reflection spectra between dead and alive 
cells. There is a magnitude drop of 25 dBm at low frequency 
range and a 12 dBm at high frequency range. What is 
different between the dead and alive cells is the frequency 
where the magnitude drops at the higher frequency range. 
The peaks are shifted to lower frequencies for dead cells 
when compared to the living cells. These results show not 
only that the sensor can monitor concentration levels and 
distinguish between different pathogens, but also to assess 
whether the cells are alive or dead, something that is vital for 
water risk assessment for pathogen contamination. 
 
Figure 6. S11 spectral comparison with live and dead bacteria (Bt.)c& 
algae (Alg.) cells. 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This research was driven by the industrial need for a 
novel, real-time method of monitoring the presence of 
bacteria and algae in water. The printed, transmission-line, 
microwave-based sensor was developed and tested. The 
response of the sensor to bacteria and algae in various 
concentrations, mixture of both and dead & alive cells was 
investigated with respect to their reflected spectral (S11) 
analysis. The results clearly confirmed that the sensor is able 
to accurately determine the concentration of bacteria and 
algae in water, but to also distinguish between the two and 
whether the cells are dead or alive. Thus, our proposed 
method provides both superior sensitivity and selectivity 
compared to other existing methods. It is important to 
mention that, the sensor’s response returned to its original 
position, namely air spectrum, after each water sample 
measurements, confirming that the developed printed, 
transmission-line sensor is reliable, re-usable and thus, a 
sustainable solution for water quality monitoring. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was supported by the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (41603069) and the fundamental 
Research Funds for the Central Universities grants from 
Dalian 
University 
of 
Technology 
(Panjin 
campus) 
(DUT14QY48, DUT15QY54). 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. T. Waller and H. J. Allen, “Acute and chronic toxicity”, 
In: Jorgensen SE., Fath BD, eds, Encyclopedia of Ecology, 
Elsevier, Oxford, UK, pp 32–43, 2008. 
[2] W. B. Bryan, et al., “Are Harmful Algal Blooms Becoming 
the Greatest Inland Water Quality Threat to Public Health and 
Aquatic 
Ecosystems?” 
Environmental 
Toxicology 
and 
Chemistry, vol. 35, No. 1, pp. 6-13, January 2016. 
[3] Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality,Fourth Edition, world 
health organization, “Microbial Aspects”, Chapter 7, pp. 117, 
2011. 
[4] Chapter 17 of the Volunteer Estuary Monitoring Manual, A 
Methods Manual, Second Edition, EPA-842-B-06-003. The 
full 
document 
can 
be 
downloaded 
from: 
http://www.epa.gov/owow/estuaries/monitor/ July, 2017. 
[5] Federal Register, Drinking water: National primary drinking 
water regulations; total coliform proposed rule. Federal 
Register  vol. 54, pp. 27544, 1991. 
[6] A. E. Greenberg, R. R. T. Russel, L. S. Clesceri, and M. A. H. 
Franson, “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water 
and Wastewater”, American Public Health Association, 
Washington, DC, 1992. 
[7] L. R. Ramon, T. Pol, C. Sophie, and L. C. Jose, “On-line 
bacteriological detection in water”, Trends in Analytical 
Chemistry, vol. 44, pp. 46-57, March 2013. 
[8] O. Büyüköztürk, T. Y. Yu, and J. A. Ortega, “A methodology 
for determining complex permittivity of construction 
materials based on transmission-only coherent, wide-
bandwidth free-space measurements”, Cement and Concrete 
Composites, vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 349-359, April 2006. 
[9] C. Davey and D. B. Kell in M. O’Connor, RHC Bentall and 
JS Monahan (Eds.), Emerging Electromagnetic Medicine, 
Springer, Berlin, 1990. 
[10] K. Foster and H. Schwan, CRC Handbook of Biological 
Effects of Electromagnetic Fields, 1986. 
[11]  K. R. Foster and H. P. Schwan, Dielectric properties of 
tissues, Handbook of biological effects of electromagnetic 
fields, vol. 2, pp. 25-102, 1995. 
[12] C. Boulton, P. Maryan, D. Loveridge, and D. Kell, “The 
application of a novel biomass sensor to the control of yeast 
pitching rate”,  Proc 22nd Eur Brew Conv Zurich European 
Brewing Convention, Oxford University Press, pp. 653-661, 
1989. 
[13] C. L. Davey, D. B. Kell, R. B. Kemp, and R. J. Meredith, “On 
the audio-and radio-frequency dielectric behaviour of 
anchorage-independent, mouse L929-derived LS fibroblasts, 
Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry and Interfacial 
Electrochemistry”, vol. 254, pp. 83-98, 1988. 
[14] G. Kedia, et al., “Addressing the challenge of optimum 
polyhydroxyalkanoate harvesting: Monitoring real time 
process kinetics and biopolymer accumulation using dielectric 
spectroscopy”, Bioresource technology, vol. 134, pp. 143-
150, 2013. 
[15] T. Maskow, A. Röllich, I. Fetzer, J. U. Ackermann, and H. 
Harms, “On-line monitoring of lipid storage in yeasts using 
impedance spectroscopy”, Journal of Biotechnology, vol. 135, 
pp. 64-70, 2008. 
[16] C. M. Harris, et al., “Dielectric permittivity of microbial 
suspensions at radio frequencies: a novel method for the real-
time estimation of microbial biomass”, Enzyme and microbial 
technology, vol. 9, pp. 181-186, 1987. 
[17] D. M. Pozar, "Microwave Engineering 3e." Transmission 
Lines and Waveguides, pp. 143-149, 2005. 
[18] Y. J. Wang, J. He, Z. Li,  and H. Y. Luo, “Determination of 
Chlorella pyrenoidosa biomass using optical density method”, 
Journal of Northwest University (Natural Science Edition), 
vol. 42, No. 1, pp. 60-63, February 2012. 
[19] S.F. Mohsenpour, B. Richards, and N. Willoughby, “Spectral 
conversion of light for enhanced microalgae growth rates and 
photosynthetic pigment production”, Bioresource technology, 
vol. 125, pp. 75-81, 2012. 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

