Radiofrequency Transceiver for Probing SAW
Sensors and Communicating through a Wireless
Sensor Network
Christophe Droit, Jean-Michel.Friedt
SENSeOR SAS
Besanc¸on FRANCE
{christophe.droit,jmfriedt}@femto-st.fr
Gwenhael Goavec-M´erou, Gilles Martin, Sylvain Ballandras,
Karla Breschi, Julien Bernard, Herv´e Guyennet
Time & frequency (TF)
Computer science & complex systems (DISC)
FEMTO-ST institute UMR 6174, Besanc¸on FRANCE
gwen@trabucayre.com, {gilles.martin,ballandr}@femto-st.fr,
karla.jimenez ramirez@edu.univ-fcomte.fr,
{julien.bernard,herve.guyennet}@femto-st
Abstract—A radiofrequency transceiver is used for the dual
purpose of probing surface acoustic wave resonator sensors and
communicating the resulting measurements through a digital
wireless link. Thus, the radiofrequency hardware exhibits a
complementary use of short range probing of piezoelectric
sensors subject to harsh environmental conditions, and long range
digital communication through a wireless sensor network. The
demonstration is performed in the 434 MHz European Industrial,
Scientiﬁc and Medical band, yielding half-duplex communication
ranges well beyond 100 m.
Keywords—transceiver; radio communication; 434 MHz ISM
band; SAW resonator; temperature sensor.
I. INTRODUCTION
Piezoelectric surface acoustic wave (SAW) transducers [1]
have been widely used as passive (no local energy source)
wireless sensors [2], [3], [4], [5], [6]. Despite apparent simi-
larities with silicon based RadioFrequency IDentiﬁcation tags
(RFID), SAW devices underlying physical principles differ
vastly, requiring only linear processes in the electromagnetic
to mechanical sensing wave conversion and thus improved
interrogation ranges [7]. SAW sensors are probed using active
interrogation units operating on principles similar to RADAR.
Amongst the classes of SAW devices, two main families
include the resonators (narrowband device, characterized by
a resonance frequency dependent on a physical quantity under
investigation) [8] and the delay lines (wideband devices,
characterized by a propagation delay dependent on a physical
quantity under investigation) [9], [10], [11]. While the latter
strategy often requires fast electronics and large data storage
memories (typical time constants are in the hundreds of MHz
bandwidth, with typical 40-ns long pulses), probing resonator
can be as simple as an embedded frequency sweep network
analyzer probing the reﬂection coefﬁcient of the transducer.
Because of the wireless link, a pulsed mode RADAR provides
improved isolation (and hence interrogation range): the typical
solution is a pulsed-mode frequency-sweep RADAR. Multiple
references in the literature discuss the implementation of dedi-
cated hardware for probing such devices [12], [13], [14], [15],
either as Fourier-transform based [16] by emitting a wideband
pulse and identifying the frequency of the signal returned by
the sensor, or sweeping a narrowband pulse [17] for identifying
the frequency at which the sensor returns most power (meeting
the resonance frequency condition, hence allowing for the
resonator to store energy which is then released during the
listening step).
On the other hand, the widespread availability of wireless
communication interfaces provides embedded chips with most
functionalities needed for probing a SAW sensor: tunable
radiofrequency source, power ampliﬁer, low noise ampliﬁer
on the reception stage, I/Q demodulator and low pass ﬁlters.
Our aim is to use such a transceiver not only for its original
purpose of transmitting digital data through a wireless link,
but also for probing the frequency-dependent response of
SAW resonators. Hence, we select transceivers which provide
the I and Q demodulated analog outputs, and analyze the
needed signal processing steps for extracting the relevant
information. All operations will be restricted to the European
434 MHz Industrial, Scientiﬁc and Medical (ISM) band: the
same hardware is ﬁrst conﬁgured to probe locally (range
0.1-2 m) a SAW sensor, and then reconﬁgured for sharing
the acquired data through a digital wireless link with a sink
in charge of storing the data and sharing them through the
Internet.
II. HARDWARE SELECTION
Because we aim at processing the analog signal returned by
the sensor, access to the raw I and Q outputs of the receiver
stage of the transceiver is mandatory. Due to increased require-
ment of compacity and low pin count, most radiofrequency
transceivers only provide digital interfaces to the user. We
have identiﬁed 3 suppliers of radiofrequency transceivers po-
tentially compatible with our need: Semtech XE1203F, Maxim
MAX7203 and Melexis TH7122. Because the latter is already
used in a commercial product [18] in a dual chip (separate
emitter and receiver) conﬁguration which is hardly satisfactory,
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

we have focused on the former reference which provides a
tunable frequency source with 500 Hz frequency step, I/Q
analog outputs, and most signiﬁcantly a fast (pin triggered)
switching from emitter to receiver mode capability. This last
point is signiﬁcant: since the time constant of a resonator
operating at frequency f0 is Q/(πf0) with Q the quality factor
of the device, the power loss is 8.7 dB/time constant during the
exponential decaying response of the sensor. Typical values at
f0 = 434 MHz are Q ∈ [8000 − 1000] so that typical time
constants for sampling the returned signal are in the 6-7 µs.
Fig. 1.
Synoptic description of the card. The microcontroller conﬁgures
components depending on the actions chosen. The two modes available are
communication mode (ﬁxed 434 MHz carrier, 4800 bit/s) and a SAW probing
mode. In the latter operating mode, the radiomodem scans the ISM frequency
band step by step so as to detect the resonant frequencies of resonators. The
resonance frequency difference is returned as the quantity representative of
the temperature measurement. This measurement result is also stored on a
SD card. The external radiofrequency duplexer is mandatory for improved
isolation between the emission and reception stage and thus an interrogation
range of the SAW sensor reaching 1 m.
Using an integrated transceiver for probing SAW devices,
although attractive in terms of integration, footprint and
power consumption, is challenging since the signal process-
ing performed at the output of the mixer of the reception
stage are hardly documented. Nevertheless, the frequency-
dependent response of SAW sensors is characterized using
such a hardware, and the frequency at which the returned
power is maximum is identiﬁed by sampling simultaneously
the I and Q output using a dual analog-to-digital converter
embedded in a ST Microelectronics STM32 microcontroller
(Fig. 1). Using this approach, the total number of integrated
circuits needed to design a SAW resonator reader is restricted
to 4 : a XE1203 transceiver, a microcontroller providing
fast (>1 Msamples/s A/D conversion), a fast radiofrequency
duplexer for switching from emission to reception stages in
a monostatic antenna conﬁguration, a digitally programmable
radiofrequency attenuator for improved measurement range
dynamics and possibly a RS232 to USB (FTDI FT232RL)
converter (Fig.1). Reducing the number of active circuits aims
at reducing the total power consumption: the STM32 based on
an ARM Cortex M3 architecture exhibits reduced deep-sleep
mode power consumption of less than 4 µA. All dedicated
radiofrequency chips are powered by General Purpose Input
Output (GPIO) pins of the microcontroller while the radio
frequency transceiver provides deep sleep mode capabilities.
Measured power consumptions are summarized in table I.
Operation mode
Consumption (mA)
RF digital communication
140
Probing SAW resonators
80
Standby mode microcontroller and
transceiver in reception mode
22.3
Standby all components
1.2
TABLE I
POWER CONSUMPTION OF THE SAW INTERROGATION UNIT BASED ON A
XE1203F RADIOMODEM AND STM32 MICROCONTROLLER, DEPENDING
ON THE OPERATING MODES. THE SUPPLY VOLTAGE IS 3.3 V.
Although the time constant of the resonator discharge is 6 to
7 µs, Fig. 2 exhibits a signiﬁcant returned signal for more than
25 µs after switching the duplexer from emission to reception
positions. This signal is interpreted as the impulse response of
the low pass ﬁlters located on the I and Q channels output,
after the internal radiomodem mixers (here set to a cutoff
frequency of 200 kHz). The oscillations observed on the I and
Q outputs are the result of mixing a ﬁxed frequency returned
by the sensor (resonance frequency) with the emitted tunable
frequency source. Following this time dependent characteriza-
tion of the output of the I and Q channels, the practical use of
these information only requires a single measurement by the
analog to digital (A/D) converters of the STM32, selected at
a time 20 µs after switching the duplexer position.
Once the relevant data from the SAW sensors are recorded,
the radiofrequency transceiver is reconﬁgured to operate in
its original purposes, namely wireless digital data communi-
cation. While the current demonstration focuses on a point
to point communication towards a sink conﬁgured as a sink
(constantly listening for incoming messages), dynamic signal
routing is under investigation using the MAC layer provided
by the TinyOS executive environment under the Collection
Tree Protocol (CTP) routing protocol [19]. Because failure of
the sink (either due to operating system crash or overload,
malicious attacks when connected to the Internet, or power
failure) is considered as the weakest link in the dissemination
of the measurement data, the embedded SAW reader has
been ﬁtted with a Secure Digital (SD) mass storage medium
for keeping a local record of all emitted sentences (Fig. 4).
Because most users request the ability to recover the stored
data on widely available Personal Computers, a FAT-based
data storage was selected as a tradeoff between a ﬁlesystem
compatible with low power microcontroller, while still widely
available on most commonly used operating systems. Thus,
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
frequence (10 kHz/point)
temps (us)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
frequency (10 kHz/point)
time (us)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Fig. 2.
Top: experimental measurement of the time-dependent output of the
I output of the XE1203F transceiver when a dual resonator SAW sensor is
connected to the antenna output. Bottom: simulation of the returned signal as
sin(2π(f − f0)t) with f0 the ﬁxed resonance frequency of the sensor and f
the frequency emitted by the transceiver (ordinate), hence demonstrating the
the signal returned by the sensor is at the natural frequency of the resonator.
The optimum signal to noise ratio was identiﬁed with a unique sampling by
the microcontroller A/D converter 20 µs after the duplexer was switched from
emission to reception positions.
the EFSL library was ported to the STM32 platform for this
purpose.
All measurements are differential: the sensor is made of
two resonators in parallel, one exhibiting a strong frequency
dependence with temperature and the other one a turnover
temperature within the operating range. Using this approach,
each measurement requires a sampling duration of 33ms,
including programming the transceiver, recording the two
values (I and Q) from the analog to digital converter for
each sampled frequency (128 samples in the 1.7 MHz wide
ISM band), applying a cross-correlation algorithm through a
fast Fourier transform to measure the frequency difference
between both resonances, and transmitting the data through the
wireless link as well as storing a copy on SD card. Digital data
communication is performed at the bandwidth of 4800 bits/s
for improved immunity to noise and extended communication
range. SAW resonators hardly provide enough information to
allow for both measuring a physical quantity and identiﬁcation:
since a resonator is characterized by only two parameters (res-
onance frequency and quality factor), the only available means
for identifying multiple sensors located within interrogation
range of a transceiver is by using frequency multiplexing. De-
spite not being compliant with ISM radiofrequency emission
regulations, the transceiver can synthesize frequencies in the
434 ±8 MHz range, far beyond the ISM band, compatible
with reading up to 32 resonances.
Although the (SAW) sensor does not require local power,
the interrogation unit is battery powered. In order to extend
the operating duration of the sensor network, deep sleep mode
is active most of the time with only intermittent wakeup
sequences to probe the sensor and transmit data to the sink.
Each SAW reader is identiﬁed by a unique, user deﬁned, 32-bit
address used as pattern during the data transmission (hardware
feature of the XE1203F chip).
III. OPERATING MODES
Fig. 3.
Three SAW readers are used in this model of the wireless sensor
network considered here: one reader acts as the sink and triggers the data
transfer (master) from the other readers used for probing SAW sensor
responses (slaves). Each slave reader is associated with nearby SAW sensors:
after receiving the command for performing a measurement, the SAW reader
probes the nearby resonator resonance frequencies and transmits the result
through a wireless digital link.
Two operating modes have been implemented:
• one reader is conﬁgured as the sink, constantly listening
for incoming data, and connected to a Personal Computer
for data storage and transfer. In this case, the radiomodem
transceiver is used in its default operating mode, namely
digital data transmission. The other readers, spread on
the ﬁeld within a digital communication range of about
100 m, are conﬁgured in standby mode and periodically
wake up to probe the nearby SAW sensor (interrogation
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

range of ≃1 m). Once the SAW sensor properties (res-
onance frequency and signal power) are recorded on the
remote system, data are transmitted to the sink (Fig.3).
One challenge in scalability of this simple approach is
that readers are assumed not to wake up simultaneously
in order to avoid interferences on the radiofrequency
link. Furthermore, the digital link is half duplex, leading
to potentially signiﬁcant limitations in the extension of
this approach to a fully distributed, multi-hop wireless
network protocol. This issue is under investigation by
porting the current low level (C-language based) im-
plementation of the communication algorithms to the
TinyOS executive environment, targeted at providing the
MAC layer and associated communication protocols.
Although the periodic wake up of each node hardly
qualiﬁes this implementation as a deployed Wireless
Sensor Network (WSN), power consumption is optimized
since the readers deployed in the ﬁeld spend most of
their life in deep sleep mode, yielding signiﬁcant power
consumption reduction.
• The second approach is based on a master/slave com-
munication protocol, in which the sink (master) requests
measurements from the readers deployed on the ﬁeld
(slaves). Again the multi hop protocol is not implemented,
but here all nodes are constantly in receive mode, poten-
tially acting as routers of the incoming messages to nodes
located further away from the sink. The drawback is that
although the microcontroller is in sleep mode (wake up
by a hardware interrupt generated by the radiomodem),
the radiofrequency transceiver exhibits signiﬁcant power
consumption even in receive mode, reducing the life
expectancy in a battery powered application.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
One example of harsh environment [20] where battery
powered sensors exhibit a limitation is buried sensors: once
the sensor is installed in concrete or buried in soil, access for
maintenance or battery replacement is no longer an option.
Thus, our experimental demonstration is performed on a SAW
sensor buried 30 cm deep in soil (ﬁg.4). Such a device has been
installed for more than 4 years with no dedicated packaging
other than a standard micro-electronics 5 mm× mm ceramic
packaging, with neither drift nor signal loss despite direct
contact of the soldered dipole antenna (enameled wires) and
the sensor with soil [21]. Alternative technologies include
distribued measurements along a buried optical ﬁber exhibiting
Brillouin backscatter [22], or if inﬁnite life expectancy is
not mandatory, battery powered systems with extended life
expectancies have been used [23], [24].
The measurement standard deviation is 2 kHz: considering
that the dual resonator sensor difference frequency dependence
with temperature is 2500 Hz/oC, the observed temperature
variations between day and night is about 4 oC. The tem-
perature measurement resolution is 1 oC.
Fig. 4.
10-day temperature record of a SAW sensor buried 30 cm deep
in soil: 20 measurements are stored on a FAT formatted SD card every 10
minutes and transmitted through a digital radiofrequency link. The various
colors indicate successive manual recoveries of the data stored on the SD
card.
V. CONCLUSION
While the use of SAW as passive sensors interrogated
through a wireless link has demonstrated unique operating
conditions in harsh environments, the widespread deployment
as part of a wireless sensor network is here investigated by
reconﬁguring the same digital data transmission transceiver
for probing SAW resonator properties and hence the associated
physical quantity under investigation. A practical demonstra-
tion of temperature measurement with local data storage on
a non-volatile medium and real time data transmission to a
remote sink connected to a personal computer is performed.
Thus, the complementarity of the approach is emphasized: a
short (0.1 to 1 m interrogation range) interrogation distance
of the passive sensor located in a harsh environment, coupled
with long range wireless digital data transmission.
REFERENCES
[1] R. White and F. Voltmer, “Direct piezoelectric coupling to surface
acoustic waves,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 314–316,
december 1965.
[2] W. Buff, F. Plath, . Schmeckebier, M. Rusko, T. Vandahl, H. Luck,
F. M¨oller, and D. Malocha, “Remote sensor system using passive SAW
sensors,” in IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium, 1994, pp. 585–588.
[3] A.Pohl, F.Seifert, L.Reindl, G.Scholl, T. Ostertag, and W.Pietsch, “Radio
signals for SAW ID tags and sensors in strong electromagnetic inter-
ference,” in IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium, Cannes, France, 1994, pp.
195–198.
[4] H. Scherr, G. Scholl, F. Seifert, and R. Weigel, “Quartz pressure sensor
based on SAW reﬂective delay line,” in IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium,
San Antonio, TX, USA, 1996, pp. 347–350.
[5] L. Reindl, G. Scholl, T. Ostertag, C. Ruppel, W.-E. Bulst, and F. Seifert,
“SAW devices as wireless passive sensors,” in IEEE Ultrasonics Sym-
posium, 1996, pp. 363–367.
[6] P. Hartmann, “A passive SAW based RFID system for use on ordnance,”
in IEEE International Conference on RFID, 2009, pp. 291–297.
[7] C. Hartmann and L. Claiborne, “Fundamental limitations on reading
range of passive IC-based RFID and SAW-based RFID,” in IEEE
International Conference on RFID, Gaylord, Texan Resort, Grapevine,
TX, USA, March 2007.
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[8] J. Beckley, V. Kalinin, M. Lee, and K. Voliansky, “Non-contact torque
senseor based on SAW resonators,” in IEEE Int. Freq. Control Sympo-
sium and PDA Exhibition, New Orleans, LA, USA, 2002, pp. 202–213.
[9] A. Pohl, R. Steindl, and L. Reindl, “The “intelligent tire” utilizing
passive SAW sensors – mesurement of tire friction,” IEEE Transactions
on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1041–1046,
december 1999.
[10] W. Bulst, G. Fischerauer, and L. Reindl, “State of the art in wireless
sensing with surface acoustic waves,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 265–271, April 2001.
[11] J. H. Kuypers, M. Esashi, D. A. Eisele, and L. M. Reindl, “2.45
GHz passive wireless temperature monitoring system featuring parallel
sensor interrogation and resolution evaluation,” in IEEE Ultrasonics
Symposium, 2006, pp. 1453–1458.
[12] X. Q. Bao, W. B. an V.V. Varadan, and V. Varadan, “SAW temperature
sensor and remote reading system,” in IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium,
Denver, CO, USA, 1987, pp. 583–585.
[13] A. Pohl, G. Ostermayer, and F. Seifert, “Wireless sensing using oscillator
circuits locked to remote High-Q SAW resonators,” IEEE Transactions
on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, vol. 45, no. 5,
pp. 1061–1168, september 1998.
[14] A. Stelzer, S. Schuster, and S. Scheiblhofer, “Readout unit for wireless
SAW sensors and ID-tags,” in International Workshop on SiP/SoC
Integration of MEMS and Passive Components with RF-ICs, 2004.
[15] G. Bruckner, A. Stelzer, L. Maurer, J. Biniasch, L. Reindl, R. Teichmann,
and R. Hauser, “A high-temperature stable SAW identiﬁcation tag for a
pressure sensor and a low-cost interrogation unit,” in 11th International
Sensor Congress (SENSOR), Nuremberg, Germany, 2003, pp. 467–472.
[16] M. Hamsch, R. Hoffmann, W. Buff, M. Binhack, and S. Klett, “An
interrogation unit for passive wireless SAW sensors based on Fourier
transform,” IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Fre-
quency Control, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 1449–1456, november 2004.
[17] J.-M. Friedt, C. Droit, G. Martin, and S. Ballandras, “A wireless in-
terrogation system exploiting narrowband acoustic resonator for remote
physical quantity measurement,” Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 81, p. 014701,
2010.
[18] D. Beier and W. Meierfrankenfeld, “Method for temperature measure-
ment in a household appliance,” U.S. Patent 7 358 464, April 15 2008.
[19] R. Fonseca, O. Gnawali, K. Jamieson, S. Kim, P. Levis, and A. Woo,
“The collection tree protocol (CTP),” Online at www.tinyos.net/tinyos-
2.x/doc/html/tep123.html, last accessed 08/08/2012, 2007.
[20] R. Fachberger, G. Bruckner, R. Hauser, and L. Reindl, “Wireless SAW
based high-temperature measurement systems,” in IEEE International
Frequency Control Symposium and Exposition, 2006, pp. 358–367.
[21] J.-M. Friedt, T. R´etornaz, S. Alzuaga, T. Baron, G. Martin, T. Laroche,
S. Ballandras, M. Griselin, and J.-P. Simonnet, “Surface acoustic wave
devices as passive buried sensors,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 109,
no. 3, p. 034905, 2011.
[22] T. Parker, “A fully distributed simultaneous strain and temperature sensor
using spontaneous brillouin backscatter,” IEEE Photonics Technology
Letters, vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 979–981, 1997.
[23] J. Hart, K. Rose, K. Martinez, and R. Ong, “Subglacial clast behaviour
and its implication for till fabric development: new results derived from
wireless subglacial probe experiments,” Quaternary Science Reviews,
vol. 28, pp. 597–607, 2009.
[24] J. Hart and K. Martinez, “Environmental sensor networks: a revolution
in the earth system science ?” Earth Science Reviews, vol. 78, pp. 177–
191, 2006.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

