 
 Bi-Directional Communication Between Infra-Structure and Mobile Device Based 
on Visible Light Communication  
 
Paula Louro, Manuela Vieira, Manuel Augusto Vieira,  
ADEETC/ISEL/IPL  
R. Conselheiro Emídio Navarro, 1959-007  
Lisboa, Portugal 
CTS-UNINOVA 
Quinta da Torre, Monte da Caparica, 2829-516,  
Caparica, Portugal 
e-mail: plouro@deetc.isel.pt, mv@isel.ipl.pt, mv@isel.pt
 
Abstract—A visible light bi-directional data transmission 
system based on visible light communication using white tri-
chromatic LEDs is presented. The proposed communication 
system allows indoor navigation for a mobile autonomous 
picking 
robot 
moving 
in 
a 
warehouse. 
Downlink 
communication from the infrastructure to the mobile device 
allows positioning, navigation services and data transmission.  
White LEDs are used at the lamps infra-structure to illuminate 
the space and to transmit data and provide positioning. An a-
SiC:H/a-Si:H pin-pin photodiode is used at the receiver unit to 
decode the transmitted data and infer location. Different 
coding schemes are proposed, considering the need to prevent 
flickering effects in downlink communication. 
Keywords- visible light communication; white LED; on-off 
keying, indoor navigation; bidirectional communication. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The connection of people and physical objects with the 
Internet gave rise to new demands on the performance of 
communication networks, regarding essentially, transmission 
data rates. This created new challenges to develop 
communication networks operating at higher data rates and 
reduced latency, ensuring simultaneously energy saving and 
cost reduction solutions. The combination of these features is 
thus the key for higher system capacity and massive device 
connectivity. In order to accomplish this goal, it is expected 
that the next-generation of communication networks will 
integrate 
several 
different 
complementary 
access 
technologies, addressing thus the challenge to explore other 
ranges of the electromagnetic spectrum, also suitable for 
communication. 
Non-guided optical communications are currently a 
competitive technology, that in a few application areas can 
be considered as alternative to radio transmission systems or 
guided optical communication systems. It operates in the 
near infrared or visible range, using lasers or Light emitting 
Diodes (LED) as optical sources. Wireless Optical 
Communication (WOC) technology can be used indoor or 
outdoor, using four generic system configurations, i.e., 
directed Line-Of-Sight (LOS), non-directed LOS, diffused, 
and quasi diffused. Outdoor wireless optical communication 
operating in the infrared range are also named as Free-Space 
Optical (FSO) communication. Optical communication 
operating in the visible range, either indoor or outdoor, are 
labelled as Visible Light Communication (VLC) and use 
white LEDs or single-color LEDs [1], to code and transmit 
the information data [2]. 
In VLC, data are basically transmitted by switching on 
and off the LEDs at a higher rate that the human eye can 
discern [3]. This technology is nested on the ubiquitous use 
of LEDs for lighting solutions. LEDs provide high energy 
efficiency when compared to conventional, almost obsolete, 
incandescent and fluorescent lamps, and at the same time are 
much more reliable and environmentally friendly, as they are 
mercury 
free. 
Thus, 
VLC 
is 
a 
precursor 
optical 
communication technology for large scale integration with 
other conventional widespread communication technologies, 
either indoor or outdoor [4][5]. 
Main advantages when compared to radio technology are 
free licensed spectrum, immunity from electromagnetic 
interference 
and, 
less 
power 
and 
weight/volume 
requirements [6]. Therefore, VLC finds application in many 
fields ranging from smart systems (transportation, targeted 
advertisement, health care monitoring), safe communication 
at RF hazardous places (petrochemical industries, mining) or 
RF undesirable locations (hospitals, aircrafts), indoor 
navigation and localization services [7], specific networks 
(underwater, near field, high speed data communication, 
Internet of Things network) to energy efficient systems as 
home automation and domotics [8]. 
Indoor navigation based on VLC are attractive solutions 
for Indoor Positioning Systems (IPS), as Global Positioning 
Systems (GPS) signals are strongly absorbed by the 
buildings and other wireless solutions need to be used. IPS 
based on VLC can be used for multiple purposes. Main 
applications include accessibility aids for visually impaired, 
navigation in large indoors areas (such as museum guided 
tours, shopping malls, airports, bus or train stations, parking 
lots), targeted advertising, augmented reality, indoor 
robotics, asset tracking and warehouses, among others.  
Nowadays, retail market has several online and offline 
channels of sales and services like same day delivery or store 
pickups. Costumers preferences have evolved forcing 
companies to reduce the order-to-delivery time which 
demands an increased logistics and new enterprise models 
based very often on technological innovation [9]. 
Warehousing is designed to provide value and service 
quality to clients and customers, which corresponds simply 
to deliver in the shortest possible time [10]. In this field, 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

flexible automation is the best solution for warehouses to 
gain a competitive advantage. Order picking is one of the 
most labor intensive and expensive activity in every 
warehouse, where high efficiency is a demand to improve 
the delivery process. Any underperformance of the order-
picking process can affect the whole supply chain and lead to 
unsatisfactory service and high operational cost for the 
warehouse. Thus, under the dual goal of efficiency and save 
labor costs, modern warehouses are evolving to new levels 
of automation using a diverse type of driverless vehicles, 
such as, mobile picking robots, self-driving forklifts, 
autonomous inventory robots or unmanned aerial vehicles 
[11]. 
Mobile robotic picking solutions that provide the 
transport of goods to the packaging station operated by a 
human worker can add a new level of efficiency to the 
process. These autonomous machines typically carry carts or 
racks following a previously defined route in the warehouse 
to move products to the packaging stations. These 
autonomous vehicles take advantage of sensing technology 
development and advanced algorithms to infer optimized 
routes. The vehicle movement inside the warehouse lays on 
indoor localization and indoor navigation techniques based 
on WiFi communication technology [12][13]. 
In this paper, we propose an indoor localization system 
[14][15] designed with white RGB LEDs and a pinpin 
photodiode based on a-SiC:H/a-Si:H with a simple On-Off 
modulation scheme [16][17]. The system is designed to 
establish bidirectional communication between a static 
infrastructure and the mobile picking robot. The LED 
luminaires at the warehouse ceiling are used to lighten the 
warehouse space, and to transmit information about 
positioning and available racks. The picking robots 
communicate with the ceiling luminaires to send information 
about the rack that is being removed and carried to the 
packaging 
station. 
The 
system 
uses 
bi-directional 
communication which demands different codification 
schemes 
to 
establish 
both 
uplink 
and 
downlink 
communication between LED luminaires and mobile robots. 
This communication uses three different communication 
channels ensured by 3 different wavelength emitters of white 
tri-chromatic LEDs. 
During the past decades, channel coding has been used 
extensively in most digital transmission systems. It is now 
widely used also in optical communication, which, however, 
brings in several challenges to the code design and 
implementation. In the specific case of optical links based on 
VLC, the use of on-off keying intensity modulation (OOK 
IM) to carry digital information into LED light signal may 
affect the light brightness. This is due to the distribution of 
information bits 1’s and 0’s in the transmitted data frames, as 
LEDs are turned on or off whether the data bits are 1 or 0. 
This procedure is prone to produce unbalanced light intensity 
as long runs of 1’s and 0’s may cause light intensity 
fluctuation over a short period, which may exceed the 
persistence of the human eye and cause noticeable brightness 
change, i.e., flicker. 
To ensure a stable and dimmable illumination, 
modulation and coding technologies of VLC systems must 
be able to provide flicker mitigation and dimming support 
[18] to avoid perceivable brightness fluctuation, as suggested 
in IEEE Standard 802.15.7 [19]. 
Different approaches to overcome this undesirable effect 
make use of Forward Error Correction (FEC) codes followed 
by DC-balanced Run-Length Limiting (RLL) line codes 
(e.g., Manchester codes), which break long runs of the same 
symbols in the code word (i.e., 1 s or 0 s). However, as RLL 
line codes have code rates less than 1, the transmission 
efficiency of VLC systems can be decreased, which in 
certain applications will affect the system performance. 
Other solutions use auxiliary coding techniques, such as code 
puncturing, scrambling, RLL line codes or even advanced 
coding schemes such as Low-Fensity Parity Check (LDPC) 
codes and turbo codes [8]. In the proposed application, the 
transmission speed is not a critical issue, as the whole 
process is mainly dependent on the mobile robot speed along 
the warehouse. Thus, the use of run-length limiting line 
codes is adequate as far as the code word for downlink 
communication balances the distribution of symbols. In 
uplink communication these effects are negligible as the 
optical source from the mobile robot is used only for data 
communication and not for illumination. 
The simultaneous use of three different wavelengths 
corresponds to wavelength multiplexing which demands 
demultiplexing of the generated photocurrent signal by the 
photodiode receiver. This task was accomplished using a 
photodetector based on a-SiC:H/a-Si:H with operation in the 
visible spectrum. Its sensitivity to different wavelengths can 
be tuned using steady state light illumination [20]. This 
feature is used in the decoding strategy to infer the optical 
signals received by the photodetector [21].  
II. 
COMMUNICATION CHANNELS  
The proposed VLC system includes an indoor scenario of 
bidirectional infrastructure-to-device communication. The 
LED luminaires at the warehouse ceiling are used to perform 
three tasks, namely, room illumination, position/navigation 
services and data transmission. The picking robots 
communicate with the ceiling luminaires to send information 
about the rack that is being removed and carried to the 
packaging station.  
The proposed system is composed of the transmitter and 
the receiver modules, located at the infra-structure and at the 
picking robot. Downlink communication is established from 
the ceiling luminaires to the picking robots and uplink 
communication 
is from the 
picking 
robot 
to 
the 
correspondent ceiling lamp where the movable rack belongs. 
The optical source of the transmitter at the ceiling lamps is 
composed of four white RGB LEDs while at the robot it is a 
multicolor LED or three different single-color LEDs placed 
at the top of the robot. Coding and modulation of the 
transmitters allow the transmission of the encoded data 
signal using on-off modulation. Different coding schemes 
are 
proposed 
to 
establish 
uplink 
and 
downlink 
communication. The receiver modules are placed at the 
ceiling lamps and at the robot. It includes demodulation and 
decoding of the electrical signal generated at the photodiode. 
The transmission channel of the optical link is free space 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

propagation. In Figure 1, it is displayed the communication 
channels established between the lamps and the mobile 
robots. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Communication channels established between the 
lamps at the ceiling and the mobile robots. 
A. Transmitters and receivers 
The transmitter proposed in this VLC system uses ceiling 
lamps based on commercial white LEDs with red, green and 
blue emitters (w-RGB LEDs). Each LED luminaire at the 
ceiling is composed of four white LEDs placed at the corners 
of a square. The w-RGB LEDs are designed for general 
illumination providing therefore, high output power (550 
mcd, 850 mcd and 320 mcd, for the red, green and blue 
emitters, respectively) and wide viewing angle. Analysis of 
the output light spectrum demonstrates the presence of three 
distinct gaussian peaks located in the blue (460 nm – 480 
nm), green (520 nm – 540 nm) and red (619 nm – 624 nm) 
regions. 
The receiver module includes a photodetector to 
transform the light signal into an electric signal that is later 
demodulated and decoded to extract the transmitted 
information. The photodetector used for the transduction of 
the optical signal is a monolithic heterojunction composed of 
two pin structures based on a-Si:H and a-SiC:H and built on 
a glass substrate between two transparent electrical contacts. 
The device operates in the visible spectrum and exhibits two 
different absorption regions due to the presence of the two 
absorber layers in each pin structure. Selective absorption of 
long and short wavelengths can be achieved by adding 
steady state illumination of short wavelength (400 nm) to the 
photodetector. When this background light soaks the device, 
from the side of the a-SiC:H pin structure (front 
illumination), long wavelengths (red and green) provide 
amplification of the photocurrent, while short wavelengths 
(blue) attenuate the signal. Under background illumination, 
from the side of the a-Si:H pin structure (back illumination), 
the behavior is reversed. Signal amplification is obtained for 
shorter wavelengths and attenuation for longer wavelengths. 
The quantification of the signal amplification under front and 
back optical bias is evaluated by the optical gain, defined at 
each wavelength as the ratio between the signal magnitude 
measured with and without optical bias. For the red, green 
and blue light the front optical gain under 400 nm 
background light is, respectively, 5, 3.5 and 1.3, while the 
back optical gains, is, for the same wavelengths, 0.6, 0.6 and 
1.7.  
In Figure 2, it is displayed the configuration of the 
luminaire with the four tri-chromatic white LEDs. With this 
configuration all emitters (red, green and blue) are switched 
on to provide uniform white lighting in the indoor area. 
However, only specific emitters are modulated at a 
frequency imperceptible to the human eye. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Configuration of the RGB white LEDs of the ceiling 
lamp showing the optical patterns generated by the red and blue 
modulated emitters (red emitters at each left side: R and R’, and 
blue emitters at each right side: B and B’). 
Each of these lamps illuminates an area as shown Figure 
2. All green emitters of the lamp are modulated with the 
same coding scheme to transmit the unique identification of 
the lamp. Red emitters at the left corners of the square are 
also modulated, using different frequencies, while the blue 
emitters remain on in a steady state. The top emitter is pulsed 
at half frequency of the bottom one. At the right side, a 
similar modulation scheme is used for the blue emitters, and 
here the red emitters stay on in steady state. Under this 
configuration the illumination pattern in the area covered by 
the light supplied by the lamps allows the definition of the 
unit navigation cell. Inside this area any receiver will be able 
to receive the identification of the emission luminaire 
(supplied 
by 
the 
green 
emitters) 
and 
make 
the 
correspondence to the spatial position. Increased position 
accuracy within each navigation cell is obtained through the 
optical pattern established by the red and blue modulated 
emitters of each lamp. Top emitters are assigned to the north 
cardinal direction inside the navigation cell, while bottom 
emitters to the south, and left and fight emitters, respectively, 
to the west and east directions. The illumination of the 
indoor space is done using different luminaires placed 
contiguously at the ceiling, which enables successive 
identification of each luminaire. In Figure 3, it is displayed 
the spatial organization of adjacent navigation cells with the 
illustration of the different nine cardinal sub-sections. Each 
of these regions can contain 4 racks, which spatial position is 
assigned by the correspondent quadrant (first, second, third 
and fourth).  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Spatial organization of the navigation cell and 
respective cardinal sub-sections. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

B. Network topology 
The network established between the luminaires and the 
mobile robots demands the definition of specific coding 
schemes to enable the accurate identification of signal 
transmitters and receivers. The downlink channel from the 
ceiling lamps to the mobile robot provides positioning 
information 
which 
enables 
navigation 
services 
and 
information about the available racks in each area. The 
uplink channel from the mobile robot to ceiling lamps 
provides information about the removed rack by each robot. 
Ceiling lamps provide information about location and about 
the presence of racks in the area covered by the unit 
navigation. As these luminaires use slow and fast modulated 
red/blue emitters and green emitters, the data frame structure 
is defined differently, depending on the type of emitter. In 
the downlink coding scheme, each frame in each channel is a 
word of 32 bits, divided into four blocks. An on-off keying 
modulation scheme was used with a 32-bit codification 
(logical state 1: light on and logical state 0: light off). The 
first and the last blocks ensure synchronism between the 
emitter and the receptor for correct demodulation of the 
transmitted signal. The first block (4 bits) is composed of 
two idle bits (logical value 1) and two start bits (logical value 
0) and the fourth block by two stop bits (logical value 0) and 
two idle bits (logical value 1). The second block is a word of 
12 bits. In the fast and slow red and/or blue emitters, this 
word contains the information on the position within the 
navigation cell, which is assigned to the frequency. Slow 
emitters have a frequency half of the fast emitters. The green 
emitter is used to carry the identification of the unit cell. Its 
format was designed to ensure safe decode of the signals and 
prevent errors. It is a 12 bits word where the logic state of 
each bit never changes simultaneously with the other fast and 
slow red and blue emitters. The format of the word code is 
0XXXX00YYYY0, where XXXX addresses the line and 
YYYY the column of the unit navigation cell. The third 
block of every emitter is a 12 bits word, reserved for the 
transmission of the information related to the available racks 
inside each navigation area. As the area covered by the 
navigation unit comprises nine cardinal sub-sections 
containing four quadrants each, it is necessary 9 x 4 = 36 bits 
to infer which of these spatial positions, i.e. racks, are 
available. Each of the channels (12 bits available) transmits 
information about 3 sub-sections, using 4 bits for each. The 
first bit is assigned to the first quadrant, the second to the 
second quadrant and so on. Slow emitters of each navigation 
cell transmit information about northwest, north and 
northeast directions, fast emitters at the bottom about 
southwest, south and southeast, and the green emitters about 
west, center and east positions.  
When the picking robot reaches the desired position 
defined by the route, it will remove the rack and carry it to 
the packaging station. It will be necessary for the robot to 
inform the ceiling lamp which rack will be removed from the 
correspondent navigation cell. Thus, a dedicated channel 
establishing communication from the picking robots to the 
ceiling lamps is needed to register which rack will be 
temporarily out of the corresponding position inside the 
navigation unit. This communication will be enabled by 
VLC using a multicolor LED or three different single-color 
LEDs placed at the top of the robot. The establishment of 
communication demands the identification of both partners 
(lamp and robot). The uplink channel uses three wavelengths 
and the info is coded in a 3x32 bits word with a simple 
structure of four blocks: two synchronization blocks (2x4 
bits) located at the beginning and at the end of the word and 
two informative blocks (2x12 bits) in the middle. The first 12 
bits block contains the identification of the ceiling luminaire 
that is illuminating the robot (red emitter) and the 
identification of the robot responsible for picking the rack 
(green emitter). Bits of the blue emitter identification block 
are all assigned to zero. This will demonstrate that the origin 
of the communication comes from the robot, as in the words 
from the ceiling luminaires this block is sequentially fulfilled 
of ones and zeros codes. Flickering effects are negligible, as 
these LEDs are used only to transmit information and not for 
lighting.  
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The 
test 
case 
used 
to 
validate 
the 
proposed 
communication scheme is displayed in Figure 4, that shows 
the specific blocks of the 32 bits word of each emitter 
assigned to the lamps and to the mobile robot. 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
Data frame - 32 bits
4th block
Syncr.
(4 bits)
1
st block
Syncr
(4 bits)
2
nd block
Position info
(12 bits)
3
rd block
Rack info
(12 bits)
Green emitters
Fast red and 
blue emitters
Slow red and 
blue emitters
 
 
Time (ms)
 B
 C
 D
 E
 F
a) 
             
0
1
2
3
4
5
Blue emitter
Green emitter
Red emitter
SW | S | SE
Lamp ID                 NW | N | NE 
2
nd block
Lamp/Robot ID
(12 bits)
Data frame - 32 bits
4th block
Syncr.
(4 bits)
1
st block
Syncr
(4 bits)
Robot ID               W | Center | E 
3
rd block
Rack info
(12 bits)
 
 
Time (ms)
 B
 C
 D
 ###
 ###
b) 
 
Figure 4 Codification of the optical signals transmitted by the: 
a) ceiling lamp; b) mobile picking robot. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

In the code transmitted by the ceiling lamp (Figure 4a), 
the 
green 
transmitters 
send 
the 
code 
1100 | 000010000100 | 0000 0000 0000 | 0011, 
which 
corresponds to the navigation cell with identification 1-2 
(line 1: 0001, column 2: 0010) and to the information that 
there is no rack placed in the position west, center and east of 
the 
same 
cell. 
Slow 
emitters 
transmit 
the 
1100 | 111111000000 | 0011 0011 0011 | 0011 code which 
identifies them as top emitters inside the navigation unit cell 
and states that in northwest, north and northeast sub-sections 
the third and fourth quadrants contain available racks that 
can be picked by the robot. In these quadrants, the 1st and 2nd 
quadrants are empty of available racks. Fast emitters transmit 
the 
code 
1100 | 111000111000 | 1100 1100 1100 | 0011 
which represents their position as bottom emitters in the 
navigation unit cell and informs that in the southwest, south 
and southeast sub-sections the 1st and 2nd quadrants contain 
available racks to be moved while the 3rd and 4th racks are 
not accessible as they are empty 
In Figure 5, it is displayed the photocurrent signal 
measured by the mobile robot under variable conditions of 
optical bias (without and with front/back steady state 
background light). The signal was acquired in position (9) of 
the navigation cell 1-2, when the picking robot moves in the 
forward lane to remove a rack of the first quadrant of sub-
section southwest (SE). 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
no bias
back bias
front bias
R'(fast red)
B'(fast blue)
B (slow blue)
Photocurrent (a.u.)
Data frame - 32 bits
4
th block
Syncr.
(4 bits)
1
st block
Syncr
(4 bits)
2
nd block
Position info
(12 bits)
3
rd block
Rack info
(12 bits)
 
 
Time (ms)
 B
 D
 E
 P4
 P5
 P6
 ###
 ###
 
 
Figure 5 Photocurrent signal (measured without and with front/back steady 
state light) measured at position (9) of the navigation cell 1-2 after removing 
the contribution from the green emitters At the top it is displayed the optical 
signal of each emitter. 
 
 
The signal was acquired in position (9) of the navigation 
cell 1-2, when the picking robot moves in the forward lane to 
remove a rack of the first quadrant of sub-section southwest 
(SE). At this position the optical excitation comes from the 
fast red and blue emitters and from the slow blue emitter. 
The displayed output signal has already been removed of the 
contribution due to the green optical excitation. In the graph, 
the trigger event allows easy synchronization and 
identification of each transmitted frame. This is noticeable 
by the highest peaks of the front photocurrent signal 
(represented in the graphs by the magenta line), as well as by 
the idle bits (all emitters are set to 1). This combination 
results in photocurrent amplification when the device is 
soaked by front steady state illumination. By opposition, the 
same signal under back background light is decreased. 
Then, it is necessary to decode the next blocks of the 
data frame. It is assumed that in the front photocurrent the 
highest levels correspond to the presence of the red light, 
while the lowest ones to its absence, which allows the 
immediate recognition of the ON-OFF states for the red 
channel. The same reasoning can be used to analyze the 
back-photocurrent signal. Here the highest levels are 
assigned to the presence of the blue input signal and the 
lowest levels to its nonexistence, which allows the decoding 
of the blue channel. However, at the regions where there are 
two different signals transmitted by the same wavelength, 
this approach is not feasible, as it is necessary to infer which 
of these is channels is on or off. The approach used to 
decode each optical state was based on the use of a 
calibration curve. This was obtained by scaling all the 
possible signal output levels (Figure 6, solid black line) and 
measuring the photocurrent signal under front optical bias 
using two red and two blue optical signals. The driving 
current of each LED emitter was adjusted to provide 
different levels of photo excitation. On the right side of the 
picture in Figure 6, it is shown the label of the modulated 
emitters that correspond to each photocurrent level.  
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
 
B'
B
BB'
R'
R'B'
R'B
R'BB'
RB'
R
RB
RBB'
RR'
RR'B'
RR'B
RR'BB'
B'
B
R'
R
 
 
Time (ms)
 B
 C
 E
 N
 R2
 D
 ###
 ###
 ###
 
 
Figure 6  Front photocurrent signal acquired along the forward path at 
position (9). In superposition it is displayed the calibration grid. 
Contribution from the green emitters has been removed.  
 
In Figure 7, it is displayed the front photocurrent signal 
due to the optical signal transmitted by the robot after 
removing a specific rack at the third quadrant of the south 
sector inside the navigation cell 1-2.  
 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
Calibration signal
Front photocurrent signal
RGB emitters 
at the robot
 
 
b
g
gb
r
rb
rg
rgb
Photocurrent (a. u.)
Time (ms)
 Q
 P
 O
 H
 F
 B
 C
 D
 ###
 
 Figure 7 Front photocurrent signal transmitted by the robot when removing 
a rack. In superposition it is placed the calibration curve with 8 levels. 
 
The calibration curve obtained with the 8 possible 
combinations is also displayed for decoding purposes. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION  
Simultaneous navigation and data transmission based on 
visible light communication was presented and discussed 
using bidirectional communication between infrastructure 
and autonomous vehicle in an indoors scenario. The 
infrastructure is the ceiling luminaire and the autonomous 
vehicle a mobile warehouse picking robot. The transmitted 
data is encoded in a 32 bits word, defined using specific data 
frames in each direction of the communication to ensure 
information transmission. Codification of the optical signals 
ensured synchronization between frames and was also 
designed to shield the decoding process from errors that 
might provide wrong identification of the correspondent 
spatial position and to minimize flickering effects.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was sponsored by FCT – Fundação para a 
Ciência e a Tecnologia, within the Research Unit CTS – 
Center 
of 
Technology 
and 
systems, 
reference 
UID/EEA/00066/2019 and by IPL/2020/Geo-Loc_ISEL. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[ 1 ] N. Kumar and N R. Lourenço, “LED-based visible light 
communication system: a brief survey and investigation”, Journal 
of Engineering and Applied Sciences, vol. 5, nº4, pp. 296-307, 
2010. 
[ 2 ] A. Jovicic, J. Li, and T. Richardson, “Visible light 
communication: opportunities, challenges and the path to market”. 
[3] W. Zhang and M. Kavehrad, “A 2-D indoor localization system 
based on visible light LED,” in Proc. IEEE Photonics Society 
Summer Topical Conf.—Optical Wireless Systems Applications, 
pp. 80–81 (2012). 
[4] W. Zhang, S. Chowdhury, and M. Kavehrad, “Asynchronous 
indoor positioning system based on visible light communications”, 
Opt. Eng. 53 (4), pp. 045105-1 - 045105-9, 2014. 
[5] Z. Jia, "A visible light communication based hybrid positioning 
method for wireless sensor networks", Intelligent System Design 
 
and Engineering Application (ISDEA) 2012 Second International 
Conference, pp. 1367-1370, 2012. 
[ 6 ] E. Ozgur, E. Dinc, and O. B. Akan, “Communicate to 
illuminate: State-of-the-art and research challenges for visible light 
communications”, Physical Communication 17, pp. 72-8 Z. Zhou, 
M. Kavehrad, and P. Deng, Opt. Eng. 51(8), (2012)5, 2015. 
[7] Z. Zhou, M. Kavehrad, and P. Deng, “High-accuracy indoor 
positioning system based on visible light communication”, Opt. 
Eng. 51(8), (2012). 
[8] T. Komiyama, K. Kobayashi, K. Watanabe, T. Ohkubo, and Y. 
Kurihara, “Demonstration of Visible light Text data transmission 
system using LED lamp”, Proceedings of SICE Annual 
Conference, IEEE, 2011, pp. 1926–1928.  
[9] W. Ding, “Study of Smart Warehouse Management System 
Based on the IOT”. In: Du Z. (eds) Intelligence Computation and 
Evolutionary Computation. Advances in Intelligent Systems and 
Computing, vol 180. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2013). 
[10] R. Koster, T. Duc, and K. Roodbergen, “Design and control of 
warehouse order picking: A literature review”, European Journal 
of Operational Research, 182 (16), 2007, pp. 481-501. 
[11] J. Gu, M. Goetschalckx, and L. McGinnis “Research on 
warehouse operation: A comprehensive review”, European Journal 
of Operational Research, 177 (1), 2007, pp. 1-21. 
[12] P. R. Wurman, R. D’Andrea, and M. Mountz, “Coordinating 
Hundreds of Cooperative, Autonomous Vehicles in Warehouses”, 
Al Magazine, 29 (1), 2008, pp. 9 – 20. 
[ 13 ] Z. Xiaoguang and L. Wei, “The research of network 
architecture in warehouse management system based on RFID and 
WSN integration”, 2008 IEEE International Conference on 
Automation and Logistics, Qingdao, 2008, pp. 2556-2560. 
[14] P. Louro, V. Silva, M. A. Vieira, and M. Vieira, “Viability of 
the use of an a‐SiC: H multilayer device in a domestic VLC 
application”, Physica Status Solidi (C) Current Topics In Solid 
State Physics, 11 (11–12) pp. 1703-1706, 2014. 
[ 15 ] P. Louro, J. Costa, M. Vieira, and M. A. Vieira, "Indoors 
positioning 
through 
VLC 
technology 
using 
an 
a-SiC:H 
photodetector", Proc. SPIE 10453, Third International Conference 
on Applications of Optics and Photonics, 104530H (22 August 
2017). 
[16] P. Louro, V. Silva; J. Costa; M. A. Vieira, and M. Vieira, 
"Added transmission capacity in VLC systems using white RGB 
based LEDs and WDM devices ", Proc. SPIE 9899, Optical 
Sensing and Detection IV, 98990F (April 29, 2016). 
[17] M. A. Vieira, M. Vieira, V. Silva, and P. Louro, “Optical 
signal 
processing 
for 
indoor 
positioning 
using 
a-SiC:H 
technology” Proc. SPIE  9891, Silicon Photonics and Photonic 
Integrated Circuits V, 98911Z (May 13, 2016). 
[18] S. Rajagopal, R. D. Roberts, and S. K. Lim, “IEEE 802.15. 7 
visible light communication: Modulation schemes and dimming 
support,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 72–82, Mar. 
2012. 
[19] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks–
Part 15.7: Short-Range Wireless Optical Communication Using 
Visible Light, IEEE Std. 802.15.7-2011, Sep. 2011, pp. 1–309. 
[20] P. Louro, M. Vieira, and M. A. Vieira, "Coding schemes in a 
communication system based on visible-light communication", 
Proc. SPIE 10947, Next-Generation Optical Communication: 
Components, Sub-Systems, and Systems VIII, 109470G (1 
February 2019); doi: 10.1117/12.2510103. 
[ 21 ] P. Louro, J. Costa, M. Vieira, and M. A. Vieira, Y. 
Vygranenko, “Use of VLC for indoors navigation with RGB LEDs 
and a-SiC:H photodetector”, Proc. of SPIE, vol 10231, Optical 
sensors 2017 (102310F-2). 
_________ 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

