Low Index Photonic Membrane Textile for Personal Thermoregulation
Salim Assaf, Yan Pennec, Alexander Korovin, Anthony Treizebre, Vincent Thomy, Bahram Djafari-Rouhani
IEMN Université de Lille
Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
E-mail: Salim.Assaf@univ-lille1.fr; yan.pennec@univ-lille1.fr; alexander.korovin@iemn.univ-lille1.fr;
Anthony.Treizebre@univ-lille1.fr; Vincent.Thomy@iemn.univ-lille1.fr; Bahram.Djafari-Rouhani@univ-lille1.fr
Abstract— The effect of a photonic polymer membrane in the
Mid InfraRed (MIR) range for passive personal heating
regulation is demonstrated. We show that, by designing the
holes’ diameters and periods of the membrane, we are able to
reflect up to 17% of the emission of the human body in the
wavelength range [7.5, 11.5] µm. The work presented here has
been performed theoretically with the help of the Finite
Element Method. The origin of the reflectivity comes from
guided and resonant modes belonging to the excitation of the
photonic membrane. Integrated to a textile, such a membrane
can greatly mitigate the energy demand for indoor heating and
ultimately contributes to the relief of the climate issues.
Keywords- photonic polymer membrane; personal heating
regulation;
human body; MIR; textile; reflectivity; numerical
calculations; Finite Element Method.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A large part of the building energy consumption is
attributed to temperature control using Heating, Ventilation
and Air Conditioning (HVAC) systems [1]. A decrease in
this consumption, even slightly, will contribute to both
environmental protection and costs saving. One way is to
support building insulation; another way is to control the
energy consumption by personal thermoregulation [2].
Toward this end, personal thermoregulation properties have
been recently developed, not only in extreme environments
for military personnel, athletes or emergency medical
service personnel [3], but for the majority of people who
spend their time in a sedentary state. The personal thermal
management has been defined through different devices,
wearable like normal clothes, but capable to control the
body comfort. Personal cooling textile have been developed
using synthetic polymer fibers with low IR absorbance
[4][5] or able to enhance the radiative dissipation by
nanoporous polyethylene film [6]. The opposite effect, i.e.
personal heating textiles, have also been studied. In this
case, the personal thermal management has been controlled
by the integration of metallic nanowires embedded in the
textile that reduce the energy waste from the human body.
Such textiles not only reflect the human body infrared
radiation, but also allow Joule heating to complement the
passive insulation [7]-[9]. Realizing heating and cooling
properties within a same structure and without any energy
input still remains a tremendous challenge. Very recently,
Hsu et al. [10] investigated a dual-mode textile for human
body radiative heating using a bilayer thermal emitter
embedded inside an IR-transparent nanoPE that can perform
both passive radiative heating and cooling using the same
piece of textile. A reversible humidity sensitive clothing for
personal thermoregulation was also proposed using shape
memory polymer [11]. The smart textile has been designed
to reversibly adapt the thermal insulation functionality, thus
permitting the air flow and reducing the humidity level and
the apparent temperature. Therefore, a tremendous effort is
necessary to develop smart wearable thermoregulating
textiles which can reversibly respond to the immediate
temperature feeling of the wearer.
Photonic
crystals,
proposed
in
1987
by
Eli
Yablonovitch [12] are periodic structures based on patterns
whose dimensions are close to the working wavelength. The
control and manipulation of waves in photonic crystals are
achieved by the generation of band gaps in the Bragg
regime for in plane waves. Photonic crystal slabs can also
interact with external radiations in complex and interesting
ways. Of particular importance here is the presence of
resonances within the plate which present a high confined
electromagnetic field [13]-[15]. Such interaction is usually
presented as Fano phenomenon that occurs when a discrete
localized state becomes coupled to a continuum of states
[16]. The resonances of the plate can then couple to external
radiation and provide an efficient way to channel light from
within the slab to the external environment. In addition, the
resonances can significantly affect the transmission and
reflection of externally incident light, resulting in complex
resonant line shapes that are useful in filter applications
[17]. Very recently, such property was introduced in topics
related to plasmonic [18], electromagnetic metamaterial
[19][20], and for different optomechanic [21] or sensing
[22][23] applications.
We investigate here the properties of a photonic crystal
membrane, tailored in the MIR range, useful for personal
heating regulation. The BCB (Benzocyclobutene) is the
polymer which compose the photonic membrane. The
objective is to increase the reflectance in the MIR range,
playing with the geometrical parameters of the membrane.
We first describe the photonic polymer membrane under
consideration and its physical and geometrical parameters.
Then, we show the calculation of the reflective spectrum
and study its behavior as a function of the geometrical
parameters. The rest of the paper is structured as follows.
After this introduction, we describe in Section 2 the design
and detail the simulation of the photonic membrane. Then,
we conclude the paper in Section 3.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

II.
DESIGN AND SIMULATION OF A PHOTONIC
POLYMER MEMBRANE
As seen schematically Figure 1a, the human body
electromagnetic wave is launched from the top and interacts
with the photonic membrane. The photonic membrane,
embedded in air, is made of a polymer (BCB) and drilled
following a triangular array of holes (Figure 1b). We took
into consideration the absorption of the BCB by using its
complex refractive index. The geometrical parameters
involved in the study are the lattice parameter P, the hole’s
diameter D and the thickness of the membrane h. All
numerical results have been performed with the help of the
Finite Element Method (FEM) for which the elementary
unit cell for the calculation of the transmission, reflection
and absorption spectra are sketched Figure 1b. At each side
of the unit cell, perfect matching layers (PML) are applied
to absorb all outgoing waves while on the plane of the
membrane periodic boundary conditions are used to build
the infinite periodic membrane.
Figure 1. a) Principal scheme of the system with the direction of the
incident (I), reflective (R) and transmitive (T) electromagnetic waves. b)
(left) 3D view of the BCB membrane where h is the thickness, D the
diameter and P the period. (Right) Elementary unit cell used for the FEM
calculation with the absorbing (PML) and periodic (CP) boundary
conditions.
Figure 2a presents, as a reference, the behavior of a not
structured BCB membrane of thickness 4µm, and records
the reflection, transmission and absorption curves, reported
respectively in black, blue and red. One can see that almost
80% of the signal emitted is transmitted through the
membrane. At the wavelengths close to 8 µm, 9.5 µm and
12µm, several dips appear in the transmission curve which
correspond to absorption peaks inside the membrane. A
small amplitude of reflection (lower than 20%) appears in
the reflection spectrum with a zero reflection at 6µm. This
variation is due to the Fabry Perot oscillations inside the
BCB membrane of finite thickness. We now structure the
membrane, considering a triangular array of holes with the
geometrical parameters P = 7 µm, D = 5.5 µm, and h = 4
µm
and
record,
as
before,
the
reflection
(black),
transmission (blue) and absorption (red) coefficients (Figure
2b). We find that the spectrum is drastically affected in the
wavelength range [6, 7.5] µm. To get a deeper insight, the
reflection coefficient is magnified in the inset of Figure 2b.
One can see that the reflection comes from the existence of
two main peaks and a small one in the middle. To
understand their origin, we perform the calculation of the
distribution of the electric field in the unit cell at the
wavelengths 6.08 µm, 6.41 µm and 6.88 µm corresponding
respectively to the three features (Figure 2c). The two high
reflection peaks come from the excitation of the guided
modes, which spread over the BCB membrane. One is
antisymmetric while the other is symmetric with respect to
the middle plane of the membrane. The small peak in the
middle corresponds to an antisymmetric mode strongly
confined inside the air hole. One can note that this localized
mode, in interaction with the emitted continuum, gives rise
to a peak of asymmetric shape in the reflection spectrum.
Such physical properties are known as a Fano resonance
[15].
Figure 2. a) Reflection (black), transmission (blue) and absorption (red)
coefficients through a) the non-structured membrane with h = 4 µm and b)
the structured membrane with P = 7 µm, D = 5.5 µm, and h = 4 µm. The
grey hatched area represents the emissivity of the human body at 37°C. c)
Representation of the electric field Ey at the wavelengths  =6.08 µm ;  =
6.41 µm, and  = 6.88 µm, corresponding respectively to the three features
in the inset of b).
Figures 2a and 2b show the emissivity of the human
body
at
37°C
calculated
from
the
Planck
law
and
represented with the grey hatched area. One can see that,
with the chosen set of geometrical parameters, the reflection
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

curve has been affected in the lower part of the emissive
spectrum. In Figure 3a, the geometrical parameters of the
photonic structure have been changed with P = 9 µm and D
= 6.5 µm. One can see that the peaks of reflection shift to
the higher wavelength and now reach the area where the
maximum of the emissive spectrum is expected. It remains
that the shape of the signal is the same, composed of two
main peaks and the Fano shape resonance in between.
Nevertheless, the amplitude has decreased, due to the
presence of the polymer absorption which was not present in
the previous case.
We then demonstrated that the resonant modes of the
low index polymer membrane can be used to produce a
reflection
in
the
MIR
range.
To
get
a
quantitative
representation of the global reflection as a function of the
geometrical parameters, we define an efficiency coefficient,
h, which corresponds to a numerical integration of the
reflection over a wavelength range under consideration,
normalized with respect to the emissivity of the human
body. So, all the efficiency factors should be comprised
between 0 and 1, with a maximum of reflection when h = 1.
This factor is explained through the following formula:
h =
∫ࡱࣅ.ࡾࣅ.ࢊࣅࣅ࢓ࢇ࢞
ࣅ࢓࢏࢔
∫ࡱࣅ
ࣅ࢓ࢇ࢞
ࣅ࢓࢏࢔

whereܧఒ is the human body emissivity at the wavelength λ
and ܴఒ is the structure’s reflectance over the wavelength
range [ߣ௠௜௡=7.5 µm,ߣ௠௔௫ = 11.5 µm].
Figure 3. a) Reflection spectra for: P = 7 µm and D = 5.5 µm (red
curve) and P = 9 µm and D = 6.5 µm (blue curve) with h = 4 µm b)
Evolution of the efficient rate  as a function of D, for three periods P
(h = 4 µm). The circled dots correspond to the position of the two
reflection spectra in a).
Figure 4. Evolution of the efficiency reflection coefficient  as a
function of h, with P = 9 µm and D = 6.5 µm. The circled dot
corresponds to the position of the blue reflection spectrum in a).
Figure 3 shows the evolution of the efficiency coefficient
(in %) as a function of the diameter of the holes, for
different periods and for a constant thickness of the
membrane, h = 4 µm. One can see that  clearly depends
of the geometrical parameters and a maximum of
reflectance (15 %) is reached for a period P = 9 µm and
a diameter D = 7 µm. The origin of the variation of 
comes from the shift of the two peaks described in the
previous section through the wavelength range [7.5, 11.5]
µm, which presents the higher level of emissivity of the
human body. Figure 4 represents the behavior of the
efficiency coefficient as a function of the thickness of the
membrane. The circled blue dot in the curve corresponds
to the maximum of the efficiency obtained from Figure 3
corresponding to the geometrical parameters P = 9 µm,
D= 6.5 µm and h = 4 µm. One can see that the response
of the efficiency coefficient is robust with respect to the
thickness variation of the membrane and even more the
efficiency can still be increased, reaching 17% of
reflectivity.
III.
CONCLUSION
The effect of reflectance of a photonic membrane of
low refractive index on the human body emission at 37°C
has been theoretically investigated in the MIR range. We
showed that the reflectivity depends on the geometrical
parameters of the membrane and found the occurrence of
three peaks of reflection whose origin is due to the
structuring of the membrane. One origin is due to the
photonic guided modes inside the membrane, the second
one comes from the local excitation of the electromagnetic
field
inside
the
air
holes.
The
dependence
of
the
geometrical parameters has been quantitatively highlighted
through the definition of an efficiency coefficient. We
found that the BCB membrane can reflect up to 17% of the
emission in the wavelength range [7.5, 11.5] µm which
correspond to the maximum of the human body emissivity.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

We are currently studying the effect of the physical
parameters considering the behavior of the refractive index
of both the membrane and the environment on the
reflectivity rate. Also, the work is ongoing toward an
experimental demonstration. This work paves the way for
the design of a smart responsive photonic membrane which
dynamically modifies its reflectance in response to external
stimuli like temperature or humidity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Semi Lab for performing the refractive index
measurement. S.A. thanks the society DAMART France for
partial financial
support of his PhD. This
work
was
supported by the European Commission project Phototex
under the INTERREG program France - Wallonie -
Vlaanderen.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. J. Chua, S. K. Chou, W. M. Yang, and J. Yan,
“Achieving better energy-efficient air conditioning – A
review of technologies and strategies,” Appl. Energy, vol.
104, pp. 87–104, Apr. 2013.
[2]
R. F. Rupp, N. G. Vásquez, and R. Lamberts, “A review of
human thermal comfort in the built environment,” Energy
Build., vol. 105, pp. 178–205, Oct. 2015.
[3]
M. M. Yazdi and M. Sheikhzadeh, “Personal cooling
garments: a review,” J. Text. Inst., vol. 105, no. 12, pp.
1231–1250, 2014.
[4]
J. K. Tong, X. Huang, S. V. Boriskina, J. Loomis, Y. Xu,
and G. Chen, “Infrared-Transparent Visible-Opaque Fabrics
for
Wearable
Personal
Thermal
Management,”
ACS
Photonics, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 769–778, Jun. 2015.
[5]
P. B. Catrysse, A. Y. Song, and S. Fan, “Photonic Structure
Textile Design for Localized Thermal Cooling Based on a
Fiber Blending Scheme,” ACS Photonics, vol. 3, no. 12, pp.
2420–2426, Dec. 2016.
[6]
P.-C. Hsu et al., “Radiative human body cooling by
nanoporous polyethylene textile,” Science, vol. 353, no.
6303, pp. 1019–1023, Sep. 2016.
[7]
P.-C. Hsu et al., “Personal Thermal Management by
Metallic Nanowire-Coated Textile,” Nano Lett., vol. 15, no.
1, pp. 365–371, Jan. 2015.
[8]
Z. Yu, Y. Gao, X. Di, and H. Luo, “Cotton modified with
silver-nanowires/polydopamine
for
a
wearable
thermal
management device,” RSC Adv., vol. 6, no. 72, pp. 67771–
67777, 2016.
[9]
L. Cai et al., “Warming up human body by nanoporous
metallized polyethylene textile,” Nat. Commun., vol. 8, no.
1, Dec. 2017.
[10]
P.-C. Hsu et al., “A dual-mode textile for human body
radiative heating and cooling,” Sci. Adv., vol. 3, no. 11, p.
e1700895, Nov. 2017.
[11]
Y. Zhong et al., “Reversible Humidity Sensitive Clothing
for Personal Thermoregulation,” Sci. Rep., vol. 7, p. 44208,
Mar. 2017.
[12]
E. Yablonovitch, “Inhibited Spontaneous Emission in Solid-
State Physics and Electronics,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 58, no.
20, p. 4, 1987.
[13]
V. N. Astratov et al., “Resonant coupling of near-infrared
radiation to photonic band structure waveguides,” J. Light.
Technol., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 2050–2057, Nov. 1999.
[14]
V. Pacradouni, W. J. Mandeville, A. R. Cowan, P. Paddon,
J. F. Young, and S. R. Johnson, “Photonic band structure of
dielectric
membranes
periodically
textured
in
two
dimensions,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 4204–4207,
Aug. 2000.
[15]
A. R. Cowan, P. Paddon, V. Pacradouni, and J. F. Young,
“Resonant
scattering
and
mode
coupling
in
two-
dimensional textured planar waveguides,” J. Opt. Soc. Am.
A, vol. 18, no. 5, p. 1160, May 2001.
[16]
M. F. Limonov, M. V. Rybin, A. N. Poddubny, and Y. S.
Kivshar, “Fano resonances in photonics,” Nat. Photonics,
vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 543–554, Sep. 2017.
[17]
P. Markoš, “Fano resonances and band structure of two-
dimensional photonic structures,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 92, no.
4, Oct. 2015.
[18]
B. Luk’yanchuk et al., “The Fano resonance in plasmonic
nanostructures and metamaterials,” Nat. Mater., vol. 9, no.
9, pp. 707–715, Sep. 2010.
[19]
A. B. Khanikaev, C. Wu, and G. Shvets, “Fano-resonant
metamaterials and their applications,” Nanophotonics, vol.
2, no. 4, Jan. 2013.
[20]
Y. Yang, I. I. Kravchenko, D. P. Briggs, and J. Valentine,
“All-dielectric metasurface analogue of electromagnetically
induced transparency,” Nat. Commun., vol. 5, p. 5753, Dec.
2014.
[21]
K.
A.
Yasir
and
W.-M.
Liu,
“Controlled
Electromagnetically
Induced
Transparency
and
Fano
Resonances in Hybrid BEC-Optomechanics,” Sci. Rep., vol.
6, no. 1, Sep. 2016.
[22]
S. Amoudache et al., “Optical and acoustic sensing using
Fano-like resonances in dual phononic and photonic crystal
plate,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 119, no. 11, p. 114502, Mar.
2016.
[23]
N. S. King et al., “Fano Resonant Aluminum Nanoclusters
for Plasmonic Colorimetric Sensing,” ACS Nano, vol. 9, no.
11, pp. 10628–10636, Nov. 2015.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

