Detection of Ice Formation over a Road Surface
Amedeo Troiano
dept. Electronics
Politecnico di Torino
Torino, Italy
Email: amedeo.troiano@polito.it
Eros Pasero
dept. Electronics
Politecnico di Torino
Torino, Italy
Email: eros.pasero@polito.it
Luca Mesin
dept. Electronics
Politecnico di Torino
Torino, Italy
Email: luca.mesin@polito.it
Abstract—The reliable detection of ice over road surfaces
is an important issue for reducing maintenance costs and
improving trafﬁc safety. An innovative capacitive sensor was
developed to detect the presence of ice on its surface, and
its repeatability, stability and reliability were assessed in
simulations and experiments described in previous papers. The
indications of the sensor are compared in this paper with
the objective identiﬁcation of ice formation or melting over
a road surface in laboratory, under dynamic or stationary
conditions. The sensor provides indications which are in line
with the condition of the road surface, with a mean error in
the identiﬁcation of the time instants of ice-wet and wet-ice
transitions lower than about 10 minutes, both under different
temperature gradients or in stable conditions.
Keywords-Capacitive sensor; ice detection; road and runway
information system.
I. INTRODUCTION
Detection of ice formation found important applications in
different ﬁelds. For instance, an adequate assessment of the
conditions of road surfaces may enhance trafﬁc safety [1];
detection of ice on the surface of the runway of airports can
improve safety during take off and landing of the aircrafts
[2]; ﬁnally, the detection of presence of ice on walkways
may prevent people falls.
Different technologies were developed to detect ice, de-
pending on the application. Some techniques put directly
the sensor in contact with the surface over which ice may
form, others allow for a remote sensing. Different sensors
were developed exploiting different physical principles, e.g.
concerning vibration [3], electro-optics [4], ﬁber-optics [5],
radio frequency [6], micro-mechanics [7], ultrasounds [8],
and inductive [9] effects.
In order to detect ice formation on the surface of a road or
a runway, embedding the sensors directly on the pavements
is preferable. However, the previously indicated methods are
not feasible for this application since they are not enough
robust or they are based on indirect measurements. Thus,
an innovative, low cost ice sensor was introduced in [10]
to detect water and ice on exposed surfaces, based on a
capacitance measurement. The sensor was investigated by
simulations and experiments, both in laboratory [11] and in
the ﬁeld [12] [13].
Reliability and repeatability of the estimates were investi-
gated in laboratory conditions by comparing the instants in
which ice formation and melting were identiﬁed by different
sensors [10]. The sensors provided indications close to each
other, with a spread of the time instants in which a state
transition was identiﬁed in the order of a few minutes.
However, the surface of the sensor is ﬂat and very different
from that of the road, which is a rough surface due to the
bitumen. Moreover, the sensor blocks percolation of water,
which is very important in determining the road surface
conditions. Thus, the icing and melting processes on the
sensor and on the surface of a road may have a deviation,
which is difﬁcult to predict. In order to address this issue,
some sensors were embedded in a road, with bitumen
covering some of them [10] [12]. Nevertheless, the icing
process over a bituminized sensor may be different from
that of a road even if the two surfaces are the same, since
percolation under them is different. Moreover, the indication
of a bituminized sensor is still mediated by the sensor, so
that it cannot be considered as an external reference. The
METAR (METeorological Aerodrome Report) message of
the Turin Airport was considered in [12] as an external,
objective indication. Data were acquired for 10 months.
Rain, fog, and snowfall events were highly correlated with
the output of the sensors, but correlation with ice could not
be assessed. In the same paper, the indications of the sensor
were compared to those of a mathematical model of indirect
ice prediction from meteorological data. Correlation was low
and, trusting on the sensor indications, it was suggested
that a precise prediction of ice formation should require
an adaptive model which ﬁts local weather data and ice
formation on the speciﬁc road under consideration, instead
of a simple general law. Thus, also the mathematical models
proposed in the literature to relate meteorological variables
to ice formation are not considered as reliable independent
references to test the sensor.
This work is devoted to the objective of test our sensor: its
indications are compared with the ice formation and melting
over a road model identiﬁed by direct inspection.
14
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

Figure 1.
(A) Relative permittivity of air, water (at 25◦C), and ice (at
-10◦C) as a function of frequency. (B) Picture of the ice sensor. (C) Picture
of the road core.
II. METHODS
The sensor described in [10] consists of a multi-frequency
capacitance measurement system. The capacitance is related
to the relative permittivity of the material placed over the
sensor, which depends on temperature and measurement
frequency [14]. On the other hand, it is worth noticing
that it is not affected by contaminants (e.g. salt) present
over the road [12]. Figure 1A shows the relation between
the relative permittivity of air, water and ice, and the
measurement frequency for speciﬁc values of temperature.
Due to the variations of relative permittivity with frequency,
it is possible to distinguish between water, ice and air by two
capacitive measurements, at low (200Hz) and high (20MHz)
frequency [10]. The capacitance is measured using a transfer
charge circuit. The sensor is shown in Figure 1B.
The road model was obtained using a road core with
diameter of 30 cm and thickness of 20 cm, shown in
Figure 1C. It does not contain the sensor and is constituted
by three layers, with asphalt and concrete with different
granularity, allowing a good distribution of loads and a
proper drain and ﬁltration. The road core is a representation
of the asphalt of the runways of the Turin-Caselle airport.
In order to compare the indication of presence of ice
provided by the sensor with the ice formation and melting
over a road, experimental tests were performed applying the
same environmental conditions to three sensors and to the
road core, and evaluating the dispersion of the time instants
in which phase changes were detected. Experimental tests
were executed inserting the sensors and the road core in a
climatic chamber (Angelantoni - Challenge 250; temperature
range for climatic test from -40◦C to +180◦C), as shown in
Figure 2A. Sensors were connected to a data acquisition
system via the RS485 communication protocol, for the
Figure 2.
(A) Picture of the experimental setup. Sensors and road core
placed in the climatic chamber, together with an USB webcam to acquire
images. (B) Representation of the two experiments.
collection of the data. At the top of the climatic chamber,
an USB webcam (Logitech - QuickCam Pro 9000; operative
temperature range from -20◦C to +60◦C) was inserted to
acquire images from the road core in order to detect the
formation of the ice over it. A PC was used to store images
from the USB webcam and sensory data from the acquisition
system using the RS232 protocol. Images and data were
simultaneously acquired using a sampling frequency of 1
sample per minute.
Two different experimental tests were performed, the
ﬁrst imposing a linear gradient of temperature, the second
leaving the climatic camber in static condition. Speciﬁcally,
in the ﬁrst test, the sensors and the road core were ﬁrst
introduced into the climatic chamber with a temperature
of 25◦C, for approximately 10 minutes in order to wait
that the indications of the sensor became stationary. Then,
1 mm of tap water was placed over each sensor and at
the center of the road core. Different temperature gradients
were applied and the time instants in which the sensors
identiﬁed ice formation and the road core surface froze
were investigated. Speciﬁcally, the climatic chamber was
arranged to reach -20◦C with different temperature gradients
equal to -0.25◦C/min, -0.5◦C/min, and -0.75◦C/min. During
this period, the water froze. Once reached the minimum
temperature of -20◦C, the climatic chamber kept stable
conditions for approximately 10 minutes, and then it was
arranged to reach 25◦C with opposite temperature gradient.
During this period, the ice melted. The climatic chamber
kept the temperature of 25◦C for approximately 10 minutes.
Then, sensors and the road core were dried.
In the second test, sensors and road core were ﬁrst placed
in the climatic chamber. Then, the chamber was arranged to
reach -10◦C with a temperature gradient of -1◦C/min. Once
15
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

Figure 3.
Example of data processing during the second type of
experiment. Images captured by the camera are shown on the top. On the
bottom, the values of sensor capacitance and the temperature of the climatic
chamber are depicted.
reached the temperature of -10◦C, the climatic chamber was
arranged to keep stable conditions. One mm of tap water
was placed over each sensor and at the center of the road
core. After closing the chamber, the water placed over the
sensors and the road core froze. Then, the climatic chamber
was open at ambient conditions and the ice melted. Finally,
sensors and the road core were dried. This experiment was
repeated in three different days in order to investigate the
repeatability of the data.
A representation of the two experiments is shown in
Figure 2B.
III. RESULTS
An example of data processing is shown in Figure 3. The
images captured by the camera allowed for the identiﬁcation
of the time instants in which water over the road core started
to ice, or when ice started to melt. A synchronous detection
of the sensor capacitance (one example is shown in the
ﬁgure) indicates the formation or melting of ice over the
sensor. Data from the camera and from the sensors were
compared in terms of the time instants in which ice was
formed or melted over the road core and those in which
state transitions were identiﬁed by the sensors.
The general results of the experiments are shown in
Figure 4. The time intants of formation and melting of ice
are shown for the sensors and compared to those in which
the same happened over the road model. The indication
of the sensors are repeatable: in the ﬁrst experiment, the
standard deviation (STD) of identiﬁed transition instants
is about 3 and 2 minutes for the wet-icy and icy-wet
transition, respectively; for the second experiment, STD
of the identiﬁed transition instants is about 4.5 and 2.5
Figure 4.
Time instants in which ice formed or melted over the road core
compared to the indications of the sensors. A) First experiments, in which
different gradients of temperature are applied. B) Second experiments, in
which stable conditions at -10◦C were maintained by the chamber till water
froze and then it was switch off and the door was opened till the ice melted.
minutes for the wet-icy and icy-wet transition, respectively.
Moreover, their indications are in line with the formation or
melting of ice over the road core: mean difference between
the mean transition instants identiﬁed by the sensors and
the actual time of state change of water over the road model
was about 11 and 2.5 minutes, for the wet-icy and icy-wet
transition, respectively, during the ﬁrst experiment; for the
second experiment, the mean difference was about 5 and 7
minutes for the wet-icy and icy-wet transition, respectively.
There was always a negative bias between the indication of
the sensors and the conditions of the road.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
Repeatability and reliability of the estimates provided by
the ice sensor are investigated comparing the time instants
in which water state transitions occurred over a road core
and those indicated by the sensor. Controlling the surface of
a road model placed in the same environmental conditions
of a sensor is an objective way to get an external validation
of its indication.
Repeatability was satisﬁed, as different sensors provided
the same indication with time delay of a few minutes
(in line with [10]). Spread of the wet-icy transitions was
larger than in the case of icy-wet transition (see [10] for
discussion about this result). The reliability of the estimates
was also satisﬁed, as the delay between the state changes
identiﬁed by the sensors and those obtained over the road
were reasonably low (lower than about 10 minutes in all
experiments considered).
It is worth noticing that there is a deviation between the
indications of the sensor and what happens over the road
core, as the indications of the sensor anticipate the road
16
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

conditions (of a few minutes, as stated before). Ice forms be-
fore over the sensor, due to the smooth surface of the sensor,
which facilitates the formation of ice crystals on it than over
the road. Moreover, ice melts before over the sensor than
over the road core: this is probably due to the low power
consumption of the electronics, which warms the surface of
the sensor. Caution is recommended before exploiting this
deviation in order to predict road surface conditions, as the
time delay surely depends on the speciﬁc weather conditions.
Nevertheless, the precision of the indications of the sensor
indicates its feasibility for different applications, such as ice
forecasting or identiﬁcation of different liquid solutions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was sponsored by the national project AWIS
(Airport Winter Information System), funded by Piedmont
Authority, Italy.
REFERENCES
[1] N. S. T. Lee, H. A. Karimi, and E. J. Krakiwsky, Road
information systems: impact of geographic information systems
technology to automatic vehicle navigation and guidance,
Toronto, Canada: VNIS, 1989.
[2] E. Pasero, W. Moniaci, and G. Raimondo, AWIS: an Airport
Winter Information System,
Prague, Czech Republic: SIR-
WEC, 2008.
[3] C. Barre, D. Lapeyronnie, and G. Salaun, Ice detection assem-
bly installed on an aircraft,
U. S. Patent 7000871, Feb. 21,
2006.
[4] M. Anderson, Electro-optic ice detection device,
U.S. Patent
6425286, Jul. 30, 2002.
[5] W. Li, J. Zhang, L. Ye, and H. Zhang, A Fiber-Optic Solution
to Aircraft Icing Detection and Measurement Problem,
Kiev,
Ukraine: ITCS, 2009.
[6] J. T. Abaunza, Aircraft icing sensors,
U. S. Patent 5772153,
Jul. 30, 1998.
[7] R. DeAnna, Ice detection sensor,
U.S. Patent 5886256, Mar.
23, 1999.
[8] H. Gao and J. L. Rose, Ice detection and classiﬁcation
on an aircraft wing with ultrasonic shear horizontal guided
waves,
IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics and
Frequency Control, vol. 56(2), pp. 334-344, 2009.
[9] H. Lee and B. Seegmiller, Ice detector and deicing ﬂuid
effectiveness monitoring system,
U.S. Patent 5523959, Jun.
4, 1996.
[10] A. Troiano, E. Pasero, and L. Mesin, New System for Detect-
ing Road Ice Formation,
IEEE Transactions on Instrumen-
tation and Measurement, vol. 60(3), pp. 1091-1101, 2011.
[11] A. Troiano, E. Pasero, and L. Mesin, An innovative water and
ice detection system for road and runway surfaces monitoring,
Berlin, Germany: PRIME, 2010.
[12] A. Troiano, E. Pasero, and L. Mesin, In the Field Application
of a New Sensor for Monitoring Road and Runway Surfaces,
Sensors & Transducers, vol. 10, pp. 71-83, 2011.
[13] L. Mesin, A. Troiano, and E. Pasero, In Field Application
of an Innovative Sensor for Monitoring Road and Runway
Surfaces,
Venice, Italy: SENSORDEVICES, 2010.
[14] A. Von Hippel, The dielectric relaxation spectra of water, ice,
and aqueous solutions, and their interpretation: critical survey
of the status-quo for water,
IEEE Transactions on Electrical
Insulation, vol. 23(5), pp. 801-840, 1988.
17
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

