Range Free Localization of Wireless Sensor Networks Based on  
Sugeno Fuzzy Inference 
 
Mostafa Arbabi Monfared 
Department of Electrical & Electronic Engineering 
Eastern Mediterranean University 
Famagusta, via Mersin10, Turkey 
mostafaarbabi@hotmail.com 
Reza Abrishambaf, Sener Uysal  
Department of Electrical & Electronic Engineering 
Eastern Mediterranean University 
Famagusta, via Mersin10, Turkey 
{reza.abrishambaf, sener.uysal}@emu.edu.tr
 
 
Abstract—One of the challenges in wireless sensor networks is 
to determine the location of sensor nodes based on the known 
location of other nodes. This paper identifies an intelligent 
localization method, which is based on range free localization 
to estimate the location of the unknown nodes. In the proposed 
method, the anchor nodes are connected to the sensor nodes 
and then each sensor node receives a signal from the anchor 
node. The Received Signal Strength Indicator is then 
calculated by the node. The RSSIs are calculated based on the 
distance of the sensor node to each anchor node. The RSSIs 
are, then, fed to the Sugeno fuzzy inference system to calculate 
the weights to be used in the centroid relation. The centroid 
technique is proposed to estimate the location of the unknown 
sensor nodes. Both analytical and experimental results are 
discussed in this paper. The results show that with increasing 
the membership functions, the error decreases and that is 
because of the RSSI graph, which better fits the corresponding 
simulation result.  
Keywords-Range-free Localization; Received Signal Strength 
Indicator (RSSI); Centroid localization; Fuzzy Logic Systems; 
Wireless Sensor Networks. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Wireless Sensor Networks consist of unique nodes, which 
are small, battery powered devices that can compute and 
communicate different signals in a target environment. The 
WSNs have many applications in building, air traffic 
control, 
manufacturing, 
automation, 
environment 
monitoring, other industrial and security applications [1].  
The recent developments of micro electro mechanical 
systems 
(MEMS), 
communication 
technology 
and 
computing have motivated the use of massive distributed 
wireless sensor networks, which consist of hundreds or 
thousands of nodes. Thus every node is able to sense the 
environment, compute one or more tasks  and communicate 
with central unit or other sensors [2]. 
Wireless Sensor Networks are particularly attractive in 
risky environments, specifically in a large deployment. In 
WSN applications, one of the important problems is the 
location of the unknown sensor nodes for the base service. 
The design of efficient localization algorithms depends on a 
successful localization technique to compute the correct 
sensor position in some coordinate system. 
There are two kinds of nodes in WSNs, namely anchor 
nodes, and unknown sensor nodes. Some sensor nodes have 
pre-determined, known positions, which are called anchors 
or beacons. However, unknown sensor nodes don’t have 
those specifications. One of the most significant problems in 
WSNs is the localization of these unidentified sensor nodes 
for the location based service and plays an important role in 
different applications scenarios in WSNs [3]. 
There are some works about localization in WSNs which 
can be divided into two classes: range based and range free 
schemes which are different in the information used for 
localization. The range based schemes require either node to 
node distance or the angles for estimating positions. They 
need more sophisticated hardware to estimate node range 
such as time of arrival (TOA), time difference of arrival 
(TDOA), angle of arrival (AOA) and received signal 
strength indicator (RSSI) [4]. 
On the other hand, the range free localization also has a 
drawback that it is not able to estimate the exact point to 
point distance. Nevertheless, the simplicity of the hardware 
made range free methods very appealing and advantageous 
for localization in wireless sensor networks. Although the 
results in range free schemes are not as precise as the range 
based, the low cost and simpler estimates are important 
reasons that the range free method has increased popularity 
in the recent years [5]. 
Fuzzy Logic (FL) is a multivalued logic which permits 
intermediate values to be defined between conventional 
evaluations such as yes or no, high or low, true or false, 
which has two different meanings. In the narrow sense 
fuzzy logic is a logic system of an extension of multivalued 
logic. FL has difference in both substance and concept of 
traditional multivalued systems in the narrow description.  
On the other hand, in a wide sense FL is synonymous with 
the theory of fuzzy sets that theory relates to classes of 
objects with limitations [6].  
In this paper, the Sugeno fuzzy [10] inference is used for 
simulation to estimate the location of each sensor nodes. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The reason for using Sugeno Fuzzy inference is the 
membership functions which are more suitable in order to 
model the RSSI graph.  We increase the number of Fuzzy 
membership function in order to better fit the RSSI graph 
versus distance. In fact, all the RSSIs are fed to the fuzzy 
system to achieve the weights to be used in centroid relation 
in order to estimate the location of the sensor nodes.  
The range free method has different techniques to 
estimate the position of sensor nodes in a specific region. In 
this paper Centroid localization based on RSSI has been 
utilized. RSSI is used in the estimation of the distance 
between each anchor and the sensor node. 
. 
II. 
CENTROID LOCALIZATION 
In centroid algorithms, the locations of the unknown 
nodes are estimate from the coordinates of their neighboring 
reference nodes. In fact, centralized localization is mainly 
based on transferring of the inter node ranging and 
connectivity data to a powerful central base station. After 
that, the computed positions are transferred back to the 
respective nodes. 
The main advantage of the centralized localization 
method is that it omits the problem of computation in every 
node. The centroid localization scheme is simple and easy to 
implement.  A simple centroid localization algorithm is 
needed to calculate a node’s location based on the positions 
of many reference nodes which is simple but the estimation 
error might be high because of the simplicity of the centroid 
formula. However, using appropriate weights for the 
reference nodes decreases the localization error [7]. 
A. Fundamental Centroid 
The range free algorithm based on proximity uses the 
location of anchor nodes (reference nodes) (
i yi
x ,
) to 
estimate the nearest unknown node [7]. The task of the 
centroid algorithm is, to take several nodes around the 
unknown nodes as polygon vertices and the unknown node 
as the centroid of the polygon, which is indicated in Figure 
1. 
 
Figure 1. Centroid Localization Algorithm. 
  
     After receiving the message, the following relationship is 
used for estimating the coordinates of the unknown node: 
     
)
N
... Y
Y,
N
X
...
( X
)
Y,
( X
N
N
est
est
+
+
+
+
=
1
1
 
                   (1) 
where 
)
Y,
( X
est
est
 indicates the estimated position of the 
sensor node and N is the number of the anchor nodes which 
is connected to the sensor node. This algorithm is simple but 
is not sufficient enough for estimating the unknown  
position. Therefore, the use of some weights on the 
reference nodes is required to solve this problem. 
The  method to improve the results of Eq. (1), where the 
anchor nodes are weighted in terms of their proximity to the 
sensor nodes, is given by this formula [8]: 
     
(Xest,Yest) = (x1w1 +...+ xnwn
wi
i=1
n
∑
, y1w1 +...+ ynwn
wi
i=1
n
∑
)                        (2) 
This method also has a weakness due to the choice of the 
weights
( w ,w ,...,w )
n
2
1
and the performance depends on 
the design of the weights. 
Soft computing is an important tool to solve the problem 
of using low-cost, simple hardware and it is very appropriate 
for systems with uncertainties and nonlinearities. It is used to 
achieve tractability, robustness and low solution cost. Soft 
computing technique in fuzzy logic plays a crucial role in 
this paper [9]. 
III. 
LOCALIZATION USING FUZZY LOGIC 
The fuzzy logic provides a distinct way to achieve control 
or classification in a system. This method is focused on 
what the system must do more than trying to model how it 
works and also it can concentrate on solving a problem 
more than the mathematical modeling of the system. The 
fuzzy logic is an area of research, which is fascinating and 
reaches a trade off between significance and exactness. 
Fuzzy logic is a reasonable way to map an input space to an 
output space where mapping is the starting point for 
everything [6].  
One of the concepts in fuzzy logic is an if-then rule, 
which used in artificial intelligence that deals with fuzzy 
antecedents or consequents. Indeed, fuzzy logic solution is 
an interpretation of human thinking. On the other hand, FL 
can model nonlinear functions of optional complexity to a 
sufficient degree of exactness. Fuzzy logic is a simple way to 
model a multi input and multi output system [10]. 
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
Estimating the location of each sensor node is done by 
the centroid method. Hence, the weights are the main 
variable in the centroid relation, which are the outputs of the 
fuzzy system in the simulation. In fact, the Sugeno fuzzy 
system receives RSSIs as inputs to map the outputs, which 
are weights of each anchor node to the sensor node.  
A WSN consists of sets of anchor nodes and sensor nodes 
with anchor nodes are located at known positions as 
[(X1,Y1),(X2,Y2),...,(XN,YN )]
and 
transmit 
signal 
strengths containing their respective locations.  
The anchor nodes in this implementation are located at 
(0,0), (10,0), (10,10) and (0,10), where the coordinates are 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

in meters. Several sensor nodes are distributed randomly in 
the specific region and receive signal strengths from the 
anchor nodes to estimate their location. The main 
responsibility of the sensor node is to compute the RSSI 
information sent by the anchor nodes.  
The implementation is been done by Sugeno type fuzzy 
inference method. The Sugeno fuzzy inference is similar to 
the Mamdani method and the main difference between them 
is the membership functions where the output in the Sugeno 
method is constant or linear. 
The input membership function of the Sugeno method is 
the RSS from the anchor nodes, which are decomposed into 
nine triangular membership function such as very very low 
(VVL), very low (VL), low (L), medium low (ML), medium 
(M), medium high (MH), high (H), very high (VH), very 
very high (VVH) that it shown in Figure 2. The input 
membership functions take value [RSSmin,RSSmax], where 
RSSmin and RSSmax are the minimum and maximum RSS 
respectively, which are received by each sensor from each 
of the anchor node. 
 
Figure 2. Input membership functions. 
 
     On the other hand, the output membership function of 
the Sugeno fuzzy inference is the weight of each anchor 
node for a given sensor node which takes a value 
[0,wmax ] , where wmax  is the weight with a maximum value 
of one. The output membership function distributes into 
nine linear functions such as VVL, VL, L, ML, M, MH, H, 
VH, VVH.  
     To find the range of output of each membership function, 
the logarithm of each RSSI at different distances should be 
mapped to linear variable between [0,1]. On the other hand, 
the RSSIs should be mapped among [0,1] in nine variable 
with weights.  
     The rules are considered for this Sugeno fuzzy method 
are in terms of the power of RSS. If the anchor node 
receives a high power from the sensor node, it indicates that 
the sensor node is near to the anchor node. On the other 
hand, if the senor node receives a low power, it shows that 
the sensor node is far from the anchor node. Table 1 shows 
the rules of  Sugeno fuzzy system.  
 
TABLE I. FUZZY LOGIC RULES 
 
      Figure 3 indicates the surface of the fuzzy system, which 
shows the weights corresponding to the RSSI values. 
 
Figure 3. RSSI vs. Weight (Surface). 
 
A. Calculating RSSI  
The sensor nodes are distributed randomly in a square 
region with a side length of 10 metres. The first step is to 
estimate the RSSI by the following formula: 
RSSI = −(10nlog10(d)+alpha) 
                                  (3) 
where d is the distance of each sensor node to the anchor 
nodes, n=3.25 is path loss exponent, which may take 
different values because of ambient conditions may differ in 
different directions. Alpha is a constant and is the RSSI 
value of the sensor node that is located at 1-meter distance 
from the anchor node; so, in this paper, alpha is considered 
to be -40dBm for this implementation. 
B. Using Localization Algorithm  
The centroid method is the scenario considered in this 
paper. Therefore, for estimating the coordinates of the 
sensor nodes, the centroid formula given in Eq. (2) is used, 
where N is the number of connected adjacent reference 
nodes. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 4. Simulation result of localization by Sugeno fuzzy 
method. 
 
As seen in Figure 4, the region is 10 square meters, 
where the anchor nodes are located at (0,0), (10,0), (10,10) 
and (0,10). 100 sensor nodes are randomly deployed in the 
region. Each sensor node receives four different RSSI  from 
each of the four anchor nodes, therefore, RSSIs reflect the 
distance of the sensor node to  each of the anchor nodes. 
After estimating the RSSIs, each sensor node has four 
weights that are estimated by Sugeno fuzzy system. 
The solid red dots shown in Figure 4 are the exact 
locations of the randomly deployed sensor nodes and the 
empty circles shown as connected to the solid circles are the 
estimated locations of the sensor nodes. The length of the 
line between them is the error of location. 
C. Performance Evaluation  
The location error between actual and estimated nodes is 
calculate by the following relation: 
Location error = 
                           (4) 
 
In order to estimate the position errors for all the estimated 
and actual nodes, the following relation is used 
Average Location Error=
(xest − xa)
2 +(yest − ya)
2
∑
N
                       (5) 
where N is the total number of sensor nodes.  
     After estimating the location of the sensor nodes in the 
simulation, Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) is 
added to the RSSI with Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) equal 
to 10. Figure 5 indicates the result simulation of localization 
with AWGN.  
 
Figure 5. The location of sensors with AWGN. 
 
     Table 2 indicates minimum, maximum and average error 
locations of sensor nodes in both centroid method and fuzzy 
are shown. Hence, the result of centroid method error 
location comparing to the fuzzy is very high. For fuzzy, the 
result error location for both with and without AWGN also 
shown. The result of average errors in both areas are close 
to each other. According to this table and comparing the 
minimum and maximum of both results of error location in 
the areas, we see that this implementation has the highest 
accuracy in different environments. 
TABLE II. THE COMPARISON RESULTS 
 
 
. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
The experiment is done in a square region with 10 meters 
side length. The RSSIs taken from each node in this 
experiment have slightly different values compared to the 
RSSIs obtained in the simulation. Figure 8 shows the result 
of RSSIs for both simulation and experiment. The solid line 
in this figure indicates the result of RSSI simulated in 
MatlabTM and the other line is the result of RSSI taken from 
the experiment (Figure 6).  
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 6. RSSIs in Simulation and Experimentation. 
 
     In the experiment, some nodes are located randomly in 
the region in order to obtain their RSSI from the anchor 
nodes. Each RSSI is then fed to the fuzzy system to get the 
corresponding weights.   
     This experiment is repeated 6 times for 6 different 
positions of the sensor nodes. Figure 11 shows the position 
of one of the random nodes located at (1,1). 
 
 
Figure 7. Sensor node in position (1,1). 
 
     As can be seen from Figure 7, the sensor node is closer 
to the first anchor (0,0), so it receives the highest RSSI in 
comparison with the other anchor nodes. The centroid 
relation for the sensor nodes is given in Table 3.  
     As can be seen from Table 3, the node at (1,1) receives 
the highest RSSI from the anchor node at (0,0), which is the 
nearest anchor node. On the other hand, that node receives 
the minimum RSSI from the anchor node at (10,10) so it is 
located at the farthest distance from that anchor node.  The 
difference between the measured and simulated results is 
very low. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE III. THE RESULTS OF THE EXPERIMENT. THE POWER 
VALUES ARE IN dbm AND THE LOCATION IN meters. 
 
 
Table 4 represents the comparison results of error location 
in both implementation and experimentation. 
 
TABLE IV: COMPARISON RESULTS OF ERROR LOCATION 
 
 
 
It can be seen that, the result of error location obtained in 
this paper by Sugeno fuzzy is less than the other existing 
methods. This is due to the enhancement in the input 
membership functions in the Sugeno fuzzy system which has 
been increased in order to better mapping between input and 
output.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The node localization is a big challenge in wireless 
sensor networks. The range free localization method is very 
simple and does not require a complicated hardware. The 
range free method has different techniques to estimate the 
position of a sensor node in a specific region. In this paper 
Centroid localization has been used. The estimation of each 
sensor node’s location has been implemented by RSSI. The 
Sugeno fuzzy inference is used to simulate for estimating the 
location of each sensor node. The RSSIs are fed to the fuzzy 
system to compute the weights to be used in the centroid 
relation in order to estimate the location of the sensor nodes. 
The weights are the main parameter in the centroid relation, 
which are the outputs of the fuzzy system. The Sugeno fuzzy 
system receives RSSIs as inputs to map to the outputs, which 
are the weights of each anchor node with respect to the 
sensor node. The simulated results are checked with an 
experimental setup. The experiment is repeated 6 times for 6 
different sensor nodes in the region. The agreement between 
the simulated and measured results is very good. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
E. D. Elson, “A Bridge to the Physical World”, Journal of Sensor 
Networks, Springer, 2004. 
[2] 
W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, E. Cayirci, and I. Akyildiz, "A 
survey on sensor networks," in Communications Magazine, 2002, pp. 
112-114. 
[3] 
U. Shaha, U.B Desai, S.N. Merchant, and M.M. Patil, "Localization 
in Wireless Sensor Networks using Three Masters," in International 
Conference on Personal Wireless Communications ICPWC, 2005. 
[4] 
X. Li, Y. Shang, D. Ma, and H. Shi, "Cramer-Rao Bound Analysis of 
Quantized RSSI Based Localization in Wireless Sensor Networks," in 
International Conference on parallel and distributed systems 
(ICPAD’05), 2005. 
[5] 
J. Heidemann, D. Estrin, and N. Bulusu, "GPS-less Low Cost 
Outdoor 
Localization 
for 
Very 
Small 
Devices," 
Personal 
Communications Magazine, vol. 7,  pp. 28-34, 2000. 
[6] 
D. H. Prade, “Fuzzy Sets and Systems: Theory and Applications”,  
New York, Academic Press, 1980. 
[7] 
C. Huang, B. Blum, J. Stankovic, A. T.  Abdelzaher, and T. He, 
"Range-Free localization schemes in large scale sensor networks," in 
International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking 
(Mobicom), 2003. 
[8] 
G. Sarigiannidis, “Localization for Ad Hoc Wireless Sensor 
Networks. Netherlands”, Technical University Delft, August 2006. 
[9] 
L. Jaehun and W. Y. Sukhyun, "A soft computing approach to 
localization in wireless sensor networks," vol. 36, pp. 7552–7561, 
2009. 
[10] M. Sugeno, "Fuzzy measures and fuzzy integrals: a survey," Fuzzy 
Automata and Decision, pp. 89-102, 1977. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

