Development of a Novel Approach for Detecting Wood Decays
in Living Trees Using Gas-Sensor Arrays
Manuela Baietto, Sofia Aquaro, Daniele Bassi
Dipartimento di Scienze Agrarie e Ambientali (DISAA)
Università degli Studi di Milano
Milano, Italy
e-mail: manuela.baietto@unimi.it
Alphus Dan Wilson
Forest Insect and Disease Research
USDA Forest Service, Southern Hardwoods Laboratory
Stoneville, MS, USA
e-mail: dwilson02@fs.fed.us
Letizia Pozzi
Demetra Società Cooperativa Sociale ONLUS
Besana in Brianza, Italy
e-mail: pozzi@demetra.net
Abstract— Wood rot is a serious fungal disease of trees. Wood
decay fungi penetrate and gain entry into trees through
pruning cuts or open wounds using extracellular digestive
enzymes to attack all components of the cell wall, leading to the
destruction of
sapwood which compromises wood strength
and stability. On living trees, it is often difficult to diagnose
wood
rot
disease,
particularly
during
extreme
weather
conditions when trees can fail, causing tree parts to fall onto
people and property. Today, tree stability evaluation and inner
decay detection are performed visually and by the use of
commercial instruments and methods that are often invasive,
time-consuming and sometimes inadequate for use within the
urban environment. Moreover, most conventional instruments
do not provide an adequate evaluation of decay that occurs in
the root system. A long-term research project, initiated in
2004, was aimed at developing a novel approach for diagnosing
inner tree decays by detecting differences in volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) released by wood decay fungi and wood
from
healthy
and
decayed
trees.
Different
commercial
electronic noses (ENs) were tested under laboratory conditions
and directly in the field, on healthy and artificially-inoculated
stem wood chips, and root fragments. For the final stage, soil
air was evaluated for the presence of VOCs released by root-
decaying fungi on diseased standing trees cultivated in the
urban environment.
Keywords- electronic nose; decay detection; urban forestry;
VOCs; tree.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Trees
in
urban
environments
are
cultivated
under
conditions that are extremely hostile (causing many stresses
and negative effects) and consequently inadequate to sustain
healthy plant life. Frequently, trees must face high levels of
air, soil and water pollution [1]. Root development is often
limited by permanent water stress and very small soil volume
for root expansion, providing inadequate support of above-
ground plant parts [2][3]. Moreover, road works, hasty or
poor pruning methods, and vandalism increase tree stress in
the urban environment. These adverse environmental factors
dramatically increase physiological stresses that decrease
tree
fitness
and
increase
susceptibility
to
attack
by
pathogenic agents [4].
Wood decay fungi are some of the worst microbial
pathogens
because
they
can
take
advantage
of
tree
physiologic stresses by attacking and destroying all woody
components, reducing tree structural stability, leading to
failure (breaks) especially during severe weather events
[5][6]. Root rots (decays) are even more dangerous and
severe, due to difficult detection and the possibility of
causing wind throw to the ground (complete tree loss). Trunk
and root rot diagnoses in standing trees currently are
performed
primarily
by
electrical
conductivity
meters,
constant feed drills, single pulse sonic and ultrasonic
techniques, core samples, computerized tomography, and
molecular methods for identification of decay fungi [7].
These tools and methods are pensive, invasive, require very
skilled personnel, and do not provide systemic information.
For these reasons, a multi-year study aimed at developing a
novel approach for diagnosing inner tree decays using
several gas sensor arrays or ENs was tested.
Section II of this paper is focused on presenting a small
bibliographic review on recent findings about VOCs emitted
by wood and wood decay fungi. Section III presents all the
electronic noses tested in our experiments. Section IV
represents results and discussions of our experiments,
supported by graphic outputs.
II.
VOCS EMITTED BY WOOD AND DECAYING FUNGI
Live standing trees containing decayed wood release a
particular mixture of volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
consisting of fungal metabolites, tree metabolites, and
fungus-induced tree antimicrobial defense compounds (e.g.
phenolic
metabolites,
terpenoids,
isoprenoids,
and
phytoalexins). The composition of metabolites released by
individual fungi is controlled largely by the types and
combinations of metabolic pathways specific to microbial
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

species, which are regulated by genetic, substrate and
environmental factors [8]. Korpi et al. [9] found microbes
that released pinenes, acrolein, ketones and acetylenes that
were irritants to mice. Other investigations have focused on
the identification of VOCs released by food spoilage fungi
[10][11]. The compound 1-octen-3-ol was detected in damp
houses containing various mold fungi [12]. Numerous other
chemical species have been reported as fungal metabolites,
including complex acids, sesquiterpenes, methyl ketones
and alcohols [13]. Relatively few recent studies have
reported on the release of VOCs by healthy and decayed
trees. An analysis of healthy Populus spp. and Pinus spp.
indicated the presence of mainly monoterpenes, acetone and
small amounts of isoprene [14]. Other studies have indicated
increases in toluene and α-pinene emissions associated with 
P. sylvestris under pathogen attack [15], and a decrease in
isoprene emissions from diseased Quercus fusiformis L. and
Q.virginiana L. [16]. The bacteriostatic role of plant VOCs
was studied by Gao et al. [17] who found emissions of
terpenoids, alcohols, aldehydes, organic acids, and esters
released by five healthy coniferous species in which α-
pinene, β-pinene, 2,(10)-pinene, myrcene and d-limonene 
represented more than 95% of total VOC emissions.
Increased levels of α-pinene, limonene, nonaldehyde and 
benzaldehyde also were found in artificially-inoculated
wood shaves in the same study.
III.
ELECTRONIC NOSES
The EN is an instrument that mimics the human olfactory
apparatus to detect VOCs through a series of sensors (sensor
array) that provide digital signatures (sensor patterns) of all
volatile chemicals present in the aroma bouquet of the
sample analyte. In this experiment, we employed three
different commercially available ENs.
A.
AromaScan A32S Electronic nose
The AromaScan 32S (Osmetech Inc., Wobum, MA,
USA) is a conducting polymer (CP) EN that contains an
organic
matrix-coated
polymer-type
32-sensor
array
designed for general use applications with 15 V across
sensor paths. The sensor array response to different VOCs
was tested previously [8]. Sensors responses are measured
as a percentage of electrical resistance changes to current
flow
in
the
sensors
relative
to
baseline
resistance
(%ΔR/Rbase). The sorption of headspace volatiles, 
composed of specific VOC mixtures, to the CP sensor
surfaces induces a change in the electrical resistance to
current flow, which is detected and measured to produce the
sensor array output. Sensor responses varied with the type
of plastic polymer used in the sensor matrix coating,
produced by electropolymerization of either polypyrrole,
polyaniline or polythiophene derivatives, which have been
modified with ring substitutions of different functional
groups and with the addition of different types of metal ions
to the polymer matrix in order to improve and modulate
sensor
response.
All
measurements
were
statistically
compared using normalized sensor outputs from the sensor
array. Conducting polymer analysis methods used with this
instrument employ application-specific reference libraries
for aroma pattern recognition and
neural-net training
algorithms.
B.
Lybranose 2.1 Electronic nose
Operation of this EN is based on the quartz crystal
microbalance (QCM) technology, which can be described as
an ultrasensitive sensor capable of measuring small changes
in mass on a quartz crystal recorded in real-time. The heart
of the QCM is the piezoelectric AT-cut quartz crystal
sandwiched between a pair of electrodes. The electrodes are
attached to an oscillator. When an AC voltage is applied
over the electrodes, the quartz crystal starts to oscillate at its
resonance frequency due to the piezoelectric effect. If
sample volatiles are evenly deposited onto one or both of
the
electrodes,
the
resonant
frequency
will
decrease
proportionally to the mass of the adsorbed layer according
to
the
Sauerbrey
equation
[18].
The
LibraNose
2.1
(Technobiochip, Pozzuoli, NA, Italy) sensor array consists
of eight 20 MHz AT-cut QCM sensors with a gold surface
(Gambetti Kenologia, Binasco, PV, Italy) coated with either
metalloporphyrines, deposited by solvent casting, or by
polypyrrole polymer) films (Technobiochip patent. no.
04425560.2-2102)
deposited
by
means
of
Langmuir-
Blodgett technology using a KSV 5000 film-deposition
device (KSV Instruments, Helsinki, Finland). This process
utilizes 0.3 mg/mL polymers dissolved in chloroform and
ultrapure, distilled water as a subphase.
C.
PEN3 Electronic nose
The PEN3 EN (Airsense Analytics GmbH, Schwerin,
Germany) is a very compact instrument (255 × 190 × 92
mm), light-weight (2.1 kg) and portable olfactory system. It
consists of an array of 10 different doped metal-oxide semi-
conductive (MOS) gas sensors positioned into a very small
chamber with a volume of only 1.8 ml. The instrument
operates with filtered, ambient air as a carrier-gas at a flow
rate of 10-400 ml min-1, sample-chamber temperature of 0-
45 °C, and sensor array operating temperature of 200-500
°C. The sensing reaction is based on an oxygen exchange
between the volatile gas molecules and the metal coating
material. Electrons are attracted to the loaded oxygen and
result in decreases in sensor conductivity. Instrument
sensitivity to various gas analytes ranges from 0.1-5.0 ppm.
IV.
MAIN GOALS
This research project, a pioneer in the field of plant
pathology and urban forestry, is based on following steps
starting from basic research to be applied to finalized
research solution. In every phase we have formulated a
hypothesis derived from a question, with the aim to verify if
the instrument could give positive answers.
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

A.
Can the EN discriminate between healthy and
inoculated wood samples?
The first step of the research was aimed at determining if
wood decay fungi emit certain combinations of VOCs that
can be detected and recognizable by ENs [19]. 11 wood
decay fungi (WDF) strains were selected, cultivated and
inoculated on wood chips samples (sapwood) taken from 19
tree species: Fraxinus pennsylvanica Marsh., Liquidambar
styraciflua L., Pinus taeda L., Platanus occidentalis L.,
Populus deltoids Bartr. ex Marshall, Quercus nuttallii Palm.,
Quercus lyrata Walt., Thuia occidentalis L., Taxodium
distichum L. Acer negundo L., A. saccharinum L., Aesculus
hippocastanum L., Castanea sativa Mill., Cedrus deodara
(D. Don) G. Don fil., Celtis australis L., Platanus x
acerifolia Brot., Quercus rubra L., Robinia pseduoacacia L.,
and Tilia spp.. Species were selected from among the
hardwood and conifer species most common in the lower
Mississippi Delta and Northern Italy urban and forest
environment, where the experiments were conducted. After
6, 12 and 24 months of incubation under standard conditions
we evaluated the discrimination ability of all three selected
ENs. Figures 1-3 show some results of this step.
Figure 1.a reports about the ability of Lybranose 2.1 in
discrimining healthy and inoculated wood samples of all tree
species with all fungal species. Although some zones of the
graph show some overlaps between the two types, it is
possible to assert that WDF emit volatiles which are clearly
discriminable for the instrument. PEN3, differently, but
clearly discriminated healthy and inoculated wood samples
(Fig. 1.b).
Running
Principal
Component
Analysis
(PCA)
on
samples belonging to one single tree species inoculated with
different fungal strains, it is clear as the EN (Fig. 2) can
easily discriminate the different WDF species.
Figure 1(A-B). Discrimination of volatiles from healthy and decayed
wood block using PCA. Labels are as follows: yellow and green labels
indicate volatiles from healthy controls and red and blue labels indicate
volatiles from decayed samples
Figure 2. Discrimination of volatiles from artificially-inoculated decayed
wood samples of Tilia spp. by PCA. Different color labels indicate different
wood decay fungi responsible for decay. Undecayed (control) wood block
are labeled in yellow
B.
Can the EN discriminate between healthy and
inoculated root samples under soil conditions?
The root system is the most important organ for initiating
plant growth as it is dedicated to the uptake of water and
minerals. In trees, structural roots give mechanical support to
the heavy woody structure. The root system is by nature the
least known of all tree organs as it is not assessable other
than by destructing methods. As far as root decay diagnoses
are concerned, there are not commercially available tools
capable of assessing and diagnosing decays in the root
system.
This phase of the research, aimed at determining if the
presence of VOCs emitted by wood decaying fungi or
decayed living wood can be detected even under-soil
conditions, utilized root tissue form four species of shade
trees [7]. Parts of 1 cm healthy roots were sampled from each
tree in which roots were prepared and inoculated with four
(B)
(A)
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

different WDF strains (two strains of Armillaria mellea, one
of
Ganoderma
lucidum
and
one
of
Heterobasidion
annosum). Inoculated root chips were then incubated under
two different kinds of soils (very poor urban soil and
professional soil for horticulture) for 12 months at standard
laboratory conditions.
Our results show that: (1) PEN 3 EN could easily
discriminate between inoculated and non-inoculated root
chips after 12 months of incubation; (2) PEN 3 EN could not
discriminate the inoculated samples from the healthy ones
after only 6 months from the inoculation. This means that
under soil conditions, wood decay fungi take a little more
time to develop enough VOCs to be detected from the EN
(Fig. 3); (3) Soil type does have an influence on the
discrimination capability of the instrument. This is probably
due to the fact that professional soil type, which is still rich
in microorganisms, emits a strong aroma bouquet.
C.
Can the EN detect the presence of a decay in the root
system of standing trees directly in the field?
All previous steps of this long research were aimed at
evaluating the diagnostic feasibility of EN under the stable
and standardized conditions of the laboratory environment.
In this stage, the EN was employed directly in the field to
detect the presence of VOCs emitted by wood decay fungi
attacking the root system.
A very important postulate of this research is that the
diagnostic system (tool as well as sampling method) should
be totally non-invasive for the plant. Wounds caused by
sampling, diagnosis or analysis method could eventually be
preferred
entry
points
for
further
pathogenic
attack.
According to this, a revolutionary sampling method was
tested based on detecting decay fungi that emit VOCs which
diffuse in soil air macropores. To sample and analyze soil
air, a pump system was designed and built as seen in figure
4, in which soil air is sucked in by the pump and directly
carried to Nalophan bags for e-nose analysis.
For this final stage of the research, more than 60 trees
planted in the city of Milano, Italy, belonging to five
different
species
[Acer
negundo
L.,
A.
negundo
‘Variegatum’,
A.
pseudoplatanus
L.,
Aesculus
hippocastanum L., and Platanus x acerifolia (Aiton) Willd
were sampled].
Figure 4. The automatic pump employed in the field to put directly soil air in
Nalophan bags
All
of
these
trees
were
previously
assessed
via
conventional methods for the presence of stem and root
decays. Soil air was sampled six times over a period of two
years.
Our
preliminary
results,
shown
in
figures
5-7,
demonstrate
that
WDF
VOCs
can
be
found
in
soil
macropores, and that their concentration in the zone of the
root system is high enough to be detected by EN sensors.
Figure 5
show a
linear discriminant
analysis
(LDA)
performed on soil air samples taken about 30 cm from the
bole of healthy and decayed trees. The etiologic agent
causing decays in sample trees, previously recognized via
traditional methods, was also recognized by the EN. Figure 6
shows the diagnostic feasibility of the PEN 3 EN in
discriminating between different WDF species. Soil air or
healthy control trees also were used to check if healthy root
systems release the same VOCs as those released by trunk
sapwood; and if ENs can discriminate between species on
the basis of those VOCs. Figure 7 shows the discrimination
feasibility of the PEN 3 EN between different healthy tree
species on the basis of VOC analysis in the aroma bouquet
released by root systems sampled at about 30 cm from the
bole by the use of an air pump.
Figure 5. Linear Discriminant Analysis performed on volatiles in soil air
samples taken 30 cm from the bole of healthy (red labels) and decayed (red
labels) standing trees.
Figure 3. Discrimination of VOCs from healthy controls (green
labels) and artificially-inoculated root chips after 6 months (red
labels) and 12 months (blue labels) from inoculation using PCA.
6
C
12 months
controls
6 months
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 6. PCA performed on volatiles in soil air samples taken 30 cm from
the bole of healthy (green labels) and decayed standing trees. Different
colors correspond to main etiologic decay agent: Armillaria spp. (red
labels), Meripilus giganteus (orange), Ganoderma spp. (pink) and
Perenniporia ssp. (blue labels).
Figure 7. PCA performed on volatiles in soil air samples taken 30 cm from
the bole of healthy standing trees. Different colors correspond to different
species as following: Metasequoia glyptostroboides (pink labels), Fagus
sylvatica (blue), F. sylvatica ‘Pendula’ (red), Aesculus hippocastanum
(green) and Quercus rubra (orange).
V. CONCLUSIONS
Tree cultivation in the urban environment requires some
agronomic works which are particularly important and
expensive for Public Administrators. Among these, pruning
and maintaining tree stability most influence the annual
budget of ordinary management. Tree stability assessment, a
fundamental duty to prevent sudden tree failures so ensure
citizen’s safety, is performed by very skilled personnel who
employ commercial instruments and tools which are, in most
of cases, invasive and very expensive. Decay assessment of
the root system is not currently performed, as there are no
commercially available instruments besides ENs capable of
these assessments.
Our experimental research started about 10 years ago,
was
aimed
at
developing
a
sampling
and
analysis
methodology to determine the presence of active wood decay
and root rots on standing trees, in a rapid and non-invasive
way, applicable in all situations and usable by non-skilled
operators. Through multiple stages of research, we have
demonstrated that three different commercial ENs can
discriminate: between different tree species and WDF
species by analyzing the VOCs in the aroma bouquet
released by healthy (non-inoculated) and inoculated trunk
wood
chips;
between
healthy
(non-inoculated)
and
inoculated root chips incubated under two different kinds of
soils; between healthy and decayed living and standing trees,
between different species of healthy standing trees, and
between etiologic agents of diseased standing trees on the
basis of the analysis of the aroma bouquet present in the soil
air (macropores) sampled near the tree bole.
The EN system is not fully ready to be employed daily in
the field yet, as it is necessary to build application-specific
aroma signature databases of healthy tree species at different
stages of growth, development and phonologic phase, as well
as diseased tree species, decayed by different wood decay
fungi species, in order to train ENs to yield immediate
answers directly in the field.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This multi-year research was funded by Comune di
Milano – Sett.re Tecnico Arredo Urbano e Verde, and from
Demetra Società Cooperativa Sociale Onlus (Besana in
Brianza, MB, Italy). The Authors would like to thank Dr.
Daniele
Guarino,
Charisse
Oberle,
Luca
Maccabelli,
Raffaello Brambilla and Lorenzo Presicce for their help in
sampling and analyzing data.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Skrbic, M. Snezana, and M. Matavulj, “Multielement
profiles of soil, road dust, tree bark and wood-rotten fungi
collected at various distances from high frequency road in
urban area,” Ecol. Indicat., vol. 13, pp. 168-177, 2012.
[2]
T. B Randrup, “Urban soils as a growing medium for urban
trees,” in Urban Forestry in the Nordic countries. Proceedings
of a Nordic Workshop on Urban Forestry, T.B. Randrup, K.
Nilsson, and P. Nilsson, Eds., Danish Forest and Landscape
Research Institute: Hoersholm, 1996, p. 59.
[3]
S. D. Day, J. R. Seiler, and N. Persaud, “A comparison of root
growth dynamics of silver maple and flowering dogwood in
compacted soil at differing soil water content,” Tree Physiol.,
vol. 20, pp. 257-263, 2000.
[4]
C. J. Luley, Wood Decay Fungi Common to Urban Living
Trees in the Northeast and Central United States, Urban
Forestry LLC: Naples, 2005.
[5]
D. Lonsdale, Principles of tree hazard assessment and
management. Forest Commission: Farnham, 1999.
[6]
N. P. Mantheny and J. R. Clark, J. R., A Photographic Guide
to the Evaluation of Hazard Trees in Urban Areas, 2nd ed.,
International Society of Arboriculture: Savoy, 1994.
[7]
M. Baietto, L. Pozzi, A. D. Wilson, and D. Bassi, “Evaluation
of a protable MOS electronic nose to detect root rots in shade
tree species,” Computer and Electronics in Agriculture, vol.
93, pp. 117-125, 2013.
[8]
A. D. Wilson, D. G. Lester, and C. S. Oberle, “Development
of
conductive polymer analysis for the rapid detection and
identification of phytopathogenic microbes,” Phytopathology,
vol. 94, pp. 419-431, 2004.
[9]
A. Korpi, J. P. Kasanen, Y. Alarie, V. M. Kosma, and A. L.
Pasanen, “Sensory irritating potency of some microbial
volatile organic compounds (MVOCs) and a mixture of five
MVOCs,” Arch. Environ. Health., vol. 54, pp. 347-352, 1999.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[10] N. Magan and P. Evans, “Volatiles as an indicator of fungal
activity and differentiation between species, and the potential
use of electronic nose technology for early detection of grain
spoilage,” J. Stored Prod. Res., vol. 36, pp. 319-340, 2000.
[11] B. J. P. de Lacy Costello, R. J. Ewen, H. E. Gunson, N. M.
Ratcliffe, and
P.T.N. Spencer-Phillips, Sensors for early
warning of postharvest spoilage in potato tubers, British Crop
Protection Council: Farnham, UK, pp. 425-432, 2002.
[12] G.
Strom,
J.
West,
B.
Wessen,
and
U.
Palmgren,
“Quantitative analysis of microbial volatiles in damp Swedish
houses,”
in
Health
Implications
of
Fungi
in
Indoor
Environments, R.A. Samson, B. Flannigan, M.E. Flannigan,
A.P. Verhoefl, O.C.G. Adan, and E.S. Hoekstra, Eds.
Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1994, pp. 291-305.
[13] R. J. Ewen, P. R. H. Jones, N. M. Ratcliffe, and P. T. N.
Spencer-Phillips, “Identification by gaschromatography-mass
spectometry of the volatile organic compounds emitted from
the woodrotting fungi Serpula lacrimans and Coniophora
puteana, and from Pinus sylvestris timber,” Mycol. Res., vol.
108. pp. 806-814, 2004.
[14] I. Villanueva-Fierro, C. J. Popp, and R. S. Marin, “Biogenic
emissions
and
ambient
concentration
of
hydrocarbons,
carbonyl compounds and organic acides from ponderosa pine
and cottonwood trees at rural and forested sites in Central
New Mexico,” Atmos. Environ., vol. 38, pp. 249-260, 2004.
[15] J. Faldt, H. Solheim, B. Langstrom, and A. K. Borg-Karlson,
“Influence of fungal infection and wounding on contents and
enatiomeric compositions of monoterpens in phloem of Pinus
sylvestris,” J. Chem. Ecol., vol. 32, pp. 1779-1795, 2006.
[16] L. J. Anderson, P. C. Harley, and R. K. Monson, “Reduction
of isoprene emissions from live oak with oak wilt,” Tree
Physiol., vol. 20, pp. 1199-1203, 2000.
[17] Y. Gao, Y. Jin, H. Li, and H. Chen, “Volatile organic
compounds and their roles in bacteriostatis in five conifer
species,” J. Integr. Plant Biol., vol. 47, pp. 499-507, 2005.
[18] G.
Sauerbrey,
“Verwendung
von
Schwingquarzen
zur
Wägung dünner Schichten und zur Mikrowägung (The use of
quartz
oscillators
for
weighing
thin
layers
and
for
microweighing),” Z. Phys., vol. 155, pp. 206-222, 1959.
[19] M. Baietto, A. D. Wilson, D. Bassi and F. Ferrini, “Evaluation
of three electronic noses for detecting incipient wood decay,”
Sensors, vol. 10, pp. 1062-1092, 2010.
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

