PIR Sensor Array for Hand Motion Recognition
Piotr Wojtczuk∗, Alistair Armitage†, T. David Binnie∗, and Tim Chamberlain‡
∗School of Engineering and the Built Environment, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, UK
†School of Computing, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, UK
‡Pyreos Ltd., Edinburgh, UK
Email: p.wojtczuk@napier.ac.uk, a.armitage@napier.ac.uk, td.binnie@napier.ac.uk, tim.chamberlain@pyreos.com
Abstract—In this paper we present our work towards a
hand gesture recognition system realised with a passive thermal
infrared sensor array. In contrast with the majority of recent
research activities into gesture recognition, which focus on the
complex analysis of video sequences, our approach shows that
the functionality of a simple pyroelectric movement sensor
can be expanded to detect differing hand gestures at short
range. We show that blob detection from a hand waving over
a 16 element passive infrared sensor array provides sufﬁcient
information to discriminate four directions of hand stroke. This
sensor system is unique and lends itself to low cost, low proﬁle
and low power applications.
Keywords-touchless input device; dynamic hand gesture;
infrared motion sensor; infrared sensor array; pyroelectricity;
I. INTRODUCTION
Non-contact operation of electrical appliances is becom-
ing increasingly desirable. This is particularly the case in
public areas where hygiene is important. Public washrooms
increasingly have taps, cisterns, soap dispensers, hand dryers
and doors activated by simple hand proximity/movement
detectors. The advantages of removing physical contact from
the activation and control of devices range from limiting the
chance of infections transmitted through touch and better
energy efﬁciency to simple convenience. In other environ-
ments such as medical facilities and food processing areas,
strict hygiene rules are essential and direct hand contact
with appliances is best avoided if at all possible [1]. These
environments present a wide spectrum of opportunities for
non-contact control, as reducing the number of touched
surfaces positively suppresses risk of cross contamination
and infection. There are often cases, where operators’ hands
may contaminate surfaces, e.g., in a kitchen or a workshop.
Strict rules apply in operating rooms, where doctors’ hands
must remain sterile throughout a procedure [2]. There are
other, rarer cases where a cultural or individual preference
may be not to make physical contact with an appliance. In
all these circumstances touch-free control is beneﬁcial.
Existing non-contact hand proximity/motion switches pro-
vide the binary “on/off” operation. They are commonly
based on single or dual cell pyroelectric infrared sensors
with a simple lens system [3], although capacitive sensing
can also be used [4]. Thus the degree of human control over
the electrical appliance is severely limited.
In this paper details are given of a pyroelectric array
device that detects simple hand movement gestures, thereby
allowing greater non-contact control capability with little
increase in size, cost or power consumption. This paper
gives an overview of existing methods of gestures detection.
Further, the problem of hand gesture recognition is discussed
and our implementation is explained.
II. RELATED WORK
Gesture recognition systems can be categorized into three
broad groups [5]: those that use a handheld pointing device,
those that require wearable sensors and those with no
user-held devices but operating using the analysis of 2D
images (external sensing). For general application of gesture
recognition sensors, it is important that the system requires
no user held or worn devices.
Research into gesture feature extraction from image se-
quences is the most active. Most common implementation
uses a video camera to capture a wide scene, from which
hands are extracted and tracked, for example [6] and [7].
Such approach gives great ﬂexibility in terms of detection
distance and detection precision and scope. Commercially,
systems operating on a video processing basis have been
developed by GestureTek [8], EyeSight [9] and Edge 3
Technologies [10]. However, it is not practical to implement
such systems ubiquitously, for example as switches, due to
size, cost and, in many cases, energy consumption.
Byung-Woo Min et al. [11] classify hand gestures into
static (hand posture) and dynamic (hand movement). Dy-
namic gestures are generally more intuitive for the user, as
the direction of motion or its shape can reﬂect the resulting
action, e.g., up/down hand stroke for increasing/decreasing
brightness in a room. Moreover, it is easier to capture this
type of gesture with a low resolution and low cost imager.
Sensor based touchless solutions become more popular
after the recent success of touch screen interfaces. Mechaless
[12] provide a hardware solution. They use an active near
infrared (NIR) arrangement with multiple IR LEDs and a
sensor that is used to calculate the distance of an object
from each LED by timing pulse to reception interval. They
propose use of their touchless interface in wall-mounted
gesture switches (increase / decrease a control by up / down
99
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

hand movement) or in a remote control with a touchless
’joystick’.
One of many NIR proximity array systems is being
developed by Dongseok et al. [13]. A 3-dimensional map
of the scene is created by analyzing reﬂections of emitted
near infrared light captured by an infrared array. Each pixel
can read range, as with simple infrared range-ﬁnders. Inter-
estingly, the research group develops a near-ﬁeld touchless,
free air touchpad-like device, where position of a ﬁnger in
front of the sensor is tracked precisely and analysed.
An ultrasonic realization of a touchless pointing interface
is proposed by Chiu et al. [14]. In this case an array of
ultrasonic receivers creates an image-like output based on
reﬂections received from a pointing object.
The related concept of interactive shop windows is intro-
duced by Krumm [15]. Interactive or immersive advertising
reacts to people passing by, trying to engage them by
showing dynamic content accordingly.
Active arrangements, comprising an emitter and a re-
ceiver, usually have the advantage of providing absolute
measurements of distance and position. However the pres-
ence of the emitter results in higher energy needs than for
a passive measurement. For dynamic hand gestures such
precision is not necessary and detection can be realised by
passively sensing thermal infrared radiation change only.
We believe that our solution is very well suited to the task
of near distance, dynamic hand gesture recognition applica-
tion and provides an alternative to existing propositions, that
is more cost and energy efﬁcient due to reduction in number
of components or their complexity.
III. PIR ARRAY BASED HAND MOTION RECOGNITION
The set of basic hand movements in front of a sensor is
limited, e.g., horizontal, vertical and diagonal swipes across
the ﬁeld of view, circular motion and in and out movements.
At this stage, only linear motion across the ﬁeld of view is
considered. Four directions of swipe were chosen as easy to
describe and reproduce: up / down, left / right.
A. Design Principle - PIR Array
As identiﬁed in the introduction to this paper, a simple,
low cost and low energy consumption device to extend
the concept of a touchless interface is desirable in many
environments.
A PIR Array is an interesting potential solution: the tech-
nology has been widely proven in settings such as burglar
alarms and automatic light switches. However, only now has
it become ﬁnancially viable for ubiquitous application in the
form of an array (previously mostly used a single or dual
element occupancy sensor).
Passive detector does not require additional light sources
for illumination of the scene, as the human body is naturally
a good thermal infrared emitter [16]. Scenes at a temperature
Figure 1.
4x4 PIR Sensor Array ( [18], with permission).
above 0 K may be dark in visible spectrum, while still full
of thermal energy [17].
A limitation common to all passive infrared detectors ex-
ists. The minimum detectable temperature difference creates
a band of target temperature relative to the background
temperature resulting in low signal to noise ratio. When
the temperature of the detected object is higher than that
of the background, the response of the infrared elements
will be positive. While when temperature of the object is
lower, the response is inverted. Increase in the temperature
of the environment and hence that of the sensor can reduce
responsivity of such passive device.
B. Research Questions
The primary aim of this study is to investigate whether it
is feasible to use a passive infrared array for hand gesture
recognition, and if so, under what conditions, and what range
of gestures can be recognized. The secondary aim is to
compare the cost effectiveness and power efﬁciency of the
passive infrared system with existing solutions using active
infrared or visible cameras.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
We propose a system to realize the task of simple dynamic
hand gesture recognition at short distances.
A. Prototype
The implementation described in this paper is a proof-of-
concept prototype. Existing signal conditioning integrated
circuit and PC interface board and software provided by the
sensor manufacturer are used for signal capture. Signals are
processed using the computer for ease of development. In
future developments a migration to an embedded system is
anticipated in order to provide a low footprint, low power
solution.
B. Capture Device
A thin-ﬁlm, passive infrared sensor, 4 pixel x 4 pixel
array, pictured in Figure 1, is enclosed in a package with
a broadband infrared ﬁlter.
100
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

Figure 2.
Optical Arrangement.
This thin-ﬁlm sensor is manufactured using standard, high
throughput wafer processing techniques. The sensor die is
a customisable MEMS structure with pixels patterned on
a silicon membrane. Such approach provides an integrated,
robust array with consistent physical properties.
Thin-ﬁlm infrared elements have low thermal mass com-
pared with bulk PZT elements. The result is higher optimal
frequency of operation, well suited for tasks such as gesture
recognition, where detected object moves quickly across the
ﬁeld of view.
An infrared-blocking ﬁlm is mounted on the underside of
the ﬁlter, with a pinhole centred above the array, as seen in
Figure 2. This optical arrangement produces a low resolution
infrared image of the scene in front of the sensor within a
ﬁeld of view of 60◦ up to 20 cm away from the sensor.
Electrical signals from the infrared array are ampliﬁed,
low pass ﬁltered and digitised. The images are captured
using a dedicated interface board. The digitized frames are
sent to a computer and pre-processed to provide a stable and
uniform output. This involves per-pixel low pass ﬁltering and
normalisation of signals across the array.
C. PIR Sensor Array
The PZT infrared array sensing elements transform ther-
mal radiation into electrical charge based on the pyroelectric
principle.
The transducer operates in the same manner as standard
security PIR motion detectors, where the change in incident
ﬂux arises from the motion of a thermal infrared source
across the ﬁeld of view. This has an advantage in that
the background subtraction is inherent in the transducer
itself: stationary infrared emitters do not cause a change
in incident ﬂux, and therefore are not detected. However,
it also becomes a limitation in that an object that moves
into the ﬁeld of view and then becomes stationary will soon
become invisible. This is not a problem in a system designed
to recognize simple ’swipe’ type gestures where motion, and
the direction of the motion, are the dynamic features that are
to be recognized.
In a fully passive arrangement, where there is no addi-
tional modulated illumination nor is the incoming infrared
radiation modulated, effectively only active motion can be
reliably detected.
Figure 3.
Hand motion and tracker response [21].
D. Signal Processing
A tracking algorithm is applied to the frame sequence.
Blob detection technique is derived from the Automatic
Centroid Extractor [19], also used for people counting appli-
cation [20]. Adaptation of the algorithm involved increased
processing rate and adjustment for larger object size.
Hotspots are localized and tracked in the image. Analysis
of the trail of a detected and tracked object allows the
determination of direction of motion. The length of the track
is used to determine if it was a valid detection, while the
x and y difference between starting and ﬁnishing point is
evaluated to provide direction information.
V. INITIAL EVALUATION
Functionality of the system was tested in four main
directions of hand swipe across the sensor. Five participants
were asked to perform a set of 100 hand movements each
(25 per direction). Detection rate and accuracy of system
response (correct direction detected) were recorded.
Figure 3 demonstrates the test arrangement and correct
detection: a sample hand motion from left to right results in
a correct ’right’ detection.
101
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

Table I
INITIAL EVALUATION RESULTS
Direction
Detection Rate (%)
Accuracy (%)
Up
72.8
93.6
Down
86.4
93.6
Left
88.0
93.6
Right
78.4
89.6
Average
81.4
92.6
Detection in the distance range of up to 20 cm from
the sensor was accurate 92.6% of time overall. 81.4% of
gestures were detected at the ﬁrst attempt. When considering
only horizontal swipes (left to right and right to left), it
can be seen that the detection rate (87.2%) and accuracy
(93.6%) were higher than overall. This is attributed to the
test arrangement, where it was more difﬁcult to accurately
present clean vertical swipes to the system then it was to
produce horizontal ones.
VI. APPLICATION
As an example application of the system, the output of
the prototype was used to emulate arrow key strokes on the
host computer. This simple test demonstrates the suitability
of the system for performing certain tasks on the computer.
As an example, the gesture recognizer was used to change
slides during a multimedia presentation.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
With our prototype system we have demonstrated that it is
feasible to recognize hand motion direction with a pyroelec-
tric passive thermal infrared array. Our approach shows that
the functionality of a simple pyroelectric movement sensor
can be expanded to detect differing hand gestures at short
range. We show that blob detection from a hand waving over
a 16 element passive infrared sensor array provides sufﬁcient
information to discriminate four directions of hand stroke.
Operation under different ambient conditions still needs to
be determined: detection relies on there being a perceptible
temperature difference between the hand and the background
scene.
Future work on the software algorithms will focus on
improving detection reliability, working towards an increase
in angular resolution for more gestures to be recognised. Op-
timization towards embedded system application is required
to achieve a low power system suitable for real application.
With the development of a dedicated array for this type of
recognition, further optimisation of the system is possible.
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported by the UK Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council and Pyreos Ltd. under
EPSRC CASE Award EP/I50137/1. The authors thank C.
Giebeler at Pyreos Ltd. Scotland, UK for his direction and
support.
REFERENCES
[1] WHO.
(2009).
WHO
guidelines
on
hand
hygiene
in
health
care
[Online].
Available:
www.who.int/rpc/guidelines/9789241597906/en/
[May,
2011].
[2] J. P. Wachs, H. I. Stern, Y. Edan, M. Gillam, J. Handler,
C. Feied, and M. Smith, “A gesture-based tool for sterile
browsing of radiology images,” Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 321–323.
[3] T. R. Winings and R. Samson, “Automated dispenser for
disinfectant with proximity sensor,” U.S. Patent 5 695 091,
Dec 9, 1997.
[4] D. K. Lambert, “Capacitive proximity sensor,” U.S. Patent
6,724,324, Apr 20, 2004.
[5] M. Ishikawa and H. Matsumura, “Recognition of a hand-
gesture based on self-organization using a DataGlove,” in
Neural Information Processing, 1999. Proceedings. ICONIP
’99. 6th International Conference on, vol. 2, 1999, pp. 739–
745 vol.2.
[6] C. Hsieh, D. Liou, and D. Lee, “A real time hand gesture
recognition system using motion history image,” in Signal
Processing Systems (ICSPS), 2010 2nd International Confer-
ence on, vol. 2, 2010, pp. V2–394–V2–398.
[7] L. Yun and Z. Peng, “An automatic hand gesture recogni-
tion system based on Viola-Jones method and SVMs,” in
Computer Science and Engineering, 2009. WCSE ’09. Second
International Workshop on, vol. 2, 2009, pp. 72–76.
[8] GestureTek Technologies. “Company Website.” Internet:
www.gesturetek.com [May, 2011].
[9] EyeSight Mobile Technologies. “Company Website.” Internet:
www.eyesight-tech.com [May, 2011].
[10] Edge
3
Technologies.
“Company
website.”
Internet:
www.edge3technologies.com [May, 2011].
[11] B. Min, H. Yoon, J. Soh, Y. Yang, and T. Ejima, “Hand
gesture recognition using hidden markov models,” in Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics, 1997, vol. 5, 1997, pp. 4232–4235.
[12] Mechaless Systems GmbH. “Company Website.” Internet:
www.mechaless.com [May, 2011].
[13] D. Ryu, D. Um, P. Tanofsky, D. H. Koh, Y. S. Ryu, and
S. Kang, “T-less : A novel touchless human-machine interface
based on infrared proximity sensing,” in Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), 2010 IEEE/RSJ International Confer-
ence on, 2010, pp. 5220–5225.
[14] T. Chiu, H. Deng, S. Chang, and S. Luo, “Implementation of
ultrasonic touchless interactive panel using the polymer-based
CMUT array,” in Sensors, 2009 IEEE, 2009, pp. 625–630.
[15] J. Krumm, “Ubiquitous advertising: The killer application for
the 21st century,” Pervasive Computing, IEEE, vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 66–73, 2011.
[16] C. M. Payne, Principles of naval weapon systems. Naval Inst
Pr, 2006.
[17] R. Siegel and J. R. Howell, Thermal radiation heat transfer.
Taylor & Francis Group, 2002.
[18] Pyreos Ltd. “Company Website.” Internet: www.pyreos.com
[May, 2011].
[19] T. S. Axelrod and T. F. Tassinari, “A VLSI centroid extractor
for real-time target tracking applications,” Lawrence Liver-
more National Lab., CA (USA), Tech. Rep., 1989.
[20] T. Chamberlain. (2008). People counting demonstration
using a pyreos IR detector array [Online]. Available:
www.pyreos.com [May, 2011].
[21] Pyreos
Ltd.
(2011).
Pyreos:
Gesture
control
-
low
power,
smal
size
[Online].
Available:
www.youtube.com/watch?v=0YpI3J2lThA [May, 2011].
102
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

