U-Park : Parking Management System Based on 
Wireless Sensor Network Technology
 
Nikos Larisis1, Leonidas Perlepes1, Panayiotis Kikiras2, George Stamoulis1 
1Department of Computer and Communications 
University of Thessaly, Volos, Greece 
2AGT Germany, Darmstadt, Germany 
nilarisi, leperlep, georges@inf.uth.gr, pkikiras@agtgermany.com 
 
Abstract—Wireless Sensor Networks can be entitled as one of 
the most challenging and emerging technologies empowering 
the provision of enhanced services to miscellaneous application 
domains. The objective of this paper is to examine and present 
an implementation of a real-time parking management system. 
This system adapts efficiently into a contemporary urban 
environment, and eventually provides to users the ability to 
find and navigate easily to a free curb space. The system is 
comprised of a deployed sensor network based on two 
collaborative vehicle detection schemes supported by an event-
driven processing algorithm and a web based application. The 
evaluation of the system is performed by conducting a number 
of experiments in order to select the optimal sensing modality 
and confirm the feasibility of the proposed application system 
in actual running conditions. Results demonstrate that the 
proposed system is capable of effectively detecting overlying 
automobiles 
and 
robustly 
distinguishing 
false 
positive 
indications. 
Keywords-wireless 
sensor 
network; 
vehicle 
detection; 
magnetic sensor; passive infrared sensor; web based interface  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The very viable and sustainable development of urban 
environment is inextricably connected with contemporary 
approaches concerning traffic congestion issues. A basic 
aspect of this problem is undeniably the parking procedure, a 
costly and time-consuming stage within urban transports and 
an everyday headache for millions of drivers and urban 
planning departments. Modeling this procedure is not an easy 
task due to problems in measuring the overall time since it 
being dependent upon inherently random factors. Looking 
for parking duration it has been proven that is not negligible 
and indeed according to [1], “cruising in congested 
downtowns takes between 3.5 and 14 minutes to find a curb 
space, and between 8% and 74% of the traffic can be 
appointed to cruising for parking”. In addition to that, a 
variety of studies, as [2] states, infer that automobiles spend 
approximately over 95% of their time parked and for trucks 
this percentage is over 85%. 
In this paper, an innovative approach in solving the 
aforementioned problem is proposed utilizing WSNs 
(Wireless Sensor Networks). WSN technology has a wide 
spectrum of applications which are deeply embedded into 
the everyday world ranging from health monitoring and 
disaster early-warning systems up to vehicle detection and 
military purpose application scenarios. Such a sensor 
network is comprised of a large number of microelectronic 
devices capable of monitoring and collecting raw data in 
different environments and conditions. Typically, each 
device –often characterized as a node– is consisted of a 
microcontroller, a power source, a radio frequency 
transceiver, an external memory, and various sensors. These 
resource constrained sensor devices communicate wirelessly 
and untethered, forming complex mesh networks through 
which data is being disseminated.  
Our 
objective 
is 
to 
investigate, 
simulate 
and 
experimentally verify the prospect of implementing an 
intelligent parking management system that provides to 
drivers the possibility to conveniently locate and be guided 
towards a free parking lot near their destination. From a 
system design perspective, WSN solution offers a number of 
unrivaled advantages. Firstly, we can hugely benefit from its 
low-cost deployment. Secondly, there is flexibility with 
regards to vehicle detection approaches since a wide 
spectrum of applicable sensing techniques is being offered. 
Finally, autonomous and long-term operation of the system 
compounds is another important feature. The latter can be 
achieved thanks to the enhanced administrative capability 
since extra information can be retrieved in real-time 
concerning features like illegal parking activity, time 
duration of each occupied lot, and other metrics that are 
indicative of a robust system operability.  
Although there is an abundance of existing solutions 
focusing on parking assistance applications that are 
employing WSN techniques, our approach differentiates in 
many aspects. We propose a hybrid detection scheme 
utilizing magnetic and passive infrared sensors. A pair of 
sensors, located at a distinct parking spot within the urban 
fabric, collects the raw data. Then this information is 
received and processed at the sinks, and ultimately evaluated 
whether if the correspondent spot is occupied or not. The 
result is appropriately stored in databases in the base station 
and then it is uploaded to a web interface and finally, 
depicted onto a user friendly map. 
The ensuing content of this paper is organized as 
follows. Section 2 briefly describes the related work and 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

how it is correlated with our approach. Section 3 overviews 
the design stages of our system, the operating principle of 
the utilized devices and the system architecture. Section 4 
describes system‟s implementation. Section 5 reports the 
system‟s testing results with respect to the various 
simulation scenarios and requirements. Finally, Section 6 
concludes with general remarks and discussion about the 
potential for future expansion. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Confronting the problem of park cruising within the 
context of urban transportation planning is not something 
new to this research field. Besides theoretical approaches in 
analyzing the problem [1][2][3], there are numerous 
research projects [4] utilizing intelligent transportation 
systems (ITS) techniques outside the WSN research area. 
Indicatively, we can mention mobiPARK [5], a free parking 
lot indicating system based on a text messaging service 
platform for a driver that departs from a previously occupied 
lot. NYU-Poly and Rutgers University [6] collaborating 
research teams attempt to provide a multimedia stream 
application that could display free parking spots within the 
congested Brooklyn. As drivers cruise streets, sensors feed 
real-time visual information regarding parking availability 
uploaded via a 4G network and depicted onto special 
graphic user interface (GUI) platforms. 
From another perspective that focuses mainly on WSN 
technologies there can be found a number of similar 
approaches. Parking Finder [7] is a Mica2Dot/MIB510-
based WSN platform implemented for detecting the 
presence of a car over a designated parking lot within a 
metropolitan city infrastructure. It employs magnetic sensors 
(HMC1001) for vehicle detection with each mote running 
on a TinyOS [8] environment. After data aggregation and 
storage in the basestation the processed data can be accessed 
via a Java-based GUI. Although there are many 
commonalities with our presented approach, it lacks specific 
characteristics that pose serious threats to its overall 
credibility. The absence of experimental verification is more 
than evident. The GUI does not fully utilize the advantages 
of a web-based implementation that our version benefits 
from and does not offer enough interoperability. Above all, 
the unilateral usage of magnetic sensors does not take into 
consideration the inherent abnormalities of the application 
environment. Thorough experimentation within our research 
proved as necessary the complementary usage of infrared 
sensors which Parking Finder excluded as inappropriate at 
the initial stages of its implementation.   
In Intelligent parking lot application using WSN [9], it 
was proposed and proven as optimal the combinatory usage 
of magnetic and ultrasonic sensors for an accurate and 
reliable detection of vehicles within a multi-storied parking 
space. Although there are similarities in the deployment 
scenery since Tmote Sky sensors are also utilized, their 
proposal undeniably cannot withstand a boisterous and 
hectic city center environment. Moreover, their data 
processing and detection algorithm followed a different 
approach employing a modified version of the min-max 
algorithm suitable for analyzing the waveformed raw 
magnetic and acoustic data. Their extensive experimental 
results imply and strengthen the necessity for assiduous 
system verification, an important attribute for every kind of 
such an application area systems. 
Design considerations for a WSN for locating parking 
spaces [10] presents a scheme for reliable detection of 
automobiles employing the same type of sensor nodes, 
Mica2/MTS310/MIB510 equipped with the same 2-axis 
magnetometer HMC1002. Their proposed platform refers to 
public parking garages and is consisted of a network of 
nodes that are distributed in strategic locations throughout 
the targeted public parking area instead of at every parking 
spot. Although the prominent differences in the objective, 
the deployment environment and the algorithmic notion of 
the detection process, the important commonality lies in the 
crucial analysis of the peculiarity in the operating nature of 
the magnetic sensor. The obtained through trial and error 
accurate positioning and orientation of the node was also 
observed in this paper. Despite that, their proposed 
algorithmic approach in order to surpass this obstacle 
differentiates 
from 
our 
more 
practically 
orientated 
perspective. 
III. 
DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 
In this section, the design process is presented detailing 
the procedure under which the specific combination of 
magnetic and passive infrared sensors was promoted as the 
optimal choice. Moreover, the operating principle of these 
sensing devices is briefly discussed and finally, the system 
architecture is unfolded.  
A. Design Process 
Solving a complicated issue such as cruising for curb-
space parking, it is relevant upon multilateral research 
derived from distinct launching perspectives. Figure 1 
indicates the initial attempt to address a solution via the 
usage of a mechanical arm with a sensor node attached at its 
base, placed under the road surface or enclosed in a 
protective sealing. A vehicle while in parking process would 
drag down the joint and an actuator would recognize the 
corresponding slope if a predefined critical angle (Φcritical) 
was breached. This in turn would enable the record of a 
vehicle‟s presence for the designated spot and this 
information would be propagated throughout the network 
for further processing. After consideration, this scheme was 
aborted from being a plausible implementation due to the 
inappropriateness of joint‟s material while colliding with 
vehicle parts and the inherent difficulties in implementing 
such a mechanical arm based on the laboratory‟s available 
apparatus. 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 1.  Initial system implementation. 
As a next step passive infrared sensors (PIR) were 
selected as a plausible detection scheme within a deployed 
sensor network. Their advantage lies within their passive 
nature, that is, independence from external conditions since 
receiving and not emitting signal. Experimental verification 
proved that the PIR sensors were extremely sensitive in 
response to environment stimuli and their detection range 
was exceedingly wide. This results to the sensor being 
constantly triggered after the initial successful detection of 
the vehicle, in case later on another car or pedestrian was 
mobile within the detection zone. The unilateral usage of 
PIR was thus rejected since neither the detection zone nor 
the detection sensitivity can be recalibrated to custom needs 
according to its manual [11]. 
As a next designing stage, the viability of acoustic 
sensors‟ usage was investigated. Various experiments were 
conducted but without deducing sufficient and credible 
conclusions regarding neither a unilateral nor a collaborative 
usage of acoustic sensors. A detection pattern for overlying 
and passing vehicles could not be concluded and thus 
uniformly applied since noise in an urban fabric, and 
especially near road surface, is an unpredicted factor. 
In order to select the optimal sensing device, and 
consequently scheme, we ought to consider the very nature 
of the object to be detected. Since a vehicle is in fact a 
sizable metal mass, the subsequent distortion it enforces in 
the earth‟s magnetic field is easily tractable by a magnetic 
sensor, thus resulting to its imperative usage. This distortion 
is unique for every ferromagnetic object and under ideal 
conditions can be perceived as its magnetic footprint, a 
useful characteristic for a wide spectrum of ITS applications 
relevant to tracking and detecting automobiles [12]. 
In addition to that, an auxiliary operation of passive 
infrared sensors would benefit the most to the system. In 
order to narrow their detection area it is obligatory to place 
them under road surface and inside a protective enclosure. 
The road penetrating costs can be compensated if 
considering the advantages that can be obtained through this 
enclosure approach such as, extra protection from theft and 
harsh weather conditions [13]. 
At the initial experiments, there were observed minor 
discrepancies in the magnetic sensor‟s output waveform. 
Strangely enough, it remained idle at a maximum value of 
approximately 780 (based on the range the utilized 
Oscilloscope/TinyOS application produces as an output, see 
Figure 2). Moreover, it did not respond to the presence of 
any ferrous objects unless a material with high magnetic 
permeability was presented in a distance less than 2cm. 
According to [14], “the NiFe core of the magnetic sensor is 
extremely sensitive. However, it is also subject to saturation. 
Saturation occurs when the sensor is exposed to a large 
magnetic field. Unfortunately the MTS310 circuit does not 
have an automatic saturation recovery circuit”. After 
experimentation, and having excluded the prospect of 
implementing such a recovery circuit, it was elicited that the 
sensor can be calibrated via appropriate nesC [15] coding of 
the relevant interfaces and components.  Its sensitivity level 
can be set manually within a range between 0 and 255, and 
accordingly to the ambient earth‟s magnetic field. Thus, as 
the sensor is moved around in the field its output waveform 
will ultimately exhibit transitions. It was experimentally 
proven that the exact sensitivity level for each deployment 
site can be calculated and eventually a waveform in between 
the desired range can be received. The sensor is thus ready 
for use. 
B. Device Specification 
The magnetic sensor module is based on Crossbow‟s 
Mica2 [16] motes equipped with the Atmega128L MCU 
(128KB flash, 521KB storage, 4KB RAM) that are attended 
with the MIB510CA programming board [17] both depicted 
in Figure 3. Sensing operation is performed via the MTS310 
sensor board [18] equipped with the HMC1002 2-axis 
anisotropic magneto-resistive (AMR) sensor that functions 
under the following principle. Since the earth‟s magnetic 
field is uniformly distributed along an area of several 
kilometers a ferrous object (e.g., automobile) causes local 
disturbances in this field while idle and/or moving [19][20]. 
The AMR sensor, implemented as Wheatstone bridge, 
detects such disturbances in the X or Y axis and interprets 
them as a differential input voltage that can be transformed 
into exploitable information regarding the presence or not of 
an overlying ferrous object. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Transitions of the magnetic sensor‟s output while being moved. 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 3.  Mica2 mote equipped with the MTS310 sensing board and the 
MIB510 programming board, [16][17]. 
    The other subsystem is constituted of a number of 
deployed Sentilla‟s Tmote Sky [21] nodes based on TI-
MSP430F1611 
MCU 
(48KB 
flash, 
1MB 
storage, 
10KBRAM). Sensing operation is performed via the WiEye 
sensor board [22] equipped with the AMN44121 PIR 
motion sensor, NaPiOn [23], all shown in Figure 4. 
According to the pyroelecrtic phenomenon [24], crystalline 
compounds can produce electric charge while being exposed 
to thermal energy. A variable thermal flux within the 
infrared spectrum will deduct a variable load onto the quad-
type pyroelectric element of the Napion which‟s output 
amplitude into the measuring circuitry will be analogous to 
the amplitude of the changing flux. Thus, when an object 
enters the detection zone, NaPiOn identifies the temperature 
difference between the target and its surroundings and 
transforms this difference into a processable value-signal. 
C. System Architecture 
    The proposed real-time parking management system is a 
hierarchical module comprised of collaborating subsystems 
and based on a three tier architectural design (see Figure 5).  
    At the lowest level the data collection subsystem 
developed in TinyOS-2.x samples the environmental stimuli 
which are then aggregated to the appropriate sinks. Current 
system implementation directs a one hop routing scheme 
containing four motes, two sensor motes (one magnetic and 
one PIR) that comprise a deployed system node, and the two 
correspondent base stations. Scalability though can be easily 
achieved via the usage of proper disseminating nesC 
interfaces, since the other hierarchical levels are already set 
for a larger number of deployed nodes.  
    The second level is comprised of the data processing 
applications residing in the two base stations. Specially 
implemented detection algorithms indicate the occurrence of 
a magnetic or a PIR triggering event. This information is 
then stored with a timestamp at a database named 
sensor_state. Each record refers to the status of the pair of 
magnetic and PIR sensors that are located at each parking 
lot. A second database named nodes is used for correlating 
these data with the third level. Analogously, each record 
corresponds to a deployed node and contains information 
regarding the status of the node and thus the availability of 
the parking lot, as well as timestamps and various spatial 
information. Moreover, there are Java-based algorithms 
responsible for the initialization of the system, the execution 
of the surveying algorithm and the update of all the 
databases‟ records correspondent to each node deployed.  
 
Figure 4.  Tmote Sky equipped with WiEye sensor board, [22]. 
 
 
Figure 5.  System‟s information flow chart. 
Finally, a web server program is implemented with the 
task of uploading the information of the nodes database to a 
web GUI. There are two interfaces implemented with 
distinct layout, one for the administrator (providing extra 
functionality) and one for the potential clients that both offer 
a customized query processing operability. The end user can 
select an area of interest within the urban fabric and he is 
given a real-time graphical representation of the available 
parking lots with green dots appearing on a google map. The 
user is also provided if requested with routing directions. 
The administrator on the contrary has access to extra 
information such as lot‟s duration of occupation, overall 
system view, or error node‟s indication. An overall 
illustration of the system‟s information flow is presented in 
Figure 5.  
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

IV.    SYSTEM  IMPLEMENTATION 
In the current section, the algorithmic perspectives of 
raw data processing as well as the administrative principles 
of our system are explained. 
A. Raw Data Analysis 
The designing process for an algorithm appointed with 
the magnetic raw data analysis is crucial for the overall 
credibility of the system. The initial experiments regarding 
HMC1002‟s response to ferromagnetic stimuli proved that a 
rather simple detection algorithm can be utilized based on 
two fundamental notions deriving from the Statistics field, 
the arithmetic mean and the population variance. It was 
observed and verified that in idling state the collected data is 
characterized by a mean value within a predefined 
equilibrium level and by a variance tending to zero. Upon the 
approximation of a ferrous object the output waveform 
would effect a drastic transition also indicative via an 
increase in the variance of the samples. Moreover, a constant 
presence of the object would be accompanied with a 
progressive stabilization of the samples‟ mean and with a 
variance again tending to zero. To this extend, the 
subsystem‟s states can be concluded (Table I), provided that 
appropriate operating levels are predefined with regards to 
the output waveform (see Figure 6). 
As mentioned before, the processing algorithm of the 
infrared data has an auxiliary role due to the fact that after 
experimentation it was proven that PIR sensor was constantly 
triggered and thus, implementing an accurate pattern 
detection scheme was unfeasible. Its final contribution was 
confined in confirming an overlying ferrous object after 
consulting for a potential magnetic triggering recorded event. 
Nevertheless, its usage cannot be excluded otherwise the 
overall system‟s credibility can be dramatically hindered. 
Through its utilization all false positive magnetic triggering 
events can be neglected. On a similar basis we can define the 
correspondent operating states, as well as a state diagram 
(see Figure 7).  
B. Core Algorithm 
Τhe core of the administrative algorithm consists of a 
infinite loop in which the node statuses are retrieved from 
the databases and according to various combinations we can 
define updating functions calculating the next system state. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Magnetic sensing subsystem‟s operational levels. 
 
Figure 7.  Infrared sensing subsystem‟s finite state machine. 
These combinations are explained in Table II (OFF 
stands for a sensor not detecting any stimuli, and ON 
otherwise). In case A, both sensors are activated and thus we 
deduce that the corresponding parking lot is occupied. Cases 
B and C are referring to undesirable circumstances 
whenever either an object with low magnetic permeability 
(animal, pedestrian, other) is revolving near and/or above 
the protective enclosure or an automobile has not parked 
within the designated lines of the parking slot. In both cases 
the specific parking slot is consider to be in error state. After 
experimentation it was derived that the PIR sensor detection 
range (placed within the enclosure) is under 20cm, and the 
magnetic sensor less than 2m. The last combination (case 
D,E) corresponds to both sensors being deactivated. That is 
either when the system has recuperated from an error state 
(due to hardware failure, false positive magnetic triggering 
or cease of constant PIR triggering) or the parking lot is free 
after a vehicle completed its withdrawal. In both cases, the 
space is free and the nodes are reinstantiated. 
TABLE I.  
MAGNETIC SENSING SUBSYSTEM STATES 
TABLE II.  
SYSTEM STATUS 
Magnetic 
(MG) 
Passive 
Infrared 
(PIR) 
Interpretation 
ΟN 
ON 
Case A - Car detected 
ΟFF 
ON 
Case B - Error :  MG = OFF ^PIR = ON 
ON 
ΟFF 
Case C - Error :  MG = ON ^PIR = Off 
OFF 
ΟFF 
Case D - Node reinstated 
Case E - Car withdrawing 
STATE 
System State 
Interpretation 
0 
System Idle 
Absence of ambient magnetic 
stimuli 
1 
Detecting 
Variation detected 
2 
Parking slot - Busy 
Overlying ferromagnetic object 
3 
Car unparking 
Withdrawal initialization   
4 
Car withdrawing 
Disengage. Final stage of 
withdrawal 
5 
Parking slot - Clear 
Initial idling stage 
6 
B U S Y@MID - 
checking 
Check for potential malicious 
parking behavior 
7 
B U S Y@MID - 
PICKED 
Potential malicious parking 
behavior confirmed 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

V.    SYSTEM  EVALUATION 
In this section, the experimental setup is presented 
including a detailed description of the experiments that were 
conducted and the evaluation results that reinforce the 
system‟s credibility.    
A. Simulation Scenarios 
System verification and evaluation process included 
different simulation scenarios that reassured the correctness 
and the preciseness of the detection procedure. These 
scenarios involved among others,    
 
detecting an overlying and/or passing bicycle, 
motorbike, and distinct manufacturer car models 
(and thus distinct ferromagnetic footprints),  
 
conducting measurements for sensor‟s response 
while a vehicle could be approaching from different 
directions and approximating distances, 
 
simulating a parking procedure with different kinds 
of maneuvers and total moves,  
 
executing an experiment emulating actual parking 
conditions in a free spot between two parked cars, 
 
verifying system‟s response while using two 
magnetic sensors in order to simulate a malicious 
driver behavior,  
 
evaluating system‟s response in full-scale and real-
time operating conditions. 
Especially for the latter two scenarios, they were crucial in 
verifying the system‟s credibility. As previously stated, 
NaPiOn can benefit the most for the system. Its usage is 
essential in detecting a malicious driver parking between 
two nodes. As depicted in Figure 8, although magnetic 
sensors are initially triggered (t1 and t2 timestamps) the car 
stops in between them and outside their detection area. If 
NaPiOn sensor is used then the magnetic initial triggering 
event could be verified and act accordingly, resulting in 
successful vehicle error detection (Case B in Table II). The 
final scenarios included experiments being conducted in 
actual urban conditions. A picture of the developed WSN 
within a real parking area is given in Figure 9 with green 
arrow indicating the deployed pair of sensor nodes. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Setup justifing the necessity of NaPiOn‟s usage.  
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Deployed WSN in actual parking conditions. 
B. Experimental Results 
The experimental procedure evolved according to the 
following stages. Initially, the response of each sensor was 
measured individually and in laboratory environment. This 
was a compulsory step in order to become familiarized with 
the sensors‟ operating principle and in order to assure that 
the design of the detection algorithm would follow the 
correct path. As a next stage, experiments involving sensors‟ 
response within outdoor conditions were conducted.  
The NaPiOn‟s outdoor experiments verified the initial 
studies and assumptions regarding its response to ambient 
stimuli. NaPiOn reacts independently from the object‟s 
nature to be detected and the weather conditions. On the 
contrary, magnetic sensor‟s experiments demanded a much 
more strenuous treatment since an assiduous comprehension 
of HMC1002‟s sensing philosophy was imperative before 
embarking on fully designing its detection algorithm. 
In order to conclude to as safe experimental results as 
possible, it was necessary that the experiments were to be 
repeated under different environmental conditions and 
simulating scenarios. In Table III the characteristic 
environmental conditions of such distinct experiment are 
presented. As implied from the data, experiments on 
different dates and times of day were conducted in order to 
benefit from variable weather conditions. Regarding the 
magnetic sensor, its sensitivity function was invoked with 
different parameters for the scenarios were one and two 
Mica2 motes (n1, n2 in table) were deployed respectively. 
TABLE III.  
EXPERIMENTS ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS 
Date 
09/04 
13/04 
16/04 
17/04 
18/04 
Sensitivity 
50,100  
for n1 
50 
 for n1 
50 for n1 
- 
45 for n2 
50 for n1 
- 
45 for n2 
50 
 for n1 
Time 
17:00  
– 
 19:00 
18:23 
– 
20:10 
17:30  
–  
21:00 
20:30  
–  
21:30 
17:30 
– 
19:30 
Temperature 
17oC 
23 oC 
16 oC - 
13 oC 
9 oC -  
8 oC 
10 oC 
Humidity 
~60% 
~50% 
~55% 
~92% 
~77% 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

An important characteristic is the fact that night and rain 
conditions were present on 17.04.2011 day adding therefore 
more credibility to our experimental set. Apart from the 
above, more experiments were conducted on laboratory 
conditions regarding the evaluation and the correctness of 
the detection algorithm while it was being implemented 
throughout its various design stages.  
Moreover, real-time system verification was performed 
including a final full-scale emulation of an actual parking 
procedure. The conducted experiments included active 
participation of all the operational components of the system 
that ranged from the initialization of the sensor nodes, 
verifying the response of the administrative algorithm and 
until projecting the information of the system onto the map 
of our web GUI. These experiments were performed both in 
safe and hostile environments. The former was performed in 
the scenery depicted in Figure 9 and the latter in front of the 
University building in one of the most traffic congested 
avenues and during evening rush hour. Truly, in both cases 
the response of the system was exceptional after carefully 
selecting such a sensitivity level that would avoid passing 
vehicles (even buses) hinders its functionality. Performing 
experiments with such a wide range of conditions verified 
the anticipated behavior of both the utilized sensors and 
verified the correctness of the utilized combinatory sensing 
modality. In Figure 10 the hand-crafted protective enclosure 
containing the pair of sensor nodes used during 
experimentation process is presented. The enclosure is made 
of a material with zero magnetic permeability (wood) and on 
the top it is protected from overlying leakage by a PVC 
surface enabling radiation penetration and thus not hindering 
NaPiOn‟s operability. More information on the verification 
procedure including photo shoots and video raw footage can 
be found on the application‟s support website [25]. 
VI.    CONCLUSION 
In this section, the overall knowledge obtained 
throughout the research procedure is presented and future 
work concludes the implementation presented. 
A. Lessons Learnt 
This research idea was developed in an attempt to seek 
an applicable solution for a major problem of contemporary 
urban environments. Cruising for parking contributes 
significantly in exaggerating air pollution due to traffic 
congestion issues, phenomena that ought to be reduced or 
even evicted from our future envisioned megacities. Our 
objective was to assiduously examine the viability of such a 
proposed application system by evaluating it on a small-
scale deployed WSN in real-time and actual conditions. 
After examination the optimal WSN sensing technology was 
utilized, comprised of a collaborative usage of magnetic and 
passive infrared sensors. The data sampling procedure was 
implemented in Java via customizing the default TinyOS-
1.x and 2.x functionalities, and the administrative algorithm 
included various other features responsible for processing,  
 
Figure 10.  Nodes‟ hand-crafted protective enclosure. 
storing, uploading and retrieving the collected information. 
Ultimately, a designated parking curb space can be 
monitored and accordingly stamped onto a web GUI map if 
it is occupied or not. The experimental and simulation 
procedure involved testing a great range of detection 
scenarios and under variable ambient conditions.  Concrete 
evidence was derived in terms of the specific utilized 
detection scheme and in comparison with the related work 
proposals. The magnetic sensor can be manually calibrated  
in order to adjust to custom needs and thus can efficiently 
detect any overlying vehicle with merely zero error rate. The 
auxiliary operation of the passive infrared sensor was  
proven obligatory since it enables the system to be aware of 
any kind of malicious parking behavior or false positive 
magnetic indications. Thus, the overall system error rate is 
substantially low, a fact proven through the strenuous full-
scale experimental results. 
B. Prespectives for Future work 
The current implementation scale can be considered as a 
rather limited one if we contemplate upon the actual 
capabilities this system can offer at a full-scale deployment. 
To that extend, its further expansion could enable further 
optimization of the administrative algorithm in terms of 
reducing its response time from the moment that ambient 
stimuli is recorded until when the information is depicted 
onto the google map. Another important feature that should 
be ensured is expanding into a multihop networking 
architecture. On the same notion, when a multihop scheme 
will be adopted charging machines (present in every urban 
fabric) can be equipped with a pair of motes so as to operate 
with the form of relay nodes with extra powering capabilities 
that would reduce in this sense the overall networking strain. 
Some optimistic scenarios would even promote this parking 
assistance system as a platform responsible for traffic 
management system based on the knowledge that each driver 
declares his destination and thus he could receive distinct 
routing directions towards each free parking space. To that 
extend, routing algorithms can be adopted from relevant 
research areas in order to facilitate such kind of expansion.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was conducted at the Wireless Sensor 
Systems Laboratory of Computer and Communications 
Engineering Department at University of Thessaly during a 
period from December 2010 until July 2011.  
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

REFERENCES 
[1] D. C. Shoup, “Cruising for parking,” Transport Policy, 
Elsevier, vol.13, no. 6, pp. 479–486, November 2006. 
[2] K. Button, “The political economy of parking charges in 
„„first‟‟ and „„second-best‟‟ worlds,” Transport Policy, 
Elsevier, vol.13, no. 6, pp.470–478, November 2006. 
[3] P. G. Höglund, “Parking, energy consumption and air 
pollution,” Science of Total Environment, Elsevier, 
vol.(334-335), pp. 39–45. December 2004. 
[4] L. E. Y. Mimbela and L. A. Klein, “A summary of vehicle 
detection and surveillance technologies used in intelligent 
transportation systems,”New Mexico University, The 
Vehicle 
Detector 
Clearinghouse, 
November 
2000, 
unpublished. 
[5] http://www.mobipark.gr 18.04.2012  
[6] http://www.poly.edu/press-release/2010/11/05/free-4g-and-
freed-parking-spot-nyc 18.04.2012 
[7] Μ.Eissa and Μ.Elhag, “Park finder,” University of Illinois, 
December 2004, unpublished. 
[8] P. Levis et al., “TinyOS: An operating system for sensor 
networks,”Ambient Intelligence, Springer, pp. 115–148, 
2005. 
[9] S. Lee, D. Yoon, and A. Ghosh, “Intelligent parking lot 
application using wireless sensor networks,” IEEE, 
International Symposium on Collaborative Technologies 
and Systems, pp.48–57, May 2008. 
[10] V. K. Boda, A. Nasipuri, and I. Howitt, “Design 
considerations for a WSN for locating parking spaces,” 
IEEE, Proceedings of SoutheastCon, March 2007.  
[11] Panasonic Electric Works Co., “NaPiOn (AMN) catalog.” 
[12] L. E. Y. Mimbela and L. A. Klein, “Surveillance 
technologies used in intelligent transportation systems,” 
New 
Mexico 
University, 
The 
Vehicle 
Detector 
Clearinghouse, August 2007, unpublished. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[13] B. Song, H. Choi, and H. S. Lee, “Surveillance tracking 
system using passive infrared motion sensors in WSN,” 
International Conference on Information Networking, pp. 
1–8, January 2008.  
[14] Honeywell International Inc., “HMC1001/1002/1021/1022 
1- and 2-axis magnetic sensors datasheet.” 
[15] D. Gay, P. Levis, D. Culler, and E. Brewer. 2005. “nesC 
1.2 Language Reference Manual,” ACM SIGPLAN 
Notices, vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 1–11, 2003. 
[16] Crossbow Technology Inc., “MPR-MIB users manual,” 
Revision B, June 2006. 
[17] Memsic Inc., “MIB510CA datasheet.” 
[18] Crossbow Technology Inc., “MTS/MDA sensor board 
users manual,”Revision A, June 2007. 
[19] http://www.metal.ntua.gr/uploads/3190/225/5th_ex.pdf 
18.04.2012 
[20] M. J. Caruso and L. S. Withanawasam, “Vehicle detection 
and compass applications using AMR magnetic sensors,” 
Honeywell International Inc., 1999, unpublished. 
[21] Moteiv Corporation, “Tmote Sky datasheet,” 2006. 
[22] EasySen LLC, “WiEye datasheet,” 2008. 
[23] Panasonic Electric Works Co., “AMN motion sensors 
design manual datasheet.” 
[24] http://users.auth.gr/~vanidhis/pdf/paragogi/7.pdf 
18.04.2012 
[25] http://inf-server.inf.uth.gr/~nilarisi/en/main.html 
18.04.2012 
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

