Statistical Analysis of Dark Current in Silicon Photomultipliers 
Giuseppina Valvo, Alfio Russo, Delfo Sanfilippo, 
Giovanni Condorelli, Clarice Di Martino,   
Beatrice Carbone, PierGiorgio Fallica 
IMS-R&D STMicroelectronics, stradale Primosole, 50 
95121 Catania, ITALY  
giusy.valvo@st.com 
Roberto Pagano, Sebania Libertino,          
Salvatore Lombardo 
CNR-IMM, Ottava Strada Zona Industriale, 5, 95121 
Catania, ITALY  
salvatore.lombardo@imm.cnr.it
Abstract—The aim of this paper is to investigate on a statistical 
basis at the wafer level the relationship existing among the 
dark currents of the single pixel compared to the whole Silicon 
Photomultiplier array. This is the first time to our knowledge 
that such a comparison is made, crucial to pass this new 
technology to the semiconductor manufacturing standards. In 
particular, emission microscopy measurements and current 
measurements allowed us to conclude that optical trenches 
strongly improve the device performances. 
Keywords - silicon photomultipliers; dark current; wafer level. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Silicon-based single photon detectors [1-11] have been 
widely investigated since their appearance thanks to their 
interesting features: reduced dimensions, low weight, low 
fabrication costs, insensitivity to magnetic fields, and low 
operation voltage. Starting from single diode devices, 
progress in the field has driven the microelectronic industry 
to go towards designing and fabricating arrays of such 
devices, that is, avalanche detectors with an integrated 
quenching resistor connected in parallel and operating in 
Geiger mode, referred to as Si Photomultipliers (SiPMs), to 
cover areas up to ≈10 mm2 per device. The principle of 
operation of each single avalanche detector consists in a p-n 
junction biased above the breakdown voltage (BV). Thanks 
to the high quality substrate and fabrication technology (low 
defect concentration), it can remain quiescent above the BV 
until a photon is absorbed in the depletion volume. Once the 
photon is absorbed, the electron-hole (e-h) pair generated 
triggers a self-sustaining avalanche breakdown. The 
avalanche is switched off through an opportunely designed 
quenching resistance that reduces the voltage below 
breakdown as soon as the current flows through the diode. 
The operation of the whole SiPM array is the parallel sum of 
the currents produced by each single pixel.  
Aim of this paper is to investigate on a statistical basis at 
the wafer level the relationship existing among the dark 
currents of the single pixel compared to the whole SiPM 
array. This is the first time to our knowledge that such a 
comparison is made, crucial to pass this new technology to 
the semiconductor manufacturing standards.  
 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL  
Single cells and arrays of 64x64 cells were fabricated in 
B doped Si wafers An enrichment region was obtained 
through B implantation, to define both the device active area 
and the BV. The cathode was fabricated through diffusion 
from a heavily doped polysilicon layer [12]. The quenching 
resistor was integrated on the cathode of the cell itself and 
fabricated using low-doped polysilicon. Finally, optical 
trenches surround the pixel active area in order to reduce 
electro-optical coupling effects (crosstalk) between adjacent 
microcells. A schematic cross-section of the final structure of 
the single cell is shown in Figure 1.  
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic cross section of the SiPM single pixel, showing the 
central active area with the cathode (indicated as “n++”), the enriched 
anode (“p+”), the sub-anode (“p epi”), the anode contact region (“p+ epi”), 
the substrate (“n-- sub”), and the optical trenches. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. 2D TCAD simulation of the electric profile performed at a bias 
polarization of -30 V in the structure sketched in Fig. 1.  
109
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

Figure 2 shows the 2D simulation of the electric profile 
performed at a bias polarization of -30 V. The electric field 
at the lateral border is well below its maximum value for 
junction breakdown and is negligible with respect to the 
maximum value in the active region, in which, on the 
contrary, the field is above the critical field for avalanche 
breakdown.  
Devices basic electrical characterization provided a 
breakdown voltage in agreement with that predicted by 
TCAD simulation, and equal to about -28.0V at room 
temperature.  
Emission microscopy (Em.Mi) measurements were carried 
out at 25°C using an overvoltage (i.e., voltages above the 
junction breakdown voltage, ∆V) of 3V.  
 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
One of the major issues to solve is the minimization of 
the cross-talk effect among close pixels. An improper 
isolation scheme results in an avalanche correlation effect 
which trigger avalanches in close pixels (Fig. 3(a)). The 
avalanches in close pixels are likely triggered either by 
photons or by minority carriers produced by the avalanche of 
a primary pixel which migrates to close pixels causing new 
avalanches. The use of a proper electro / optical isolation 
trench scheme dramatically improves the situation (Fig. 
3(b)), rendering negligible the cross-talk effect among 
neighbor pixels, and strongly reducing the dark current (from 
300 to 10 µA). 
The relationship among the dark currents in single pixels 
and in complete SiPM arrays is investigated in Fig. 4. We 
model the dark current of a single pixel as [13]: 
 
G
A
q N
I
i
Pixel
Def
D
)
(
τ
τ
+
=
 
 
 
(1) 
 
where q is the elementary charge, 
NDef
the number of 
carrier generating defects per pixel in the active volume, 
τ the average time for carrier generation event by one 
defect, 
APixel
the single pixel active area, 
iτ  the average 
time per unit area for the intrinsic carrier generation due to 
diffusion from the quasi neutral regions to the active 
volume, and G  the gain, i.e., the total number of carriers 
generated in a single avalanche, from the avalanche buildup 
to the avalance quenching and pixel recharge. We find that 
the ID of the overall SiPM devices is simply the sum of the 
currents of single pixels as above modeled, with no 
contribution of extrinsic defects providing high leakage 
paths. In particular Fig. 4 shows frequency histograms 
comparing the dark currents measured at room temperature 
of single pixels and SiPM arrays for a total of 952 devices at 
overvoltages (i.e., voltages above the junction breakdown 
voltage) of 2, 3, and 4 V. The SiPM device contains 4096 
pixel, so the respective currents of SiPM to single pixel 
should stay in ratio of about 4,000, as actually found. 
 
Figure 3. Emission Microscopy measurements on SiPM arrays (a) without 
and (b) with optical trenches. 
 
 
Figure 4. Probability density as a function of the output current at 
overvoltages of 2V, 3V and 4V, for both single pixels and arrays (having 
4096 cells). The solid red lines are the model results. 
110
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
 
Figure 5. Experimental values of the variance divided by average device 
current as a function of the device overvoltage for the single pixel (in blue) 
and the SiPM (in red) 
 
 
Figure 6. Experimental values of the ratio of the variance divided by the 
average device current between SiPMs and single pixels as a function of 
the overvoltage. The model, in good agreement with the experimental 
results, predicts that the ratio should be equal to the number of pixels in the 
SiPM device, equal to 4,096. 
 
To model ID in the present devices, we note that at room 
temperature the term 
τ
NDef
dominates, so the ID statistics 
should essentially coicide with the NDef statistics. The 
prevalence of the 
τ
NDef
 term has been demonstrated 
through the temperature dependence of the leakage current, 
as reported in ref. [14]. For the 
NDef
statistics we assume 
the Poisson statistics so we find that the probability dP of 
having a dark count between ID and ID+dID is: 
 
(
)
⎥
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎢
⎣
⎡
−
+
=
)
(
)
/
log(
exp
2
D
D
D
D
I
D
D
I
D
I
I
D
m
I
I
m
I
m
N
dI
dP
σ
  
(2) 
 
where N is a normalization constant,
mID
is the statistical 
average of the dark current and 
2
σ ID
 is the variance. In the 
case of the SiPM arrays the same expression holds. Fig. 4 
reports also the model curves, which show a good match 
with the experimental data. The model predicts that the 
combination of statistical parameters 
D
D
I
I
m
σ 2
 should be equal 
to 
q G
τ
 or 
q G
4096× τ
, for the single pixel and the SiPM 
array, respectively. Fig. 5 reports the experimental values of 
D
D
I
I
m
σ 2
 as a function of the device overvoltage. As the 
overvoltage increases, 
D
D
I
I
m
σ 2
 grows, due to the G increment. 
Morevover the ratio of 
D
D
I
I
m
σ 2
 between SiPM and single 
pixel results of the order of 4,000 (Fig. 6), as predicted by 
the model. More details will be shown in the presentation.  
 
 
Figure 7. Reverse current for single pixels and arrays from 25 up to 4096 
cells. 
 
Further developments are ongoing and will be reported at 
the conference. In particular we would like to mention that 
an improved version of our SiPM technology shows a 
further reduced dark current leakage (Fig. 7). This is 
111
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

attributed to an improved minority carrier lifetime (larger 
iτ  in Eq. (1)), obtained through a better device architecture 
[14].  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
CNR authors gratefully acknowledge ST support for research 
funding.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] R.H. Haitz, “Model for the electrical behavior of a 
microplasma”, J. Appl. Phys., 35 (1964), p. 1370.  
[2] R. H. Haitz, “Mechanisms contributing to the noise pulse rate 
of avalanche diodes,” J. Appl. Phys., 36, (1965), pp. 3123–
3131 
[3] R. J. McIntyre, “The distribution of gains in uniformly 
multiplying avalanche photodiodes: Theory,” IEEE Trans. 
Electron Devices, 19, 6, (1972), pp. 703–713. 
[4] “SPCM-AQR Data Sheet”, Perkin Elmer Optoelectronics, 
available 
online 
http://www.htds.fr/doc/optronique/ 
scientifiqueBiomedical/SPCM-AQR.pdf   
[5] S. Cova et al., “Active-quenching and gating circuits for 
single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs)”, IEEE Trans. Nucl. 
Sci., 29, 1, (1982), pp. 599–601.  
[6] F. Zappa et al., “Fully-integrated active-quenching circuit for 
single-photon detection”, Proc. of the 28th European Solid-
State Circuits Conference, ESSCIRC 2002, p. 355.  
[7] S. Vasile et al., “High gain avalanche photodiode arrays for 
DIRC applications”, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 46 (1999) p. 848. 
[8] P. P. Antich, “Avalanche photo diode with local negative 
feedback sensitive to UV, blue and green light”, Nucl. 
Instrum. Meth. A, 389 (1997) pp. 491-498.  
[9] G. Bondarenko, “Limited Geiger-mode microcell silicon 
photodiode: new results”, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A, 442 (2000) 
pp. 187-192.  
[10] V. Golovin, Avalanche Photodetector, Russian Agency for 
Patents and Trademarks, Patent No. RU 2142175 (1998).  
[11] Z. Sadygov, Avalanche Detector, Russian Agency for Patents 
and Trademarks, Patent No. RU 2102820 (1998). 
[12] E. Sciacca et al., “Silicon Planar Technology for Single-
Photon Optical Detector”, IEEE Trans. Electr. Dev.,50, 4 
(2003) pp. 918-925. 
[13] R. Pagano, S. Lombardo, S. Libertino, G.Valvo, G. 
Condorelli, B. Carbone, D. N. Sanfilippo, and G. Fallica, 
“Understanding 
dark 
current 
in 
pixels 
of 
silicon 
photomultipliers”, IEEE, Proc. Of 40th European Solid State 
Device Research Conference, pp. 265-268 (2010) 
[14] R. Pagano, S. Libertino, D. Corso,  G. Valvo, D. Sanfilippo, 
G. Fallica, and S. Lombardo, “Dark current in SiPM pixels: 
data and model”, article in preparation. 
 
112
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

