Capillary Sensors with Two Coupled LEDs for UV-Forced Degradation and
Fluorescence Reading of Chemical Stability of Diesel Fuels
Michal Borecki
Institute of Microelectronics and Optoelectronics
Warsaw University of Technology
Warsaw, Poland
email: borecki@imio.pw.edu.pl
Mateusz Gęca 
Lublin University of Technology
Lublin, Poland
email: mati.geca@gmail.com
Michael L. Korwin-Pawlowski
Département d’informatique et d’ingénierie
Université du Québec en Outaouais
Gatineau, Québec, Canada
email: Michael.Korwin-Pawlowski@uqo.ca
Piotr Doroz
Institute of Microelectronics and Optoelectronics
Warsaw University of Technology
Warsaw, Poland
email: piotr.65@gazeta.pl
Przemysław Prus 
Blue Oak Inventions
Wroclaw, Poland
email: pprus@boinv.com
Jan Szmidt
Institute of Microelectronics and Optoelectronics
Warsaw University of Technology
Warsaw, Poland
email: j.szmidt@imio.pw.edu.pl
Abstract- The stability of the diesel fuel is related to the fuel
composition that evolved to the modern fuels from the
historical ones. The instability of modern diesel fuel is mainly
due
to
the
presence
of
unsaturated
components
and
components with oxygen. Standard laboratory techniques for
measuring fuel stability are relatively complex and time
consuming. The time of examination of initial stages of
degradation is in the rank of a dozen of hours. The fast
methods of diesel fuel stability pointing with single ultraviolet
(UV) wavelength forced degradation and fluorescence reading
have been proposed. The present paper concentrates on the
possibility of further reduction of time of examination of the
diesel fuel that enables initial and advanced stages of fuel
instability indicating. The reduction of time of degradation is
expected as two light emitting diodes (LED) working at
different wavelengths are implemented in sensor head. The
long-wave ultraviolet (UVA) - 365 nm high power light emitted
diode and the short-wave ultraviolet (UVC) - 265 nm light
emitted diode are selected for examination. The procedure of
degradation and examination with signal switching of LEDs
has been proposed. Experimental results are presented for the
dual LED degradation system in comparison of to the single
265 nm LED degradation system. Obtained characteristics
show fluorescence emitted signal at selected wavelength bands
dependency of initial, medium and advanced effects of fuel
degradation. The results show that using dual LED system
increases fuel degradation speed as an advanced effects of fuel
instability arise in the time less than one hour.
Keywords-biodiesel
fuel stability;
diesel
fuel instability;
unsaturated
hydrocarbons;
capillary
sensor;
LED
excited
fluorescence; UV degradation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Capillary measurement systems are popular in many
chemical laboratories as they enable measurement of
complex solutions. Capillary electrophoresis (CE) is one of
the highest efficiency small volume separation methods
available and laser induced fluorescence (LIF) detection is
the most sensitive CE detection method [1]. It should be
pointed that, CE is appropriate to examination of conductive
solutions.
Therefore,
CE
is
not
applicable
to
direct
inspection of oils [2][3]. The LIF detecting units are still
expensive and dangerous to eyes. Thus, implementation of
LIF in sensor is the subject of investigations [4]. Capillary
measurement systems are also made with the use of liquid
core waveguide (LCW) and LED fluorescence detection
unit. A Teflon AF coated fused silica capillary usually
serves as the LCW [5]. Therefore, examination of oils is
quite difficult. But, implementation of low cost unit for
fluorescence examination with dual LED system was
proposed.
This unit, consisting of one high power LED
worked at 365 nm and other worked at 405 nm, seems very
interesting and fit for in sensing device application.
A dedicated sensor of diesel fuels stability using a
disposable capillary optrode and UV radiation as the
fluorescence excitation factor and fuel degradation initiator
was
investigated
[6].
The
preliminary
results
of
an
examination, using a single wavelength configuration of the
sensor, show that it is possible to obtain the first signs of
fuel instability in a time less than one hour [7]. Therefore,
advances of two wavelength examinations using two LEDs
working
at
UVC
and
UVA
in
sensor
dedicated
to
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

examination of diesel fuel stability are presented in this
paper.
A.
Modern diesel fuels
There are many types of diesel fuels including petro-
diesel, syn-diesel (synthetic) and bio-diesel. The fuel types
can be further classified in groups as for example petro-
diesels include classical petro-diesel and modern petro
diesel groups, while bio-diesels include Fatty-Acid Methyl
ester (FAME) or Hydrogenated Vegetable Oil (HVO)
components. The syn-diesel main groups cover liquid fuel
components. Liquid
syn-diesel is produced
from any
carbonaceous material that was gasified, purified and
converted in the Fischer–Tropsch process. Gas syn-diesel is
Dimethyl Ether (DME).
Classical
petro-diesel
fuels
are
made
from
stable
components of straight run distillate products of crude oil
(alkanes) with an addition of improvers [8]. Modern petro-
diesel fuels include stable and unstable components.
Stable
components
are
alkanes
and
cycloalkanes.
Unstable components include acyclic and cyclic unsaturated
hydrocarbons. Acyclic unsaturated components may include
alkynes, alkadienes and alkatrienes, while cyclic unsaturated
components may include monocyclic benzene (MAH –
Monocyclic
Aromatic
Hydrocarbon)
and
Polycyclic
Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs). MAH is represented by
benzene, a natural liquid constituent of crude oil and one of
the elementary petrochemicals. The simplest PAHs are
naphthalene (white crystalline solid), having two aromatic
rings and the three-ring compounds anthracene (colorless
solid) and phenanthrene (white powder). Diesel fuel is
expected to contain PAHs particles ranging from three to
five ring systems [9], although the harmfulness of PAHs for
human health is a known issue. Thus, the volume of PAHs
with two or higher number of rings is limited in Europe by
the Directive 2003/17/EC to 11 wt%. But, for the defined in
Sweden class 1 diesel fuel the limit value for PAHs with
three or more rings is 0.02 vol%.
It was historically postulated that classical petro-diesel
fuel may be kept in storage for prolonged periods, but also
that synthetic diesel and HVO components are generally
first class fuels.
On the other hand, modern petro-diesel and FAME are
unstable and their degradation is accelerated with oxygen
presence,
temperature
and
sunlight,
which
include
ultraviolet radiation [10]-[12]. The results of diesel fuel
instability are sediments and gum formation. The results of
bio-diesel degradation with polymer and soluble waxes
formation is the increase in the diesel fuel viscosity [13].
The changes in molecular composition of the fuel affect its
ignition characteristics, which is one of the most important
diesel fuel quality parameters. The minimum cetane number
of diesel fuel differs by region. For example, in Europe the
minimum value is 51, but in some regions of United States
it is 40. It should be noted, that obtaining fuel with high
cetane number is not simple task.
There are two methods to increase the cetane number.
The first method is to reduce the unsaturated content of fuel
by hydrogenation - this is usually not done because of a
high cost. The second method is using cetane improving
additives – this method is preferred due to its low cost [14].
The 2-Ethyl Hexyl Nitrate (2-EHN) is the most popular
improver, but it can be an additional cause of the fuel
instability. Thus, the extended period diesel fuel storage
conditions have to be described with the use of parameters
including exposure to air and light with a specified
environment temperature.
B.
Optoelectronic measurement systems and sensors for
diesel fuel testing
There are many standards of fuel testing procedures, but
their applications are limited to petrochemical laboratories.
New methods and adaptation of examination standards to
ordinary laboratory conditions and in-situ examinations are
in
development.
The
most
popular
directions
of
investigation
include
fuel
type
and
fuel
fit
for
use
classifications [15]-[17]. For such measurement set-ups and
corresponding measurement procedures dedicated electronic
components [18]-[20] and units [21]-[23] as well as
methods of data analysis [24][25] are under development.
Spectrophotometric methods consisting of examinations
of light absorption, scattering and fluorescence are popular
for diesel fuel testing. Light absorption in infra-red is used
in screening analysis to detect specific types of adulteration
in
diesel/biodiesel
blends
[26].
Biodiesel
content
determination in diesel fuel is also possible with the use of
fluorescence examination [27].
The
Time-Resolved
Laser-Induced
Fluorescence
Spectroscopy (TRLIFS) enables the characterization and
identification of different petroleum diesel fuels, biodiesel
from different feed stocks and theirs blends. A typical
TRLIFS set-up consists of an ultraviolet excitation pulsed
laser working at 266 nm wavelength, an acquisition system
measuring the dynamic response with a specific time gate
width, and software that compares obtained results as:
recorded impulse shape, frequency behavior and decay
behavior, maximal intensities and the wavelength of the
maximal fluorescence intensity to a previously created data
base [28]. Similar created databases used with measurement
data of Synchronous Scanning Fluorescence Spectroscopy
(SSFS) that are processed with multivariate analysis enable
the determination of quality parameters of diesel blends
[29]. The sample measurement set-up of SSFS includes a
fluorescence spectrometer, for example Shimadzu RF-5301,
that is equipped with a high power xenon discharge light
source that converts about 150 W of power into radiation
spectrum for sample excitation with wavelength width equal
1.5 nm scanned from 220 nm to 750 nm, while the recorded
wavelength interval is 50 nm.
The literature review may lead to the conclusion that
spectrophotometric
methods
require
costly
equipment
dedicated
to
a chemical
laboratory environment.
But
fortunately, diesel fuel stability may be considered as a
function
of
most
unstable
components
presence
and
concentration. These unstable components include multi-
unsaturated hydrocarbons are known as fluorophores [30].
For example, anthracene absorbs radiation in the range of
200 nm to 380 nm and emits light mainly in the range of
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

380 nm to 600 nm with characteristic multi peak spectrum
with three major peaks with maximum at 430 nm [31]. For
optical
detection
of
such
particles
presence,
the
optoelectronic components are available. Such components
may be the base of prototyping of rapid in examination and
low-cost in use sensors for reliable determination of fuel
chemical stability.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the sensor configuration including the sensor head
with the optrode as well as the optoelectronics system set-
up. Section III addresses the experimental results of the
fluorescent signal analysis. Section IV goes into short
conclusions.
II.
SENSOR CONFIGURATION
The idea of the sensor was inspired by the need to come
up with a low-cost measurement method for a set of diesel
fuels utilizing forced UV degradation effects in one system
that would require the minimum of automated mechanical
elements.
A.
Sensor head
The sensor’s head consists of two functional units: the
head base with fixed optical fibers and the capillary optrode,
as shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1.
Head of the capillary sensor.
The use of capillary reduces significantly the costs of
measurement in a few ways:
First, the measurement of diesel fuel degradation results
in adhesive gums generation inside the vessel, thus a
disposable vessel is a must. Moreover, diesel and biodiesel
fuels affect plastic optical cuvettes made from poly(methyl
methacrylate). Therefore, using a capillary glass optrode
reduces costs versus classic cuvettes.
Second, the capillary optrode introduces a smaller
fluorescent aperture and radiation path compared to classic
cuvette
holders.
Thus,
the
optical
power
used
for
degradation and excitation of fluorescence in the proposed
head may be significantly lower (100 times) than when a
commercial spectrophotometer is used. Therefore, radiation
sources with lower power can be used in the construction of
the sensors, for example light emitted diodes instead of laser
diodes.
Third, the capillary optrode is filled with the use of
capillary force; therefore, pipettes are not used contrary
classic set-up.
Thus, the capillary optrode CV7087Q is used here as a
replaceable and disposable vessel.
B.
Sensor scheme and measurement procedure
The set of parameters of interest may be observed using
forced UV degradation realized simultaneously at UVC 265
nm and UVA range 366 nm wavelengths. Light emitted
diodes can be used as a cost/performance balanced radiation
source at these ranges of wavelengths. Commercial LEDs
powers at UVA wavelengths are relatively high, as 15 mW at
365 nm are available. What should be noted is that the
powers of LEDs in mentioned wavelengths increase with
current technological progress. For example, single chip
M365F1 LEDs, that represent the state of the art of the last
few years, has the maximum power of about 4 mW, while
this year’s M365FP1e Thorlabs’ element’s maximum power
is about 15 mW. LEDs at UVC and UVB ranges are
characterized by significantly lower emitted powers than
those for UVA [32]. In the UVC range the single chip LEDs
maximum power is about 1.5 mW. Maximum power
increase of UVC LEDs is realized with the multi- chip
construction as for example in the UVLUX250-HL-5
element. Unfortunately, such construction does not fit well
with the fiber optics senor technology.
The sensor scheme designed to realize simultaneous
degradation at UVC and UVA and fluorescence reading
with excitation at UVC is presented in Figure 2.
Figure 2.
Scheme of the capillary sensor.
The optoelectronic set-up is divided into two parts, the
UV radiation sources and the detection unit, both connected
to a personal computer equipped with spectra acquisition
software and system script designed for measurement
automation.
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

As the UVA source, fiber-coupled LED Thorlabs
M365F1 with the 365 nm dominant wavelength was used.
As the UVC source, the UVTOP265
from Roithner
LaserTechnik
was
implemented
into
Thorlabs
SM1
micromechanical components to make a fiber-coupled unit.
Diodes were connected to DC2100 controllers operating in
the constant current mode. In the presented set-up the
powers
delivered
from
both
sources
are
not
perfect
balanced. The source working at 366 nm delivers 1 mW of
power, while the source working at 265 nm delivers 300
µW.
The
detection
unit
consists
of
the
power
meter
(PM100D+S120VC), the optical fiber divider (RP20) and
the spectrometer (Maya 2000pro). The RP20 divider is used
to divide the UVC signal between the head and the power
meter. Thus, UVC radiation can be used for degradation and
for fluorescence excitation with a precisely monitored value.
This value is used for the calibration of the fluorescence
emitted signals. The spectrometer is used for the acquisition
of spectra signals. The software on the personal computer
enables proper sequencing of the degradation measurement
procedure.
Examination procedure resulted in better than 280 [a.u.]
absolute measured signal accuracy when full scale range of
analyzed signal is 64000 [a.u.].
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Experimental
results
have
been
obtained
for
two
measurement procedures. The first procedure was with
active UVC and UVA sources. The time stamp of first two
steps of this procedure is presented in Figure 3.
Figure 3.
Initial steps of first measurement procedure with both UV
sources used in fuel degradation.
The time stamp is calculated versus time of activation of
UVA source. The second procedure used for evaluation was
performed with only one active UVC source. For the second
procedure, the time stamp is provided with the same starting
point as for the first procedure. The measurement procedure
time events are triggered with 1 second accuracy. The
experiments were performed for two winter diesel fuels
marked as standard and premium, but both characterized
with identical chemical stability according to EN 15751
standard equals 20 hours and 25 g/m3 base of ISO 12205.
Base of both fuels consist of hydrocarbon mixtures that
include particles with carbon number from C9 up to C25.
Both fuels are characterized by initial boiling points in 175-
180ºC range and solid state pollution 24 mg/kg according to
EN 12662. Examined fuels differ in cetane number, which
for premium one is 55 and for standard fuel is 51. The bio-
component is not present in premium diesel fuel.
The
standard fuel includes 93% of petro-diesel and up to 7% of
FAME including saturated and unsaturated components
with carbon number from C16 to C18.
The premium winter diesel fuels examination with first
procedure
results
are
presented
in
Figure
4,
while
examination results with the second procedure are presented
in Figure 5.
Figure 4.
Spectra of first measurement procedure with UVA and UVC
sources used for premium winter fuel degradation.
Figure 5.
Spectra of second measurement procedure with one UVC
source used for premium winter fuel degradation.
The results obtained for two types of winter fuel
degradation look similar. The big difference is in the
direction of signal changes during degradation. The signal
decreases for two UVC and UVA sources degradation,
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

while it first increases and then slowly decreases for single
UVC source degradation. Moreover, for two UVC and UVA
sources degradation, the absolute emitted signal level is
higher than for one UVC source. The shape of saddle
between peaks at 380 and 405 nm is also different, pointing
that there is a possibility of a new unsaturated hydrocarbon
generation for two wavelengths degradation. The small peak
of emission at 675 nm can be observed in Figure 4 and
Figure 5. For degradation with first procedure the peak
disappears while with second procedure the peak presence
lasts.
The results of the eco winter fuels examination with the
first procedure are presented in Figure 6, while the results
for examination with second procedure in which one UVC
source is active are present in Figure 7.
Figure 6.
Spectra of first measurement procedure with UVA and UVC
sources used for standard winter fuel degradation.
Figure 7.
Spectra of second measurement procedure with one UVC
source used for standard winter fuel degradation.
In the latter case, the spectra are also similar, but as
previously changes of emitted radiation are in different
directions. But, the spectral signal increases
in range from
550 nm towards 700 nm in the case of UVA and UVC
degradation, presented in Figure 6. This is significant for
detection of advanced fuel degradation products, as emitted
signal presence in this range can be connected with resin
development.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
We have examined a capillary sensor of diesel fuel
chemical stability with forced UV degradation realized at
265 nm and 365 nm wavelengths with fluorescence reading
with excitation at 265 nm. These observation points, that
chemical instability of diesel fuel is a result of complex
chemical reactions that follow one after the other. Obtained
results show emitted signal dependency on degradation
grades. The initial grade of degradation can be related to
increase of emitted signal in 380 - 420 nm and 450 - 525 nm
ranges. The medium grade of degradation can be related
with signal saturation in mentioned above ranges as well as
disappearance of 675 nm peak. The advance grade of
degradation can be related to increase of signal in 550 - 700
nm range.
The analysis of the signals measured during fuel
degradation with two radiation sources working at UVA and
UVC shows that the emitted signal characteristics saturate
faster than in the case of examination with one UVC source.
Moreover, in the one-sensor set-up we have shown that
depending on the used degradation regime the changes of
emitted signal differ for different fuels. Interestingly, for
different fuels characterized with identical chemical stability
at 475 nm, the saturation time of changes is similar for
examinations with two UV sources. Therefore, we conclude
that the proposed sensor configuration may lead in future to
the reduction of the time of examination of diesel fuel
stability. Obtained results, for set-up with two LEDs
sources, show the necessity of degradation procedure,
parameters optimization as initial stages of fuel degradation
are crossed a bit too fast.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the WUT grant no. 8956/E-
365/S/2017, task 504/03115/1035/40.000105.
REFERENCES
[1]
C.
A.
Monnig
and
R.
T.
Kennedy,
“Capillary
electrophoresis,” Anal. Chem., vol. 66, 1994, pp. 280R-314R.
[2]
L. Sánchez-Hernández, M. Castro-Puyana, M. Luisa Marina,
and A.L. Crego, “Determination of betaines in vegetable oils
by capillary electrophoresis tandem mass spectrometry--
application to the detection of olive oil adulteration with seed
oils,” Electrophoresis, vol. 32, 2011 pp. 1394-401.
[3]
T.
Galeano-Díaz,
I.
Acedo-Valenzuela,
and
A.
Silva-
Rodríguez, “Determination of tocopherols in vegetable oil
samples by non-aqueous capillary electrophoresis (NACE)
with fluorimetric detection,” Journal of Food Composition
and Analysis, vol. 25, 2012, pp. 24-30.
[4]
A. Van Schepdael, “Recent Advances in Portable Analytical
Electromigration Devices,” Separations, vol. 3, 2016, pp. 1-
12.
[5]
G. Song et al., “Capillary scale liquid core waveguide based
fluorescence detectors for liquid chromatography and flow
analysis,” Talanta, vol. 77, 2008, pp. 901–908.
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[6]
M. Borecki, M. Gęca, M. L. Korwin-Pawlowski, and P. Prus, 
“Capillary
sensor
with
UV-forced
degradation
and
fluorescence reading of diesel and biodiesel fuel chemical
stability,” The Eighth International Conference on Sensor
Device Technologies and Applications (SENSORDEVICES
2017) IARIA, Aug. 2017, pp. 25-30, ISBN: 978-1-61208-
581-4.
[7]
M Borecki, M Gęca, ML Korwin-Pawlowski, and P Prus, 
“Capillary
Sensor
with
UV-Forced
Degradation
and
Examination of Fluorescence for Determination of Chemical
Stability
of
Diesel
and
Biodiesel
Fuels,”
Sensors
&
Transducers, vol. 220 (2), 2018, pp. 20-30.
[8]
Technical Committee of Petroleum Additive Manufactures in
Europe, “Fuel Additives: Use and Benefits,” ATC Document,
vol. 113, 2013, pp. 1-68.
[9]
P.
Aakko,
T.
Harju,
M.
Niemi,
and
L.
Rantanen-
Kolehmainen, “PAH content of diesel fuel and automotive
emissions,” Research Report VTT, vol. VTT-R-1155-06,
2006, pp. 1-50.
[10] M. A. Wechter and D. R. Hardy, “Insoluble Sediment
Formation
in
Middle-Distillate
Diesel
Fuel:
Evidence
Concerning the Role of Fuel Acidity,” Energy & Fuels, vol. 3,
1989, pp. 461-464.
[11] S. Jain and M. P. Sharma “Stability of biodiesel and its
blends: A review,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, vol. 14, 2010, pp. 667-678.
[12] M. Borecki and M.L. Korwin-Pawlowski, “Capillary sensor
with UV-VIS reading of effects of diesel and biodiesel fuel
degradation in storage,” Sensors & Transducers, vol. 205,
2016, pp. 1-9.
[13] R. A. Korus, T. L. Mousetis, and L. Lloyd, “Polymerization
of
vegetable
oils,”
American
Society
of
Agricultural
Engineering vol. 4, 1982, pp. 127-137.
[14] T. Herold, “Next Generation Derivered Cetane Analysis:
High Precision Enables Refineries to Operate Close to
Specifications and Increase Profitability,” Petro Industry
News, vol. 15, 2014, pp. 6-7.
[15] M. Wlodarski, A. Bombalska, M. Mularczyk-Oliwa M.
Kaliszewski, and K. Kopczyński, “Fluorimetric techniques in 
analysis and classification of fuels," Proc. SPIE vol. 8703,
2012, pp. 87030B.
[16] M. Borecki et al., “Fiber optic capillary sensor with smart
optrode for rapid testing of the quality of diesel and biodiesel
fuel,” IJASM, vol. 7, 2014, pp. 57-67.
[17] M. Borecki et al., “Dynamical capillary rise photonic sensor
for
testing
of
diesel
and
biodiesel
fuel,”
Sensors
&
Transducers Journal, vol. 193, 2015, pp. 11-22.
[18] A. Baranowska, P. Miluski, M. Kochanowicz, J. Zmojda, and
D. Dorosz, “Capillary optical fibre with Sm3+ doped ribbon
core,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 9662, 2015, pp. 96620Z.
[19] A. Kociubiński, M. Borecki, M. Duk, M. Sochacki, and M. L. 
Korwin-Pawlowski,
“3D
photodetecting
structure
with
adjustable
sensitivity
ratio
in
UV–VIS
range,”
Microelectronic Engineering, vol. 154, 2016, pp. 48-52.
[20] P Firek and J Szmidt, “MISFET structures with barium
titanate as a dielectric layer for application in memory cells,”
Microelectronics Reliability, vol. 51, 2011, pp. 1187-1191.
[21] S. Y. Yurish, N. V. Kirianaki, and R. Pallàs Areny,
“Universal frequency to digital converter for quasi digital and
smart
sensors:
specifications
and
applications,”
Sensor
Review, vol. 25(2), 2005, pp. 92-99.
[22] P. Doroz, M. Duk, M. L. Korwin-Pawlowski, and M. Borecki,
“Amplifiers dedicated for large area SiC photodiodes,” Proc
SPIE, vol. 10031, 2016, pp. 100311R.
[23] Z. Bielecki, “Readout electronics for optical detectors,” Opto-
electronics Review, vol. 12, 2004, pp. 129-137.
[24] M. T. Ibrahim et al., “Self-adaptability and man-in-the-loop: a
dilemma in autonomic computing systems,” Proceedings:
15th International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems
Applications
(IEEE
Computer
Society),
Los
Alamitos,
California, USA, 2004, pp. 722-729.
[25] P.
Prus,
M.
Borecki,
M.
L.
Korwin-Pawlowski,
A.
Kociubiński, and M. Duk, “Automatic detection of 
characteristic
points
and
form
of
optical
signals
in
multiparametric capillary sensors,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 9290,
2014, pp. 929009.
[26] M. J. Coelho Pontes, C. F. Pereira, M. F. Pimentel, F. V. Cruz
Vasconcelos, and A. G. Brito Silva, “Screening analysis to
detect adulteration in diesel/biodiesel blends using near
infrared
spectrometry
and
multivariate
classification,”
Talanta, vol. 85, 2011, pp. 2159-2165
[27] A.
R.
L.
Caires,
V.
S.
Lima,
and
S.
L.
Oliveira,
“Quantification of biodiesel content in diesel/biodiesel blends
by fluorescence spectroscopy: Evaluation of the dependence
on biodiesel feedstock,” Renewable Energy, vol. 46, 2012, pp.
137-140.
[28] Z. Fan and J. Krahl, “Characterization and Identification of
Diesel Fuels, Biodiesel and their Blends by Time-Resolved
Laser
Induced
Fluorescence
Spectroscopy,”
The
14th
International Meeting on Chemical Sensors (IMCS 2012),
2012, pp. 1483-1485.
[29] M. Insausti, C. Romano, M. F. Pistonesi, and B. S. Fernández
Band, “Simultaneous determination of quality parameters in
biodiesel/diesel blends using synchronous fluorescence and
multivariate analysis,” Microchemical Journal, vol. 108,
2013, pp. 32-37.
[30] D. Liuet et al, “A Reversible Crystallinity-Preserving Phase
Transition 
in 
Metal−Organic 
Frameworks: 
Discovery, 
Mechanistic Studies, and Potential Applications,” J. Am.
Chem. Soc., vol. 137(24), 2015, pp 7740-7746.
[31] S. Reineke and M. A. Baldo, “Room temperature triplet state
spectroscopy of organic semiconductors.” Scientific Reports
vol. 4:3797, 2014, pp. 1-8.
[32] Roithner
LaserTechnik,
“DUV-OC39,”
Roithner
LaserTechnik data sheet rev. 4.5 (11/2017), pp. 1-4.
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

