Flexible Lightweight Films-based Physical Sensors with Wireless Data 
Transmission 
 
Vladimir Laukhin  
Dept. name: NANOMOL 
Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, 
ICMAB-CSIC, CIBER-BBN  
Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain 
e-mail: vladimir@icmab.es  
Elena Laukhina 
Dept. name: NANOMOL  
CIBER de Bioingeniería, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina 
(CIBER-BBN) at ICMAB-CSIC 
Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain 
e-mail: laukhina@icmab.es
Bahareh Moradi, Victor Lebedev, Raphael Pfattner, Concepció Rovira, Jaume Veciana  
Dept. name: NANOMOL  
Institut de Ciencia de Materials de Barcelona (ICMAB) -CSIC 
Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain 
e-mails: bmoradi@icmab.es, vlebedev@icmab.es; rpfattner@icmab.es, cun@icmab.es, vecianaj@icmab.es 
 
Abstract— This article is addressed to the development of 
flexible lightweight physical sensors suitable for body sensing 
technology. The polycarbonate films were covered with 
different organic molecular conductors to fabricate flexible 
strain and temperature sensing materials. The resulting 
surface-modified films were fully characterized by different 
microscopic and spectroscopic techniques and their electric 
transport and electromechanical properties were studied as 
well. The investigations demonstrated that the electrical 
responses of these films suffice to measure very small pressure 
or temperature changes. Prototypes of strain and temperature 
sensors 
with 
wireless 
data 
transmission 
are 
under 
development. 
 
Keywords-flexible strain sensor; temperature sensing material; 
organic molecular conductors; electrical detection principle; 
wireless data transmission. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The application of flexible lightweight sensors in 
electronics is a key point in the development of novel high-
tech [1-4]. Engineering flexible all-organic sensing 
materials with electrical detection principle brings great 
opportunities in the field of physical sensors for their 
applications in intelligent textiles, robotic interfaces and 
body sensing devices [1-3]. A simple covering process of 
polymeric films with highly strain sensitive, piezoresistive, 
micro- or nano-crystals of BEDT-TTF-based molecular 
conductors has been developed previosly; BEDT-TTF = bis 
(ethylenedithio)tetrathiafulvalene, Fig. 1 [4, 5].  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Skeletal formula of BEDT-TTF 
We have shown that these bi layer (BL) films may have a 
great interest in sensor engineering due to important 
material properties, such as conductivity, high strain 
(pressure) and temperature sensitivity, excellent elasticity, 
weightless and biocompatibility [6]. Since the ultimate goal 
of our studies is to use the developed BL films in body 
sensing technology the biocompatibility of the BL film has 
been tested. Haematoxylin-Eosin staining of the tissues 
adjacent to the sensing BL film and to the silicon band 
showed the less inflammatory reaction to BL film samples 
as compared with the reaction to a silicone band [6]. So, the 
developed sensing BL films have a higher biocompatibility 
than standard silicone-based materials used in surgery. 
The processing characteristics of polycarbonate films, 
covered with the layer of a BEDT-TTF–based organic 
molecular conductor, make them potentially useful for 
electronic applications where conductivity, lightweight, 
large or small area coverage and flexibility are required [4]. 
Recently, we have reported on the integration of 
polycarbonate films metalized with the highly strain 
sensitive β-(BEDT-TTF)2I3 metal in a polyester textile, that 
permits to demonstrate that the strain sensing properties of 
this unique organic molecular metal can be completely 
transferred on the fabric [7]. This result prompted us to 
develop a temperature sensing material that also uses the 
electrical detection principle. For this purpose we suggested 
to cover polycarbonate films with the highly temperature 
sensitive α’- (BEDT-TTF)2IxBr3-x conductor [8]. Noteworthy 
also is that the BL film-based sensors have to be equipped 
for some particular applications especially in biomedicine 
with some electronic circuit to measure, amplify and 
transmit the deformation or temperature data. 
 
Here, we present flexible, lightweight sensing BL films 
whose electrical resistance significantly responses to 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

deformation 
(piezoresistive) 
or 
temperature 
changes 
(pyroresistive) depending on the type of molecular 
conductor used for covering the polycarbonate film. This 
article also demonstrated a system that can measure strain 
and temperature and a possibility to transmit the measured 
data to a data acquisition (DAQ) system. Prototypes of 
strain and temperature sensors with wireless data 
transmission being under development will be presented as 
well. 
II. 
FABRICATING FLEXIBLE  STRAIN AND TEMPERATURE 
SENSING FILMS WITH ELECTRICAL DETECTION PRINCIPLE 
In line with the early reported method, [9] we first 
prepared a 25 µm thick polycarbonate (PC) films that 
contain a 2 wt. % of BEDT-TTF that is a precursor for 
various organic molecular metals. The films were cast on 
glass supports at 130 oC from a 1,2-dichlorobenzene 
solution of PC and BEDT-TTF. In order to cover the film 
with the layer of a BEDT-TTF-based conductor we exposed 
the film surface to the vapors of a solution of either iodine 
or IBr in dichloromethane. The surface of a polycarbonate 
film easily swells under its exposure to dichloromethane 
vapors; this swelling facilitates a migration of BEDT-TTF 
molecules from the film bulk to the swollen film surface 
where the part of donor molecules are oxidized to radical 
cations by halogen, which penetrates in the film surface 
together with dichloromethane vapors. This redox process 
induces the rapid nucleation of highly insoluble the (BEDT-
TTF)+•(halogen)n
- conductor and the facing layer of an 
organic molecular conductor is formed. It should be stressed 
that 
the 
treatment 
of 
the 
film 
surface 
with 
iodine/dichloromethane vapors resulted in the formation of 
the covering layer of the α- phase of (BEDT-TTF)2I3; gauge 
factor (GF) is equal to 10 [4]. On the other hand, we have 
shown that PC films covered with the layer of the beta-
phase of (BEDT-TTF)2I3 demonstrate GF being equal to 20 
[4]. Taking into account that the highly piezoresistive layer 
of β-(BEDT-TTF)2I3 may be formed via a thermo-activated 
α→β phase transition that occurs at T>100 oC [9], the BL 
film with the layer of α-(BEDT-TTF)2I3 was annealed at 
150oC during 30 min.  The formation of the both covering 
layers based on either the strain sensing β-(BEDT-TTF)2I3 
metal or the highly temperature sensing α´-(BEDT-
TTF)2IxBr(3-x) conductor was confirmed by the X-ray 
diffraction patterns. Referring to Figures 2(left) and 3 (left), 
both patterns  demonstrate only (00l) reflections that are 
characteristic of conducting layers formed by oriented 
crystals: the c* axis of the crystals is perpendicular to the 
film surface and, consequently, their molecular ab 
conducting layers are parallel to it. The surface analysis on a 
micro scale, performed using “Quanta FEI 200 FEG-
ESEM” scanning electron microscope (SEM), showed that 
the crystallites of the both types of sensitive covering layers 
are of submicro sizes (Fig. 2, right and 3, right).  
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
4000
8000
12000
16000
008
007
005
004
003
002
Intensity, a.u.
2θ, deg.
001
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. X–ray powder diffractogram (top) and SEM image (bottom) of 
the piezoresistive covering layer of β-(BEDT)2I3.  
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
5000
10000
009
008
007
006
005
004
003
002
Intensity, a.u.
2θ, deg.
001
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. X–ray powder difractogram (left)  and SEM image (right) of the 
covering layer of α´-(BEDT-TTF)2IxBr(3-x) whose electrical resistance 
highly sensitive to temperature changes. 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

As a final remark to this part, we would like to add that the 
temperature coefficients of resistance (TCR) were found as 
0.3 %/oC and -1.3 %/oC, for the covering β-(BEDT-TTF)2I3 
and α´-(BEDT-TTF)2IxBr(3-x) layers, respectively (Fig. 4). 
The TCR were calculated as a relative resistance change per 
grade. The room temperature resistance of the films covered 
with the sensitive α´-(BEDT-TTF)2IxBr(3-x) layer is equals to 
25-30 kΩ. It is evident from the forgoing TCR that the film 
resistance changes as 320-390 Ω per grad. It is obviously 
that such sensitivity permits this BL film to control small 
temperature changes (0.01-0.005 grad) as a well definite 
electrical signal. 
Figure 4. Temperature dependence of the resistance for sensing BL films.  
III. 
ELECTRONIC AND ELECTROMECANIC 
MEASUREMENTS – PROTOTYPES 
With the aim to study the possibility to apply the highly 
sensitive BL films as physical sensors, different prototypes 
have been developed [4, 6, 7]. 
A. Portable Prototype capable of monitoring deformation 
induced resistance change displayed in a LED array 
A 
new 
sensor 
prototype 
capable 
of 
measuring 
deformations of the BL-Film manifested in either 
compression or expansion of the crystalline network has 
been developed. For this purpose, a BL-Film covered with 
β-(BEDT-TTF)2I3, was mounted on top of a 30 µm thick 
steel foil (see Figure 5 bottom right). An electronic circuit 
which includes a Wheatstone bridge, amplifiers and two 
transistor driven “staircase” light emitting diode (LED) 
schemes to monitor the deformation is also shown in 
Figure 5. Upon expansion of the BL-Film the and upon 
compression the corresponding LEDs turn on sequentially. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Demonstration proof of concept prototype to monitor the 
compression and expansion of BL-Film based sensor mounted on a thin 
steel foil. Electronic scheme (top) and finished prototype box developed at 
NANOMOL Department (ICMAB-CSIC) with a zoom of the sensor 
element (right). 
B. Development of Prototypes based on piezoresistive and 
pyroresistive BL-Films with wireless data transmission 
Our sensor prototypes developed up to know exhibited 
high 
sensitivity 
and 
reproducibility 
in 
the 
strain 
measurements; however the sensing unit was connected 
with an electrical cable to the measurement unit which was 
further connected to a measurement computer. In many real 
applications, especially in monitoring vital functions of the 
human body, sensors connected with the data acquisition 
(DAQ) system using wires limit the feasibility drastically. 
An important improvement in this regard is the development 
of a small measurement unit connected to the sensor 
element, either piezoresistive or pyroresistive, which than 
transmits the measured data set to a DAQ system or a 
computer. 
 
A simple variant of such an electronic scheme includes a 
Wheatstone bridge for offset compensation and an 
operational amplifier [10]. Depending on the chemical 
nature of the BL-Film and the particular application one is 
interested in, the Wheatstone bridge also allows to include 
additional to the active strain sensing unit a passive (strain) 
sensors, which can be used for temperature compensation if 
needed. The analog electrical signal obtained after the 
amplifier has to be digitalized (A/D converter), encoded and 
transmitted. Figure 6 shows a simple block diagram of the 
complete sensor unit which works for both piezoresistive 
and pyroelectric sensors. 
 
30
40
50
60
70
80
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
1,0
1,1
α'-(BEDT-TTF)2IxBr3-x
β-(BEDT-TTF)2I3
 
 
R(T)/R(29
oC)
T (oC)
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 6. Simple block diagram of the BL-Film based sensor unit (either 
piezoresistive or pyroresistive), Wheatstone bridge with amplifier and 
transmitter scheme  for wireless data transmission.  
On the receiving side of the electrical circuit, the signal 
has to be decoded and transferred either directly to a DAQ-
system (i.e., computer) or back converted to an analog 
signal (Figure 7). 
 
Figure 7. Simple electronic reciever scheme with decoder for either analog 
output or connected directly to a data aquistition (DAQ) system (i.e. 
Computer). 
For the construction of a proof of concept device to 
measure, transmit and receive the variation of the electrical 
resistance induced in the BL-Film based sensor a 
commercial transmitter-receiver unit was purchased at 
ABACOM Technologies [11]. The transmitter unit (RF-
AD-TX) consists of an 8 bit analog to digital converter able 
to convert a voltage range from 0 to 5 V of up to four 
independent channels and a corresponding step size of about 
20 mV. The transmitter works at a frequency of 433 MHz. 
The receiver unit (RF-AD-RX) on the other hand consists of 
an 8 bit digital to analog converter and again for 
corresponding analog outputs. A schematic representation is 
shown in Figure 8. 
 
A complete system and a new generation of prototypes 
including similar schemes described above with wireless 
data transmission in smaller dimensions is currently under 
preparation. The development of similar prototype devices 
including wireless data transmission is desired especially for 
applications in biomedicine for human healthcare to monitor 
vital functions. 
 
IV. 
SUMMARY 
It was shown that covering polycarbonate films with the 
α´-(BEDT-TTF)2IxBr(3-x) conductor makes  a good promise 
of a flexible lightweight temperature sensor. 
The small measurement unit connected to the BL film-
based sensing elements which is able to transmit the 
measured data set to a DAQ system or a computer have been 
designed that permits to develop prototypes of the BL film-
based strain and temperature sensors with wireless data 
transmission.  
The preliminary data show that the polycarbonate films 
covered with molecular BEDT-TTF-based conductors show 
a considerable promise as flexible wireless physical sensors 
that are able to take the place of conventional metal-based 
strain and temperature sensors in biomedical high-tech. It is 
expected that developed sensing materials may have a large 
impact in biomedical applications. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research was supported by Instituto Carlos III, through 
“Acciones CIBER” under CIBER-BBN, the MICINN, Spain 
(CTQ2006-06333/BQU and CTQ2010-19501/BQU), and 
Generalitat de Catalunya (2009SGR00516). 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Commercially available analog to digital transmitter (RF-AD-TX) and digital to analog reciever (RF-AD-RX) used to transmit the measured and 
amplified signal of the BL-Film based sensor (scheme taken from data sheet, 11). 
 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Y. Yurish, N. V. Kirinaki, and I. L. Myshkin, “World 
Sensors and MEMS Markets: Analysis and Trends”, Sensors 
& Traducers Magazine (S&T e-Digest), vol. 62, Issue 12, pp. 
456-461, 2005.  
[2] F. Axisa, P. M. Schmitt, C. Gehin, G. Delhomme, E. 
McAdams, and A. Dittmar, “Flexible technologies and smart 
clothing for citizen medicine, home healthcare and disease 
prevention”, IEEE Transactions on Information Technology 
in Biomedicine,  vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 325-336, 2005.  
[3] B. Adhikari, and S. Majumdar, “Polymers in sensor 
applications”, Progress in Polymer Science, vol. 29, pp. 699-
766, 2004. 
[4] E. Laukhina, R. Pfattner, L. R. Ferreras, S. Galli, M. Mas-
Torrent, N. Masciocchi, V. Laukhin, C. Rovira, and J. 
Veciana, “Ultrasensitive Piezoresistive All-Organic Flexible 
Thin films”, Adv. Mater., vol. 22, pp. 977-991, 2010. 
[5] E. Laukhina, C. Rovira, and J. Ulanski,  Organic metals as 
active components in surface conducting semi- transparent 
films, Synth. Met., vol. 21, pp. 1407-8, 2001 
[6] V. Laukhin, I. Sánchez, A. Moya, E. Laukhina, R. Martin, F. 
Ussa, C. Rovira, A. Guimera, R. Villa,  J. Aguiló, J.-C. Pastor, 
and J. Veciana, “Prototype for Noninvasive IOP Monitoring
with a Nanostructured Polymeric Sensor Embeded in a 
Contact Lens”, Transducers & Sensors, vol. 170, pp. 36– 43, 
2011. Patent: ES2330405-A1; WO2009147277-A1. 
[7] L. R. Ferreras, R. Pfattner, M. Mas-Torrent, E. Laukhina, L. 
López, V. Laukhin, C. Rovira, and J. Veciana J. “Highly 
piezoresistive textiles based on a soft conducting charge 
transfer salt”, Mater. Chem., vol. 21, pp. 637- 641, 2011. 
[8] E. Laukhina, V. Tkacheva,  S. Khasanov, L.  Zorina, J. 
Gomez-Segura, A. Perezdel Pino,  J. Veciana, V. Laukhin, 
and C. Rovira, “Linked Crystallites in the Conducting 
Topmost Layer of Polymer Bilayer Films Controlled by 
Temperature: 
From 
Micro- 
to 
Nanocrystallites”, 
ChemPhysChem, vol. 7  pp. 920 – 923, 2006  
[9] E. E. Laukhina, V. A. Merzhanov, S. I. Pesotskii, A. G. 
Khomenko, E. B. Yagubskii, J. Ulanski, M. Krysezewski, J. 
and K. Jeszke, “Superconductivity in reticulate doped 
polycarbonate films containing (BEDT-TTF)2I3”, Synth. Met., 
vol 70, pp. 797-800, 1995. 
[10] U. Tietze, and C. Schenk, “Halbleiter-Schaltungstechnik“, 
Springer Verlag Berlin-Heidelberg, 1999, ISBN: 3-540-
64192-0,  pp. 1242-1260. 
[11] ABACOM 
Technologies: 
http://www.abacom-tech.com 
[retrieved : 07, 2012]. 
 
 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

