Thermoelectric Energy Harvesting Circuit for Variable Temperature Gradients 
 
Martin Lenzhofer 
Silicon Austria Labs GmbH 
Villach, Austria 
e-mail: Martin.Lenzhofer@silicon-austria.com 
 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, a thermoelectric energy harvesting 
circuit that starts up at very low input voltages and harvests 
the very little energy of a variable temperature gradient is 
presented. It is based on a commercially available step-up 
converter Integrated Circuit (IC), with an adopted wiring 
scheme and some additional components to guarantee a stable 
operation for a sensor unit over a certain time. As a result, it 
turns out that load matching is suboptimal for the start up of 
the Thermo-Electric Generator (TEG) system in the case of 
small temperature gradients. 
Keywords-energy harvesting; small temperature gradient; 
step-up converter; thermoelectric generator. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
One main resource used for generating electrical power is 
thermal energy. There are many applications, which focus on 
the usage of thermoelectric devices exploiting temperature 
differences, but there are rarely any of them dealing with 
harvesting energy from temperature gradients [1]-[3]. There 
are two main reasons for that: on one hand, the little energy 
potential within a gradient does not seem to be attractive and, 
on the other hand, it is a reliability issue for stable operations 
of autonomous systems. Nevertheless, there are a plenty of 
applications that show small temperature gradients, for 
example in wearable systems and in systems for 
environmental and infrastructure monitoring. 
The presented paper describes in Section 1, a thermal 
harvesting circuit that is capable to start up at very low 
voltage levels and to harvest all disposable energy within a 
thermal gradient to supply a sensor node in an oven 
application. In Section 2, the main results are briefly 
discussed and an outlook for future work is given.   
II. 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE HARVESTER CIRCUIT 
A commonly used IC to build up a thermal energy 
harvesting device is the LTC3108 from Linear Technology 
Corp. [4]. It is intended for low power wireless sensor nodes 
and other low power applications and, therefore, contains 
additional to the power management unit, several output 
voltage regulators that can either be switched on 
independently, on demand or sequentially, to supply a 
controller core and a transmitter or sensor unit. The power-
up sequence of the circuit is fixed and hard coded, if thermal 
energy is applied to the TEG and will be described next.  
After some energy is collected, the voltage at the low 
voltage regulator starts to increase until it reaches a level of 
2.2 V. This regulator is intended to supply a controller unit. 
As the thermal energy is still available at the input, the 
voltage at the output VOUT still increases to 3.3 V. If this 
level is reached, the Power-Good (PGD) indicator pin 
activates, indicating the controller that a valid voltage level is 
available for other components. Due to the still applied 
energy at the input, now a transistor in the LTC3108 
activates another output to charge an additional external 
storage capacitor.  
Based on this short functional description, it can be 
recognized that the power up sequence is only useful if a 
constant energy is present at the input. If working with 
thermal gradients, in worst case also limited in time and 
additionally at varying rates, some problems will occur with 
this setup. One major problem is that the thermal energy 
within such gradients is very limited. In the case of constant 
heat transfer in the TEG, load matching is targeted to 
guarantee maximal power transfer. This configuration is 
suboptimal for the start up of a TEG system from small 
temperature gradients. The reason is that, if a load like a 
Microcontroller (MCU) core is already present at the Low-
Dropout Regulator (LDO) output, the current flow will lead 
to a decrease of voltage level at the input. Tests showed that 
even for very low power MCUs, a valid start up of the 
controller core is impossible. Therefore, another strategy 
must be implemented; meaning, first to harvest all available 
energy within the thermal gradient and just at a certain point 
where enough power is available to initially activate the 
controller circuit. 
If investigating in the different units implemented in the 
LTC3108, [3], all necessary building blocks can be found 
that are suitable to change the originally intended sequence, 
by just adding a few external components and adopting the 
connection scheme shown in Figure 1. The presented circuit 
just considers temperature gradients, which result in a 
positive voltage on the TEG system. 
The start up procedure, for example of an oven, results in 
a temperature gradient, which proportionally increases the 
generated voltage of the TEG in the self-sustaining sensor 
system. If a level of 20 mV is reached, the dc-dc converter of 
the LTC3108 starts, leading to a corresponding voltage at the 
pin VOUT. To avoid a constant current flow and perform 
voltage matching, just a capacitor as load is connected to this 
pin. The reason is that it is slowly charged and, therefore, 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

harvests all the available power at the input. The value of this 
capacitance must be matched to the slope of the thermal 
gradient, because if it continues to heat up the system, the 
voltage at the TEG will decrease at a certain time and will 
deactivate the dc-dc converter again if turning below 20 mV. 
In the case of a too high value, even the expected output 
voltage level at VOUT will not be reached anymore. The 
stored energy in this capacitor can then be used to supply the 
sensor electronics. The IC internally generates a PGD signal 
if the programmed output level at VOUT reaches 2.235 V. In 
the presented application, the load formed by a MCU is 
connected to the pin VOUT2. The reason for that is that this 
pin is switchable by an internal low leakage transistor. For 
enabling VOUT2, the PGD signal is used and connected to 
the respective input pin with a low voltage Schottky diode 
D1. This diode D1 represents another key aspect of the 
presented circuit, because it forms together with the second 
one an OR-gate controlled by an output of the MCU. This 
method is necessary due to the load case at output VOUT2. 
The MCU current at start up, refer to Figure 2 a.) (A), leads 
to a voltage drop at VOUT (B), where the energy flows from 
the capacitor C7 over the internal transistor of IC1 to the 
MCU. The PGD condition is tied to an internal not access- 
and adjustable hysteresis setting, which leads to switch off 
again if the voltage level decreases by 7.5% of the nominal 
set value (B). This happens quite rapidly, because the start up 
current even of a low power MCU is quite high. If the 
voltage is switched off by the PGD signal again, the 
electronics would never be supplied sufficiently. After 
switching off (B) again, the current is almost zero again, 
causing an increase in voltage at VOUT and switching on the 
voltage regulator once more (C). So, this effect of switching 
on and off the load leads to some kind of ringing, refer to 
Figure 2 a.), which has to be prohibited. Therefore, the 
energy stored in the capacitor C7 must be high enough to 
hold the voltage level during start up, configuration and 
switching on the diode D1 over the rated voltage minus 7.5% 
(internally fixed hysteresis value). After that, a further 
decrease in voltage level is not critical anymore, due to the 
lock of the high level of the MCU pin, resulting in Figure 2 
b.). In the presented application, the output level is 2.235 V, 
therefore, the start up procedure including the output pin set 
is not allowed to decrease beyond 2.174 V. As an MCU with 
a supply rating of 1.8 V is used, still a margin for a further 
approximately 0.4 V voltage drop is guaranteed for valid 
operation. Depending on the stored energy, the permitted 
voltage drop and the current demand of the electronic circuit 
for the active operation time of the system, can be calculated.   
III. 
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION 
This paper describes a thermal harvesting circuit that can 
start up at very low input voltages, generated by thermal 
gradients and supply a circuit over a certain time. As a result, 
it must be mentioned that the presented solution is just meant 
for applications where the temperature gradient is exploited 
in one direction. Furthermore, if harvesting energy from 
small thermal gradients load matching of the TEG is not 
suitable, then additional changes to the standard circuitry, 
provided by the manufacturer, are presented and evaluated to 
proof the concept. Future work will focus on the 
improvement of the matching of the used components to 
increase the efficiency of the circuit and to extend the active 
time for the sensor application. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The COMET Centre ASSIC Austrian Smart Systems 
Integration Research Center/ COMET Project XX is funded 
by BMVIT, BMDW, and the Austrian provinces of Carinthia 
and Styria, within the framework of COMET - Competence 
Centres 
for 
Excellent 
Technologies. 
The 
COMET 
programme is run by FFG. 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Leonov, P. Fiorini, S. Sedky, T. Torfs, and C. Van Hoof, 
“Thermoelectric MEMS generators as a power supply for a 
body area network”, Proc. IEEE Transducers 2005, pp. 291-
295, 2005 
[2] Y. Meydbray, R. Singh, and A. Shakouri, “Thermoelectric 
module construction for low temperature gradient power 
generation”, Proc. 24th Int. Conference on Thermolectrics, 
pp. 348-351, 2005 
[3] P. Woias, “Thermoelectric Energy Harvesting from small 
variable Temperature Gradients”, Proc. 12. Dresdener Sensor-
Symosium, pp. 83-88, DOI 10.5162/12dss2015/5.6, 2015 
[4] Linear Technology Corp., datasheet LTC3108. [Online]. 
Available from: https://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-
documentation/data-sheets/LTC3108.pdf , [accessed Oct. 
2019] 
 
Figure 1.  Developed circuit of the thermal harvester unit. 
 
Figure 2.  a.) Ringing phenomena due to different load conditions at 
VOUT,    b.) Avoidance of the effect through self locking circuitry  
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

