Improvement of the Diffusive Component of Dark Current in Silicon 
Photomultiplier Pixels 
 
Roberto Pagano, Sebania Libertino, Domenico 
Corso, and Salvatore Lombardo  
Istituto per la Microelettronica e Microsistemi, 
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR) 
VIII Strada Z.I. 5, 95121, Catania, Italy 
roberto.pagano@imm.cnr,it, 
sebania.libertino@imm.cnr.it, 
domenico.corso@imm.cnr.it, 
salvatore.lombardo@imm.cnr.it 
Giuseppina Valvo, Delfo Sanfilippo, Giovanni 
Condorelli, Massimo Mazzillo, Angelo Piana, 
Beatrice Carbone, and Giorgio Fallica 
IMS-R&D 
STMicroelectronics 
Stradale Primosole, 50 95121 Catania, Italy 
giusy.valvo@st.com, delfo.sanfilippo@st.com, 
giovanni.condorelli@st.com, 
massimo.mazzillo@st.com, angelo.piana@st.com, 
beatrice.carbone@st.com, giorgio.fallica@st.com.
 
 
Abstract— The temperature behavior of dark current in SiPM 
pixels was studied for two fabrication technologies differing in 
the anode contact. The first (old) technology had the contact on 
the front, while the second (new) has the anode contact on the 
back. The layout changes allowed us to obtain a strong 
reduction of the dark current diffusive component thus 
strongly improving the device performances.  
Keywords-Silicon Photomultipliers (SiPM); Dark Counts.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Silicon Photomultipliers (SiPMs) are a very promising 
technology to complement or even replace conventional 
vacuum tube photomultipliers, given their strong advantages 
in terms of cost, mechanical robustness, reliability, and 
insensitivity to magnetic field [1-4]. These devices are the 
parallel connection of pixels, each one consisting in a p-n 
junction suitably doped in order to have avalanche 
breakdown in a well defined active area with a quenching 
resistance in series. The active area is formed by creating an 
enriched well, generally doped by ion implantation followed 
by thermal processing for dopant activation and defect 
annealing. This dopant local enrichment generates regions 
where the vertical junction electric field is higher, and these 
become the device active areas for photon detection [5]. The 
p-n junction devices are operated in Geiger mode [6], that is, 
they are biased above the junction breakdown voltage (BV). 
The single pixel operation is as follows: when the device is 
quiescent its active area is characterized by an electric field 
well above the breakdown field. In such a condition the 
absorption of a single photon in the active area will trigger, 
through the generation of an electron-hole pair, with a nearly 
100% probability, the onset of the junction avalanche. The 
voltage drop across the series resistance, which decreases the 
voltage applied to the p-n junction, quickly quenches the 
avalanche. Therefore the photon arrival results in a current 
pulse which can then be easily measured by an external 
circuit. The avalanche quenching, moreover, restores the 
pixel to the original condition of electric field above BV, 
rendering the pixel ready to the detection of a new photon 
[6]. The operation of the overall SiPM is simply the sum of 
the behaviors of the various pixels. Therefore, this device 
compared to the original design of the Single-Photon 
Avalanche Diode (SPAD) has the advantage of having a 
relatively large dynamic range response proportional to the 
flux of photons impinging on the detector at the same time 
[7].  
The SiPM major drawback is the relatively large dark 
current, due to the combination of a diffusion current 
produced at the quasi-neutral regions at the boundaries of the 
device active region, and of generation of carriers due to 
point defects and/or metallic impurities in the active area 
depletion layer emitting carriers through the Schockley-Hall-
Read (SHR) mechanisms, eventually boosted by the Poole-
Frenkel effect [8]. 
In previous works [9-12], we investigated the dark 
current of SiPM devices produced by STMicroelectronics. 
After the first two work [9-10] that was essential to 
comprehend that that the single pixel dark current in the first 
developed SiPM technology is due to the above two 
mentioned processes and that have different weight varying 
the temperature, we finally understood [12] that the first 
process, the diffusion of minority carriers, is relevant for 
temperatures below 10 °C and it is primary localized at the 
lateral border of the pixel, while the latter, the carriers 
generation through SHR mechanism, dominates at higher 
temperatures and is localized in the active area of the pixel. 
Hence, at 25 °C, the dark current is limited by the lateral 
diffusion of minority carriers. This is an intrinsic effect, due 
to the diffusion of minority carriers towards the p-n junction 
depletion layer, inversely proportional to the doping level 
and, therefore, larger at the perimeter of the active area, 
where the dopant concentration is lower. Being an intrinsic 
effect, one may conclude that the dark current levels of the 
above mentioned SiPM devices, at least at 25 °C, are the 
ultimate limit, which cannot be subjected to further 
improvements. In principle, however, this is not true, since  
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
Figure 1.  Schematic cross-section of a SiPM pixel (not in scale). (a) Old technology with double epitaxial layer, n-substrate and trenches crossing the 
sinker diffusion. (b) New technology with single epitaxial layer, p-substrate,  and isolated sinker diffusion. Dotted black lines remark the depleted region 
extension. 
the diffusion currents that leads to the dark current is 
expected to be also inversely proportional to the square root 
of minority carrier lifetime. Any strong improvement in the 
minority carrier lifetime would therefore translate into a dark 
current improvement. 
In this paper, we show that a new device architecture, 
investigated in [11], does provide such a strong lifetime and 
the dark current improvement. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
The full device fabrication details can be found in [13]. 
In this paper, we want to focus our attention on similarities 
and differences between the two technologies in study. They 
have the same active part and guard ring of the device, 
fabricated and discussed in [9-13], thus producing the same 
BV (-28V at 25°C). The main difference between the two 
technologies is in the substrate: in the first technology a 
double epitaxial layer, first p+, then followed by a p- is grown 
on a low doped n-type (100) oriented Si substrate [9,10,12]. 
In the second technology [11,13], only a single p- epitaxial 
layer is grown on a highly doped p+ (100) Si substrate. In 
both cases deep optical trenches are realized for the optical 
and electrical isolation between the pixels. Figure 1 shows 
the schematic cross section of the device, not in scale, for the 
two technologies, old and new (Fig. 1a and b, respectively). 
A further difference in the two devices is that in the new 
technology is not needed the presence of the anode contact 
on the front, hence the p+ region between the active area and 
the optical trench has been removed (see Fig. 1).  
Electrical characterization was performed at wafer level 
using a Cascade Microtech Probe Station 11000. The 
samples were cooled using a Temptronic TPO 3200A 
ThermoChuck that provide a stabilized temperature between 
-60°C and 200°C. Current vs. voltage measurements (I-V) 
were acquired using an HP 4156B precision semiconductor 
parameter analyzer using an integration time of 1s. The dark 
count was obtained using a Tektronix DPO 7104 Digital 
Oscilloscope with 1 GHz bandwidth and 20 Gsa/s. The I-V 
characteristics have been measured on more than 30 SiPM 
pixels of old and new technologies, showing a very good 
uniformity. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
Dark currents of single SiPM pixels fabricated in the two 
different technologies were investigated with respect to 
voltage and temperature (from -25°C to 65°C). Figure 2 
shows the dark currents as a function of voltage at three 
different temperatures, -25°C (circles), 25°C (triangles) and 
65°C (squares) of a SiPM pixel fabricated in the old 
technology (filled symbols) compared to the dark current of 
a pixel in the new technology (open symbols). At -25°C the 
dark currents (circles) are of the same order of magnitude, 
while by increasing the temperature they show remarkable 
differences. At 25°C and at VBIAS = -32V (+ 4V overvoltage, 
OV) the dark current in the old technology is one order of 
magnitude higher than that of the new technology one. At 
65°C the difference increases (two orders of magnitude of 
difference). 
In order to understand the reason of such reduction, we 
extracted the activation energy of the dark current for the two 
devices as a function of the temperature. The Arrhenius plot 
of the dark current for a constant OV (+4V in Fig. 3) 
evidences a clear reduction of the diffusion component in the 
new technology. In particular, at low temperatures the dark 
current is dominated by SHR generation from mid-gap level 
defects of similar density in both technologies, as 
demonstrated by the measured activation energies, reported 
 
TABLE I.  
MEASURED VALUE OF THE DC AT 25°C; ACTIVATION 
ENERGIES EXTRACTED FROM THE ARRHENIUS PLOT OF FIGURE 3; SOME OF 
THE PARAMETERS USED IN THE DC SIMULATION. 
Technology 
DC 
(s-1) 
EA1 
(eV) 
EA2 
(eV) 
NDEF 
(cm-3) 
EC-ET 
(eV) 
τn 
 (s) 
Old 
600 
0.57 
1.18 
10-9 
0.55eV 
10×10-6 
New 
4600 
0.59 
1.12 
10-9 
0.55eV 
3×10-3 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 2.  Dark currents at three different temperatures, -25°C (circles), 
25°C (triangles) and 65°C (squares) of SiPM pixels fabricated in the old 
technology (filled symbols) and new technology (open symbols). 
in Table I. At higher temperatures, the diffusion of minority 
carriers becomes the dominant mechanism of dark current. 
Note, however, that this mechanism becomes the leading 
effect at different temperatures for the two technologies. For 
the old one the diffusion mechanism dominates for 
temperatures above 10°C, while for the second one it 
prevails at temperatures above 40°C.  
To get a further insight, the dark count (DC) rates for the 
two devices were measured as a function of temperature and 
bias voltage (Fig. 4). In general, it has been demonstrated 
that the DC rate in a pixel is well described by the following 
equation [10,12]: 
 
DIFF
SHR
DC
DC
DC
+
=
 
 
    (1) 
 
The first term, DCSHR, takes into account the SHR generation 
from mid-gap level defects located in the depleted active 
volume of the pixel p-n junction: 
 
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛
−
−
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
=
kT
E
E
T
W
A
N
DC
T
C
n
n
ACT
Def
SHR
2 exp
σ
γ
   (2) 
 
where NDef is the defect concentration, W the depletion layer 
width, AACT the pixel active area, γn the universal constant for 
emissivity [14], σn the defect cross-section, EC-ET the defect 
ionization energy [14], T the temperature, and k the 
Boltzmann constant. 
The second term DCDIFF is the component due to the 
minority carrier diffusion from the perimeter of the pixel 
active area into the active depleted volume, given by: 
 
a
i
n
n
P
DIFF
N
n
D
A
DC
2
⋅
⋅
=
τ
 
 
   (3) 
 
Figure 3.  Arrhenius plot of the dark currents at constant +4 V overvoltage 
for a SiPM pixel fabricated in the old technology (filled squares) and in the 
new (open circles) technology. 
where ni is intrinsic carrier concentration, Na is the dopant 
concentration of the epitaxial layer in the active area 
perimeter, Dn is the electron diffusivity, τn is the minority 
carrier lifetime and AP the area of the perimeter zone 
surrounding the active area. 
Figure 4 shows the comparison of the experimental  
(symbols) and the simulated DC rates (continuous and 
dashed line) using Eqs. (1), (2) and (3) for the old and the 
new technology respectively at different temperatures. The 
agreement between data and simulation is extremely good in 
the full temperature range explored. We modeled the 
experimental data by assuming NDef = 109 cm-3, EC-ET = 0.55 
eV, σn = 1.6×10-15 cm2, with the universal constant γn = 
1.78×1021 cm-2 s-2 K-2 for the SHR term (Eq. (2)) in both 
technologies. For the diffusion term (Eq. (3)) we assumed: 
µn=1500 cm2/Vs and Na= 1015 cm-3, that is the dopant 
concentration of the p- epitaxial layer. To explain the large 
difference in the DC rate in the diffusion regime, we have to 
assume drastically different values of minority carrier 
lifetime: τn = 10 µs for the old technology and τn = 3 ms for 
the new technology. The large lifetime improvement results 
in a noticeable improvement of the DC rate diffusive 
component, as shown in Figs. 3 and 4. The reason for such 
radical improvement of both lifetime and DC rate in the 
diffusive regime may be ascribed to the different device 
architecture (see Fig. 1). In the old technology a large p-type 
dopant concentration in the device periphery, up to a B 
concentration of the order of 2×1018/cm3, is present, while it 
is completely absent in the new technology. By considering 
that the Auger effect [15-16] for such a large dopant 
concentration becomes a relevant recombination mechanism, 
with lifetimes of the order of 1 µs in correspondence with the 
peak B concentrations at the periphery, we propose that the 
low effective minority carrier lifetimes observed in the old 
technology are due to Auger recombination occurring at the 
device periphery. Such effect disappears in the new 
technology, resulting in a noticeable improvement of lifetime 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

and, therefore, of DC rate in the diffusive regime. In the 
present new generation technology, the defect concentration 
is of the order of 109/cm3, hence the diffusive component 
dominates the DC rate at about 50°C and above. By further 
decreasing the concentration of SHR defects, the DC rate 
would be limited only by the diffusive regime also at room 
temperature (25 °C), which would result in a level of DC rate 
of a few tens of counts per second for our pixel size. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we have reported on the comparison of two 
SiPM pixel architectures: the first one has a double epitaxial 
layer p+/p on an n-type Si substrate and the anode contact is 
on the top of the structure; the second one has only a single 
p- epitaxial layer grown on a highly doped p+ Si substrate 
with the anode contact at the bottom of the structure. In both 
cases deep optical trenches are realized.  
The dark current behavior of SiPM pixels with respect to 
the temperature was studied for the two fabrication 
technologies. The realization of a back-side anode contact 
results in a major improvement of the minority carrier 
lifetime, probably due to the reduction and/or removal of 
Auger recombination at the device periphery taking place 
when a high B doping is used to provide the front side anode 
contact. This results in a noticeable improvement of the 
diffusive component of the DC rate and then to a reduction 
of the pixel DC for temperature higher than 10°C. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by STMicroelectronics 
under Grant CDR.ST.CNR-IMM.MATIS.24.02.2010.002 
 
Figure 4.  Comparison of DC at three different temperatures, -25°C 
(circles), 25°C (triangles) and 65°C (squares) of the two SiPM pixels 
fabricated in the old (filled symbols) and new (opens symbols) 
technologies. Continuous and dashed lines are the simulated DC as 
described in text for the old and the new technology respectively. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Otte, B. Dolgoshein, J. Hose, S. Kleminin, E. Lorentz, R. 
Mirzoyan, E. Popova, and M. Teshina, “The Potential of 
SiPM 
as 
Photon 
Detector 
in 
Astroparticle 
Physics 
Experiments like MAGIC and EUSO”, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 
in Phys. B Proc. Suppl., vol. 150, 2006, pp. 144-149. 
[2] V. D. Kovaltchouk, G. J. Lolos, Z. Papandreou, and K. 
Wolbaum, “Comparison of a silicon photomultiplier to a 
traditional vacuum photomultiplier”, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in 
Phys. A, vol. 538, 2005, pp. 408-415. 
[3] P. Finocchiaro, A. Pappalardo, L. Cosentino, M. Belluso, S, 
Billotta, G. Bonanno,  and S. Di Mauro, “Features of Silicon 
Photo Multipliers: Precision Measurements of Noise, Cross-
Talk, Afterpusing, Detection Efficiency, IEEE Trans. Nucl. 
Sci., vol. 56, 2009, 1033-1041. 
[4] A. Del Guerra, N. Belcari, M. G. Bisogni, G. LLosa, S. 
Marcatili, G. Ambrosi, F. Corsi, C. Marzocca, G. Dalla Betta, 
and C. Piemonte “Advantage and pitfalls of the silicon 
photomultiplier (SiPM) as photodetector for the next 
generetaion of PET scanners”, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. 
A, vol. 617, 2010, pp. 223-226. 
[5] E. Sciacca, A. C. Giudice, D. Sanfilippo, F. Zappa, S. 
Lombardo, R. Consentino, C. Di Franco, M. Ghioni, G. 
Fallica, G. Bonanno, S. Cova, and E. Rimini, “Silicon Planar 
Technology for Single-Photon Optical Detectors” IEEE 
Trans. Elec. Dev., vol. 50, 2003, pp. 918-925. 
[6] S. Cova, M. Ghioni, A. Lacaita, C. Samori, and F. Zappa, 
“Avalanche photodiodes and quenching circuits for single-
photon detection”, Appl. Opt., vol 35, 1996, pp. 1956-1976. 
[7] D. Renker and E. Lorentz, “Advances in solid state photon 
detectors” J. Instrum., vol. 4, 2009, p.04004. 
[8] S. Cova, A. Lacaita, and G. Ripamonti, “Trapping 
Phenomena in Avalanche Photodiodes on Nanosecond Scale” 
IEEE Electron Dev. Lett., vol. 12, 1991, pp. 685-687. 
[9] R. Pagano, S. Libertino, G. Valvo, G. Condorelli, B. Carbone, 
A. Piana, M. Mazzillo, D. N. Sanfilippo, G.G. Fallica, G. 
Falci, and S. Lombardo, “Dark Count in Single Photon 
Avalanche Si Detectors”, Proc. Of SPIE, vol. 7598, 2010, p. 
75980Z-1-8. 
[10] R. Pagano, S. Lombardo, S. Libertino, G.Valvo, G. 
Condorelli, B. Carbone, D. N. Sanfilippo, and G. Fallica, 
“Understanding 
dark 
current 
in 
pixels 
of 
silicon 
photomultipliers, proc. IEEE European Solid-State Device 
Research Conference, (ESSDERC 2010), IEEE press, Sept. 
2010, pp. 265-268. 
[11] R. Pagano, D. Corso, S. Lombardo, S. Libertino, G. Valvo, D. 
Sanfilippo, A. Russo, P. G. Fallica, A. Pappalardo, and P. 
Finocchiaro, “Optimized silicon photomultipliers with optical 
trenches”, proc. IEEE European Solid-State Device Research 
Conference, (ESSDERC 2011), IEEE press, Sept. 2011, pp. 
183-186. 
[12] R. Pagano, D. Corso, S. Lombardo, G. Valvo, D.N. 
Sanfilippo, G. Fallica, and S. Libertino, “Dark current in 
SiPM pixel: data and model”, IEEE Trans. Electron Dev. (in 
press). 
[13] M. Mazzillo, G. Condorelli, D. Sanfilippo, G. Valvo, B. 
Carbone, G. Fallica, S. Billotta, M. Belluso, G. Bonanno, L. 
Cosentino, A. Pappalardo, and P. Finocchiaro, “Silicon 
Photomultiplier Technology st STMicroelectronics”, IEEE 
Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 56, 2009, pp. 2434-2442. 
[14] D. K. Schroder, Semiconductor Material and Device 
Characterization 3rd ed., Wiley-Interscience, 2006, pp. 262-
264. 
[15] L. Passari and E. Susi, “Recombination mechanisms and 
doping density in silicon”, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 54, 1983, pp 
3935-3937. 
[16] D. K. Schroder, “Carrier Lifetimes in Silicon”, IEEE Trans. 
Electron Dev., vol. 44, 1997, pp. 160-170. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

