An Automatic System for Bilayer Lipid Membrane Formation and Monitoring 
 
Michele Rossi, Federico Thei, and Marco Tartagni 
ARCES – Advanced Research Center on Electronic Systems 
Second School of Engineering, University of Bologna - Via Venezia 52, 47521 – Cesena (FC), Italy 
mrossi@arces.unibo.it, fthei@arces.unibo.it, mtartagni@arces.unibo.it  
 
 
Abstract— Ion channels are natural nanometric pores formed 
by proteins across cell membranes. They are responsible of 
part of cell signaling and a large part of pharmaceutical 
compounds are interacting with them. Therefore, single ion 
channel screening is being proposed as a fundamental 
technique for investigating the function of cell membrane 
proteins with pharmaceutical compounds. The technique 
consisting in embedding ion channels in artificial bilayer lipid 
membranes (BLM) is gaining attention over patch clamp 
approach due to its characteristics of performing parallel tests 
over selected classes of channels. However, no valid procedures 
for automatic formation and real time monitoring of BLM 
arrays have been presented so far. More specifically, since 
BLM is based on a manual and time-consuming technique, 
there is a strong need of automatic systems for forming BLMs 
in a fully parallel fashion for testing compounds in high 
throughput screening (HTS) fashion. In this paper, an 
automatic liquid dispensing system for BLM formation is 
presented using commercial 3+1 axes movement stepper 
machine together with a multi-sensor technique for monitoring 
BLM formation in real time. As proof of this concept, the 
automatic dispensing system is interfaced with an 8 channel 
electronic interface where low noise amplifiers are able to 
automatically sense BLM formations by means of current 
sensing. 
Keywords - Bilayer lipid membrane, automatic dispensing 
system, ion channels, high thoughput screening. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
Bilayer lipid membranes are artificial biological 
substrates composed of phospholipid mixtures suspended 
into different organic solvents that self assemble to form 
bilayers under specific conditions [1]. BLMs are used to host 
ion channel proteins since they well approximates the natural 
behavior of cell membranes. Ion channels are natural 
nanopores that regulates the ions exchange from intra and 
extra-cellular solution, and they are involved into all the 
cellular life process [2]. Because of their key role in the 
physiologic process, ion channels behavior can be altered or 
compromised from several diseases [3]. For these reasons, 
simple and versatile systems that allow to verify and 
screening drugs interaction with ion channels are required to 
reduce time consuming in the drugs discovery and validation 
processes [4]. 
The integration of biological nanopores, such as ion 
channels with electronics is also a promising approach for 
the development of novel biosensors that are able to detect 
low concentrations of target molecules [5], or even identify 
differences between different DNA bases [6]. 
BLMs can be used instead of natural cell membrane 
without significant information loss using channel proteins 
incorporation techniques [5]. BLMs can be formed by means 
of different techniques using microfluidic chambers and 
systems to mechanically support the bilayer. 
Various techniques to form BLMs are reported in 
literature: one of the first developed is the painting method, 
consisting in applying a small quantity of lipid-solution 
dissolved in an organic solvent using a borosilicate rod over 
an aperture immersed in water. The orfice, in the range of 
tens to hundreds micrometers, is created in a hydrophobic 
material foil such as Teflon or Delrin [1]. At the lipid-
aqueous interface, a lipid monolayer will be constituted 
thanks to the amphiphilic properties of lipids. The lipid-
solvent solution wets the hydrophobic walls of the aperture, 
resulting in a thinning of the solvent solution in the center of 
the aperture, until a completely fusion of the two monolayers 
into a single bilayer. A small quantity of solvent remains at 
the aperture perimeter (the annulus), increasing the BLM 
stability and acting as connection between the thick Teflon 
sheet and the final thickness of the BLM, typically in the 
nanometric range [1]. 
 Following different approaches, other techniques were 
developed: some are based on droplets of water inside lipid 
solution [8], others using solvent evaporation and resulting 
thinning of the bilayer [9], or based on the liquid insertion 
through a microfluidic chip which spreads lipids over a small 
Teflon apertures [10]. These techniques allow the BLMs 
formation, but they are not suitable to be automated. In 
contrast, the Montal-Muller approach presents some 
characteristic procedures so as to to be automated [11]. As 
illustrated in Figure 1, the Montal-Muller technique consists 
of the formation of two lipid monolayers above the aqueous 
surface of two separated chambers by applying a lipid 
solution in a volatile solvent, such as hexane or chloroform. 
The chambers are separated by a thin septum where a micro 
aperture is drilled and, during the monolayer formation, it is 
kept out from the aqueous surface. After the evaporation 
time, the micro aperture of the septum is lowered and the two 
monolayers formed into the chambers aqueous surfaces are 
folded down against each other, forming a bilayer across the 
aperture [11]. 
This paper present first example of a fully automatic 
system for parallel BLM formation inspired on the Montal 
Muller approach employing disposable bilayer chambers 
[12] and an array of sensing amplifiers to continuously 
160
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

monitor BLM formation. The system allows testing and 
optimizing different protocols, offering a large flexibility and 
a fast characterization of membranes.  
Section II will show the system architecture and working 
principle. Section III will present the implementation of the 
mechanical control. Section IV will show a real experiment 
where BLM are formed in parallel fashion and monitored in 
real time by embedded amplifiers. Finally, Section V will 
present an application of the apparatus for recording single 
ion-channel signals. 
II. 
SYSTEM STRUCTURE AND CALIBRATION 
The proposed automatic liquid handling system (Figure 
2) is composed of: i) Sutter Instrument MP-285: 3-axis 
micromanipulator for pipette automatic movements in the 3D 
space; ii) Newport NSA12: single-axis micromanipulator for 
multipipette flux control; iii) Anachem Ltd 8-Channel 
Pipette (20-200 µL); iv) LabVIEWTM control panel. 
Sutter Instruments MP-285 micromanipulator offers a 
range of movement of 25 mm in the 3 directions. It allows 
also selecting between two submicron movement resolutions 
of 0.2 mm (coarse range) and of 40 nm (fine range). Newport 
NSA12 provides a motorized, linear plunger, whose position 
can be controlled with sub-micron (0.1 µm-µSTEP) 
resolution over 11 mm of travel, with a minimum 
incremental motion of 0.3 µm (3 µSTEPs). Each µSTEP is 
1/64 of the full-step (FS) of 6.4 µm. The NSA is mounted in 
a fixed aluminum bracket (screwed in the MP-285 vertical 
plate) that provides both a rigid coupling between NSA12 
plunger and the pipette plunger along the vertical axis and 
the rigid coupling between the MP-285 and the multipipette. 
In order to have the maximum pipette volume range, when 
the NSA12 plunger is fully retracted, the pipette plunger is 
fully extended and vice-versa. The mechanical interface is 
compatible with any kind of pipettes.  
Calibration is done using a precision balance (±0.1mg 
resolution) knowing these experimental relationships, which 
are dependent on the particular pipette tips used: 
8100µSTEPS=100µL ⇒ 810 µSTEPS
µL
=12.66 FS
µL
                                   (1) 
 
1⋅ mm
s =156.25⋅ FS
s ⋅
µL
12.66FS =12.35 µL
s  ⇒ 12.34 µL
mm
           (2) 
Using these two relationships, it has been possible to relate 
the volume with the linear movement of the NSA12 plunger 
as 
in 
equation 
(1) 
and 
its 
velocity 
with 
the 
infusion/withdrawal flow rate as in equation (2) in order to 
have a control with a precision of ±1µL.  
Both micromanipulator are connected to a PC using RS-
232 interface and are controlled by LabVIEWTM. Elementary 
operations are implemented in LabVIEWTM executable in 
order to obtain modular software, very versatile for different 
applications as described below. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Montal Muller technique for BLM formation on a small hole on 
a Teflon or Delrin septum separating two chambers. 1) device empty; 2) 
pipette positioning on the inlet channels; 3) injection of buffer solution; 4) 
deposition of lipids for monolayer assembly on the two solution surfaces; 
5) rising solution level 6) final bilayer assembly. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Details of the micromanipulators and multipipette composing 
the compact automatic liquid handling system. 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONTROL 
The described system has been designed with the 
particular aim to create a compact automatic liquid handling 
robot for BLM formation able to be interfaced with an array 
platform [13]. The system is controlled by an implemented 
user-friendly control panel (Figure 3). This has been 
NSA 12 
MP-285 
multi 
pipette 
161
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

designed following a modular and reusable design, starting 
from elementary operations, implemented in different 
subroutines and associated to single independent controls.  
 
 
Figure 3.  LabVIEWTM Control Panel interface for automatic liquid 
handling.  
The operations are referred to the reference system fixed to 
the array platform [13]. Elementary operations are available 
to the user, more specifically: 1) to move the multipipette to 
buffer reservoir; 2) to move the multipipette to lipid 
reservoir; 3) to shift left/right the multipipette on the bottom 
of left/right chamber; 4) to move the multipipette on the 
bottom of left/right chamber at the air-buffer interface level 
where lipids are deposited; 5) to return to origin: move the 
multipipette to the reference system origin; 6) to withdraw a 
fixed amount of buffer selected by the user (µL); 7) to inject 
a fixed amount of buffer selected by the user (µL). 
Furthermore, several important parameters for BLM 
formation can be set, in order to test different BLM 
protocols, in particular: a) volume of buffer/lipids 
injected/withdrawed (µL); b) infusion/withdrawal flow rate 
(µL/s); c) number of lowering/raising buffer level cycles in 
both chambers; d) waiting time for lipid solvent evaporation 
(minutes). Finally, stacking and synchronizing the different 
elementary operations, two automatic BLM formation 
protocols (both using the Montal-Müller method) have been 
implemented. 
IV. 
MEASUREMENTS ON PARALLEL BLM FORMING BY 
REAL-TIME MONITORING 
As proof of concept, two protocols for automatic BLM 
formation have been implemented, following the Montal 
Muller technique [11]. They are called “Automatic Raising” 
and “Automatic”. I) Automatic raising. The system 
withdraws a quantity of buffer from the reservoir and then 
fills the two chambers beneath the microhole (buffer volume 
≤ 70µl). Then, a selected quantity of lipids is injected in the 
two chambers and, after a waiting time for solvent 
evaporation, the buffer level in the two chambers is raised by 
a fixed quantity at a fixed velocity. At the end the pipette is 
moved to the reference system origin. II) Automatic. This 
sequence is illustrated in Figure 5. The system withdraws a 
quantity of buffer (1) from the reservoir it fills the two 
chambers above the microhole (2) (3), in order to allow to 
use the offset correction (4) functionality implemented in the 
readout interface. Then a selected quantity (5) of lipid is 
infused (6) (7) in the two chambers and, after a waiting time 
for solvent evaporation, the buffer level in the two chambers 
is lowered and immediately raised (8) (9) by a selected 
quantity of buffer.  
For a better lipid spreading over the microhole, the 
“lowering/raising 
cycle” 
functionality 
has 
been 
implemented. 
This 
procedure 
automatically 
move 
alternatively the pipette to both chambers, withdraws and 
then injects a selected quantity of buffer from the two 
chambers using a fixed pipette flow rate (selected in 
“raising/lowering level velocity” option). In order to better 
distribute the lipid at the air-buffer interface, the user can set 
several automatic cycles.  
To monitor the membrane formation, following a known 
technique [1], a triangular wave of 80 mVpp@6Hz is applied 
by the electronic system and the current signals coming from 
the parallel fluidic bilayer chambers are visualized and 
recorded by means of a PC-based custom graphical user 
interface (GUI). As shown, in Figure 4, if the lipid bilayer is 
not formed, the microhole acts as an electrical resistor. 
Hence, the current follows the same shape as the voltage 
stimulus. When a BLM is formed, the equivalent circuit 
element could be modelled as a capacitor and the current is 
given by the derivative of voltage stimulus, resulting in a 
square current waveform proportional to the membrane 
capacitance. This method allows to known the dimensions of 
the bilayer since different BLM have different square wave 
amplitudes (Figure 5). 
 
Figure 4.  Equivalent electrical circuit of the septum (above). If BLM is 
not present, the microhole can be represented by a resistor. In the presence 
of a lipid membrane it can be modeled by a capacitor. The difference is 
sensed by a low-noise transconductance amplifier placed on each spot of 
the array (below). 
The typical measured current is about 300 pApp, 
equivalent to a membrane capacitance of about 156 pF, 
162
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

much higher of the septum strain capacitance (8–10 pF 
range), which can be neglected. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Example of automatic operations sequence implemented in the 
“automatic” procedure. Steps 4-10-11 are screenshots of the GUI interface. 
The three square-wave signals (red, cyan and yellow) in step 11 
demonstates the concurrent formation of three independent BLMs of 
different dimensions on different microholes, while brown wave indicates 
the early stages of membrane formation where a lipid agglomerate is 
present  and acts as a very small capacitance between the two chambers. 
V. 
APPLICATION TO SINGLE CHANNEL RECORDINGS 
As a working proof of formation of artificial lipid bilayer 
resulting from the proposed approach, a typical single 
channel recording using artificial lipid bilayer membrane 
will be shown. In the trans-chamber an α-haemolysin (αHL) 
protein is embedded with the BLM with a final 
concentration of 5ng/mL. αHL is an exotoxin secreted by 
the bacterium staphylococcus aureus that forms pores 
allowing ions and molecules to pass through the BLM.  
 
Figure 6.  Example of single molecule binding activity over two differents 
BLM. 
When no ion channel is embedded into BLM, no passage 
of current occurs, due to the high electrical resistance 
(several Gigaohms) of the membrane with respect to ions. 
After insertion of a αHL pore into BLM a constant current is 
detected through the membrane. When a transmembrane 
potential of -80mV, is applied a current of about -80pA is 
observed. Finally, we have also introduced β-cyclodextrin 
(βCD), which binds the α-haemolysin protein and 
significantly reduces the ionic channel conductance, and 
thus the measured current. This molecule is able to get into 
the lumen of the pore from the stem side and to bind to it, 
partially blocking the channel and causing stochastic current 
spikes. Figure 6 is illustrating this experiment where current 
pulses 
are 
readout 
using 
the 
same 
low-noise 
transconductance amplifiers used for monitoring BLM 
formation. 
1 
2 
3 
buffer withdrawal 
from reservoir  
buffer infusion 
chamber two  
4 
buffer infusion 
chamber one  
electrode offset 
correction  
5 
lipids withdrawal 
from reservoir  
lipid infusion 
chamber two  
7 
6 
lipid infusion 
chamber one  
8 
buffer lower-rising 
chamber one  
9 
10 
buffer lower-rising 
chamber two  
11
2 
BLM starting 
formation 
BLM formed 
Ion channel closed: 
no ions flow 
a) 
ions 
membrane 
Single molecule binding: 
current pulse due to ion 
channel temporary occlusion 
b) 
Ion channel 
ion channel open: 
ions current flow  
163
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

VI. 
CONCLUSION 
A compact parallel liquid handling system for automatic 
BLMs formation procedure and real time monitoring is 
presented. The apparatus shows for the first time a complete 
automatic setup for parallel BLM formation. A user-friendly 
interface controlling the micromanipulators has been 
implemented in order to automatically create BLMs 
regardless of the user’s ability with a high yield rate. As 
proof of concept, a complete sequence for parallel BLM 
formation is reported together with single channel recording 
using the same transconductance amplifiers used to monitor 
BLM formation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the 6th Framework 
Programme of the European Commission under the contract 
NMP4-CT-2005-017114 "RECEPTRONICS". We are also 
grateful to the “Fondazione Cassa dei Risparmi di Forlì” for 
its support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H.T. Tien, “Bilayer lipid membranes (BLM), Theory and 
practice”, Ed. Marcel Dekker Inc., New York, 1974. 
[2] B. Hille, “Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes”, Sinauer 
Associates Inc. 2001. 
[3] J.P. Overington, B. Al-Lazikani, and A.L. Hopkins, “How 
many drug targets are there?”, Nature Review Drug 
Discovery 5, pp. 993-6, 2006. 
[4] J.J. Clare, “Targeting Ion Channels for Drug Discovery”, 
Discovery Medicine, 9(46):253-260, 2010. 
[5] H. Bayley, and P.S. Cremer, “Stochastic sensors inspired by 
biology”, Nature 413, pp. 226–230, 2001. 
[6] J. Clarke, H. C. Wu, L. Jayasinghe, A. Patel, S. Reid, and H. 
Bayley, “Continuous base identification for single-molecule 
nanopore DNA sequencing.”, Nature Nanotechnology, 4, pp. 
265-270, 2009. 
[7] D.J. Estes, S. Memarsadeghi, S.K. Lundy, F. Marti, D.D. 
Mikol, D.A. Fox, and M. Mayer, “High-throughput profiling 
of ion channel activity in primary human lymphocytes”, Anal. 
Chem. 80, pp. 3728–3735, 2008. 
[8] M. Zagnoni, M.E. Sandison, H. Morgan, “Microfluidic array 
platform for simultaneous lipid bilayer membrane formation”, 
Biosens. Bioelectron., 24, pp. 1235-1240, 2009. 
[9] M.E. Sandison, M. Zagnoni, and H. Morgan, “Air-Exposure 
Technique for Formation of Artificial Lipid Bilayers in 
Microsystems”, Langmuir, 23, pp. 8277-8284, 2007. 
[10] V.C. Stimberg, I. Uitert, S. Le Gac, A. Berg, “BLM 
Experimentation and Opto-Electrical Characterization on 
Microchips. Towards an Integrated Platform for Drug 
Screening on Membrane Proteins”, MicroTAS conference, 
Groningen (NL), pp. 830-832, 2010. 
[11] M. Montal, and P. Mueller, "Formation of Bimolecular 
Membranes from Lipid Monolayers and a Study of Their 
Electrical Properties", Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 69, pp. 3561-
3566, 1972. 
[12] F. Thei, M. Rossi, M. Bennati, M. Crescentini, F. Lodesani, 
H. Morgan, and M. Tartagni, "Parallel Recording of Single 
Ion Channels: A Heterogeneous System Approach", IEEE 
Transaction on Nanotechnology, 1536-125X, pp. 295-302, 
2010. 
[13] M. Rossi, F. Thei, H. Morgan, and M. Tartagni, "A 
Disposable Microfluidic Array Platform for Automatic Ion 
Channel Recording", MicroTAS, Groningen, pp. 1913-1915, 
2010. 
[14] F. Thei, M. Rossi, M. Bennati, M. Crescentini, and M. 
Tartagni, "An Automatic Offset Correction Platform for 
High-Throughput 
Ion-Channel 
Electrophysiology", 
Eurosensors XXIV, Linz, pp. 816-819, 2010. 
 
164
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

