Receiver Design of Passive UHF RFID Sensor Platform for Gas Identification   
 
Muhammad Ali Akbar, Amine Ait Si 
Ali, Abbes Amira, Mohieddine 
Benammar, Faycal Bensaali  
College of Engineering  
Qatar University 
Doha, Qatar 
e-mail: ali.akbar@qu.edu.qa, 
amine.aitsiali@qu.edu.qa, 
abbes.amira@qu.edu.qa,  
mbenammar@qu.edu.qa, 
f.bensaali@qu.edu.qa 
Mohamed  Zgaren, Mohamad Sawan 
Dept. of Electrical Engineering 
Polytechnique Montreal 
Montreal, Quebec 
e-mail: mohamed.zgaren@polymtl.ca, 
mohamad.sawan@polymtl.ca   
 
 
 
 
Amine Bermak 
School of Engineering 
Hong Kong Uni. of Sci. and Tech.  
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong 
e-mail: eebermak@ust.hk 
 
 
 
.
Abstract— The concept of passive Radio Frequency 
Identification (RFID) sensor tag is introduced to remove the 
dependency of current RFID platforms on battery life. In this 
paper, a reader for passive RFID sensor tag is presented along 
with the processing unit. The RFID system is compliant to 
Electronics Product Code Generation 2 (EPC-Gen2) protocol in 
902-928 MHz ISM band. Whereas the processing unit is 
implemented and analyzed in software and hardware platforms. 
The software platform uses MATLAB, whereas a High Level 
Synthesis (HLS) tool is used to implement the processing unit on 
a Zynq platform. Moreover, Principal Component Analysis 
(PCA) and Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) based feature 
reduction approaches are analyzed in detail for efficient 
classification of gas data. It is found that 90% gases are identified 
using first three principal components, which is 7% more 
efficient than LDA. While in hardware, LDA requires 50% less 
Look-Up Tables than PCA. The RFID tag used for transmission 
is implemented in 0.13 µm CMOS process, with simulated 
average power consumption is 2.6 µW from 1.2 V supply. 
ThingMagic M6e embedded reader is used for RFID platform 
implementation.  It shows an output power of 31.5 dBm which 
allows a read range of 9 meter.    
Keywords—Sensor tag; Pattern recognition; Gas identification; 
UHF RFID Reader; EPC Gen2; ISM Band 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Gas identification is one of the most critical challenges in 
current gas industry because a single leakage of an explosive 
gas can cause a complete disaster for the whole company., The 
explosion of a gas container or the leakage of a hazardous gas 
will also be disastrous for the environment [1].  Therefore, 
human olfactory based Electronic Nose (EN) systems are 
introduced, with wide range of applications like milk industry 
[2] and patient monitoring system [3].   
In gas applications, the presence of complex compounds 
like water vapour with the gases of interest creates one of the 
challenging issues for the gas identification using EN [4]. The 
presence of battery further limits the life and durability of the 
sensor tag. Moreover, the drift and non-selectivity of sensor 
raise the problem of classification for EN [5]. The possible 
approaches to deal with the problem of drift and non-selectivity 
is to increase the number of sensors as adopted by Guo et al. 
[6] or to introduce the temperature modulation such that a 
single sensor provides different responses for the same gas due 
to temperature variations [7]. The purpose of these approaches 
is to get more signatures for the same gas, whereas both 
approaches of multiple-sensors and single sensor-modulation 
increase the dimensionality of feature vector, thereby 
increasing the computational complexity. The problem 
becomes severe if the gas identification system is implemented 
on any hardware platform because of resource utilization and 
power consumption which increases with the computational 
complexity. Therefore, feature reduction approaches like 
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) or Linear Discriminant 
Analysis (LDA) is required to reduce the data size and to 
increase the processing efficiency. 
On the other hand, Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) 
sensing design has been widely explored as a low-cost 
candidate toward lightweight, reliable and energy-efficient 
devices for gas detection [8]. There has been permanent 
evolution toward combining the capabilities of gas sensing and 
wireless technology in order to collect, process, and transmit 
time-varying data. This approach leads to RFID-enabled 
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) infrastructure. Most of the 
WSN include a battery [9], which increases their cost and 
limits their autonomy. The power autonomy can be 
encountered by using a fully passive (battery-less) UHF RFID 
design. A typical RFID system is mainly composed by a reader 
and antenna (also named interrogator), one to several tags (also 
named electronic labels) and an information systems back-end. 
Furthermore, a reconfigurable hardware is required to 
improve the processing time for run-time classification because 
a dedicated hardware is faster than the software application. 
However, gas recognition process requires a complicated 
training phase and frequent calibration, which is even harder to 
implement on a dedicated hardware. As a consequence, most 
EN solution today are software based platforms and the 
integration of a real-time in-site training and portable EN 
microsystem is yet to be demonstrated. Therefore, a hardware 
based processing unit is demonstrated which can be applied in 
any multi-sensing gas identification platform. The presence of 
a processor along with a programmable logic based on field 
programmable gate array (FPGA) has made heterogeneous 
Zynq platform suitable for our research. A hybrid system can 
easily be implemented on Zynq using High Level Synthesis 
(HLS) tool. The other reason for using Zynq board is because 
the circuit implemented and tested on it can easily be 
reproduced to application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC).        
Therefore, in this paper the reader for a passive Ultra-High 
Frequency (UHF) RFID sensor platform is presented with a 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

centralized hardware processing unit to perform feature 
reduction and classification. The data from multiple sensor tags 
will be collected using M6e embedded reader at the central 
processing unit with respect to the Electronics Product Code 
Generation 2 (EPC-Gen2) protocol in the 902-928 MHz ISM 
frequency band. Each sensor tag has a 4x4 array gas sensor 
proposed by Guo et al. [6] and a low power temperature sensor 
[10]. Moreover, a unique code is associated with all sensor tags 
individually which helps the processing unit to identify the tag 
and process the collected data accordingly. The central 
processing unit is tested on a heterogeneous reconfigurable 
Zynq platform using High-Level Synthesis (HLS) tools while 
the tag sensors are implemented in CMOS process to reduce 
the power dissipation and enhance the full system integration. 
The presented work is part of an ongoing project in which a 
low-power multi-sensing gas identification platform is need to 
be developed for gas identification based on an array of tin-
oxide gas sensors. 
The remaining sections of this paper are organized as 
follows. Section II covers the RFID sensor tag along with the 
experimental setup for data acquisition. The UHF RFID 
receiver is described in Section III. Section IV is concerned 
with the processing unit. Simulation results are shown and 
discussed in Section V. Section VI concludes the paper.  
II. RFID SENSOR PLATFORM AND DATA EXTRACTION  
The UHF RFID based sensor platform includes a 4x4 array 
gas sensor [6] and a low power temperature sensor [10]. The 
main challenge of the RFID sensor design is the power hungry 
building blocks for which an external power source is required. 
Whereas, the presence of battery in the sensor tag creates 
problems by limiting the lifetime of the tag-based sensors. Tags 
will not be able to communicate with the embedded reader if 
battery power level goes below a fixed threshold. Therefore, a 
fully passive UHF RFID approach is adopted such that, the 
communication link between tags based sensor and reader is 
guaranteed for longer time. The full tags based sensor system 
are powered by a remote power through the RF energy 
received from the reader in order to create autonomous gas 
measurement micro systems.  
 The main challenge with the passive RFID tag is the 
limited range of communication; therefore, hybrid design could 
be used by adding a battery as power bank in addition to the 
power harvesting circuit. The power bank will allow to reach 
higher communication range when needed. Furthermore, 16 
gas sensors are used in the tag which results in huge 
transmission overhead as tag needs to transmit the data in 
periodic sessions which in turn further increases the problem of 
power consumption, therefore a compressive sensing approach 
such as Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (OMP) algorithm can be 
adopted for reconstructing the compressed signal [11]. 
In order to test the sensor tag, data is extracted for 10 
concentrations of 20, 40, 60, 80, 100, 120,140, 160, 180 and 
200 ppm in air, of three different gases namely Carbon-mono-
oxide, ethanol and hydrogen, in a controlled experimental 
environment. The extraction process of gas data is carried out 
in a way that the dry air is flushed for 750 s before exposing 
the sensor to any new concentration of gas. The sensor is then 
exposed to gas for 250s in a closed glass chamber. This is due 
to the fact that the sensor reaches steady state after 250s. The 
experiment is repeated again after obtaining the data for 10 
concentrations of each gas such that the obtained data is 
divided into two parts. The first one is used for training 
purpose known as learning data (Dl) and the second one for 
testing purpose known as test data (Dt). The overall model of 
sensor tag is shown in Figure 1. 
III. 
UHF RFID READER PERFORMANCE 
A typical RFID system consists of tags, readers and 
computer application systems, as shown in Figure. 2. With 
several excellent characteristics, such as portable, high 
capacity, long life, security access, and movable recognition, 
RFID is used more and more widely in logistic systems, 
production management system, monitoring and tracking 
system, and so on [12]. The EPC Gen2 protocol was designed 
based on the minimal features available on an EPC Gen2 RFID 
tag specifically a 32-bit secret access password, a 16-bit 
pseudo-random number generator, and limited memory that 
can store at least two 16-bit random numbers while the tag is 
powered. An improved authentication scheme is adopted with 
this standard [13]. 
The communication range performance of a RFID system 
depends mainly on the choice of frequency, transmitted power 
from the reader, sensitivity of tag, tag‟s modulation efficiency, 
data rate, reader receiver sensitivity and location of the tag 
[14]. Based on the frequency, the RFID system can be 
considered as Low Frequency (LF), High-Frequency (HF), 
UHF and Microwave (WF) RFID. Nowadays, the UHF RFID 
is the most used technology because of its far reading distance 
(up to 10 meter), passive (battery less) tags, high security, and 
strong 
penetrating 
force 
features 
[15].
Air
Data Fusion & 
Compression 
Modulator
Demodulator
Energy Recovery 
& 
Power 
Distribution 
Digital
Base 
Band
One Time 
Programmable 
(OTP)
Memory
Antenna
Transmitter
N/A
B
P
H
Au
Pb
Pt
N/A
Temperature Sensor
16- Sensor Array
Sensor Tag
Mass Flow 
Control for 
Gas/air 
Injection
Gas
Cylinder
 
Figure 1. Block Diagram of RFID Sensor tag with data acquisiton set-up 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

As shown in Figure. 2, the controller activates the RFID 
reader to send RF signals. Tags receive, process and send back 
the requested data through the tag‟s antenna. The tag responds 
with an identification code using backscattering of modulated 
received signal. There is no battery as source of energy in the 
passive tags system, and thereby it gets all the energy needed 
for running from the electromagnetic wave transmitted by the 
reader. The reader decodes the received signal through its 
antenna to be processed by the controller.  
In most cases, the reader‟s antenna is placed into an 
external module as presented in Figure. 2 to achieve long 
read\write ranges also when a circularly polarized reader 
antenna is used to eliminate tag orientation sensitivity. 
According to different configurations and parameters ，UHF 
RFID readers can be designed as fixed or handheld readers.   
Handheld readers are used in a large number of applications 
for its portable, and easy to use in shift data collection. It is 
complicated to design handheld UHF RFID reader, while it 
includes embedded computer middleware and application, 
microwave and antenna designs, radio frequency electronic 
circuits, wireless communications and signal processing, low-
power control and many other technical fields. In this research, 
embedded RFID reader is taken into consideration to reduce 
the overall system cost and complexity. 
A. Antenna Design  
Among the important performance characteristic is the 
maximum range at which RFID reader can detect the 
backscattered signal from the tag. Because reader sensitivity is 
typically high in comparison with tag, the reading range is 
defined by the tag response threshold. Communication range is 
also sensitive to the tag orientation, the material the tag is 
placed on, and to the propagation environment. The reader 
antenna should be a circularly polarized antenna, in order to 
avoid the polarization loss when the orientation of the 
identified object is changed. The read range r can be calculated 
using Friis free-space formula as: 
        
 
  √
       
                                                    
where λ is the wavelength, Pt is the power transmitted by 
the reader, Gt is the gain of the transmitting antenna, Gr is the 
gain of the receiving tag antenna, Pth is the minimum threshold 
power necessary to provide enough power to the RFID tag 
chip, and τ is the power transmission coefficient. 
 
B. Link budget 
In UHF RFID systems, the forward link depends on the tag 
sensitivity Ptag while the return link depends on the reader 
sensitivity Preader. The reader can process the tag response data 
when the tag signal power Pr, received at the reader, is larger 
than the reader sensitivity. The reader sensitivity is the 
minimum power of the received tag signal necessary for 
successful data processing and is mainly defined by the level of 
self-jammer [16]. One important characteristic is the needed 
reader sensitivity to detect an arbitrary tag at the maximum 
possible distance. From [16], the needed reader sensitivity must 
be better or equal to: 
 
            
   
  
                                
Where K is the tag backscatter gain and Pt is the reader 
output power. The given equation is valid for any propagation 
environment. Figure. 3 shows the reader sensitivity requested 
by the tags to read command at their maximum possible range 
[16]. The backscatter gain is assumed to be -10dB. The study 
illustrated in Figure. 3 uses four readers with four levels of 
output power 30dBm, 20dBm, 10dBm and 0dBm.  
C. ThingMagic M6e embedded RFID reader 
To further verify the performance of the proposed UHF tag 
[17] for both near-field and far-field operations, the Thing 
Magic M6e embedded RFID reader module [18] is studied to 
be used with a circularly polarized antenna in the free space. 
This RFID reader module supports the ability to transmit up to 
31.5dBm for the UHF RFID band of 902–928MHz and can 
read more than 750 tags/seconds. This performance makes 
M6e the recommended RFID reader for challenging 
applications such as gas identification and temperature 
monitoring. The M6e has both serial and USB interfaces to 
support both board-to-board and board-to-host connectivity.  
The maximum tags read range can reach up to 30 feet (9 
meters) for an operating temperature from -40 °C to 60 °C. 
Antenna
OMP based 
Reconstruction
Dimensionality 
Reduction & 
Classification
Zynq-7000
FPGA Board
Receiver Side
Sensor Tag
Main Server 
 
Figure 2. RFID System architecture diagram 
 
Figure 3. Reader sensitivity comparaison at -10dB backscatter gain 
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
-32
-27
-22
-17
-12
-7
-2
Reader Sensitivity (dBm) 
Tags Power Sensitivity (dBm) 
Reader 1 (30dBm)
Reader 2 (20dBm)
Reader 3 (10dBm)
Reader 4 (0dBm)
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

IV. 
PROCESSING UNIT 
The data received by the RFID receiver is fed to the 
processing unit for analysis. The possibility of parallel 
computation in dedicated hardware makes it much faster than 
the software at run-time. Therefore the processing unit is 
implemented on heterogeneous reconfigurable Zynq platform 
which is having an ARM processor and FPGA chip based on 
Xilinx 7-series [20]. The reason of selecting the Zynq platform 
is because of its suitability for hardware/software co-design 
approach. It is worth noting that the purpose of hardware 
platform is to process the Dt whereas the training part is done 
offline using MATLAB. This is to reduce the hardware 
overhead caused by the complexities of the feature reduction 
and classification algorithms. Also, the Dl is used one time for 
training purpose so it is more feasible and efficient to do the 
training offline. Thus, the hardware processing unit is used to 
perform real-time feature reduction and classification on Dt of 
gases. 
A. Compressive Sensing Reconstruction 
The data acquired by the sensor is compressed before 
transmission to reduce the power overhead of sensor tag 
required for transmission purpose. After receiving the RFID 
signal the processing unit should need to reconstruct the 
compressed signal to acquire the original sensor data. There are 
different approaches for reconstruction process, however in this 
research we utilized the OMP based reconstruction algorithm 
proposed in [11]. The reason of using this algorithm is due to 
its scalability and high Peak Signal to Noise Ratio (PSNR).    
B. Feature Reduction  
After reconstruction a PCA and LDA based feature 
reduction approaches are applied to check the suitability of the 
two most common reduction algorithms for gas application. 
The aim of feature reduction is to reduce the feature size 
without losing useful information. PCA and LDA-based feature 
reduction algorithms are summarized in Figure. 4. 
In case of PCA the Eigen vectors (Ev) and mean values will 
be computed offline for training data Dl and then the projection 
of Dl in new space is obtained by simple multiplication of 
normalized data with the Ev using MATLAB. Whereas, since 
the testing part requires only Eigen vectors and mean values, as 
shown in Figure. 4(a) [19], therefore in case of PCA the 
computed mean and Ev for Dl are pre-stored in the flash 
memory of the board and at run-time the hardware will take 
those values to perform normalization and projection of Dt with 
lower complexity and faster speed.  
In contrast to PCA, LDA is not performed directly on Dl 
because LDA deals with class boundaries which cannot be 
identified in Dl. Therefore, Dl is split in to classes such that 
data for each gas is considered as a single class. The training-
data obtained at different concentrations of gas is stored as a 
train-class (Tc), where sub-script c is representing the type of 
gas. After computing normalization as well as between and 
within class-differences, the Ev will be computed. The Ev is 
then forwarded to the projection block which projects the Dl on 
reduced feature space. It is worth noticing that LDA testing 
part requires only Eigen vectors as shown in Figure. 4(b) to 
project Dt on reduced feature space. 
C. Classification  
 
A Binary Decision Tree (BDT) classifier is used to 
identify the gases after feature reduction. The reason of 
selecting BDT for classification is because of the 
simplicity and good performance. The tree formation is 
carried out on Dl using MATLAB library function 
whereas the decision nodes will be implemented on 
hardware using successive if-else condition to classify 
the 
gases 
at 
run-time 
from 
the 
obtain 
Dt.
TRAINING
  TESTING
TRAINING
Mean
Normalization 
(Mean Sub)
Covariance 
Matrix
 Eigenvectors
Projection
Normalization          
(Mean Sub)
Projection
Set of Steady States
Vector of Means
Matrix of Eigenvectors
PCAs
Set of 
PCAs
x1
x2
xm
Steady
 States
PCA1
PCA2
PCAm
Decision 
Tree 
Classifier
TESTING
Decision 
Tree
PCA Based Feature Reduction
Classification 
 
(a) 
  TESTING
TRAINING
Mean
Normalization 
(Class Mean)
Within & 
b/w class 
variance
Eigenvectors
Projection
Projection
Each Gas Class Tc
Matrix of Eigenvectors
LDA
x1
x2
xm
Steady States
LDA1
LDA2
LDAm
LDA Based Feature Reduction
TRAINING
Decision 
Tree 
Classifier
TESTING
Decision 
Tree
Classification 
Steady States Dl
 
(b) 
Figure 4. Feature reduction algorithm based on (a) PCA and (b) LDA 
V. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS OF THE PROCESSING UNIT 
The software simulation is carried out using MATLAB 
whereas the hardware implementation is achieved using 
Vivado HLS tools [21]. It has been observed that for 
classification BDT with three principal components can 
classify 90% of gases [19] and is therefore 7% better than using 
LDA based feature reduction.  
 
CO
C2H6O
CO
CO
H2
3 PCAs
x3 < 0.134946
x3 ≥  0.134946
x1 < 4.31419
x1 ≥  4.31419
x2 < 0.177746
x2 ≥  0.177746
x1 < 3.63144
x1 ≥ 3.63144
 
C2H6O
CO
H2
LDA
x1 <0.0625139
x1 ≥  0.0625139
x1 < 0.107181
x1 ≥ 0.107181
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 5. BDT for (a) PCA and (b) LDA 
 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

TABLE I.  SIMULATION RESULTS FOR GAS-CLASSIFICATION AND HARDWARE OVERHEAD WITH PCA/LDA BASED FEATURE REDUCTION   
 
Properties 
LDA 
PCA 
2-PCA 
3-PCA 
Classification 
Steady State (SS) 
83% 
80% 
90% 
 
Hardware 
Resources 
FF 
893 
2089 
2089 
LUT 
1937 
3925 
3925 
Clock Cycles (CC) 
(Nano-seconds) ns 
8.20 
8.20 
8.20 
Latency Period  (CC) 
163 
261 
261 
Input Interval    (CC) 
164 
262 
262 
 
 
 
 
 
However, for hardware implementation LDA based feature 
reduction requires 50% less Look Up Tables (LUTs) and 57% 
less Flip-Flops (FF) than PCA. Moreover, LDA requires 37.5% 
less latency time than PCA. Where latency time is the period 
require to produce the final output, as shown in Table. I.  
Furthermore, the BDT obtained with LDA based feature 
reduction algorithm exhibits only 2 decision nodes along with 
unity depth, while in case of PCA the BDT have 4 decision 
nodes with three steps in depth. Therefore, LDA offers 
simplified decision tree which require less time for searching 
and classification of gas than PCA, as shown in Figure. 5. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Since the reader is considered as a key component of the 
RFID gas application system, therefore a UHF RFID reader is 
presented with a processing unit implemented on a 
reconfigurable Zynq platform. The overview of the reader 
performance characterization is also demonstrated. Whereas, 
ongoing research focuses on the design and implementation of 
efficient reconfigurable architectures for OMP algorithm The 
RFID system is compliant with the EPC-Gen2 protocol in the 
902-928 MHz ISM frequency band. ThingMagic embedded 
M6e reader shows an advantage over existing readers in the 
market in term of high integration, low power dissipation and 
low cost.  
The designed processing unit at reader is tested with PCA 
and LDA based feature reduction approaches. It is found that 
BDT can classify 90% of the gases with three principal 
components which is 7% more efficient than the identification 
of gas by BDT using LDA. While in terms of hardware 
overhead LDA requires 50% less LUTs than PCA and is 37.5% 
more efficient in terms of latency time. 
The presented work is part of an ongoing project in which a 
low-power multi-sensing gas identification platform is need to 
be developed for gas identification based on an array of tin-
oxide gas sensors. Therefore the system will be tested on real 
conditions after the completion of the integration process.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper was made possible by National Priorities 
Research Program (NPRP) grant No. 5 – 080 – 2 – 028 from 
the Qatar National Research Fund (a member of Qatar 
Foundation). The statements made herein are solely the 
responsibility of the authors. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Yamazoe, and N. Miura, “Environmental gas sensing”, Sensors and 
Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 20, no. 2-3, 1994, pp. 95-102. 
[2]  S. Labreche, S. Bazzo, S. Cade, and E. Chanie, “Shelf life 
determination by electronic nose: application to milk”, Sensors and 
Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 106, no. 1, 2005, pp. 199-206. 
[3] S. Dragonieri et al. “An electronic nose in the discrimination of patients 
with asthma and controls”, Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 
vol. 120, no. 4, 2007, pp. 856-862. 
[4] F. Röck, N. Barsan, and U. Weimar, “Electronic nose: current status and 
future trends”, Chemical reviews, vol. 108, no. 2, 2008, pp. 705-725. 
[5] M. Shi, A. Bermak, S. B. Belhouari, and P.C. Chan, “Gas identification 
based on committee machine for microelectronic gas sensor”, IEEE 
Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 55, no. 5, 2006, 
pp. 1786-1793. 
[6] B. Guo, A. Bermak, P.C. Chan, and G.Z. Yan, “An Integrated Surface 
Micromachined Convex Microhotplate Structure For Tin Oxide Gas 
Sensor Array”, IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 7, no. 12, 2007, pp. 1720-
1726. 
[7] E. Llobet et al. , “Multicomponent gas mixture analysis using a single tin 
oxide sensor and dynamic pattern recognition”, IEEE Sensors Journal, 
vol. 1, no. 3, 2001, pp. 207-213. 
[8] L. Yang, R. Zhang, D. Staiculescu, C. P. Wong, and M. M. Tentzeris, 
“A novel conformal RFID-enabled module utilizing inkjet-printed 
antennas and carbon nanotubes for gas-detection applications”, 
Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, IEEE, vol. 8, 2009, pp. 653-
656. 
[9] M. Brandl et al. "A low-cost wireless sensor system and its application 
in dental retainers" , IEEE Sensors Journal, vol.  9, no. 3, 2009, pp. 255-
262. 
[10]  S. Mohamad, F. Tang, A. Amira, A. Bermak, and M. Benammar, "A 
Low Power Oscillator Based Temperature Sensor For RFID 
Applications", 5th Asia Symposium on Quality Electronic Design 
(ASQED) , 2013,  pp. 50-54. 
[11] H. Rabah, A. Amira, B. K. Mohanty, and S. Almaadeed, “FPGA 
Implementation of Orthogonal Matching Pursuit for Compressive 
Sensing Reconstruction”, IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale 
Integration Systems , DOI. 10.1109/TVLSI.2014.2358716 . 
[12] R. Weinstein, “RFID: A Technical Overview and it‟s Application to the 
Enterprise,” IT Professional, vol. 7, no. 3, 2005, pp. 27-33.  
[13] EPCglobal Inc., “EPC Radio-Frequency Identity Protocols Class-1 
Generation-2 UHF RFID Protocol for Communications at 860MHz-
960MHz Version 1.0.9”, EPC global Standards, 2005. 
[14] K. Finkenzeller, “RFID Handbook”, New York: Wiley, 2003. 
[15] A. S. Ahson, and M. Ilyas, “RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, 
Security, and Privacy”, CRC Press, 2008. 
[16] P. Nikitin, K. V. S. Rao, and S. Lam, "UHF RFID tag characterization: 
overview and state-of-the-art", Antenna Measurement Techniques 
Association 
Symposium 
(AMTA) 
34th 
Annual 
Meeting 
and 
Symposium, 2012, pp. 289-294. 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[17] M. Zgaren, and M. Sawan, “A Front end-EPC Gen-2 Passive UHF RFID 
Transponder for Embedded Gas Sensor”, 4th International Gas 
processing symposium, 2014, pp. 223-231. 
[18] „M6e 
High-Performance 
4-Port 
UHF 
RFID 
Module‟, 
http://www.dpie.com/manuals/rfid/M6eHardwareGuide_Sept13.pdf, 
v 
1.13.1, accessed May. 12,2015.  
[19] A. Ait Si Ali, A. Amira, F. Bensaali, and M. Benammar, “Hardware 
PCA for Gas Identification Systems Using High Level Synthesis On The 
Zynq SoC”, IEEE 20th International Conference on Electronics, 
Circuits, and Systems (ICECS) , 2013, pp. 707-710. 
[20] „Inc Xilinx. Zynq-7000 All Prog. SoC: Tech. Reference Manual‟, 
http://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/user_guides/ug585-Zynq-
7000-TRM.pdf, UG585, v1.8.1, accessed Feb. 20, 2015. 
[21] „Inc Xilinx Vivado Design Suite User Guide: Embedded Processor H/W 
Design‟,http://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/sw_manuals/xili
nx2013_3/ug898-vivado-embedded-design.pdf, 
UG898, 
v2014.3, 
accessed March 9, 2015. 
 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

