Development of Fast Response Humidity Sensors Based on Carbon Nanotubes 
 
Marcos C. Moraes, Elisabete Galeazzo, Henrique E.M. 
Peres, and Francisco J. Ramirez-Fernandez 
Departamento de Engenharia de Sistemas Eletrônicos 
Universidade de São Paulo 
São Paulo, Brazil 
e-mail: bete@lme.usp.br 
Michel O. S. Dantas 
Centro de Engenharia, Modelagem e Ciências Sociais 
Universidade Federal do ABC 
Santo André, Brazil 
michel.dantas@ufabc.edu.br
 
Abstract — Current search on miniaturized humidity sensors 
primarily emphasizes issues related to integration and 
technological aspects. In this context, research efforts have 
been focused on developing sensors with Carbon Nanotubes 
(CNT) because of their promising sensing characteristics. 
However, there are challenges related to their application in 
commercial devices such as sensitivity, compatibility, and 
complexity of miniaturization, among others. In this work, we 
report the study of the electrical behavior of Multi-Walled 
Carbon Nanotubes (MWCNT) material deposited between 
interdigitated 
electrode 
structures 
by 
means 
of 
Dielectrophoresis (DEP), which is a simple and cost-effective 
method for deposition in micrometric regions. A fast and 
remarkable increase of electric resistance (up to 2.3 times) was 
noticed in the tested devices as a function of the concentration 
of water vapor, thus, these devices play an important and 
promising role for the development of integrated humidity 
sensors. 
Keywords: Carbon Nanotubes, Dielectrophoretic Deposition, 
Humidity Sensors. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Nanomaterials have been drawing a lot of attention from 
scientific community to their potential applications in several 
areas. Many efforts are focused on obtaining nanomaterials 
in large scale, or on the analysis of their physical and 
chemical properties, as well as their application in the 
technological area. Because of their interesting properties, 
they have stimulated the development of new gas sensors 
[1]. 
Among the various kinds of nanomaterials for humidity 
and gas sensing applications, Carbon Nanotubes (CNT) are 
interesting alternatives due to their remarkable characteristics 
such as high specific area, good electric conductivity, high 
mechanical and chemical stability [2]. In addition, their 
capability to change electrical characteristics at room 
temperature in contact with low concentration gases has been 
published in several works [3] [4]. Moreover, a lot of 
research has been focused on answering open questions 
about electrical conduction and sensing mechanisms of CNT 
[5] [6]. 
CNT can be divided essentially into two categories: 
Single-Walled (SWCNT) and Multi-Walled (MWCNT) 
carbon nanotubes. Although SWCNT present advantageous 
characteristics for electrical devices and gas sensors 
development due to their purity, experimentally MWCNT 
have been more attractive because they can be produced in 
large industrial scale, reducing the production cost in 
comparison with SWCNT. Various methods have been 
developed for integration or deposition of CNT over the 
surface of devices [7]-[9]. In particular, Dielectrophoresis 
(DEP) is a simple, versatile and cost-effective method to 
deposit and to align CNT on pre-fabricated electrodes 
immersed in solutions without post-processing procedures. 
Another advantage of DEP is its compatibility with existing 
microfabrication capabilities, because this process is 
conducted at room temperature, in noncorrosive solutions, 
and at low voltage. The Dielectrophoretic Force (FDEP) arises 
when an external non-uniform electric field is applied 
between electrodes immersed in a CNT solution, inducing 
dipole moment in the nanotubes. The polarized CNT will 
suffer the action of the FDEP, promoting their motion toward 
regions of higher electric field gradient, aligning them in 
parallel with the electric field lines when their permittivity 
(εp) exceeds the permittivity of the suspending medium (εm), 
otherwise they will be repelled. The CNT deposition by DEP 
method depends on other parameters such as amplitude, 
frequency, total time of the external applied voltage, CNT 
morphology, electrode geometries, and solution properties 
[10]. 
In this work, we investigate the electrical response of 
CNT deposited by DEP on interdigitated electrodes towards 
the development of integrated humidity gas sensors 
considering that commercial humidity sensors are usually big 
and slow. The search for fast and reliable sensors, integrated 
and compatible with microelectronic circuits is a current 
need. This paper is organized in four sections:  Section I 
presents the advantages of CNT and the DEP process for 
humidity sensors development; Section II details the 
experimental 
procedure 
for 
devices 
fabrication 
and 
characterization; Section III shows and discusses the results 
of 
CNT 
deposition 
by 
DEP 
and 
the 
electrical 
characterization of the sensors in humidity environment; the 
conclusions and perspectives are described in Section IV. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE 
A. Devices Fabrication 
The fabricated devices were based on interdigitated 
electrode geometries [11]. Our devices are composed of two 
interdigitated aluminum (Al) electrodes (A and B), with five 
fingers each, deposited by sputtering over a planar glass 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

substrate. As seen in the inset of Figure 1, each finger is 
composed of triangular geometries to concentrate the electric 
field during the DEP process and, consequently, to obtain 
CNT “bridges” between them. The minimum separation 
distance between electrodes is around 6 µm, and the CNT 
bridges will form parallel resistive elements between 
electrodes along the fingers. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Interdigitated electrodes for CNT deposition. The inset shows 
the minimum distance between electrodes where CNT are deposited to 
form bridges. 
The CNT used in this work were CVD-grown MWCNT 
(catalog n. PD15L520, from Nanolab Inc, USA), which were 
functionalized for DEP according to the protocols described 
in [12]. The CNT solution was applied directly onto the 
samples. The DEP CNT deposition was carried out with the 
setup illustrated in Figure 2, as follows: a sinusoidal signal 
with V = 10 Vpp and f = 2 MHz was applied for 60 minutes in 
the circuit by a function generator. A 1 kΩ shunt resistor was 
included to allow monitoring the DEP current and protecting 
the generator in case of short circuit in the electrochemical 
cell. The oscilloscope monitored the applied voltage and the 
current in the process. 
  
 
Figure 2.  Setup applied for CNT dielectrophoretic deposition. 
 After the deposition process, the samples were rinsed in 
ethanol and left to dry in air. The fabricated devices were 
observed by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) with a 
FEI NOVA NanoSEM 400 microscope. 
B. Electric Characterization 
All the samples were characterized before and after CNT 
deposition inside a controlled environment (from dry N2 to 
N2 saturated with H2O vapor), by using the experimental 
setup illustrated in Figure 3 [13]. The N2 was chosen as 
“background” environment to verify the sensitivity of the 
devices only for water vapor, avoiding the influence of other 
gas species. In this setup, the devices were inserted in a 
small-volume test chamber (300 µL), and the electrical 
measurements were performed with a Semiconductor 
Parameter Analyzer, model HP 4156A. The humidity levels 
into 
the 
chamber 
were 
established 
by 
adjusting 
simultaneously the fluxes of dry N2 and N2 saturated with 
H2O through the needle valves and flowmeters. The 
electromagnetic valve allowed controlling the time intervals 
of dry and wet injections.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Experimental setup for electrical characterization of the devices 
under controlled humidity environments. 
Before the humidity tests, the devices were dried into dry 
N2 for several minutes. The influence of the deposited CNT 
was characterized by measuring the electrical resistance 
between 
the 
interdigitated 
electrode 
fingers. 
These 
characterizations were conducted as follows: first, the 
electrical resistances of the devices were monitored along the 
time by varying the humidity from 0 to 100% in N2 
environment (with steps of dry N2 for 200 s and wet N2 
for 20 s). Second, they were submitted to injection steps of 
saturated wet N2 to evaluate the response repeatability. It is 
important to remark that the devices were also submitted to 
the same electrical characterization procedures before the 
CNT deposition [13], with the aim to stabilize the Al 
electrode surfaces and avoid additional oxidation during the 
tests with CNT.   
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Figure 4 shows DEP deposition aspects obtained on the 
devices. The results indicate the presence of CNT in several 
regions of the devices, but preferentially deposited at the 
apex of triangular geometries where the DEP electric field is 
stronger (Figures 4a and 4b). The applied DEP parameters 
allowed the formation of nanotube “chains” linked to each 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

other; however, an inhomogeneous deposition among the 
electrodes was noticed (Figures 4c and 4d). The hypothesis 
for this inhomogeneity can be related to the nanotubes 
deposited in the beginning of DEP which could generate 
distortions in the applied electric field along the process. 
Then, the more CNT deposition, the more inhomogeneity 
could occur.  
 
      (a) 
(b) 
 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 4.  (a) Interdigitated electrodes after DEP CNT deposition; 
(b, c, d) Detail of CNT bridge between electrodes.  
The devices presented a remarkable sensitivity to detect 
water vapor within a wide range of concentration. As shown 
in Figure 5, the device presented very fast increase and 
decrease of the resistance for humidity and for dry 
environment, respectively.  
 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
60
80
100
120
140
160
Dry N2
Time (s)
Resistance (kΩ)
15%
31%
46%
65%
77%
100%
77%
62%
49%
31%
15%
Humidity (%)
 
Figure 5.  Device resistance along the time for several humidity 
conditions.  
The response and recovery times are about only 3 s, i.e., 
the time necessary to reach 63 % of total resistance variation 
for each humidity level tested. This result indicates that the 
interaction between water vapor and CNT is mainly 
dominated by physiosorption with weak bonds. As it takes 
some time to break these weak bonds, probably due to the 
water molecules trapped into the agglomerated of the CNT, 
the total recovery time was about 90 s. The devices 
recovered their original characteristics, and they did not 
show evidences of changes occurred by permanent oxidation 
or poisoning, thus, there was no need to heat or to expose the 
devices into vacuum environment, as reported in other works 
[14]. The Al oxidation [15] was considered negligible in our 
analysis because the devices were also exposed and 
characterized into oxidant environment before the CNT 
deposition, and no significant changes were noticed. 
The overall electrical response of these devices is the 
result of several CNT resistors in parallel configuration.  
Under dry N2 environment, the resistance measured is related 
mainly to the existence of metal-CNT and CNT-CNT 
interface contact resistances [13]. The increase of this 
resistance in humidity environment occurs because the CNT 
have p-type semiconductor behavior, and its resistivity tends 
to increase due to charge transfer from H2O molecules to 
CNT, thereby depleting the hole density in the CNT 
[16]-[18].  
  The devices showed repeatability of relative resistance 
measurements in the humidity range tested, with a well-
defined trend. The relation between relative resistance R/R0 
and humidity shows no linear behavior (Figure 6), but the 
hysteresis is very low (about 7 %), which allow the devices 
to measure environments with increase or decrease of 
humidity levels with low dispersion. Results depicted in 
Figure 5 and summarized in Figure 6 show a clear 
correspondence between the device resistance and the 
environmental humidity. Naturally, additional careful 
measurements are needed to determine the accuracy and 
precision of the sensor. 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
0,8
1,0
1,2
1,4
1,6
1,8
2,0
2,2
2,4
 
 R/R0
Humidity (%)
 Increase Humidity
 Decrease Humidity
 
Figure 6.  Relative resistance vs humidity for CNT device.  
Figure 7 shows the response of the device for successive 
injections of water saturated N2.  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
60
80
100
120
140
160
 
Time (s)
 R/R0
Resistance (kΩ)
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
 
N2+H2O 
Injections
 
Figure 7.  Electrical response for successive injections of humidity saturated 
N2. Test steps: dry N2 (200 s) and N2 saturated with H2O vapor (20 s).  
One can verify a drift in the response, but it tends to 
stabilize after some injections. Moreover, the electrical 
resistance returns to the initial level because there is no 
sensor poisoning or significant oxidation of the electrodes 
after wet environment exposure, as described before. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Miniaturized CNT resistive sensor devices were 
fabricated by applying DEP deposition. The electrode 
geometries and DEP parameters allowed CNT deposition 
preferentially localized. However, reduced DEP times must 
be experimented to promote CNT deposition only in the 
regions with stronger electric field. Water molecules 
adsorbed on CNT surface increase the electrical resistivity of 
this nanomaterial, and its value is dependent on water vapor 
concentration in the environment Experiments with other 
oxidant environments (including a background with 
synthetic air instead N2) will be carried out aiming to obtain 
the selectivity of the sensors for practical applications. 
Although additional studies must be carried out to improve 
the sensors, they showed fast response, sensitivity even for 
low humidity level, and no evidence of poisoning, which is 
promising for the development of integrated sensors for 
industrial, agricultural and environment control applications. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to acknowledge the Laboratório de 
Sistemas Integráveis – LSI at Escola Politécnica – 
Universidade de São Paulo for the electron microscopy 
facilities, N. Peixoto for the CNT solutions, V. Lobo, and T. 
Uwande for experimental support, CNPq for Scholarship 
(no. 148826/2013-0), and Fapesp for financial support 
(2009/53359-0). 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. P. Colinge et al., “Junctionless nanowire transistor (JNT): 
properties and design guidelines”, Solid-State Electronics, 
vol. 65–66, July 2011, pp.  33–37.  
[2] W. Bai, D. Zhuo, X. Xiao, J. Xie, and J. Lin, “Conductive, 
mechanical, 
and 
chemical 
resistance 
properties 
of 
polyurushiol/multiwalled 
carbon 
nanotube 
composite 
coatings”, Polymer Composites, vol. 33, no. 5, March 2012, 
pp. 711-715. 
[3] H. Liu, H. Ma, W. Zhou, W. Liu, Z. Jie, and X. Li, “Synthesis 
and gas sensing characteristic based on metal oxide 
modification multi wall carbon nanotubes composites”, 
Applied Surface Science, vol. 258, January 2012, pp. 1991-
1994. 
[4] F. Inam, H. Yan, M. J. Reece, and T. Peijs, “Structural and 
chemical stability of multiwall carbon nanotubes in sintered 
ceramic nanocomposite”, Advances in Applied Ceramics, vol. 
109, no.4, April 2010, pp. 240-245. 
[5] O. K. Varghese, P. D. Kichambre, D. Gong, K. G. Ong, E.C. 
Dickey, and C. A. Grimes, “Gas sensing characteristics of 
multi-wall carbon nanotubes”, Sensors and Actuators B, vol. 
81, August 2001, pp. 32-41. 
[6] P. Bondavallia, P. Legagneuxa, and D. Pribat, “Carbon 
nanotubes based transistors as gas sensors: State of the art and 
critical review”, Sensors and Actuators B, vol. 140, May 
2009, pp. 304–318. 
[7] C. Bower, O. Zhou, W. Zhu, D. J. Werder, and S. Jin, 
“Nucleation and growth of carbon nanotubes by microwave 
plasma chemical vapor deposition”, Applied Physics Letters, 
vol. 77, no. 17, October 2000, pp. 2767-2769. 
[8] I. G. Assovskii and G. I. Kozlov, “Synthesis of Single-Walled 
Carbon Nanotubes by the Laser Ablation of Graphite under 
Normal Conditions”, Physical Chemistry, vol. 388, no. 1–3, 
January 2003, pp. 13–17. 
[9] M. Chhowalla et al., “Growth process conditions of vertically 
aligned carbon nanotubes using plasma enhanced chemical 
vapor deposition”, Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 90, no. 10, 
November 2001, pp. 5308-5317. 
[10] A. K. Naieni and A. Nojeh, “Dielectrophoretic deposition of 
carbon nanotubes: The role of ﬁeld frequency and its 
dependence on solution conductivity”, Microelectronic 
Engineering, vol. 114, September 2013, pp. 26-30. 
[11] L. H. D. Skjolding, C. Spegel, A. Ribayrol, J. Emnéus, and L. 
Montelius, 
“Characterisation 
of 
nano-interdigitated 
electrodes”, Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 100, 
no. 5, March 2008, pp. 1-4.  
[12] S. Minnikanti, P. Skeath, and N. Peixoto, “Electrochemical 
characterization of multi-walled carbon nanotubes coated 
electrodes for biological applications”, Carbon, vol. 47, no. 3, 
March 2009, pp. 884-893. 
[13] M. C. Moraes, E. Galeazzo, H. E. M. Peres, M. O. S. Dantas, 
and F. J. Ramirez-Fernandez, “Electrical behavior of devices 
composed 
by 
dielectrophoretically 
deposited 
carbon 
nanotubes for gas sensing applications”. IEEE Proceedings, in 
press. 
[14] W. Kim, A. Javey, O. Vermesh, Q. Wang, Y. Li, and H. Dai, 
“Hysteresis caused by water molecules in carbon nanotube 
field-effect transistors”, Nano Letters, vol. 3, no. 2, 
January 2003, pp. 193-198. 
[15] I. Olefjord and A. Nylund, “Surface analysis of oxidized 
aluminum. 2. Oxidation of aluminum in dry and humid 
atmosphere studied by ESCA, SEM, SAM and EDX”, 
Surface and Interface Analysis, vol. 21, no. 5, May 1994, pp. 
290-297. 
[16] A. Zahab, L. Spina, P. Poncharal, and C. Marlière, “Water-
vapor effect on the electrical conductivity of a single-walled 
carbon nanotube mat”, Physical Review B, vol. 62, no. 15, 
October 2000, pp. 10000-10003 
[17] P. R. Bandaru, “Electrical properties and applications of 
carbon nanotube structures”, Journal of Nanoscience and 
Nanotechnology, vol. 7, January 2007, pp. 1–29 
[18] R. Pati, Y. Zhang, S. K. Nayak, and P. M. Ajayan, “Effect of 
H20 adsorption on electron transport in carbon nanotubes”, 
Applied Physics Letter, vol.81, no.14, September 2002, 
pp. 2638-2640. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

