Surface Acoustic Wave Sensors for Fine Particle Detection
Air Quality Monitoring
Lyes Djoumi
and Virginie Blondeau-Patissier
and Meddy Vanotti
D´epartement Temps-Fr´equence
FEMTO-ST
Besanc¸on, France
e-mail: lyes.djoumi@femto-st.fr
e-mail: virginie.blondeau@femto-st.fr
e-mail: meddy.vanotti@femto-st.fr
Etienne Quivet
and Daphne Buiron
Laboratoire de Chimie de l’Environement
Universit´e Aix-Marseille
Marseille, France
e-mail: etienne.quivet@univ-amu.fr
e-mail: daphne.buiron@univ-amu.fr
Abstract—Surface acoustic wave (SAW) sensors consisting of
delay lines built on Quartz are used for ﬁne particle detection.
Sensors based on either Rayleigh or Love waves using different
guiding layers such as silica and resin were tested. A comparison
of these different sensors capabilities has been achieved. Our SAW
sensors proved to be able to detect PM10 and PM2.5 particles
in the 0 − 100 µg/m3 concentration range. The inﬂuence of the
guiding layer thickness on the Love wave sensors sensitivity was
also investigated.
Keywords–SAW sensors; Love wave; ﬁne particles; air quality.
I.
INTRODUCTION
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), air
pollution is responsible for approximately two million prema-
ture deaths per year. Therefore, it is of great importance to
be able to precisely measure particle concentration in the air
so that proper actions could be taken in order to reduce it.
Particles smaller than 10 microns and 2.5 microns in diameter,
respectively PM10 and PM2.5, are a major cause of health
issues since they are likely to deeply penetrate the human
lungs. Instruments currently used to measure micro particle
concentration are both large and expensive. Using micro-
acoustic devices for that purpose offers many possibilities in
terms of cost and size. They also tend to be very sensitive as
they are used for gas detection applications [1], [2]. They could
also be potentially wireless [3]. The SAW sensors designed for
this work are based on delay lines built on quartz (AT cut).
They consist of 200 nm thick aluminum interdigited electrodes
(IDTs), (cf Figure 1). The wavelength is λ = 40 µm. Since
c = f.λ, the resulted frequency for Rayleigh type waves
is f = 78.5 MHz as the wave velocity is approximately
c = 3100 m.s−1. On the other hand, the Love wave, which
is faster c = 5000 m.s−1, operates at higher frequency
f = 125 MHz.
In this paper, the experiment setup in which the SAW
sensors were tested is ﬁrst described in section II. In section
III, the results of these different experiements are reported and
discussed before ﬁnishing with a short conclusion and a brief
perspective on our ongoing works.
Figure 1. Surface Acoustic Wave sensor
II.
EXPERIMENTS
SAW sensors were exposed to PM2.5 particles within a
VCE1000 room in which particles concentration is monitored
using an Optical Particle Counter (Grimm OPC). PM10 and
PM2.5 micro particles are generated from a burning candle.
Particle concentration, which varies in the 0 − 100 µg/m3
range, is measured simultaneously by the OPC. The particles
adsorbed on the sensitive zone induce a gravimetric effect that
slows the acoustic wave down. The wave velocity decrease
results in a phase shift at a constant frequency (125 MHz for
Love waves and 78.5 MHz for Rayleigh waves). This phases
shift is continuously monitored using dedicated electronics [4]
. It is then compared with the particle concentration in the
room measured with the OPC. The particles are injected the
ﬁrst time resulting in an increase of the concentration; the
injection is stopped when the concentration reaches approxi-
mately 100 µg/m3. As soon as the injection is stopped, particle
concentration drops down. The cycle is repeated a second time
during the experiment.
III.
RESULTS
A. Love Wave Devices
Love waves are horizontally polarized surface waves. For
the Love wave to appear, it requires a guiding layer that has a
lower acoustic velocity than that of the quartz substrate. Love
wave based sensors using different guiding layers were tested
in this work.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

1) Resin guiding layer: As shown in Figure 2, sensors
using 1.8 µm thick photosensitive resin as a guiding layer re-
sponded by a phase decrease as soon as the particle concentra-
tion increased. The phase decrease is due to particle adsorption
onto the sensor’s surface. Conversely, the particles desorbed
from the surface when particle concentration dropped down
inducing the phase to increase. These sensors demonstrated a
quick response and a sensitivity of 11.5 m◦.µg−1.m3.
Figure 2. Phase response (green curve) with particle concentration variation
(red curve) for a Love wave sensor with a photo-resistive resin guiding layer.
2) Silica guiding Layer: As it is shown in Figure 3, sensors
using silica as a guiding layer also showed a quick response
and exhibited a much higher sensitivity compared to the
resin based sensors. It was approximately 50.9 m◦.µg−1.m3.
Different silica layer thicknesses from 700 nm to 1.8 µm
presented a similar behaviour.
Figure 3. Phase response (green curve) with particle concentration variation
(red curve) for a Love wave sensor with a 1.8 µm silica guiding layer.
B. Rayleigh Wave Devices
In constrast to Love wave based sensors, Figure 4 shows
that Rayleigh wave sensors did not respond at all to the
particles. Indeed, the phase was almost constant during the two
particle injection cycles. This type of devices should therefore
not be used for this type of applications.
Figure 4. Phase response (green curve) with particle concentration variation
(red curve) for a Rayleigh wave sensor.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this work, we demonstrated the potential of using
surface acoustic wave sensors for ﬁne particle detection in
the 0 − 100 µg/m3 concentration range. In particular, Love
wave based sensors proved to be very sensitive and quick
to respond. However, this type of devices are not able to
distinguish particles by size. In particular PM10 and PM2.5
particles, which represent the biggest threat to health, would
induce the same response at equal mass. The SAW sensors
therefore require the use of a ﬁltering system beforehand.
The design of a such ﬁltering system and integrating it with
the SAW sensors is the focus of our current research work.
An operating prototype has been ﬁnalized and will soon be
published.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partly supported by the french RENATECH
network and its FEMTO-ST technological facility.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Vanotti, V. Blondeau-Patissier, D. Rabus, J.-Y. Rauch, J.-M. Barbe,
and S. Ballandras, “Development of acoustic devices functionalized
with cobalt corroles or metalloporphyrines for the detection of carbon
monoxide at low concentration,” Sensors & Transducers, vol. 14, no. 1,
2012, p. 197.
[2]
M. Vanotti, V. Blondeau-Patissier, D. Rabus, J.-Y. Rauch, and S. Bal-
landras, “Selective Detection of Hydrogen with Surface Acoustic Wave
Devices Using Palladium Layer Properties,” Sensors & Transducers,
vol. 18, no. 1, 2013, p. 84.
[3]
J.-M. Friedt, C. Droit, S. Ballandras, S. Alzuaga, G. Martin, and P. San-
doz, “Remote vibration measurement: A wireless passive surface acoustic
wave resonator fast probing strategy,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments,
vol. 83, no. 5, 2012, p. 055001.
[4]
D.
Rabus,
J.
Friedt,
S.
Ballandras,
G.
Martin,
E.
Carry,
and
V. Blondeau-Patissier, “High-sensitivity open-loop electronics for gravi-
metric acoustic-wave-based sensors,” Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and
Frequency Control, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 60, no. 6, 2013, pp. 1219–
1226.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

