Evaluation of Torque and Axial Loading Physics for Atmospheric Icing Sensors
Umair N. Mughal and Muhammad S. Virk
Atmospheric Icing Research Team
Narvik University College,
Narvik, Norway
Email: unm@hin.no
Abstract—Measuring icing load and icing rate are important
parameters for an atmospheric icing sensor. A new icing sensor
has recently been designed and developed at Narvik University
College for measuring atmospheric icing rate, icing load and icing
type. Unlike the existing atmospheric icing sensors commercially
available in market, which uses the axial loading for measuring
icing load and icing rate, this new sensory system measures icing
load and icing rate using the torque loading physics. The per-
formance of this new icing sensor has been tested and validated
at cryospheric environment simulator Japan. This research work
focus upon the lab based experimentation and evaluation of axial
loading and torque loading sensory physics during an icing event.
Results show a signiﬁcant performance difference between torque
and axial loading physics for atmospheric icing sensors.
Keywords–Atmospheric Icing Sensor; Icing Load; Icing Rate;
Axial Loading; Torque Loading
I.
INTRODUCTION
A. Atmospheric Ice
Atmospheric icing primarily occurs due to the accretion of
ice on structures or objects under certain conditions. Gener-
ally an icing event is deﬁned as periods of time where the
temperature is below 0◦[C] and the relative humidity is above
95%. Ice accretion can be deﬁned as, any process of ice build
up and snow accretion on the surface of objects exposed to
the atmosphere [4]. Liquid below 0◦[C] is called supercooled
liquid, which creates atmospheric icing. This accretion can
take place either due to freezing precipitation or freezing fog.
It is primarily freezing fog that causes this accumulation,
which occurs mainly on mountaintops, which is particularly
dominant in Norway [1]. It depends mainly on the shape
of the object, wind speed, temperature, liquid water content
(amount of liquid water in a given volume of air) and droplet
size distribution (conventionally known as the median volume
diameter). Sometimes ice crystals have a thin coating of water
even at temperatures well below freezing, which form clouds.
These ice crystals join together to form ﬂakes and reach
ground as snow via air passage with temperature less than
zero [5]. Snow crystal forms when tiny supercooled cloud
droplets (about 10[µm] in diameter) freeze. However, if the
outer coating of water freezes of the combined ice crystals
during its path via a air passage with temperature less than
zero then they form snow pellets, which are sometimes called
as graupel. Also, if there is a hot layer of air just below the
cold layer of air then they reach ground assleet. Sometimes
these small droplets with water coating are not successful in
combining with other droplets and they get affected by the
surrounding air currents but eventually they fall on the surface,
they are called drizzle, which is different than fog as it doesn’t
fall. Drizzle drops are of 0.5[mm] but drops larger than this are
raindrops. Hail is another form of ice. Ice crystals when drop
towards the surface they are sometimes passed through very
moist air passage due to which they are coated with liquid
water, which by strong wind is moved upward where water
freezes and then then they move down and get covered by
liquid water and then moves up to become solid. This process
is continued and then it becomes to fall. Cloud formation is
motivated by a seed or crystalline skeleton on which very tiny,
supercooled water droplets can freeze to form snowﬂakes or
soft ice (graupel). Naturally, these seeds are random particles
of soil, dust, sand, and salt. Artiﬁcially they are of two types
glaciogenic (ice forming e.g., silver iodide or dry ice crystal)
or hygroscopic (water attracting e.g., small salt particles as
potassium chloride) [8].
B. Applications of Atmospheric Icing Sensors
Atmospheric icing is a natural phenomenon, which cannot
be avoided in Cold Regions. However, it deﬁnitely has some
physical loading characteristics on human activities and their
associated inventories. On the basis of its loading aspects we
can distinguish the effects of atmospheric ice on three classes
[8], which are
a Static Loads: Atmospheric ice, particularly (rime and glaze)
is when deposited on some static structure, it increases
its mechanical weights. Hence it constrains, the design
characteristics (particularly factor of safety) of any civil or
mechanical structure to be developed in Cold Regions.
b Dynamic Loads: This atmospheric ice, when deposited on
the dynamic structures e.g., free dynamic structure as like
power cables and motorized dynamic structures as like
wind turbines or automobile or ships/boats create additional
dynamic loads on these surfaces, which need to be overcome
by either anti/de icing techniques in case of free dynamic
structures or through increasing the power delivered to such
systems.
c Wind Action on iced structure: It is expected that if the struc-
ture is iced, its effective geometry will be altered, which in
turn reduces the aerodynamic efﬁciency of structures. This
additional drag cannot be completely controlled, however
efﬁcient anti/de icing techniques through a good feedback
from atmospheric icing sensor may reduce the losses.
Atmospheric ice can be a big problem for different in-
dustries working in Cold Regions. The potential affected
stakeholders can be [8],
i Wind Turbine Industry: One can improve the efﬁciency of
Wind Turbines by installing an atmospheric icing sensory
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

network, which should control turbine pitch by providing
feedback to ﬁlter out the atmospheric icing loading and
rate errors
ii Oil and Gas Industry due their Onshore and Offshore
Installations: These sensors can be utilized in the big
installations of oil and gas platforms in Arctic Region.
The output from these sensors can be a good feedback
for active monitoring of atmospheric icing activities and
its remedies through a good anti/de icing system
iii Automobiles Industry: In Automotive industry these sen-
sors are required to be installed in order to sense the real
time atmospheric icing activity on the road surfaces. These
sensors can be interconnected with the Road Services via
GPS so that accelerated responses for road maintenance
can be conducted.
iv Power Industry due to the ice on the long power networks:
On power networks, one cannot completely calculate the
icing load (which can be very critical). This load if it
remains on the power line can be less dangerous than
if it suddenly falls its reaction can damage the system.
However, active monitoring of icing rate and icing load
may reduce this problem if it is connected with some semi
active dampers (e.g., magnetorheological damper) mounted
on the power cable connections on the pole.
This paper is divided in ﬁve sections. In section II, it
is aimed to discuss the atmospheric icing load measurement
techniques through International Standards/Recommendations
and some details about the commercially available atmospheric
icing load sensors along with their necessary physics. Section
III deals with the torque loading basics and the need to
utilize this technique for measuring atmospheric icing load
and rate. Section IV starts with an introduction of Cryospheric
Environmental Simulator and leads towards performing series
of experiments to validate the usefulness of torque loading
over axial loading. The concluding section V is divided into
smaller parts to comment on various aspects of experimental
results.
II.
ATMOSPHERIC ICING LOAD MEASUREMENT
To design a new atmospheric icing sensor, in order to
measure icing load and icing rate, it is important to understand
the existing atmospheric icing rate and icing load sensors.
Power requirements for the removal of snow and ice is different
hence to distinguish between snow and ice can be considered
to be a limiting factor for de-icing system, because most
devices for the removal of snow are normally ineffective for
the efﬁcient removal of ice or hard packed snow [3]. It is
therefore important to distinguish between different types of
atmospheric ice. Presently as found, there are commercially
available atmospheric icing load sensors, which are only based
upon axial loading physics e.g., Ice Load Monitor and Ice
Meter [2]. As recommended in international standard ISO
12494 [7], a standard way of measuring ice accretion is to
measure the load of atmospheric ice on a steel rod that is
0.5[m] high (1[m] if heavy icing is expected) and has the
diameter of 30[mm]. The rod must be freely rotating or forced
to rotate at a constant speed. When ice accumulates on the
steel rod, aerodynamic drag will cause it to rotate in the case
of free rotating icing load monitor, always facing the least
amount of the iced part towards the wind. This doubling of
length of the steel rod due to heavy icing is primarily aimed
to uniform the drag distribution along its proﬁle. By measuring
the weight of the iced steel rod with the help of load cells, the
amount of ice that has accreted can be determined. Two ice
sensors (ice monitor & ice meter) have been developed on
the basis of this technique. The following sections describes
these two sensors. However, till date none of the atmospheric
icing sensor is utilizing torque loading physics, which is also
recommended in ISO 12494 [7].
A. The Ice Monitor
The Ice Monitor measures the mass of accumulated ice
gravimetrically. The working element is a freely rotating steel
pipe resting on a rod placed on a load cell. As ice accumulates
on the freely rotating steel pipe, the ice load is weighed by
the load cell, see Figure 1. The Ice Monitor is manufactured
by SAAB Technologies and was initially developed for power
line surveillance systems. It can measure the rate because the
readings from the load cell are recorded with time. The Ice-
Monitor is not able to detect ice over a wide area and cannot
distinguish between the two types of in-cloud icing.
Figure 1. Ice Load Monitor [13]
B. Ice Meter
The ice meter was developed by the Institute of Atmo-
spheric Physics, Prague, Czech Republic. It measures the mass
of icing accumulated on the surface of the collector. It has a
horizontal rod, which is coupled with a cylindrical collector to
the tensometric. The cylinder is orientated vertically in order
to eliminate the detection of wet snow as much as possible but
the orientation of this cylinder can be changed to horizontal, if
required, see Figure 2. In this sensor, the mass of accumulated
ice is measured by means of a tensometric bridge (strain gauge
load sensor) the output of which is tied to the precise AD con-
verter. The digital signal is preprocessed by a micro-controller,
which assigns the time and stores the data into the device
memory. In order to prevent the freezing of the horizontal
rod, which couples the cylindrical collector to the tensometric,
which is located together with the electronics in the housing.
The passage through the housing may be heated depending
on the passage temperature. A test electromechanical impulse
is applied each hour to verify the free force transition to the
tensometric, and thus to check whether the acquired data are
reliable or not [6].
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure 2. Ice Meter [6]
C. Study of the Physics of Axial Load Based Ice Sensing
Methodology
The load is normally described by the way they are applied.
If the line of action of the loads is applied parallel to the
surface they are called shear loads and when they are applied
perpendicular to the surface they are called axial loads, see
Figure 3. Although there are many techniques to measure these
loads but the most common are associated with piezoelectric
sensor and strain gauge sensing elements.
Figure 3. Axial and Shear Load (a). Typical clevis joint, (b). FBD of bolt,
(c). FBD of section mnqp, (d). Shear Force on Section mn
D. Piezoelectric Sensing
This sensing technique works by converting the force
or strain by converting it into electric charge. Its primary
application is in the vibration industry, however it can also
be used for load sensing. Piezoelectricity is a property, which
is possessed by some materials, which is activated when are
acted by some force. Piezoelectric materials have a recoverable
strain of 0.1 % under electric ﬁeld; they can be used as sensors.
They may be polymers (e.g., polyvinylidene ﬂuoride PV DF)
or ceramic materials (e.g., Lead Zirconate Titanate PZT).
If you apply a static force to a piezoelectric force sensor,
then the charge output generated initially will leak away and
the output of the sensor will ultimately return to zero. This
discharging rate of the charge is exponential and is based on
the sensor’s discharge time constant, DTC. Mathematically
the charge characteristics can be described as [9],
Qx = dxyFy b
a
qx = Qxe−
t
RC
(1)
where Qx is the amount of charge stored in the piezoelec-
tric material due to the orthogonal force Fy, a and b are the
characteristic dimensions of the sensor parallel and orthogonal
to the Fy respectively, dxy is the characteristic piezoelectric
coefﬁcient (or calibration coefﬁcient of the material), q is the
instantaneous charge, R resistance prior to ampliﬁed and C is
the total capacitance prior to ampliﬁer.
Figure 4. Piezoelectric Sensing [9]
E. Strain Gage Sensors
This technique is more suitable for precise measurement
of static loads or a quasi dynamic loads. Within the elastic
limits of the material, when a stress is applied to an electric
conducting material its electrical conductance Rx changes due
to the change in its geometry. This change in conductance is
then further measured using a wheatstone bridge (special com-
bination of resistors), which is then further used to measure the
load. The resistance change in the wheatstone bridge delivers
a voltage, which deliver the strain and hence the force. This
special combination of wheatstone bridge is shown in Figure
5b.
qx = Qxe−
t
RC
R2
R1 = Rx
R3
Rx = R2
R1 Rx
VG =

Rx
R3+Rx −
R2
R1+R2

Vs
(2)
This concept has been utilized in the Ice Load Moniter
Sensor by SAAB Technologies, see Sec. II-A.
F. Problems with existing Ice Load and Icing Rate Measure-
ment Systems
1) Measurements in Czech Republic [7]: The icemeter has
been operated on the Milesovka peak from 2000. Although
icemeters installed in the site measured correctly most of
the time, but there were also some time periods when the
instruments gave obviously wrong negative values. These times
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

(a) Strain Guage [10]
(b) Wheatstone Bridge [11]
Figure 5. Strain Guage Sensing
can usually be associated with the periods when the horizontal
rod coupling the tensometric with the vertical collector became
icebound to the instrument housing. Thus there was no free
force transition, which can be identiﬁed by not observing
a proper electromechanical pulse in the data. The following
changes are expected to be made in icemeter for its better
performance,
i Possibility to build an instrument with a rotating collector.
ii More focus on the sensors that measure accumulated icing.
III.
TORQUE MEASUREMENTS
An analytical expression between mass moment of inertia
and the supplied current (3) was developed (for more see
Mughal et. al. [14]),
J = aIin − b
(3)
where a = αVin/βγω3
m and b = η/βγω3
m will be constant.
The (3) relation was further modiﬁed to take the form (4) in
order to compare the results of this new sensor with a standard
ice load sensor.
δmice = AδIin(ice) + B
(4)
Where A =
a
R2
ice and B = aIin−J−b
R2
ice
. The (4) relation is
named as MuVi Current-Mass (δI − δm) Relation.
A. Requirement of Torque Loading
As it is understood from [7] that presently their is no
atmospheric icing sensor in the commercial market that can
measure the icing load, which is uniformly distributed along
the sensory surface. All the commercially available sensors
(e.g., Ice Load Monitor), measure the non uniform loading on
a freely rotating surface, however it is recommended in [7] that
a rotary sensory system will be more suitable. A new sensor
have been developed by the authors to measure icing load and
icing rate. This sensor is based upon the rotary dynamics where
the collector rotates at a constant speed in order to allow ice
to uniformaly distribute around the rotary collector.
IV.
CRYOSPHERIC ENVIRONMENT SIMULATOR CES,
SHINJO JAPAN
Cryospheric Environmental Simulator is an experimenta-
tion facility of NIED at Shinjo, Japan. They provide the
capacity to perform basic and applied studies related with snow
and ice disasters using a snow fall machine and icing wind
tunnel. For this experimentation to evaluate the performance
of this new sensor, Cryospheric Environmental Simulator CES
was the most suitable choice, which had the facility to test
this sensor both in Icing Wind Tunnel and Snow Simulator.
The facilities and speciﬁcations of CES are provided in Table
I, which are taken from [12],
TABLE I. FACILITIES AND CONTROLLABLE PARAMETERS IN COLD ROOM
AT CES, NIED JAPAN
Facilities
Speciﬁcations
Variables
Limitations
Comments
General Conditions in the Cold Room
Temperature
−30◦ →
+25◦
−
Snowfall Machine A
Snowfall
Intensity
0 −
1[mm/h]
water
equivalent
Crystal
Type
Dendrities
0.5 →
5[mm]
Area
3 × 5[m]
−
Snowfall Machine B
Snowfall
Intensity
0 −
5[mm/h]
water
equivalent
Crystal
Type
Sphere
Diameter
0.025[mm]
Area
3 × 5[m]
−
Rainfall Machine
Rainfall
Intensity
0 −
2[mm/h]
−
Area
3 × 5[m]
−
Solar Simulator
Solar
Radiation
0 −
1000[W/m2]
−
Area
3 × 5[m]
−
Experiment Table
Size
3 × 5[m]
−
Inclination
0 → 45◦
−
Wind Tunnel
Wind
Speed
0 →
10[m/s]
−
A. Calibration of Ice Load Monitor and new atmospheric
Icing Sensor
1) Ice Load Monitor: It is found that this standard sensor
have never been tested in any standard icing tunnel or snow
simulator as like Cryospheric Environmental Simulator and if
it is tested then it is not published/reported (the details of CES
Simulator will be discussed in Sec IV). The Ice Load Monitor
deliver a current output as a measure of icing load. This sensor
was calibrated at Narvik University College and the calibration
equation is given by (5). For more details on this calibration,
see Mughal and Virk [15].
I = 0.0017δδmILMcal + 4.435
(5)
2) New Atmospheric Icing Sensor: This was calibrated
using standard rotary masses on the sensor shaft and measuring
the output current as a measure of mass moment of inertia. The
electronic setup for calibration can be seen in Figure 6c. The
calibration equations thus obtained is given by (6) (for more
details on this, see Mughal et. al. [14]),
I = 2.91 × 10−7JMuV ical + 328.64
(6)
Where J is in

gm mm2
and Imeasured is in [mA].
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

(a) Experimental Table - Top View
(b) Experimental Table - Side View
(c) Electronic Setup
Figure 6. Experimental and Electronic Setup, CES Japan [15]
B. Experiment performed at CES, Japan
The experiment was performed in Icing Wind Tunnel using
three different sensors, arranged on the sensory table as can
be seen in Figure 7a where Sensor 1 is the rotary sensor
with complete electronics of this new sensor, Sensor 2 is the
additional sensor, which is just a geometric shape to understand
the deposition of atmospheric ice in order to optimize the non
rotary parts parts of new sensor. The experimental conditions
during the experiment can be seen in Table II, which is
followed by Figure 7b reﬂecting the measurement setup under
the experimental table. The graphical results of this experiment
are shown in Figure 8 [8].
TABLE II. EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS FOR EXPERIMENT 1
Before Experiment
Condition/Variables
Speciﬁcations
Date of Experiment
17/02/2014
Experiment Number
1
Experimental Facility
CES Icing Wind Tunnel
Sensor 1
Rotating hexagon with plates
Sensor 2
Non rotating cylinder
Sensor 3
Freely rotating Ice Load Monitor
Tunnel Temperature
−15◦
Time of Experiment
170[min]
Wind Speed for ﬁrst 60[min]
6[m/s]
Wind Speed for next 110[min]
10[m/s]
Mass of Sensor 1 (without ice)
8936[gm]
Mass of Sensor 2 (without ice)
591[gm]
Mass of Sensor 3 (without ice)
0[gm]
After Experiment
Mass of Sensor 1
9735[gm]
Mass of Sensor 2
866[gm]
Mass of Sensor 3
480[gm]
(a) Sensors Arrangement in Icing Tunnel - Front View
(b) Sensors Arrangement in Icing Tunnel - Side View
Figure 7. Experimental Setup in Icing Tunnel
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The icing rate on this new sensor can be determined using
the relation (7) whereas the icing rate on Ice Load Monitor can
be determined using the relation (8). The associated curves for
these equation are shown in Figure 8a, which clearly reﬂect
that this new sensor, have more capability of holding uniform
distribution of atmospheric ice then a freely rotating Ice Load
Monitor. Also, the manufacturers of Ice Load Monitor claim
that after 40[gm] their sensor will be able to predict icing
load and icing rate and as found by experiments this 40[gm]
on ice load monitor is collected in around 30[min] whereas
the same 40[gm] of mass on new sensor is collected in ﬁrst
5[min] and that too uniformly. This uniform distribution is
very important for additional mass moment of inertia on the
sensor to deliver additional current as a measurable quantity.
The calibrated relation between mass moment of inertia and
current loading is given by (6) whereas the experimental mass
moment of inertia and current loading equation is given as (9)
and graphical results are shown in Figure 8b. The experimental
section was bounded by walls (in icing wind tunnel), and
it may be one of the possible reason of deviation between
calibrated and experimental I − JRelation but nevertheless
this can be adjusted through proper calibration. The additional
mass and additional current calibrated equation of Ice Load
Monitor is given by (5) and the experimental relation is
given by (10) and the results are shown in Figure 8c. These
results of Ice Load Monitor shows that for a mass range of
0 → 500[gm] the current variation is around 4.5 → 5.3[mA]
ideally and 5 → 6.8[mA] experimentally, which have more
potential of noise interference. The mass current relation of
this new sensor was also determined experimentally and is
given by (11) and the graphical representation can be seen in
Figure 8d. This equation of this new sensor was then compared
with the (10), which clearly reﬂect that this new sensor for a
mass domain of 40 → 800[gm] was having a current range
of 0 → 150[mA], which is quite reasonable to ﬁlter noise
and other calibration errors. The R2 value reﬂect that linear
relations of experimental of this new sensor are 96% whereas
for Ice Load Monitor this value is 88% linear.
δmMuV i = 4.480t + 54.519
(7)
δmILM = 2.716t − 54.725
(8)
I = 2.84 × 10−6JMuV iexp + 349.87
(9)
δI = 0.0031δmILM + 5.259
(10)
δI = 0.1936δmnewsensor − 7.21
(11)
(a) Atmospheric Ice Growth Rate (Mass-Time Curve)
(b) Current Mass Moment of Inertia Curve (I-J Curve) of New Sensor at 6rpm
(c) Current Mass (I-m Curve) of Ice Load Monitor
(d) Additional Current Additional Mass (δI − δm Curve)
Figure 8. Graphical Results of Experiment 1 in Icing Wind Tunnel [15]
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

V.
CONCLUDING DISCUSSIONS
1) RPM Fluctuations: The rotational speed of this sensor
was selected to be 6rpm. It is found that if the rpm was
5 there were current ﬂuctuations in the range of mA during
rotation without any change in load. Also, during experiment
it was found that if the rpm was increased to 8 chances of
non uniform deposition of ice on the sensor, which may lead
to additional errors.
2) Sensitivity: The results of experiment clearly reﬂect that
new sensor provide sufﬁcient deposition of atmospheric ice ice
at an optimized rpm of 6. Also, the current range to measure
icing load and icing rate is quite reasonable to determine the
required parameters. This new sensor is more sensitive than
Ice Load Monitor because if it is said that 40[gm] of mass for
Ice Load Monitor as the starting mass for new sensor than it is
collected within ﬁrst 5 → 10[min] on new sensory unit and it
is more than 30[min] for Ice Load Monitor. The reason of this
mass deposition is due to the rotary physics associated with
new sensor and the surface area of Ice Load Monitor is around
50 × 103[mm2] and new sensor is around 112 × 103[mm2].
3) Saturation: The saturation limit for the motor was
adjusted to be around 1[A]. If the demand in current from the
rotary unit of new sensor exceeds 1[A] than the motor would
stop. The maximum mass for new sensor was tested for a mass
of 800[gm] for a time period of 170[min] and it is found that
new unit have still more potential to hold the ice mass.
4) Performance:
The sensor have been tested in the
Cryospheric Environmental Icing Simulator at a temperature
of −15◦[C] and have performed satisfactory without any error
signal. This sensor have not been tested in the ﬁeld, however it
is aimed to test this sensor in the ﬁeld in the upcoming Winter
2014 − 15. The calibration error may have been associated
with the poor performance of the sensor, however this have
been true if the results of experiment were not linear. The
experimental results show that the new sensor have a good
performance potential than Ice Load Monitor, however Ice
Load Monitor is already in use by industry in the ﬁeld whereas
new sensor still has not yet been commercialized.
5) Error Diagram: The error diagrams from experiment 1
to experiment 4 reﬂect that new sensor have very low error in
the start but it increases linearly due to the deviation between
the experimental slope and calibrated slope of new sensor but
nevertheless it can be improved by adopting proper calibration.
The error is calculated using the following (12),
%Error =

Iexp − Ical
Ical
 × 100.
(12)
The error diagram of Experiment between new sensor and
Ice Load Monitor as calculated by (12) is shown in Figure 9.
The error results shows that the % error range of new sensor
is starts from 0% and increases linearly because experimental
slope of J-I Relation of new sensor (9) is one order higher than
the calibrated slope of (6). The error on Ice Load Monitor is
around 10 − 30%. These all results reﬂect new sensor as a
good solution for measuring Icing and Snow Load Rate if
properly calibrated as it has more potential to deposit ice and
give reasonable reading count, which is required to ﬁlter the
cold climate current errors.
Figure 9. Experiment 1 Percentage Error Diagram
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We acknowledge the research funding from Research
Council of Norway, project no. 195153/160 and partially by
the consortium of the ColdTech RT3 project - Sustainable Cold
Climate Technology.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. C. Homola, “Atmospheric Icing on Wind Turbines”, Doctoral
Theses at NTNU 2011:259, 2011.
[2]
U. N. Mughal and M. S. Virk, “Atmospheric icing sensors - An in-
sight”, The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies
and Applications, ISBN 978-161208-296-7, August 25-31, 2013, pp.
191-199.
[3]
C. D. Kuhumonen, “Ice removing machine”, U.S. Patent 4186967,
1980.
[4]
H. F. Foder, “ISO 12494 - Atmospheric icing on structures and how
to use it”, ISO 12494:2001, ISBN 1-880653-51-6, June 2001.
[5]
S. W. Trimble, “Encyclopedia of Water Science - 2nd Edition”, CRC
Press, ISBN 978-0-8493-0-9627-4, 2008.
[6]
http://www.ufa.cas.cz/html/upperatm/chum/namraza/Icingmeasczech2.pdf,
Last Access date: September 10, 2014.
[7]
S. Fikke, “Cost 727 - Atmospheric icing on structures; measurement
and data collection on icing”, ISSN 1422-1381, MeteoSwiss, 2007.
[8]
U. N. Mughal, “Design and Development of Robust Atmospheric
Icing Sensor”, PhD Thesis submitted at the Department of Physics,
University of Oslo, July 2014.
[9]
http://migyanesfertecno.blogspot.no/2012/01/piezoelectricidad.html,
Last Access date: September 10, 2014.
[10]
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strain gauge, Last Access date: Septem-
ber 10, 2014.
[11]
http://www.allaboutcircuits.com/vol 1/chpt 9/7.html,
Last
Access
date: September 10, 2014.
[12]
http://www.bosai.go.jp/seppyo/jikkentou/jikkentou syoukai e.html,
Last Access date: September 10, 2014.
[13]
http://www.combitech.com/Documents/IceMonitor Produktblad Combitech.pdf,
Last Access date: September 10, 2014.
[14]
U. N. Mughal, M. S. Virk, K. Kosugi, and S. Mochizuki, “Experi-
mental Validation of Icing Load Using Rotary Physics”, Manuscript
submitted in International Journal of Cold Regions Science and
Technology, August 2014.
[15]
U. N. Mughal and M. S. Virk, “Performance Evaluation of MuVi-
Graphene and Ice Load Monitor in icing conditions”, Manuscript
submitted in International Journal of Cold Regions Science and
Technology, August 2014.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

