Thick Film Sensors for Soil Measurements
Gerardo Espindola Garcia, John Atkinson and Joel Smethurst
Faculty of Engineering and Environment
University of Southampton
Southampton, United Kingdom
Email: Gerardo.Espindola@soton.ac.uk, jka@soton.ac.uk, j.a.smethurst@soton.ac.uk
Abstract—Water content has considerable influence on soil
pore water pressure and shear strength, potentially leading to
failure in earthworks. This research aims to develop novel
sensors (employing Thick-Film electrodes) intended to detect
changes in soil parameters such as resistivity, porosity and
water content and determine if these are indicative of
earthworks instability (potential slope failure). Using Thick
Film electrodes to measure parameters could be a cost effective
method for condition monitoring. The resistivity output of the
sensors and how it relates to the soil water content needs to be
understood, and a framework of working conditions for this
sensing technology needs to be documented. In this study, the
behaviour of the Thick Film cell developed by the University of
Southampton was tested for a particular soil particle size by
simulating heavy rainfall and rising of the water table within a
soil column. Final results show a consistent response from
Thick Film cell for the specific soil sample used, however, the
direction
of
infiltration
has
created
a
very
interesting
difference in resistivity readings that need to be further
investigated.
Keywords- thick film; soil resistivity; water content.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Landslides due to heavy rainfall have been a concern in
the UK in recent times, particularly in 2012, when several
incidents caused trains to derail, including Beaminster tunnel
in Dorset, St Bees station in West Cumbria, and the West
Highland line near Tulloch, among others. Not only is the
safety of people a concern but also the cost of disruption to
the rail transport system. As in most developed countries, the
earthworks in the UK supporting the transport system are at
risk due to ageing and a lack of maintenance and renovation
due to the high costs involved [1].
However, predicting landslips has several difficulties.
A significant part of the railway infrastructure dates from the
Victorian
age
(the
mid-nineteenth
century),
and
this
infrastructure does not comply with present design standards.
In the period 1834 to 1841, around 1060km of railways were
built in the UK following nine main lines. Pick and shovel
excavations were used to build most of the soil cuttings and
embankments, with the latter often poorly compacted, and
heterogeneous in composition [2]. Vegetation and climate
can modify the soil water content causing shrink and swell
cycles, which will affect the strength of the soil. Natural
weathering processes also occur and vary with rainfall,
extreme temperatures and biological activity. Additionally,
increases in the speed and weight of railway traffic affect
applied loads and earthworks performance [3].
Railway earthwork failures can have impacts on railway
operations, involving partial or total disruption of the rail
network. Remediation implies significant cost, including the
direct cost of reconstruction, and fines incurred by the track
operator for unexpected line closure or delays to trains.
Therefore, to prevent as much as possible reaching a state
where they may fail and need to be remediated, a more
effective and accurate condition monitoring of assets needs
to be designed and developed, targeting smaller, low-cost
and simpler sensing devices. Condition monitoring should
enable more targeted interventions for earthworks. There is
evidence that proactive maintenance can reduce the total cost
of unplanned repairs considerably, reducing cost by about
60% per metre for London Underground Limited (LUL) [2].
This work tries to relate the water content of the soil with
the soil resistivity/conductivity using printed Thick Film
(TF) sensors, to develop a sensor device to infer changes in
the soil structure due to water cycles using these parameters.
Thick film sensing has been used for other applications such
as water quality and other soil measurements [4]-[6].
The soil water content (θ) is defined as the amount of 
water that is removed when a soil sample is heated at over
100ºC until the maximum weight loss is reached. This
parameter is commonly measured in the environmental field
such as ecology and hydrology including agriculture [7]-
[10], and along with electrical conductivity in many
geotechnical applications [11]-[13].
The Electrical Conductivity (EC) of the soil is defined as
the reciprocal of the soil’s resistivity, which is linked to the
electrical resistance that can be deduced between two
electrodes in a conductive material on application of a
known voltage. There are three possible ways that the current
is able to flow in soils, and these are shown in Figure 1. The
first path is a solid-liquid segment where an exchange of
cations is associated with clay minerals.
Figure 1.
Soil sample cross section with pathways of EC [14].
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The second is related to current flow in the liquids due to
the presence of dissolved particles in the water, and the last
is the flow in solids in direct contact with each other [14]. A
key consideration for the TF sensor electrode arrangement is
the potential heterogeneity of the soil, in terms of particle
sizes and the way they pack around the sensor. A large
spacing between electrodes is desirable to monitor larger and
more representative volume of soil, but this can generate
measurement noise due to the increase of the length of the
electrical
path
between
electrodes
[15].
Soil
resistivity/conductivity has been directly studied and linked
to water content and used for measurement and assessment
of seasonal water cycles on soil slope stability. A recent
study using a clay soil performed by Hen-Jones et al. (2017)
[3] showed an inverse relationship between soil resistivity
and water content in both laboratory and field experiments
which
cycled
water
content
(Figure
2)
[3][16].
The
instrumentation used included the Decagon 5TE sensor
which uses a stainless steel electrode array to measure soil
EC, temperature and water content directly. As the Decagon
5TE sensor requires good contact between the electrodes and
the soil, the electrodes were coated with a layer of Nyogel
756 during the experiments.
The electrical resistivity in soil samples has also been
investigated by McCarter (1984) [16] for compacted clay,
including responses of different degrees of compaction and
saturation. Figure 3a clearly shows that resistivity decreases
quickly at high water contents and the rate of change almost
flattens when water content exceeds 20%. Its reciprocal, the
soil conductivity is shown in Figure 3b, in electrostatic units
σesu (σesu=1/ρ·9x109).
The electrical conductivity of the soil (σ) is defined as 
the reciprocal of the soil’s resistivity (ρ) which is linked to 
the electrical resistance (R) given by the equation:
Resistance (R) = V/I
(1)
The voltage (V) can be measured across a pair of
electrodes by manipulation of the current, namely a drive
current (I); this resistance generally is a function of the
geometry of the electrodes (Cell), which includes the cross-
sectional area (A) (of the electrical conductivity electrodes)
and length (L) between the electrodes (of the material being
measured).
Figure 2.
Water content - resistivity relationships [3]
With these known parameters a cell constant can be
calculated by the following relationship:
Cell Constant (K) = A/L
(2)
Thus, the resistivity is expressed as follows:
ρ=R ∙ K  
(3)
Conductivity is expressed as follows:
σ=1/(R ∙ K) 
(4)
The apparatus, characteristics of the soil sample, TF cell
parameters and the methodology used are described in
Section
2. Table 1
lists
the
three
different
sets
of
experiments that were conducted. The results of each set of
experiments
are
discussed
in
Section
3,
including
preliminary Tests used to obtain the initial set up. Finally,
Section 4 gives some remarks and future work to follow
given the results obtained.
II.
METHODS
The general aim of the set of experiments included in this
paper is to characterise the response of the Thick Film cell
when used to determine the resistivity of a soil sample
subjected to a simulation of seasonal wetting processes. The
TF cell output voltage is used to calculate resistivity and
conductivity of the soil sample over consecutive cycles of
wetting and drying.
TABLE I.
EXPERIMENT DATASETS DESCRIPTION
Name
Experiment Description
Drive
Current
Filling
Direction
Draining
Direction
Preliminary 1 - 500
500 µA
Top → Bottom
Top → Bottom
Preliminary 2 - 250
250 µA
Top → Bottom
Top → Bottom
Test 1- Orientation
250 µA
Top → Bottom
Top → Bottom
Test 2- Location a
250 µA
Top → Bottom
Top → Bottom
Test 2- Location b
150 µA
Top → Bottom
Top → Bottom
Test 3- Wetting
150 µA
Bottom →Top
Top → Bottom
Figure 3.
Variation in soil resistivity (a) and soil conductivity (b) with
water content [16].
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

A.
Apparatus
In order to achieve this goal, a series of laboratory
experiments were conducted, using a column of 1.0m height
and 0.255m diameter, with a geotextile and gravel filter
layer at the base to avoid clogging of the drainage pipe.
Following
in
part
the
methodology
described
by
Sophocleous & Atkinson (2015) [15], the soil column was
used to bury the Thick Film (TF) cell at the same depth as a
soil water content probe (a Delta-T Devices ML2x Theta
probe), at 0.20m above the geotextile filter in the bottom of
the column. A schematic representation of this apparatus is
shown in Figure 4. The GP1 Data Logger by Delta-T
Devices™ was used as an instrumentation interface.
For all the laboratory experiments, the soil samples were
subjected to complete cycles of water variation consisting of
wetting (imbibition) phase followed by a draining phase.
Measurements of water content and TF cell output voltage
were recorded simultaneously, and full cycles are plotted and
analysed.
One full cycle started when water was poured directly
into the top of the column, and wetting continued until the
Theta probe reached maximum water content and a column
of water of 0.15m height had formed above the soil sample.
The draining phase was continued for 24 hours after the bulk
of the water in the column had drained out. Some water
continued to drain until the water content reached about 10%
after the first 4 ~ 6 hours. An average of 36% was recorded
as maximum water content, with minimum values of the
water content of 10-12%, as the soil retained some pore
water that was not able to drain under gravity.
B.
Sample particle size
The pluviation tube method was used to fill the column
using fraction D of Leighton Buzzard quartz sand. This sand
has particle sizes ranging from 150µm to 300µm. However,
it was observed that after several consecutive cycles of
wetting and drying the sand reorganised its particle size
distribution, moving smaller particles to the bottom of the
column. Therefore a particle size distribution test was made
at the end of each set of experiments to determine sizes
around the location of the sensors. The column was re-built
after each test listed in Table 1.
C.
Thick Film cell and drive current
The TF cell (Figure 5) used for the experiments
compensates
some
of
the
drawbacks
of
an
earlier
conductivity sensor design used for soil monitoring by using
the principle of ratio-metric symmetry (a balance between
spacing and cross-sectional area) in the configuration of the
electrodes [15]. The TF cell configuration is shown in
Figure 5a. The screen printed electrodes are of gold isolated
by a waterproofing layer, with two sets of electrodes placed
parallel to one another using a custom 3D printed structure
(Figure 5b). The structure allows space for the sample
material to be inserted between the sets of electrodes.
Figure 4.
Schematic of apparatus used for experiments.
Figure 5.
(a) TF Cell configuration [15] (b) TF cell 3D printed structure
for the TF electrodes.
Each set is composed of 3 electrodes, where the outer
electrodes are driving the current, and the potential of the
cell is measured through the inner electrode on each set. The
TF cell is interfaced by a low power electrical circuit
designed to generate a voltage for conductivity, and the data
logger easily reads this conductivity as a function of output
voltage. This interface circuit allows the AC drive current
amplitude to be varied up to 10mA.
D.
Experiments carried out
For Test 1 and Test 2a, the drive current used to
configure the Thick film cell was 250µA, while for Test 2b
and 3 it was changed to 150µA, as this was found to be the
lowest value giving a stable reading of the TF cell.
For Test 1, 2a and 2b the column was filled at the top of
the apparatus allowing the water to drain at the bottom.
Only in Test 3, the water was pumped upwards from the
bottom, followed by draining at the base as in the rest of the
tests (see Table 1).
For Test 1, the orientation of the Theta probe was
changed to vertical. For the rest of the experiments, the
Theta probe was restored to the original horizontal position.
Both sensors, Theta probe and TF cell were physically
closer together for Tests 2a, 2b and 3 than for the
preliminary tests and Test1, which helped to give more
consistent readings.
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

III.
RESULTS
All water content values presented refer to volumetric
water content, which corresponds to the parameter that is
commonly used in literature and is therefore applicable for
comparison
purposes.
Preliminary
experiments
used
induced currents (drive current) of 500µA and 250µA
respectively, and sensor responses were compared. These
initial tests had the objective of providing the basic set-up of
the TF cell.
The first set-up configuration using a drive current of
500µA proved to be inappropriate to obtain the full response
during the wetting phases (labelled 1 on the graphs). As the
soil sample reached maximum water content (~34%), the TF
output
voltage
suddenly
dropped,
in
addition,
very
inconsistent responses were recorded during the draining
phases (labelled 2 on the graphs); the voltage data were
converted to resistivity, and this is plotted in Figure 6. The
range of operation for this configuration was recorded as
resistivity from ~260Ωm to 360Ωm.
For the second set-up using a drive current of 250µA, the
response for the wetting phases was improved, giving a
complete set of measurements during wetting. Figure 7
shows the TF cell resistivity response, where it is evident
that the response over consecutive cycles continued to be
dispersed for both phases but more prominently in the
wetting phases.
The improvement compared to the previous set-up is
notable, but there is still a sharp change when the soil sample
reaches a water content over 33%. Nonetheless, it is less
variable than that of the response using 500µA. Therefore
250µA was chosen as the starting level of drive current to
continue investigating the TF cell response, this time
modifying other parameters.
For all cycles, the voltage (V) applied to the cell and the
cell constant (K) were kept the same; 5V was the maximum
valid output voltage for the interface circuit of the Thick film
conductivity sensor, which also had a cell constant value of
1/15m. Readings from the Theta probe and TF cell were
taken at intervals of 5 seconds. The first cycles of all tests
were removed as the readings are considered outliers due to
the initial dry condition of the sand (which gave a measured
value of less than 0.1% water content).
Figure 6.
Water content - resistivity curves for all 500µA cycles.
Only three cycles are presented on each of the following
plots for better visualisation, and in most cases, the re-
wetting
and re-draining cycles plotted
are those that
immediately followed cycle 1.
A.
Test 1
Figure 8 shows the resistivity- water content curves of
three of the five cycles made for Test 1. It can be observed
that there is better repeatability over the draining phases than
the wetting phases compared with the 250µA preliminary
test. The sudden change in resistivity at higher water content
(greater than 33%) was also no longer observed. Resistivity
remains almost flat above 22% water content on all drying
cycles and grows exponentially when the water content is
below that value. Responses during wetting phases show an
exponential decrease in resistivity, although the curves show
significant variations between different cycles.
B.
Test 2a
For Test 2a, the drive current was kept at 250µA, and the
orientation of the Theta probe was restored as horizontal.
The location of both sensors was modified, moving them
closer together. This was to try to obtain more consistent
readings, as there was some concern that wetting of the sand
was not occurring uniformly with time across the column.
Figure 9 includes the resistivity-water content curves of three
of the six cycles made for Test 2a. It can be seen that there is
an improvement in the consistency and repeatability over the
wetting phases compared with Test 1.
Resistivity continues to show an exponential trend,
decreasing as water content increases over all the cycles.
Responses during re-wetting decrease in resistivity as the
water content increases up to 30%, then flatten up to 34%,
while all draining cycles decrease exponentially from 34% to
12% water content. The re-wetting cycles still show some
variability between successive cycles. The draining cycles
seem to be missing readings at 33%, where there was an
unexpected decrease in resistivity that was not recorded by
the TF cell since it was outside of its working range.
Figure 7.
Water content - resistivity curves for all 250µA cycles.
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 8.
Water content - resistivity curves for Test 1 cycles.
C.
Test 2b
Keeping the same configuration of Test 2a for the
apparatus, Test 2b includes a change of drive current
provided to the TF cell. As previously stated, the objectives
of Test 2b were to use a drive current of 150µA to keep all
readings within the range of the conductivity sensor output.
As can be seen in Figure 10, the range of the resistivity
registered for all cycles is virtually double that of the
previous experiments, preliminary and Test 1 (100Ωm-
720Ωm) and almost triple that from Test 2a (50Ωm-480Ωm) 
ranging from 200Ωm to 1500Ωm. Re-wetting and re-drying 
phase’s
responses
both
follow
the
same
trend
with
decreasing resistivity as water content is increasing.
However, re-drying phases again have lower resistivity
readings compared to re-wetting readings. Measurements
were taken at same 5-second intervals in both phases
showing that the draining phase is much slower. The classic
exponential trend is more explicit over the re-drying than re-
wetting phases. There is an apparent hysteresis when
responses of wetting and drying phases are compared in
Figure 10; while there seems to be a good repeatability over
consecutive cycles the responses follow different trends on
each phase.
The TF cell gives different values of resistivity at the
same water content being measured, e.g., in Figure 10 it is
clearly seen that at 20% water content the value of resistivity
is approximately 500Ωm and 900Ωm for wetting and
draining phases respectively.
Figure 9.
Water content - resistivity curves for Test 2a cycles.
Figure 10. Water content - resistivity curves for Test 2b cycles.
A theory to explain this behaviour is shown in Figure
12a. Water is being added rapidly at the top of the column
and allowed to drain at the bottom using only a small hose.
Air trapped in the soil finds it difficult to escape, causing the
water infiltration to be non-uniform. Figure 12b shows the
sample between the electrodes of the TF cell when water is
added at the top of the column, and Figure13b when water is
added slowly from the bottom. The air that may stay trapped
in the soil sample on rapid downward infiltration is the
possible cause of the variation of the TF readings in the
wetting phase, and this theory is supported by the results
obtained on changing the direction of the water in the
wetting phase of Test 3.
D.
Test 3
For this test, the drive current was kept as 150µA, and the
direction of filling was modified by adding water from the
bottom, going up through the soil sample at an average flow
rate of 7.68e-6m3/s until a water column of 0.15m height was
formed at the top of the soil sample before draining started.
The average drainage flow rate was a bit higher than filling
with a value of 8.99e-6m3/s.
Figure 11 shows water content-resistivity curves for three
of the eight complete re-wetting and re-draining cycles. It
can be seen that curves during wetting and drying phases
both follow the same exponential trend of decrease in
resistivity as soil water content increases.
Figure 11. Water content - resistivity curves for Test 3 cycles.
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 12. (a) Soil sample showing non-uniform downwards water
infiltration, (b) non-uniform composition of soil/water between the TF
electrodes.
However, the range of values over each phase are slightly
different ranging from 200Ωm to 750Ωm for wetting, and 
100Ωm to 600Ωm for drying. As explained previously, this 
may be because air is no longer trapped in the soil sample
when the water is added from the bottom of the column, as
is shown in Figure 13a. As the water surface moved upward,
it pushed the air in the soil sample uniformly to the top of
the open column.
IV.
CONCLUSION
The Preliminary Test, along with Test 1 and 2a had the
purpose
of
establishing
the
correct
set-up
of
the
experimental apparatus, including drive current and physical
location of the sensors. The results from these have
demonstrated the importance of setting the correct drive
current for the TF cell. Test 2b and 3 compared the
responses of the TF cell under two
different
water
infiltration paths, downwards and upwards respectively, and
this difference in the wetting method has created an
interesting
difference
in
the
resistivity
readings;
the
hypothesis of trapped air being the cause needs to be further
investigated.
Resistivity measured using the output of the TF cell
follows the trends in the available literature, including
McCarter (1984) [16] and more recently Hen-Jones et al.
(2017) [3], that show resistivity-water content trends for
compacted clays. These can be seen in Figure 2 which
summarises both works. The values of resistivity in Figure 2
are considerably lower than the values obtained in all
experiments using TF cell. However, the soil samples used
in this paper are sand instead of clay. Higher values were
expected and correspond to soil resistivity generally having
higher values in the sand than in clay soil samples.
Following the results presented, future work includes
characterization of the response for different soil particle
sizes and types (sand to clay), and relation to fundamental
models including parameters of the soil such as density,
porosity, saturation and compaction degrees.
Figure 13. (a) Soil sample showing uniform upwards water infiltration, (b)
uniform composition of soil/water between the TF electrodes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Authors express their gratitude to the Mexican National
Council for Science and Technology (CONACYT), the UK
Engineering
and
Physical
Sciences
Research
Council
(EPSRC), and the Rail Safety and Standards Board (RSSB),
who have all supported this work.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Glendinning, J. Hall, and L. Manning, “Asset-management
strategies for infrastructure embankments,” In Proceedings of
the Institution of Civil Engineers-Engineering Sustainability,
vol. 162, no. 2, pp. 111-120, 2009.
[2]
J.
Perry,
M.
Pedley,
and
M.
Reid,
“Infrastructure
embankments: condition appraisal and remedial treatment,”
Construction Industry Research and Information Association.
2001.
[3]
R. M. Hen-Jones, et al., “Seasonal effects on geophysical–
geotechnical relationships and their implications for electrical
resistivity
tomography
monitoring
of
slopes,”
Acta
Geotechnica, pp. 1-15, 2017.
[4]
J. K. Atkinson, A. W. J. Cranny, W. V. Glasspool, and J. A.
Mihell, “An investigation of the performance characteristics
and operational lifetimes of multi-element thick film sensor
arrays used in the determination of water quality parameters,”
Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 215-
231, 1999.
[5]
J. K. Atkinson, et al., “Thick film screen printed environmental
and chemical sensor array reference electrodes suitable for
subterranean and subaqueous deployments,” Microelectronics
International, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 92-98. 2013.
[6]
A. Gac, J. K. Atkinson, Z. Zhang, and R.P. Sion, “A
comparison of thick-film chemical sensor characteristics in
laboratory
and
on-line
industrial
process
applications,”
Measurement Science and Technology, vol. 13, no. 12, pp.
2062. 2002.
[7]
C. M. Gardner, D. A. Robinson, K. Blyth, and J. D. Cooper,
“Soil water content. Soil analysis: physical methods,” pp. 1-74.
[8]
R. D.
Grisso, M. M. Alley, D. L. Holshouser, and W. E.
Thomason,
“Precision
farming
tools.
Soil
electrical
conductivity,” Available at https://pubs.ext.vt.edu/442/442-
508/442-508_pdf.pdf (verified 2017.08.15), 2005.
[9]
National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), “Inherent
factors affecting soil EC,” Soil Electrical Conductivity,
Available
at
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/nrcs1
42p2_053280.pdf (verified 2017.08.15).
[10] J. D. Rhoades, N. A. Manteghi, P. J. Shouse, and W. J. Alves,
“Soil electrical conductivity and soil salinity: new formulations
and calibrations,” Soil Science Society of America Journal,
vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 433-439, 1989.
[11] V.
Lapenna,
et
al.,
“High-resolution
geoelectrical
tomographies in the study of Giarrossa landslide (southern
Italy),” Bulletin of Engineering Geology and the Environment,
vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 259-268, 2003.
[12] Y. Mao, E. Romero, and A. Gens, “Exploring ice content on
partially saturated frozen soils using dielectric permittivity and
bulk
electrical
conductivity
measurements,”
The
third
European Conference on Unsaturated Soil – E-UNSAT 2016
vol. 9, pp. 1-6, 2016.
[13] K. Suzuki and S. Higashi, “Groundwater flow after heavy rain
in landslide-slope area from 2-D inversion of resistivity
monitoring data,” Geophysics, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 733-743,
2001.
[14] D. L. Corwin and S. M. Lesch, “Apparent soil electrical
conductivity measurements in agriculture,” Computers and
Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 11-43, 2005.
[15] M. Sophocleous and J. K. Atkinson, “A novel thick-film
electrical conductivity sensor suitable for liquid and soil
conductivity
measurements,”
Sensors
and
Actuators
B:
Chemical, vol. 213, pp. 417-422, 2015.
[16] W. J. McCarter, “The electrical resistivity characteristics of
compacted clays,” Géotechnique, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 263-267,
1984.
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

