Issues in Designing 6TiSCH Wireless Networks  
 
Sunghee Myung† 
Cho Chun Shik Graduate School of Green Transportation† 
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
1992happy@kaist.ac.kr† 
Chaewoo Lee* and Dongsoo Har† 
Graduate School of Information and Communication* 
Ajou University 
Suwon, Republic of Korea 
cwlee@ajou.ac.kr*, dshar@kaist.ac.kr† 
 
 
Abstract—Industrial Internet of Things (IoT) communication 
systems are becoming critical for the efficient operation of 
industrial wireless sensor networks. The IPv6 over IEEE 
802.15.4e Time Slotted Channel Hopping (TSCH) (6TiSCH) 
group enables system to fill in the blank between IP-enabled 
protocol stack and IEEE 802.15.4e link layer. In this paper, we 
identify and investigate three issues related to 6TiSCH 
networks and suggest potential solutions. 
Keywords-Industrial IoT; Wireless sensor networks; 6TiSCH. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
      Sustainable operation is critical for Wireless Sensor 
Networks (WSNs), such as the recently developed industrial 
IoT. Particularly, to offer the desired level of service, 
wireless computer networks, characterized by Information 
Technology (IT) and Operational Technology (OT), are 
expected to operate over long duration. IT deals only with 
data and OT deals only with the physical world; therefore, 
the convergence of IT and OT is necessary. Nowadays, a lot 
of studies have been reported related to the convergence of 
IT and OT [1][2].  
Of these Industry 4.0 related research areas, the IoT is 
expected to play the main role of data acquisition system, 
which is fundamentally important for Industry 4.0. The IoT 
stack consists of the IEEE 802.15.4 simple physical layer, 
IEEE 802.15.4e (TSCH) MAC layer, Internet Engineering 
Task Force (IETF) 6TiSCH, IETF IPv6 over Low-power 
Wireless Personal Area Networks (6LoWPAN), the User 
Datagram Protocol (UDP), and the Constrained Application 
Protocol (CoAP) [3]. Especially, IETF 6TiSCH is related to 
the scheduling of the resources and is thus important for 
efficient resource allocation and traffic management.    
To implement efficient resource allocation of the IoT, 
many scheduling approaches have appeared in the literature. 
Scheduling in wireless networks can be divided into two 
groups: centralized scheduling methods and decentralized 
(distributed) 
scheduling 
methods. 
The 
centralized 
scheduling strategy for 6TiSCH wireless networks is 
introduced in [4]. This strategy deals with a Traffic Aware 
Scheduling Algorithm (TASA), which allocates cells and 
resources to all the nodes deployed in the service area. On 
the other hand, the Decentralized Traffic Aware Scheduling 
(DeTAS) algorithm was investigated to solve four critical 
problems, which can be enumerated as small end-to-end 
latency, small queue but still capable of traffic, collision-
free networking, and distributed scheduling [5].  
In this paper, we address three issues in industrial IoT 
and suggest potential solutions for each. The first issue is 
the problem of multiple sensor nodes running out of power 
or malfunctioning. The second issue is data processing of 
information sensed by two or more sensors. Out of these 
multiple sensor nodes, selection of a sensor node in charge 
of data transmission to the root (sink) node depends on 
various criteria. The third issue is to detect malfunctioning 
sensor nodes. To this end, choosing the right sensing results, 
obtained from two or more sensor nodes, should be 
implemented.  
Compared to the other works presented above, our 
contributions are to manage the network balance efficiently 
so that end-to-end delay can be dramatically reduced, and to 
bring up practical issues that have not been raised in the 
literature up to now, thus improving our knowledge of the 
6TiSCH network.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, the 6TiSCH IoT network is presented. Section III deals 
with three issues of network operation; Section IV 
concludes this paper.  
II. SYSTEM MODEL 
  The baseline 6TiSCH configuration is presented in Table 
1. 
TABLE I.  
6TISCH CONFIGURATION [7] 
 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

   We adopt the topology of wireless sensor networks 
described in [6]. The balanced binary tree from [6] enables 
us to characterize the network width. Also, this topology is 
suitable for adopting nearly realistic dense networks. The 
Destination-Oriented Directed Acyclic Graph (DODAG) 
root has rank 1, which is denoted as 0 in Figure 1. This root 
can be represented as: 
S1,1
,  
,
Sa b
 where a and b represent 
the rank and the ID of the node numbered from the leftmost 
one in the rank. For instance, the node with ID=1 in the 2nd 
rank is represented as 
S2,1
and the node with ID=2 in the 2nd 
rank is labeled as 
S2,2
. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Topology of balanced binary tree.  
 
      This wireless sensor network is assumed to be randomly 
distributed in the service area. The density of the sensor 
nodes can be visualized according to the corresponding 
population in the binary tree topology. In Figure 1, circles 
with numbers represent sensor nodes, which are individual 
entities of nodes in the wireless sensor network. Arrows 
represent the directions of data flow. 
III. ISSUES IN NETWORK OPERATION 
A. Solution to  eliminate the problem of sensor nodes 
running out of energy and/or malfunctioning 
 
 
Figure 2.  6TiSCH cell coloring mechanism. 
      In Figure 2, we propose a coloring method that is 
characterized by ‘two-hop skipping’. This method enables 
nodes of the same color to use the resources as efficiently as 
possible, while avoiding collision. The process of ‘two-hop 
skipping’ is carried out by placing nodes of the same color 
in the two hops higher position. These nodes of the same 
color are activated after a certain timeslot period; in this 
case, after four time slots, as shown in Figure 2.  
 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 3.  Scenarios for dropping sensor nodes out of wireless sensor 
network squentially and simultaneously: (a) sequential drop out, (b) 
simultaneous drop out.  
 
      Figure 3 shows network topology changes after 
introduction of least amount of degradation by the ‘two-hop 
skipping’ method.  
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

B. Solution for the problem of choosing a sensor node to 
send information to DODAGroot when two or more 
sensor nodes simultaneously sense the object 
      For example, when sensor nodes 
S5,15
 and 
S5,16
 detect 
the same object, sending all the sensed information is not a 
good idea from the point of view of network sustainability, 
because using more sensor nodes in communications will 
incur more energy consumption. Therefore, we have to set a 
criterion to ameliorate this issue. Suppose that node 
S5,15
 
has only 100mJ of energy, while node 
S5,16
 has 500mJ of 
energy. Then, node
S5,16
 sends the information to the 
DODAGroot. 
C. Solution for the problem of choosing sense results 
obtained from two or more sensor nodes that 
demonstrate dissimilarity 
      When sensor nodes 
S5,15
 and 
S5,16
 detect the same 
object, but with different sensed information, it is likely that 
one or both of them are providing erroneously sensed 
information. Therefore, for the sustainability of the 6TiSCH 
network, erroneously working sensor nodes must be 
removed. This issue can be solved by comparing the Signal 
to Noise Ratio (SNR) of the sensed signals of the sensor 
node to the other. For example, when node 
S5,15
sensed a 
signal with an SNR value ten times larger than that of 
sensor node 
S5,16
, the sensed results of 
S5,15
can be selected.  
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Sustainable operation of 6TiSCH networks is a critical 
issue in the realization of industrial IoT. To attain such 
sustainability, we have to deal with practical issues in 
6TiSCH networks. This paper has identified three issues that 
can occur in 6TiSCH networks. Each issue has been 
addressed with practical solutions. For future work, by 
considering various network performance metrics, solutions 
to these issues will be derived.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. R. Palattella, P. Thubert, X. Vilajosana, T. Watteyne, Q. Wang,  
and T. Engel, “6tisch wireless industrial networks: Determinism 
meets ipv6,” In Internet of Things, Springer International Publishing, 
pp. 111-141,  2014. 
[2] M. Domingo-Prieto, T. Chang, X. Vilajosana, and T. Watteyne, 
“Distributed pid-based scheduling for 6tisch networks,” IEEE 
Communications Letters, vol. 20, no.5, pp. 1006-1009, 2016. 
[3] B. Martinez et al., “I3Mote: An Open Development Platform for the 
Intelligent Industrial Internet,” Sensors, vol. 17, 2017. 
[4] M. R. Palattella, N. Accettura, M. Dohler, L. A. Grieco, and G. 
Boggia, “Traffic Aware Scheduling Algorithm for reliable low-power 
multi-hop IEEE 802.15. 4e networks,” In Personal Indoor and 
Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2012 IEEE 23rd 
International Symposium on, pp. 327-332, September 2012. 
[5] N. Accettura, M. R. Palattella, G. Boggia, L. A. Grieco, and M. 
Dohler, “Decentralized traffic aware scheduling for multi-hop low 
power lossy networks in the internet of things,” In World of Wireless, 
Mobile and Multimedia Networks (WoWMoM), 2013 IEEE 14th 
International Symposium and Workshops on a, pp. 1-6, June 2013. 
[6] N. Accettura et. al., “Decentralized traffic aware scheduling in 
6TiSCH networks: Design and experimental evaluation,” IEEE 
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 2, pp. 455-470, 2015. 
[7] X. Vilajosana, and K. Pister. Minimal 6TiSCH Configuration. 
[Online]. 
Retrieved: 
August, 
2017. 
Available 
from: 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-6tisch-minimal-16
 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

