Self-Powered Wireless Ocean Monitoring Systems
Sea-Hee Hwangbo, Jun-Ho Jeon and Sung-Joon Park
Digital Communication Lab.
Department of Electronic Engineering, Gangneung-Wonju National University,
7 Jukheon-gil, Gangneung, Gangwon, Republic of Korea
Email: psj@ieee.org
Abstract—Recently,
underwater
wireless
sensor
network
(UWSN) has been emerged as one of the important research
topics from the need for the conservation and exploitation of the
ocean. Since underwater sensor nodes suffer from limited power
source, in this paper, we have planned to design and implement
self-powered ocean monitoring systems which generate renewable
marine energy from a device at sea surface and share the energy
with underwater nodes. As a ﬁrst step of this objective, we have
developed an acoustic modem for wireless communication and
made experiments in a pond to verify the performance of the
modem. In addition, we have supplied the power to the modem
by harvesting solar energy with solar panels. Efﬁcient energy
management, movement of underwater nodes and energy transfer
will be investigated as succeeding work.
Keywords-Underwater Wireless Sensor Network (UWSN); En-
ergy Harvesting; Acoustic Modem.
I. INTRODUCTION
During the last few years, there has been a growing interest
in observing underwater environments for scientiﬁc explo-
ration and monitoring ocean currents and winds (Tsunamis)
and some researchers have studied and developed the proto-
type of underwater wireless sensor network (UWSN) systems
[1], [2]. The study on acoustic modem has also conducted by
many research groups. Especially, Yan et al. [3] implemented
a modem adopting orthogonal frequency division multiplexing
and veriﬁed one-way communication in oceanic environments.
One of the open problems for UWSN is the limited power,
since the devices of UWSN typically rely on batteries. Until
now, researchers tried to resolve this problem by utilizing a ﬁ-
nite energy efﬁciently as much as possible [4], [5]. Meanwhile,
in case of autonomous unmanned vehicle (AUV), there was a
trial for the vehicle to be equipped with solar energy harvesting
module at the Beacon Institute for Rivers and Estuaries [6].
When the vehicle ﬂoats to the sea surface, it starts to generate
energy by using solar panels on its back.
Recently, initial studies on wireless energy sharing between
devices are investigated in various forms. Magnetic resonant
coupling with coils has lots of attention due to its efﬁciency
and working range. Photonics and modern electro-magnetics
group at MIT has conducted theoretical analysis and experi-
ments with coils [7]. According to the results, wireless energy
transfer in the air was possible between two self-resonant coils
having the radius of 30 cm. The efﬁciency for 60 watts transfer
was 70 % and 40 % at 1 m and 2 m distance, respectively.
Besides, magnetic induction, RF and optics are the candidates
of wireless energy transfer in air in the spotlight.
Based on the thorough survey of the abovementioned exist-
ing work, in this paper, we suggest the concept of self-powered
wireless ocean monitoring system which generates solar or
wind energy from a device at the sea surface and transfers
this energy to other devices in a wireless manner. It would
be possible to observe oceanographic data and predict natural
disasters such as tsunami and sea shock permanently with this
system. As a ﬁrst step of the target system, we design and
implement an acoustic communication system operated by the
renewable solar energy and make experiments in a pond.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We
ﬁrst describe the big picture of the target system in Section
II. The design of solar harvesting and acoustic transceiver
are discussed in detail in Section III. In order to examine
solar harvesting modules and estimate the performance of
the developed modem, experimental results are provided in
Section IV. Finally, in Section V, we give a brief summary
and comments on further work of this paper.
II. OBJECTIVES
Fig. 1 shows the blueprint of a self-powered wireless ocean
monitoring system. This system is comprised of four compo-
nents for monitoring of underwater environments: sensor node,
sink node, gateway and an onshore user. The basic operation of
the system is similar to the normal UWSN. That is, when the
user requires underwater sensing data, it queries to a speciﬁc
sensor node via the gateway in downlink transmission and gets
the wanted data in uplink data transmission.
The main differentiated points of the proposed system
are power management, energy harvesting, actuator module
of node and wireless power transfer module. The power
management part on the gateway controls energy generation
and consumption continuously for smart energy management.
Also, renewable energy is generated from the gateway located
at the sea surface and the nodes goes to the gateway and
recharge the battery when it is needed. Also, Fig. 2 illustrates
the block diagrams of node and gateway in detail. In the ﬁgure,
the black dotted lines represent the data ﬂow and the red solid
lines means the power transfer.
The speciﬁc procedures for energy sharing of the system are
as follows. First, solar module on the gateway keeps generating
energy from the sun and charging a battery. Meanwhile, in the
underwater, each smart battery charge controller continuously
checks the residual battery power in the node. When detected
a lack of power of its node, the controller reports the present
334
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 1.
Blueprint of self-powered wireless ocean monitoring system.
state to the gateway and sends a signal to a actuator module
to move to the gateway. The actuator module consists of
thruster and ballast which take in charge of the horizontal
and vertical movements. After being arrived near the gateway,
the battery in the node is charged wirelessly by two strongly
coupled induction coils in wireless power transfer module.
Since two resonant objects having the same magnetic resonant
frequency have a tendency to exchange energy, these two coils
make it possible to transfer a power. When the recharging is
completed, the node goes back in underwater with the help of
actuator module and starts acoustic communication again.
To realize this system, the following devices should be
investigated.
1) Acoustic modem
2) Smart battery charge controller
3) Marine energy harvesting module
4) Actuators with thruster and ballast module
5) Wireless power transfer module
Among the ﬁve items, we have designed and implemented
three devices: acoustic modem, smart battery charge controller
and marine energy harvesting module. In further works, we
will develop remaining two devices such as actuator and
wireless power transfer.
III. A PROTOTYPE OF SELF-POWERED WIRELESS OCEAN
MONITORING
A. Transceiver
In our previous work, several transceiver modules taking in
charge of underwater wireless data transmission and reception
have been implemented [8], [9]. Compared to the previous
transceiver, ampliﬁcation blocks in transmitter and receiver
RF Module 
Acoustic  
Modem 
Wireless 
power 
transfer 
module 
Thruster 
Battery 
Sensors 
Trans- 
ducer 
Trans- 
ducer 
Signal 
Power 
Ballast 
module 
Actuator 
Acoustic  
Modem 
Wireless 
power 
transfer  
module 
Thruster 
Battery 
Ballast 
module 
Actuator 
Solar 
Module 
Smart  
Battery 
Charge  
Controller 
Smart  
Battery 
Charge  
Controller 
Fig. 2.
Block diagram of gateway and node.
are reinforced and software coding is optimized for the perfor-
mance enhancement in terms of working range and data rate.
As shown in Fig. 3, the acoustic transceiver consists of digital
board, analog transmission board, analog reception board and
transducer. The detailed speciﬁcation of the transceiver is
summarized in Table I.
B. Smart Battery Charge Controller
As shown in Fig. 2, smart battery charge controller at
gateway is connected to ﬁve components: RF module, acoustic
modem, actuator, wireless power transfer module and battery.
In this work, we have implemented controller communicating
with RF module via RS-232, acoustic modem via SPI and
battery.
The software processed at the controller of gateway is
depicted in Fig. 4. MCU measures battery voltage level
335
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 3.
Implemented acoustic transceiver.
TABLE I
SPECIFICATION OF ACOUSTIC TRANSCEIVER
Feature
Description
MCU
ARM9 (Cortex-M3)
Transducer
Omnidirectional
Resonant frequency
74 kHz
Interface
UART
Data rate
1 kbps
Power Consumption
3 W
Modem size
70 x 35 mm (φ×H)
periodically and compares it with a predetermined threshold
Th. If the voltage level is less than Th, it computes sensing
period to save power consumption and sends alarm command
to the user. Then, the gateway requests data to nodes and
receives sensing data from nodes. After forwarding the data
to the user, it returns to the original state again.
C. Solar Energy Harvesting Module
The capacity of solar energy harvester should be determined
by the following values:
1) the amount of power consumption of a device per day
2) the required amount of solar energy per day
3) the total required amount of solar energy per day con-
sidering a natural loss factor.
Since most of battery power is consumed at acoustic modem
and actuator among several modules loaded in the sensor
or sink node, the two modules are only considered for the
capacity calculation of an energy harvester without loss of
generality.
First, the amount of power consumption at acoustic modem
per day is simply calculated by multiplying the power con-
sumption of acoustic modem by hours in use per day. With
the assumption that the acoustic modem operates during 20%
in time in order to send data in underwater, the amount of
power consumption per day becomes
3 · (24 · 0.2)
=
14.4 WH .
(1)
For actuator, if we assume that it consumes 60 watts and
operates 5 minutes per day, the amount of power consumption
at actuator is given by
60 · 5
60
=
5.0 WH .
(2)
Start 
Sensing battery level 
Sending alarm 
to user 
Sending data  
to user 
Calculating  
sensing period 
Requesting data  
to node 
Receiving data  
from node 
Voltage > 
  
NO 
YES 
Fig. 4.
Flow chart of software of smart battery charge controller at gateway.
TABLE II
THE AMOUNT OF POWER CONSUMPTION AND HARVEST
Comsumption
Harvest
Acoustic modem
Actuator
3 W
60 W
20 W
From (1) and (2), total power consumption per day at each
node is equal to 19.4 WH. Here, the result provided in [10]
is used for the reference of power consumption at an actuator
of wireless remotely-operated vehicle.
Since the hours exposed to sunshine is 3.5 hours in average,
the required amount of solar energy per day can be predicted
by dividing the amount of power consumption per day at a
node by the sunshine hours, which is written by
19.4/3.5
=
5.5 W .
(3)
Also, by considering the typical loss factor of 1.2, the total
required amount of solar energy per day becomes
5.5 · 1.2
=
6.6 W .
(4)
In order to recharge the three nodes simultaneously in the
worst scenario in Fig. 1, the solar panel should harvest at least
19.8 watts. From these reasons, solar energy harvesting mod-
ule which generates 20 watts is selected for the implementation
of the system. Table II shows the consuming power at a node
and the harvested power at the gateway of this system.
IV. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTS
The developed acoustic modem, battery controller and solar
energy harvester are veriﬁed the functionality in a pond. Fig.
5 illustrates the test scenario at the pond. As shown in the
336
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 5.
Experimental environment.
50
100
150
200
250
10
-7
10
-6
10
-5
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
   200bps
 1000bps
   500bps
BER
Vin[Vpp]
Fig. 6.
Bit error rate with respect to input voltage and data rate.
ﬁgure, solar panel is connected to the transmitting modem and
generates power. The receiving modem is placed on the other
side at the distance of 50 meters from the transmitter. For the
ease of experiments, only transducers are submerged to the
pond. Predetermined data pattern is transmitted sequentially
at the transmitter and the bit error rate (BER) is measured at
the receiver.
Fig. 6 represents the bit error rate with respect to the input
voltage of the transmitting transducer Vin and the data rate.
According to the result, BER is improved by the increase of
Vin at a given data rate. This is because if Vin is increased, the
signal strength of received signal is also increased which make
it easy for MCU to extract the transmitted signal from the
corrupted signal by noise and multipath. Also, it is observed
that BER degrades by increasing data rate which means both
noise and multipath affect more and more for shorter symbol
duration.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK
In this work, we have proposed the concept of self-
powered wireless ocean monitoring system which could be
operated semi-permanently. Five core technologies have been
distinguished for the target system. Furthermore, a simple
underwater communication system equipped with solar energy
harvester and battery controller has been developed and tested
in a pond.
As succeeding work, we are planning to address the follow-
ing topics. First, we will make more experiments in various
marine environments to deploy acoustic modem with solar
energy harvesting module. And, we will also develop wireless
power transfer module and actuator and verify the feasibility
of the self-powered wireless ocean monitoring systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by Basic Science Research
Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea
(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and
Technology (2012-0004624).
REFERENCES
[1] I. F. Akyildiz, D. Pompili and T. Melodia, “Underwater acoustic sensor
networks: a survey revisited,” Ad Hoc Networks (Elsevier), 2007.
[2] Underwater acoustic network (UAN), ”Underwater Acoustic Network,”
http://www.ua-net.eu/, [Jun. 2012].
[3] H. Yan, L. Wan, S. Zhou; Z. Shi, J.-H. Cui, J. Huang and
H. Zhou, “DSP based receiver implementation for OFDM acous-
tic modems,” Elsevier Journal on Physical Communication, 2011;
doi:10.1016/j.phycom.2011.09.001.
[4] J.-H. Cui, J. Kong, M. Gerla and S. Zhou, “Challenges: building scalable
mobile underwater wireless sensor networks for aquatic applications,”
IEEE Network on Wireless Sensor Networking, May 2006.
[5] J. Heidemann, W. Ye, J. Wills, A. Syed and Y. Li, “Research challenges
and applications for underwater sensor networking,” in Proc. Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference, Las Vegas, NV, 2006, pp.
228-235.
[6] Beacon
institute
for
Rivers
and
Estuaries,
”About
REON,”
http://www.bire.org/approach/reonoverview.php, [Jun. 2012].
[7] A. Kurs, A. Karalis, R. Moffatt, J. D. Joannopoulos, P. Fisher and
M. Soljacic, “Wireless power transfer via strongly coupled magnetic
resonances,” Science, vol. 317, pp. 83-86, 2007.
[8] Jun-Ho Jeon and Sung-Joon Park, “A low-power underwater acoustic
modem and its applications,” in Proc. SENSORCOMM 2011, Nice,
France, Aug. 2011.
[9] Tae-Hee Won and Sung-Joon Park, “Design and implementation of an
omni-directional underwater acoustic micro-modem based on a low-
power micro-controller unit,” SENSORS, Feb. 2012.
[10] Geol-Ju Kim and Sung-Joon Park, “A wireless remotely operated vehicle
using acoustic communication,” MTS Journal, May/June 2012.
337
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

