IoT-based Wireless Access Point for Underground Safety Services
Taewook Heo, Sanggi Hong*, Jaehum Lee and Inhwan Lee
UGS Convergence Research Division, IoT Convergence Research Division*
ETRI (Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute)
Daejeon, Korea
e-mail: {htw398, sghong*, ljh, ihlee}@etri.re.kr
Abstract— Recently, many researchers have focused on
solving problems related to sinkholes, exploring both natural and
artificial options. To address this problem, researchers need to
work with land subsidence related to groundwater. In this paper,
we consider outdoor environmental factors such as groundwater,
water supply, and sewer and propose an Underground SAfety
Hybrid (USAH) architecture. Specifically, the WAPUS (Wireless
Access Point for Underground Safety services for Sinkhole
detection) exploits a periodic monitoring and an aperiodic
sensing. To increase the accuracy and reliability, we propose a
hybrid
architecture
which
merges
these
techniques.
Furthermore, in our proposed architecture, the sensor nodes
collect sensing data as part of periodic monitoring and our
platform carefully examines it using aperiodic sensing. Our
simulation results show that WAPUS enhances the reliability in
the hybrid special condition.
Keywords—sink hole; underwater detection; wireless sensing
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, there has been an increasing interest in the
processes going on under the ground in Korea. Humans can
not see the natural sinkholes that form underground.
Because of artificial water supply and sewer leaks, a
subsidence of the ground occurs. This phenomenon has
given rise to social issues [8] [9].
In particular, if water leaks occur underground, they are
likely to cause sinkholes. For this reason, several sinkhole
technologies have been proposed. Many proposals [4] dealt
with how to connect the information gathered from the
sensors of the central server. In general, smart meters using
ZigBee method have wireless networks (900MHz, 2.4GHz
ISM band). LoRaWAN is a Low Power Wide Area
Network (LPWAN) specification intended for wireless
battery operated Things in regional, national or global
network [2]. LoRa technology has over 1Km RF (Radio
Frequency) range and the LoRa alliance wants to achieve
reliable networks.
This paper explains that WAPUS has several networks
simultaneously connected
to the
central
server
using
several
connecting
methods,
such
as
WiFi
network,
Ethernet, and Long Term Evolution (LTE) [6].
Secondly, WAPUS supports IEC/ISO 30128 specification
to connect to the server and IEEE 802.15.4 standardization
to link reliable RF connectivity.
Due to its support for standard interfaces, WAPUS has a
merit of dynamic extensibility.
Periodic sensing has to use an existing technique via the
various wireless sensor networks, which will be expanded
into the Internet of Things applications. Further, these
applications include a lot of aperiodic and non-destructive
techniques.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Section II,
we present USAH architecture, which can be used for
wireless sensing. Section III describes the application and
the architectural benefits of WAPUS. In Section IV, we
introduce a system design that takes into consideration the
hybrid wireless sensing data. In Section V, we evaluate the
WAPUS based on the simulation environment. Finally, in
Section VI, we provide some concluding remarks along with
directions for future research.
II.
USAH AND WAPUS ARCHITECTURE
The architecture presented in this paper is a sensor
network infrastructure that is used by the general wireless
sensor
network
architecture
[1]-[3].
Current
legacy
infrastructure provides a common standard interface and a
core infrastructure of the sensor network [7].
Figure 1. USAH system scenario [5].
The main idea provided in this paper is a method of
collecting periodic and aperiodic sensing information at the
same time. Periodic sensing has long break periods to
achieve low power consumption. It performs aperiodic
sensing if slightly suspicious information is reported from
periodic sensing. By using this method, it is possible to
perform
hybrid
sensing
by
utilizing
low
power
consumption.
We propose a hybrid structure with the aperiodic sensing
information and periodic sensing information serving at the
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

same time (see Figure 1 [5]).
Our WAPUS has several features;
1.
Multi network connections (LTE, WiFi, Ethernet,
etc.)
2.
Two RF modules with dynamic ranges
3.
NXP Cortex-A7 dual processor with 1GHz DDR 3
memory
4.
4+ UART ports
A.
WAPUS Hardware Architecture
First, WAPUS supports several interfaces to be able to
have multi networks (LTE, WiFi, Ethernet, etc.). In Figure
2, our platform has 2 RF ports, WiFi port, and LTE port.
Also, WAPUS supports dual RF modes to know dynamic
situations simultaneously.
RF Module Block
LS1021A
ARM Coretex-A7
Dual Processor
DDR3 4Gbit
FLASH 1Gbit
RF1(TI) Port1
UART
WiFi Module Port
UART
LTE Module Port
Sierra Wireless
DTM970 – LG Uplus
UART
AR8033
100/1000 Base
Ethernet PHY
SGMII/RGMII
RJ-45
RF2(Analog
Device) Port2
DDR3 4Gbit
SMPS &
Power Management
RF3(Onramp)
Port2
I/O Module Block
Optional SDHC
Glue Logic
Figure 2. WAPUS Hardware Block Diagram.
B.
WAPUS Software Architecture
The software architecture of WAPUS is as follows:
WAPUS has multi-thread blocks and fundamental functions
of logging, configuration, UART connection and network
connections.
WAPUS has N2S (Node to Server) thread block that
processes the messages transferred from PANC (PAN
coordinator)
through
UART
(Universal
Asynchronous
Receiver/Transmitter), and S2N (Server to Node) thread
block that processes the messages transferred from the
server through TCP (Transmission Control Protocol).
Also, WAPUS has a system initialization function and an
AP (Access Point) main function (see Figure 3).
III.
APPLICATION AND ARCHITECTURAL BENEFITS OF
WAPUS
Our WAPUS proposal has several advantages, as follows.
The WAPUS, unlike existing AP, has a structure that
supports two or more RF devices. The AP with two or more
RF components has an advantage in scalability. Another
WAPUS
advantage
is
the
stability
of
the
network.
Furthermore, by supporting the ISO standard, WAPUS
provides compatibility with other devices.

WAPUS provides an aperiodic sensing function,
periodic monitoring and a merged hybrid platform
using these methods.

WAPUS proposes a dual RX/TX queue architecture
to remove a bottleneck of gateway.

WAPUS provides extensibility with the ISO standard
interface adaptation.

WAPUS has several interfaces to allow aperiodic data
sensing such as moving images.
Figure 3. WAPUS Software Block Diagram.
A.
PAN Decision Maker Algorithm
The proposed algorithm used in the PAN Decision Maker
is as follows: The PAN Manager selects the better PAN
module from the available networks, as shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4. PAN Decision Maker Algorithm.
Referring to Figure 5, while managing two or more RF
modules AP gateway corresponding to the spatial domain,
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

WAPUS communicates with the sensor nodes using the
RF1 module at point A and RF2 module for communication
of the C point.
Basically,
it
will
be
responsible
for
different
communication modules in Zone1 and Zone2.
Since the sensor node’s RF characteristics vary at point B
existing between the Zone1 and Zone2, the WAPUS selects
the RF module according to the RSSI (Received Signal
Strength Indicator) and RF characteristics.
Figure 5. Sensor nodes spatial layout.
The method of RF selection is as follows. Firstly, we
propose that average RSSI values are accumulated N times
in selecting an RF module. We consider a method of
selecting by using maximum and minimum values. If the
difference between maximum value and minimum value is
large, we will change to the better RF module. If the
difference value is minimal, we keep the original RF
module.
Also, we select the RF module depending on the
determined angle, the obstacles and other settings between
the sensor node and the WAPUS.
Normally, we have a choice of RF modules that gives a
better RSSI value. We measure the average RF signal
strength of at least N times, analyze the optimization
characteristics of the communication, and choose to use the
optimal RF module. We choose to collect N times or more
RF signal strength, in consideration of the location and
time change. This will select the RF module. Also, it will
be determined in consideration of 2.4GHz method and
900MHz modulation scheme.
IV.
EVALUATION
To evaluate our proposal, we used the Matlab toolkit.
Simply, we propose a sensor accuracy model, as seen in
Figure
6.
We
can
calculate
several
parameters
from
equations (1)-(3).
Figure 6. The sensor accuracy model with time interval.
(1)
(2)
(3)
We show the average accuracy as a function of sensing
rate (sensing counts/hour) in Figure 7 and the sensing cost
versus aperiodic sensing over total sensing ratio in the
simulation in Figure 8.
Figure 7. Average accuracy via sensing rate (sensing counts/hour).
As shown in Figure 7, the accuracy decreases in time after
it is measured. When the measured value is corrected again,
the system has high accuracy. Therefore, the average
accuracy decreased when the sensing time interval increases,
as shown in Figure 7 and Figure 8.
The sensing cost, as shown in Figure 8, also increases as
aperiodic sensing over total sensing ratio also increases.
Figure 8. Sensing cost via REvent.
For this reason, we do not select a large aperiodic sensing
period. It is necessary to use the aperiodic sensing with the
proper aperiodic sensing period.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper showed that WAPUS includes the sensing
information to be acquired from various sensing devices in
the underground facility management subsystem to transfer
from the gateway to the upper platform. The sensing period
of the gateway device dynamically varies according to the
value of the sensing information.
Also, through a variety of RF modules in a long distance
and a short distance, we dynamically select the better RF
module.
In this paper, we introduced the WAPUS designed for sink
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

hole detection applications. The WAPUS exploits its hybrid
sensing characteristic to form a networked system that
effectively
increases
the
accuracy
of
the
sensing
measurement. We believe that this study is an effort to
diversify
our
thoughts
on
IoT
(Internet
of
Things)
architectures
and
quantitatively
notice
that
with
new
capabilities added on to the wireless sensor networks, a new
perspective of network architecture design is required.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Research Council
of
Science
&
Technology
(NST)
grant
by
the
Korea
government (MSIP) (No. CRC-14-02-ETRI, Development of
Internet of Things (IoT)-based Urban Underground Utility
Monitoring and Management System)
REFERENCES
[1]
Sang Gi Hong, Nae Soo Kim, and Whan Woo Kim, “Reduction of False
Alarm Signals for PIR Sensor in Realistic Outdoor Surveillance,” ETRI
Journal, vol. 35, no. 1, Feb. 2013, pp. 80-88.
[2]
Lora Alliacne, http://lora-alliance.org, Jun. 2016.
[3]
T. Heo, et al., “Adaptive dual prediction scheme based on sensing
context similarity for wireless sensor networks,” IET Electronics Letters,
vol. 50, 2014, pp. 467-469.
[4]
J. A. Stankovic. “When sensor and actuators cover the world,” ETRI
Journal, vol. 30, no. 5, 2008, pp. 627–633.
[5]
ISO/IEC 30128:2014, “Information technology – Sensor networks –
Generic Sensor Network Application Interface”
[6]
ETSI TS 136211, “LTE; Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access
(E-UTRA); Physical Channels and Modulation,” Nov. 2008.
[7]
T. Heo, et al., "Escaping From Ancient Rome, Finally! Applications and
Communication Infrastructures for Designing Smart Cities". Wiley
Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies (ETT),
vol. 25, Issue 1, January 2014, pp. 109-119.
[8]
P. Kwak, et al., “IoT(Internet of Things)-based Underground Risk
Assessment System Surrounding Water Pipes in Korea,” International
Journal of Control and Automation, vol. 8, no. 11 (2015), pp. 183-190.
[9]
K. Kim, D. H. Park, J. Lee, and S. I. Jin, “UGS Middleware for
Monitoring State of Underground Utilities,” in Proceedings of the
International
Conference
on
Information
and
Communications
Technology Convergence (ICTC) Oct. 28–30, 2015, Jeju, Rep. of Korea.
The Korean Institute of Communcations and Information Sciences, Oct.
2015, pp. 1186–1188.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

