High Performance GMI Sensor for
Biomagnetic Field Measurement
Tsuyoshi Uchiyama and Jiaju Ma
Department of Electronics
Nagoya University
Nagoya, Japan
e-mail: tutiyama@nuee.nagoya-u.ac.jp, ma.jiaju@i.mbox.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In this paper, we present a high performance
Giant Magneto-Impedance (GMI) sensor for biomagnetic
field measurement. We used a first order gradiometer based
on amorphous wire GMI sensor for measuring the cardiac
magnetic field and the brain magnetic field. The measured
results of a cardiac magnetic field perpendicular to the breast
plane (cardio apex position) and simultaneously recorded
Electrocardiography (ECG) are shown. The spontaneous
brain activity (Alpha rhythm) measurements were carried
out on a female subject by GMI sensor and simultaneously
recorded Electroencephalography (EEG).
Keywords-amorphou wire; GMI sensor; MCG; MEG.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Superconducting interferential devices (SQUID) have
been used as measuring tools for biomagnetic signals from
human beings. Magnetocardiography (MCG) is a non-
invasive and non-contact technique for the diagnosis of heart
diseases. The existing experimental data and clinical data
revealed the MCG is more sensitive (in comparison with the
methods based on the measurement of electric potentials) to
local currents that are generated at the interfaces of
myocardium fragment with different electrophysiological
properties.
The
technology
for
recording
non-invasive
cranial nerve activity that requires no liquid helium and high
spatial resolution has been around for over 30 years.
Recently, the use of different types of magnetic sensors, such
as Tunnel Magneto-Resistance (TMR) sensor and atomic
magnetometer
are
being
studied
for
Magnetoencephalography (MEG).
In the present study, we report measurement results for
MCG and MEG based on magnetoimpedance (MI) sensor
that can be operating in an unshielded environment and at
room temperature. This paper is organized as follows.
Section II is dedicated to the description of the theoretical
basis of GMI effect and the structures of complementary
metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) MI sensor. Section III
presents the results of MCG measurements and spontaneous
brain activity measurements via the new MI sensor system.
Finally, a general conclusion is given in Section IV.
II.
GMI SENSOR
We
used
the
amorphous
wire
(manufactured
by
UNITIKA Ltd.) with composition of FeCoSiB. The wire was
cold-drawn to around 30 um diameter from the as-quenched
state of approximately 130 um diameter and then tension-
annealed.
The
remarkable
GMI
effect
occurs
in
the
amorphous wire because the high frequency AC current
passing through the amorphous wire leads to the skin effect.
The impedance of the wire depends on the skin depth. In
general, the skin depth is related to the permeability of soft
magnetic
materials.
Therefore,
the
impedance
has
dependence on the magnetic field through change in
permeability.
Using both pick-up coil and analogue switch for the
signal processing, the temperature stability and linearly of
the CMOS MI sensor was remarkably improved. The
magnetic sensors using GMI element in combination with
pick-up coil have been reported by several groups as Off-
Diagonal GMI sensor [1][2]. More recently, we have
successfully developed a high performance magnetic sensor
having 2pT resolutions at 1Hz based on Off-Diagonal GMI
sensor [3]. In order to cancel out the effect of environmental
magnetic field noise, we have developed a first order
gradiometer for biomagnetic field measurement. In the
gradiometer, the amorphous wire has two coils: a sensing
coil and a reference coil.
III.
RESULTS
MCG measurements by MI gradiometer were carried out
for a men subject (aged 54) in sitting position. We measured
MCG at the point of the chest surface 25mm on the left hand
side of subject from a pit of the stomach. Figure 1(a)
illustrates the experimental set up in this study. The MI
gradiometer is placed on the wooden table and we measure
the perpendicular magnetic field component (Bz) to the chest
surface. D is the distance from chest surface to the front edge
of the MI gradiometer. Figure 1(b) represents simultaneous
measurement of ECG and MCG signals, when the distance D
is approximately 4 mm. In this case, we can identify sharp
magnetic peak which corresponds to peak in R wave of
ECG. Negative magnetic peak is observed following the T
wave in ECG.
The
spontaneous
brain
activity
(Alpha
rhythm)
measurements were carried out on a female subject. The
subject was with eyes open during the first 8 s of the
recording. Then, the subject was instructed to close her eyes
for the remaining 8 s of the recording. As expected, the alpha
rhythm signals simultaneously measured by EEG and MI
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

sensor were significantly attenuated when the subject opens
her eyes, and intensified with eyes closed. The subject's α 
wave MEG signal has a main frequency component of 10-11
Hz and the maximum amplitude is about 25 pTrms.
Significant susceptibility of MI sensor to spontaneous brain
activity was confirmed by signal / noise of 8/1, as shown in
Figure 2.
IV.
CONCLUSION
The noise level of the developed GMI gradiometer,
which can operate in an unshielded environment and at room
temperature, was 30pT root-mean-square (rms) in a 40Hz
bandwidth. In this study, measurement of MCG (by GMI
sensor) and ECG was carried out simultaneously. We can
identify sharp magnetic peak with strength of approximately
100pT, which was corresponded to peak in ECG R wave.
We also tried to measure the brain magnetic field of female
subject. The alpha rhythm signals simultaneously measured
by EEG and MEG (by GMI sensor) were significantly
attenuated when the subject opens eyes, and intensified with
eyes close.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Gudoshnikov, N. Usov, A. Nozdrin, M. Ipatov, A. Zhukov
and V. Zhukova, “Highly sensitive magnetometer based on
the
off-diagonal
GMI
effect
in
Co-rich
glass-coated
microwire”, Phys. Status Solidi A 211, No. 5, pp. 980–985.
[2]
B. Dufay, S. Saez, C. P. Dolabdjian, A. Yelon, and
D.
Menard, “Characterization of an optimized off-diagonal GMI-
based magnetometer”, IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 13, No. 1,
pp. 379-388, 2013.
[3]
J. Ma and T. Uchiyama, “High Performance Single Element
MI Magnetometer with Peak to Peak Voltage Detector by
Synchronized Switching”, IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 53, no.
11, 4003404, November 2017.
Figure 1. Set up for MCG measurement in (a). Simultaneous measurement
of ECG and MCG in (b).
Figure 2. Comparison of the spectral density of alpha rhythm signals
simultaneously measured by EEG and MI sensor between eyes opening and
closing. (a) EEG. (b) measured by MI sensor. (c) the sum power spectrum
level of MI sensor recording.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

