Low Profile Circularly Polarized Antenna with Large Coverage for Multi-Sensor
Device Links Optimisation
Mohamad Majed, Youssef Sbeity
University of Limoges
ENSIL-ENSCI
Limoges, France
E-mail : mohamad.majed@etu.unilim.fr
youssef.sbeity@etu.unilim.fr
Michele Lalande, Bernard Jecko
University of Limoges
XLIM Lab
Limoges, France
E-mail : michele.lalande@xlim.fr
bernard.jecko@xlim.fr
Abstract-Multi-sensor devices are well connected to each other
and to the microcontrollers via wireless links. This technology
introduces the interfacing problems not only in terms of signal
processing, but also in the Electromagnetic (EM) links to
perform
Multi-sensor,
Sensor
arrays,
Identification,
Localization, Tracking, and Multiple Input Multiple Output
(MIMO) Radar applications. Because of the unpredictable
sensor positioning, the link antennas must work in circular
polarization, have large coverage and a small thickness to be
located on walls, ceilings, platforms, etc. To satisfy these
conditions, this paper presents a new kind of low profile
antenna with circular polarization able to cover a large area.
The use of Electronic Band Gap Low Profile Metamaterial
(LP-EBG) satisfies all these specifications together.
Keywords-Sensor; Radar; Circular Polarization; Antenna;
Miniature; Larger Aperture Angle.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Today, multi-sensors are extensively used for many
applications including: temperature control in a building,
identification, localization, tracking, remote sensing, and
MIMO radars.
All these wireless technologies need reliable links with
microcontrollers, base station and other links for ad-hoc
sensors techniques. Such applications involve link antennas
with circular polarization because the sensor positions
cannot be mastered. In addition, they need antennas with
large coverage to minimize the number of sensors and the
cost. Large coverage means a large aperture angle but of a
small gain. There is no problem by the gain decrease
because of the radiated power, which is always limited by
the
Equivalent
Isotropic
Radiated
Power
(EIRP)
specifications. Hence, the decrease of the working band
must be controlled.
These antennas will be located on Printed Circuit Board
(PCB), walls, ceilings, Internet of Things (IoT) boxes, etc.
Consequently, they must have a low profile. To achieve
these characteristics together, an original antenna based on
the Electronic Band Gap (EBG) antenna concept [1] was
designed in this paper. This is a low profile antenna with a
thickness around λ/10 and transversal dimensions usually 
included between 1.5λ and 0.1λ. This antenna can work in a 
linear or circular polarization and it is possible to multiply
the space coverage by 2 or 3 times in its miniaturized form.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2
describes a small low profile antenna design, followed by
the circular Pixel characteristics in Section 3. Antenna
miniaturization to increase the aperture angle is explained in
Section 4 and Section 5 sheds light on the Radio Frequency
Identification (RFID) application and ground coverage. The
work is concluded in Section 6, followed by references.
II.
SMALL LOW PROFILE ANTENNA DESIGN
A Low Profile EBG antenna [2] is a resonant high gain
air cavity (Figure 1.a) inserted between a ground plane and a
semi-reflective
surface
usually
a
Frequency
Selective
Surface (FSS). A small antenna is built with the same
characteristics (see Figure 1.b) by introducing vertical walls
in such structure. This small antenna is called “Pixel”
because it has already been used in its square shape as Pixel
in the Agile Radiating Matrix Antenna (ARMA) concept
[3].
The new air cavity antenna (Pixel) is fed by a patch that
is printed on a dielectric slab or by any other probe being
located on the cavity (Figure 1.c). The dimensions of the
final structure with a square shape [3] can be chosen to be
between 1.5λ and 0.1λ, and other shapes can be used besides 
a circular one, as shown further in the paper.
Figure 1.a EBG Antenna
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 1.b Walls limited cavity antenna
Figure 1.c
Final antenna with its corresponding radiating surface ES field
cartography
III.
CIRCULAR PIXEL CHARACTERISTICS
To show the main characteristics, a circularly shaped
Pixel antenna with a λ/2 diameter fed by a circular patch is 
designed (Figure 2). The antenna is fed by four ports [4]
polarization circuit in order to obtain a good circular
polarized radiation pattern.
Figure 2.a Circularly shaped Pixel antenna above a square ground plane
Figure 2.b
Cut view: plane containing two feeding coaxial cables.
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The Return Loss S11 parameter evolution as a function of
the frequency (Figure 3.a) shows a large bandwidth: 18%
but the aperture angle is only about 103° (Figure 3.b) with a
λ/2 diameter of the “Pixel”. The axial ratio is presented in 
Figure 3.c.
Figure 3.a S11 parameter as a function of the frequency
Figure 3.b Antenna gain evolution
Figure 3.c Axial ratio
Axial Ratio: <3 dB for +-60 degrees. This indicates that the
deviation from circular polarization is less than 3 dB over
the specified angular range.
IV.
ANTENNA MINIATURIZATION TO INCREASE THE
APERTURE ANGLE
To increase the aperture angle of the antenna, the
diameter of the Pixel antenna is reduced to 0.2λ (Figure 4). 
Consequently, the feeding patch dimensions must be highly
reduced by introducing a new substrate with a high
permittivity Ɛ = 10 (Arlon). This new antenna is called Mini 
Antenna “MINA” and the characteristics are demonstrated
in a linear polarization design as seen in Figure 4.
Figure 4. Half cut-view of the MINA (with and without the FSS substrate).
Concerning these conditions, the bandwidth is strongly
reduced as shown in Figure 5.a: 0.5% (should be improved
to match with the application bandwidth) but the aperture
angle is large, as expected (Figure 5.b).
Figure 5. a S11 parameter as a function of the frequency
Figure 5.b   Gain evolution as a function of the Ɵ angle for all the ϕ planes. 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

V.
GROUND COVERAGE
To illustrate the operation, let us consider MINA as a
reader antenna for a simple Radio Frequency Identification
(RFID) application. It is located on the roof of a large
shopping center area. The miniaturized MINA solution
offers a coverage multiplied by four, as shown in Figure 6,
when the 0.5λ and the 0.2λ structures are compared. Instead 
of using 4 readers, the number of the prepared tags is
multiplied
by
4
and
only
one
reader
is
used.
Figure 6. Ground coverage obtained with the 2 antennas: 0.5λ Pixel and the 
0.2λ MINA. 
VI.
CONCLUSION
A new kind of low profile antenna was presented in this
paper. The behavior is deduced from the usage of an EBG
metamaterial, which allows to build planar antennas with
large or small surfaces (1.5λ to 0.2λ). 
For low frequency sensor-to-microcontroller links, the
use of this solution is only limited by the antenna size and
for high frequency solutions (sub millimeter ones) it is
limited
by
the
manufacturing
technology.
Such
link
antennas are particularly suitable for coverage of multi-
sensor applications.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Menudier, M. Thevenot, T. Monediere, and B. Jecko "EBG
Resonator Antennas: State of Art and Prospect" Antenna Theory and
Techniques,
6th
International
Conference
IEEE,
pp.37-43.
Sevastopol, Ukraine, September,2007.
[2]
M. S. Toubet et al. "Wide Bandwidth, High-Gain, and Low-Profile
EBG Prototype for High Power Applications," Antennas and
Wireless Propagation Letters, IEEE , vol.10, no. 1362-1365, 2011.
[3]
B. Jecko, E. Arnaud, H. Abou Taam, and A. Siblini "The ARMA
concept: Comparison of AESA and ARMA technologies for agile
antenna design.": Fermat Journal vol 20, pp.1-7, 2017.
[4]
A. Siblini, B. Jecko, H. AbouTaam, M. Rammal, and A. Bellion
"New Circularly Polarized Matrix Antenna for Space Applications"
Wireless Telecommunications Symposium (WTS) IEEE, pp.1-4,
London, 2016.
[5]
A. Siblini, B. Jecko, and E. Arnaud "Multimode Reconfigurable
Nano-Satellite Antenna for PDTM Application," Antennas and
Propagation, 11th European Conference EUCAP, pp.542-545, Paris
2017.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

