An Efficient Machine Learning-based Elderly Fall Detection Algorithm 
Faisal Hussain, Muhammad Basit Umair and 
Muhammad Ehatisham-ul-Haq 
Department of Computer Engineering 
University of Engineering and Technology (UET) 
Taxila, Pakistan 
e-mails: faisal.hussain.engr@gmail.com, 
basitumair@gmail.com and ehatishamuet@gmail.com 
 
Ivan Miguel Pires*,**, Tânia Valente*, Nuno M. 
Garcia** and Nuno Pombo** 
* Altranportugal 
Lisbon, Portugal 
** Instituto de Telecomunicações, 
Universidade da Beira Interior 
Covilhã, Portugal 
e-mails: impires@it.ubi.pt, tania.ss.valente@gmail.com, 
ngarcia@di.ubi.pt and ngpombo@di.ubi.pt 
 
 
Abstract— Falling is a commonly occurring mishap with 
elderly people, which may cause serious injuries. Thus, rapid 
fall detection is very important in order to mitigate the severe 
effects of fall among the elderly people. Many fall monitoring 
systems based on the accelerometer have been proposed for 
the fall detection. However, many of them mistakenly identify 
the daily life activities as fall or fall as daily life activity. To 
this aim, an efficient machine learning-based fall detection 
algorithm has been proposed in this paper. The proposed 
algorithm detects fall with efficient sensitivity, specificity, and 
accuracy as compared to the state-of-the-art techniques. A 
publicly available dataset with a very simple and 
computationally efficient set of features is used to accurately 
detect the fall incident. The proposed algorithm reports and 
accuracy of 99.98% with the Support Vector Machine (SVM) 
classifier.  
Keywords- Elderly Fall Detection; Human Fall Detection; 
Wearable Fall Detection System; Fall Monitoring System; 
SisFall Dataset; Machine Learning Algorithms; KNN; SVM. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The number of people who are elder and living alone in 
the world has been increasing continuously in western 
countries [1]. Different problems occur with the elderly 
people and one of them is falling. Fall is the most common 
issue among the elderly people of age ≥ 65. Falls are 
commonly defined as “inadvertently coming to rest on the 
ground, floor or other lower level, excluding intentional 
change in position to rest in furniture, wall or other objects” 
[2]. One-third of the people who are over 65 years old have 
an average one fall per year, two-third of them have a risk 
of falling again [3], and this number increases with age.  
According to the World Health Organization (WHO) 
report [2], falls are the second leading cause of 
unintentional or accidental death [2] [4]. One bad fall can 
mean a long hospital stay, permanent disability, painful 
rehabilitation, a loss of independent life, or worse. 
For over two decades, the experts from both 
technological and medical fields are working on reducing 
the consequences of fall by reducing the response time and 
providing better treatment upon occurrence of a fall. Falls 
are considered among one of the most hazardous incidents 
that can happen to an elderly person. 
This topic is included in the research for the creation of 
different systems related to the Ambient Assisted Living 
Systems (AAL), where the development of a framework for 
the identification of Activities of Daily Living (ADL) and 
their environment was previously studied [5]–[9]. 
Falls can affect the quality of life among the elderly 
people by resulting in many hazardous health issues such as 
fractures and spinal cord injury and decline in mobility and 
activity. One serious consequence of falling is the “long-
lie”, defined as remaining on the ground or floor for more 
than an hour after a fall, which can cause death.  
Elderly having age more than 65, suffer the greatest 
number of fatal falls. It is said that every year approximately 
646000 individuals die from falls globally of which over 
80% are in low and middle-income countries [4]. The death 
rates due to the unintentional falls are increasing over the 
globe. In the U.S., approximately 30,000 elderly people 
aged ≥ 65 died due to unintentional fall during the year 2016 
[10]. Figure 1 shows the death rates per 100,000 population 
for elderly aged 65 and more from the year 2000 to 2015. It 
can be observed that this rate is continuously increasing 
with an average of 4.9% per annum. Moreover, the death 
ratio in elderly men is higher as compared to the elderly 
women [11].  
The consequences of fall are not only confined to severe 
physical injuries, but psychological grievances as well. 
These psychological consequences include anxiety, activity 
disorder, depression, factitious activity restriction and fear 
of falling.  
Fear of falling is one of the major psychological issues 
in elderly people, which restricts their daily life activities. 
About 60% of the elderly people restrict their daily living 
activities due to the fear of fall [12]. This activity restriction 
may lead to meager gait balance and muscle weakness, 
which ultimately affects the mobility and independence of 
the elderly people, and, as a result, the falling incident 
happens again. Figure 2 illustrates the fall cycle that may 
happen again and again due to fear of fall.  
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 1.  Death Rate in U.S. Due to Fall Incidents from 2000 to 2015 [11] 
As the age increases and the human body becomes 
weaker, the chances fall occurrence also increase. 
Approximately 30 to 50% of people living in long-term care 
institutions fall each year, and 40% of them experience the 
fall again [13]. Falls exponentially increase with age-related 
biological changes. The incidence of some fall injuries, 
such as fractures and spinal cord injury, have markedly 
increased by 131% during the last three decades [13].. It is 
estimated that by the year 2050 one or more in each group 
of five people will be aged 65 years or above [14]. So, if the 
preventive measures are not taken in immediate future then 
the number of injuries caused by falls will increase 
significantly. 
 
Figure 2.  Fall Life Cycle 
The severe and long-lasting effects of falling can be 
diminished by detecting the fall earlier and providing the 
medical assistance timely. Thus, a fall monitoring system 
can help in mitigating these problems by generating an 
emergency alert upon the occurrence of the fall incident. 
For this purpose, many solutions have been proposed for 
fall detection. Many fall monitoring systems based on 
accelerometer and gyroscope have also been proposed for 
fall detection. However, many of them mistakenly identify 
the daily life activities as fall or fall as daily life activity. To 
this aim, an efficient machine learning-based fall detection 
algorithm has been proposed in this paper.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the related work. Section III describes the 
methodology used. Section IV addresses the results 
obtained. Finally, Section V concludes the article along 
with the acknowledgement. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A fall incident occurs whenever a person loses his/her 
balance and is unable to stay erect. When a young person 
losses balance, then he/she has the strength to recover 
his/her balance, but when an elderly person losses his/her 
balance then it is very difficult for him/her to recover as 
he/she is physically frail at that age. There are many factors 
that can cause the fall. All the factors that can be the cause 
of falls are called risk factors for fall. In fact, fall occurrence 
is the result of a complex interaction of many factors.  
The risk of falling and the number of factors are 
interrelated i.e. the risk of falling increases as the number of 
factors increases. The risk factors are categorized into three 
main types: behavioural, environmental and biological risk 
factors, as shown in Figure 3.  
Behavioural risk factors are related to human actions, 
emotions and activities of daily life. These factors are 
controllable through the strategic intervention. For 
example, if a person falls due to excess intake of drugs, 
alcohol then this habit or behaviour can be modified by 
strategic treatment.  
Environmental 
risk 
factors 
originate from the 
surrounding environment of a person. Slippery floors, 
insufficient lighting and cracked pathways are some of the 
major environmental risk factors. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Fall Risk Factors 
Biological risk factors are related to age, gender and 
physical health of a person. Some biological risk factors 
include: chronic and acute diseases, diabetes, heart 
problems, eyesight disorders, high or low blood pressure, 
gait and balance disorders. The biological factors like age 
and gender are uncontrollable, however, the diseases can be 
alleviated or controlled through their proper treatment and 
the physical health can also be improved. 
There are two research tracks in the human fall-related 
domain: falling detection (FD) and falling prevention (FP) 
[15]. In the falling detection domain, the main focus is to 
reduce the rescue time after the fall incident occurred. In 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

the falling prevention domain, the main focus is to predict 
fall through gait and balance analysis.  
Fall detection systems are very helpful in reducing the 
response time after the falling incident. Fall prevention 
systems are very helpful in stopping and avoiding future 
falls. Human fall-related systems are classified into three 
types on the basis of sensor deployment, i.e. camera-based 
systems, ambient-based systems and wearable systems. 
Due to expensive hardware cost, camera-based and 
ambient-based devices are rarely used. Wearable devices 
are commonly used which use inertial measurement units 
like accelerometers and gyroscope. With the invention of 
micro-electro-mechanical system, wearable devices can be 
implemented to be small and lightweight. 
K. Chaccour et al. [15] proposed a global classification 
scheme for both FDS and FPS. They categorized both FDS 
and FPS on the basis of sensor deployment, into three types: 
wearable based systems (WS), non-wearable based systems 
(NWS) and fusion or hybrid-based systems (FS). In the 
wearable based systems, sensors are deployed on the body 
of an elderly person for falling detection or falling 
prevention purpose. Mostly, these are deployed on waist or 
wrist. However, in the non-wearable based systems, sensors 
(i.e., ambient, vision or RF sensors) are deployed in the 
surrounding environment rather than on the human body. 
On the other hand, the fusion or hybrid-based systems 
consist of both wearable and non-wearable sensors. J. T. 
Perry et al. [16] classified FDS on the basis of the 
accelerometer technique. They classified FDS methods into 
three types: methods that measure acceleration, methods 
that combine acceleration with other sensor data and 
methods that do not measure acceleration at all. R. Igual et 
al. [17] divided fall detection systems into wearable devices 
and context-aware systems. 
Different data processing techniques are used in fall 
detection systems. These techniques depend upon the 
parameters extracted from the sensors. Mainly two types of 
data processing techniques are used in are used in FDS: 
analytical methods and machine learning methods. 
A. Analytical Methods 
Analytical methods use statistical techniques for fall 
prediction or fall prevention. These methods are based upon 
traditional techniques for the classification of data. Some 
famous analytical techniques for data processing are: 
Thresh-Holding [18][19], Fuzzy Logic [20], Hidden 
Markov model [21], and Bayesian Filtering [22]. All these 
techniques are used to classify the falls from non-falls. 
Among these methods, Thresh-Holding technique is mostly 
used. In this technique, fall is reported or predicted when 
peaks or specific shape features are detected in the data 
signals. This method is mostly used in wearable based 
systems. Ambient-based systems use event sensing 
techniques to monitor and track the vibrational data, while 
camera-based systems use image processing techniques to 
identify falls. 
B. Machine Learning Methods 
Machine learning methods predict or detect the falls 
through complex algorithms. These complex algorithms are 
used to get close insight on data for predicting the falls. In 
machine learning methods, firstly, the algorithm is trained 
on a feature set extracted from the dataset then it is used for 
testing real-time data. Some famous machine learning 
algorithms used for detection or prediction of falls are: 
Support Vector Machine [23] Multilayer Perceptron [24], 
K-Nearest Neighbors [25], Naive Bayes [26], and others. 
These methods are used to gain insights of data for detection 
and even prediction of future falls.  
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The proposed methodology uses a machine learning 
approach for the fall detection. SisFall [19], a publicly 
available dataset, is used for the training and testing of the 
proposed algorithm on the falling or non-falling activities. 
There are four major steps of the proposed methodology i.e.  
Data collection, Preprocessing, Feature Extraction, and Fall 
Detection, as shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Flow Chart of the Proposed Methodology 
1) 
Data Collection. The first step of the proposed 
methodology is to collect data that is to be used in further 
stages after the preprocessing. It is a very challenging task 
to collect data in real time by the people especially 
performing activities by the elderly people. Many 
researchers have collected data for fall activities and 
activities of daily life.  Different datasets are available, but 
most of them have activities performed by only young 
participants. For an efficient elderly fall detection system, 
the dataset should contain the falls and daily life activities 
performed by the elderly people also. So, we found SisFall 
[27] dataset which contains both young and elderly 
participants. 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

SisFall is a fall and movement dataset that is used in this 
study. SisFall dataset contains 4505 files out of which 1798 
files include 15 types of falls and 2707 files include 19 types 
of ADL performed by 23 young adults of age 19 to 30 years 
and 15 elderly people of age 60 to 75 years. All the activities 
are recorded at sampling rate Fs = 200 Hz using a wearable 
device mounted at the waist of the participant, having three 
motion sensors i.e. two accelerometers and one gyroscope.  
2) 
Data Preprocessing. Once the data is acquired, the 
next step is to preprocess the data in order to remove the 
unwanted noise from the signal so that better classification 
can be performed by the machine learning algorithms. 
There are different filters used [14] but, in this 
methodology, we used a fourth order low pass infinite 
impulse response (IIR) Butterworth filter with the cut-off 
frequency Fc = 5Hz because it is simple and has low 
computational cost.   
3) 
Feature Extraction. Once the raw signal is 
preprocessed, the next step is to extract the features for the 
purpose of classification. We extracted six features from the 
preprocessed data. These features include maximum 
amplitude, minimum amplitude, mean amplitude, Variance, 
kurtosis and skewness of the signal.  These features along 
with mathematical expressions are mentioned in Table I.  
Each feature is extracted on three sensors data which 
includes two accelerometers and one gyroscope along three 
axis x-axis, y-axis and z-axis. The size of one feature for a 
single sensor along the three axis is [1(# of samples) x 1(# 
of features) x 3(# of axis)]. In this way, the size of all six 
features along with all three axis for each single sensor 
becomes [1(# of samples) x 6 (# of features) x 3(# of axis)] 
= [1 x 18] for one sample. Consequently, we come up with 
a final feature vector of size [1 x 54] for all three sensors 
along all three axis across one sample. 
TABLE I.  SET OF FEATURES EXTRACTED FOR FALL DETECTION 
 
4) 
Fall Detection. After the feature extraction, the 
next step is to classify the activity whether it is a fall or not. 
The fall detection problem is a binary classification problem 
i.e. we have to classify the activity as fall or non-fall (i.e. 
ADL) activity. Hence, we divided the whole dataset into 
two classes i.e. Class-1 for fall activity and Class-2 for non-
fall (i.e. ADL) activities. All the feature vectors that were 
extracted from the samples collected in the dataset by 
performing falls were labelled as Class-1 while all the 
feature vectors that were extracted from the samples 
collected by performing ADL were labelled as Class- 2. In 
this way, the total number of samples in Class-1 is 1798 for 
falls and the total number of samples in Class-2 is 2707 for 
ADL.  
After labelling the feature vector of samples, we then 
applied the 10-fold cross-validation scheme in order to 
make the machine learning classifier a better predictive 
model and to diminish the bias. Finally, we used four 
machine learning classifiers in order to evaluate the 
performance of the proposed scheme. These algorithms 
include Decision Tree (DT), Logistic Regression (LR), K-
Nearest Neighbor (KNN) with K=1 based on Euclidean 
distance and Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier with 
Quadratic kernel function. The results are given in Section 
IV.  
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
A. Method of Analysis 
The performance of the proposed algorithm is analyzed 
on the basis of three commonly used performance metrics, 
i.e., sensitivity, specificity and accuracy. These are defined 
as: 
1) Sensitivity (SE). It will measure the capacity of the 
system to detecting falls. It is the ratio of true positives to 
the total number of falls. Mathematically, it can be written 
as in (1). 
 
𝑆𝐸 =
$%
$%&'( × 100                       (1) 
 
2) Specificity (SP). It is the capacity of the system to 
detect falls only when they occur. Mathematically, it can 
be written as in (2). 
 
𝑆𝑃 =
$(
$(&'% × 100                        (2) 
 
3) Accuracy. It is the ability of the system to 
differentiate between falls and no-falls. Mathematically, it 
can be written as in (3). 
 
 
𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 =
$%&$(
$%&'(&$(&'% × 100 
  (3) 
 
where TP refers to True Positive, i.e., fall occurs and the 
algorithm detects it, TN refers to True Negative, i.e., fall 
doesn’t occur & algorithm does not detect a fall, FP refers 
to False Positive, i.e., fall does not occur but the algorithm 
reports a fall, and FN refers to False Negative, i.e., fall 
occurs but the algorithm does not detect it.  
B. Results and Discussion 
The experiments are performed using MATLAB 
R2016a. In order to analyze the extracted features, we used 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

four machine learning classifiers (i.e., DT, LR, KNN and 
SVM), for fall detection, which has been evaluated on the 
bases of above-discussed parameters. The confusion 
matrices of these classifiers are shown in Figure 5.  
 
Confusion Matrix - 1 
 
Confusion Matrix - 2 
DT 
Predicted 
LR 
Predicted 
Actual 
Fall 
ADL 
 
Actual 
Fall 
ADL 
Fall 
1776 
22 
 
Fall 
1778 
20 
ADL 
22 
2685 
 
ADL 
8 
2699 
Confusion Matrix - 3 
 
Confusion Matrix - 4 
KNN 
Predicted 
 
SVM 
Predicted 
Actual 
Fall 
ADL 
 
Actual 
Fall 
ADL 
Fall 
1794 
4 
 
Fall 
1797 
1 
ADL 
0 
2707 
 
ADL 
0 
2707 
Figure 5.  Confusion Matrices of DT, LR, KNN and SVM Classifiers 
The 10-fold cross-validation scheme is used for the 
training and testing, i.e., the dataset is divided into 10-folds 
randomly in such a way that every time 9-fold for training 
and 1-fold for testing. Hence, the entire dataset is used for 
both training and testing. Table II shows the results of the 
four machine learning classifiers. These parameters are 
calculated using confusion matrices shown in Figure 5.  
 
TABLE II.  FALL DETECTION RESULTS OF THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM 
Classifier 
SE 
SP 
Accuracy 
DT 
98.78% 
99.19% 
99.02% 
LR 
98.88% 
99.70% 
99.38% 
KNN 
99.78% 
100% 
99.91% 
SVM 
99.94% 
100% 
99.98% 
 
From the Table II, it can be noted that based upon the 
extracted set of features, among the four machine learning 
classifiers, SVM performs better as compared to three 
classifiers in sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy. The 
performance of the proposed SVM-based scheme is also 
compared to the state-of-the-art techniques as shown in 
Table III. 
 
TABLE III.  RESULT COMPARISON OF THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM WITH 
THE STATE-OF-THE-ART TECHNIQUES 
Research Study 
SE 
SP 
Accuracy 
A. Sucerquia [27] 
95.5 % 
96.38 % 
95.96 % 
A. Sucerquia [28] 
99.27 % 
99.37 % 
99.33 % 
L. P. Nguyen [24] 
99.62% 
98.26% 
96.60% 
Proposed  
(SVM-based) 
99.94% 
100% 
99.98% 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this study, an efficient fall detection algorithm was 
proposed which uses a very simple and computationally 
efficient set of features extracted from a publicly available 
dataset. The extracted features are used to train and test four 
machine learning classifiers. Among these classifiers, 
SVM shows the highest accuracy, i.e., 99.98% which is 
better than the state-of-the-art techniques as shown in 
Table III.  
The proposed algorithm is efficient to be used in the 
real-time fall detection system. The future work includes 
the hardware implementation of the proposed fall detection 
algorithm in order to secure the independent life of elderly 
people.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This 
work 
was 
supported 
by 
FCT 
project 
UID/EEA/50008/2013. The authors would also like to 
acknowledge the contribution of the COST Actions IC1303 
– AAPELE – Architectures, Algorithms and Protocols for 
Enhanced Living Environments, and CA16226 – Indoor 
living space improvement: Smart Habitat for the Elderly.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
D. E. Bloom, A. Boersch-Supan, P. McGee, and A. Seike, 
“Population aging: facts, challenges, and responses,” Benefits 
Compens. Int., vol. 41, no. 1, p. 22, 2011. 
[2] 
W. H. O. Ageing and L. C. Unit, “WHO global report on falls 
prevention in older age,” World Heal. Organ., 2008. 
[3] 
A. T. Özdemir, “An analysis on sensor locations of the human 
body for wearable fall detection devices: Principles and 
practice,” Sensors, vol. 16, no. 8, p. 1161, 2016. 
[4] 
“Falls.” [Online]. Available: http://www.who.int/en/news-
room/fact-sheets/detail/falls. [Accessed: 07-May-2018]. 
[5] 
I. M. Pires, N. M. Garcia, N. Pombo, and F. Flórez-Revuelta, 
“User 
Environment 
Detection 
with 
Acoustic 
Sensors 
Embedded on Mobile Devices for the Recognition of Activities 
of Daily Living,” arXiv Prepr. arXiv1711.00124, 2017. 
[6] 
I. M. Pires, N. M. Garcia, N. Pombo, F. Flórez-Revuelta, and S. 
Spinsante, 
“Pattern 
Recognition 
Techniques 
for 
the 
Identification of Activities of Daily Living using Mobile Device 
Accelerometer,” arXiv Prepr. arXiv1711.00096, 2017. 
[7] 
I. M. Pires, N. M. Garcia, N. Pombo, and F. Flórez-Revuelta, 
“A Multiple Source Framework for the Identification of 
Activities of Daily Living Based on Mobile Device Data,” 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

arXiv Prepr. arXiv1711.00104, 2017. 
[8] 
I. M. Pires, N. M. Garcia, N. Pombo, F. Flórez-Revuelta, S. 
Spinsante, and M. C. Teixeira, “Identification of activities of 
daily living through data fusion on motion and magnetic sensors 
embedded on mobile devices,” Pervasive Mob. Comput., vol. 
47, pp. 78–93, 2018. 
[9] 
I. M. Pires, N. M. Garcia, N. Pombo, F. Flórez-Revuelta, and 
N. D. Rodríguez, “Validation Techniques for Sensor Data in 
Mobile Health Applications,” J. Sensors, vol. 2016, 2016. 
[10] 
E. Burns and R. Kakara, “Deaths from Falls Among Persons 
Aged ≥65 Years — United States, 2007–2016,” MMWR. Morb. 
Mortal. Wkly. Rep., vol. 67, no. 18, pp. 509–514, May 2018. 
[11] 
“Age-Adjusted Death Rates* from Unintentional Falls Among 
Adults Aged ≥65 Years, by Sex — National Vital Statistics 
System, United States, 2000–2015,” MMWR. Morb. Mortal. 
Wkly. Rep., vol. 66, no. 35, p. 943, Sep. 2017. 
[12] 
N. Deshpande, E. J. Metter, F. Lauretani, S. Bandinelli, J. 
Guralnik, and L. Ferrucci, “Activity restriction induced by fear 
of falling and objective and subjective measures of physical 
function: a prospective cohort study,” J. Am. Geriatr. Soc., vol. 
56, no. 4, pp. 615–620, 2008. 
[13] 
Y. Dionyssiotis, “Analyzing the problem of falls among older 
people,” Int. J. Gen. Med., vol. 5, p. 805, 2012. 
[14] 
N. El-Bendary, Q. Tan, F. C. Pivot, and A. Lam, “FALL 
DETECTION AND PREVENTION FOR THE ELDERLY: A 
REVIEW OF TRENDS AND CHALLENGES.,” Int. J. Smart 
Sens. Intell. Syst., vol. 6, no. 3, 2013. 
[15] 
K. Chaccour, R. Darazi, A. H. El Hassani, and E. Andrès, 
“From fall detection to fall prevention: A generic classification 
of fall-related systems,” IEEE Sens. J., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 812–
822, 2017. 
[16] 
J. T. Perry, S. Kellog, S. M. Vaidya, J.-H. Youn, H. Ali, and H. 
Sharif, “Survey and evaluation of real-time fall detection 
approaches,” in High-Capacity Optical Networks and Enabling 
Technologies (HONET), 2009 6th International Symposium on, 
2009, pp. 158–164. 
[17] 
R. Igual, C. Medrano, and I. Plaza, “Challenges, issues and 
trends in fall detection systems,” Biomed. Eng. Online, vol. 12, 
no. 1, p. 66, 2013. 
[18] 
C. Medrano, R. Igual, I. García-Magariño, I. Plaza, and G. 
Azuara, 
“Combining 
novelty 
detectors 
to 
improve 
accelerometer-based fall detection,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., 
vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 1849–1858, 2017. 
[19] 
G. Šeketa, J. Vugrin, and I. Lacković, “Optimal Threshold 
Selection for Acceleration-Based Fall Detection,” in Precision 
Medicine Powered by pHealth and Connected Health, Springer, 
2018, pp. 151–155. 
[20] 
D. Anderson, R. H. Luke, J. M. Keller, M. Skubic, M. Rantz, 
and M. Aud, “Linguistic summarization of video for fall 
detection using voxel person and fuzzy logic,” Comput. Vis. 
image Underst., vol. 113, no. 1, pp. 80–89, 2009. 
[21] 
H. Cao et al., “A fall detection method based on acceleration 
data and hidden Markov model,” in Signal and Image 
Processing (ICSIP), IEEE International Conference on, 2016, 
pp. 684–689. 
[22] 
J. Howcroft, J. Kofman, and E. D. Lemaire, “Prospective fall-
risk prediction models for older adults based on wearable 
sensors,” IEEE Trans. neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 25, no. 
10, pp. 1812–1820, 2017. 
[23] 
Y. Wang, K. Wu, and L. M. Ni, “Wifall: Device-free fall 
detection by wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput., 
vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 581–594, 2017. 
[24] 
L. P. Nguyen, M. Saleh, and R. L. B. Jeannès, “An Efficient 
Design of a Machine Learning-Based Elderly Fall Detector,” in 
International Conference on IoT Technologies for HealthCare, 
2017, pp. 34–41. 
[25] 
A. T. Ozdemir, C. Tunc, and S. Hariri, “Autonomic Fall 
Detection System,” in Foundations and Applications of Self* 
Systems (FAS* W), 2017 IEEE 2nd International Workshops 
on, 2017, pp. 166–170. 
[26] 
H. Wang, M. Li, J. Li, J. Cao, and Z. Wang, “An improved fall 
detection approach for elderly people based on feature weight 
and Bayesian classification,” in Mechatronics and Automation 
(ICMA), 2016 IEEE International Conference on, 2016, pp. 
471–476. 
[27] 
A. Sucerquia, J. D. López, and J. F. Vargas-Bonilla, “SisFall: A 
fall and movement dataset,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 1, p. 198, 
2017. 
[28] 
A. Sucerquia, “Real-Life/Real-Time Elderly Fall Detection 
with a Triaxial Accelerometer,” Sensors (Basel)., vol. 18, no. 4, 
2018. 
 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

