Silver Gate Field Effect Transistor for Oxygen Gas Sensor 
 
Keiji Tsukada, Daisuke Kiriake, Kenji Sakai, Toshihiko Kiwa 
Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Okayama University 
Okayama, Japan 
tsukada@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— A silver gate field effect transistor (FET) integrated 
thermal controller was developed for a new type of oxygen gas 
sensor. It showed a threshold voltage change at a temperature 
as low as 80˚C. Oxygen response characteristics of the FET 
prepared with different productions of silver materials using a 
vacuum-evaporated membrane, printed material using silver-
nanoparticles and silver epoxy were compared. The FET with 
a gate of silver epoxy showed the largest sensitivity of 135 
mV/decade in the oxygen concentration range from 5% to 40% 
at 120˚C. 
Keywords-FET; oxygen gas; silver gate 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The oxygen gas sensor is one of the most commonly used 
chemical sensors. There are many types of sensor such as 
potentiometric, resistive, amperometric and optic sensors. 
Miniaturization and mass-production are desired for sensor 
devices, especially in multipoint measurement such as in 
sensor networks. A solid-state sensor is suitable for such 
demands. At present, oxygen sensors based on yttria-
stabilized zirconia (YSZ) electrolytes as solid-state are being 
successfully utilized for automobile and industry monitoring. 
An oxygen sensor with YSZ is suitable for high temperature 
conditions such as in automobile exhausts and furnaces. On 
the other hand, it is limited to low temperature operation 
lower than 500˚C because the resistivity of YSZ is too high 
at low temperatures. Recently, solid-state oxygen sensors 
operable at low temperature have been reported.  For 
example, a ZnO nanowire-based sensor [1] and platinum-
doped In2O3 nanocrystals [2] operable at room temperature 
showed resistance change to oxygen.  One of the authors 
reported a field effect transistor (FET) type oxygen sensor 
operable at room temperature, and the FET-type sensor 
showed a sensitivity of 6 mV/decade to oxygen partial 
pressure [3]. The FET-type sensor has a gate of about 10-
nm-thick platinum/ YSZ layer deposited on the gate insulator 
of FET. The interface between the YSZ layer and the Pt 
layer was an active site for oxygen dissociation. However, it 
was very difficult to optimize the gate structure because the 
interface of gas-Pt-YSZ had to exist on the gate surface. 
Silver is an oxygen selective material and acts as a catalyst to 
oxygen; therefore gas diffusion electrodes with silver 
catalysts have been investigated for fuel cells, batteries, etc 
[4]. In this study, we applied silver as the gate material for 
the FET-type gas sensor. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
The developed FET has a gate structure of upper silver 
material as the oxygen sensitive layer, and double insulator 
layers of a 125-nm-thick Si3N4 and a 43-nm-thick SiO2 (Fig. 
1), which are based on a similar structure to that of the 
previous reported hydrogen sensor [5]. The FET is an n-
channel type FET with a channel 40 m long and 390m 
wide. To investigate the optimization of the silver gate, three 
types of fabrication method were compared. One is a thin 
film that was fabricated by vacuum evaporation. The second 
material was fabricated using silver-nanoparticles. The FET 
insulator gate was coated with the silver-nanoparticles ink 
(nanometal ink L-Ag, ULVAC), and then baked at 120˚C. 
The third material was silver epoxy (CircuitWorks®), which 
was fabricated by a printing mixture of epoxy and hardener, 
and then cured at room temperature. To control the 
temperature of the Ag-gate FET sensor, a temperature sensor 
using a p-n junction diode and a heater using Ti/Ni/Au 
resistance were integrated into the same chip. To measure the 
oxygen response, voltage follower circuits were used to 
determine the threshold voltage change of the FET. The 
voltage follower circuits worked to maintain the constant 
drain-source voltage and current of the FET. To maintain the 
constant gate voltage, the Ag-gate was connected to the 
electrode. This circuit configuration operated such that the 
output voltage change of the circuit was the same as the 
work-function change of the silver. The work-function 
change was equal to the threshold voltage change of the FET. 
Sample gases with different oxygen concentration were 
prepared by a gas mixture using oxygen and nitrogen gases. 
The gas sensor was installed in a flow-through cell, and 
sample gas was flowed into the cell at a flow rate of 0.5 
l/min. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The oxygen gas response of the developed sensor was 
evaluated by the gas flow system. To control oxygen 
concentrations, pure oxygen and nitrogen gas were mixed. 
First, the sensor reproducibility as a function of oxygen 
concentration ranging from 10% to 20% was studied at 
100˚C (Fig. 2). The oxygen sensor with silver epoxy 
showed the largest sensitivity and best stability. In contrast, 
the sensor with silver nanoparticles showed poor response. 
The sensitivity of the FET with silver epoxy was 50 
mV/decade, and it was larger than the Nernstian response 
5
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the structure of the integrated silver-
gate FET with thermal control.  
Ag-FET
Thermometer
TEOS
p-well
p-well
Ti/Ni/Au
SiO2
Si3N4
Ag
Al
n-substrate
Heater
(Ti/Ni/Au)
channel
Drain
Source
sensitivity (19 mV/decade at 100˚C) based on the 
equilibrium reaction as below.  
ଵ
ଶ Oଶ ൅ 2eି ↔ Oଶି                                            (1) 
If the reaction occurs at the membrane surface, the silver 
membrane potential changes according to the Nernst 
equation below: 
∅୫ ൌ const െ ቀ
ୖ୘
ସ୊ቁ lnP୓మ                       (2)                        
where mis the membrane potential, F is Faraday’s 
constant, R is the gas constant, T is absolute temperature, 
and PO2 is the partial pressure of oxygen. The sensitivity of 
the sensor with the silver vacuum evaporation was 20 
mV/decade, and it was nearly equal to the Nernstian 
response.  
To investigate the response difference, membrane 
structures were observed by scanning electron microscopy 
(Fig. 3). The silver vacuum evaporation membrane showed 
a very smooth surface whereas the silver nanoparticle 
membrane showed a crushed surface. This was due to the 
poor adherence to the Si3N4 gate insulator, and therefore it 
showed the lowest response. The silver epoxy membrane 
showed a porous and rough surface. This created the largest 
surface, so active sites of the silver membrane were 
considered to be rich. The silver vacuum evaporation 
membrane had a very smooth surface, where it was assumed 
that the smooth surface created the monolayer reaction at 
the activated site on the membrane, and then the membrane 
potential was described by the Nernst equation. On the other 
hand, the sensor with the silver epoxy had a porous and 
rough surface, and it created the multilayer of the 
dissociated oxygen inside the gate membrane. The higher 
sensitivity was considered due to the dissociated oxygen 
diffusion inside the silver gate.  
The oxygen response was obtained over 80˚C, and 
sensitivity was increased according to the temperature 
increment (Fig.4). It was not linear. According to the 
temperature increment, activation energy increased and then 
oxygen dissociation reaction was accelerated. The oxygen 
response to a wider oxygen range from 5% to 40% was 
investigated. The sensor showed a linear response to 
 
 
Figure 2. Comparison of oxygen response characteristics of the FET-
type sensor using different silver membranes at 100˚C: (a) silver 
nanoparticle membrane, (b) silver vacuum evaporation membrane, (c) 
silver epoxy membrane. 
0
900
1800
2700
3600
4500
0
-10
-20
-30
10
20
(a)
(b)
(c)
20%
10%
20%
10%
20%
Time (s)
Output voltage change (mV)
 
Figure 3. SEM images of the silver membrane: (a) silver 
nanoparticle membrane, (b) silver vacuum evaporation membrane, 
(c) silver epoxy membrane. 
 
Figure 4. Temperature dependence of the sensitivity of FET-type 
oxygen sensor with silver epoxy gate. 
60
80
100
120
140
0
10
20
30
40
Temperature (˚C)
Output voltage change (mV)
6
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

logarithmic oxygen concentration, and it was 135 
mV/decade at 120˚C (Fig. 5).    
In this study, we proposed a new oxygen sensor for the 
silver-gate FET. The silver-gate FET using silver epoxy 
showed the largest sensitivity compared with other silver 
membranes. This was considered due to the sterically-
congested dissociated oxygen at the silver membrane. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] C. Lu, S. Chang, S. Chang, et al., “ZnO nanowire-based 
oxygen gas sensor”, IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 9, pp. 485-489, 
2009 
[2] G. Neri, A. Bonavita, G. Micali et al., “A highly sensitive 
oxygen sensor operating at room temperature based on 
platinum-doped 
In2O3 
nanocrystals”, 
Chemical 
Communications, pp.6032-6034, 2005 
[3] Y. Miyahara, K. Tsukada, H. Miyagi, “Field-effect transistor 
using a solid electrolyte as a new oxygen sensor”, Journal of 
Applied Physics, vol. 63, pp. 2431-2434, 1988 
[4] E. Gulzow, N. Wagner, M. Schulze, “Preparation of gas 
diffusion electrodes with silver catalysts for alkaline fuel cells”, 
Fuel Cells, vol. 3, pp. 67-72, 2003 
[5] K. Tsukada, Masatoshi Kariya, Tomiharu Yamaguchi, et al., 
“Dual-gate field-effect transistor hydrogen gas sensor with 
thermal compensation”, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 
vol. 49, pp. 024206-024206-5, 2010. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Calibration curve of the FET-type oxygen sensor at 120˚C. 
1
10
100
2.42
Oxygen concentration (%)
Output voltage (V)
2.44
2.46
2.48
2.50
2.52
2.54
2.56
2.58
2.60
7
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

