Improving Distance Estimation in Object Localisation with Bluetooth Low Energy
Georgia Ionescu, Carlos Mart´ınez de la Osa and Michel Deriaz
Institute of Services Science
University of Geneva
Switzerland
Email: {georgia.ionescu, carlos.martinez, michel.deriaz}@unige.ch
Abstract—The arrival of Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) creates
opportunities for great innovations. One possible application is
object localisation. We present our unique software that can
track objects and help ﬁnding their location within a house
perimeter. With the help of Bluetooth beacons that can be
attached to different items, we can estimate the distance between
the mobile device and the object with an accuracy of less than
one meter. In this paper, we describe our system and the
techniques we use, the experiments we conducted along with the
results. In addition, we brieﬂy present some work in progress
using an indoor positioning system that helps locating the objects.
Keywords—object localisation; mobile application; Bluetooth
Low Energy
I. INTRODUCTION
Improving the quality of life of elderly people with the help
of technology is a key topic in the current research. There are
numerous advantages of using technology in order to complete
tasks that otherwise would be very difﬁcult for a human.
Technology can help elderly overcome different challenges.
One particular problem that we try to solve is ﬁnding lost
personal items. Locating objects has a wide variety of practical
applications, not only for elderly people. On a daily basis
people deal with losing important items (like wallets, keys,
etc.). Having your phone telling you where a desired item is,
or giving you information about how far the object is from you,
could save a lot of time and effort for a person. Additionally, it
would help people for which it is difﬁcult to remember where
they keep such items.
Currently, there exists a wide range of systems and tech-
nologies that provide real-time locating. Different technologies
include WiFi [1], RFID (Radio-Frequency Identiﬁcation) [2],
ZigBee [2], etc. They all differ in terms of cost, infrastruc-
ture complexity, availability, maintenance costs, etc. These
differences make each of them more appropriate for certain
problems with different characteristics, further presented.
We describe distance estimation improvements when locat-
ing lost objects using the Bluetooth Low Energy technology.
We developed a unique approach to reduce the noise and lower
the error up to 1 meter for short distances and below 3 meters
for long distances.
In this paper, we present ﬁrstly previous work that is
relevant to our research along with some of the existing
systems used for locating objects. Next, we provide a detailed
description of our proposed model, and the techniques we use.
In Section IV, we describe the results of our experiments.
Finally, in Section V, we discuss several directions of current
and future research along with the conclusions.
II. RELATED WORK
Locating objects is not a new problem. Over the past years,
there were many attempts to ﬁnd a generic solution and
currently there are numerous approaches and technologies that
address this issue. Each of them is more suitable for certain
contexts and constraints that we present below.
One of the most common approaches is tracking objects and
their movements in a video sequence, using a camera. This is
well suited for trafﬁc, surveillance and robots that need to
identify objects based on images [3][4][5]. The vision-based
techniques are not ideal in a mobile context, due to several
reasons. Firstly, the lost object might be visually inaccessible,
despite the fact that it can be close to the person. Secondly,
these techniques are very computationally expensive, which
makes it not suitable for a mobile device.
A different category of Real-Time Location System is based
on WiFi. The main components are the tag (active or passive)
that is attached to the object, and the reader, that can establish a
wireless communication with the tag. It has been successfully
used for autonomous mobile robots [6] and for locating people
in the underground (subway) [7]. However, WiFi is better
suited to locate smart devices rather than objects.
Although RFID is primarily used for identifying objects,
real-time location based on RFID has been studied extensively
over the past years, with applications in health-care [8] and
warehouse operations [9]. However, RFID id not a technology
accessible to most of the people, expensive devices (RFID
readers) are required.
Bluetooth Low Energy has a lot of potential for object
tracking. It is a mainstream technology available on latest
mobile devices. The distance between the tags and the readers
can reach up to 50 meters.
Bluetooth has been successfully used for indoor positioning.
L. Pei et al. [10][11] present their system that ﬁnds the location
using ﬁngerprinting. The position is calculated using the RSSI
(Received Signal Strength Indication) probability distribution
combined with the Weibull distribution. The accuracy obtained
has a standard deviation of 10 meters. A different approach
is proposed by F. Subhan et al. [12] that use trilateration for
computing the position. The distance is estimated based on the
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

radio propagation model combined with the Gradient ﬁlter for
reducing the noise. The accuracy obtained using this method
is 2.67 meters.
In contrary, the technology proposed in our paper is based
on BLE, as most portable devices come already equipped with
it, hence we can beneﬁt without additional cost and effort.
The system setup cost is low which makes it more affordable
in comparison to above mentioned solutions. In addition, the
accuracy of the distance we achieve in our system is proven
to be higher than in previous approaches.
There are several recent commercial products that offer the
hardware and software to help ﬁnding objects [13][14], based
on BLE. However, they all give only information regarding
the intensity of the communication, or whether the object is
in range or not.
III. SOLUTION OVERVIEW
Our goal is to provide a mobile application that helps
people ﬁnd their belongings, without the need of expensive
infrastructure. Secondly, the set-up must be minimal and easy
to use by a person without technical background. Thirdly, the
technology must be accessible to everyone who owns a smart
device.
Based on all these criteria, Bluetooth Low Energy was
chosen. Our system uses the StickNFind [14] beacons which
can be attached to the objects. Their battery lasts up to one
year based on 30 minutes a day use [14].
The distance between the emitter and the receiver can be
estimated using the Log Normal Shadowing model (LNS)[15]
detailed in (1).
Pd = P0 − 10n log( d
d0
) + Xσ
(1)
• Pd represents the power of the signal strength (RSSI),
• P0 is the offset (the signal strength at the reference
distance d0),
• n is a coefﬁcient characteristic to the device and the sur-
rounding environment, d represents the distance between
the emitter and the receiver,
• X is the noise added to each measurement.
The parameters that can be tuned are P0 and n. These are
speciﬁc to the environment and the layout of the room. Using
the appropriate values of P0 and n we can estimate the distance
between the receiver and the emitter, using (1). Computing the
distance is not just a simple estimation. The process consists
of several steps showed in Figure 1.
A. Data Acquisition
The StickNFind beacons broadcast data one time per second
when they are not paired with the smart device. Once paired,
they broadcast every 100 milliseconds. The RSSI (Received
Signal Strength Indication) value of the Bluetooth signal
received by the mobile device is used for estimating the
distance between the beacon and the mobile device.
Fig. 1. Diagram
B. Data Sampling
The Bluetooth signal is not sufﬁciently stable to estimate
the distance based solely on one measurement. In Figure 2,
we show an example of different measurements of the RSSI
for the same distance between the emitter and the receiver. In
order to reduce the noise and attenuate the extreme values, we
use a sample of ten measurements for computing the distance,
instead of a single one. For every value of the distance, we
use the last ten measurements to which we apply ﬁltering
techniques which we detail later.
Fig. 2. RSSI variation for a ﬁxed distance
C. Outliers Removal
The experiments (Figure 2) show that the signal is very un-
stable. Due to noise, spikes appear in the signal which should
not be taken into consideration. We remove the outliers with
the help of Chebyshev Outlier Detection based on Chebyshev’s
theorem detailed in (2). We apply the inequality for k=2,
which was proven to be a good choice according to other
researchers [16]. As a consequence of (2), 75% of the data
must be in the range of maximum two times standard deviation
distance from the mean value. Based on this probability, we
remove all the values that fall outside the domain. The values
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

inside the domain are used to calculate the mean value.
Pr(|X − µ| ≥ kσ) ≤ 1
k2
(2)
D. Filtering
We consider the mean value calculated above as the current
value of the signal strength. We use the Kalman ﬁlter [17] to
better estimate the mean, which is proven to add more stability
to signal.
E. Discretisation
The ﬁnal step is to approximate the value of the distance
with the closest value from a predeﬁned set. From a human
point of view, the little variation of the value creates more difﬁ-
culty in interpreting the distance. For instance, we approximate
all the values between 0.76 and 1.25 to 1, all between 1.26
and 1.75 to 1.5, etc. This gives better stability to the estimated
distance displayed to the user. In the same time, the little error
added does not create an impediment in the process of ﬁnding
the object.
IV. RESULTS
A. Tuning the parameters
The distance can be estimated based on the RSSI value as
shown in (1). The different parameters described in (1) can be
tuned, in order to acquire a good accuracy of the estimation.
We conducted measurements at distances up to 25 meters.
A set of measurements contains 20 values of the RSSI for
every value of distance. The average of the set is calculated.
The parameters are further calculated using linear regression,
that minimize the error of the measurements. The parameters
are used in estimating the distance between the beacons and
the mobile device. The best values of these parameters were
found to be P0 = −63.506 and n = 1.777. We used this
values in all our experiments.
B. Experimental setup
The experiments were conducted in two different ways.
For the ﬁrst set of experiments the beacon was placed at a
distance of 0 meters from the mobile device, and moved with
a constant speed from 0 to 18 meters away from the target. The
RSSI was measured and the distance computed based on (1),
and following the steps presented in Section III. The results
obtained are shown in Figure 4, Figure 5 and Table I.
For the second set of values, we performed different mea-
surements of the RSSI at distances from 0 to 25 meters. In
Figure 3 we show the distance computed based on the RSSI
value, the estimation using our method, along with the actual
measured distance.
C. Results
We can clearly see an improvement of the distance estima-
tion as a result of applying Chebyshev’s theorem combined
with the Kalman ﬁlter. Moreover, the discretisation of the
distance values adds stability and reduces the noise as shown
in Figure 4.
In Figure 3, we plot the estimated distance against the
measured distance between the tag and the smart device.
The points tend to be closer to the ﬁrst diagonal (pictured
in green) when the distance is smaller which shows that we
obtain a smaller error for a shorter distance. This has a direct
implication on the process of ﬁnding an item. The closer we
are to the object, the more accurate the distance becomes,
which makes it easier to ﬁnd the object.
Fig. 3. Estimated distance against measured distance
In order to have a numerical quantiﬁcation of the error,
we deﬁned 3 domains of accuracy for which we compute the
average error in meters, and as a percentage. The ﬁrst chosen
range (4 meters) is based on the average room size in the
typical elderly residence we collaborate with. This will give us
an indication of the efﬁciency of our system, in the perimeter
of a room. The second domain (4-10 meters) corresponds to
the average overall length of the whole apartment. The last
range (10-18 meters) represents the size of bigger, non typical
household.
We show the results in Table I. The ﬁrst two rows of
the table show the error produced when we estimate the
distance based on the signal measurement without any ﬁlters
applied. Although the absolute value seems to increase with
the distance, the percentage decreases. On the other hand,
the use of our techniques produce different results, as we
can see in the third and fourth row. The average error is
roughly 3 times better after applying the ﬁlters, with an
average error below one meter for distances up to 4 meters.
Even though an error of 43% can be considered not reliable
in certain circumstances, it is a signiﬁcant improvement in the
context of our application. While searching for a lost item,
this accuracy gives a good indication on how close the object
is. Additionally, the average error obtained with our approach
is proven to be smaller than the previous approaches found in
the literature [12].
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. Error results
Distance
0-4 meters
4-10 meters
10-18 meters
Error Measured %
182%
127%
111%
Absolute value Measured
3.61 m
8.95 m
8.95 m
Error Filtered %
43%
34%
36%
Absolute value Filtered
0.865 m
2.45 m
2.90 m
Fig. 4. Distance over time
In Figure 4 and Figure 5, we show the evolution of estimated
distance for a moving receiver, as described in Section IV-B.
On the x-axis we have the number of discrete values for
which we measured the RSSI. The green straight line shows
in both pictures the measured distance between the beacon
(receiver) and the emitter (the tablet in our case). In Figure 5
the estimated distance based on the RSSI is shown in grey,
while the value computed with our method is displayed in dark
blue. Our method is clearly improving the distance estimation.
We show the results for short distance (lower than 4 meters)
in Figure 4. Similar to Figure 5, the green line represents the
actual distance, and the grey one shows the estimated value
based on one RSSI value. In red we show the values computed
using our method. The stability is clearly improved with our
method, and the extreme values affect very little the distance
estimation.
It is important to mention some limitations that our system
still has, which will be addressed in the future. Firstly, the
effect of the battery level of the beacons is not studied yet.
Additionally, the setup of our experiments didn’t include walls
or other obstacles that can interfere and increase the noise.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We presented our model that can successfully guide people
into ﬁnding their lost items. As opposed to the currently
available products which give only a non quantiﬁable informa-
tion about how close the object is, our application can locate
objects by estimating the distance between the BLE beacons
with a good accuracy. We showed that Chebyshev inequality
combined with the Kalman ﬁlter can be successfully applied to
Bluetooth. In addition, discretising the distance adds a certain
stability to the signal, which makes the application easier to
use from a human-machine interaction point of view.
We are currently working on a more advanced version of
the application that is able to locate the object in the perimeter
Fig. 5. Distance over time
of the home. We use an indoor positioning system to locate
the user, and based on the person’s movement (location at
different moments) and using the different distance between
the person and the object we can determine the location of
the object. The location is displayed as an area and not as a
point.
Lastly, we will study the impact that the battery level and
the interference of obstacles have on the distance estimation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work of this paper was supported by the AAL EDLAH
project (aal-2012-5-062). The authors would like to thank
Anastasija Collen who helped to improve the quality of this
paper.
REFERENCES
[1] ”WIFI”, 2014, URL: http://standards.ieee.org/about/get/802/802.11.html
[accessed 2014, 09, 19].
[2] ”PANs”, 2014, URL: http://standards.ieee.org/about/get/802/802.15.html
[accessed 2014, 09, 19].
[3] M. Irani, B. Rousso, and S. Peleg, ”Detecting and tracking multiple
moving objects using temporal integration”, Computer Vision
ECCV
1992, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Volume 588, 1992, pp. 282-
287.
[4] A. Gilbert and R. Bowden, ”Tracking Objects Across Cameras by
Incrementally Learning Inter-camera Colour Calibration and Patterns of
Activity”, Computer Vision
ECCV 2006, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Volume 3952, 2006, pp. 125-136.
[5] F. Fayad and V. Cherfaoui, ”Tracking objects using a laser scanner in
driving situation based on modeling target shape”, Intelligent Vehicles
Symposium, 2007.
[6] B. G. Amidan, T. A. Ferryman, and S. K. Cooley, ”Data outlier detection
using the Chebyshev theorem”, Proceedings of Aerospace Conference,
2005.
[7] N. Kawaguchi, et al., ”Underground Positioning: Subway Information
System using WiFi Location Technology”, Tenth International Confer-
ence on Mobile Data Management: Systems, Services and Middleware,
2009.
[8] P. Najera, J. Lopez, and R. Roman, ”Real-time location and inpatient
care systems based on passive RFID”, Journal of Network and Computer
Applications, Volume 34, Issue 3, May 2011, pp. 980989.
[9] H. K. H. Chowa, K. L. Choya, W.B. Leea, and K.C. Lau, ”Design of
a RFID case-based resource management system for warehouse opera-
tions”, Expert Systems with Applications, Volume 30, Issue 4, May 2006,
pp. 561576.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[10] L. Pei, et al., ”Inquiry-based Bluetooth Indoor Positioning via RSSI
Probability Distributions”, Second International Conference on Advances
in Satellite and Space Communications, 2010, pp. 151-156.
[11] L. Pei, et al., ”Using Inquiry-based Bluetooth RSSI Probability Distri-
butions for Indoor Positioning”, Journal of Global Positioning System,
Volume 9, Issue 2, 2010, pp. 122-130.
[12] F. Subhan, H. Hasbullah, A. Rozyyev, and S. T. Bakhsh, ”Indoor
Positioning in Bluetooth Networks using Fingerprinting and Lateration
approach”, International Conference on Information Science and Appli-
cations, April 2011, pp. 1-9.
[13] ”TrackR”, 2014, URL: http://www.thetrackr.com/ [accessed 2014, 09,
19].
[14] ”StickNFind”, 2014, URL: https://www.sticknﬁnd.com/ [accessed 2014,
09, 19].
[15] T. S. Rappaport, ”Wireless communications principles and practices”,
Proceedings of Aerospace Conference, 2002.
[16] B. G. Amidan, T. A. Ferryman, and S. K. Cooley, ”Data outlier detection
using the Chebyshev theorem”, Proceedings of Aerospace Conference,
2005.
[17] R. E. Kalman, ”A New Approach to Linear Filtering and Prediction
Problems”, Transaction of the ASMEJournal of Basic Engineering, 1960,
pp. 35-45.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

