Automatic Identification Monitoring System for Fishing Gear Based on
Narrowband Internet-of-Things Communication Systems
Sangmin Lee, Dongsoo Har
The Cho Chun Shik Graduate School of Green Transportation
KAIST
Daejeon, Korea
E-mail: dwarang@kaist.ac.kr, dshar@kaist.ac.kr
Abstract—Lost and derelict fishing gear is devastating for
the marine environment, causing marine accidents and
decreasing the catch of fish. Therefore, South Korea is
attempting to reduce this lost and derelict fishing gear by
developing a new monitoring system that can track the
location of fishing gear and manage this type of debris. This
monitoring
system
will
use
what
is
known
as
the
Narrowband
Internet
of
Things
(NB-IoT)
for
marine
communication. Marine communication encounters a signal
strength problem when a wave invades the first Fresnel zone.
This article suggests relaying by drones to solve this problem
and extend the coverage of communication modules.
Keywords—Marine
communication;
Fishing
gear;
Narrowband Internet of Things; First Fresnel zone; Drone;
Relaying
I. INTRODUCTION
Various types of fishing gear are used in the fishery and
aquaculture industries both in nearshore and offshore
locations. In particular, 131,000 tons of fishing gear are
used each year in South Korea, which is surrounded by
seas on three sides [1]. Lost and derelict fishing gear is
causing great damage to marine environments, and marine
accidents caused by derelict fishing gear are threatening
the safety of fishermen. This devastation of the marine
environment due to these debris decreased the catch of
fish by an estimated 10% in 2016 in South Korea. Derelict
fishing gear sometimes causes marine accidents in South
Korea. Currently, fishing boats have become larger and
use advanced fishing methods. However, the productivity
of fisheries in nearshore and offshore locations has
decreased. It is assumed that this decrease is caused by
overfishing, ghost fishing (a term referring to lost and
derelict fishing gear), and illegal fishing. Therefore,
fishing gear management laws, monitoring systems,
closed seasons, and resource management efforts have
been
considered.
The
FAO
(Food
and
Agriculture
Organization) of the United Nations has promoted the
development of a management plan to maintain marine
resources and to guarantee their efficient use. However,
some feel that the efforts of the FAO will decrease
productivity of fisheries. The Code of Conduct for
Responsible Fisheries of the FAO recommends the
marking of fishing gear during the operation of a fishery,
emphasizing
the
importance
of
developing
new
technologies or new fishing methods to minimize ghost
fishing [2].
South Korea revised the rule to permit fisheries and to
register them, also introducing a real-name fishing gear
system to prevent the overuse of fishing gear in nearshore
and offshore areas. However, these regulations, despite
much sympathizing with them, were not followed closely
due to perceived inconvenience and unfairness. Therefore,
South Korea suggested the necessity of developing a new
real-name fishing gear system, a monitoring system to
manage fishing gear, new technology to handle derelict
fishing gear, and technology by which derelict fishing
gear can be collected. In certain more advanced countries,
such as Norway, Canada, and France, technology to check
the condition of fishing gear on fishing boats and to
monitor fish catches is being developed based on marine
communication and navigating technology. However, no
country can monitor all fishing gear around the world.
South Korea, which has implemented a real-name fishing
gear system, is attempting to adopt a new automatic
identification monitoring system using NB-IoT [3], one of
the latest IoT technologies, in cooperation with a mobile
communication company to reduce the amount of lost and
derelict fishing gear.
Section 2 outlines the current knowledge on automatic
identification monitoring systems. Section 3 discusses
several issues, including the decline of signal strength
levels caused by the invasion of first Fresnel zone area
related to antenna buoys and wave heights. Drones for
relaying are then suggested as a solution for the signal
strength and coverage issues of NB-IoT modules. Section
4 concludes this article.
II. AUTOMATIC IDENTIFICATION MONITORING SYSTEM FOR
FISHING GEAR BASED ON NB-IOT
A. Narrowband Internet of Things
The
IoT
as
the
next
generation
of
mobile
communication has been developed rapidly by mobile
communication companies and manufacturers. NB-IoT, a
form of the IoT, uses low-power wide-area (LPWA)
communication
technology.
Related
to
this,
3GPP
approved NB-IoT based on narrowband LTE including
OFDMA/SC-FDMA and it was included as a working item
(WI) in Release 13 of Radio Access Network (RAN) #70
to cope with issues related to LPWA, LoRa, and Sigfox.
NB-IoT can communicate via small amounts of data on a
bandwidth of 180 kHz in the licensed LTE frequency
domain. NB-IoT has three operation modes, the guard-
band, in-band, and stand-alone modes, as described in
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. Table 1 presents the specifications of NB-IoT.
RAN #72 approved an enhanced NB-IoT (eNB-IoT) which
requires additional improved technology as specified in the
WI of Release 14 [3].
NB-IoT has several advantages. First, the NB-IoT
modules are typically small and therefore inexpensive.
Second, NB-IoT uses existing LTE base stations, which
are already widespread in South Korea. Therefore, this
technology allows communication everywhere in South
Korea. Third, the batteries used in NB-IoT modules are
expected to work for ten years because NB-IoT uses
LPWA. Thus, maintenance is also inexpensive. NB-IoT is
thus clearly suitable for small data communications.
B. Concept of the automatic identification monitoring
system
The automatic identification monitoring system as a
new system developed by the government attempts to
prevent lost and derelict fishing gear from causing harm to
marine environments
while
also maintaining a safe
environment for fishermen by attempting to prevent
marine accidents which are caused by the derelict fishing
gear, among other tasks. The government wants to
successfully manage fishing gear near the shore and in
offshore areas. The monitoring system can always track
the positons of fishing gear and judge whether or not these
items are lost. Furthermore, the real-name fishing gear
system serves to prohibit the overuse of fishing gear and to
control fish catches. Above all, these measures motivate
fishermen to maintain control over their fishing gear. The
adoption of IoT technology for communication between
fishing gear and the base station, between the base station
and management ships, and between the base station and
fishing boats is the key aspect of this monitoring system.
The monitoring system utilizes NB-IoT communication
technology, broadcasting on empty bandwidth segments of
the licensed LTE frequency domain.
The automatic identification monitoring system for
fishing gear based on NB-IoT consists of satellites, buoys,
fishing gear, base stations, integrated base station on land,
management ships, and fishing boats. Figure 2 shows the
concept of this monitoring system. A satellite provides a
global positioning system (GPS). Buoys, management
ships, and fishing boats use GPS to determine current
positions. Buoys form a connection to the fishing gear
components and send information which includes the
current position and data pertaining to the connections
between buoys and these fishing gear components to the
base station on land. These processes require very little
data; therefore, NB-IoT, a type of LPWA, can handle these
tasks. The integrated base station can receive data from all
buoys in nearshore and offshore locations and track the
positions of all of the fishing gear. The integrated base
station sends all data to the management ships after
accumulating
data
from
the
buoys.
However,
communication between the integrated base station and the
management ships uses existing LTE because the data
from the integrated base stations are in the form of
multimedia information including image data, such as
positions of fishing gear, marine maps, and bathymetric
charts.
NB-IoT
cannot
handle
this
data,
which
is
considered to be ‘big’ data.
Buoys have global navigation satellite system (GNSS)
antennas
for
GPS,
RF
antennas
for
NB-IoT,
communication modules for LPWA, and modules to
identify fishing gear. The buoys float on the surface of the
sea while maintaining a connection to the fishing gear.
Fishing gear components, located underwater, typically
have acoustic transmitters. When fishing gear becomes lost
and/or detached, the fishing gear identification module
detects the loss and sends information pertaining to the
loss. At the same time, the acoustic transmitter in the
fishing gear starts to work. The velocity of sound waves is
340 m/s in air and about 1500 m/s in water. Sound waves
are elastic waves, which transfer energy more rapidly in a
dense material. Therefore, they offer an advantage when
used in water. The integrated base station sends the loss
information to the fishing boat that originally installed the
lost fishing gear after receiving information about the lost
fishing gear. Fishing boats should have wireless nodes for
NB-IoT
communication.
The
fishing
boats
and
management ships have acoustic receivers, allowing the
fishing boats to move to the position of the lost fishing
gear and receive the
signal sent from the
acoustic
transmitter. Due to the use of an acoustic receiver, fishing
boats can track the exact position of the fishing gear and
collect it even when moved by sea currents.
III. ISSUES OF THE AUTOMATIC IDENTIFICATION
MONITORING SYSTEM FOR FISHING GEAR
A. First Fresnel zone and wave height
The automatic identification monitoring system for
fishing gear uses NB-IoT. Communication is mainly
Figure 1. Operation modes of NB-IoT
TABLE I.
SUMMARY OF NB-IOT
NB-IoT
Deployment
In-band & guard-band LTE, stand-alone
Coverage
164dB for standalone, FFS others
Downlink
OFDMA, 15kHz tone spacing, 1 Rx
Uplink
Single tone, 15kHz and 3.75kHz spacing
SC-FDMA, 15kHz tone spacing, Turbo code
Bandwidth
180kHz
Peak rate
(DL/UL)
DL: ~200kbps
UL: ~200kbps
Duplexing
HD, FDD
Coverage
~15km
Modulation
QPSK/16QAM
Power saving
PSM, ext. I-DRX, C-DRX
Power class
23dBm
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

between buoys and the base station, which is on land. NB-
IoT uses the licensed frequency domain. LTE is a type of
wireless
communication;
therefore,
it
has
the
same
characteristics as electromagnetic waves. A certain amount
of empty air space is necessary for electromagnetic waves
to propagate from the transmitter to the receiver without a
decline of the signal strength.
Energy in space cannot arrive at a receiver in a straight
line. Electromagnetic waves require an ellipsoid space
following the minimum distance between the transmitter
and the receiver. This space is called the Fresnel zone. In
fact, it is possible to extend the space of the Fresnel zone
infinitely. In principle, the first space, known as the first
Fresnel zone, contributes to transfer the greatest amount of
energy of a wave. The signal strength can decrease when
obstacles exist in the first Fresnel zone. This weak signal
strength increases the loss of transmitted data and the
probability of errors. The first Fresnel zone is an ellipsoid
space formed by the electromagnetic wave arriving at the
receiver with following the shortest distance, which has a
path difference of λ/2. Here, λ is the wavelength of the 
electromagnetic wave. The electromagnetic wave passing
through the first Fresnel zone arrives at the receiving point
after being superposed. Propagation loss in the first Fresnel
zone becomes close to the theoretical value of the empty
space. Therefore, good signal strength is guaranteed when
no obstacles exist in 60% of the radius of the first Fresnel
zone [4].
1
1
1
2
2
cD
F
D
f
λ
=
=
(1)
Equation (1) is used to determine the radius of the first
Fresnel zone. F1 is the radius of the first Fresnel zone, D is
the distance between the transmitter and the receiver, f is
the frequency of the transmitted signal, and c ≃ 2.997 ×
108 m/s is the speed of light in air. According to (1), the
radius of the first Fresnel zone is wide when the distance is
long or the frequency is low. A small radius of the first
Fresnel zone offers a low probability to lose the signal.
The automatic identification monitoring system for
fishing
gear
based
on
NB-IoT
requires
a
marine
communication environment. The surface of the sea
continually changes due to waves. For example, the radius
of the first Fresnel zone of a buoy with a 1.8GHz
electromagnetic wave with a distance of 1km is 6.452m. In
this case, 60% of the radius is 3.871m, indicating that the
buoy should have an antenna which is longer than 3.871m
to ensure an empty first Fresnel zone. However, obstacles
such as waves and other ships likely exist between the
buoy and the base station. It is difficult to make the
antenna longer when the size of the buoy is considered. Of
course, the base station on land is located at a high altitude.
The radius of the first Fresnel zone of the buoy with 850
MHz electromagnetic waves and with a 15 km distance is
36.362m, and 60% of the radius is 21.817m. This radius
must encounter obstacles as those shown in Figure 3.
Therefore, the communication between the buoy and the
base station will not always be smooth.
B. Using drones for relaying
Using drones for relaying has been suggested to solve
first Fresnel zone problem on the sea. The automatic
Figure 2. The automatic identification monitoring system for fishing gear based on NB-IoT
Figure 3. The first Fresnel zone and relaying by drones
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

identification monitoring system for fishing gear operates
on management ships. These ships have drones that have
NB-IoT communication modules and signal amplifiers for
relaying. The management ship flies the drone through the
air. The signal from the buoy is then transmitted to the
base station via the drone, as shown in Figure 3. It is
possible
to
remove
obstacles
and
to
communicate
smoothly when the drone is in the air at an altitude in the
tens of meters. Furthermore, relaying by drones is able to
extend the communication coverage of NB-IoT between
the buoy and the base station via the signal amplifier [5].
IV. CONCLUSION
This
article
briefly
introduces
a
new
automatic
identification monitoring system for fishing gear based on
NB-IoT communication that is being developed in South
Korea. Some issues are discussed related to the realization
of this monitoring system. The problem of the decreased
signal strength arises when the wave height invades the
first Fresnel zone. Therefore, relaying by drone was
suggested to solve this signal strength problem and to
extend the coverage of NB-IoT communication. The
objectives of this monitoring system are to track the
locations of lost and derelict fishing gear components with
the real-name fishing gear system and to collect these
items. Furthermore, the system can prevent lost and
derelict fishing gear from devastating marine environments
and can reduce ghost fishing and marine accidents caused
by this fishing gear. In several years, this automatic
identification monitoring system for fishing gear will be
developed
and
will
hopefully
contribute
to
marine
environment preservation efforts and to better fishery
practices in many parts of the world.
REFERENCES
[1]
SG. Kim, WI. Lee, and Y. Moon, "The estimation of derelict
fishing gear in the coastal waters of South Korea: Trap and gill-net
fisheries," Marine Policy, vol. 46, pp. 119-122, 2014.
[2]
SM. Garcia, "The FAO definition of sustainable development and
the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries: an analysis of the
related principles, criteria and indicators," Marine and Freshwater
Research, vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 535-541, 2000.
[3]
R. Ratasuk, B. Vejlgaard, N. Mangalvedhe, and A. Ghosh, "NB-
IoT system for M2M communication," Wireless Communications
and Networking Conference (WCNC), pp. 1-5, 2016.
[4]
A. Sorrentino, G. Ferrara, and M. Migliaccio, "The reverberating
chamber as a line-of-sight wireless channel emulator," IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 56, no. 6, pp.
1825-1830, 2008.
[5]
A. Jaziri, R. Nasri, and T. Chahed, "Congestion mitigation in 5G
networks
using
drone
relays,"
International
Wireless
Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC),
pp. 233-238, 2016.
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

