 Energy Reduction in Wireless Sensor Networks by Switching Nodes to Sleep 
During Packet Forwarding  
 
Anne-Lena Kampen1,2, Knut Øvsthus1 
1Bergen University College, Bergen  
2ITEM NTNU, Trondheim 
Norway 
{Anne-Lena.Kampen | knut.ovsthus}@hib.no 
 Lars Landmark, Øivind Kure  
Centre for Quantifiable Quality of Service in 
Communication Systems* (Q2S) 
NTNU, Trondheim 
Norway 
{ larsla | okure }@q2s.ntnu.no 
 
 
Abstract—Energy consumption determines the lifetime of 
Wireless Sensor Networks, WSN. In current radio chip sets the 
energy consumption for receiving a packet is of the same order 
as transmitting a packet. In such a setting, the transmission 
range and sleep strategies should be reevaluated. We present a 
simple extension to the  MAC protocol that reduce the waste of 
energy for processing packets not addressed to a node by 
letting them sleep during transmission. The nodes enter sleep 
mode by means of a Transmission Announcement packet, 
TAN, sent by the transmitter. The performance is evaluated 
through simulation. Based on a simplified model, we show that 
the optimal transmission range in such a setting is given by the 
minimum needed to avoid partitioning. We use data sheet 
values from three different WSN Transceiver modules to 
derive parameter values to be used in the model. The model 
and related analysis concentrates on the energy consumption in 
transmitting and receiving, since the radio is the main 
contributor to energy consumption in WSN. We show that it is 
the energy consumption in receiving that is the main 
contributor to total energy consumption in WSN. 
Keywords-WSN; 
Energy 
Consumption; 
Sleep 
control; 
Optimal transmission range  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
One of the most active research areas in Wireless Sensor 
Networks (WSN) concerns reduction of the energy 
consumption of the nodes to increase the lifetime of the 
WSN. A WSN node consists of several units such as the 
microcontroller, the memory and the radio, which consumes 
most energy [1]. Various energy efficient protocols have 
been proposed to reduce the radio energy consumption. 
These may be categorized as topology control protocols and 
sleep management protocols. Topology control protocols use 
hierarchies and transmission control to limit the number of 
neighbors (covered nodes) of a node to only those required to 
avoid network partitioning [2]. This is achieved by reducing 
the transmission power, and thus shortening the transmission 
range. But reducing transmission range may degrade the 
capacity of the network. In their seminal paper, Takagi and 
Kleinrock determined that the optimal transmission range is 
when the expected number of neighbors is 8 [3].  However, 
their work focused on the capacity, and they did not consider 
the energy consumed listening to packets. Hence, the optimal 
number of neighbors in order to maximize the lifetime is not 
evident. Reasons to avoid routing over many short hops are 
discussed in [4]. Among the listed reasons are interference, 
energy consumption, path efficiency and end-to-end 
reliability. 
Sleep management protocols schedule redundant nodes 
to enter sleep mode in order to reduce energy consumption 
[5]. However, there exist no sharp distinctions between the 
two mentioned categories, as they may utilize each other 
qualities to get a more energy efficient network.  
Information collected from datasheets for three different 
WSN Transceiver modules [6][7] shows that the receiving 
energy consumption is of the same order as transmission 
energy consumption. In addition, the average number of 
nodes in a randomly deployed WSN increases quadratic with 
transmission range, leading to a step increase of energy 
consumption as transmission range increases. Energy 
optimization in such a setting requires short transmission 
range or switching redundant receivers to sleep mode. 
The contributions of this article are threefold. First, we 
present a simple model for calculating the total energy 
consumption in WSN, taking all the receiving nodes into 
account.  Using the model, we analyze the energy optimal 
transmission range based on parameters from datasheets for 
three different WSN Transceiver modules. Last we present a 
simple energy efficient forwarding approach based on the 
findings in the analysis. The forwarding approach put 
redundant nodes to sleep as packets are forwarded.  
The rest of the article is organized as follows: related 
work is introduced in Section 2; the energy consumption 
model are presented in Section 3; parameter estimation and 
analysis are done in Section 4; energy preserving forwarding 
is described in Section 5, and related simulations are 
presented in Section 6; Section 7 presents the conclusion. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
Two main classes of energy optimization solution are 
described herein. Sleep management and topology control.  
Redundant nodes in a densely deployed network may 
switch to sleep mode without negatively affecting the 
communication.   Sleep   protocols   may  be  divided  in  two  
 
 
 
*Centre for Quantifiable Quality of Service in Communication 
Systems, Centre of Excellence, appointed by The Research Council of 
Norway, and funded by the Research Council, NTNU and Uninett 
(http://www.q2s.ntnu.no)” 
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

groups: local-area-based approaches and backbone-based 
approaches. In the local-area-based approaches, a node’s 
mode is determined by the mode of the neighboring nodes, 
and redundant nodes enter sleep mode if it does not 
negatively affect the connectivity of the network. Examples 
of protocols in this group are the ones presented in [8][9] 
[10][11] and [12]. The backbone-based approach selects 
some nodes to stay active to constitute the backbone of the 
network. These nodes are responsible for relaying data and 
scheduling the other nodes to operate in low duty cycles. 
Clustering is one way of creating a backbone network, in 
which the clusterhead constitutes the backbone. In LEACH 
[13], the network is partitioned into clusters and a 
clusterhead is responsible of organizing the communication 
in the cluster. Manjeshwar et al. [14] presented an enhanced 
clustering by letting redundant nodes alternate in handling 
quires 
from 
the 
clusterhead 
to 
avoid 
unnecessary 
communication cost. In [15], gridding and clustering are 
combined in a grid-based clustering technique and the 
energy-optimizing grid size is evaluated. An overview of 
sleep management protocols is provided in [5]. Generally, 
sleep management protocols add synchronization overhead, 
and are prone to added delay. Our energy optimized 
forwarding, called Transmitting Announcement (TAN), 
differentiates from traditional sleep modes. TAN does not 
require synchronization, and is totally decentralized by 
simply switching nodes to sleep mode as data packets 
progress to sink.  A detailed description of the approach is 
given in Section 5.   
Topology control approaches adjust the nodes output 
power to limit the energy consumption of the network. WSN 
are generally densely populated networks, hence the nodes’ 
output power may be reduced without negatively affecting 
the connectivity of the network. ATPC [16] proposes a 
feedback scheme whereby the nodes find the optimal 
transmission power level for each individual neighbor 
dynamically. The smallest common transmission power that 
results in a connected network is found in COMPOW [17], 
and this power is used by all nodes. CLUSTERPOW [18] 
integrates routing table information and transmission range 
to optimize topology control. Dynamic adjustment of 
transmission range based on node degree is investigated in 
LINT and LILT [19]. Another example is the one used in 
CBTC [20], where transmission power is adjusted to reach 
one neighbor in every sector of a specific degree around the 
node. A third example is to use graph models, such as used 
in GG and RNG [21]. They minimize energy consumption 
by using relay node if this reduces transmission range. An 
overview of topology control issues and approaches is 
presented in [2]. Analysis of the energy optimal transmission 
range is given in Section 4.    
 
There exist several energy consumption models for WSN 
[22][23][24][25]. However, few of the proposed models 
consider the receiving energy consumed by the nodes not 
forwarding packets. These nodes only receive packets to 
discard them, thus waist energy.  The model presented in 
[26] includes all receivers as data are forwarded from source 
to destination. However, the distance between the nodes 
changes as the transmission range change. Hence, the 
number nodes within the range of a transmitter are constant. 
The model computes energy consumption for broadcasting. 
Opposed to the model in [26], the distance between nodes in 
our model is constant. Hence, the number nodes within the 
range of a transmitter changes with transmission range. 
Further, we consider unicast transmission. The energy 
consumption model is presented in Section 3. 
III. 
ENERGY CONSUMPTION MODEL  
Our goal is to investigate the relationship between the 
nodes transmission range, and total network energy 
consumption. The aim is to determine the energy optimal 
transmission range for a given node density. We focus only 
on the energy used for packet transmission and packet 
reception. Our scenario is a WSN where the nodes are 
randomly distributed. 
The analysis of energy consumption assesses a source 
node that is located at a distance D from the sink, without 
accounting for the network edges. The energy consumption 
for transmitting data packets depends on the amplifier 
architecture. A common model for energy consumption per 
bit has a constant level, k1, that is independent of the radiated 
power, plus an offset, k2, proportional to the radiated power 
[27]. All nodes have the same transmission range d. Hence, 
the minimum number of times the packet has to be relayed to 
reach the sink is D/d. The expression for the energy required 
to transmit b bit of data is [27]  

               
 
   

In addition, we assume that the energy a node uses for 
receiving data is constant equal to k3, energy consumed per 
received bit [27]. The total number of active nodes receiving 
data is proportional to the density of active nodes, λ, times 
the area covered by the emission. The consumed energy per 
bit for one transmission accounting for the number of 
receivers is thus, πd2*λ* k3. As stated above, the data must 
be relayed to reach the destination. Hence, the total 
consumed energy has to be multiplied by the number of 
times the data is relayed, D/d. The total energy consumed by 
nodes that receive b bits becomes  
               
 
   . 
  
 
The total energy consumed in relaying the data from the 
source node to the sink is calculated by adding (1) and (2) 
        
 
                         
Our analysis is with respect to optimal transmission 
range. Constants that have no influence on the result are 
omitted for simplicity. The expression is normalized with 
respect to the constant level of the transmission energy. 

          
 
  (
  
   
  
      )   

190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

By differentiating (4), the energy optimum transmission 
range is 

     √
 
  
     
      

IV. 
 DATASHEET-BASED ESTIMATIONS 
In this section, the parameter values for k1, k2 and k3 are 
estimated based on values extracted from datasheets, and the 
optimal transmission range are calculated using these 
parameter 
values. 
Three 
Transceiver 
modules 
are 
investigated: AT86RF230 [6], CC2420 and CC1000 (_868 
and _433) [7]. The datasheet [6][7] provides data for 
transmission with different output powers, and power 
measurements for receiving, idle and sleep modes. Power 
measurements are converted to energy by multiplying with 
the bit-time calculated from the bit-rate of the Transceiver 
modules, which is 250 kbit/s for AT86RF230 [6] and 
CC2420 [7], and the highest bitrate for CC1000 [7] is 76.8 
kbit/s.  
The parameters k1 and k2 are estimated based on the 
relationship between transmission range and output power, 
which may be expressed by rearranging Friis [28] equation: 
 
 
   
         ( 
 )
 
          
 
 
Rearranging (6) gives: 
 
 
  (
         ( 
 )
 
        
)
   
 
 
 
The parameters used in these equations are as follows. Pr 
is the power received by an antenna through free space, Pt is 
the transmitted power, Gt is the transmitting antenna gain, Gr 
is the receiving antenna gain, c is the speed of light and d is 
the distance between the antennas. The red curves in Fig. 1 
are plotted using (7) with datasheet values for  Pr and Pt, 
using  antenna gain of 1.64, which is the gain of a half wave 
dipole antenna, and choosing path loss exponent n=3 
[29][30]. The curves show output power versus transmission 
range. To find k1 and k2 we need to define the red curves by 
their corresponding second order equations as k1 and k2 
represent the parameter values in these second order 
equations (multiplied by bit-time to convert form power to 
energy). We use curve fitting to find the equations. 
The middlemost of the blue dotted curves in Fig. 1 
presents calculated curve fitted lines. The equations for these 
curves are presented in the respective display. Multiplying 
the parameter values in these equations with bit-time gives k1 
and k2. The other two dotted curves show the fitted curve 
with a +/- 10% change of parameter values, indicating that 
the real values for k1 and k2 are within +/-10%. 
The receiving power consumption is illustrated by the 
straight green line. k3 is derived by multiplying receiving 
power consumption and bit-time.  
Based on the equations for the curve fitted line for 
CC1000_868, the values for k1, k2 and k3 are 36.1µJ/bit, 
0.06pJ/bit/m2 and 37.5 µJ/bit respectively. Choosing λ=0.1 
active nodes/m2 give an optimal d=1.75m using (5). The 
average number of covered nodes is then 0.96. Performing 
the same calculations for CC2420, AT86RF230 and CC1000 
433 gives optimal distances of 1.2, 1.4 and 1.7, and average 
number of covered nodes of 0.45, 0.62 and 0.96, 
respectively. The required number of neighbors to avoid 
partitioning is 4 according to the discussion presented in [31] 
that is based on results from [32][33]. As the calculated 
number of neighbors is lower than 1, the network is 
partitioned. Hence, using the energy optimal transmission 
distance, d, would probably lead to network partitioning. 
A. Critical parameters regarding energy consumption 
In order to present a clear understanding of the critical 
parameters determining the energy efficient transmission 
range, the derivative of the total energy consumption (4) with 
respect to range is rearranged as:  
 
 
(
  
  )    (
  
  )            
 
 
The term, πd2*λ, is equal to the number of active nodes 
receiving data. Clearly, there must be at least one active 
receiver in order to make any progress in forwarding, this 
implies that πd2*λ must be larger than 1. In (8), this means 
that there is no real value for d that gives a minimum point if 
k3 approaches k1. Estimations of the parameters based on 
datasheet [6] and [7] indicate that k2<<k1, and that k1≈k3,see 
above. Thus, the receiving energy consumption, k3, is the 
main contributor to the short transmission length. The reason 
is that a linear increase of transmission range, d, causes an 
increase proportional to d2 in the number of receiving nodes. 
This result is consistent with the result of the simulations in 
[34]. Hence, given that k3≈k1, these findings imply that 
topology control protocols should aim to reduce the 
transmission range as much as possible.  
Fig. 2 shows how the node density impacts the energy 
optimal transmission range. Increased node density increases 
the number of receivers, thus, reducing the optimal 
transmission range. The values used for the parameters k1, k2 
and k3 reflects the relationship between the values as found 
above.  
Keeping the number of receiving nodes constant would 
reduce the impact of k3 on the optimal transmission range, 
and thus the total energy consumption. 
V. 
TRANSMISSION ANNOUNCEMENT ,TAN, USED FOR 
ENERGY REDUCTION  
The analysis in Section 4 shows that the receivers are the 
main contributor to the total network energy consumption. In 
WSN, generally all nodes within the transmitter vicinity 
receive the transmitted packet. However, according to the 
routing protocol, only one, or a subset, of the receivers are 
assign to forward the packet. The remaining nodes waste 
energy as they receive the packet just to discard it. 
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Red curve: power consumption vs. transmission range based on datasheet values. Blue curves: the curve fitted power consumption with +/- 10% 
change of parameter values. Green curve: receiver power consumption. 
 
Figure 2. Total normalized energy consumption for sending from a source to 
the sink. k1=1, k2=0.005 and k3=1. 
 
Our proposal is to reduce energy consumption by 
preventing nodes form receiving packets not intended to 
them. This is done by the transmitting node. It prevents 
nodes from receiving ordinary data packets by sending a 
short signaling packet prior to the data packet.     
The proposed data forwarding approach is as follows. 
Nodes within the range of the transmitter radio, except for 
the next-hop node, are switched to sleep mode using a 
signaling packet called TAN. The packet carries the 
transmission time for the following data packet, and is 
addressed to the next-hop node determined by the routing 
table. All nodes receiving the TAN packet not destined to 
them change to sleep mode during the corresponding data 
packet transmission. Radios in sleep mode do not amplify 
receiving data, which prevents the MAC layer form 
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

receiving data. The length of the sleeping period is: (2*SIFS) 
+ (ACK length) + (Data packet length). SIFS is the waiting 
time between transmitting TAN and the data package, in 
addition to the waiting time between receiving a data 
package and transmitting ACK. TAN is only used for unicast 
transmission, since broadcast and multicast are intended for 
more than one receiver. 
The conditions for TAN to be advantageous compared to 
plain Carrier Sense Multiple Access (CSMA) depend on: the 
ratio between data and TAN packet size, node density, and 
the distance between transmitter and receiver. The 
requirements on the data packet size are found by estimating 
the breakeven point when energy consumption using TAN 
equals the energy consumption using CSMA.  
The breakeven point depends on the localization of the 
receiver inside the sender’s transmission range, and two 
extreme cases are calculated: (1) when the transmitter and 
receiver share all neighboring nodes (co-located sender and 
receiver) and (2) when the receiver is localized on the 
circumference for the sender’s transmission range. In the 
first case, the TAN energy consumption for a one hop 
communication is: k*(N+1)*bTAN + k*2*bData + k*2*bACK, 
where the average number of neighbors is N, breference is the 
number of data-bits in the referenced packet-type, and the 
receiving and transmitting energy consumption per bit is 
assumed to be equal (k). In the second case, the number of 
nodes receiving ACK increases, and is exactly those nodes 
that are inside the area of the receiver’s transmission range 
but outside the sender’s transmission range. This crescent 
shaped area may be calculated based on the formulas 
described in [31], and the number of nodes in the area is 
found by multiplying by the node density. Thus, the TAN 
energy consumption for the second cases is: k*(N+1)*bTAN + 
k*2*bData + k*(        (
 
  √ 
 ) *bACK. The energy 
consumption using plain CSMA is for both cases: 
k*(N+1)*bData +k* (N+1)*bACK.  
Based on the equations in the paragraph above and the 
assumption that ACK and TAN packets size are equal 
(bACK=bTAN), the breakeven point for case one is:   
 
 
      
 
         
 
 
Equation (9) shows for N larger than 3, TAN is 
advantageous even for data packet smaller than the TAN 
packet. Note that this occurs for co-located source and 
destination nodes, which is probably rarely the case as it 
would result in no progress of the forwarded packet.  
By using the fact that N=λπd2, the equation for the 
breakeven point for case two is: 
 
 
      
 
    √  
  
   
      
 
 
TAN preserves energy, according to (10), if the data 
packet is smaller than the TAN packet when the number of 
neighbors is larger than ~ 5.2. On the average, the number of 
neighbors needed to make TAN energy efficient for data 
packet size no bigger than TAN packet sizes, lies between 
these two extreme values, 3 and 5.2. Clearly, the breakeven 
data packet size is reduced with an increased number of 
neighbors.  
VI. 
SIMULATIONS 
We evaluate our forwarding scheme in an extension of 
the OMNET ++ simulator [35] with the MiXiM module for 
wireless communication. The simulator is extended to 
separate the receiving and idle energy consumption, and to 
implement TAN. Our simulations are validated against 
analytic results. 
The simulations compare the energy consumption for 
relaying unicasting traffic, using a plain CSMA MAC layer 
protocol and our TAN. The comparison is made by 
measuring the energy consumption when transmitting 1000 
data packets from source to the sink. Edge effects are 
avoided by placing both the source and the sink at a distance 
from the edge of the network that is longer than the 
maximum transmission range. Data is transmitted using the 
maximum 802.15.4 data packet size, 127 bytes at PHY layer 
[36]. The size of the TAN packet used in the simulations is 
30 bytes. Three scenarios with different number of nodes are 
simulated. The nodes are placed in a random pattern inside 
an area of 570 x570 m. The distance between source and the 
sink is 382 m. The presented simulated results are averaged 
over 30 simulation runs with different seeds for random 
deployment of nodes. RPL [37] is used for routing, and the 
routing tables in the nodes are completed before any data is 
being forwarded. 
Simulations performed to compare the total average 
energy consumption for varying output power levels are 
shown in Fig. 3. The output power values are chosen based 
on datasheet values for CC2420. The simulated scenarios 
consist of 400 nodes. The related 95% confidence intervals 
are shown in the figure.  
Figure 3 shows that the total network energy 
consumption is lower in TAN than in plain CSMA. In plain 
CSMA, the number of redundant receivers increases with 
increased output power. The energy consumption for next 
highest output power level is higher than for the highest 
output power level. This counter intuitive result is traced 
back to a higher hop count that outweighs the increase in the 
number of covered nodes. The added number of hops 
resulted in more transmissions draining more energy. 
TAN has only one receiver for each transmission. 
However, there is a tiny increase of energy consumption as 
output power increases. It is caused by a higher number of 
receivers receiving the ACK packet sent from the receiving 
nodes. Similar to the CSMA, TAN experiences an increase 
in energy for the next highest power. The added energy 
consumption is caused by the increase in number of hops, 
and the corresponding number of ACKs. Note that, there is 
no difference in packet forwarding as routing is equal for 
both ordinary CSMA and TAN.  
The broader 95% confidence interval at the output power 
level of -15dBm is caused by the larger deviation in path 
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 Figure 3. Energy consumption for transmitting 1000 packets in a network 
consisting of 400 nodes. 
 
length. In addition, due to the low node density, some of the   
simulations at -15dBm do not have a connection from the  
sensor to the sink. These simulations are omitted as no 
results with respect to energy consumption due to data 
transfer are produced. The 95% confidence interval narrows 
as the output power increases.  
Forwarding energy for different node densities versus 
transmission range is shown in Fig. 4. As expected, the 
difference between the plain CSMA and TAN increase with 
increased node density. This means that the advantage of 
using the TAN increases as the node density increases. 
Change of data packet size would give similar results. An 
increase in packet size would lead to higher difference 
between the TAN and the plain CSMA. 
Simulations for -15 dBm output power are omitted in for 
the 200 nodes scenario in Fig. 4. The reason is that the 
network is partitioned for these low output powers. 
If the number of neighbors is low, no energy is preserved  
 Figure 4. Energy consumption for transmitting with different node densities  
when using TAN as no redundant nodes receives the 
transmitted data packets. Hence, if the simulation in Fig. 3 
were extended with result for lower output powers, the 
graphs would eventually merge as the number of neighbors 
approaches one. Likewise, the graphs in Fig. 4 would merge 
for very low node densities.  
Loss of data packet occurs if the intended receiver is in 
sleep mode caused by TAN packet received from another 
node. However, these packets would otherwise be destroyed 
by collision from the ongoing transmission. Thus, the 
number of lost packets is the same as with CSMA. The 
solution to avoid losing these packets is to combine TAN 
with RTS/CTS.   
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Datasheets for WSN Transceiver modules shows that the 
receiving and transmitting energy consumption are of the 
same order of magnitude. Furthermore, the average number 
of receivers increases quadratic with transmission range in a 
randomly distributed network. Thus, the energy optimal 
transmission range is short. We calculate the range using 
parameter values estimated based on datasheet information. 
The calculation is performed using an energy consumption 
model that we present. The range is shorter than the 
minimum needed to avoid network partitioning. The required 
number of neighbors to keep a network connected is 4 
according to [31] and its references, but the calculated 
optimal range covers less than one neighboring node. Thus, 
in order to energy optimize a WSN network the transmission 
range must be kept just large enough to ensure a connected 
network.  
However, if the number of receivers is fixed, the 
receiving energy consumption is also fixed. Hence, we 
propose a solution that reduces the number of receivers to 
consist of only the next hop node towards the sink. The 
solution is a simple sleep management approach that makes 
redundant nodes switch to sleep mode during transmission of 
data packets. A small signaling packet sent prior to the 
unicast data packets announces the transmission. Simulations 
compare the proposed approach against simple CSMA using 
the maximum 802.15.4 packet size. The simulations show 
that there is a great reduction in total energy consumption 
when using the proposed approach. The energy savings 
depends on data packet size and node density. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Enz, C.C., Scolari, N., and Yodprasit, U.: Ultra Low-Power 
Radio Design for Wireless Sensor Networks. IEEE 
Proceedings. International Workshop on Radio-Frequency 
Integration Technology, pp. 1-17. (2005) 
[2] SANTI, P.: Topology Control in Wireless Ad Hoc and Sensor 
Networks. ACM Journal, Computing Surveys, Vol. 37, No. 2, 
pp. 164-194. (2005) 
[3] Takagi, H. and Kleinrock, L.: Optimal Transmission Ranges 
for Randomly Distributed Packet Radio Terminals. IEEE 
Transactions on communications, Vol. 32, No. 3, pp. 246-
257. (1984) 
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[4] Haenggi, M.: Twelve Reasons not to Route over Many Short 
Hops. IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, Vol. 5, pp. 
3130-3134. (2004) 
[5] Wang, L. and Xiao, Y.: A Survey of Energy-Efficient 
Scheduling Mechanismsin Sensor Networks. ACM Journal,  
Mobile Networks and Applications, Vol. 11, No. 5, pp. 723-
740. (2006) 
[6] Atmel http://www.atmel.com/Images/doc5131.pdf. (April 24, 
2012) 
[7] Chipcon        Products         from        Texas           Instrument: 
- CC2420:          http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/cc2420.pdf.  
(April 24, 2012)  
-  
CC1000:    http://focus.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/cc1000.pdf. 
(April 24, 2012)  
[8] Xu, Y., Heidemann, J., and Estrin, D.: Geography Informed 
Energy Conservation for Ad Hoc Routing. ACM Proceedings 
of the 7th annual International Conference on Mobile 
computing and networking, pp.70-84. (2001) 
[9] Ye, F., Zhong, G., Cheng, J., Lu, S., and Zhang, L.: PEAS: A 
Robust Energy Conserving Protocol for Long-lived Sensor 
Networks. IEEE In Proceedings of 23rd International 
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, pp.1-10. 
(2003) 
[10] Bulut, E. and Korpeoglu, I.: Sleep scheduling with expected 
common coverage in wireless sensor networks. ACM Journal 
Wireless Networks, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp. 19-40. (2011) 
[11] Yardibi, T. and Karasan, E.: A distributed activity scheduling 
algorithm for wireless sensor networks with partial coverage. 
ACM Journal, Wireless Networks, Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 213-
225. (2010)  
[12] Kumar, S., Lai, T.H., and Balogh, J.: On k-Coverage in a 
Mostly Sleeping Sensor Network. ACM Proceedings of the 
10th annual international conference on Mobile computing 
and networking, pp. 144-158. (2004) 
[13] Heinzelman, W.B., Chandrakasan, A.P., and Balakrishnan, 
H.: An Application-Specific Protocol Architecture for 
Wireless Microsensor Networks. IEEE Transactions on 
Wireless Communications, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp.660-670. (2002) 
[14] Manjeshwar, A., Zeng, Q.A., and Agrawal, D.P.: An 
Analytical Model for Information Retrieval in Wireless 
Sensor Networks Using Enhanced APTEEN Protocol.  IEEE 
Transactions  on Parallel and Distributed Systems, Vol. 13, 
No. 12, pp. 1290-1302. (2002) 
[15] Zhuang, Y., Pan, J., and Wu, G.: Energy-Optimal Grid-Based 
Clustering in Wireless Microsensor Networks. 29th IEEE 
International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems 
Workshops, pp. 96-102. IEEE. (2009) 
[16] Lin, S., Zhang, J., Zhou, G., Gu, L., He, T., and Stankovic, 
J.A.: Atpc: Adaptive Transmission Power Control for 
Wireless Sensor Networks. ACM, In Proceedings of the 4th 
international conference on Embedded networked sensor 
systems,pp.223-236. (2006) 
[17] Narayanaswamy, S., Kawadia, V., Sreenivas, R.S., and 
Kumar, P.R.: Power Control in Ad Hoc Networks: Theory, 
Architecture, 
Algorithm 
and 
Implementation 
of 
the 
COMPOW protocol.  In Proceeedings of European Wireless 
Next Generation Wireless Networks: Technologies, Protocols, 
Services and Applications, pp. 156-162. (2002) 
[18] Kawadia, V. and Kumar, P.R.: Power Control and Clustering 
in Ad Hoc Networks. IEEE, Twenty-Second Annual Joint 
Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications, Vol. 
1, pp. 459-469. (2003) 
[19] Ramanathan, R. and Rosales-Hain, R.: Topology Control of 
Multihop 
Wireless 
Networks 
using 
Transmit 
Power 
Adjustment. IEEE, Nineteenth Annual Joint Conference of 
the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies, Vol. 2, 
pp. 404-413. (2000) 
[20] Li, L., Halpern, J.Y., Bahl, P., Wang, Y.M., and Wattenhofer,  
R.: A Cone-Based Distributed Topology-Control Algorithm 
for Wireless Multi-Hop Networks. IEEE/ACM, Transactions 
on Networking, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp.147-159. (2005) 
[21] Jaromczyk, J.W. and Toussaint, G.T.: Relative neighborhood 
graphs and their relatives. IEEE Proceedings of the IEEE, 
Vol. 80, No. 9, pp. 1502-1517. (1992) 
[22] Wang, Q., Hempstead, M., and Yang, W.: A Realistic Power 
Consumption Model for Wireless Sensor Network Devices. 
IEEE, Sensor and Ad Hoc Communications and Networks, 
pp. 286-295. (2006) 
[23] Gogu, A., Nace, D., and Challal, Y.: A note on joint optimal 
transmission range assignment and sensor deployment for 
Wireless Sensor Networks. IEEE, Telecommunications 
Network Strategy and Planning Symposium, pp. 1-6. (2010) 
[24] Xing, G., Lu, C., Zhang, Y., Huang, Q., and Pless, R.: 
Minimum Power Configuration for Wireless Communication 
in Sensor Networks. ACM, Transactions on Sensor Networks, 
Vol. 3, No. 2, Article 11, pp. 1-33. (2007) 
[25] Zhang, R. and Gorce, J.M.: Optimal Transmission Range for 
Minimum Energy Consumption in Wireless Sensor Networks. 
IEEE, 
Wireless 
Communications 
and 
Networking 
Conference, pp. 757-762. (2008) 
[26] Ingelrest, F, Simplot-Ryl, D, and Stojmenovi, I.: Optimal 
Transmission Radius for Energy Efficient Broadcasting 
Protocols in Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks. IEEE, 
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, Vol. 17, 
No. 6, pp. 536-547. (2006) 
[27] Heinzelman, W.R., Chandrakasan, A., and Balakrishnan, H.: 
Energy-Efficient Communication Protocol for Wireless 
Microsensor Networks. IEEE, Proceedings of the Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, pp.1-10. (2000) 
[28] Friis, H.T.: A note on a simple transmission formula. In 
Proceedings of I.R.E., pp. 254-256. (1946) 
[29] Andersen, 
J.B., 
Rappaport, 
T.S., 
and 
Yoshida, 
A.: 
Propagation 
Measurements 
and 
Models 
for 
Wireless 
Communications 
Channels. 
 
IEEE, 
Communications 
Magazine, Vol.33, No. 1, pp.42-49. (1995) 
[30] Seidel, S.Y. and Rappaport, T.S.: 914 MHz Path Loss 
Prediction Models for Indoor Wireless Communications in 
Multifloored Buildings.  IEEE, Transactions on antennas and 
propagation, Vol.40, No.2. pp.207-217. (1992) 
[31] Kleinrock, L. and Silvester, J.: Optimum transmission radii 
for packet radio networks or why six is a magic number. 
Proceedings of the IEEE National Telecommunications 
Conference, pp.431-435, (1978)  
[32] Erdos, P. and Renyi, A.: On Random Graphs I. Publications 
Mathematicae, Debrecen 6, pp. 290-297. (1959) 
[33] Dewitt, H.: The Theory of Random Graphs with Applications 
to the Probabilistic Analysis of Optimization Algorithms. 
Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Computer Science, 
U.C.L.A., Los Angeles. (1977) 
[34] Dallas, D. P. and Hanlen, L. W.: Optimal Transmission Range 
and Node Degree for Multi-hop Routing in Wireless Sensor 
Networks, ACM Proceedings, Workshop on Perfomance 
Moitoring and Measuremet of Heterogenous Wireless and 
Wired Networks, pp. 167-174. (2009) 
[35] OMNET++ : http://www.omnetpp.org/. (April 24, 2012) 
[36] IEEE Std 802.15.4™-2003. Chapter 6, Digital Object 
Identifier : 10.1109/IEEESTD.2003.94389. (2003) 
[37] ROLL IETF Internet-Draft : RPL: IPv6 Routing Protocol for 
Low power and Lossy Networks. draft-ietf-roll-rpl-19 [work 
in progress], 13 Mar (2011) 
 
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

