An Autonomous Time Synchronization Sensor Device Using a Chip Scale Atomic 
Clock for Earthquake Observation and Structural Health Monitoring 
 
Narito Kurata 
Faculty of Industrial Technology 
Tsukuba University of Technology 
Tsukuba City, Ibaraki, Japan 
e-mail: kurata@home.email.ne.jp 
 
 
Abstract - This article describes the research and development 
directed toward an autonomous time-synchronized sensor 
device equipped with a chip scale atomic clock (CSAC) that 
records highly accurate time information. The R & D project 
presented herein aims to achieve earthquake observation to 
prepare for disasters and structural health monitoring to 
improve the efficiency of maintenance and management of 
buildings and civil engineering structures. For these reasons, it 
is necessary to install sensors in a wide area at a high density 
and to measure the data with accurately synchronized time 
information. It is recommended that the sensor device itself 
maintains accurate time information without relying on the 
network or a Global Positioning System (GPS) signal. Therefore, 
in this study, a sensor device that autonomously maintains 
accurate time information using an ultra-high precision, ultra-
low power consuming, and ultra-small (and therefore, loadable 
on a board) atomic clock, known as CSAC, was developed. In 
this 
article, 
first, 
the 
concepts 
of 
autonomous 
time 
synchronization and CSACs are described, and the mechanism 
for assigning ultra-high precision time information to the sensor 
data by using a CSAC is explained. Next, the performance of the 
improved sensor device is demonstrated and the results of the 
vibration table test, which was conducted to examine the 
performance, are presented.  
Keywords-Time Synchronization; Chip Scale Atomic Clock; 
Earthquake Observation; Structural Health Monitoring; MEMS 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Previously, a sensor based on wireless sensor networks 
and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) was developed 
for structural health monitoring and applied to a high-rise 
building as an Internet of Things (IoT) device [1]-[3]. In the 
corresponding research, the sensor device was installed at a 
high density inside the building, and a method to accurately 
detect the stability of the building and the damage caused to it 
after an earthquake, was demonstrated. However, in order to 
compare and analyze the data measured by several sensors, 
they must be time-synchronized [4]-[6]. In this work, time 
synchronization was achieved by transmitting and receiving 
wireless packets among the sensors [3]. Although a wireless 
sensor network enables time synchronization among the 
sensors installed inside a single building, it is not capable of 
achieving the same in multiple buildings, large-scale 
structures such as a bridge, or a wide urban space. 
Alternatively, a global positioning system (GPS) is available 
for outdoors; however, it cannot be used underground or in 
tunnels. To obtain measured data from any sensor installed 
anywhere using time synchronization, it is desirable that each 
sensor maintains accurate time information autonomously 
without relying on the networks or GPS signals. Therefore, by 
employing a chip scale atomic clock (CSAC), which is an 
ultra-high precision clock with considerably less delay than 
quartz oscillators [7]-[9], a sensor device that records accurate 
time information autonomously was developed [10][11]. 
In Section III, the concepts of autonomous time 
synchronization and CSACs are described, and a mechanism 
to assign ultra-high precision time information to sensor data 
using a CSAC is presented.  
In Section IV, the sensor device, which was developed as 
a prototype, and the improvements made to the sensor are 
explained in detail.  
In Section V, the construction of an autonomous time 
synchronization sensing system with the sensor device is 
discussed. 
In Section VI, a vibration table test is performed for the 
improved sensor device, which is equipped with a MEMS 
acceleration sensor, and its amplitude performance is 
examined based on a comparison with the results obtained by 
a comparative servo-type acceleration sensor. Multiple sensor 
devices are installed on the vibration table and allowed to 
vibrate simultaneously in order to confirm that time 
synchronization is realized among the sensors within 0.001 s 
for a 100 Hz measurement sampling. In addition, the output 
of one displacement sensor is branched in order to connect to 
eight improved sensor devices via external analog sensor 
input interfaces, and a test is conducted to prove that the 
measured results are in agreement. 
Furthermore, to apply this technology for earthquake 
observation, the logic for detecting the occurrence of an 
earthquake according to a set threshold and saving only the 
data of the earthquake event is presented. Its function is 
illustrated using a vibration table test. 
Based on these test results, the performance of the 
developed autonomous time-synchronized sensor device is 
confirmed, and it is shown that this device can be applied for 
earthquake observation and structural health monitoring. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
The time synchronization function is essential for sensor 
devices used in earthquake observation and structural health 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

monitoring. In this research, a prototype sensor module that 
autonomously maintains accurate time information by 
applying an ultra-high precision clock, CSAC, was made to 
improve practical applications. Even if a huge number of 
sensors are installed, if accurate time information can be 
autonomously assigned to the measurement data of each 
sensor, time synchronization of the data of the sensors can be 
established just only by collecting data with arbitrary means 
and rearranging the data based on the time information. 
For time synchronization sensing, many studies such as 
Global Positioning System (GPS) using radio clocks and 
satellites, and Network Time Protocol (NTP) [5] for achieving 
time synchronization on the Internet have been conducted so 
far. Some studies have realized highly accurate time 
synchronization with a simple mechanism by utilizing the 
characteristics of wireless sensor networks with small 
propagation 
delays. 
For 
example, 
various 
time 
synchronization protocols such as Reference Broadcast 
Synchronization (RBS), Timing-sync Protocol for Sensor 
Networks (TPSN), and Flooding Time Synchronization 
Protocol (FTSP) have been studied [4][8][12]-[14]. However, 
although these time synchronization techniques are still used 
today, as described in the Introduction, they are not ideal for 
sensor devices used in earthquake observation and structural 
health monitoring. As shown in this research, if each sensor 
gives accurate time information autonomously to the 
measurement data, even if a huge number of sensors are 
installed in an arbitrary environment, it is possible to create 
data groups with secured time synchronization and use them 
for comparison and analysis. 
III. 
AUTONOMOUS TIME SYNCHRONIZATION AND CSACS 
In order to obtain a collection of sensor data with stable 
time synchronization, even when GPS signals are not 
available, wireless data transmission is unstable, or there is no 
wired network connection, the most idealistic condition is that 
each 
sensor 
maintains 
accurate 
time 
information 
autonomously. If accurate time information (time stamp) can 
be provided to the data measured by each sensor, a collection 
of sensor data with time synchronization can be obtained. 
Therefore, in this study, a CSAC with a high-precision time-
keeping performance and considerably less delay than quartz 
oscillators was used [7]-[9] to develop a sensor that can 
autonomously maintain accurate time information. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Chip Scale Atomic Clock (CSAC). 
TABLE I.  
CSAC SPECIFICATIONS 
Model 
SA.45s 
RF output 
10 MHz 
1 PPS output 
Rise/fall time: < 10 ns
Pulse width: 100 µs
Power consumption 
< 120 mW 
Outside dimensions (mm) 
40 × 35 × 12 
Frequency accuracy 
± 5 × 10-11 
Aging 
< 9 × 10-10/month 
TABLE II.  
VARIOUS CLOCKS AND OSCILLATORS 
 
Cesium 
atomic 
clock
Rubidium 
atomic 
clock 
CSAC 
Quartz 
oscillator 
Time until it 
has a 1-s 
delay
50,000 
years 
1,000 years 
1,000 
years 
1 day 
Size
0.1 m3
1,000 cm3 
1 cm3 
10 mm3
Power 
consumption
50 W 
Several 
tens of W 
30 mW 
10 μW 
 
A CSAC is a clock that realizes ultra-high precision time 
measurement of several tens of picoseconds (5 × 10-11 s) with 
low power consumption. Owing to its ultra-small size, it can 
also be loaded on a board (see Figure 1, Table I and II). The 
development of CSACs began with the support of the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in the United 
States in 2001, and commercial products were launched in 
2011. 
Its 
applications 
include 
countermeasures 
for 
disturbance of GPS positioning caused by jammed signals, 
high-precision positioning for smartphones and other devices, 
and incorporation in cloud servers. Owing to its increasing 
popularity, further reduction in price and a smaller unit design 
are expected. By installing a CSAC in each sensor device and 
loading a mechanism to assign highly accurate time stamps to 
the sampling data, a group of sensor data with autonomously 
secured time synchronization can be obtained. To collect the 
measured data with accurate time stamps, any technology, 
such as 3G, Wi-Fi, or Ethernet can be used. 
IV. 
DEVELOPMENT AND IMPROVEMENT OF SENSOR 
DEVICE EQUIPPED WITH CSAC 
A sensor device usually consists of the following: CPU 
for controlling the measurement, sensor, filter, analog-to-
digital (A/D) converter, storage, and network interface. A 
crystal oscillator is used as the CPU. If a CSAC is installed 
in it and used for measurement, then a time delay will occur 
while correcting the CPU, because the timing accuracy of the 
CSAC is very high. Therefore, in order to directly assign the 
timing information provided by the CSAC to the data 
measured by a sensor using hardware, a mechanism equipped 
with a dedicated integrated circuit, field-programmable gate 
array (FPGA), was developed and a prototype of the sensor 
device was produced [10][11]. Since an FPGA is 
programmable, a logic for earthquake detection using the 
measured data can be incorporated, by assigning it the time 
measurement information provided by the CSAC. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

From Figure 2, it can be seen that the sensor device 
consists of a main control unit, sensor unit, and wireless 
communication unit. The main board is equipped with a 
CSAC, FPGA, GPS, CPU, storage, and network interface. 
The main control unit controls the measurement made by the 
sensor while generating time stamps based on the ultra-high 
precision timing information given by the CSAC. The 
measured data is stored in the storage and then transmitted to 
the network via Ethernet or wireless communication. The 
measured data to be saved is of two types: data to be 
measured on a steady basis and data of extracted events such 
as earthquakes. To handle data of the latter type, the logic to 
detect the beginning and end of an earthquake is incorporated 
in the FPGA, and data of only the earthquake events are 
promptly transmitted to the network after the earthquake. For 
initialization and adjustment of time information, it is 
equipped with a GPS. The sensor unit obtains measurements 
based on the commands given by the main control unit. The 
sensor unit is equipped with tri-axial MEMS acceleration 
sensor, external analog sensor input interface, temperature 
sensor, anti-aliasing filter, and A/D converter.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Design of Sensor Device Equipped with CSAC. 
TABLE III.  
SPECIFICATIONS OF MEMS ACCELERATION SENSOR 
Model 
LIS344ALH 
Measurement direction 
3 
Maximum acceleration (± G) 
2 
Outside dimensions (mm) 
4 × 4 × 1.5 
Consumption current (mA) 
0.68 
Stand-by power consumption (µA) 
1 
Detection sensitivity 
660 mV/G ± 5% 
Noise characteristics 
50 μG/√Hz 
Operating temperature (°C) 
-40 - +85 
 
 
Figure 3.  Improved Sensor Module with CSAC. 
Table III shows the specifications of the mounted tri-axial 
MEMS acceleration sensor. The wireless communication 
unit enables data collection using a wireless system and 
allows selectable use of either a general wireless LAN (Wi-
Fi) or 3G. The basic performance of the prototype of the 
developed sensor device was examined [10][11]. 
The prototype of the developed sensor device was 
improved in the following ways, with the aim of achieving 
increased functionality and practical usability: 
a) Generation of three channels for serving as an external 
analog sensor input interface 
b) Addition of a 24-bit A/D converter 
c) Reinforcement of FPGA 
d) Separation of the wireless communication unit and 
adoption of a commercially available motherboard 
(Raspberry Pi 2 Model B) 
e) Loading of the IEEE 1588-based time synchronization 
function 
By including the 24-bit A/D converter and using three 
channels as the external analog sensor input interface, a sensor 
that requires a wide dynamic range, such as a servo-type 
acceleration sensor, can be connected. Furthermore, by 
joining three units of a strain or displacement sensor, the 
sensor device can be used as a data logger. In addition, with 
the wireless communication unit and the use of commercially 
available Raspberry Pi, the system is capable of responding to 
a new wireless communication system quickly. Finally, by 
equipping the interface based on the IEEE 1588 standard for 
time synchronization of networks, the measurement timing 
can 
be 
initialized 
among 
the 
sensor 
devices 
for 
synchronization. Figure 3 shows the improved sensor device 
that was produced. 
V. 
FORMULATION OF AN AUTONOMOUS TIME 
SYNCHRONIZATION SENSING SYSTEM 
Herein, the construction of an autonomous time 
synchronization sensing system with the sensor device 
described in Section III is discussed. To construct the sensing 
system composed of multiple sensors using the CSAC 
equipped sensor devices, it is necessary to prepare one device 
 
Z 
X 
Y 
Main control unit 
Sensor unit 
Wireless communication unit 
Main control unit
Sensor
unit 
Chip scale atomic 
clock (CSAC) 
MEMS acceleration 
sensor 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

as the master, define absolute time information on it, and 
synchronize the other devices as slaves. The main control unit 
of each sensor device is armed with an I/O connector for 1 
Pulse Per Second (PPS) signals of the CSAC. By using this, 
the master device outputs 1 PPS signals to each slave device 
to synchronize them, and adjusts the clock phase of the CSAC 
of the slave devices. Although a CSAC has a high time-
keeping accuracy, it is necessary to define the absolute time 
information separately, because it originally has no such 
information. At the time of initial setting, the GPS module 
installed in the main control unit is used. The data is 
transmitted from the master device to the slave devices based 
on the IEEE 1588 method. Once all the sensor devices have 
been initially synchronized, they will autonomously retain the 
high-precision time information, and they only need to be set 
at arbitrary places for data collection. As mentioned 
previously, since accurate time stamps are recorded for the 
measured data, the data can be collected via any system 
including Ethernet, Wi-Fi, and 3G. Furthermore, even in 
places where GPS signals are not available and wireless or 
wired networks cannot be prepared, the data can be measured 
and collected. Therefore, this system can be used for mobile 
measurement or as a portable sensing system. 
Figure 4 shows the configuration of the autonomous time 
synchronization sensing system. The sensor devices, which 
are individually equipped with the acceleration sensor board 
containing the MEMS acceleration sensor, can be freely 
combined with the other sensor devices having displacement 
sensors or strain sensors via external sensor boards. 
VI. 
BASIC PERFORMANCE TEST OF IMPROVED SENSOR 
DEVICE 
a) Vibration table test with built-in MEMS acceleration 
sensor 
To check the basic performance of the improved sensor 
device proposed in Section III, a vibration table test was 
conducted. During the vibration table test, measurements were 
made with the built-in MEMS acceleration sensor in each 
sensor device. 
The purpose was to check the measurement performance 
of 
the 
MEMS 
acceleration 
sensor 
and 
the 
time 
synchronization performance of the sensor device. As shown 
in Figure 5, four sensor devices were fixed on the vibrating  
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Configuration of Autonomous Time Synchronization Sensing 
System. 
table, the same vibration was applied towards one horizontal 
direction, and the measured results were compared. In the test, 
a swept sine wave of 0.1 to 2 Hz and 2 to 10 Hz was applied 
as the input wave, as shown in Figure 6. The measurement 
sampling frequency of the sensor device was set as 100 Hz in 
this case. 
A vibration was applied along the Y direction of the sensor 
devices and measurements were made with the sensor 
devices and a comparative servo-type acceleration sensor. 
Figure 7 shows the calculated results of the Fourier amplitude 
spectral ratio for the acceleration waveforms measured with 
the four sensor devices and the servo acceleration sensor (for 
control). Compared to that of the servo acceleration sensor, 
the amplitudes of the four sensor devices were flat in the 
frequency bands of 0.1 to 2 Hz and 2 to 10 Hz, and the MEMS 
acceleration sensors loaded on the sensor devices showed a 
good performance for the components in the Y direction. 
Figure 8 shows the calculated results of the Fourier phase 
spectrum ratio of the acceleration measurement waveforms 
of the three (slave) devices with one sensor device on the 
vibration table as the master. If there is no phase delay among 
the sensor devices and time synchronization is secured, the 
Fourier phase spectrum ratio should be close to zero in all the 
frequency bands. In Figure8, a phase delay within 0.001 s is 
plotted with a dotted line. This indicates that the time 
synchronization realized among the sensor devices was 
within 0.001 s. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Vibration Table Test in Y Direction. 
 
Figure 6.  Input Swept Sine Wave (2 to 10 Hz). 
Y direction 
Data collection: 
Wi-Fi, 3G, Ethernet 
Database 
Acceleration sensor  
(built-in) 
Acceleration (cm/sec2) 
Time (sec) 
Displacement 
sensor  
(external) 
Strain sensor 
(external) 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 7.  Spectrum Ratios of Fourier Amplitudes of Four Sensor Modules 
to Servo-Type Acceleration Sensor (Y direction). 
 
Figure 8.  Spectrum Ratios of Fourier phase of Three Slave Modules to 
Master Module (Y direction) 
b) Displacement measurement test using external analog 
sensor input interface 
In order to examine the time synchronization performance 
when using an external analog sensor input interface, a test 
was performed using a displacement gauge. As shown in 
Figure 9, the voltage output of one displacement gauge was 
branched and given as input to the eight sensor devices 
equipped with an external sensor board. In the test, the 
displacement was changed by about 1 cm each time and it was 
measured using the eight sensor devices. Figure 10 shows the 
measurement results. The measurement results obtained by 
the eight sensor devices exactly match each other, indicating 
that they had correctly synchronized time data. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Measurement Test with the Displacement Sensor Connected to 
the External Analog Sensor Input Interface. 
 
Figure 10.  Measurement Test Results with Connected Displacement 
Sensor 
 
Figure 11.  Acceleration of Measurement Results of Earthquake Detection 
Test 
c) Earthquake detection test 
In order to use the sensor device for earthquake 
observation, it is necessary to detect the occurrence and end 
of an earthquake. The developed sensor device realizes 
earthquake detection by comparing the measured values with 
the threshold values during sensing. When the occurrence of 
an earthquake is detected during the sensing operation, it starts 
saving the measurement data. At this time, immediately after 
the earthquake occurs, it also saves the data measured for 
several tens of seconds before the earthquake and the data 
measured for several tens of seconds immediately after the 
end of the earthquake, to secure the data of the total event of 
the earthquake. 
In order to check the earthquake detection performance, a 
test was conducted with a vibration table. An earthquake wave 
excitation was provided in the Y direction of the sensor 
devices and the data was measured with a threshold value of 
0.5 cm/s2. The input earthquake wave was the NS direction 
component of the strong motion record observed at the JMA 
Kobe during the 1995 Southern Hyogo Prefecture Earthquake. 
Figure 11 shows the measurement results. It shows that the 
earthquake detection algorithm was able to first detect the 
occurrence and end of the earthquake with the set threshold 
values and then save the measured data. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
Displacement sensor 
-0.001 seconds 
0.001 seconds 
Amplitude ratio 
Frequency (Hz) 
Frequency (Hz) 
Phase delay (Degree) 
Displacement (cm) 
Acceleration (cm/sec2) 
Time (sec) 
Time (sec) 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

VII. 
CONCLUSION 
Our research and development efforts for designing an 
autonomous time synchronization sensor device equipped 
with a chip scale atomic clock (CSAC), which records and 
maintains high-precision time information, for earthquake 
observation and structural health monitoring of buildings and 
civil engineering structures was reported in this paper. First, 
the concepts of autonomous time synchronization and CSACs 
were explained, and the mechanism to assign ultra-precision 
time information to sensor data using a CSAC was presented. 
Then, the development of the sensor device as a prototype and 
the improvements applied to it were described in detail. The 
improved prototype was used to develop a sensor device for 
practical application, and a vibration table test was conducted 
to examine the performance of the improved sensor device.  
To apply the device for earthquake observation, the logic 
to detect the occurrence of an earthquake according to set 
threshold values and to save the data of only the earthquake event 
was prepared, and its function was confirmed using the vibration 
table test. These results demonstrate that the developed autonomous 
time-synchronization sensor device has good performance and that it 
can be applied for earthquake observation and structural health 
monitoring. 
One of the future challenges is to consider how to operate the 
sensing system for measurement purposes, assuming that even 
CSAC will undergo aging in the long term. In addition, it is not easy 
to fully utilize the high-precision time-keeping performance of the 
CSAC device. For example, even with a dedicated built-in FPGA, its 
clock is just 125 MHz, and it can give time stamps to the 
measurement data only within a time interval of 8 ns. When the 1 
PPS output of CSAC is used to synchronize the sensor devices, a 
delay occurs due to the length of the cable connecting them. 
Furthermore, even though it is expected that CSACs will eventually 
be installed on all computers and smartphones worldwide, at present, 
only one US company manufactures and sells CSAC products, and 
therefore, they are very expensive. It can be hoped that more sensor 
companies will join the market and several products will be actively 
used in various fields. My future research plan includes detailed 
verification of the time-keeping performance of a CSAC as an atomic 
clock and the confirmation of the wireless communication function. 
In addition, it will be applied for actual earthquake observation, and 
demonstration tests will be conducted on actual buildings and bridges. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by the New Energy and 
Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) through 
the Project of Technology for Maintenance, Replacement and 
Management of Civil Infrastructure, Cross-ministerial Strategic 
Innovation Promotion Program (SIP). This research was also 
partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP16K01283. 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Kurata, B. F. Spencer, and M. Ruiz-Sandoval, “Risk 
Monitoring of Buildings Using Wireless Sensor Network,” 
Journal of Structural Control and Monitoring, vol. 12, Issue 3-
4, pp. 315-327, July-Dec. 2005, doi: 10.1002/stc.73. 
[2] N. Kurata, M. Suzuki, S. Saruwatari, and H. Morikawa, 
“Actual Application of Ubiquitous Structural Monitoring 
System using Wireless Sensor Networks,” Proc. 14th World 
Conference on Earthquake Engineering (14WCEE), Beijing, 
China, Oct. 2008, Paper ID:11-0037, pp. 1-8. 
[3] N. Kurata, M. Suzuki, S. Saruwatari, and H. Morikawa, 
“Application of Ubiquitous Structural Monitoring System by 
Wireless Sensor Networks to Actual High-rise Building,” Proc. 
the 5th World Conference on Structural Control and 
Monitoring (5WCSCM), Tokyo, Japan, July 2010, Paper No. 
013, pp. 1-9. 
[4] M. Maroti, B. Kusy, G. Simon, and A. Ledeczi, “The Flooding 
Time Synchronization Protocol,” Proc. the 2nd International 
Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (SenSys 
'04), Baltimore, USA, Nov. 2004, pp. 39-49, ISBN:1-58113-
879-2. 
[5] D. L. Mills, “Internet time synchronization: the network time 
protocol,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 39, 
Issue 10, pp. 1482-1493, Oct. 1991, doi:10.1109/26.103043. 
[6] B. W. Parkinson, and J. J. Spilker Jr. eds, “Global Positioning 
System: Theory and Applications,” Vol. I & II, American 
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), 1996, ISBN: 
978-1-56347-106-3. 
[7] S. Knappe, et al., “A microfabricated atomic clock,” Applied 
Physics Letters, vol. 85, Issue 9, pp. 1460-1462, Aug. 2004, 
doi:10.1063/1.1787942. 
[8] Q. Li, and D. Rus, “Global Clock Synchronization in Sensor 
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 55, Issue 2, 
pp. 214-226, Jan. 2006, ISSN: 0018-9340. 
[9] R. Lutwak, et al., “The Chip-Scale Atomic Clock - Prototype 
Evaluation,” Proc. the 39th Annual Precise Time and Time 
Interval (PTTI) Meeting, Long Beach, USA, Nov. 2007, pp. 
269-290. 
[10] N. Kurata, “Disaster Big Data Infrastructure using Sensing 
Technology with a Chip Scale Atomic Clock,” World 
Engineering Conference and Convention (WECC2015), Kyoto, 
Japan, Dec. 2015, pp. 1-5. 
[11] N. Kurata, “Basic Study of Autonomous Time Synchronization 
Sensing Technology Using Chip Scale Atomic Clock,” Proc. 
the 16th International Conference on Computing in Civil and 
Building Engineering (ICCCBE2016), Osaka, Japan, July 2016, 
pp. 67-74. 
[12] J. Elson, L. Girod and D. Estrin, “Fine-Grained Network Time 
Synchronization using Reference Broadcasts,” Proc. 5th 
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation 
(OSDI’02), Boston, Massachusetts, Dec. 2002, pp. 147-163. 
[13] S. Ganeriwal, R. Kumar and M. B. Srivastava, “Timing-sync 
Protocol for Sensor Networks,” Proc. the 1st international 
conference on Embedded networked sensor systems (SenSys 
'03), Los Angeles, California, Nov. 2003, pp. 138-149. 
[14] K. Romer, “Time Synchronization in Ad Hoc Networks,” Proc. 
the 2nd ACM International Symp. on Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networking & Computing (MobiHoc’01), Long Beach, 
California, Oct. 2001, pp. 173-182. 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

