A Survey of Deterministic Vs. Non-Deterministic
Node Placement Schemes in WSNs
Luhutyit Peter Damuut
Computer Science and Electrical
Engineering Department,
University of Essex,
CO4 3SQ, England.
Email: pdamuu@essex.ac.uk
Dongbing Gu
Computer Science and
Electrical Engineering Department,
University of Essex,
CO4 3SQ, England.
Email: dgu@essex.ac.uk
Abstract—In Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs), the node’s
position determines the functionality, life span and the eﬃ-
ciency of the network. The choice of the deployment strategy
is crucial in most mission critical application areas. This
paper examines the issues surrounding the choice of sensor
placement schemes with respect to the application areas,
type of sensors and the operational environment. Simulation
results, based on hierarchical data clustering algorithm , reveal
the eﬀect of both deterministic and non-deterministic sensor
placement strategies on the lifespan of a network formed using
homogeneous sensors. The results corroborate the widely held
view that deterministic sensor placement schemes usually
outperforms non-deterministic methods, due to the higher
level of control available to the network designer in the former
than in the later approaches.
Keywords- sensor; deterministic; non-deterministic; de-
ployment.
I. INTRODUCTION
Sensor nodes deployed with the intention of being
operated autonomously in unattended environments like
an oil pipeline running through hundreds or even thou-
sands of miles presents a non-trivial challenge. In many
conﬁgurations, it is normally envisioned that the wireless
sensor networks (WSNs) should consist of hundreds or
thousands of nodes, each operating on a small battery that
stops working whenever it runs out of energy [1]. The
WSN could fail to function should a signiﬁcant number
of those sensors exhaust their on-board energy supply.
In certain applications and deployment schemes, failure
of the critical node could result in the termination of
the network’s life [2]. Therefore, it is proper to carefully
plan, design and manage WSNs in order to meet the
application’s requirements such as energy conservation
which helps to prolong the overall lifespan of the network.
The choice of a sensor deployment scheme is often
aﬀected by the type of sensors, the application and the
operational environment of the sensors [3]. The need to
exercise control over node deployment is governed by
the monetary and operational costs of the nodes and
when their position in the network signiﬁcantly aﬀect
their operation.
There are many perspectives under which the sensor
placement problem could be viewed. The common ones
include nodes function in the network, the optimization
objective and the deployment methodology [4]. From the
deployment point of view, we could classify the sensor
placement problem into two namely, non-deterministic
and deterministic placements.
Non-deterministic sensor placement is often referred to
as random placement, while deterministic placement is
often called controlled placement in some texts. In this
paper, we would refer to random sensor placement as
non-deterministic placement while controlled placement
would be referred to as deterministic placement.
In Deterministic Sensor Placement Schemes (DSPS) [5],
the nodes are placed in order to meet some desired
performance objectives. For example, the coverage of the
monitored region can be ensured through careful planning
of node densities and ﬁelds of view and thus the network
topology can be established at setup time. DSPS are
common in certain applications like room temperature
monitoring, medical applications, underwater acoustics,
imaging and video sensors among others.
In many wireless sensor network applications however,
the sensors are deployed randomly. In this placement
scheme, there is little control over coverage and node
density distribution to ensure strongly connected network
topology [6]. Therefore, DSPS is often pursued for only a
selected subset of the deployed nodes with the aim of
structuring the network topology in a way that achieves
the desired application requirements. Besides coverage,
the node’s positions in the WSN aﬀect a number of
network performance metrics such as energy consump-
tion, delay and data throughput. For example, the signal
strength gets attenuated with increase in distance from the
transmitting node.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows:
Section II presents related work on sensor placement;
Section III discusses some selected deterministic and non-
deterministic sensor placement algorithms and Section IV
highlights the factors that inﬂuence the choice of sensor
node placement schemes. Finally, section V concludes the
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

paper and points the way forward for our future work.
II. RELATED WORK
Sensor placement is an area that has been well re-
searched over the years [7] [1] [6]. In indoor applications,
the sensor placement problem closely resembles the art
gallery problem (AGP) which is aimed at determining the
minimum number of guards needed to cover the interior
of an art gallery [8].
In most of the literature, the problem is often viewed as
an optimization problem that aims to meet some speciﬁc
sets of objective function(s) such as coverage of a well-
deﬁned physical topology; coverage of a speciﬁc target
of interest; network connectivity or maximization of the
network’s life span as the case may be.
Sensor placement in WSN presents a serious challenge
in most of the non-trivial applications. The researchers in
[8], showed that sensor placement problem is NP-hard.
As a result of the complexity involved, [7] [9] proposed
several heuristics aimed at ﬁnding sub-optimal solutions
to the problem.
The position of a sensor node in a WSN can be viewed
from three diﬀerent perspectives namely; the deployment
methodology, the optimization objective and the role of
the node in the WSN [4]. Fig. 1, summarizes the dif-
ferent perspectives under which a sensor node can be
viewed. A node is either deployed deterministically (i.e.,
when the node is carefully and deliberately positioned to
serve its purpose) or non-deterministically (i.e. placement
with little control over the actual positioning compared
to deterministic method). When viewed in terms of its
optimization criteria, the node could be to maximize the
network lifespan, to ensure maximum area or network
coverage, maximize connectivity or it could be to mini-
mize energy wastage and so on. Moreover, a node in the
sensor ﬁeld could be viewed in terms of its function in
the network. Here, the node could be serving the role of
a sensor, a relay node( viewed in some cases as cluster
head) or a data sink (i.e., terminal point where decisions
on the sensed information is taken).
These optimization strategies are however based on the
assumption that these sensors maintain static positions
throughout the life time of the network so that the quality
of service metrics such as distance, network connectivity
can be measured with relative ease.
Some researchers in this area however, advocate for dy-
namic adjustment of the node’s location. Their argument
is based on the fact that the optimality of the initial node’s
positions in the WSN may become void during the life
time of the network ( [10] [11]). This, in our opinion,
is a valid point because external factors such as human
activities (e.g., excavation) or environmental conditions
(e.g., earth tremor), may change the initial locations of
the deployed sensors. Moreover, network resources may
result in changes as new nodes join the network, or as
some existing nodes get exhausted and die out.
Fig. 1.
Sensor Node Placement Strategies
Guo et al. [1] examined the impact of deterministic lin-
ear sensor placement on the life span of a wireless sensor
network (WSN) deployed to monitor an oil pipeline us-
ing equal distance node placement scheme over diﬀerent
power conﬁgurations. They argued that by using only
the right number of sensors, the life span of the WSN
can be signiﬁcantly enhanced. Any further addition to
the minimal number of those sensors tends to worsen the
lifespan of the network.
Shakkottai et al. [12] showed that it is possible to
achieve optimal network connectivity without necessarily
achieving area coverage. Their submission is based on the
fact that disparity exists between the sensing and trans-
mission ranges of a sensor . In practice these values are not
always the same so, it is an important consideration that is
equally related to the node deployment strategy. Examples
of DSPS can be found in [13], where the sensors are
used to monitor the health of buildings in order to detect
corrosions and overstressed beams that can endanger the
structure.
Similarly, varying the node density throughout the area
of the sensor ﬁeld can lead to unbalanced traﬃc load and
hence bottlenecks. Likewise, a uniform node distribution
may lead to depleting the energy of nodes that are closer
to the base-station faster than those far from it, leading to
shorter network lifetime [1].
III. SENSOR PLACEMENT ALGORITHMS
DSPS in WSN is concerned with careful and controlled
placement of sensors around the area of interest while
non-deterministic on the other hand there is little control
over the deployment at the target locations. In those WSN
applications that employ DSPS algorithms, the positions
of the sensors can be optimized to achieve the best cover-
age, connectivity or to maximize network lifetime as the
case may be. This sensor placement strategy is common
in most indoor and industrial applications where there is
reasonable level of control on the node positions. Table III
below depicts some sample references to node placement
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Reference
Type of coverage
Approach
[9]
Target
Objective is to minimize the
number of deployed sen-
sors in the network
[6]
Target
Algorithm is based on vir-
tual forces (analogous to
magnetic force of attraction
on objects)
[14]
Area
Focus of maximizing area
coverage;
Algorithm
is
based
on
potential
ﬁeld;
the number of neighbours
of each sensor is required
to
be
at
least
K.
K,
is
number of communicating
neighbours
[15]
Target/area
Focus on connectivity; As-
sumes
equal
communica-
tion and sensing ranges for
all the sensors
[16]
Area
Considers
connectivity;
The algorithm works for
arbitrary-shaped
region
and with any ratio of rc/rs,
where rc is communication
range
and
rs
is
sensing
range
TABLE I
Some Sensor Placement Algorithms
algorithms designed and implemented to address sensor
area coverage, target coverage or both.
In [9], the algorithm uses path exposure (which is a
metric), to estimate the likelihood that a target would
be detected when it traverses through a sensor network.
The metric is obtained by calculating the probability of
detecting the target anywhere along the path. To obtain
the probability, the total energy (E) that each sensor at
position i (i.e., si) could expend when detecting a target
at position u is formulated as:
Ei(u) =
K
||u − sj||k + Ni
(1)
where K is the energy emitted at the target, k is decay
constant (2 < k < 5), ||u − sj|| is the distance between the
sensor si and the target and Ni is noise at si. The possibility
of detecting a target event that occurred at position u is
given by the probability that the total energy Pn
i=1 E(u)
of all the n sensors, with reference to the target at u, is
greater than a certain threshold η. This expression gives
the probability that a target at location u can be detected
by the network:
Pi(u) = Prob
n
X
i=1
E(u) > η
(2)
where Ei(u) is as in equation 1 and η is the detection
threshold.
The monitored area is divided into a ﬁne grids, and
every edge in the grid is assigned a weight equal to Pi(u)
for all the points within that segment. Dijkstra algorithm
Fig. 2.
Example of Sensor Placement Forming an r-strip
is then applied to ﬁnd the path with minimum weight as
the least exposed.
Zou and Chakrabarty [6], proposed the use of a virtual
force and target location query. The idea is to use the
virtual force to ﬁnd the optimal location for a sensor after
it is initially placed randomly in the sensor ﬁeld. The
operational principle of the virtual force is similar to that
of the magnetic force which attracts opposite ends of the
magnetic pole while it repels identical ends. The inﬂuence
of this force on the sensors ensures coverage of the target
location by moving them as far apart from their neighbor’s
as the force can possibly allow.
The same idea of the virtual force usage is further
by extended by Poduri and Sukhatme [14], where they
proposed two opposing forces Fcover and Fdegree, the former
being that which makes neighbouring sensors repel one
another to increase area coverage, while the latter is the
force of attraction among the neighbouring sensors to
maintain a threshold of k connectivity (k being the mini-
mum number of nodes required to maintain simultaneous
connectivity). Consequently, the eventual position of any
sensor in the network is determined by the net force (i.e.,
Fcover + Fdegree) acting on that sensor. Intuitively, it is easy
to see that under this scheme, a deployed sensor node
would maintain its ﬁxed position until at least one of its
neighbours die out or if some external barrier or force
tends to break this equilibrium. In our opinion, it is not
energy eﬃcient to use this node deployment strategy for
unattended outdoor application areas for obvious reasons.
Diﬀerent from the schemes in [6] and [14], the au-
thors of [15] examine the classical case of deterministic
placement of nodes in an r-strip (i.e. with equal sensing
and communication radii for all the deployed sensors).
Their work is aimed at properly placing the sensors to
achieve connectivity, coverage and to minimize the overall
number of sensor nodes. The r-strip is as shown in ﬁgure
2, where the sensors are placed side by side and the
distance between any two adjacent sensors is given by r.
The overlapping circular rings represent the sensing and
communication radii for each sensor.
Non-deterministic sensor placement is common in such
application areas as disaster recovery and forest ﬁre de-
tections and other mission critical applications where it is
quite risky and/or infeasible to use deterministic deploy-
ment strategies.
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 3.
DSPS Method
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In comparing the performance of DSPS against its non-
DSPS counterpart, LEACH [17] algorithm was used with
the following parameters: n = 100 (i.e., the number of
nodes); the topology is given by a 10x10 2-dimensional
grid and r=500 (i.e., the number of rounds for executing
the algorithm ). The data fusion center was situated at
a ﬁxed location within the sensor ﬁeld while the nodes
were deployed randomly (in the ﬁrst case) and then
deterministically (in the second case) respectively.
Recall that the LEACH algorithm proceeds in two
phases namely, the network setup and the steady state
phase. The network setup phase is comprised of the
node deployment and initialization activities. Therefore,
the sensor ﬁeld for the DSPS method, was set up as shown
in Fig. 3, where the nodes were carefully placed at evenly
spaced grid points. This type of deployment is common
in ﬁeld surveillance applications (e.g., agriculture).
In a similar manner, the non-DSPS method was also set
up as depicted in Fig. 4 with equal number of nodes on
the same topology as in the case of the DSPS method.
The result in Fig. 5 shows the result of comparing
the two deployment strategies in terms of the number
of nodes whose energy are exhausted at each round of
the algorithm. It is obvious that the DSPS method out
performs against the non-DSPS method in terms of the
number of dead nodes per round. This is indicative of the
level of control that is inherently available to the network
designer when DSPS method is used compared to non-
DSPS methods.
In addition to the network performance indicators that
correspondingly vary with the node deployment strategy
in use, there are other important factors that govern the
choice of any particular sensor node deployment scheme.
Some of these factors are highlighted below:
(a.) Type of sensor:
Fig. 4.
Non-DSPS Method
Fig. 5.
Using LEACH to Compare DSPS With Non-DSPS
The type of sensor determines how it could be de-
ployed. For example, heat sensors (thermal) cannot
be deployed to measure wave amplitude (acoustic)
because doing so would not yield the desired results.
There are many dimensions to the type of sensor.
Some of which include detection means, sensor ma-
terial, size, weight, etc.
(b.) Application area:
Next to the type of sensor is the intended application
area. In applications such as domestic appliances, per-
sonal health or scientiﬁc measurement, deterministic
placement schemes are advisable while in military
surveillance in enemy territories, forest ﬁre detection,
seismic sensing, etc., non-deterministic approaches
are advisable.
(c.) Cost:
Cost is a general terms which is subject to interpre-
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

tation based on the context. Here, we limit the word
to the monetary cost of acquiring and maintaining
the sensor node while in operation. For example,
non-deterministic sensor node deployments are very
common in application areas where the costs of the
sensors are insigniﬁcant whereas, deterministic ap-
proaches are the norm in areas where the costs are
high.
V. CONCLUSION
One substantive contribution of this paper is in corrob-
orating the widely held view that the choice of sensor
deployment strategy directly aﬀects network performance.
The paper also highlights the factors that inﬂuence the
choice of node deployment strategies in wireless sensor
networks. Notable among these factors include the opti-
mization criteria of the network and the role of the node
in the network. Other factors include the type of sensor,
the application area and the acquisition and operational
costs of the nodes.
Whenever the application requires massive number of
sensors in potential target areas, and the cost of the nodes
is insigniﬁcant, we opined that non-deterministic place-
ment strategies are more practical. For example, when
using a sensor network to monitor an oil pipeline running
through thousands of miles or for security surveillance
purposes, employing the non-deterministic deployment
strategy would be highly recommended in order to meet
certain acceptable performance objectives such as cover-
age and connectivity. This paper focuses its investigation
on sensor node deployment strategies in WSNs only. It
does not cover other types of nodes serving diﬀerent roles
(e.g., relay nodes or base station nodes) in the network.
We envision that a mix of both deterministic and nonde-
terministic sensor placement schemes would be the most
eﬀective and eﬃcient placement strategy for large-scale
and mission-critical WSN applications where inexpensive
nodes could be deployed to serve the roles of sensors
in the monitored region while few, more powerful nodes
could serve the roles of data relay nodes in the network
to save energy. In our future work, we plan to embark on
the comparative analysis of sensor placement and data
ﬁdelity in WSN using some tested models.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by the Petroleum Tech-
nology Development Fund (PTDF) under grant number
10PHD056 and in part by the University of Jos, Nigeria.
References
[1] Y. Guo, F. Kong, D. Zhu, A. Tosun, and Q. Deng, “Sensor placement
for lifetime maximization in monitoring oil pipelines,” in Proceed-
ings of the 1st ACM/IEEE International Conference on Cyber-Physical
Systems.
ACM, 2010, pp. 61–68.
[2] I. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, “Wire-
less sensor networks: a survey,” Computer networks, vol. 38, no. 4,
pp. 393–422, 2002.
[3] M. Abd-El-Barr, M. Youssef, and M. Al-Otaibi, “Wireless sensor
networks-part i: topology and design issues,” in Electrical and
Computer Engineering, 2005. Canadian Conference on.
IEEE, 2005,
pp. 1165–1168.
[4] M. Younis and K. Akkaya, “Strategies and techniques for node
placement in wireless sensor networks: A survey,” Ad Hoc Networks,
vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 621–655, 2008.
[5] J. Li, L. Andrew, C. Foh, M. Zukerman, and H. Chen, “Connectivity,
coverage and placement in wireless sensor networks,” Sensors,
vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 7664–7693, 2009.
[6] Y. Zou and K. Chakrabarty, “Sensor deployment and target local-
ization based on virtual forces,” in INFOCOM 2003. Twenty-Second
Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications.
IEEE Societies, vol. 2.
Ieee, 2003, pp. 1293–1303.
[7] S. Dhillon and K. Chakrabarty, Sensor placement for eﬀective coverage
and surveillance in distributed sensor networks.
IEEE, 2003, vol. 3.
[8] A. Efrat, S. Har-Peled, and J. Mitchell, “Approximation algorithms
for two optimal location problems in sensor networks,” in Broad-
band Networks, 2005. BroadNets 2005. 2nd International Conference on.
IEEE, 2005, pp. 714–723.
[9] T. Clouqueur, V. Phipatanasuphorn, P. Ramanathan, and K. Saluja,
“Sensor deployment strategy for target detection,” in Proceedings of
the 1st ACM international workshop on Wireless sensor networks and
applications.
ACM, 2002, pp. 42–48.
[10] K. Akkaya, M. Younis, and M. Bangad, “Sink repositioning for
enhanced performance in wireless sensor networks,” Computer
Networks, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 512–534, 2005.
[11] G. Wang, G. Cao, T. La Porta, and W. Zhang, “Sensor relocation in
mobile sensor networks,” in INFOCOM 2005. 24th Annual Joint Con-
ference of the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies. Proceedings
IEEE, vol. 4.
IEEE, 2005, pp. 2302–2312.
[12] S. Shakkottai, R. Srikant, and N. Shroﬀ, “Unreliable sensor grids:
Coverage, connectivity and diameter,” in INFOCOM 2003. Twenty-
Second Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communi-
cations. IEEE Societies, vol. 2.
IEEE, 2003, pp. 1073–1083.
[13] J. Paek, K. Chintalapudi, J. Caﬀrey, R. Govindan, and S. Masri, “A
wireless sensor network for structural health monitoring: Perfor-
mance and experience,” 2005.
[14] S. Poduri and G. Sukhatme, “Constrained coverage for mobile
sensor networks,” in Robotics and Automation, 2004. Proceedings.
ICRA’04. 2004 IEEE International Conference on, vol. 1.
IEEE, 2004,
pp. 165–171.
[15] K. Kar, S. Banerjee et al., “Node placement for connected coverage
in sensor networks,” 2003.
[16] Y. Wang, C. Hu, and Y. Tseng, “Eﬃcient deployment algorithms for
ensuring coverage and connectivity of wireless sensor networks,”
in Wireless Internet, 2005. Proceedings. First International Conference
on.
IEEE, 2005, pp. 114–121.
[17] W. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, “Energy-
eﬃcient communication protocol for wireless microsensor net-
works,” in System Sciences, 2000. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Hawaii International Conference on.
IEEE, 2000, pp. 10–pp.
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

