A Wireless Electronic Nose for Emergency Indoor Monitoring 
 
Vincenzo Di Lecce, Rita Daria 
DIASS – Politecnico di Bari 
 Taranto, Italy 
{v.dilecce, r.dario}@aeflab.net 
Jessica Uva 
SINCON s.r.l. 
Taranto, Italy 
jessica.uva@sincon.it 
 
 
Abstract—The non-compliance with the ambient air quality 
standards in hospitals as well as in all working settings can 
cause possible adverse effects on health of people. It is 
extremely important to monitor public exposure of air 
pollutant contaminants in order to prevent air quality related 
emergencies such as heavy smoke from fires or toxic releases. 
 In this paper a wireless device for monitoring air quality is 
presented. Each node, based on commercial gas sensor arrays 
and a ZigBee wireless network interface, is local powered by 
plugging it into a generic light socket. No wiring is required for 
data transmission. Air data measured by nodes are delivered 
via ZigBee network to a database station where different 
technical analyses can be used to obtain pollutant dispersion 
information. This system can be used for monitoring and 
classifying Hazardous Air Pollutants in various places: 
laboratories, offices and operating rooms. Thus, the wireless 
electronic nose approach aims at strengthening its potential for 
automatic environment monitoring with regard to many 
industrial applications too.  
 
Keywords: e-nose, environment, emergency 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The implementation and development of electronic 
noses are linked to different areas of application today. In 
food field artificial olfactory systems have an important role 
for preventing food fraud. Similarly, in industrial areas (e.g., 
industry of perfumes and cosmetics) there are many 
potential applications, such as the dangerous chemical agent 
detection. In the healthcare field, extensive researches, 
based on a thorough examination and appropriate 
investigations of relevant data as a result of medical 
diagnosis in this regard, were conducted. The most 
promising results have been obtained with the detection of 
lung cancer through breath. The principle is based on 
clinical chemistry. In fact, the chemical composition of a 
person's breath changes when they develop this disease. 
Furthermore, numerous scientific studies have clearly 
demonstrated the influence that the air has on human health. 
The great importance of the continuous air monitoring in 
residential areas or in workplaces is really self evident. 
Particular attention is given to the risk factors for specific 
population groups (children, elderly, sick, etc). This paper 
aims to define a low-cost, real time, self configurable sensor 
network for the continuous evaluation of indoor/outdoor air 
quality.  
A classical limit of monitoring is the data network 
wiring. Currently, fully wired buildings are going to become 
the norm, but this feature is typically reserved to working 
areas and not to service and technical areas (i.e. storage 
room, basement and wire way). 
Particular consideration, by the same authors, has been 
given to air quality in hospital environments. In [1] we 
report an application of monitoring system within 
laboratories, operating rooms, and executive offices. 
However this technology can be applied to several industrial 
and domestic fields. 
From the environmental perspective, the hospital is 
characterized by a mixture of gases and chemical products 
(many of which are volatile organic compounds) used in 
therapy and generic activity (cleaning, maintenance, potting 
etc). 
The monitoring stations, for checking the presence of 
hazardous substances to human health, are only located in 
operating rooms and in specific laboratories (that use 
antiblastic and another dangerous compounds). Therefore, 
these devices cannot provide the control of the whole 
hospital, but only of some spaces. 
In addition to human risks, the presence of oxygen, 
butane and other technical gases highlights the risk of 
explosion. 
Significant examples of rules to be observed are offered 
by the Italian Public Health Office: Circular letter n. 5 of the 
year 1989, that establishes the maximum concentration 
levels of substances used for anesthesia gases in operating 
rooms 
(Guidelines 
for 
environmental 
and 
hygienic 
procedures in operation theatre) and the DECREE on April 
9, 2008, n. 81 for the protection of health and safety at work 
[9]. 
It is clear that the proposed technologies can be used in 
fire, flooding and contamination detection [2-3]. 
With the continuous development of wireless sensor 
network (WSN), the usability of sensors is becoming 
increasingly prevalent in our environments. Therefore, 
combining an electronic nose technology with WSN to 
realize wireless detection system can be seen as a very 
important step in the right direction of human safety 
research. According to this trend, a wireless electronic nose 
has been developed; the device has been based on IEEE 
802.15.4 or the so-called ZigBee and tested for environment 
monitoring in various rooms and areas. 
ZigBee technology is a short-range (10-300 feet), low 
power, 
low-speed, 
low-cost 
wireless 
communication 
technology, mainly for wireless sensor networks, automatic 
274
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

control and remote control areas. It is, generally, considered 
as a good wireless communication protocol, because it fully 
meets the requirements of WSN application and owns such 
property as higher reliability, self-organization network, 
self-cure capacity and large network volume [2]. 
In this paper after a methodological approach, describing 
the sensors and the circuits of the electronic nose, a case 
study with the related results is discussed. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
The design of the wireless electronic nose node (e-nose) 
can be divided into three parts including sensor and 
electronic hardware, power supply and ZigBee network 
interface.  
A. Electronic Hardware and Sensor 
The e-nose is composed of an acquisition module 
comprising the sensors and the signal conditioning circuitry, 
and an interface to the ZigBee transponder, also a different 
protocol transponder or a data-logger that records the data in 
an SD memory can be used [4]. For specific applications in 
medical and hospital environments, the following sensors 
are provided: LM335 sensors for detecting temperature, 
HIH-4000-001 for relative humidity, TGS2620 for CH4 and 
TGS2602 to monitor CO, MQ811 for CO2, and MQ137 for 
NOx, and MQ131 for O3 and MQ136 for SOx.  
 The criterion for the choice of these sensors was based 
on the need for covering the greatest range of pollutants to 
be observed in hospital environment [Table I]. 
These sensors are semiconductor gas sensors and they 
are widely used for detecting inflammable gases and certain 
toxic gases in air. The adsorption or reaction of a gas on the 
surface of the semiconducting material induces a change in 
the density of the conducting electrons in the polycrystalline 
sensor element. This chemical reaction can be described by 
four steps as follows: 
• 
Pre-adsorption 
of 
oxygen 
on 
semiconducting 
material surface; 
• 
Adsorption of specific gas; 
• 
Reaction between oxygen and adsorbed gas; 
• 
Desorption of reacted gas on surface. 
The sensing element gas sensor is a tin dioxide (SnO2) 
semiconductor, which has low conductivity in clean air. In 
the presence of a detectable gas, the sensor resistance 
decreases depending on the gas concentration in the air. An 
electrical circuit can convert the change in resistance to an 
output signal operating the preliminary correction as 
function of temperature and humidity. 
B. Power supply 
A very simple and low cost constant voltage power 
supply has been used. Main feature is 5V DC, 1 A (high 
current for gas sensor header supply). The circuit is 
designed around ON’s NCP1014 integrated controller with 
internal mosfet in a discontinuous mode flyback topology. 
A low drop serial regulator IC has been used to reduce 5 
Volts outputted to 3.3 volts for ZigBee transponder supply. 
Due to low current used by the transponder, the dissipated 
thermal power is about 170 mW. In order to evaluate the 
features of powerline communications an OFDM-based 
modem is also present on the board [Figure 1-2]. 
C. ZigBee Modules  
ZigBee technology is based on the IEEE 802.15.4 
standard, which also represents the personal area wireless 
network (PAN) [4]. ZigBee is characterized by its low cost, 
low power consumption and miniaturization. 
The ZigBee stack architecture defines two layers, 
namely, the physical layer and the medium access control 
sub-layer. The ZigBee alliance provides the network layer 
and the framework in the application layer. In the test-bed a 
commercial ZigBee module has been used (XTR-ZB1-xHE 
from Aurel). From specifications, the line of sight distance 
of this module can extend up to 1000 feet (open air) with 
power consumption of 350 mW. ASCII strings commands 
are used to configure the module (PAN ID, channel scan 
function, time to join the network, destination address, 
hopping parameters, data baud rate, sleep mode function 
TABLE I. SENSORS USED IN THE ZIGBEE E-NOSE NODE PROTOTYPE. 
 
Gas 
Sources  
Typical concentrations 
Sensor 
CO2 
Decomposition of organic matter; combustion 
380 ppm throughout the troposphere 
MQ811 
 
CO 
Decomposition of organic matter; combustion of 
fossil fuels 
0.05 ppm unpolluted air, 10-50 ppm in the urban traffic 
areas 
TGS2602 
CH4 
Decomposition of organic matter; natural gas 
emission 
1-2 ppm throughout the troposphere 
TGS2620 
NOx 
Electric 
shock; 
internal 
combustion 
engines, 
combustion of organic matter 
0,01 ppm ppm unpolluted air; 0,5 ppm in air pollution  
MQ137 
O3 
Electric shock; photochemical smog 
Up to 0.01 ppm in the air unpolluted, 0.5 ppm in 
photochemical smog 
MQ131 
SO2 
Volcanic gases, forest fires, fossil fuels, roasting ore 
Up to 0.01 ppm in the air unpolluted, 0.5 ppm in 
photochemical smog 
MQ136 
Temperature 
 
-10 °C to + 40° C 
LM335 
Humidity 
 
0-100% relative 
HIH-4000 
275
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

etc). This ZigBee module uses a frequency band at 2.4 GHz 
and 128 bits cryptography. We have employed a stylus 
external antenna in order to work also in reinforced concrete 
buildings. The Figure 3 depicts a ZigBee module (on the 
right).  
In general, a ZigBee network can be implemented using 
one of topologies, as depicted in left side of the Figure 3. 
The used modules adopt the mesh topology allowing nodes 
to have as many paths as possible for communication. As a 
result, the mesh topology is very reliable and the extension 
of the network size can be done with a simple 
reconfiguration (up to 6 links in the used Aurel firmware). 
However, this network topology requires each node to be 
activated for most of the time, thus consuming more energy 
than other topologies. The base node is realized using the 
same module, with specific network interface (in our case 
USB) collecting data from all nodes in the network.  
 A previously-tested database, MySQL base was used 
for storing data. Before storing, two relevant operations are 
made on the row-data. The first one is needed to correct the 
sensors output for temperature and humidity dependence 
[5]. The second one is needed to reduce the ambiguity of 
this class of sensors. 
It is well known that low-cost oxide-based resistive 
sensors are sensitive to a wide spectrum of VOCs, however 
their selectivity is generally low [6] thus providing an 
ambiguous response in terms of individual components of 
the gas mixture. Several attempts have been made to 
overcome this problem. With reference to tin oxide 
chemical sensors, two typical measurement strategies are 
employed 
[7]: 
multi-sensor 
arrays 
or 
dynamic 
measurements based on a single sensor [8]. 
In this paper, according to previous works of the same 
authors, an IF THEN inference system is used [10]. 
The experimental results seem to be in good agreement with 
what has been previously observed experimentally for these 
systems and show the effectiveness of the proposed method 
consistent with those in literature 
III. 
APPLICATION AND CASE STUDY 
In hospitals both medical gas cylinders and compressed 
gases are used. The most commonly used gases are: oxygen, 
air, carbon dioxide, propane, acetylene and anesthetic gases 
(nitrous oxide and halogenated agents). They are generally 
available in vial forms. These substances, with their 
distribution systems are the subject of close attention for a 
 
Figure 3. On the left: high power Aurel XTR-ZB1-xHE module, based on IEEE 802.15.4 standard and ZigBee protocol [15]; 
On the right: topology of ZigBee wireless networks: star, tree, and mesh. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Wireless electronic node for environmental emergency 
application (e-nose). Here, it is possible to note the power  
supply modules with OFDM modem, the ZigBee transponder 
antenna and the gas sensors. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Block diagram of the electronic node. Dot line 
highlights an additional feature under test. 
276
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

proper assessment and management of potential chemical 
hazards in a hospital [12]. We can suppose that in a hospital 
there could be: 
 Operating rooms and medical center 
  Hospital rooms 
  Offices 
  Laboratories and kitchen 
  Hall and open public areas  
  Unattended rooms. 
Here, several logistic and health activities are performed 
and these require the adoption of specific security measures. 
In particular, the operating rooms [11] are equipped with 
ventilation and air change systems and fixed monitoring 
stations. In fact, here there are many pollution sources due 
to the several activities performed by the staff. 
Another important issue regards air quality of hospital 
rooms and medical center, equipped with air conditioning 
systems. Therefore, in these areas, it is important to adhere 
to air quality safety features by equipping the rooms with 
humidification and dehumidification system, filtration, and 
air flow regulation devices. In fact, in these rooms 
microclimatic conditions must be respected according to 
Italian standards, (referring to D. P.R. 01/14/1997). In these 
areas, however, air quality can be altered (e.g., a low 
number of air changes per hour, cigarette smoke, etc). This 
situation cannot be detected, because in these places there 
are not any monitoring devices.  
The same thing could occur within the laboratories. 
They are a potential source of chemical hazard. Here, the 
solvents and detergents have to be used, in accordance with 
appropriate safety procedures (under the hood, with gloves 
and masks). However, they could cause accidental releases 
of hazardous substances thus bringing about dangerous 
situations such as poisoning or fire. 
The kitchens are hazardous too for the presence of 
propane gas. Specific risk areas may also be halls (open 
public room) and administrative offices. For adequate air 
exchange, these places must be equipped with efficient air 
conditioning systems and active and passive ventilation 
systems providing fresh air circulation. A default of air 
exchange may be a source of microbiological risk, causing 
the inhalation of microbial aerosol or deposition of 
contaminated particles. Particular attention should be given 
also to the unattended areas, which represent approximately 
20-30% of all hospital. The lack of staff to check regularly 
or occasionally spills, changes in humidity or other similar 
risks is a condition that deserves attention. They are 
typically intended for ancillary services to health care:  
 
Technical areas 
 
Paper archives 
 
Computer rooms  
 
Conducted for the gas adduction gas and other 
products within the hospital 
 
Power and data distribution lines. 
In normal conditions there are not gas leaks and therefore 
the direction does not perform a periodic inspection. In fact, 
usually, technical staff is only in charge of annually 
maintenance operation, with the exception of occasional 
conditions, such as emergency or concurrent events 
(restructuring, maintenance) [14].  
The fire detection system, as required by the regulations 
for public and private healthcare settings, is the only 
security measure that is effective in these places. 
In addition, many of these spaces are also used to store 
laboratory materials, disused electrical devices or waste. 
This stuff stationed here for a long time. 
In fact, the material can show the signs of wear over the 
times. This could cause small leaks of various kinds of 
substances, sometimes with harmful consequences. It should 
also be recalled that seasonal temperature changes i.e., the 
climatic variations occurring from warm to cold seasons in 
these storage rooms involve a high risk of incorrect 
maintenance of materials, for instance the degradation of 
papers or radiological materials. In many cases, these risk 
situations are very difficult to cope with if there is no 
outside automatic control. 
In these conditions, the environmental relief appears to 
be very complex. It will be measured only by the subjective 
perception of people entering into the room (smell of damp, 
smelly material, acrid smell of gas). The devices that can 
detect the problem are extremely expensive and complex 
(e.g., hygrometer, gas detector, samples of chemicals).  
These phases of control, however, are not very useful in 
 
 
Figure 4. Row-data of the acquisition realized in an office on the 4th floor of 
the hospital with a courtyard window. 
277
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

emergency situations that may arise from sudden emission 
of toxic gases, when we have not time to sample the 
surrounding 
air 
and 
analyze 
it 
with 
sophisticated 
instruments that provide 
detailed concentrations of 
pollutants, but require extremely long time to report a 
hazard [13]. 
According to the aim of this paper, the wireless e-nose 
was tested in three operating rooms, in the hall and an office 
of a public hospital. The first test has been realized in an 
office on the 4th floor with a courtyard window. The office 
belongs to a Head Physician. Row-data (electric output of 
the sensors as ratio Ro/Rs) from the sensor, except for direct 
voltage output sensors (LM335 and HIH-4000-001) are 
shown 
in 
Figure 
4. 
The 
same 
data 
after 
humidity/temperature correction and disambiguation are 
shown in Figure 5 according to [10]. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Gas concentration (ppm) of the acquisition realized within a 4th 
floor office of the hospital with a courtyards window. 
 
The second test has been realized in the hall of the 
Hospital with the access to Emergency Room. The hall is 
open and exposed to an urban traffic-congested street, with 
private cars, ambulances and bus. There are at least 30 
persons including patients, relatives, staff and waiting 
persons. Gas concentrations in ppm are reported in Figure 6.  
The last test has been made in a surgical room. As 
already reported in [4] all operating rooms are equipped 
with continuous monitoring stations and they have air 
conditioning and ventilation systems with HEPA filters. The 
volume of each room is 25 m2. The presented data are 
related to a plastic surgery facility (specifically in relation to 
mastectomy operation). The smell of alcohol was perceived 
by the operators, probably due to use of Betadine (alcohol 
disinfectant), Sevoflurane (vaporized) and Propoform. 
During the surgery operation, the door of the operating 
room is often open or ajar and there is continuous passing-
by of personnel (doctors, nurses and auxiliary ones). An 
electrosurgical device was used. Gas concentrations of the 
monitoring performed in operating rooms on the 1th floor in 
1 hour of acquisition, are shown in Figure 7 and, after 25 
minutes, a probably sensor saturation can be seen, 
synchronized to use electrosurgical devices and a strong 
smell perceived by the operators.  
 
 
Figure 6. Gas concentrations of the monitoring carried out in a hall hospital 
on the ground floor exposed to an urban traffic-congested street (private 
cars, ambulances and bus). There are at least 30 persons including patients, 
relatives, staff and waiting persons. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Gas concentrations of the monitoring carried out in operating 
room on the 1th floor in 1 hour of acquisition, where, about after 25 
minutes, the electrosurgical device was used during a mastectomy 
operation. 
278
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

IV. 
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION 
In this study, six gas sensors were used to test air quality 
inside different rooms and areas of a public hospital. It 
should be noted that after a warming up period (some 
minutes for data sheet, about 1 hour in our tests) the sensors 
are able to measure the presence of pollutants in the air. 
Typical responses of gas sensing measurement are 
shown. None of the data are reposted by the existing sensor. 
Some of these data show the exceeding of the limits 
imposed by a directive of Italian Public Health policy. 
But low-cost solid state sensors are generally sensitive to 
a number of different gases and are characterized by a high 
response to the temperature and the humidity. In this work, 
the problem of discrimination abilities of these sensors has 
been solved. The basic idea grounds on the hypothesis that, 
if the same gas is actually measured by two or more sensors, 
then their estimated concentrations will be similar, with 
accuracy related to the number of concordant sensors.  
The sensors are connected to the hub using the ZigBee 
protocol. Main features of this choice refer to the high 
connectivity ability. In particular, the adopted mesh 
topology is very reliable and extension of the network size 
can be done without reconfiguration.  
Joining these two technologies a very cheap gas sensor 
network arrangement has been realized, tested and proposed 
in this paper.  
The same technology, tested for a hospital application, 
can be used in any class of application. Farms, workshops, 
offices, public area can suffer from air contamination. The 
classical solutions, based on air sample or chemical tests are 
very slow and expensive. Moreover, the proposed solution 
does not require wiring and fixed installation, it is possible 
to reconfigure dynamically the network configuration. As 
described, a kit with a mixture of different selectivity e-
noses can be considered as a smart and cost effective 
solution to emergency air monitoring. 
Therefore, the experimental results, albeit grounding on 
a set of catalytic sensors, seem to support the idea that smart 
compositions of low-cost sensors are able to manifest 
surprising discrimination abilities. 
The achieved goals are in line with our expectations and 
show that overall our system is able to perform an analysis, 
efficient enough to be of practical use. Future works will 
focus on studying further improvements of the system for 
getting higher accuracy level measurements. 
AKNOWLEDGMENTS  
We are grateful to the reviewers for their helpful 
suggestions and for their proposed corrections to improve 
the paper. The authors would like to thank Mr C. Martines, 
V. Guastamacchia e G. Mola for having contributed to the 
production of the results obtained by the acquisitions 
performed in the hospital. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] V. Di Lecce, A. Amato, R. Dario, C. Martines, Air Quality 
Control for Health Care Centres. The Application of an 
Intelligent Distributed System. 2009 IEEE Workshop on 
Environmental, Energy, and Structural Monitoring Systems. 
EESMS 2009 Crema (Italy) 25/09/2009, ISBN: 978-1-4244-
4848-7 . Pag 27-30.  
[2] T. Defeng, L. Shixing, X. Wujun, Z. Yongming “A Fire 
Monitoring System in ZigBee Wireless Network” CYBERC 
2010 - The 2nd International Conference on Cyber-Enabled 
Distributed Computing and Knowledge Discovery CyberC 
2010. October 10-12, 2010. Huangshan/China. 
[3] M. Xiangyin, X. Shide, X. Ying, H. Huiping “ZigBee Based 
Wireless Networked Smart Transducer and Its Application in 
Supervision and Control System for Natural Gas Gate 
Station”. July 25-28, 2009 Nanning, China. 
[4] R. Dario, A. Mundo, A. Leaci, V. Di Lecce, J. Uva, G. Bianco 
“Medical Environment Spot Exposure: a Solid State Personal 
Dosimeter” 2010 IEEE Workshop on Environmental, Energy, 
and Structural Monitoring Systems, pag. 19-25. Taranto, Italy, 
9 September 2010. 
[5] http://www.figarosensor.com/products/common%281-
104%29.pdf 
[6] P. Moseley and B. Tofield “Solid-State Gas Sensors” Bristol, 
U.K. Adam Hilger, 1987. 
[7] X. Huang, F. Meng, Z. Pi, W. Xu and J. Liu “Gas sensing 
behavior of a single tin dioxide sensor under dynamic 
temperature modulation”, Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, 
Volume 99, Issues 2-3, 1 May 2004, pp. 444-450. 
[8] A. P. Lee and B. J. Reedy, “Temperature modulation in 
semiconductor gas sensing”, Sensors and Actuators B: 
Chemical, Volume 60, Issue 1,2 November 1999, pp. 35-42. 
[9] http://www.ego-gw.it/public/about/VIR-0558A-09.pdf  
[10] V. Di Lecce, M. Calabrese, R. Dario “Computational-based 
Volatile Organic Compounds discrimination: an experimental 
low-cost setup” Proc. of the 2010 IEEE International 
Conference on Computational Intelligence for Measurement 
Systems and Applications Taranto (CIMSA2010), Italy, 6-8 
September 2010, pp. 54-59, ISBN: 978-1-4244-7229-1. 
[11] S. Mehta, W. J. Cole, J. Chaw and K. Lewin, “Operating 
room air pollution: Influence of anaesthetic circuit, vapour 
concentration, gas flow and ventilation”, Canadian Journal of 
Anesthesia, Volume 22, Number 3, pp. 265-274. 
[12] M. Leung, A. H.S. Chan, “Control and management of 
hospital indoor air quality”, Med Sci Monit, 2006; Volume 
12, Number, 3, pp.17-23. 
[13] J. E. Hall, K. A. Henderson, T. A. Oldham, S. Pugh and M. 
Harmer, “Environmental monitoring during gaseous induction 
with sevoflurane”, British Journal Anaesthesia Volume 79, 
Issue 3, pp. 342-345, 1997. 
[14] D. Norback, M. Ingegerd, J. Widstrom, “Indoor air quality 
and personal factors related to the sick building syndrome”, 
Scand Journal Work Environmental Health, Volume 16, 
pp.121-128. 
[15] http://www.aurel-zigbee.com/download/documents/ 
italiano/manuale-XTR-ZB1-xHE.pdf 
279
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

