Development of a Real-Time Evaluation System For Top Taekwondo Athletes 
SPERTA 
 
Pedro Cunha 
ALGORITMI Research Centre  
Minho University 
Guimarães, Portugal 
email: id5514@alunos.uminho.pt 
Vítor Carvalho 
2Ai Lab - EST & ALGORITMI Research Centre 
 IPCA & Minho University 
Barcelos & Guimarães, Portugal 
email: vcarvalho@ipca.pt 
Filomena Soares 
ALGORITMI Research Centre  
Industrial Electronics Department 
Minho University 
Guimarães, Portugal 
email: fsoares@dei.uminho.pt 
 
 
Abstract - At any level of sport, evaluating the performance of 
the athletes is a constant challenge for trainers. In the case of 
Taekwondo, where there is lack of technological solutions to 
help the trainer to perform this task, there is a higher 
difficulty. The system presented in this paper is part of a PhD 
project, which the main objective is to develop a system 
reliable and affordable for evaluate in real-time the 
performance of top Taekwondo athletes. The system consists of 
a 3D camera Orbbec Astra with RGB and depth sensor and a 
computer for data acquisition and processing. The data 
(information of the Cartesian coordinates and speed of the 
hands and feet movements performed by the athlete) is 
displayed in real-time either by numerical value or by charts. 
It is intended to provide an accurate feedback for the 
correction or improvement of the athlete's technique, allowing 
an increase in the athlete performance in a shorter period of 
time. Aiming to evolve the Taekwondo training techniques and 
the technological development of Taekwondo practice.  
Keywords - motion analysis; orbbec astra; performance; real-
time; Taekwondo. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In today's society, technology has been assimilated as 
something natural and accessible, being part of the daily 
routines. The regular use of technology, in the personal, 
professional and even during the educational journey, comes 
from the combination of information processing with 
objects. This combination provides a reality where the 
extension of computing devices into in everyday life is 
known as 
“Ubiquitous 
Computing” 
[1]. 
Ubiquitous 
computing has been suffering a fast-growing with 
applications in many areas.  
One of these areas is motion analysis where there has 
been active participation of scientists in the development of 
technological solutions that do not require markers on the 
human body for monitor and analyze athletes’ movements 
performed in ordinary environment conditions. The use of 
these new methods of movement analysis have contributed 
to for the emergence of motion capture solutions and low-
cost and accessible equipment [2]. 
One of the applications is in sports, where the equipment 
are used not only to collect, analyze and present athletes 
performance data from training practices and competitions 
but also to develop automatic score and refereeing systems 
[3]. This trend allows the development of athlete’s 
performance feedback systems, by measuring accelerations 
and forces, recognizing and tracking movements, quantifying 
the effort applied and many other functionalities. The overall 
objective is to reduce the time of analysis of the trainer and 
to accelerate the improvement of the performance of the 
athlete [4] [5]. 
Taekwondo was introduced in Portugal in 1974 by Grand 
Master David Chung Sun Yong [6]. Over the last two 
decades, it has gained popularity and it became an Olympic 
Sport in the year 2000 [7]. The number of federated athletes 
has been increasing, reaching currently more than 4500 
athletes in Portugal [8]. Unlike other sports, Taekwondo has 
not accompanied the technological development regarding 
training methods. Nowadays, the evaluation methods used by 
the trainers are mostly made manually, making the 
assessment of the athletes a slow, and sometimes, inefficient 
process. The trainer has to analyze all the available data, 
such as videos, time and number of movements’ executions, 
in order to obtain the information needed to provide a 
relevant feedback that allows the athletes to improve their 
performance.  
Martial arts and combat sports depend on special 
activities that expect complex skills and tactical excellence. 
The movements most executed by the athletes consist of 
specific stances and dynamic activities (strikes, punches, 
kicks, throws, blocks, falls, among others) performed 
individually or in contact with the opponent. The majority of 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

them are characterized by high dynamics, high intensity and 
very short duration, usually named as ballistic movements 
[9]. 
Following this trend, the main objective of the present 
work is to develop a real-time system to evaluate the 
performance of the Taekwondo athletes in training 
environment, taking into account reliability, usability and the 
cost of the system. The proposed system aims to provide a 
faster feedback process, contribute to an evolution of the 
performance of the most effective athlete and add 
technological development in the practice of taekwondo. 
This study presents the system structure and the developed 
software, which allows input data of the athletes training and 
output data of the Cartesian coordinates and speed of both 
hands and feet. 
This paper is divided in five sections. The Section 2 
addresses the state of the art in the field of motion analysis 
and performance evaluation in sports. The Section 3 presents 
the methodology used for the development of the 
technological tool to aid the evaluation of athletes in real 
time. In Section 4 are disclosed the final remarks of the 
development process and of the achieved system. The 
Section 5 reveal the future work regarding the further 
development and application of the system presented in this 
paper. 
II. 
STATE OF ART 
Motion analysis, over time, has aroused the interest of 
several areas of scientific research. With the evolution of 
technology, several devices have emerged that enable the 
monitoring and analysis of movements performed by the 
human body. Sports area currently represents a significant 
part of the research conducted with the aim of contributing to 
both improving athletes' performance and preventing injury. 
For trainers, motion analysis has been a key issue as it 
can improve technical skills by correcting the trainee’s body 
motion to perform correct movements in any sports. 
Some of the research carried out in motion movement 
aims to study the hands movements and localization, such as 
the study of Suarez and Murphy [10] that consists in a survey 
where they resumed the techniques used for hand 
localization and gesture classification. 
Traditional video cameras, when used in low or in 
unstable lighting and in skin colored objects environments, 
hamper the correct digital analysis of the image. The depth 
cameras are the appropriate alternative for image collection 
in these situations, as they allow to collect depth images that 
are not dependent on the brightness or color scheme of the 
environment. The most used depth sensor in scientific 
research 
regarding 
hand 
localization 
and 
gesture 
classification is the Microsoft Kinect [10]. Microsoft Kinect 
systems are low cost, portable, do not require markers, are 
easy to set up, and create 3D images. These 3D video motion 
systems are used to human movement kinematics analysis of 
body joints and segments in several areas associated with 
gait analysis, medical robotics, rehabilitation, biofeedback 
and sports performance.  
Concerning the whole human body gesture recognition 
Patsadu, Nukoolkit and Watanapa [11] present a study for 
human gesture recognition using data mining classification 
methods in video streaming of twenty body-joints positions 
of the human body collected with the Microsoft Kinect 
camera. The study recognized gesture patterns as stand, sit 
down, and lie down. The classification methods adopted for 
comparison were backpropagation neural network, decision 
tree, support vector machine and naive Bayes. For this, the 
researchers used the Microsoft Kinect camera. The results 
obtained allowed to conclude that backpropagation neural 
network shows superior performance compared to the other 
classification methods, recognizing human gestures with 
100% accuracy. The average accuracy of all classification 
methods was 93.72%, confirming the efficiency of the 
Kinect camera when used in human body recognition 
applications. 
Other study of the Microsoft Kinect was performed by 
Zerpa et al. [12]. They compared the Microsoft Kinect 
displacement measures with the Peak Motus marker-based 
system displacement measures. The results allowed to 
conclude that the Microsoft Kinect, for being a markless 
system, was more favorable during the setup, data collection 
and analysis stages as compared to the Peak Motus. 
In their study, VencesBrito et al. describe and compare 
the variety of modern motion analysis systems used in 
scientific research as well in the daily work of coaches and 
athletes in combat sports and martial arts. The authors 
suggest some applications in scientific research and scope of 
applications that contribute for optimizing the training 
process, providing information for non-expert trainers and 
athletes in the field of biomechanics but interested in motion 
analysis [13]. 
Pinto et al. [14] present a real-time evaluation approach 
that uses a Microsoft Kinect and image processing 
techniques to recognize and record the number of 
occurrences of a movement in Taekwondo training 
environment. The recognition of the movements was made 
through the calculation of the angles between human body 
joints and comparing them with the correct values of each 
movement previously saved in a database. 
Further studies are needed, to confirm the reliability and 
validity of the Microsoft Kinect for human movement 
kinematics analysis [12]. However Robertson et al. [15] and 
Corazza et al. [16] both verified and agreed that markerless 
systems would be a major revolution in the analysis of 
human motion and significantly would expand the 
application of human motion capture. 
III. 
DEVELOPMENT 
The training process in martial arts, just as in other 
sports, aims to improve the performance of certain 
techniques and strategic behaviors along with the increase of 
the physical condition of the athlete, allowing him/her to 
compete with other athletes and reduce the risk of injury. 
The analysis of the movements performed by the athletes is a 
key element in training sessions. In this sense, motion 
analysis could provide relevant information about the 
accuracy of the athlete techniques and identify errors, when 
implemented during the training. The information collected 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

should serve to apply actions that allow the trainers and the 
athletes to correct the errors and adjust the training plan. 
Thus, contributing to improve the efficiency of movements 
and obtain the expected progress [13]. 
The study exposed in this paper is part of a PhD project, 
which has the main objective to develop a system where the 
overall goal is the evaluation of performance of top 
Taekwondo athletes in real time.  
The system developed consists in a 3D camera with RGB 
and depth sensor, a computer and a software for data 
processing and storage, as seen in Figure 1. It is intended that 
the developed system is as portable and easy to use as 
possible, without neglecting the reliability and robustness. 
It is provided a graphical environment for the user to 
interact with the system that allows: 
 
the trainer to enter the athlete information and 
training data; 
 
to store the training data in a database; 
 
real-time visualization of movements and joints of 
the athlete; 
 
view through charts the Cartesian coordinates values 
of the athlete's hands and feet; 
 
graphical visualization of the instantaneous velocity 
of the athlete's hands and feet. 
 
The depth sensor chosen for the development of the 
system was the 3D camera Orbbec Astra, shown in Figure 2, 
that provides 640 pixels x 480 pixels at 30 frames per second 
for depth and RGB image size, a 0.6 to 8 meter range and a 
field of view of 60° horizontal x 49.5° vertical (73° 
diagonal). Another relevant aspect to the choice was the 
small size and ease of use that are important for the usability 
of the system. Thus, the dimensions of the Orbbec Astra are 
165 x 30 x 40 mm, the weight is 300 grams and the power 
supply and the data interface only require a USB 2.0 port 
[17]. Comparing with Microsoft Kinect 2, the most used 
depth sensor in research, Orbbec is smaller, has less weight, 
with a higher maximum reach distance. 
 
 
The performance of the computer must be taken into account 
for the proper functioning of the system. Due to the large 
amount of data read, processed and stored by the software, 
the performance of the computer is of utmost importance. 
The better the processing capacity is, the better the efficiency 
of the movements’ data collection is, either by the motion 
sensor or by the software where the information is processed. 
The computer used for the development consists of a 
portable computer, with 4th generation Intel® Core ™ i7-
4720HQ processor with Intel® Turbo Boost Technology 2.0, 
8 GB of RAM, AMD Radeon ™ R9 M265X graphics card 
with 2 GB dedicated and Microsoft Windows 10 64-bit 
operating system. 
A Windows application was developed, so that it can be 
used by computers running the Windows operating system, 
the most commonly used operating system in Portugal at the 
moment [18]. The programming language used was C# 
along the Microsoft Visual Studio 2017 IDE. Although 
Orbbec Astra provides a SDK with full body skeleton 
tracking, Orbbec itself advises the use of Nuitrack ™ that 
has been developed in partnership with 3DiVi Inc. 
Nuitrack™ is a 3D skeleton tracking gesture recognition 
solution middleware enabling Natural User Interface (NUI) 
capabilities on Android, Windows and Linux platforms [19]. 
The developed software interface consists of several 
windows/forms that allow the user to enter and view the 
information regarding the training performed, visible in 
Figure 3a). The main window has 3 buttons, one for ‘Add 
athlete’, one for ‘Begin training’, one for ‘Exit’ application 
and also fields for data entry of the training to be performed.  
When pressed the ‘Add athlete’ button another window 
opens, Figure 3b), that allows adding the database athlete 
data such as name, age, weight, height, gender and team. The 
‘Begin training’ button is pressed after selecting the athlete 
in the dropdown field ´Name:´, which automatically fills the 
remaining fields referring to the athlete.  
After ‘Begin training’ is pressed, a new window opens, 
Figure 3c), that allows to see the depth image and the athlete 
hands and feet joints movements data in Cartesian 
coordinates numeric values, Cartesian coordinates line chart 
and speed line chart, all in real-time as presented in Figure 4. 
Figure 2.  3D Camera Orbbec Astra [17]  
 
Figure 1.  Sperta system architecture 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The joints Cartesian coordinates are obtained through the 
Nuitrack™ SDK integrated in the software and their values 
are presented in millimeters. The values of each one of the 
joints refer to the X, Y, and Z coordinates relative to the 
range of the 3D camera Orbbec Astra.  
It is important for the trainer to access the previous 
training information in order to evaluate the performance 
evolution of the trainee. The developed software integrates 
an SQL database where all the training data collected with 
the system is saved, which structure is presented in Figure 5.  
The database is divided into three tables: ‘Athlete’ table 
with fields ‘IdAthelete’, ‘name’, ‘age’, ‘weight’, ’height’, 
’genre’ and ‘team’; ‘Training’ table with fields ‘IdTraining’, 
‘dateHour’, 
‘technique, 
‘place’ 
and 
foreign 
key 
‘trainingAthlete’; ‘CoordinatesXYZ’ table with fields 
‘IdCoordinates’, 
‘time’, 
‘handRightX’, 
‘handRightY’, 
‘handRightZ’, 
‘handLeftX’, 
‘handLeftY’, 
‘handLeftZ’, 
‘footRightX’, 
‘footRightY’, 
‘footRightZ’, 
‘footLeftX’, 
‘footLeftY’, 
‘footLeftZ’ 
and 
 
foreign 
key 
‘coordinatesTraining’. 
The speed of the athlete joints movements is not obtained 
directly from the SDK Nuitrack. To calculate the speed of 
the athlete's movements in real-time using the Cartesian 
coordinates it is necessary to calculate the movement 
displacement value according to the time elapsed between 
each reading. For that it was used the distance equation in 
three-dimensional Euclidean space (1). Where p and q are 
the current values read and the last read antecedent’s values, 
respectively of the Cartesian coordinates of the joints. 
 
                           (1)       
 
 
The time elapsed between two adjacent acquisitions was 
calculated (current coordinate data of the joints of the athlete 
and the previous coordinates). This calculation was 
performed through the used computer system clock in 
milliseconds (2), where t and t-1 are the current time value 
and the time value of the previous Cartesian coordinates read 
respectively. 
 
   
                                   (2) 
 
After calculating the joints distance between the collected 
data and the time between data collection, the velocity 
 
Figure 4. Depth sensor, cartesian coordinates and speed data output in 
real-time 
Figure 5.  Database tables and data fields (in Portuguese). 
 
 
Figure 3.  Sperta software interface windows: a) information regarding 
the training; b) athlete data; and c) depth image and line charts. 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

calculation was performed using (3), where ds and dt are the 
derivative of the displacement value of the joint and the 
derivative of the value of the time elapsed between the 
displacement, respectively. 
 
                                       (3) 
 
The calculated speed values are presented by the software 
in real-time allowing the trainer to follow the evolution of 
the training and providing relevant feedback in real-time to 
the athlete.  
In order to verify the accuracy of the system developed, 
some tests were made, where the recording of the operation 
and data presented in real-time was performed. The 
collected (in the database) output graphs of various sections 
of the training were compared with the charts provided by 
the system software. The charts of the database were created 
using the Microsoft Excel worksheet. In Figure 6, it is 
possible to visualize the comparison between the Cartesian 
coordinates of the movement realized by the right hand 
during the period comprised between the 9890 and the 
13895 milliseconds of a section of training. 
This comparison seeks to visually verify that the values 
collected in real-time by the Orbbec Astra 3D camera, 
Figure 6 a), and the values presented by the software in real-
time, Figure 6 b), are the same. This allows us to conclude 
that the system performance is effective and able to provide 
real-time feedback of the performance of Taekwondo 
athletes. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The development of an accurate, economically affordable 
and non-invasive solution to monitor in real-time the 
practice of Taekwondo is of utmost importance [5]. 
The system presented in this paper intends to accomplish 
the performance evaluation of taekwondo athletes in real-
time in a training environment. The evaluation of the 
movements of the athlete is performed through motion 
analysis of the movements, using computer processing of 
the information collected through the 3D Camera Orbbec 
Astra, with its depth sensor and the SDK Nuitrack™. 
The system developed allows the trainer and athlete to 
have a real-time feedback of the movements performed 
during the training and the speed of the movement 
execution. In fact, the objective is to provide a tool that 
could be used by both, trainer and athlete, which promotes 
an increase in the speed of the feedback of the trainer on the 
performance of the athlete during the training. 
Thus, the developed system aims to be an easy-to-use and 
affordable technology solution and to contribute to the 
technological development of the performance evaluation of 
Taekwondo athletes in a training environment. 
V. 
FUTURE WORK 
The system presented is part of a larger project and it is 
still under development. So, it is intended to add other 
features to the system, such as: output of the movements 
acceleration and strength in real-time, either in numeric 
values or charts; output of the speed, acceleration and 
strength of more human body joints relevant to the 
evaluation of the athlete performance; create a database with 
the correctly executed Taekwondo movements Cartesian 
coordinate’s patterns, for use as reference values; identify 
and count the movements performed by the athlete during 
the training sessions using deep learning methods, such as 
backpropagation neural network using as reference values 
the data previously saved in the database of the correct 
execution of the movements.  
Finally, it will be necessary to test the software in real 
training environment with Taekwondo top athletes to be 
able to adjust the system to the real needs of the training, as 
well as collecting enough data to allow the use of deep 
learning methods needed to make the system more efficient 
and accurate in real-time interpretation of data. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like also to express their 
acknowledgments to COMPETE: POCI-01-0145-FEDER-
007043 and FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia 
within the Project Scope: UID/CEC/00319/2013. Pedro 
Cunha 
thanks 
FCT 
for 
PhD 
scholarship 
SFRH/BD/121994/2016. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Baca, P. Dabnichki, M. Heller, and P. Kornfeind, 
"Ubiquitous computing in sports: A review and analysis," 
Journal of Sports Sciences, vol. 27, pp. 1335-1346, Oct. 2009, 
doi.org/10.1080/02640410903277427.  
[2] B. A. King and L. D. Paulson, "Motion capture moves into 
new realms," Computer, vol. 40(9), pp. 13–16, Sep. 2007, 
doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/MC.2007.326.  
[3] A. Baca and P. Kornfeind, "Rapid feedback systems for elite 
sports training," IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 5 (4), pp. 
70–76, Oct. 2006 doi.org/10.1109/MPRV.2006.82. 
 
Figure 6.  Hand right Cartesian coordinates charts from 9890 to 13895 
milliseconds: a) Excel chart of values collected by Orbbec Astra and 
stored in the database; b) graph of the values presented by the software 
in real time.  
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[4] D. G. Liebermann et al., "Advances in the application of 
information technology to sport performance," Journal of 
Sports Science, vol. 20, pp. 755–769, Dec. 2010, 
doi.org/10.1080/026404102320675611.  
[5] P. Cunha, V. Carvalho, and F. Soares, "Real-Time Data 
Movements Acquisition of Taekwondo Athletes: First 
Insights," in International Conference on 
Innovation, 
Engineering and Entrepreneurship, Cham, Springer, pp. 251-
258, Jun. 2018, doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91334-6_35. 
[6] E. H. A. Costa, "Taekwondo History," [Online]. Available: 
http://www.dojangabilio-costa.com/home.. [retrieved: june, 
2018]. 
[7] W. T. Organization, "About the Federation," [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.worldtaekwondo.org/about-wt/about-
wt/. [retrieved: june, 2018]. 
[8] I. P. D. J. I.P, " Federated Practitioners - Statistics - Tables," 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.idesporto.pt/conteudo.aspx?id=103. 
[retrieved: 
june, 2018]. 
[9] A. M. VencesBrito, M. A. Rodrigues Ferreira, N. Cortes, O. 
Fernandes, 
and 
P. 
Pezarat‐Correia, 
"Kinematic 
and 
electromyographic analyses of a karate punch," Journal of 
Electromyography and Kinesiology, vol. 21(6), pp. 1023–
1029, Dec. 2011, doi.org/10.1016/j.jelekin.2011.09.007.  
[10] J. Suarez and R. R. Murphy, "Hand gesture recognition with 
depth images: A review," Ro-man, 2012 IEEE, pp. 411-417, 
Sep. 2012.  
[11] O. Patsadu, C. Nukoolkit, and B. Watanapa, "Human gesture 
recognition using Kinect camera," Computer Science and 
Software Engineering (JCSSE), 2012 International Joint 
Conference on. IEEE, pp. 28-32, 2012.  
[12] C. Zerpa, C. Lees, P. P., and E. Pryzsucha, "The use of 
microsoft 
Kinect 
for 
human 
movement 
analysis," 
International Journal of Sports Science, vol. 5(4), pp. 120-
127, Oct. 2015, doi:10.5923/j.sports.20150504.02.  
[13] A. VencesBrito, M. A. Castro, and O. Fernandes, "Motion 
analysis systems as optimization training tools in combat 
sports and martial arts," Revista de Artes Marciales Asiáticas, 
vol. 
10(2), 
pp. 
105-123, 
2016,   
dx.doi.org/10.18002/rama.v10i2.1687.  
[14] T. Pinto et al., "Recording of Occurrences Through Image 
Processing in Taekwondo Training: First Insights," European 
Congress on Computational Methods in Applied Sciences and 
Engineering, 
vol. 
27, 
pp. 
427-436, 
Oct. 
2017, 
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68195-5_47. 
[15] D. G. E. Robertson, G. Caldwell, J. Hamill, G. Kamen, and S. 
N. Whittlesey, "Research methods in biomechanics," in 
Human Kinetics., Champaign, IL, 2004.  
[16] S. Corazza, L. Mundermann, E. Gambaretto, G. Ferrigno, and 
T. Andriacchi, "Markerless motion capture through visual 
hull, articulated ICP and subject specific model generation," 
International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 87, pp. 156-
169, Sep. 2009, doi.org/10.1007/s11263-009-0284-3. 
[17] Orbbec, "Orbbec Astra, Astra S & Astra Pro," [Online]. 
Available: 
https://orbbec3d.com/product-astra/. 
[retrieved: 
june, 2018]. 
[18] S. GlobalStats, "Operating System Market Share Portugal, 
June 2017 - June 2018," Statcounter GlobalStats, [Online]. 
Available: 
http://gs.statcounter.com/os-market-
share/all/portugal. [retrieved: june, 2018]. 
[19] Nuitrack, "What is Nuitrack™SDK?," 3DiVi Inc., [Online]. 
Available: 
http://download.3divi.com/Nuitrack/doc/Overview_page.htm. 
[retrieved: june, 2018]. 
 
 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

