Environmental Monitoring based on Wireless Sensor Network via Mobile Phone  
Laura M. Rodríguez Peralta 
Cómputo Académico, Universidad Popular Autónoma de 
Puebla (UPAEP), Puebla, México.  
E-mail: lauramargarita.rodriguez01@upaep.mx 
Andrea M. M.  Abreu, Lina M. P. L. Brito,  
Competence Centre of Exact Sciences and Engineering, 
University of Madeira (UMa), Madeira, Portugal.  
E-mail: nickandrea8@gmail.com, lina@uma.pt
 
 
Abstract - Preventive conservation of artwork is a vital issue for 
museums. Therefore, it is fundamental to continuously monitor 
its environment. To accomplish this, the WISE-MUSE project 
proposes the use of Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) for 
monitoring and automatically control museums’ environment 
and structural health. The deployment of a Wireless Sensor 
Network 
can 
help 
to 
implement 
these 
measurements 
continuously, in a real-time basis, and in a much easier and 
cheaper 
way 
than 
when 
using 
traditional 
measuring 
equipments 
and 
procedures. 
Nevertheless, 
continuous 
monitoring implies that the persons in charge for the museum 
must be immediately informed of any abnormal value detected 
in its environment. Thus, this contribution arises: the 
development of a new mobile application that allows users to 
continuously monitor the environment and be aware of any 
undesirable changes that may occur.  
 
Keywords-wireless sensor networks; mobile applications; 
environmental monitoring; preventive artwork conservation. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Controlling some of the major causes of deterioration 
and damage of artwork in a museum environment avoids or 
reduces the need for invasive conservation treatment and 
ensures that artwork is protected. Therefore, preventive 
conservation of art in museums is of extreme importance.  
Preventive 
conservation 
is 
achieved 
mainly 
by 
controlling the indoor environment, especially temperature, 
humidity, and light levels. However, environmental 
monitoring and control in this type of buildings must respect 
some specific requirements due to esthetical reasons, like 
minimizing the visual impact caused by the installation of 
monitoring systems. Besides, the current economic situation 
requires the choice of a cheap solution.  
The deployment of a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) 
in a museum can help to implement these measurements 
automatically and continuously. This solution is much 
cheaper and easier to install than traditional measuring 
equipment. Besides, the major advantage of using WSNs in 
this type of environment is causing very little visual impact 
due to the small size of sensor nodes, and an extremely 
important aspect in the context of a museum: being wireless.  
Considering these requirements, the WISE-MUSE 
project [1, 2] was created with the purpose of employing 
WSNs for monitoring the environment and structural health 
of 
museums, 
and 
automatically 
control 
relevant 
environmental parameters. The importance of this project, 
obviously besides monitoring the environment of the 
museum, is to study and to demonstrate some practical 
aspects of WSNs, since most of the applications have not 
been tested in real WSNs. 
The WISE-MUSE project is an on-going project that 
was initially developed for a contemporary art museum that 
is located on the premises of Fortaleza São Tiago, a fortress 
located in Madeira Island. Currently, this project has been 
extended to Madeira Whale Museum, also located in the 
island. 
In this paper, an emphasis will be given to the WISE-
MUSE mobile application, which is an important 
contribution of the WISE-MUSE project that was not 
planned from the beginning. This contribution came up to 
meet the needs that have arisen throughout the course of this 
project.  
The WISE-MUSE mobile application was developed to 
meet the concerns of those responsible for the museum to be 
always informed about abnormal environmental parameters, 
when they are not on the premises of the museum. The 
WISE-MUSE mobile application is developed for Android 
and iPhone mobile platforms and allows an easy and 
flexible way to remotely monitor the museum environment. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly 
describes some of the most important aspects of the WISE-
MUSE project. In Section 3, an emphasis will be given to 
the WISE-MUSE mobile monitoring application designed to 
monitor a WSN through either Android or iPhone mobile 
platforms. Section 4 describes related work and provides a 
comparison with the WISE-MUSE mobile application. 
Section 5 summarizes the most important conclusions, 
whereas Section 6 points out some directions for future 
work. 
II. 
THE WISE-MUSE PROJECT: APPLYING WSNS 
TO MUSEUMS’ ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING 
The main goal of the WISE-MUSE project is to create a 
WSN for monitoring and automatically controlling the most 
critical environmental parameters of interest to a museum, 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

which are humidity, temperature, and light, in museums 
(exposition rooms and storage rooms).  
Nevertheless, pollutants are also of major concern for 
museum managers due to their influence in the degradation 
of artworks; therefore, this project also involves the 
monitoring pollutants, namely CO and CO2. Thus, the major 
goal of the WISE-MUSE project can be divided into several 
sub-goals, which comprise: 
• 
To create a WSN for monitoring the most critical 
environmental parameters in museums (both in 
exposition and storage rooms). 
• 
To monitor pollutants as they are also a major 
concern for museum managers.  
• 
To give users and museum’ managers the possibility 
of consulting the collected data in real-time, via 
different data formats (e.g., graphs, tables, colour 
gradients, etc.), and consulting the historical reports 
whenever needed.  
• 
To analyze data in order to verify its compliance 
with the art conservation rules. If a significant 
variation (below or above the required levels) on at 
least one of the measured parameters occurs, an alert 
has to be automatically sent to the user through a 
mobile phone (SMS) or e-mail, in order to increase 
the efficiency of this environmental monitoring 
system. 
• 
To control the environmental conditions through the 
automatic control of the air conditioning and 
dehumidifying systems of the museum. 
• 
To visualize data integrated in a 3D representation of 
the building. 
• 
To remotely monitor the state of the emergency 
doors of the museums, giving their managers and 
security personnel more awareness of their state, and 
avoiding their displacement to examine the state of 
each door. 
• 
To implement low-cost devices for monitoring and 
controlling environmental parameters, as well as the 
state of emergency doors. 
So, this project proposes an environmental monitoring 
solution that involves installing only one network, using 
nodes that have the ability to monitor several parameters at 
the same time. In the context of the WISE-MUSE project, 
new wireless sensor nodes [1, 2] were developed. These 
new nodes are smaller and cheaper than the nodes used in 
other solutions, like the ones used by Spinwave [3]. Besides, 
the concepts encompassed in WISE-MUSE project are 
appropriate to be applied either in historic or new buildings. 
These factors are the basis for making the solution proposed 
by the WISE-MUSE project more suitable to the 
environmental monitoring of buildings.  
The WISE-MUSE project offers several advantages in 
relation to other approaches, namely: i) visualizing sensors’ 
data using either a web-based platform or a mobile phone; 
ii) changing sensors’ parameters through the platform; iii) 
creating and manipulating collaborative sessions using the 
WISE-MANager tool [4]; and, finally, it allows to monitor 
the state of the WSN through the awareness tool or the 
WISE-MANager tool [4]. Another advantage is that, using 
the same visualization platform; it is also possible to 
monitor the state of the emergency doors and the 
environment of cold chambers of the museum [5]. 
The WISE-MUSE project was validated in two real 
scenarios: i) Museum of Contemporary Art of Funchal and; 
ii) Madeira Whale Museum. These scenarios were chosen to 
reinforce the validation since they have completely different 
characteristics. The Contemporary Art Museum of Funchal, 
situated in the city of Funchal, on the island of Madeira, 
Portugal. Fortaleza São Tiago is an irregular-shaped fortress 
from the 17th century, which today houses the Museum of 
Contemporary Art of Funchal). On the other hand, 
Madeira Whale Museum is a recently built museum 
located in a small fishing village, on Madeira Island. The 
museum focuses on the whale hunting activities that were 
part of many fishermen’s lives for several decades and 
houses several types artifacts, like 3D models of whales, 
objects made of whale bones, etc. 
III. 
THE WISE-MUSE MOBILE APPLICATION. 
To complement the monitoring platform already 
developed and installed in the museum, a mobile application 
for the environmental monitoring of museums was 
developed. With this application, the managers of the 
museum can see data anytime and wherever they are, they 
can receive notifications of unwanted situations even when 
they are not in the museum.  
This application was implemented in Android, and later 
it will be extended to the iPhone platform. The reason for 
using these platforms is because these Operating Systems 
(OS) are the most widely used nowadays. This application 
will allow the visualization of data produced by a WSN 
installed in the Whale Museum. This application will also 
display in a user-friendly interface data captured by the 
sensor nodes installed in the exhibition rooms, in cold 
chambers and the emergency doors, through graphs and 
maps. The historic data collected can also be found in 
tables. 
Thus, the monitoring system will allow to: 
• 
Observe 
the 
state 
and 
the 
most 
important 
environmental monitoring information, monitoring 
of emergency doors and cold chambers; 
• 
Consult the historic of sensed data; 
• 
Visualize data from environmental monitoring, 
monitoring of emergency doors and cold chambers, 
through graphs and maps, thereby making it more 
noticeable; 
• 
Visualize environmental parameters (humidity, light, 
temperature, CO2 and CO) collected both in 
exhibition rooms and cold chambers; 
• 
Generate notifications in order to alert the user of a 
parameter whose value is not within the desired 
levels. 
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

This application will display the measurements received 
by wireless sensors, in a fast and reliable way, so that as 
soon as a problem is detected, those in charge for the 
museum are informed about it, being able to act in time and 
solve the problem, preventing major damage. 
Use cases detail the functional requirements of the 
application, thus giving a clear idea of the different 
activities that users can perform, when using the application. 
The most important use cases used for this application 
can be seen in Figure 1, in which the behavior of two 
important stakeholders can be seen; these are the client 
(person responsible for constant monitoring of data from the 
museum), and WSN coordinator or gateway (system 
responsible for sending the data required for monitoring). 
The WSN coordinator will send data from the various 
sensors, in real-time manner, to be visualized later by the 
customer using this application. 
 
Figure 1.   Use case diagram of the WISE-MUSE mobile application 
Figure 2 shows the architecture of the WISE-MUSE 
mobile application. It follows the client-server paradigm. 
It is possible to observe that there is a search service that 
sends the data to the database or gets data form the database, 
which is implemented through the PHP server, The PHP 
server, in turn, takes care of the communication between the 
mobile platform and MySQL database. 
 
Figure 2.   Client-server architecture of the WISE-MUSE mobile 
application 
This communication is initiated by the client, which 
makes a request to the PHP server using the HTTP protocol. 
This protocol is integrated into the Android operating 
system. Subsequently, the server connects to the MySQL [6] 
database using SQL language [7]. The server encrypts data 
using the JSON format, which will be used by the WISE-
MUSE application to obtain and process this data, showing 
it later on their Android device [8]. 
Regarding the implementation different mockups were 
created, in order to show the interaction between the 
different scenarios, as well as their presentation. A planning 
scenario was conducted both for the iPhone and Android 
platforms. In this paper, only the most important navigation 
scenarios of these two OS are presented. 
A. Android platform  
Figure 3 shows several scenarios of the Android 
platform. The application menu (Figure 3a) can be expanded 
to view some of its options; the menu can be saved after 
choosing what to visualize, thus allowing optimizing the 
size of the screen for the presentation of information. Then, 
it is possible to see the information (Figure 3b) and state 
(Figure 3c) about the most important sensors, emergency 
doors and cold chambers, allowing to choose the floor 
where the different sensors to be visualized are located. The 
application also allows selecting the different rooms of a 
previously selected floor, finishing with the visualization 
afterwards.  
Next, the user can select to visualize data by a graph 
(Figure 3e) or a historic (Figure 3f), selecting different 
visualization criteria (Figure 3d). First, a date can be chosen; 
then the floor where sensors are located can be chosen (all, 
several or a specific floor); subsequently, all rooms may be 
chosen, several rooms, or only one room, from the floor 
which has been previously selected; similarly, the device 
category may be chosen, i.e. the type of device (sensors, 
emergency doors or cold chambers); besides, it is possible 
to choose whether to view all or only a few of these sensors. 
After choosing the sensor, it is then possible to choose the 
types of parameters to be displayed, the user may opt for 
one, all or some, among which are: temperature, humidity, 
light, CO2 and CO. It is also possible to display a graphic or 
historic with all the selected criteria. 
B. iPhone platform  
Regarding the iPhone platform, the application menu is 
always visible and the user can choose one of the options, at 
any time. When selecting the scenario, it remains green, 
allowing giving feedback to the user. In Figure 4, the user 
can visualize several scenarios of the iPhone platform on 
which data is represented in different maps (Figure 4a). 
First, the user has to select the type of map (Figure 4b) that 
user wants to observe, such as the map of temperature, 
humidity, light, CO2 and CO. 
 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.   Android Prototypes. a) Application menu. b) Viewing the state of a sensor. c) Display of data from a selected sensor. d) Graphics menu. e) 
Graphics display. f) Historic display. 
 
 Inside the maps, we can choose the criteria according to 
which data will be visualized, such as the floor, the room 
and the sensor, and for these last three, it is possible to 
choose one, all or only some. In the case of temperature 
map, the visualization criteria are the same; with the 
exception of have the possibility of choosing the type of 
device to be visualized (sensor or cold chambers). In any 
case, the presentation of data is performed using the map 
(Figure 4b). The user can also see the notifications (Figure 
4c) of devices that are in danger or emergency, through its 
representation using different colors depending on the 
corresponding status. 
When 
the 
user 
performs 
authentication 
in 
the 
application, if notifications exist, they will be shown to the 
user (Figure 4c), in order to alert him immediately. 
Nevertheless, the user may also view the notifications at any 
time. 
IV. 
RELATED WORK.  
When looking for other environmental monitoring 
works, we realize that there are some applications in either 
software or hardware that can monitor effectively the 
environmental conditions of a specific place.  
The 
Overseer 
application 
(Network 
Monitoring 
Software) [12] monitors the environmental status of the 
room where a server is located, i.e., the user can monitor 
temperature and humidity of a data center via an EM1 
monitor [13]. Alerts are sent to the user via e-mail to the 
mobile phone if the upper or lower limits of these 
parameters have been reached. 
On the other hand, there are different applications which 
help in environmental monitoring for instance, EnviroSense 
[14], which is software that monitors temperature and 
humidity, being useful for either for agriculture, computer 
rooms or any area that needs monitoring. This application 
alerts the user by sending SMS and reports, to a mobile 
phone. 
Among the works found that most resembles the WISE-
MUSE application, we have found a surveillance 
monitoring system developed for the Android mobile 
platform [12, 14]. This system aims to address the 
deficiencies of security systems through WSN via the 
Android mobile phone, allowing the user to monitor a 
particular place at any time. In this work, the activity sensor 
was used to display data on humidity, temperature, carbon 
dioxide and gas concentrations, allowing shutting down or 
activating the air conditioning equipment, if the sensors 
detect abnormal data. Additionally, it indicates any unusual 
movement of material or people outside or inside the room. 
All this can be observed at the interface of the 
corresponding application, where data from the different 
sensors can also be visualized, as well as a video of the 
room captured by a digital camera via USB. 
In the specific case of the project WISE-MUSE, an 
application was developed with the aim of allowing to 
monitor 
the 
different 
environmental 
conditions 
(temperature, humidity, light, CO2 and CO) captured in a 
museum, thus enabling the persons responsible for the 
conservation of artworks in the museum to detect if the 
environmental parameters are outside acceptable limits, 
alerting the museum staff in a fast and efficient manner.
  
 
 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.   iPhone Prototypes. a) Choice of different maps. b) Map view of humidity gradient. c) Display of notifications. 
 
Other application that has some similarities to our work, 
is a system that allows monitoring different WSN sensor 
nodes (temperature and humidity) allowing the users to can 
visualize these parameters, and send notifications when a 
certain value has exceeded its limit. These sensors can be 
visualized by building plan, floor or sensor type; it is also 
possible to customize the reception of notifications from 
various sensors that are associated with a particular person 
[13]. 
In order not to only send notifications via SMS or email, 
but also to allow visualizing the data collected by the WSN 
at any time, the WISE-MUSE application was implemented 
for a mobile platform. This will ensure efficient monitoring 
of real-time data in order to allow better preservation of 
artwork.  
Table 1 shows a comparison between the WISE-MUSE 
mobile application, the application developed by [12, 14] 
and a mobile application to monitor a WSN [13].  
The major advantage of the WISE-MUSE mobile 
application is to provide complete overview of all real-time 
data collected by different types of sensors, emergency 
doors and cold chambers. It also allows visualizing data 
using graphs, maps and historic. 
Both in the security system developed for the Android 
platform [12, 14] as well as in the mobile application to 
monitor a WSN [13], sensor data can be visualized only in 
real-time. That is, they do not let the users to view and 
analyze historic data through graphs and maps of gradients. 
Another advantage of the WISE-MUSE is being possible 
to observe the different data from one or more sensors, 
emergency doors and cold chambers at a time. This is not 
possible with other applications. The application developed 
by Moreira et al. [13] allows selecting from various sensors, 
not allowing the visualization of the state of emergency 
doors, whereas with the security system presented in [12, 
14] can only be observed data from a sensor.  
Regarding the work that focus on surveillance 
monitoring [12, 14] it was observed that the environmental 
parameters are displayed on the Android application, but 
there is nothing to help understanding if the data are 
abnormal or not, which may difficult the interpretation of 
data. Due to this, the WISE-MUSE mobile application uses 
different colors to give feedback to the user and alert them if 
any parameter is outside the normal values. For this reason, 
the 
WISE-MUSE 
mobile 
application 
was 
designed 
considering different types of sensors, deployed by several 
floors and rooms that will need to be monitored. 
The uses of cameras placed in locations to record and 
transmit images via a USB interface is an important 
advantage of the application proposed in [12, 14]. Thus, the 
architecture 
of 
WISE-MUSE 
project 
includes 
the 
installation of a camera-based monitoring module. Once this 
module is installed and integrated in the WSN network, this 
functionality can be added to the mobile application. 
V. 
TESTS 
In order to ensure that the WISE-MUSE mobile 
application meets all requirements and all features important 
to the proper monitoring of a museum, it was necessary to 
carry out usability tests. These tests intended to verify 
whether such features are implemented correctly. 
Tests should be performed with the most appropriate 
type of users, which, in this case, are the museum’s staff. 
They are the ones who daily deal with the concern of 
preserving the artworks and, thus, quickly understand the 
goal of the application, ensuring that it is used and tested the 
appropriately. 
This staff was contacted and visited to conduct the tests. 
After the tests were carried out, they were asked to answer a 
short survey to help in better understanding the results of 
this experience and, thus the usability of the developed 
mobile application. 
The usability tests that were conducted allowed 
validating the different functionalities of the application, 
permitting to observe how the user reacts, interacts and 
navigates through different application scenarios. Also, 
these tests allowed understanding what the users’ 
preferences are. In addition, these tests help to observe the 
 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

performance of users, enabling the analysis of the product's 
usefulness and ease of use, which allows improving the 
quality of the developed application. 
The tests were conducted with five heads of different 
museums, aged between 35 and 60. This application has 
also been tested in the Whale Museum. 
It was observed that most users easily interact with the 
application using all functionalities correctly, especially 
those who are familiar with an Android phone. 
Nevertheless, the tests helped in detecting which aspects 
to be refined in order to improve the operation for this 
application, namely: 
• 
To add the ability of zooming in and out to improve 
the visualization of the historic; 
• 
To provide real-time gradient maps of the measured 
parameters; and; 
• 
To increase the visibility of notifications in the 
users’ mobile phone, to ensure that abnormal 
situations are quickly detected. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The WISE MUSE project aims to the deployment of a 
WSN for automatically and continuously monitoring and 
control the environment of museums. The use of WSNs for 
environmental monitoring of a museum is, indeed, a more 
reliable solution. It is also less expensive than manual data 
collection or than a wired central monitoring system.  
This project has proposed several contributions, among 
them the WISE-MUSE mobile application. This application 
allows the environmental monitoring based on wireless 
sensor networks via a mobile phone. Besides, it allows users 
to constantly check and analyze data on the monitored 
parameters, anytime and anywhere, enabling monitoring 
with more flexibility and more security, providing better 
visualization of all data captured by different sensors 
through charts, maps and historical gradients, in real-time. 
One of the most important features of the proposed 
application is to provide a notifications’ system to users, in 
case any parameter presents an abnormal value.  
The tests carried out allow to conclude that the WISE-
MUSE application fits the most important requirements of a 
museum, associating the efficient display of accurate 
measurement of environmental factors, all captured by 
sensors, with the ability of sending notifications, allowing 
preventive action in preserving the history that these works 
represent. 
VII. 
FUTURE WORK  
In order to make the mobile application more efficient 
and perceptible to the user, we intend to improve it by 
providing feedback about the user navigation on the 
application.  
Similarly, we also intend to implement the zoom feature 
to enable enlarging or reducing the size of the table with the 
historic of data, so that people who want to browse data in a 
larger size may do so. We also intend to give the user the 
possibility of sorting historic data by a parameter chosen by 
the user, i.e., to allow the user to sort data by date, rooms, 
floors, or sensors, showing data in a descending or 
ascending order. 
It is desirable that the module generating a gradient map 
of the environmental parameters is implemented, which will 
allow displaying data from a particular sensor in a more 
intuitive manner. This makes it possible to give a more 
specific idea of what is occurring, allowing the user even to 
check if a particular sensor needs to be moved to another 
location or replaced by another one. 
The tests of this application were based on data collected 
from a small testbed installed in the laboratory. The WSN 
was not installed in the museum yet since the equipment for 
assembling the monitoring devices did not arrive in time. 
Thus, the application was tested with some data to permit to 
observe its basic operation. Therefore, one future work 
intention is to carry out tests with the WSN deployed in the 
museum. 
 
 
 
TABLE 1. COMPARATIVE TABLE OF THE APPLICATION WISE-MUSE WITH THE SECURITY SYSTEM DEVELOPED FOR ANDROID AND A MOBILE APPLICATION 
TO MONITOR A WSN [12] 
PARAMETERS 
SECURITY SYSTEM 
IN ANDROID [12] 
Sensor – Mobile application to 
monitor a WSN [13] 
WISE-MUSE 
Presentation of data from sensors in real-time 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Presentation of data from emergency doors in real-time 
No 
No 
Yes 
Submission of data from cold chambers in real-time 
No 
No 
Yes 
Generation of graphics 
No 
No 
Yes 
Generation of data historic 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Map view 
No 
No 
Yes 
Notification of anomalies 
Yes (SMS) 
Yes (SMS, E-mail) 
Yes (Popup) 
Presentation of a video of the monitored site 
Yes 
No 
No 
Presentation of a image of the monitored site 
No 
Yes 
No 
Visualization of all deployed sensors 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Selection of a specific sensor to visualize 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. M. Rodríguez Peralta, L. M. P. L. Brito, J. P. B. F. Santos, J. F. F. 
Santos, C. M. M. Francisco, C. M. A. Sousa, P. M. Moraes, and F. B. 
Gouveia, 
“Environmental 
Monitoring 
Platform 
based 
on 
a 
Heterogeneous 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Network”, 
Cyber 
Journals: 
Multidisciplinary Journals in Science and Technology, Journal of 
Selected Areas in Telecommunications (JSAT), October Edition, pp. 
26- 38, ISSN: 1925-2676, 2011 
[2] 
L.M. Rodríguez Peralta, L.M.P. Leão Brito, B.A. Teixeira Gouveia, 
D.J.G. Sousa, and C.S. Alves, “Automatic monitoring and control of 
museums’ environment based on Wireless Sensor Networks”, 
International Journal EJSE – Electronic Journal of Structural 
Engineering, Special Issue: Wireless Sensor Networks and Practical 
Applications, pp. 12 – 34, 2010, ISSN 1443-9255. 
[3] 
Spinwave 
Systems, 
April 
2009, 
from 
http://www.spinwavesystems.com/ [Retrieved: July, 2013] 
[4] 
L. M. P. Brito, L. M. Rodríguez Peralta, F. Santos, and R. Fernandez, 
“Environmental Monitoring of Museums Based on Wireless Sensor 
Networks”, Proc. 4th International Conference on Wireless and 
Mobile Communications (ICWMC 2008), IEEE Computer Society 
Press, Athens, Greece, July 27 - August 1, 2008, pp. 364- 369. 
[5] 
L.M. Rodríguez Peralta, L.M.P. Leão Brito, and J.F.F. Santos, 
“Improving Users’ Manipulation and Control on WSNs through 
Collaborative Sessions”, International Journal of Knowledge and 
Web Intelligence (IJKWI), Special Issue on Social Media Support for 
Intelligent Service and Interaction, Vol. 3, No. 3, 2012, pp. 287 – 311, 
DOI: 10.1504/IJKWI.2012.050860. 
[6] 
MySQL, form http://www.mysql.com/ [Retrived: July, 2013] 
[7] 
Wikibooks, 
“Structured 
Query 
Language”, 
from 
http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Structured_Query_Language/  [Retrived: 
July, 2013] 
[8] 
F. Rahman, (2011) “Connection between PHP (server) and Android 
(Client) 
using 
HTTP 
and 
JSON”, 
from 
http://fahmirahman.wordpress.com/2011/04/21/connectionbetween-
php-server-and-android-client-using-http-and-json/ Retrived: July, 
2013]  
[9] 
Overseer , Overseer Network Monitoring Software, Environmental 
Monitoring Software, 2012, from http://www.overseer-network-
monitor.com/Sensatronics-Environmental-Temperature-Monitoring-
Software.aspx, [Retrieved: July, 2013] 
[10] SensaTronics, “Model EM1 Environmental Monitor “, from 
http://www.sensatronics.com/wp-
content/uploads/2013/07/SensatronicsDatasheets5-4.pdf  [Retrived: 
July, 2013] 
[11] Envirosense, EnviroSense Strategic Environmental Consultants, 
2012, from http://www.envirosense.com/index.php?, [Retrieved: July, 
2013] 
[12] P. Heming, J. Linying, Y. Liu, and Y. Kun, “Design and 
Implementation of Android Phone Surveillance System”, Proc. of the 
IEEE International Forum on Information Technology and 
Applications (IFITA’10), IEEE, 2012, pp. 222-225. 
[13] N. Moreira, M. Venda, C. Silva, L. Marcelino, and A. Pereira, 
“@Sensor – Mobile Application to Monitor a WSN”, 6th Iberian 
Conference on Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI), 
Leiria, Portugal, July. 2011, pp. 1 -6. 
[14] H. Pang, L. Jiang, L. Yang, and K. Yue, “Research of Android Smart 
Phone Surveillance System”, International Conference on Computer 
Design and Applications (iCCDA), Shenyang, China, vol. 2, June. 
2010, pp. 373 – 376. 
 
 
 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

