On Exploring the Use of Mobility Parameters in the Analysis of Early Childhood 
Developmental Disorders 
Rama Krishna Thelagathoti 
College of Information Science and Technology 
University of Nebraska Omaha 
Omaha, NE 68182, USA 
e-mail: rthelagathoti@unomaha.edu 
Hesham H. Ali 
College of Information Science and Technology 
University of Nebraska Omaha 
Omaha, NE 68182, USA 
e-mail: hali@unomaha.edu
 
 
Abstract— Impaired motor development is one of the initial 
signs of early childhood developmental disorders. Autism 
spectrum disorder (ASD), Cerebral Palsy (CP), and Attention 
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) are the most common 
disorders that infants are affected in the USA. Albeit they are 
not being diagnosed until their school-age because there is no 
standardized clinical diagnosing routine like a blood test. 
Existing clinical diagnostic approaches are predominantly 
dependent on observational assessment by a trained physician 
along with patient feedback. Furthermore, these methods are 
subjective and do not provide an accurate decision.   
Nonetheless, research findings reveal that abnormal motor 
skills are often the initial signs of later developmental 
disorders. This paves the way for exploring alternative 
opportunities to identify the disease in the early stages of 
childhood. Recent advancements in sensing technologies 
facilitate convenient as well as unobtrusive methods to collect 
the mobility data even from the infants and be able to detect 
the disorder. Wearable devices are tiny and easy to use in 
collecting motor data from neonates and distinguish abnormal 
motor development from normal motor development. Thus, 
mobility data collection from an infant using a wearable sensor 
is beneficial in the early diagnosis of developmental disabilities 
like cerebral palsy. Our main contribution in this study is to 
present the analysis of various wearable sensor-based motor 
assessment methods in predicting childhood disorders.  
Furthermore, this document presents various crucial mobility 
parameters associated with identifying childhood disorders. 
Keywords- mobility; developmental disorder; wearable 
sensor; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
     In recent years, the prevalence of developmental disorders 
among children is rising at an alarming rate. Early childhood 
developmental disorder is one of the primary causes for 
children being referred to primary healthcare clinics [1]. 
Chronic or perpetual delays in one or more motor functions 
of the child can be treated as a development disorder [2]. The 
onset of the disability may occur regardless of racial, ethnic, 
and socioeconomic groups. The manifestation of motor 
disability is caused by atypical brain development. Yet, 
specific reasons for atypical brain development are not 
known [3]. Research shows that preterm birth and pregnancy 
complications that occur in the perinatal period may affect 
the brain. Consequently, babies born in this category are at 
risk for neurodevelopmental impairments [4]. Additionally, 
low birth weight and infections during pregnancy are at high 
risk for several developmental disabilities. According to the 
study conducted by National Health Interview Survey 
(NHIS) in the United States, the growth of childhood 
disorders has increased to 17% between the years 2009 and 
2017. Also, one out of six children between the age groups 3 
and 17 years have one or more disabilities [6]. Furthermore, 
ADHD, ASD, and CP are the common disorders found 
among children and boys were more likely to be in the 
vulnerable group than girls [2]. 
The evolution of fine and gross motor skills in children 
with atypical neurodevelopment is cramped than children 
with typical neurodevelopment. As a result, affected children 
do not acquire smooth limb movements rather rigid and 
nonsynchronous [5]. Often, delays in acquiring sufficient 
motor movements are the early signs of later developmental 
impairment. Hence, an infant’s motor assessment can be a 
potential parameter for the early diagnosis of the disability. 
Moreover, significant research is going on towards the 
assessment of an infant’s motor function as a method to 
detect developmental disorders, such as cerebral palsy, 
autism [2][5][6]. The sooner the disorder is diagnosed the 
better the possibility for effective intervention therapy. 
In the past decade, there has been a substantial rise in the 
quantitative assessment of motor dysfunction by attaching 
tiny sensors to neonates’ upper and lower limbs. Abnormal 
movements are characterized by repetitive, stereotyped 
movements, rigid movements due to lack of smoothness, 
unusual gait patterns [4]. These atypical patterns are 
distinguishable by processing the mobility data collected 
from the sensors attached to a child’s limb. Researchers have 
also concluded that abnormal movements are strongly 
correlated to their abnormal brain development [7]. The goal 
of motor assessment is to quantify the degree and range of 
motor disability and predict whether the child falls under the 
stage of Typical Development (TD) or At Risk (AR).  
The primary purpose of this document is to review the 
various mobility assessment methods that were employed for 
diagnosing early childhood developmental disorders. At first 
subjective methods are discussed then wearable sensor-based 
assessment methods are elaborated. For this study, literature 
has been chosen which includes the following criteria. 
1. The Data collected from human subjects by using 
wearable sensors 
2. The primary aim of the article is to diagnose 
childhood disorders 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

3. The motor movements are the main diagnostic 
assessment 
4. The fundamental human subjects are infants or 
preschool-age kids.  
The remaining sections of the document are structured as 
follows. In Section II, qualitative assessment methods are 
discussed. Section III explains the types of devices used for 
mobility data collection. The quantitative diagnostic 
approaches are presented in section IV. Under Section V, 
various aspects of mobility-based assessment methods are 
elaborated. Finally, Section V concludes with a summary of 
this work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
To discuss different assessment methods following three 
generalized developmental stages are defined. 
A. Developmental Stages 
At Risk (AR): Neonates born preterm and with pregnancy 
complications are considered At Risk (AR) of developing 
aberrant motor function and eventually likely to be 
diagnosed with developmental disorders including CP [2]. 
Typically developing (TD): Infants with normal limb 
movements are classified as Typical Developing (TD) [2]. 
Neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD): children who are 
already diagnosed with any developmental disorders like 
CP, ASD, and ADHD are categorized as infants with NDD 
[8]. 
    According to the CDC [2], a TD child reaches certain 
developmental milestones as they grow. For instance, a 12-
month-old toddler should be able to sit without any help and 
exhibit variable movements. On the other hand, AR infants 
lag in acquiring one or more such skills. 
B. Qualitative Assessment Methods 
    Traditional assessment is heavily dependent on visual 
observation by a trained physician. Sometimes physicians 
prepare a questionnaire and assess the level of abnormality 
by integrating the feedback from the parents and/or the 
child. In such a scenario, parents might unaware of specific 
symptoms that the child is suffering, and the child may not 
be able to give precise feedback as adults. Hence, the 
decision-making becomes more complex. Additionally, 
existing clinical methods, such as analysis of neuroimaging 
require a trained consultant physician. But reliability and 
accuracy are largely depending on the expertise of the 
consultant. Besides the inherent complexity in judging the 
presence of the disorder, estimating the severity of the 
illness is far more challenging. The inception of qualitative 
assessment of the infant’s nervous system is indeed a 
breakthrough in the diagnosis of developmental disorders. 
    The Alberta Infant Motor Scale (AIMS) [9] is one of the 
early observational scales to assess the neonate’s gross 
motor function. In this method, a rating will be calculated 
based on the infant’s performance in weight-bearing, 
posture, and antigravity movements. This method can be 
used only for babies under 18 months of age and the 
observer needs extensive training in the respective 
assessment. Prechtl et al. [10] proposed another observation-
based systematic methodology termed General Movement 
Assessment (GMA) for diagnosing cerebral palsy. They 
have postulated that the quality of General Movements 
(GMs) is cramped and lacks smoothness over time due to 
impaired brain development. The absence of GMs may be 
observed from the video recording of an infant. This 
approach also does necessitate training by experts. In 
another experiment [11], Heineman et al. developed a 
video-based mobility evaluation technique, the Infant Motor 
Profile (IMP), that can differentiate between kids between 
TD and AR neurodevelopment. The downside of all these 
methods is that it involves an enormous human effort to 
examine the video recording for accurate prediction. 
Melbourne Assessment of Unilateral Upper Limb Function-
2 (MA-2) is a standard reference tool to measure the quality 
of upper limb movements in kids with atypical brain growth 
aged between 2 to 15 years [12]. Moreover, scoring is 
estimated based on how a child performs 14 test activities 
including pickup and release of some objects. 
Nonetheless, rating-dependent approaches have various 
shortcomings. 
(1) 
assessment 
is 
entirely 
observer-
dependent. consequently, there is a high probability that the 
observer will make a wrong estimation. (2) Evaluation is 
time-intensive and consumes immense human effort. (3) 
The observer is required to be trained in advance with the 
necessary skills to make an optimal conclusion. After the 
training, it takes substantial time to acquire proficiency in 
the diagnosis. (4) Patients must visit the physicians and 
laboratories frequently. (5) Often, laboratories must have a 
specialized environment and equip with expensive tools. (6) 
monitoring the rehabilitation of the affected infants is 
challenging as there is a dependency on the observer. (8). 
Children’s attention span is very limited, and so they can 
easily get annoyed with cumbersome instructions. Hence, it 
is essential to have an observer-independent approach with 
the best accuracy. 
III. 
DATA AND DEVICES 
Characterizing the atypical motor movements including 
repetitive and stereotypical patterns is crucial in the early 
diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disease. A qualitative 
examination of neonate movements necessitates a special 
skill set and the outcome varies from observer to observer 
[13]. To fill the gap, sophisticated systems, such as stereo 
photogrammetric movement analysis, gaze-tracking devices, 
and 3D motion tracking with passive markers [14] were 
introduced. Yet, these methods require an expensive 
structured setup with many wires and sensors to monitor the 
baby's physical movements. Wearable technology made it 
possible to collect the movement data by attaching tiny 
sensors to the body parts of the infants without major 
disturbance. 
In recent times, Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs), also 
known as inertial sensors have been increasingly explored by 
numerous 
researchers. 
Typical 
IMUs 
comprise 
of 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

accelerometer, gyroscope, and occasionally include a 
magnetometer. Nevertheless, many scholars have employed 
an accelerometer-based sensor to acquire infants' arm and leg 
movements [4][15][16]. Wearable instruments are suitable 
for monitoring the limb movements of infants because of 
their flexibility in sensor placement, adaptability, and power 
efficiency. Since the human subject is an infant, sensors are 
usually embedded in an appropriate peripheral, such as Leg 
warmers [7], wristwatches [17]. In some studies, skin-
adhesive sensors have also been used [18].  Although the 
device has a variety of sensing technology, the aim is to 
collect the movement data unobtrusively without creating 
considerable discomfort to the babies. Therefore, wearable 
sensors are efficient for the objective assessment of 
children's movements. Fig. 1 depicts the convenient body 
locations where sensors are attached. And different impaired 
movements are shown that are characterized as aberrant 
motor movements exhibited by the disordered children. 
Nowadays, wearable devices are compact yet affordable.  
They come with internal storage as well as a provision to 
connect and upload the data to cloud storage on the go. Most 
of the devices are battery-powered that eliminating the 
cumbersome wires and cables. When multiple sensors are 
included in the data collection process, then all the sensors 
must be actively synchronized throughout the duration. Then 
it allows collecting the data continuously from all the sensors 
even outside of the lab environment like home. Primarily, 
these devices are used to record upper and lower limbs that 
will help characterize the disorder.   
IV. 
QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENT 
Measuring abnormality from the child’s movements is an 
important clinical task as it reduces the significant human 
effort in identifying the impaired motor skills. Further, it 
helps physicians to come to an objective conclusion. With 
the latest advancements in wearable devices, it has become 
easy to attach them to infants and collect the data 
continuously. Various quantitative motor assessment studies 
are summarized in Table 1. This study includes the research 
that has employed wearable sensors and finds the 
quantitative 
measurement 
of 
the 
children's 
motor 
movements.  
A few scholars had toiled and developed unobtrusive and 
non-invasive wearable instruments suitable for infants and 
toddlers. As early as 2008, Campolo et al. [14] prototyped a 
wearable sensing system for monitoring the upper and lower 
limb spontaneous movements of premature babies. Their 
sensing instrument can be used in infants as young as 2 
weeks. They have hypothesized that abnormal movements 
are the early signs of later developmental disorders, such as 
autism. Redd et al. [18] carried a pilot project on a single 
healthy born infant to assess the General Movements (GMs) 
and Fidgety Movements (FMs) [10]. They have built a 
wearable monitoring system with an array of sensors to 
acquire the infant movements for both the short and long-
term. Their results show that the absence of variability in 
GMs and FMs might be the early sign for the manifestation 
of neurodevelopmental disorders, such as CP. Nonetheless, 
they have experimented with only one healthy infant.  
     Typically developing (TD) neonates demonstrate a rich 
and variable repertoire of movements compared to their 
counterpart infants at risk (AR) [19]. Often, it is critical to 
categorize between TD and AR during early infancy. 
Abrishami et al. [19] quantified infants' spontaneous leg 
movements by embedding tiny sensors inside custom-
designed leg warmers. This study aimed to classify the group 
of infants into (TD) or (AR) from the day-long (8-13 hours) 
leg movements data. They also analyzed sensor data 
recorded from AR infants and were able to distinguish 
between AR babies with poor and good development. In 
[19], Goodfellow et al. developed binary classification 
algorithms to predict whether the child is TD or AR.  In this 
approach, a group of 22 infants aged between 0 to 12 months 
was divided into two groups as 0-6 months and 6-12 months. 
Then, extracted two sets of features for each group and found 
a significant difference between TD and AR mobility data of 
0-6 months than 6-12 months. Their findings prove the 
prominence of early childhood diagnosis. 
Similarly, numerical estimation of abnormal mobility has 
also been studied in the past as it helps in distinguishing 
both, healthy and impaired. One of the early experiments 
demonstrated by Gravem et al. [4], utilized a simple 
accelerometer sensor and was able to collect the data from 
the premature neonates recruited from the NICU, who are 
potentially at risk of CP.  Then, by extracting features and 
applying the machine learning technique including Decision  
 Trees, he was able to recognize the abnormal 
movements 
namely 
Ccramped-Synchronized 
General 
Movements 
(CSGMs) 
[10]. 
According 
to 
Prechtl’s 
assessment for CP [22], the presence of CSGM is an early 
marker for lateral developmental disorders. Wilson et al. 
[20], formulated Motion Complexity (MC) by measuring the 
variability from the infant’s leg movement data.  They 
conjectured that infants with lower MC are at risk (AR) of 
disabilities, such as ASD. Moreover, AR subjects compose 
lower motion complexity compared to TD subjects because 
their actions are repetitive and stereotyped.  Smith et al. [15] 
proposed Sample Entropy (SampEn) as a function to 
measure the variation and repetition in kids' leg movements. 
Additionally, 
SampEn 
is 
lower 
for 
infants 
with 
developmental delays than normal infants. A different 
experiment carried by Hoyt et al. [17], assessed only upper 
limb movements and recommended two metrics: The Use 
 
Figure 1: sensor-based quantitative diagnosis 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Ratio (UR) to measure the quality of using both arms and the 
Mono Arm Use Index (MAUI) for quantifying intensity and 
frequency of each arm. Their results signify that UR and 
MAUI are lower for typically developing children and higher 
for the children at of developmental delays. 
Furthermore, many scientists are interested in studies 
specific to a particular disorder like cerebral palsy (CP) and 
Down Syndrome (DS). McKay et al. [24] conducted a 
mobility assessment of a group of infants with DS and 
without DS. Using an activity monitor attached to the baby’s 
right ankle measured leg activity and sleep patterns at 3,4,5, 
and 6 months. Their statistical analysis observed a significant 
group difference between the infants with DS and without 
DS with respective to their motor component. Strohrmann et 
al. [16] acquired mobility data from four children (2 of them 
diagnosed with Cerebral Palsy and 2 others with stroke) who 
are undergoing rehabilitation. In this work, they were invited 
to perform a set of predefined motor tasks and measured the 
progress of the rehabilitation therapy using extracted features 
including smoothness in the upper and lower limb 
movements, and coordination between both arms. In another 
study conducted by Heinze. et al. [21], proposed an objective 
assessment methodology to diagnose cerebral palsy from the 
spontaneous leg and arm movements of newborn babies. 
Their method is built on a decision tree classifier algorithm 
and achieved ~90% accuracy. Further, they have posited that 
their methodology can be easily adapted by the clinical 
practitioners and helps to monitor the progress of 
rehabilitation.   
     A different experiment performed by Deng et al. [23] 
assessed the motor behavior of neonates to determine the 
minimum number of days required to characterize the ideal 
daily leg movement patterns of children who are at risk of 
developmental disorders. They hypothesized that two days of 
leg movement data is sufficient to accurately predict 
developmental disorder among the infants at risk.   Smith et 
al. [22] developed an algorithm to measure the full day leg 
activity and attempted to identify the relationship between 
the number of leg movements and the onset of walking. 
However, their test produced surprisingly unexplainable 
results as infants with a smaller number of leg movements 
began walking early than the babies with a greater number of 
leg movements. 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
     This section presents the various aspects of mobility-
based assessment approaches and discusses their merits as 
well as demerits.   
Reference Purpose  
Sensor  
Sensor 
placement 
Wear time 
(in hours) 
Setting  
Disorder  Movement type 
Subjects  Age (in 
months) 
[7] 
Classify TD and AR IMU 
Ankles  
8-13 
Natural  
 NA 
Spontaneous leg 
movements 
12 TD 
19 AR 
1-15 
[14] 
Early diagnosis  
IMU 
Wrist and 
ankles 
NA 
Clinical  
 ASD 
Spontaneous leg 
and arm 
movements 
NA 
NA 
[19] 
Classify TD and AR IMU 
Ankles 
8-13 
Natural 
NA 
Spontaneous leg 
movements 
12 TD 
19 AR 
1-16 
[20] 
Diagnose ASD 
IMU 
Ankles  
8-12 
Natural  
ASD 
Spontaneous leg 
movements 
5 
3-12 
[21] 
Diagnose CP 
Accelerometer  
Ankles and 
wrist 
20 min 
Clinical  
CP 
Spontaneous leg 
and arm 
movements 
19 TD 
4 AR 
<10 
[18] 
Diagnosis CP 
IMU 
Forehead, 
ankles, and 
wrist 
1 min 
Clinical 
CP 
Spontaneous head, 
leg, and arm 
movements 
1 TD 
3-5 
[22] 
Quantify leg 
movements 
Inertial sensor 
Ankles  
8-13  
Natural  
NA 
Spontaneous leg 
movements 
12 TD 
1-12 
[4] 
Predict impaired 
motor activity 
Accelerometer  
Head, ankles, 
and wrist 
1 
Clinical  
CP 
Spontaneous head, 
leg and arm 
movements 
10 AR 
<3 
[23] 
Number of days 
required for 
assessment 
IMU 
Ankles 
5 days 
Natural  
NA 
Spontaneous leg 
movements 
16 AR 
2-14 
[15] 
Measure variability 
of movements 
IMU 
Ankles 
8-13  
Natural  
NA 
Spontaneous leg 
movements 
11 TD 
20 AR 
6-9 
[24] 
Assess leg 
movements 
accelerometer  
Right ankle  
48 hrs. x 4 
times 
Natural 
DS 
Spontaneous right 
leg movements 
8 TD 
8 AR 
3-6 
[16] 
Predict motor 
disorder 
Accelerometer 
and gyroscope  
Trunk, upper 
and lower limbs  4 
clinical 
CP, 
stroke  
Predefined body 
movements 
4 AR 
9-12 years 
[17] 
Clinical vs motor 
assessment 
Accelerometer 
wrist 
75 
Natural  
CP 
Spontaneous upper 
arm movements 
26 TD 
26 AR 
1-17 years 
TABLE 1: SUMMARY OF QUANTITATIVE METHODS 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

A. Challenges in Data Collection 
Infants motor assessment using wearable sensors have 
been increasing over the last decade because of its miniature 
size and wearability. Also, sensors can be attached to any 
part of the body and have the capability to work in a 
laboratory setting as well as in a home environment. 
Nonetheless, unlike adults collecting data from kids is not so 
easy for various reasons. (1) Preparing an infant for data 
collection is challenging because they are fragile and need 
utmost care. If it is a lab environment, then room temperature 
must be adjusted to the comfort of the child [21]. 
Additionally, the parent must ensure essential daily routines, 
such as breastfeeding and diapering. So, the child is ready 
and perform desired spontaneous movements (2) Children's 
behavior is unpredictable, so sensors may drop off or loosen 
which can eventually add noise in the data stream. For this 
reason, in a clinical setting or home environment, either a 
parent or a caregiver must always be present to take care of 
sensor positing during the data acquisition period [23][25]. 
(3) size and sensor placement are important to lessen the 
irritation to the child.  From the ongoing research, it is 
evident that the average weight of each sensor ranges 
between 10 grams to 30 grams [7][17][18]. However, the 
sensor's positioning has limited choices as it needs to be 
placed on the arms and legs to measure the limb movements.  
B. Wear Time 
Although there is no evidence for precise sensor wear 
time required for accurate data analysis, numerous studies 
collect the data for more than one hour for an objective 
conclusion.  As wearable technology is advancing, it is now 
possible that sensors can be placed in diversified products 
like leg warmers [7] which are comfortable for the infant.  
Hence, some scholars have embedded sensors in the form of 
socks, wristwatches and were able to collect the data for 2 to 
5 days. Nonetheless, according to the study conducted by 
Deng et al. [23], two days of sensor data of infants is 
sufficient to differentiate between typical and atypical 
movements pattern. Yet, further investigations are necessary 
to minimize the wear time.  
C. Accuracy and Validation 
Accuracy validation of an infant’s motor assessment 
method is crucial for decision-making in clinical research. 
Irrespective of the methodology used for the assessment, it is 
essential to compare the results with ground truth to measure 
the accuracy of the model. Researchers are primarily 
depending on two types of accuracy validation approaches 
for the context of an infant’s motor assessment. Each method 
differs by ground truth. (1) In this approach, the sensor data 
collection procedure is video recorded such that normal and 
abnormal movements are annotated by experts. This 
annotated data is used as ground truth to validate the 
accuracy [7][15][16][17][22]. Undoubtedly, it is one of the 
popular and fastest methods used in many studies.  (2) As an 
alternative, some investigators do the follow-up of the 
infant’s health status after a few months to validate their 
inference, of those who were classified as high risk. In a 
study done by Wilson et al. [20], the authors assessed 
children's movement complexity pattern at 3,6, 9, and 12 
months of age, however, follow-up was done at 18 and 36 
months of age to validate their results. 
D. Noise Elimination 
Unfortunately, infant movement data recorded from the 
sensors is mostly accompanied by noise [22]. Especially, in 
the context of infants, the amount of noise-induced might be 
higher than normal. Because the daily routine of every child 
frequently changes between sleep, waking, and active states. 
Besides, a child might experience discomfort for unknown 
reasons. Then, either parent or caregiver must pacify the 
child to resume the data recording. Thus, the presence of 
noise is inevitable in children's movement data. Due to the 
effects of noise, movement assessment derived from the 
noisy sensor data is biased and inaccurate.  To eliminate the 
noise from the movement data, investigators have employed 
different techniques. To eliminate outliers, preprocessing and 
normalization of the data are some of the popular approaches 
[11][16][22]. In this approach, raw data is normalized and 
standardized to align within either first or third quantiles. 
Alternatively, parents or caregivers to write down the 
activity log of any major change in movement [7][15]. For 
instance, the activity log records the sleep, wake, and play 
times of the child. This method helps to extract the data 
which is relevant and useful based on the activity log.  
E. Quantifiable Parameters 
Quantitative measurement has been used by several 
researchers for the automatic assessment of impaired motor 
function. In contrast, some researchers have developed a 
quantifiable metric that can measure the level of motor 
impairment. Their main objective is to quantify variability 
and repeatability of arm and leg movements as a unit that can 
be used to measure the degree of neuromotor control. Wilson 
et al. [20] proposed an objective metric called Motion 
Complexity (MC) from the full-day mobility data acquired 
from the sensors attached to both legs. MC is computed from 
the duration of movement, peak acceleration, and average 
acceleration during a movement. MC is essentially a measure 
of the variability of the recorded leg movements. Their 
experimental results demonstrate that two kids from the 
sample of five subjects, have lower MC scores than the other 
three kids and they later developed ASD. Sample Entropy 
(SampEn) is another quantitative measure introduced by 
smith et al. [15]. Their analysis proved that AR infants' 
SampEn values are significantly lesser than TD infants. 
Hence, SampEn may be a potential early marker to detect 
abnormal growth of neuromotor control.  Hoyt et al. [17] 
computed two metrics from the sensor data of upper limb 
movements: Use Ratio (UR) and mono arm use index 
(MAUI). These two components measure the asymmetry 
between the two arms. They postulated that infants with 
neurodevelopmental deficits might not use both arms like 
normal children. Their study results corroborated their 
theory. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

F. Spontaneous Movements vs Therapeutic Movements 
While spontaneous movements are either leg or arm 
movements recorded during an infant’s active playtime, 
therapeutic (pre-defined) movements are designed by 
researchers in collaboration with clinical expert physicians 
[16]. Pre-defined movements are straightforward to process 
because they are logged in a well-controlled lab environment 
and accurate movement is well known in advance. Whereas 
spontaneous movements require additional processing to 
extract useful features as well as suppress unnecessary noisy 
data [21][22]. Although pre-defined movements processing 
technique is simple to use, scholars are mostly interested in 
spontaneous physical movements. Because the treatment of 
spontaneous arm and leg movements is more practical and 
accurate.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
     Developmental disorders such as autism hamper the 
typical behavior of a child. Consequently, they do not grow 
like a normal child. Thus, it is crucial to diagnose and begin 
the treatment as soon as early infancy. However, the most 
frequently used clinical method is ineffective in the early 
detection of the disorder. Quantitative measurement of 
disability using smart wearable devices speeds up the 
diagnosing 
process. 
This 
document 
highlighted 
the 
importance of quantitative prognosis and presented the 
various diagnostic approaches that are explored by the 
scientific community as a method of identifying the disorder 
by employing sensor devices.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1]. K. A. I. Evensen, S. Sellæg, A.-C. Stræte, A. E. Hansen, and 
I. Meisingset, “Profile of children referred to primary health 
care physiotherapy: a longitudinal observational study in 
norway,” BMC Health Services Research, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 
1–10, 2021. 
[2]. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Developmental 
disabilities,” 2021, [Online; retrieved: October 2021]. 
Available from: 
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/developmentaldisabilities/index.
html 
[3]. B. Zablotsky et al., “Prevalence and trends of developmental 
disabilities among children in the United States: 2009–2017,” 
Pediatrics, vol. 144, no. 4, e20190811,2019.  
[4]. D. Gravem et al., “Assessment of infant movement with a 
compact wireless accelerometer system,” Journal of Medical 
Devices, vol. 6, no. 2, 2012. 
[5]. F. Ferrari et al., “Cramped synchronized general movements 
in preterm infants as an early marker for cerebral palsy,” 
Archives of pediatrics & adolescent medicine, vol. 156, no. 5, 
pp. 460– 467, 2002. 
[6]. L. Meinecke et al., “Movement analysis in the early detection 
of newborns at risk for developing spasticity due to infantile 
cerebral palsy,” Human movement science, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 
125–144, 2006. 
[7]. M. S. Abrishami et al., “Identification of developmental delay 
in infants using wearable sensors: Full-day leg movement 
statistical feature analysis,” IEEE journal of translational 
engineering in health and medicine, vol. 7, pp. 1–7, 2019. 
[8]. I. Braito et al.,“Assessment of upper limb use in children with 
typical development and neurodevelopmental disorders by 
inertial 
sensors: 
a 
systematic 
review,” 
Journal 
of 
neuroengineering and rehabilitation, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 
2018. 
[9]. M. C. Piper, L. E. Pinnell, J. Darrah, T. Maguire, and P. J. 
Byrne, “Construction and validation of the alberta infant 
motor scale (aims).” Canadian journal of public health= 
Revue canadienne de sante publique, vol. 83, pp. S46–50, 
1992. 
[10]. C. Einspieler and H. F. Prechtl, “Prechtl’s assessment of 
general movements: a diagnostic tool for the functional 
assessment of the young nervous system,” Mental retardation 
and developmental disabilities research reviews, vol. 11, no. 
1, pp. 61–67, 2005. 
[11]. K. R. Heineman, A. F. Bos, and M. Hadders-Algra, “The 
infant motor profile: a standardized and qualitative method to 
assess motor behaviour in infancy,” Developmental Medicine 
& Child Neurology, vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 275–282, 2008. 
[12]. M. Randall, C. Imms, and L. Carey, “Establishing validity of 
a modified melbourne assessment for children ages 2 to 4 
years,” American Journal of Occupational Therapy, vol. 62, 
no. 4, pp. 373–383, 2008. 
[13]. H. Chen, M. Xue, Z. Mei, S. Bambang Oetomo, and W. Chen, 
“A review of wearable sensor systems for monitoring body 
movements of neonates,” Sensors, vol. 16, no. 12, p. 2134, 
2016. 
[14]. D. Campolo et al., “A novel technological approach towards 
the early diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disorders,” in 2008 
30th 
Annual 
International 
Conference 
of 
the 
IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE, 2008, 
pp. 4875–4878. 
[15]. B. A. Smith, D. L. Vanderbilt, B. Applequist, and A. 
Kyvelidou,“Sample 
entropy 
identifies 
differences 
in 
spontaneous leg movement behavior between infants with 
typical development and infants at risk of developmental 
delay,” Technologies, vol. 5, no. 3, p. 55, 2017. 
[16]. C. Strohrmann et al., “Monitoring motor capacity changes of 
children during rehabilitation using body-worn sensors,” 
Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation, vol. 10, no. 1, 
pp. 1–16, 2013. 
[17]. C. R. Hoyt et al.,“Using accelerometry for measurement of 
motor behavior in children: Relationship of real-world 
movement 
to 
standardized 
evaluation,” 
Research 
in 
developmental disabilities, vol. 96, p. 103546, 2020. 
[18]. C. B. Redd, L. A. Barber, R. N. Boyd, M. Varnfield, and M. 
K.Karunanithi, “Development of a wearable sensor network 
for quantification of infant general movements for the 
diagnosis of cerebral palsy,” in 2019 41st Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC). IEEE, 2019, pp. 
7134–7139. 
[19]. D. Goodfellow et al., “Predicting infant motor development 
status using day long movement data from wearable sensors,” 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.02617, 2018. 
[20]. R. B. Wilson, S. Vangala, D. Elashoff, T. Safari, and B. A. 
Smith, “Using wearable sensor technology to measure motion 
complexity in infants at high familial risk for autism spectrum 
disorder,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 2, p. 616, 2021. 
[21]. F. Heinze et al., “Movement analysis by accelerometry of 
newborns and infants for the early detection of movement 
disorders due to infantile cerebral palsy,” Medical & 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

biological engineering & computing, vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 765–
772, 2010. 
[22]. B. A. Smith, I. A. Trujillo-Priego, C. J. Lane, J. M. Finley, 
and F. B. Horak, “Daily quantity of infant leg movement: 
wearable sensor algorithm and relationship to walking onset,” 
Sensors, vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 19 006–19 020, 2015. 
[23]. W. Deng, I. A. Trujillo-Priego, and B. A. Smith, “How many 
days are necessary to represent an infant’s typical daily leg 
movement behavior using wearable sensors?” Physical 
therapy, vol. 99, no. 6, pp. 730–738, 2019. 
[24]. S. M. McKay and R. M. Angulo-Barroso, “Longitudinal 
assessment of leg motor activity and sleep patterns in infants 
with and without down syndrome,” Infant Behavior and 
Development, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 153–168, 2006. 
[25]. N. Jalloul, “Wearable sensors for the monitoring of movement 
disorders,” Biomedical journal, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 249–253, 
2018. 
 
 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

