Design and Implementation of a Low Cost System to Determine the Composition of 
Biogas
Antonio José Calderón Godoy, Isaías González Pérez 
Dept. of Electrical, Electronic and Automatic Engineering 
University of Extremadura 
Badajoz, Spain 
e-mail: {ajcalde, igonzp}@unex.es 
 
Abstract—The main objective of this work is the design and 
development of a device similar to a continuous gas sensor, 
which can analyze the composition of combustible gases, 
depending on the types of sensors installed in the capsule 
designed for this purpose. Some manufacturers of continuous 
gas analyzers develop equipment with high price. The purpose 
of this work is the design and implementation of a low cost 
system, affordable to any type of company, based on the 
platform Open Hardware Arduino, for measuring and 
analyzing biogas. This system can be used for many 
applications and because biogas is a renewable gas fuel, it will 
be increasingly important in countries committed to the 
reduction of greenhouse gases. All circuits will be designed and 
later simulated with the Multisim 12.0 software. The printed 
circuit boards will be created with the help of the Ultiboard 
12.0 software and, finally, the necessary files will be created for 
the printing of these circuits in the plates with the software 
LPKF CircuitPro 1.5. 
Keywords-continuous analyzer; combustible gases; biogas. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Continuous gas analyzers are equipment that analyzes the 
composition of gases continuously. That is, as the gas is 
flowing through the analyzer, the reading of the gas 
composition can be instantly obtained. 
Focusing on combustible gases, these are used for the 
production of thermal energy from a combustion process. 
Some gases of this type are natural hydrocarbons and those 
manufactured solely for use as fuel. Among all possible 
cases, it has been decided to develop a prototype to 
determine the composition of biogas. The composition of 
this combustible gas varies according to the origin of the 
same [1]. Biogas can be generated in natural media or in a 
sealed, oxygen-free tank called anaerobic digester, from the 
reactions of biodegradation that are produced of the organic 
matter, by the action of microorganisms in the absence of 
oxygen [2]. 
This combustible gas consists of a mixture composed of 
50-70% of methane (CH4) and 30-50% of carbon dioxide 
(CO2). It also contains minimal amounts of other gases, such 
as nitrogen (N2), hydrogen sulphide (H2S), and some traces 
of water vapor. The calorific value of the biogas will vary its 
value depending on the proportion of methane in the mixture 
[3]. 
The measurement system designed in this work is based 
on four sensors that have been chosen according to the 
composition of this renewable fuel gas. However, it can be 
extrapolated to any other type of gas simply modifying the 
set of selected sensors. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the sensors used. Section III describes the 
developed prototype. The conclusions and acknowledgement 
close the article. 
II. 
SENSORS FOR COMBUSTIBLE GASES 
Regarding the monitoring of combustible gases, sensors 
are required that can detect high concentrations of gases, 
compared to those required for toxic gases that must be more 
sensitive to lower levels of concentrations. 
For both cases, there are five types of sensors, each based 
on a different foundation for the detection of different gases, 
namely electrolytic sensors, catalytic sensors, solid state 
sensors, infrared sensors and photoionization detectors.  
Among all types of gas sensors, semiconductor type 
sensors have been chosen. These sensors have a thin film of 
metal oxide, on which a piece of silicone is deposited. The 
absorption of gas at the surface with this oxide results in a 
change in the electrical resistance, which is related to the 
measured gas concentration of the sample. 
The following sensors have been selected for the 
implementation of the biogas measurement and analysis 
system: ammonia (TGS2444), hydrogen (TGS821), methane 
(TGS3870) and carbon monoxide (TGS5042) sensors [4]. 
Fig. 1 depicted the sensors selected along with their interface 
circuitry. The sensors have been bought as ready product but 
the interface circuitry have been fully designed and built. 
III. 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE PROTOTYPE 
This section deals with the design and theoretical 
development of all the circuits involved in the biogas 
measurement and analysis system. All circuits will be 
defined theoretically and, later, simulated by the software 
Multisim 12.0. Printed circuit boards will be created with the 
help of Ultiboard 12.0 software. Finally, the necessary files 
will be created for the machine responsible for printing these 
circuits on the plates with the LPKF CircuitPro 1.5 software 
[5]. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

      
              
 
                  (a)                                             
(b) 
    
 
            (c)                                                  
(d) 
 
 
             
(a) 
                      
(b) 
Figure 1.  Sensor used: (a) ammonia, (b) hydrogen, (c) methane and (d) 
carbon monoxide 
In this research, an Arduino board, model MEGA2560 
has been used as Data Acquisition system (DAQ) for the set 
of sensors. It is based on a microcontroller ATmega2560. 
Analogue input channels are used to measure the voltage of 
the output circuits of the sensors. The cost of Arduino 
MEGA is noticeably lower than the cost of a traditional 
DAQ. The carbon monoxide sensor is the cheapest, 28€, 
whereas the ammonia sensor costs 90€. The system total cost 
is about 300€. The cost of the Arduino board is 40 €. A DAQ 
with analog inputs costs over 450€ in the market, so the low 
cost character of the proposal is clearly stated. 
A methacrylate capsule has been designed with Autodesk 
AutoCad 2013 and Autodesk Inventor 2014 software, which 
will circulate the biogas to analyze and house the sensors 
used (Fig. 2a). Fig. 2b shows a snapshot of the hydrogen 
sensor as sample of the developed prototype. 
Figure 2.  Appearance of: (a) Methacrylate capsule containing the sensors 
and (b) hydrogen sensor. 
Figure 3.  Preliminary experimental results. 
Early results are shown in Fig. 3 where a snapshot of the 
system working under laboratory conditions can be 
observed. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this work, the design and development of a cost-
effective continuous gas analyzer has been reported. Each of 
the four sensors chosen for the detection of the biogas 
composition has been studied and analyzed. Besides, all the 
circuits necessary for this purpose have being realized. All 
the circuits that compose the system of measurement and 
analysis of biogas have been simulated with the software 
Multisim 12.0, obtaining at all times the corresponding 
values exposed in the sheets of characteristics of each of 
them. All the printed circuit boards of the circuits necessary 
for this project have been implemented with the software 
Ultiboard 12.0. Currently, the developed meter is in the test 
phase in order to validate the proposed system. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the FEDER Funds 
(Programa Operativo FEDER de Extremadura 2014-2020) 
through the grant “Ayuda a Grupos de Investigación” (ref. 
GR15178) of Junta de Extremadura. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Cacua, A. Amell, and L. Olmos, “A comparative study of 
the combustion properties of normal biogas-air mixture and 
oxygen-enriched biogas-air”, Ingeniería e investigación, vol. 
31, pp. 233-241, 2011. 
[2] D. Deublein and A. Steinhauser, Biogas from Waste and 
Renewable Resources, Wiley-VCH, 2011. 
[3] T. Abbasi, S. A. Abbasi, and S. M. Tauseef, Biogas Energy, 
Springer, 2012. 
[4] Product Information, FIGARO Engineering inc. Available 
from: 
http://www.figaro.co.jp/en/product/ 
(last 
accessed 
March 2016) 
[5] 
http://www.lpkfusa.com/support/files/manuals/CircuitPro%202.1.x%
20How%20To%20Guide-e-2-1.pdf (last accessed September 
2016)  
 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

