Figure 1. (a) Structure of a piezoelectric cantilever beam with a tip mass 
harvesting energy from vibrations; (b) a simplified equivalent circuit of a 
piezoelectric transducer. 
(a) 
(b) 
A Rapid Modeling and Prototyping Technique for Piezoelectric 
Energy Harvesting Systems 
Aldo Romani, Enrico Sangiorgi, Marco Tartagni 
Advanced Research Center on Electronic Systems 
University of Bologna – Cesena Campus 
Cesena, Italy 
{aldo.romani, e.sangiorgi, marco.tartagni}@unibo.it 
Rudi P. Paganelli 
IEIIT-CNR  
National Research Council (CNR) 
Bologna, Italy 
rudipaolo.paganelli@cnr.it
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes a reliable modeling technique 
for piezoelectric transducers and a procedure for identifying 
model parameters with few simple measurements and 
standard laboratory equipment. Direct measurements were 
taken 
on 
commercial 
Q220-A4-303YB 
piezoelectric 
transducers from Piezo Systems in a cantilever configuration 
with tip masses between 6 g and 18 g. For validation purposes, 
the behavior of the equivalent electromechanical circuits was 
simulated and compared to direct observations in real 
operating conditions. The model showed to  predict with a high 
degree of accuracy both the response of the transducers to 
vibrations and a set of second order effects associated to the 
presence of a non-linear power converter and usually ignored 
by conventional models presented in literature. 
Keywords: piezoelectric devices, energy harvesting, model 
identification, equivalent electromechanical circuit 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Piezoelectric transducers are widely used in energy 
harvesting applications. Small-sized oscillating structures 
with seismic masses attached are often used (Fig. 1a). 
Several types of electronic interfaces have also been 
proposed up to now for collecting electrical charge from the 
transducers [1].  
The behavior of this kind of systems depends on many 
factors such as the input vibrations, the shape of the 
transducer, the seismic mass attached to the transducer and 
the electronic interface. During the design phase a rapid and 
reliable quantitative estimate of the behavior of transducers 
and circuits is highly desirable for optimizing the system as a 
whole. In this task two main difficulties coexist: (a) in 
piezoelectric transducers electrical and mechanical quantities 
are strictly coupled; (b) conversion circuits are usually non-
linear and include power transistors, diodes and digital 
control. Currently, especially during the design phase, there 
is still need of reliable methods for rapid prototyping and 
predicting the behavior of such complex systems. 
An analytical approach [2] can accurately model the 
behavior of the piezoelectric transducer itself, but such 
models cannot be used in circuit simulations.  In [3] a 
modeling approach based on an equivalent electro-
mechanical circuit with lumped parameters provided reliable 
results. This type of approach is also suitable for joint 
simulations with non linear (e.g. switching) power converter 
circuits. However, in practical cases not all the required 
electrical, mechanical and geometrical parameters are 
known. Nonetheless, an accurate modeling is essential for 
carrying out system design efficiently. In fact, the way 
charge is extracted and transferred away from the transducer 
might significantly affect the response to vibrations of the 
transducer itself. Recent works on non-linear power 
conversion circuits [1][4][5] made use of assumptions such 
as weak electromechanical couplings, forced displacements 
or purely capacitive transducers (Fig. 1b) which are not valid 
in many practical cases, especially when the transducers 
operate near resonance.  
This paper presents a new technique for a fast and 
reliable identification of the parameters of the equivalent 
electromechanical 
circuit 
of 
a 
generic 
piezoelectric 
transducer. The proposed approach is general and the 
technique can be applied to any type of transducer. For 
validation purposes, the equivalent circuits of a set of 
commercial piezoelectric transducers will be identified and a 
series of experimental measurements in both frequency and 
time domain will be compared to simulations. The results 
will show that the modeling technique produces reliable 
results in predicting the behavior of the transducers. 
 
II. 
EQUIVALENT ELECTROMECHANICAL CIRCUIT OF A 
PIEZOELECTRIC TRANSDUCER 
As shown in Fig. 1, in energy harvesting applications 
piezoelectric transducers are usually coupled with a seismic 
mass in order to build up a mechanical oscillator. Because of 
formal analogies between Newton’s laws and Kirchoff’s 
laws, as discussed in [3], an equivalent electromechanical 
circuit such as the one shown in Fig. 2a can model the 
behavior of a piezoelectric transducer .  
The mechanical part may be described in terms of forces (F) 
and velocities ( z ), where z is the deflection of the cantilever. 
86
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

In general, according to the laws of dynamics it holds that 
         , where FIN is the force acting on the transducer 
(e.g. expressed in N),    is the amplitude of input vibrations 
(e.g. in m/s2) and     the equivalent mass of the oscillating 
system (e.g. in kg) which is related to the inertial mass and to 
the geometries of the transducer. In this paper, without losing 
generality, all the forces acting on the system will be 
expressed in scaled units by assuming a unity equivalent 
mass    . This notation implies that the input force FIN is 
considered numerically equal to the amplitude of input 
vibrations   , which can be directly measured. On the 
contrary, an exact value of the equivalent mass     cannot 
be easily determined with direct measurements. 
Each lumped element of the equivalent circuit takes into 
account different physical quantities: LM, RM, CM are 
respectively related through       to kinetic energy, 
mechanical losses and elastic energy of the system; CP is the 
electrical capacitance measured between the surface 
electrodes of the piezoelectric element; the coefficients ,  
respectively model the inverse and the direct piezoelectric 
effects. Additional vibration modes can be taken into account 
by including additional mechanical resonators. 
An equivalent circuit approach, provided that a reliable 
estimate of its parameters is provided, allows to perform 
accurate simulations of the transducer connected to any 
power conversion circuit or external load. In next section a 
parameter identification technique based on the observation 
of few significant quantities will be presented. 
 
III. 
IDENTIFICATION OF MODEL PARAMETERS 
In general, as shown in Fig. 2b, the piezoelectric 
transducer in an open circuit configuration basically behaves 
as an oscillator with  a resonance frequency f0: 

2
0
1
1
M
LMCEQ
f





where CEQ = CM CP / (CP +  CM) and M is the exponential 
damping time constant defined below. 
When the terminals of the transducer are shorted (VP = 0), 
as shown in Fig. 2c, a pure mechanical oscillator is built up 
with time constant M and resonance frequency  fM: 

2
M
1
1
f
,     
2
M
M
M
M
M
M
L C
R
L







It can be demonstrated that the transducer can be 
considered shorted whenever we connect to its terminals a 
resistor RL whose value is low enough to drain almost all the 
current  z  coming from the controlled current source, so 
that the effect of the VP voltage generator on the 
mechanical part is cancelled. When RL  0 the following 
relations can be determined by solving circuit equations: 

M
M
L
M
P
z
f
R
f
V
 


 
)
(





2
2
2
)
 
16 ( 
1
1
)  2
(
M
M
M
M
M
IN
M
f
z
f
F
L












2 
2
1/
2
1
M
M
M
M
f
L
C






where zM is the peak-to-peak displacement of the shorted 
transducer at the mechanical resonance fM. 
Conversely, when the transducer is in open circuit 
configuration the following equation holds: 






1
1/
2  
 
1
2
2
0



M
M
M
M
P
f
L C
C
C







IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND RESULTS 
This section describes the experimental setup used for the 
identification of model parameters. The measurements were 
performed on a set of Q220-A4-303YB piezoelectric 
transducers from Piezo Systems with tip masses respectively 
of 6 g, 10 g, 12 g, 18 g. The transducers were mounted on a 
Figure 2. (a) generic equivalent electromechanical circuit of a piezoelectric 
transducer modeled as a two-port network; (b) equivalent oscillator circuit 
of a piezoelectric transducer in open circuit configuration; (c) equivalent 
oscillator circuit of a piezoelectric transducer in a short circuit 
configuration 
(b) 
(a) 
(c) 
87
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

cost-effective custom shaker system based on a Ciare 
CW200Z woofer (Fig. 3). A Kionix KXP-84 accelerometer 
was also mounted on the shaker for measuring the actual 
input acceleration. The shaker was used for generating 
sinusoidal vibrations of given frequency and amplitude or 
other test signals. An Agilent 34401A digital multimeter and 
a sampling oscilloscope were used for measuring the 
voltages produced by the transducers. A resistor RL = 98  
was used for emulating the shorted devices, as discussed in 
previous section. 
The identification procedure is herein summarized. First, 
a series of measurements is performed on the mechanical 
oscillator, with RL connected as a load. 
1. The shaker produces very short mechanical pulses, 
so that damped voltage oscillations can be observed 
with an oscilloscope. The damping time constant M 
can be easily obtained (e.g. from the screen 
coordinates (t1, V1) and (t2, V2) of two subsequent 
maxima with the expression: M = (t2-t1) / ln(V1/V2). 
2. The shaker generates sinusoidal accelerations at 
different frequencies at which the output voltage 
VP(f) and the input acceleration 
y ( f )
 are measured. 
The frequency at which 
( )
/)
(
y f
VP f

 is maximum 
is identified as fM. 
3. The peak to peak displacement zM at fM is measured 
with a common digital camera. A ruler is positioned 
next to the transducer and a 1” exposure shot is taken 
(Fig. 4). The bitmap image then is analyzed at pixel 
level for measuring the displacement. 
Then, additional measurements are performed on the 
transducer in an open circuit configuration: 
4. Step 2 is repeated with no load resistor in order to 
identify f0; 
5. The electrical capacitance CP of the transducer is 
measured with an Agilent 4284A LCR-meter, at a 
10 kHz frequency well above the mechanical cut-off 
frequency, so as to neglect all mechanical effects. 
Finally, all the parameters of the equivalent circuit are 
computed with equations (3)-(6) with the measured 
quantities. In (4), FIN(fM) is expressed in scaled units (by a 
factor meq) so that it is numerically equal to 
)
(
y fM
. The 
values obtained for the considered transducers are reported in 
Table I. 
TABLE I.  
IDENTIFIED MODEL PARAMETERS 
mass 
[g] 
LM 
[kg]  
CM 
[m/N] 
RM 
[N·s/m] 

[N/V]

[A·s/m]
CP 
[nF] 
6 
5.82·10-2 2.44·10-4 
1.16 
12.2·10-3 2.10·10-3 
52 
10 
5.32·10-2 4.37·10-4 
0.96 
4.32·10-3 3.40·10-3 
52 
12 
5.85·10-2 4.80·10-4 
1.06 
3.78·10-3 2.90·10-3 
52 
18 
7.54·10-2 5.27·10-4 
1.26 
4.90·10-3 2.10·10-3 
52 
In order to prove the effectiveness and the degree of 
reliability of the proposed approach, after identifying their 
model parameters, Spice simulations of the four previously 
identified piezoelectric transducers have been compared to 
direct measurements in different operating conditions. 
Fig. 5 shows a comparison between the predicted and the 
observed behavior of the four transducers in frequency 
domain. The identified models accurately predict the 
response of the piezoelectric transducers to vibrations. 
Figure 3. The cost effective shaker system composed of a standard 
woofer and a digital accelerometer operated under software control in 
a Labview environment and a detailed view of the piezoelectric 
transducers used in this work. 
shaker 
accelerometer 
piezo 
transducer 
sw control 
Figure 4. The peak to peak displacement can be directly measured by setting 
the shaker oscillating frequency and by taking a shot with 1” exposure time 
with a standard digital camera. Pixel resolution allows to measure the 
displacement with satisfactory accuracy. As an examples, some 
measurements are reported on the right. 
354px = 1cm 
55px 
Figure 5. Comparison in frequency domain between measured (dots) and 
simulated data (continuous lines) for the Q220-A3-303YB transducer 
with different tip masses of 6g, 12g, 18g in open circuit configuration. 
VP(f) is the output voltage of the transducer, A(f) is the input 
acceleration ( y ). 
88
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
As an additional proof, another measurement and 
simulation campaign was performed for verifying the 
capability of the model of predicting the effects of a non 
linear power converter on the performance of the transducer. 
In this setup, the piezoelectric transducers were connected to 
a switching converter circuit performing synchronous charge 
extraction. A schematic representation of the power 
converter is shown in Fig. 6. 
Each time that the transducer reaches a local maximum 
or minimum of voltage it is connected to an inductor for a 
short time interval until his electric charge (and, 
consequently, its electrostatic energy) is fully removed. This 
technique was described in [1] and [5] where weakly coupled 
transducers with simplified capacitive models (Fig. 1b) were 
considered. These models predict, in case of sinusoidal 
vibrations, that the peak-to-peak voltage across the 
transducer doubles. However, with respect to those analyses, 
in a general case a lower energy harvesting performance 
should be expected: in fact, in case of sinusoidal vibrations, a 
synchronized converter actually applies a periodic series of 
current pulses to the electrical port of the piezoelectric 
transducer for removing charge. At resonance this effect 
cannot be neglected and the overall result is a force opposing 
to input vibrations. As a consequence, the actual output 
voltage of the transducer is lower than predicted with a  
capacitive model with weak electro-mechanical coupling. 
A series of time domain simulations was performed on 
the four transducers and compared to direct measurements: 
sinusoidal vibrations at different frequencies were generated 
and the amplitude VP0 of the open circuit voltage was 
compared to the actual amplitude VP observed when the 
synchronized converter is activated. Fig. 7 shows the VP/VP0 
ratio as a function of vibration frequency. Measurements 
show that near the resonance the power converter produces a 
significant and undesired damping effect. However, once 
again circuit simulations with the identified parameters 
accurately predict the effective behavior and allow taking it 
into account in the design phase. On the contrary, the 
hypothesis of weak electromechanical coupling (i.e. a 
transducer model such as that in Fig. 1b) would predict a 
constant ratio VP/VP0 = 2 [1] and thus lead to a significant 
overestimate of harvester performance. 
An accurate identification of model parameters is 
extremely useful in energy harvesting applications. The 
available accelerations can be easily measured with cost 
effective accelerometers and provided as input to the 
equivalent electro-mechanical circuits of piezoelectric 
transducers. At the same time, actual power conversion 
circuits can be jointly simulated. Different topologies or 
control algorithms of the power converter, such as for 
example synchronous charge extraction, can be easily 
characterized. Moreover, their impact on the actual 
performance of the transducer is determined. The proposed 
modeling technique allows to choose the most suitable 
power converter for maximizing the output power depending 
on the effectively available accelerations. 
 
Figure 7. Sinusoidal accelerations of known frequency and amplitude 
were applied to the Q220-A4-303YB transducer with tip masses of 6g 
and 10g. The voltage on the terminals of the transducer was measured in 
an open circuit configuration (VP0) and when the power converter 
performing synchronous charge extraction is connected (VP). The plot 
compares the measured ratioes of the two voltage with values obtained 
from simulations. 
Figure 6. Schematic of the power converter performing synchronous 
charge extraction (top). Qualitative representation of waveforms when 
the converter is active and inactive (bottom). Synchronous conversion 
introduces at each activation a voltage offset, which is expected to 
increase the peak-to-peak voltage on the transducer.  
89
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presented a technique for a rapid and reliable 
identification 
of 
model 
parameters 
of 
piezoelectric 
transducers, with a special focus on energy harvesting 
applications. All the necessary measurements are carried out 
with common laboratory instrumentation and cheap 
equipment. Parameter identification allows performing 
reliable joint simulations of transducer and electronic 
circuits. This is of great help during the design phase of 
piezoelectric energy harvesting systems since it allows better 
performance estimates even during early design phases. 
As a proof of concept it was shown that this technique 
provides reliable results both in frequency domain and in a 
transient analysis with a non-linear power converter. In the 
latter case the proposed model was able to predict undesired 
side effects at resonance and to overcome the limitations 
imposed by simplified assumptions or limitative hypotheses 
commonly taken in literature.  
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research leading to these results has received funding 
from the European Community's Seventh Framework 
Programme 
(FP7/2007-2013) 
under 
grant 
agreement 
NANOFUNCTION no. 257375 and from the ENIAC Joint 
Undertaking under grant agreement END no. 120214. The 
authors thank Mattia Tassinari of University of Bologna for 
his valuable contributions to the experimental measurements 
and Fondazione Cassa dei Risparmi di Forlì for financial 
support.  
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Lefeuvre, A. Badel, C. Richard, L. Petit, D. Guyomar, “A 
comparison between several vibration-powered piezoelectric 
generators for standalone systems,” Sensors and Actuators A: 
Physical, vol. 126, Feb. 2006, pp. 405-416. 
[2] A. Erturk, D.J. Inman, “An experimentally validated bimorph 
cantilever model for piezoelectric energy harvesting from 
base excitations,” Smart Materials and Structures, vol. 18, no. 
025009, Feb. 2009, pp. 1-18 
[3] R. P. Paganelli, 
A. Romani, 
A. Golfarelli, 
M. Magi, 
E. Sangiorgi, M. Tartagni, “Modeling and characterization of 
piezoelectric transducers by means of scattering parameters. 
Part I: Theory,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 160, 
Mar. 2010, pp. 9-18. 
[4] M. Lallart, L. Garbuio, L. Petit, C. Richard, D. Guyomar, 
“Double synchronized switch harvesting (DSSH): a new 
energy harvesting scheme for efficient energy extraction.,” 
IEEE transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and 
frequency control, vol. 55, Oct. 2008, pp. 2119-30. 
[5] A. Romani, M. Tartagni, and E. Sangiorgi, “An Energy 
Autonomous Switching Converter for Harvesting Power from 
Multiple Piezoelectric Transducers,” Sensors, 2010 IEEE, 
Nov. 2010, pp. 1173-1176 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
90
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

