Comparison of Dry and Wet Electrode Systems for Spontaneous and Event Related 
Electroencephalograms  
 
M. Fatoorechi, R.J. Prance, H. Prance 
Department of Engineering and Design 
University of Sussex 
Brighton, UK 
e-mail: M.Fatoorechi@sussex.ac.uk   
R.J.Prance@sussex.ac.uk; H.Prance@sussex.ac.uk  
D. Schwartzman, J. Parkinson, A. Seth 
Department of Informatics 
University of Sussex 
Brighton, UK 
e-mail: D.Schwartzman@sussex.ac.uk; 
J.M.Parkinson@sussex.ac.uk; A.K.Seth@sussex.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— Low frequency noise performance is the key 
indicator in determining the signal to noise ratio of a 
capacitively 
coupled 
sensor 
when 
used 
to 
acquire 
electroencephalogram (EEG) signals. For this reason, a 
prototype Electric Potential Sensor (EPS) device based on an 
auto-zero operational amplifier has been developed and 
evaluated. The absence of 1/f noise in these devices makes them 
ideal for use with signal frequencies ~10 Hz or less. The active 
electrodes are designed to be physically and electrically robust 
and chemically and biochemically inert. They are electrically 
insulated (anodized) and have diameters of 12 mm or 18 mm. 
In both cases, the sensors are housed in inert stainless steel 
machined housings with the electronics fabricated in surface 
mount components on a printed circuit board (PCB) 
compatible with epoxy potting compounds. Potted sensors are 
designed to be immersed in alcohol for sterilization purposes. 
A comparative study was conducted with a commercial wet gel 
electrode system. These studies comprised measurements of 
both free running EEG and Event Related Potentials (ERP). A 
strictly comparable signal to noise ratio was observed and the 
overall conclusion from these comparative studies is that the 
noise performance of the new sensor is appropriate. 
Keywords-Sensors; EEG; Biosensors; Assistive technology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The traditional methods employed for the acquisition of 
EEG signals rely on the use of wet silver/silver chloride 
(Ag/AgCl) transducing electrodes. These convert ionic 
current on the surface of the body to electronic current for 
amplification and subsequent signal processing. Such 
electrodes are cheap and disposable but require the use of a 
conducting gel between the electrode and the skin, since 
they rely on maintaining a low electrical resistance 
contact [1]. Operationally significant care is required in the 
preparation of the skin, usually involving abraision, by 
skilled personnel. In addition, the gel may cause skin 
irritation and discomfort as well as drying out after a period 
of time, meaning that wet electrodes are unsuited to long 
term monitoring applications [2]. The gel may also be 
responsible for cross coupling or shorting between 
electrodes in an array if great care is not taken during 
placement. Dry conducting electrodes provide a more user 
friendly approach with electrodes making resistive contact 
with the skin [3]. This overcomes the problems caused by 
the wet electrode gel, but introduces an additional variable, 
the variation in contact resistance due to perspiration or skin 
creams. For these reasons, they tend to be noisier than wet 
electrodes and can suffer from movement artefacts if they 
are not securely fastened. 
An alternative approach is to dispense with the resistive 
contact and couple capacitively through an insulating layer 
[4]. With this method the signal fidelity no longer relies on 
skin resistance, however they can also suffer from 
movement artefacts and charge sensitivity. In most 
embodiments of dry and insulated electrodes an active 
electrode 
structure 
is 
used 
with 
high 
impedance 
amplification [4][5]. This minimizes the noise due to 
cabling and transmission of the signal. EPS is a high 
performance version of the insulated active sensor. 
With specific reference to EEG signal acquisition, 
evidence exists that smaller, lighter sensors with a higher 
array density are required in order to reduce movement 
artefacts and to allow for redundancy [6]. A comprehensive 
review of wet, dry and insulating electrode technologies 
concludes that insulated active electrodes offer the most 
promising solution for future healthcare applications [1]. 
More recent work on dry electrodes has included a trial of a 
6 sensor EEG system [7] and concludes that this could offer 
a cost effective solution for brain-computer interfacing. A 
clinical comparison of concurrent measurements with wet 
and dry EEG electrodes concludes that a high degree of 
correlation is seen and that dry electrodes offer better long 
term performance [8]. New work on motion artefact 
reduction relies on the simultaneous measurement of the 
contact impedance of each sensor [9] using a small a.c. 
current (20 nA @ 1 kHz) and multiple dry spring loaded 
contacts in each sensor to introduce redundancy. Other 
workers have designed quasi-dry polymer electrodes which 
use a small quantity of moisturizing agent to address these 
problems [10].  
In summary, EPS technology has already demonstrated 
that 
these 
problems 
can 
be 
addressed 
for 
electrocardiogram (ECG) 
data 
acquisition 
where 
the 
inherent DC stability and short settling time of the sensors 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

differentiate 
them 
from 
other 
insulated 
electrode 
implementations [11]. However, the low frequency noise 
performance required for accurate EEG data acquisition is 
considerably more stringent and it is this important 
parameter which will be addressed in this paper. A review 
of sensor developments for healthcare [11] discusses the 
low frequency noise performance of a number of active 
sensors and characterizes them in terms of the noise spectral 
density at 1 Hz. This is a useful indicator of the performance 
for EEG use and gives values ranging from 2 V/√Hz to 
10 V/√Hz, however these values will increase at lower 
frequencies due to 1/f noise. The aim of this work is to 
produce a high impedance capacitively coupled sensor with 
noise that is comparable or lower than conventional 
electrode systems in a 0.1-10 Hz bandwidth. 
The design and specifications of the EPS sensor used in 
these experiments are described in section II, along with 
details of the commercial system used for comparing EPS 
with gel electrodes. In section III the results for free running 
EEG is demonstrated followed by data for two ERP studies 
in section IV. The second ERP experiment outlines the 
comparative study conducted between the two systems.   
II. 
PROTOTYPE SENSOR AND SYSTEM 
The prototype Sussex EPS device for this project is based 
on an auto-zero operational amplifier, chosen to give the 
lowest possible low frequency noise [12]. The absence of 1/f 
noise in these devices makes them ideal for use with signal 
frequencies ~10 Hz or less, with a quoted noise performance 
of 22 nV/√Hz and 5 fA/√Hz. The input capacitance is ~8 pF 
with an associated voltage noise between 0.1-10 Hz of 
0.5 µVp-p. After consideration of the expected signal 
amplitudes and frequency the sensor was configured to have 
an operational bandwidth of 0.1 Hz to 78 Hz and a voltage 
gain of x50. The voltage gain was distributed between two 
stages with x5 and x10 respectively for the first and second 
stages. The operation and circuit details of EPS devices have 
been published previously by the authors [13]. Here, the 
sensors are operated from split symmetric power supply rails 
of ±2.5V. Two versions were produced with different 
electrode sizes to enable reliable contact to be made to 
different parts of the body. The electrodes are electrically 
insulated through an anodized electrode with diameters of 
either 12 mm or 18 mm. In both cases the sensors were 
housed in inert stainless steel machined housings with the 
electronics fabricated in surface mount on a PCB compatible 
with epoxy potting compounds. Potted sensors are designed 
to be immersed in alcohol for sterilization purposes. 
The gain and operational bandwidth of the sensors was 
confirmed using a standard spectrum analyzer to be as 
specified. 
The 
most 
significant 
parameter 
for 
the 
specification of the sensor in this particular application is the 
voltage noise referred to the input. This was measured by 
placing the sensor in a screened environment and recording 
the spectral noise density over a 1 kHz bandwidth. From this 
data, shown in Figure 1, two numbers are produced to 
characterize the noise performance these are the spot noise 
figure at 1 Hz and the integrated noise from 0.1 Hz to 10 Hz. 
The results obtained for the voltage noise measurements are: 
30 nV/√Hz at 1 Hz and 0.2 µVp-p from 0.1 to 10 Hz; 
consistent with the data provided by the manufacturer. The 
absence of 1/f noise in this data confirms that the auto-zero 
amplifier used in this design is performing as expected.  
 
Figure 1.  Noise spectral density plot for prototype auto-zero sensor. 
 
In order to confirm, at an early stage in the design 
process, that the sensor design was both suitable for high 
quality EEG signal acquisition and that it was compatible 
with commercial systems and practice we interfaced the 
sensors to a TMS International system currently in use in 
the School of Psychology at Sussex. This also enabled us to 
do direct comparisons with wet gel electrode measurements. 
The prototype sensors were interfaced to a Refa8 amplifier 
produced by TMS International [14] with 64 EEG channels 
at 24 bit resolution with an input noise of 1 Vrms. All 
electrode cables have active shielding to reduce 50 Hz  
mains interference and cable movement artefacts. In the 
comparative data presented here the TMS International 
acquisition system and data processing were applied to both 
sets of data. 
In order to provide a comprehensive comparison 
between the Sussex EPS prototype and the commercial 
system two different types of EEG data were measured. The 
spontaneous, or free running, EEG as shown by recording 
the alpha signal and in particular by observing the, well 
known, alpha blocking signal. The second type is the ERP, 
here an oddball paradigm was chosen to record ERP signals 
[15]. In both cases the International standard 10-20 system 
was employed to record EEG [16]. In our case all signals 
were recorded against a reference, this may be the signal 
from any electrode on the head or an average of all 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

electrodes. Usually a linked mastoid reference is used and 
we followed this practice with the signals from the O2 and 
O1 positions and the reference sensor on M1 (left mastoid). 
III. 
FREE RUNNING EEG 
Initial measurements were carried out on the free running 
EEG to verify that the prototype sensor had an appropriate 
noise performance to allow EEG data to be seen. The alpha  
 
Figure 2.  Time domain data showing the alpha blocking phenomena 
measured using the prototype sensor. 
 
Figure 3.  Fourier transform of  40 s of time domain data showing a broad 
alpha signal peak at ~10 Hz. 
signal is observed when the eyes are closed and is 
characterized by an increase in amplitude of the 8-13 Hz 
EEG signal. Alpha activity can be recorded from 95% of 
people [15] and is blocked when the eyes are open. The 
signal may be seen in real time in the time domain, as shown 
in Figure 2, where the alpha blocking caused by opening the 
eyes may be seen clearly. Alternatively, if the time series 
data is Fourier transformed we see a broad peak in the 
frequency domain data. This is illustrated in Figure 3 where 
a 40 s section of time series alpha data has been Fourier 
transformed to show a clear ~10 Hz peak. A residual 50 Hz 
mains interference signal may also be seen, however the 
common mode rejection ratio (CMRR) is sufficient to reduce 
this amplitude to be comparable to the measured signal. 
IV. 
EVENT RELATED POTENTIAL 
The oddball effect is a measure of the response of the 
brain to the frequency of occurrence of differing events on a 
screen. The ERP resulting from this shows a time shift which 
arises from this difference. Two different events are 
presented on a screen with one event randomly chosen to 
occur more often than the other. A volunteer is asked to press 
the space bar only when they are presented with one of the 
two events. Typically, signals are averaged and band-pass 
filtered at 0.1 to 30 Hz, again we have followed this standard 
practice. A typical setup is where the letters X and O are 
displayed on a monitor with 80% and 20% relative frequency 
respectively. The letters are displayed for 100 ms with a 
blank screen presented for 1.4 s space between each letter.  
 
Figure 4.  Averaged prototype sensor ERP data showing the expected time 
delay associated with the oddball effect. 
Little or no useful information may be gained from real 
time data and averaging over a number of events is usual. 
The data is usually recorded using the Pz position and a 
reference electrode. Figure 4 shows the results for 67 
averages, 53 for the ‘X’ and 14 for the ‘O’. There is a clear 
time difference between the ‘X’ and ‘O’ data as expected. 
This is a relatively low number of averages for this type of 
measurement and indicates that the EPS prototype sensor is 
very capable in this challenging mode of operation. For ERP 
measurements direct comparisons between the wet gel and 
EPS systems are shown in Figures 5 and 6 with measurement 
electrodes located at the P7 and P8 positions. In order to 
improve the quality of the data and to allow a more accurate 
comparison to be conducted a grand average was produced 
over 4 subjects.  
 
Figure 5.  Grand average of ERP data from TMS system. 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 6.  Grand average of ERP data from prototype EPS. 
Three different images were presented to the subjects; faces 
(black line); inverted faces (red line) and scrambled faces 
(blue line). The overall conclusion from these ERP 
measurements is that the grand average data sets show a 
high degree of correlation between the two systems with the 
apparent signal to noise ratio looking strictly comparable. 
From these initial results we therefore conclude that the 
current prototype EPS device has an adequate level of noise 
performance for all the EEG signals observed during these 
tests. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The Sussex EPS prototype has been verified as suitable for 
the acquisition of both free running EEG and ERPs. The 
prototype performance has also been verified by interfacing 
with a commercial system and comparing results with those 
from wet gel electrodes. All results obtained indicate that the 
Sussex EPS prototype produces strictly comparable signal to 
noise ratios to conventional wet gel electrode devices for 
both free running and ERP measurements. The low 
frequency noise has been identified as the key performance 
indicator for capacitively coupled active sensors. In 
particular, the frequency range of typical EEG signals lies 
within the 1/f noise region of most active devices. The use of 
an auto-zero operational amplifier within the prototype 
sensor has been demonstrated to eliminate this problem and 
yield results which are strictly comparable to wet gel 
electrodes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work presented here forms part of the DeNeCoR 
project which is funded by the European ENIAC Joint 
Undertaking (JU) and the Technology Strategy Board (TSB). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Searle and L. Kirkup, ”A direct comparison of wet, dry 
and insulating bioelectric recording electrodes,” Physiological 
Measurement, vol. 21, 2000, pp. 271-283, ISSN 0967-3334J.  
[2] D. Prutchi and M. Norris, Design and Development of 
Medical Electronic Instrumentation, John Wiley and Sons 
New Jersey, 2005, ISBN 0-471-67623-3. 
[3] Y.M. Chi, T-P Jung and G. Cauwenberghs, “Dry-Contact and 
Noncontact 
Biopotential 
Electrodes: 
Methodological 
Review,” IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering, vol. 3, 
2010, pp. 106-119, ISSN 1937-3333. 
[4] A.J. Clippingdale, R.J. Prance, T.D. Clark, H. Prance, and T. 
Spiller, “Ultra-high impedance voltage probes and non-
contact electrocardiography,” In: Sensors VI: Technology, 
Systems and Applications, K.T.V. Grattan (Ed.), IOP 
publishing, 1991, pp.469-472, ISBN 0-7503-0316-0. 
[5] E. Spinelli and M. Haberman, “Insulating electrodes: a review 
on biopotential front ends for dielectric skin-electrode 
interfaces,” Physiological Measurement, vol. 31, 2010, pp. 
S183-S198, ISSN 0967-3334. 
[6] B.A. Tahari, R.T. Knight, and R.L. Smith, “A dry electrode 
for EEG recording,” Electroencephalography and clinical 
Neurophysiology, vol. 90, 1994, pp. 376-383. 
[7] F. Popescu, S. Fazli, Y. Badower, B. Blankertz, and K.R. 
Muller   “Single Trial Classification of Motor Imagination 
Using 6 Dry EEG Electrodes,” PLos ONE, Issue 7, e637, July 
2007. 
[8] G. Gargiulo et al. “A new EEG recording system for passive 
dry electrodes,” Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 121, 2010, pp. 
686-693. 
[9] A. Bertrand, V. Mihajlovic, B. Grundlehner, C. van Hoof, and 
M. Moonen, “Motion artifact reduction in EEG recordings 
using multi-channel contact impedance measurements,” 
Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS), 
IEEE, Oct. 2013, pp. 258-261, 
doi:10.1109/BioCAS.2013.6679688  
[10] A.R. Mota et al. “Development of a quasi-dry electrode for 
EEG recording,” Sensors and Actuators A, vol. 199, 2013, pp. 
310-317. 
[11] H. Prance, “Sensor Developments for Electrophysiological 
Monitoring in Healthcare,” Applied Biomedical Engineering, 
Dr. Gaetano Gargiulo (Ed.), InTech, 2011, ISBN: 978-953-
307-256-2, Available from:  
http://www.intechopen.com/books/applied-biomedical-
engineering/sensor-developments-for-electrophysiological-
monitoring-in-healthcare, [retrieved: June, 2014] 
[12] AD8628 datasheet, Analog Devices, Inc., One Technology 
Way, P.O. Box 9106, Norwood, MA 02062-9106, U.S.A., 
Available 
from: 
http://www.analog.com/static/imported-
files/data_sheets/AD8628_8629_8630.pdf, [retrieved: June, 
2014]  
[13] C.J. Harland, T.D. Clark, and R.J. Prance, "Electric potential 
probes - new directions in the remote sensing of the human 
body," Meas. Sci. and Tech., vol. 13, 2002, pp. 163-169. 
[14] Refa8 amplifier datasheet, TMS International, Zutphenstraat 
57, 7575 EJ Oldenzaal, The Netherlands, Available at: 
http://www.tmsi.com/products/systems/item/refa, [retrieved: 
June, 2014] 
[15] P. L. Nunez and R. Srinivasen, Electric Fields of the Brain: 
The Neurophysics of EEG, 2nd Edition, Oxford University 
Press, 2005, ISBN-13: 978-0195050387 
J. Malmivuo and R. Plonsey, Bioelectromagnetism: Principles 
and Applications of Bioelectric and Biomagnetic Fields, 
Oxford University Press, 1995, ISBN-13: 978-0195058239 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

