A New Clustering Algorithm in WSN Based on
Spectral Clustering and Residual Energy
Ali Jorio∗, Sanaa El Fkihi † Brahim Elbhiri‡and Driss Aboutajdine∗
∗LRIT, Research Unit Associated to the CNRST (URAC 29), FSR, Mohammed V-Agdal University, Rabat, Morocco
jorio.ali@gmail.com, aboutaj@fsr.ac.ma
†ENSIAS Mohammed V University Souissi Rabat, Morocco
elfkihi@ensias.ma
‡EMSI Rabat, Morocco
elbhirij@emsi.ac.ma
Abstract— Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) are composed of
large number of sensor nodes that are randomly distributed in
a region of interest. The nodes are responsible of the supervision
of a physical phenomenon and periodic transmission of results
to the sink. Energy saving results in extending the life of
the network, which presents a great challenge of WSNs. To
deal with this, a hierarchical clustering scheme, called K-Way
Spectral Clustering Algorithm in Wireless Sensor Network
(KSCA-WSN), is proposed in this paper. This algorithm is based
on spectral classiﬁcation; it also considers the residual energy,
as well as some properties of the network nodes. Thus, our
approach aims to seek for an ideal distribution of sensor nodes
(clusters) and proposes new feautures to elect the appropriate
cluster-heads. In term of extending the network lifetime and
minimizing the energy consumption, the simulation results
show an important improvement of the network performances
with KSCA-WSN compared to other existing clustering methods.
Keywords-Clustering;
Graph
theory;
Spectral
classiﬁcation;
Energy consumption.
I. INTRODUCTION
A Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) is a wireless network
consisting of spatially distributed autonomous devices using
sensors to cooperatively monitor physical or environmental
conditions at different locations, such as temperature, sound,
and vibration. It contains a large number of nodes, which sense
data from an inaccessible area and send their reports towards a
processing center called Base Station (BS). WSNs have many
advantages, such as the ease deployment and the capacity
of self-organization. However, their main challenges are the
limited resources in terms of radio communication capabilities
and energies. This article addresses this last point.
Even if the sensors are usually powered by batteries, it is not
practical to recharge or replace them, because they are often
deployed in hostile environments. Furthermore, in a WSN, a
large part of energy is consumed when communications are es-
tablished [1]. Hence, frequent and long distance transmissions
should be minimized to extend the lifetime of the network.
One way to reach this result consists in dividing the network
into multiple clusters; each cluster has a cluster-head node (C-
H) [2]. The C-H collects data from nodes of its same cluster,
aggregates them and transmits them to the BS. Nevertheless,
the main problem of many proposed clustering protocols is
the random selection of the C-Hs. Indeed, all C-Hs can be
located in a small region of the network, and some ordinary
nodes will be isolated. To tackle the clustering problem and
to fairly localize C-Hs, we propose to consider methods of
spectral clustering and the sensor’s residual energies.
Spectral clustering has become one of the most popular
modern clustering algorithms. It is based on graph theory, can
be solved efﬁciently by standard linear algebra software. It also
and very often outperforms traditional clustering algorithms
such as the k-means algorithm [3]. It includes a variety of
methods based on the notion of similarity matrix and use the
eigenvectors differently. The k-ways approach is one of these
methods. It consists to divide points into K disjoint classes.
This method is based on the K eigenvectors related to K
largest eigenvalues of Laplacian matrix [4]. Following this
approach, we present a K-Way Spectral Clustering Algorithm
in Wireless Sensor Network (KSCA-WSN), which has four
main goals: (i) extending the network life-time by distributing
energy consumption, (ii) running the clustering process within
a constant number of iterations/steps, (iii) minimizing control
overhead (to be linear in the number of nodes), and (iv)
producing well-distributed cluster heads and compact clusters.
KSCA-WSN does not make any assumptions about the distri-
bution or density of nodes, neither about node capabilities.
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows: In
Section II, we give a brief overview of some related research
work. Section III describes the network model and states the
addressed problem in this work. Details and properties of the
proposed algorithm are given in Section IV while Section V
presents the simulations and the results. Finally, conclusion
and some perspectives are drawn in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
Many routing protocols have been designed based on clus-
tering [5], where C-Hs are elected periodically and alternately.
Moreover, the most commonly used approach for clustering is
the LEACH algorithm [6]. LEACH is an energy-efﬁcient com-
munication protocol, which employs a hierarchical clustering.
Besides, many clustering protocols based on the principle of
this algorithm have been developed, such as LEACH-C [7],
Energy-Kmeans [8], DECSA [9], EECS [10] and SECA [11].
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

In LEACH, nodes organize themselves into clusters using
a distributed algorithm. Its main idea is to randomly and
periodically select the C-Hs. The probability of becoming
a C-H for each period is chosen to ensure that every node
becomes a C-H, at least once within N/K rounds, where
N is the number of node and K is the desired number of
clusters. After the election of C-Hs, each ordinary node in
the WSN determines its cluster by choosing the C-H that
requires the minimum communication energy, based on the
received signal strength of the advertisement from each C-H.
Each ordinary node will choose to join the C-H which has the
highest signal quality. Once the clusters are formed, each C-H
node creates Time division multiple access (TDMA) schedule.
The C-H collects and aggregates information from sensors in
its own cluster and passes on information to the BS. Although
LEACH distributed clustering algorithm has advantages, using
a central control algorithm to form clusters may produce
better clusters by dispersing the cluster head nodes throughout
the network [7]. In LEACH-centralized (LEACH-C), the BS
determines the C-Hs by computing the average node energy.
The node with energy below this average cannot be cluster
heads for the current considered round. This ensures that the
energy consumption will be effectively distributed among all
the nodes.
Yong and Pei [9] presented a distance-energy cluster struc-
ture algorithm (DECSA) based on the classic clustering al-
gorithm LEACH. This proposed approach considers both the
distance between the nodes, the position of the BS and residual
energy of nodes. Its main idea is to partition the network into
three levels of hierarchy to reduce the energy consumption of
C-Hs. this results from the non-uniform distribution of nodes
in the network and thus avoid direct communications between
the BS and C-H that has minimal energy and is far away from
the BS.
Elbhiri et al. [12] propose a new approach called the
Spectral Classiﬁcation based on Near Optimal Clustering in
Wireless Sensor Networks. This approach is based on spectral
bisection for partitioning a sensor network into two clusters.
This could be applied recursively to get the desired number of
clusters. However, recursive spectral bisection ﬁnally produces
2n clusters where n is the number of iterations. This method
cannot partition the network into any desired number of
clusters.
III. RADIO MODEL AND PROBLEM STATEMENT
This paper, discusses the periodical data gathering appli-
cation, for which LEACH is proposed. Thus, the proposed
clustering algorithms usually produce clusters of the same
size. The C-H consumes the same amount of energy during
intra-cluster communications. Moroever, cluster head election
method based essentially on residual energy can obtain better
energy efﬁciency than the method in which cluster heads are
elected in turns or by probabilities. For this, we use the spectral
classiﬁcation that is widely used to solve graph partitioning
problems. The spectral methods get their name from the spec-
tral theories of linear algebra. This theories allows afﬁrming
the diagonalization of real symmetric matrices. It also justiﬁes
the decomposition of real symmetric matrices into eigenvalues
in an orthonormal set of eigenvectors. Besides, the graph
partitioning problem can be reduced to the resolution of a
numerical system Mx = λx. Solving this numerical system
consists in seeking an orthogonal base of eigenvectors of the
matrix M [4].
In our approach, the BS constructs the graph corresponding
to the WSN based on the spectral clustering principle. Indeed,
let x be an observation vector composed of the sensor network
nodes (let N be the number of nodes). This vector can
be represented by an undirected graph G (V, E); where V
is the set of vertices (sensor nodes) identiﬁed by an index
i ∈ {1, · · · , N} and E is the set of edges that link each
two vertices (communication link). Let A ∈ ℜN×N be the
similarity matrix of the graph G.Each value of A is associated
to each pair of the graph nodes (i, j). The total weight of
incident edges to node i is given by dii = Pj=N
j=1 aij. The
degree matrix D ∈ ℜN×N of G is a diagonal matrix deﬁned
by D = [dij]. Finally, the Laplacian matrix of the graph is
calculated by :
L = D− 1
2 ∗ A ∗ D− 1
2
(1)
To simplify the network model, we make some assumptions
that are:
• All nodes are homogeneous and have the same capacities.
• Each node is assigned a unique identiﬁer (id) that in-
cludes the cluster identiﬁer to which the node belongs.
• The network topology remains unchanged over time.
• The BS is placed far away from the network.
In addition, we use the model of the radio hardware energy
dissipation presented in [6] and [7], and illustrated by Figure.1.
Fig. 1.
Radio energy dissipation model.
Thus, to transmit an L − bits message between two nodes
separated by a distance d, the spent energy by the radio
transmitter is given by the next equation:
ET x (L, d) =
 L ∗ Eelec + L ∗ Efs ∗ d2
if d < d0
L ∗ Eelec + L ∗ Emp ∗ d4
if d ≥ d0
(2)
and to receive this message, the spent energy by the radio
receiver is:
ERx (L, d) = L ∗ Eelec
(3)
where, Eelec is the energy consumption per bit in the trans-
mitter and receiver circuitry, Efs is the free space model’s
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

ampliﬁer energy consumption, and Ems is the multiple atten-
uation model’s ampliﬁer energy consumption. The threshold’s
value (d0) is determined by the equation (4):
d0 =
r
Efs
Ems
(4)
In addition, once a sensor node runs out its energy, it is
considered as died.
IV. KSCA-WSN DETAILS
In this section, we give details of the proposed KSCA-WSN
algorithm. The latter consists in partitioning the WSN into
a set of clusters based on spectral classiﬁcation. Besides, it
determines the CHs based on the residual energy of each node
of the network. Some other properties will be explained in the
subsections.
The spectral classiﬁcation algorithm proposed here consists
of three steps, as illustrated in the Figure 2.
A. The Pre-Processing step
First, each wireless sensor network node determines its
position by using a Global Positioning System (GPS) or other
tracking device, and transmits it to the BS in a short message.
Based on the spectral clustering principle, the BS constructs
the graph G and the similarity matrix A which represents the
network. Each value of A is associated to each pair of the
graph nodes (i, j). This value is of gaussian type and the
matrix A is given by eq.(5).
A = [aij] =

exp

Fig. 2.
Spectral clustering scheme of the KSCA-WSN approach.
as a C-H, the node with id = ((i + 1 + |Sk|) mod |Sk|) is
assigned the ﬁrst period to transmit its data.
One of the most important challenges in our approach
consists in reducing the total consumed energy of each round.
Hence, we avoid energy consumption due to synchronization
of the cluster nodes when the C-H is elected to assign the
TDMA. Indeed, this technique ensures not having collisions
between data messages. It also allows the radio components of
each non-C-H node to be disabled at any time, except during
the time it is allocated for transmitting these data. this reduces
the energy consumed by the nodes. However, the C-H must
keep its receiver in order to receive data from other nodes. In
addition, to save more energy in a wireless sensor network, we
assume that if the distance between a node and the BS is lower
than the distance between this node and its C-H. Then the node
transmits its data directly to the BS. Moreover, each node can
move in the standby mode to reduce energy consumption.
V. SIMULATIONS AND RESULTS
In this section, we present the results of the evaluation
experiments of the proposed KSCA-WSN algorithm. We used
the MATLAB software to simulate and analyze this algorithm.
Besides, we consider the radio model presented in Figure 1
and the different parameters used in our simulations are shown
in TABLE I.
TABLE I
EXPERIMENTAL SIMULATION PARAMETERS.
Parameter
value
Eelec
50nJ/bit
Efs
10pJ/bit/m2
Emp
0.0013pJ/bit/m4
Initial energy E0
0.5J
EDA
5nJ/bit/message
Area of Network
200m ∗ 200m
Sink coordination
(100m, 250m)
d0
88m
Message Size
4000bytes
Number of Nodes
500
A node that runs out of energy is considered dead and can-
not transmit or receive data. For these simulations, the energy
of a node decreases each time it sends, receives or aggregates
data according to the model radio parameters. Also, we ignore
the effect caused by the signal collision and the interference
in the wireless channel. Furthermore, each simulation result
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

shown below is the average of 100 independent experiments,
where each experiment uses a different randomly-generated
uniform topology of sensor nodes.
As illustrated in Figure 3, an example of wireless sensor
networks with N
=
500 nodes randomly distributed in a
200m∗200m area. The BS is located far away from the sensing
area (xSB = 100m ; ySB = 250m).
Fig. 3.
Distribution of wireless sensor network.
In order to evaluate the performances of the new proposed
protocol, we propose to compare it to the Spectral Classiﬁ-
cation based on Near Optimal Clustering (SCNOC) [12], the
DECSA [9] and the LEACH-C [7] algorithms. Also, we use
two metrics to analyze and compare the performances of the
protocols:
• Network lifetime: It can be deﬁned as the time elapsed
until the ﬁrst node (or the last node) in the network
depletes its energy (dies). This paper uses First Node Dies
(FND) metrics which were presented as an approach to
deﬁne lifetime of a WSN in literature.
• Energy consumption: Uniform energy consumption is
very important for network load balancing. More uniform
energy consumption, less possibility for node premature
death. And less energy consumption per round, more
network performance.
As illustrated in Figure 4, the main problem of LEACH-
C and DECSA protocols are the random selection of the
CHs. Indeed, all CHs can be located in a small region of the
network. Hence, some ordinary nodes would be out of reach.
Also, SCNOC produces 2n clusters where n is the number
of iterations; it cannot partition the network into any desired
number of clusters.
The Figure 5 presents an example of clustering for the
KSCA-WSN algorithm. We note that the network is subdi-
vided into six clusters, and the nodes are correctly distributed
over the sensing area. Also, there is no intersection between
the different clusters.
Figure 6 shows a signiﬁcant improvement for the KSCA-
WSN approach in terms of numbers of periods relating to
Fig. 4.
Illustration of the critical area in the LEACH-C clustering algorithm
with N=500 nodes
Fig. 5.
Clustering results of the KSCA-WSN algorithm with N=500 nodes.
FND. In the proposed method, FND occurs at the period 520
while it occurs at the 378 period for spectral classiﬁcation
based on Near Optimal Clustering, at 21 periods for LEACH-
C, and at 74 for DECSA protocols.
Figure 7 gives the total network remaining energy in every
transmission round. The network remaining energy decreases
more rapidly in the spectral classiﬁcation based on Near
Optimal Clustering, the LEACH-C, and the DECSA protocols
than in the KSCA-WSN algorithm.
The Figure 8 shows the effects of the node density on the
compared clustering techniques as well as on the network’s
stable regions (First Node Dead ’FND’).
As shown in Figure 8, for different values of N equal to 100,
200, 300, and 400, our algorithm presents an improvement of
performances compared to the other algorithms. It follows that
even if the node density increase the new proposed approach
still gives best results compared to the other ones.
Figure 9 shows the performances of the different compared
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 6.
Number of nodes alive over time of the compared protocols
Fig. 7.
Evolution of the remaining energy in the network when the
transmission rounds.
protocols by using different initial energies. It gives the FND
round depending on the quantity of the node initial energy.
Once more, it is shown that for different values of the energy,
the new proposed approach presents a signiﬁcant improvement
compared to the others.
We conclude that the KSCA - WSN algorithm gives a
signiﬁcant performance improvement; in terms of energy and
lifetime gains, compared to the Spectral Classiﬁcation based
on Near Optimal Clustering, the LEACH-C, and the DECSA
protocols. The best results of the KSCA-WSN approach can
be explained by the three points: (i) the proposal starts by
selecting the clusters (similar nodes) before the election of
the C-Hs. (ii) the approach considers the WSN nodes residual
energies when electing C-Hs. And (iii) a C-H is elected at any
position of the wireless sensor network.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Energy saving is an important challenging issue in a wireless
sensor network. To ensure more effective energy distribution
Fig. 8.
Impact of the node density N on the performances of the compared
algorithms
Fig. 9.
Impact of the initial energy quantity on the performances of the four
compared algorithms
and to extend the life time of a network, new and efﬁcient
energy saving scheme is developed in this paper. We have
proposed a new method of clustering, based on spectral
classiﬁcation. The latter has been widely used to solve graph
partitioning problem. In particular, we use the method of k-
ways. Thus, we start by determining similar nodes (clusters)
before selecting C-Hs. Furthermore, we take into account
the node residual energy when selecting the appropriate C-
H nodes. Indeed, simulation results show that our approach
ensures the low energy consumption and improves the network
lifetime. Promising results are obtained by several simulations,
and exceed those obtained by others algorithms.
Further works need to determine other properties to improve
both the clustering and the cluster-head election processes.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, ”A survey
on sensor networks,” Communications magazine, IEEE, vol. 40, no. 8,
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

2002, pp. 102−114.
[2] J. Al-Karaki and A. Kamal, ”Routing techniques in wireless sensor
networks: A survey,” Wireless Communications, IEEE, vol. 11, no.
6,2004, pp. 6−28.
[3] U. Von Luxburg, ”A tutorial on spectral clustering,” Statistics and
computing, vol. 17, no. 4, 2007, pp. 395−416.
[4] A. Ng, M. Jordan, Y. Weiss, ”On spectral clustering: Analysis and an
algorithm,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 2,
2002, pp. 849−856.
[5] O. Boyinbode, H. Le, and M. Takizawa, ”A survey on clustering algo-
rithms for wireless sensor networks,” International Journal of SpaceBased
and Situated Computing, vol. 1, no. 2, 2011, pp. 130−136.
[6] W. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, ”Energyefﬁcient
communication protocol for wireless microsensor networks,” in System
Sciences, 2000. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Hawaii International
Conference on, vol. 2. IEEE, 2000, p. 10.
[7] W. B. Heinzelman, A. P. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, ”An
application-speciﬁc protocol architecture for wireless microsensor net-
works,” IEEE Transactions on wireless communications, vol. 1, no. 4,
2002, pp. 660−670.
[8] S. Jerusha, K. Kulothungan, and A. Kannan, ”Location aware cluster
based routing in wireless sensor networks,” International Journal of
Computer and Communication Technology, vol. 3, no. 5, 2012, pp.
0975−7449.
[9] Z. Yong and Q. Pei, ”A energy-efﬁcient clustering routing algorithm based
on distance and residual energy for wireless sensor networks,” Procedia
Engineering, vol. 29, 2012, pp. 1882−1888.
[10] M. Ye, C. Li, G. Chen, and J. Wu, ”Eecs: an energy efﬁcient clustering
scheme in wireless sensor networks,” in Performance, Computing, and
Communications Conference, IPCCC 2005, IEEE, 2005, pp. 535−540.
[11] J.-Y. Chang and P.-H. Ju, ”An efﬁcient cluster-based power saving
scheme for wireless sensor networks,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless
Communications and Networking, vol. 2012, no. 1, 2012, pp. 172.
[12] B. Elbhiri, S. El Fkihi, R. Saadane, and D. Aboutajdine, ”Clustering in
wireless sensor networks based on near optimal bi-partitions,” in Next
Generation Internet (NGI), 2010 6th EURO-NF Conference on. IEEE,
2010, pp. 1−6.
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

