Polymer Photonic Crystal Membrane for Human Body Thermoregulation 
 
Mohamed Boutghatin, Salim Assaf, Michèle Carette, Vincent Thomy, Abdellatif Akjouj, Bahram Djafari- Rouhani, Yan 
Pennec* 
Institute of Electronic, Microelectronic and Nanotechnology (IEMN), Université de Lille 
Villeneuve d’Ascq, France 
e-mail : mohamed.boutghatin@univ-lille.fr; salim.alhajj-assaf@univ-lille.fr; michele.carette@univ-lille.fr; 
vincent.thomy@univ-lille.fr; abdellatif.akjouj@univ-lille.fr; bahram.djafari-rouhani@univ-lille.fr; *yan.pennec@univ-
lille.fr 
 
 
Abstract—We study the optical properties of a polymer 
photonic membrane to keep the human body in thermal 
comfort. We show theoretically that the periodic structuration 
of the membrane with air holes modulates the optical response 
in the Mid-Infrared range. We found that the modulation of 
the optical spectrum allows to decrease the required ambient 
temperature by about 0.5 °C to maintain the normal skin 
temperature of 34 °C. The structured membrane is flexible and 
can easily be added to usual textiles. 
Keywords-photonic membrane; Mid-Infrared; thermal comfort. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A large part of the energy consumed is used to regulate 
the temperature of residential buildings. Reducing this 
consumption will have a positive impact on the economy and 
the environment. In previous studies, the importance of 
personal 
thermoregulation 
was 
investigated 
and 
demonstrated in different ways [1][2]. Photonic crystals have 
been recently proposed to control the propagation of 
electromagnetic waves in the Mid-Infrared range for several 
applications from thermophotovoltaic systems to thermal 
textile [3]. For radiative cooling, Raphaeli et al. presented a 
metal-dielectric photonic structure, reflective in the visible 
and having high emissivity in the Mid-Infrared [4]. More 
recently, we have demonstrated the efficiency of a structured 
polymer membrane to maintain an individual thermal 
comfort in indoor rooms [5]. Our objective here is to 
demonstrate that a polymer membrane can act both as a 
sensor by the modification of its structural parameters and as 
a passive actuator by modifying its thermal properties. 
In this work, we propose to study numerically a 
polyethylene (PE) membrane drilled with air holes following 
a triangular array, as illustrated in Figure 1. The structured 
membrane is characterized by three geometrical parameters, 
the thickness (h), the diameter of the hole (D) and the period 
of the array (P). 
 
Figure 1. 3D and top-view representation of the polymer photonic 
membrane. The red dotted lines represent the elementary unit cell. 
In section II, we discuss the effect of structuration of the 
PE membrane in the Mid-IR range. In section III, we 
investigate the thermal properties of the photonic membrane 
to maintain the thermal comfort of the human body. 
II. 
OPTICAL PROPERTIES 
We performed the numerical calculation with the help of 
the Finite Element Method (FEM), considering an incident 
wave coming from the human body and launched in air 
medium normally to the photonic membrane. To simulate the 
interaction 
wave-photonic 
membrane, 
we 
used 
the 
commercial COMSOL software to solve the Maxwell 
equations. The elementary unit cell is defined Figure 1, 
where we applied the Periodic Boundary Conditions (PBC) 
along the two directions x and y to build the periodic 
membrane. We thus calculated the reflection (R) and 
transmission (T) coefficients and deducing the absorption 
coefficient (A) by the formula A = 1 – R – T. Figure 2(a) 
shows the evolution of the reflection R (black), transmission 
T (blue) and absorption A (red) in the wavelength range [5-
15 μm] for a non-structured membrane of thickness h = 4 
μm. The blue light shaded area corresponds to the human 
body radiation calculated at 34 °C following the Planck law. 
One can see that, for a thickness h = 4 μm, the transmission 
is comprised between 80% and 100% with an average 
absorption less than 10%. It means that the PE membrane is 
almost transparent in the Mid-IR. 
Figure 2 (b) reports the same calculation of the 
coefficients when the membrane is structured with the set of 
geometrical parameters: h = 4 μm, D = 5.5 μm and P = 7 μm. 
The comparison between the spectrum of the simple 
membrane (a) and the structured one (b), shows the 
occurrence of new peaks and dips between 6 and 7 μm (see 
Figure 2(c)). It means that the structuration clearly affects the 
scattering coefficients at low wavelength. The modulus of 
the calculated electric field shows that the two peaks (A and 
C) correspond to guided modes inside the membrane. With 
respect to the middle plane of the membrane, the first one 
(A) is antisymmetric while the second one (C) is symmetric. 
The peak B corresponds to a mode confined in the air hole. 
This latter gives rise to an asymmetric peak and comes from 
the interaction of the localized mode B with the incident 
wave, known as a Fano-like resonance. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
Figure 2. (a, b) Reflection (black), transmission (blue) and absorption (red) 
spectra for the (a) non structured and (b) structured PE membrane with the 
geometrical parameters: h = 4 µm, D = 5.5 µm and P = 7 µm. (c) 
Magnification of the reflection curve in (b) in the wavelength range [5-7] 
µm. Human body radiation at 34 °C is indicated by the shaded region. (d) 
Snapshots of the modulus of the electric field for the three peaks of 
reflection A, B and C.  
In order to show the effect of geometrical parameters on 
the photonic membrane spectrum (that could happen when 
using active polymer reacting to parameters, such as 
temperature or humidity), we homothetically increase the 
three parameters h, D and P. Figure 3 shows the spectrum for 
the set of geometrical parameters: h = 5.1 μm, D = 7.1 μm 
and P = 9 μm.  
 
Figure 3. Reflection (black), transmission (blue) and absorption (red) spectra 
for the structured PE membrane with the geometrical parameters: h = 5.1 
μm, D = 7.1 μm and P = 9 μm. 
One can see that the photonic effect has been shifted to 
higher wavelengths. With these chosen parameters, peaks 
and dips now occur in the vicinity of 9 μm. Therefore, a 
variation of the geometrical parameters offers the possibility 
to span the full range of radiation of the human body at the 
skin temperature 34 °C. 
III. 
THERMAL PROPERTIES 
We then investigated the thermal properties of the 
photonic membrane, considering an unidimensional heat 
model previously developed [2]. The two volumes of control 
in our case are: the human body standing and relaxed and the 
PE membrane. The emissivity of the human body and 
environment is assumed to be equal to the unity. In the 
thermal model, we have considered all conduction, 
convection and radiative heat flows between the human body 
and the indoor room, through the photonic membrane. The 
resolution of the thermal equations leads to a balance where 
the temperatures depend on the scattering coefficients 
calculated in the previous part. 
To estimate the efficiency of the photonic membranes we 
proceed to the calculation of the required ambient 
temperature to achieve the skin temperature of 34 °C. This 
latter is considered as a reference for a comfort feeling of the 
human body. 
Figure 4 represents the evolution of the required ambient 
temperature as a function of different set of parameters of the 
photonic membrane. The blue curve corresponds to the 
ambient temperature for a non-structured membrane, drawn 
as a reference. For the structured one, we have considered 
different scaling factors, taking from reference [5]: α1 (h = 4 
μm, D = 5.5 μm, P = 7 μm), α3 (5.1 μm, 7.1 μm, 9 μm), α5 
(6.3 μm,8.6 μm, 11 μm), α7 (7.4 μm, 10.2 μm, 13 μm) and α9 
(8.6 μm, 11.8 μm, 15 μm). Figure 4 shows that for the non-
structured membrane with a thickness of 8.6 μm (α9), the 
comfort skin temperature of 34 °C can be reached with an 
ambient temperature of 25.5 °C.  
 
Figure 4. Evolution of the required ambient temperature to achieve 34 °C as 
a function of geometrical parameters for a skin covered with a non-
structured (blue) and structured (red) membrane. 
On the other hand, when the same membrane is drilled with 
air holes of diameters 11.8μm and a period of 15 μm, an 
ambient temperature of 25 °C is sufficient to achieve the skin 
comfort. It means that the latter structured membrane 
minimizes the necessary external temperature to maintain the 
human body in thermal comfort by almost 0.5 °C. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In conclusion, we have demonstrated theoretically that a 
change in the structuration parameters of a polymer 
membrane can modulate the optical coefficient in the Mid-IR 
range. We show that, with an appropriate design of polymer 
photonic membrane, we can efficiently modulate the thermal 
radiation emitted from the human body. Compared to a 
regular PE textile, the photonic membrane maintains the 
thermal comfort of the human body with a lower ambient 
temperature of 0.5 °C. In addition, we seek to study photonic 
membranes based on active polymer, sensitive to ambient 
temperature, to study a textile membrane which acts both as 
a sensor and a passive actuator. 
A 
B 
C 
A 
B 
C 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
 
(d) 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the European Interreg 
project ‘Photonitex’. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P.-C. Hsu et al., “Personal Thermal Management by Metallic 
Nanowire-Coated Textile”, Nano Lett., vol. 15, no 1, p. 
365‑371, janv. 2015, doi: 10.1021/nl5036572.J. Clerk 
Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, 3rd ed., 
vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon, pp. 68–73, 1892, 
[2] J. K. Tong, X. Huang, S. V. Boriskina, J. Loomis, Y. Xu, and 
G. Chen, “Infrared-Transparent Visible-Opaque Fabrics for 
Wearable Personal Thermal Management”, ACS Photonics, 
vol. 
2, 
no 
6, 
pp. 
769‑778, 
juin 
2015, 
doi: 
10.1021/acsphotonics.5b00140. 
[3] W. Li and S. Fan, “Nanophotonic control of thermal radiation 
for energy applications [Invited]”, Opt. Express, vol. 26, no 
12, p. 15995, juin 2018, doi: 10.1364/OE.26.015995. 
[4] E. Rephaeli, A. Raman, and S. Fan, “Ultrabroadband Photonic 
Structures To Achieve High-Performance Daytime Radiative 
Cooling”, Nano Lett., vol. 13, no 4, pp. 1457‑1461, avr. 2013, 
doi: 10.1021/nl4004283. 
[5] S. Assaf et al., “Polymer photonic crystal membrane for 
thermo-regulating textile”, Sci Rep, vol. 10, no 1, pp. 9855, 
déc. 2020, doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-66731-1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

