Impact of the Packaging on the Static Behavior of Piezoresitive Pressure Sensor 
Dedicated to the Monitoring of Blast Waves 
Bilel Achour, Lilian Marty, Kevin Sanchez, Samuel Charlot, Xavier Dollat, Benjamin Reig, Laurent Bouscayrol, 
Aurélie Lecestre, Anthony Coustou, André Ferrand, Hervé Aubert, Patrick Pons 
CNRS-LAAS, Toulouse University 
Toulouse, France 
 
E-mails: bachour@laas.fr, lmarty@laas.fr, ksanchezba@laas.fr, scharlot@laas.fr, xavier.dollat@laas.fr, breig@laas.fr, 
laurent.bouscayrol@laas.fr, alecestre@laas.fr, acoustou@laas.fr, andre.ferrand@insa-toulouse.fr, aubert@laas.fr, 
ppons@laas.fr 
 
 
 
Abstract— The packaging is an important step, allowing to 
transform the transducer chip into a sensor. This step is 
necessary to perform the sensor characterization in a real 
environment, while minimizing the impact of the influence 
parameters on the sensor response. This study concerns the 
impact of the packaging on the static response of a miniature 
pressure sensor dedicated to the monitoring of blast waves. 
The transducer is based on 5 µm - thick rectangular (55 µm x 
135 µm) silicon membrane and piezoresistive gauges. Pressure 
sensitivity measurements are performed using stressed and 
non-stressed sensor’s holder configurations. Measurements 
results indicate that the pressure sensitivity is doubled when 
the sensor’s holder is stressed. Finite Element Method 
simulations using COMSOL Multiphysics software show here 
that this result originates from the deformation of the sensor’s 
holder, which leads to the deflection of the thin silicon 
membrane. 
Keywords – blast waves; pressure sensor; packaging; 
mechanical stress; Finite Element Method. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Shock waves are characterized by the propagation of a 
pressure discontinuity at supersonic speeds, which makes 
difficult the measurement of the overpressure peak [1]. For 
near-field experiments, the sensor’s bandwidth required to 
ensure the accurate measurement of the overpressure is 
higher than 1 MHz [2]. To achieve such large bandwidths, 
the fundamental mechanical resonant frequency of pressure 
sensors must be far above 1 MHz (typically > 10 MHz). 
However, 
the 
fundamental 
mechanical 
resonant 
frequency does not exceed a few MHz for commercial 
sensors dedicated to the monitoring of shock waves. To 
achieve higher mechanical resonant frequencies, studies 
focused on the design and fabrication of sensors using silicon 
or silicon dioxide micro-membranes with a lateral dimension 
of less than 100 µm and a thickness of a few microns [3]-[6]. 
However, the significant reduction of the membrane 
dimensions results in a very low sensitivity of the membrane 
deflection to applied pressure (typically, a few nm/bar). The 
measurement of such very small deflections is possible either 
from optical transduction [3]-[5], or by using strain gauges 
[6]. But the pressure sensor can be subjected to the 
deformation of its packaging, especially during dynamic 
characterizations [7]. Studies on high-bandwidth pressure 
sensors, published in open scientific Literature, generally do 
not address the impact of such deformation on sensor 
performances, whereas the experimental characterization of 
the sensors shows instabilities on the sensor’s response after 
the passage of the shock wave front [3]-[6]. 
The work reported here aims to understand the impact of 
the packaging on the static response of piezoresistive 
pressure sensors dedicated to the monitoring of aerial shock 
waves. The obtained results will help us for the future design 
of 
optimized 
packaging 
dedicated 
to 
dynamic 
characterization of such sensors. 
The paper is organised as follows. Section II is dedicated 
to the description of the pressure sensor, and Section III 
presents the experimental setup used for the static 
characterisation of the sensors. Measurement results are 
reported and analysed in Section IV. Mechanical simulation 
results are presented and discussed in Section V. Finally, the 
conclusion and perspectives of this work are drawn in 
Section VI. 
II. 
PRESSURE SENSOR DESCRIPTION 
The sensor is based on a rectangular silicon micro-
membrane with 4 gauges located near its centre and 
connected in a Wheatstone bridge configuration (Figure 1). 
The manufacturing process of the sensor is detailed in [7]. 
The only difference with the design reported in [7] is the use 
of a Silicon-On-Insulator (SOI) substrate with 1 µm - thick 
buried silicon dioxide instead of a thickness of 2 µm. The 
main changes in the design relate to (see Figure 2): (a) lower 
access resistances to the Wheatstone bridge by defining the 
gauge length (P+) by the distance between the heavily doped 
areas (P++), (b) larger gauge size (2 µm × 10 µm instead of  
1 µm × 5 µm) in order to reduce the impact of technological 
inaccuracies in the fabrication process, and finally (c) larger 
lateral dimensions of the membrane (55 µm × 135 µm 
instead of 40 µm × 100 µm) to compensate for larger gauge.  
15
Copyright (c) The Government of CNRS, 2022. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
Figure 1. (a) Top view of the Wheatstone bridge reported on the membrane 
surface, (b) Cross sectional view of the transducer.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Top view of the mask used for the technological fabrication 
process (Purple / Green: Al / P++ interconnection, Orange: P+ Gauge) 
The 
theoretical 
fundamental 
mechanical 
resonant 
frequency F0 of the membrane is about 10 MHz, that is, 
twice as low as the frequency reported in [7] but about 10 
times higher than the fundamental resonant frequency of 
commercial sensors. 
 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP FOR THE STATIC PRESSURE 
CALIBRATION 
The setup used for the static calibration of pressure 
sensors is shown in Figure 3. The 4 mm - square silicon chip 
is glued on a 2.4 mm - thick stainless-steel holder using the 
thermosetting epoxy (Epotek-H70E) that is annealed for 90 
minutes at 80°C. The device is then inserted into an airtight 
Static Pressure Box (SPB) connected to a pressure regulator 
(MENSOR APC600), which delivers a controlled relative 
pressure Pr (Pr = Pabsolute - Patmosphere). The pressure stability 
after regulation is  ± 1 mbar. The sensor power supply  
(Va = 960 mV ± 5 mV) is provided by the ELC- AL991S 
voltage generator. The differential output voltage Vs  
(Vs = V2 - V1) of the sensor is measured by using the 
Keithley-2000 multimeter with a resolution of 0.1 µV.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Experimental setup for the static pressure calibration of the sensor. 
(SPB: Sensor Pressure Box) 
 
 
16
Copyright (c) The Government of CNRS, 2022. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Two configurations are considered here to characterize 
the sensor: 
i. Configuration #S: the sensor’s holder is screwed onto 
the polymer (Derlin®) SPB base (Figure 4). The 
airtightness of the SPB is ensured by an O-ring 
(thickness φR = 2370 µm) embedded in the  
1860 µm - depth groove. Before tightening process, the 
height of the O-ring protruding from the groove is 
therefore of 510 µm. The tightening of the screws is 
controlled by means of a 100 µm - thick calibrated 
metal wedge. The crushing of the O-ring is thus  
∆φR ≅ 410 µm (i.e. 17% of the initial thickness).  
ii. Configuration #F: the sensor’s holder is separated from 
the SPB base in order to reduce the stresses transferred 
to the sensor’s holder (Figure 5). The airtightness of the 
SPB is then ensured by a holder without sensor, whose 
tightening is not controlled. The electrical connection 
between the two holders is achieved by using wires of 
about 5 cm long (the upper end is fitted with a female 
pin). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Configuration #S for the characterization of the sensor. 
(SPB: Sensor Pressure Box) 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Configuration #F for the characterization of the sensor. 
(SPB: Sensor Pressure Box) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For both configurations #S and #F, the sensor pressure 
calibration is performed after a stabilisation phase, which 
takes at least 3 hours after the sensor placement inside the 
SPB. This phase is performed at atmospheric pressure and 
allows the mechanical relaxation of the sensor due to the 
stresses generated in holder. Next, the measurement of the 
voltage Vs is performed with increasing pressures, from the 
atmospheric pressure Patm to a relative pressure Pr of 5 bar, 
with a step of 1 bar. The voltage Vs is measured about 2 
minutes after the pressure stabilisation phase in order to 
achieve a good stability on Vs (± 10 µV). The voltage 
measurement for decreasing pressure is performed a few 
minutes after the first phase for which the pressure increases. 
 
IV. 
MEASUREMENT OF THE SENSOR RESPONSE TO A 
STATIC PRESSURE 
In Figure 6 to Figure 8 and Table I are displayed the 
measurement results for the two configurations (#S and #F) 
defined in Section III.  
 
 
 
Figure 6. Sensor response in the configuration #S (Stressed holder). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Sensor response in configuration #F (Holder without stress). 
 
17
Copyright (c) The Government of CNRS, 2022. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
Figure 8. Comparison of the sensor responses in both configurations. The 
voltage variation ∆Vs is normalized by the voltage Vs obtained before 
applying the increasing pressure. 
 
TABLE I.  
CHARACTERISITICS OF THE SENSOR RESPONSES 
 
 
Configuration #S 
(Stressed holder) 
Configuration #F 
(Free holder) 
Offset  
(Before applying the 
increasing pressure) 
- 10.65 mV/V 
- 10.42 mV/V 
Offset  
(After applying the 
decreasing pressure) 
- 10.21 mV/V 
- 10.43 mV/V 
Pressure sensitivity Sp 
(Increasing pressure) 
1782 µV/V/bar 
799 µV/V/bar 
Pressure sensitivity Sp 
(Decreasing pressure) 
1703 µV/V/bar 
816 µV/V/bar 
 
 
When 
the 
sensor’s 
holder 
is 
not 
constrained 
(configuration #F), the magnitude of the pressure hysteresis 
is 
lower 
than 
the 
measurement 
accuracy  
(< 10 µV/V) and the pressure sensitivity Sp is between  
799 µV/V/bar (for increasing pressure) and 816 µV/V/bar 
(for decreasing pressure). When the sensor’s holder is 
constrained (configuration #S), the measurement results are 
less repeatable with a magnitude of the pressure hysteresis of 
440 µV/V and a pressure sensitivity Sp ranging from  
1782 µV/V/bar (for increasing pressure) to 1703 µV/V/bar 
(for decreasing pressure). This lower repeatability is 
probably related to partial stress relaxation in the sensor’s 
holder during the pressure cycle. The stresses in the sensor’s 
holder modify significantly the pressure sensitivity of the 
sensor (by a factor higher than 2). 
 
 
 
 
 
V. 
SIMULATION OF THE SENSOR RESPONSE TO A STATIC 
PRESSURE 
In order to identify the origin of the large increase of the 
sensor’s pressure sensitivity when the holder is constrained, 
mechanical simulations are performed by using COMSOL 
Multiphysics software (Finite Element Method) (Figure 9 
and Figure 10). The 4 mm - square Silicon-Glass sensor chip 
described in Figure 1 is connected to the elliptical-shaped 
metallic holder with a 100 µm - thick glue (Young's modulus 
8 GPa). We assume that the center of the metallic holder and 
membrane coincide and that the axis of the screws is along 
the membrane length. The O-ring (in blue in Figure 10) is 
modelled as a spring whose mechanical stiffness KS is 
estimated at 174 N/mm from the measurement of the O-ring 
crushing (between 30 µm and 270 µm) for a given mass. The 
tightening force FT of the screw is modelled by a force 
applied along the edge (in green in Figure 10) and is adjusted 
to obtain the desired crushing of the O-ring.  
 
 
 
Figure 9. Cross section view of the device used for the simulation model. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. COMSOL 3D view of the half-simulated device. The membrane 
length is along x axis. 
 
18
Copyright (c) The Government of CNRS, 2022. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The pressure response of the device is simulated for four 
different cases, corresponding to different mechanical 
stresses on the sensor’s holder (Figure 11). The case #1 
corresponds to configuration #F, in which the sensor’s 
holder is not subjected to a mechanical stress, as the screw 
tightening force is zero and the pressure is identical at both 
sides of the sensor’s holder. The case #2 is associated with 
the configuration #S, in which the sensor’s holder is 
subjected to two types of stresses that deform it, that is, (a) 
the differential pressure applied on the central part of the 
sensor’s holder (inside the O-ring) and, (b) the screw 
tightening force. The cases #3 and #4 allow isolating 
respectively the effect of the differential pressure and the 
screw tightening force on the deformation of the sensor’s 
holder (in case #3, the pressure is not applied to the 
membrane surface). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Description of the four studied simulation cases. 
 
 
The simulations are performed with PE = 1 bar absolute 
and PE = 2 bar absolute. Table II shows the results obtained 
for the stress values at the centre of the membrane and at its 
surface. The stress extracted is the differential stress  
σxx - σyy, that is the stress along the length of the membrane 
minus the stress along its width. The pressure sensitivity Sp 
of the sensor is, as a first approximation, directly 
proportional to Sσ defined by the relationship (1). 
 
Sσ = (σxx - σyy)PE = 2 bar - (σxx - σyy)PE = 1 bar 
(1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE II.  
SIMULATED STRESS ON THE SURFACE OF THE 
MEMBRANE AND FOR X = Y = 0 (CENTER OF THE MEMBRANE) 
 
σxx - σyy 
PE = 1 bar PE = 2 bar 
Sσ 
Case #1 
(Configuration #F) 
2.86 MPa 
5.72 MPa  2.86 MPa/bar 
Case #2 
(Configuration #S) 14.73 MPa 18.47 MPa 3.74 MPa/bar 
Case #3 
0 
0.86 MPa 
0.86 MPa/bar 
Case #4 
14.73 MPa 17.59 MPa 2.86 MPa/bar 
 
The case #1 provides the reference sensitivity of  
2.86 MPa/bar, which corresponds to the sensitivity obtained 
when only the membrane deforms with the applied pressure. 
In this case, the offset (PE = 1 bar absolute) is not zero since 
there is vacuum in the cavity below the membrane. When we 
add to case #1 the tightening of the screws that deform the 
sensor’s holder (case #4), the offset increases significantly  
(≅ + 12 MPa) but the pressure sensitivity is unchanged. The 
increase in pressure sensitivity (case #2) of 0.88 MPa/bar  
(≅ +30%) comes from the deformation of the sensor’s holder 
(case #3), which causes the deformation of the Silicon-Glass 
chip and in turn, of the membrane. These results are 
consistent with the measurement results, even if the 
simulated increase magnitude is much lower than the 
measured magnitude (30% instead of more than 100 %). 
More Multiphysics simulations would be necessary to 
identify the origin of this discrepancy. 
Preliminary characterization is performed by increasing 
the thickness of the glass substrate (from 0.5 mm to 2 mm) 
in order to enhance the mechanical stiffness of the Silicon-
Glass chip. Pressure measurements show an increase in 
pressure sensitivity of only 20% when moving from the 
configuration #F to the configuration #S. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The development of new packaged sensors for the 
monitoring of blast waves is challenging. We have 
previously developed a transducer using silicon micro-
membrane and piezoresistive gauges to reduce the reaction 
time compared to one achieved by commercial sensors and 
we have experimentally validated the dynamic behaviour of 
sensor using a shock tube. However, we identified 
undesirable effects, that lead to large drift after few 
microseconds.  
In order to understand the impact of the packaging in the 
pressure sensor performances, we studied the sensor 
responses under static pressure and for various packaging 
configurations. Measurement results have shown that the 
sensor sensitivity to pressure is increased by more than 
100% when the sensor’s holder is deformed by applied 
pressure. Simulation results obtained from COMSOL 
software confirmed this effect (even if the simulated 
magnitude is not of 100%, but of 30% only) and indicated 
that it is related to the holder mechanical deformation 
19
Copyright (c) The Government of CNRS, 2022. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

transferred to the silicon-glass die and to the membrane. The 
effect is large as the membrane deflection under pressure is 
very low (few nm/ bar). Preliminary characterizations with 
thicker glass substrate have shown a reduction by a factor 
six of the effect of holder deformation on the sensor 
pressure sensitivity. 
In future works, the COMSOL model will be used to 
reduce the impact of the packaging on the dynamic 
responses of the pressure sensors to blast waves. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially funded by CEA-DAM, through 
the LICUR (joint Laboratory between CEA-DAM and 
CNRS-LAAS) and by Occitanie Region (France) and was 
supported by LAAS-CNRS micro and nanotechnologies 
platform members of the French RENATECH network. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Walter, “Air-blast and the Science of Dynamic Pressure 
Measurements,” Sound and Vibration, vol. 38, no. 12,  
pp. 10-17, December 2004. 
[2] M. Chalnot, P. Pons, and H. Aubert, “Frequency Bandwidth 
of Pressure Sensors Dedicated to Blast Experiments,” 
Sensors, 
vol. 
22, 
no. 
10, 
p. 
3790, 
May 
2022, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/s22103790.  
[3] N. Wu et al., “Low-cost rapid miniature optical pressure 
sensors for blast wave measurements,” Optic Express, vol. 19, 
no. 11, p. 10797, May 2011, doi: 10.1364/OE.19.010797.  
[4] X. Zou et al., “Ultrafast Fabry–Perot fiber-optic pressure 
sensors for multimedia blast event measurements,” Applied 
Optics, vol. 52, no. 6, p. 124820, February 2013, doi: 
10.1364/AO.52.001248.  
[5] C. Chu, J. Wang, and J. Qiu, “Miniature High-Frequency 
Response, High-Pressure-Range Dynamic Pressure Sensor 
Based on All-Silica Optical Fiber Fabry-Perot Cavity,”  IEEE 
Sensors Journal, vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 13296–13304, June 2021, 
doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2021.3068456.  
[6] J. Riondet et al., “Shock Tube Characterization of Air Blast 
Pressure Sensor Based on Ultra-Miniature Silicon Membrane 
and Piezoresistive Gauges,” Micro and Nano Engineering 
Conference, Turin, Italy, Sep. 2021. 
[7] K. Sanchez et al., “Design, Fabrication and Characterization 
of a Novel Piezoresistive Pressure Sensor for Blast Waves 
Monitoring,” International Conference on Sensor Device 
Technologies and Applications, Athens, Greece, Nov. 2021, 
pp. 47–52, ISSN: 2308-3514, ISBN: 978-1-61208-918-8. 
 
 
 
20
Copyright (c) The Government of CNRS, 2022. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-006-3
SENSORDEVICES 2022 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

