Early-Warning System for Machine Failures:  
Self-Sufficient Radio Sensor Systems for Wireless Condition Monitoring 
Michael Niedermayer,  
Eduard Armbruster 
Fraunhofer Institute for  
Reliability and Microintegration,  
Berlin, Germany 
niedermayer@izm.fraunhofer.de 
Rainer Wirth, 
Axel Haubold 
GfM Gesellschaft für 
Maschinendiagnose mbH  
Berlin, Germany 
wirth@maschinendiagnose.de 
Stephan Benecke,  
Klaus Dieter Lang 
BeCap 
Technical University of Berlin  
Berlin, Germany 
tib421@tu-berlin.de
 
 
Abstract — European machinery products are in great demand 
due to their reliability. This competitive advantage can be 
further extended by using wireless sensor network for 
condition monitoring. Radio sensor nodes constantly monitor 
the aging of machines and detect faults before the machine 
fails. This means that time-consuming and expensive downtime 
can be avoided. A sensor network for the condition monitoring 
of industrial machines has been developed in the publicly 
funded project ECoMoS. The implemented sensor nodes are 
able to predict machine failures until 3 months in advance. 
Keywords-Energy 
Harvesting; 
Condition 
Monitoring; 
Machine Diagnosis; Wireless Sensor Networks 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Systems for condition monitoring should ideally identify 
malfunctions before the machine fails. Until now, this kind 
of sensor has only been used with high-end drives for cost 
reasons. The situation is changing with the availability of 
inexpensive, self-powered wireless solutions because the 
burden of such condition monitoring systems drops signify-
cantly. This is especially true for upgrading existing pro-
duction equipment whose unplanned downtime causes consi-
derable costs. Furthermore, wireless sensor networks open 
up new opportunities by distributed data acquisition and 
communication. This offers the chance to revolutionize 
measurement technology in the coming years. In the joint 
project 'Energy-autarkic Condition Monitoring System' 
(ECoMoS), the application field of self-powered wireless 
sensor technology has been expanded to the wireless condi-
tion monitoring of industrial plants. A lot of research has 
been done to prepare this development. The preceding 
research activities focused on the implementation of sensor 
nodes with small size [1,2] at minimal costs [3,4] for 
industrial enviroments [5,6].  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: first, we 
discuss relevant aspects of vibration diagnosis in Section 2. 
Afterwards, prototypes for energy harvesting are presented in 
Section 3. Section 4 describes several implementation details 
of the wireless sensor network. Finally, Section 6 concludes 
our work and gives a perspective on our future work. 
II. 
DETECTING MACHINE DAMAGES IN ADVANCE 
Several measurement categories can be checked for the 
condition monitoring of machines. Temperature and vibra-
tion signals are most frequently analyzed to identify 
malfunctions of machines. Here, we focus on condition 
monitoring based on acceleration sensors which measure 
vibrations. The vibration diagnosis has been established for 
early prediction of machine breakdowns. The corresponding 
signal analysis methods are usually based on spectral 
analyses of the occurring mechanical vibrations. Two types 
of machine diagnosis can be distinguished regarding the 
accuracy. One variant, the basic diagnosis utilizes methods 
of simple characteristics. The second variant of condition 
monitoring applies an in-depth diagnosis to predict machine 
failures several weeks in advance. The higher accuracy can 
be achieved with the help of diagnostic algorithms, which 
use knowledge of kinematic drive models in addition to the 
analysis of vibration measurements. Condition monitoring 
systems for in-depth diagnosis are based on wired accele-
ration sensors, which are connected with diagnosis core 
units. There are only several wireless system solutions to run 
the less precise base diagnosis of machines. 
The concept in the joint project ECoMoS (Fig. 1) is 
based on wireless condition monitoring using wireless sensor 
nodes [7]. The individual sensor nodes have the intelligence 
to carry out an in-depth diagnosis directly at the measuring 
position. This makes it possible to predict, for example, 
bearing damage by up to three months in advance. The 
sensor systems can be configured via radio transceiver and 
regularly send the machine state to a remote base station. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Condition monitoring of plants by wireless sensor networks 
The complexity of the in-depth diagnosis drives the 
system requirements for the wireless sensor nodes to a large 
extent [8]. The vibration signal needs to be sampled at a 
frequency of 10 kilohertz and then digitized. At the same 
225
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

time, it is required to check whether the engine speed has 
remained within a tolerable range of about 0.5 percent during 
the measurement interval. If the change in rotational speed is 
greater, the measurement will be discarded. Since the measu-
rement of the engine speed is performed by a different sen-
sor, the speed values are transmitted before and after the 
vibration measurement of the wireless sensor node. 
The spectrum of measured time signal has to be calcula-
ted by a fast Fourier transform (FFT, [9]) to later derive the 
envelope spectrum of the vibration signal. The abscissa of 
the spectrum can be replaced from sampling frequency to the 
fraction of the basic rotational speed to get the order spec-
trum. The critical multiples of the basic rotational speed are 
identified by a significance analysis. In a further step, it is 
checked whether these coincide with typical damage pat-
terns. If errors are detected, e.g., irregularity on the inner ring 
of the roller bearing SKF 6309, the results of the diagnosis 
are transmitted in the form of feature vectors, comprising 
error code, kinematic frequency, significance level, and 
magnitude. 
For the implementation of wireless sensor nodes that can 
perform this type of machine diagnostics directly at the 
measuring position, different circuit designs were evaluated 
regarding their energy efficiency. Some Digital Signal 
Processors (DSP) were capable of performing the algorithms 
for in-depth diagnosis more energy-efficiently than 16-bit 
microcontrollers, e.g., MSP430 from Texas Instruments, or 
32-bit microcontrollers, e.g., AVR32 from Atmel. Hence the 
power consumption of the processor types could be 
compared for a number of FFT cycles with 1024 samples at a 
clock frequency of 1 MHz (Fig. 2). While the DSP based 
system architectures require significantly higher peak 
currents, the execution time is considerably shorter. This 
results from the special hardware support for filters and FFT 
calculations. 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
DSP
TI 5509
MCU 16bit
MSP 430
MCU 32bit
AVR 32
DSP
TI 5505
 µW/MHz
 kCycles/FFT
 x10µWs/FFT
 
Figure 2.  Comparison of different system architectures [10] 
The analysis of analog circuit elements for data 
acquisition showed that the use of a DSP system architecture 
is the best solution to minimize the power consumption 
because the data from the acceleration sensor can be 
digitized immediately while the necessary filtering and 
scaling is left to the DSP. Another advantage of this 
approach is the increased flexibility in the evaluation of the 
measurement. It is thus possible to generate customized re-
ports for specific measurement positions by parameterization 
with moderate effort. Fig. 3 summarizes the system 
architecture of the ECoMoS sensor nodes. 
 
Energy Harvester
(Thermo, 
Vibration)
Charging Circuit
(Step Up)
32768Hz
Energy Storage
(Supercap)
Radio 
868 MHz
Flash
Program 
Memory
A/D Converter
incl. Filter
Charge 
Amplifier
Piezo 
Acceleration 
Sensor
Voltage
Conditioning
(Step Down)
+1.8V
+1.05V
on 
off
DSP
SPI
 
Figure 3.  System architecture of the radio sensor nodes [10] 
The selection of the appropriate sensor depended on accu-
racy of the measurement range, size, supply voltage, and 
power consumption. It was found that a piezoelectric 
acceleration sensor from IMI Sensors with charge output 
provides the preferred properties for the target application. 
Thus, a charge amplifier has been added to the input stage 
on the sensor node. This makes it possible to sample the 
machine vibrations with minimal energy consumption. 
Furthermore, the duration of the transient can be consi-
derably shortened by a special discharge stage. This would 
not be possible for sensors with integrated amplifier. 
III. 
ELECTRIC ENERGY FROM VIBRATIONS AND 
TEMPERATURE DIFFERENCES 
In addition to precise sensor, efficient data processing, 
and wireless connectivity, the power supply belongs to the 
key components for the development of maintenance-free 
wireless sensor nodes. The operating time of the wireless 
sensor nodes with batteries – depending on the duty cycle of 
the in-depth diagnoses – can reach several years by applica-
tion of low-power components in combination with an 
optimized power management. However, there are several 
concerns 
regarding 
battery-powered 
wireless 
sensors 
especially in industrial environments. The users prefer solu-
tions energy harvesting whenever possible. While solar cells 
can only be used in very clean industrial surroundings with 
little dust, thermal generators and vibration transducer pro-
vide a good way to convert the energy from the environment. 
This eliminates any effort for battery replacement and 
increases the operational reliability. 
There are many different types of vibrations, which can 
be used for powering wireless sensor nodes in industrial 
environments. However, rigid structures should be chosen as 
measurement position for in-depth diagnosis of machines. 
This improves the precision of the diagnosis results but the 
magnitudes of vibrations on these locations are typically 
below 2m/s² (Fig. 4). 
226
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 4.  Exemplary acceleration spectrum of a typical drive 
Most commercial vibration transducers are designed for a 
single resonance frequency between 50 and 120 Hertz. This 
means that such a narrowband converter cannot be used on 
each machine, since the efficiency massively decreases 
whenever the vibrations are not in the vicinity of the reso-
nance frequency. 
 
Figure 5.  Design of a broadbane vibration transducer by stacking  
piezo elements [10] 
A broadband vibration transducer (Fig. 5) has been 
developed in the ECoMoS project by skillful stacking 
piezoelements. The first prototypes of the vibration energy 
converter (Fig. 6) were tested with a tunable Shaker. It was 
found that the vibrations in the range of 300 to 800 Hertz 
provided enough energy to supply the radio sensor 
electronics. Such broadband transducers can be used more 
universally. 
Significant temperature differences can often be found in 
industrial plants. Different drives have been examined under 
operational 
conditions 
regarding 
their 
temperature 
distribution (Fig. 7a) to develop very compact wireless 
sensor nodes with integrated thermal converter. It was 
considered what temperature differences occur directly on 
the thermocouple for typical measuring points by using a 
special test setup consisting of a reference heat sink and 
thermal converters with embedded temperature sensor. A 
temperature difference of only 3 ° C at the thermocouple was 
required to deliver enough energy for the power 
consumption of wireless sensor nodes for condition moni-
toring. 
a) 
  b) 
 
Figure 6.  a) Implemented prototype of the vibration harvester,  
 
      b) Vibration transducer characterisation, source: Baumer 
a) 
  b) 
 
Figure 7.  a) Temperature distribution during machine operations,  
b) Simulation of temperature distribution  
The knowledge of the temperature distribution at the 
measuring points was applied in simulations to evaluate 
different assembly concepts (Fig. 7b). A robust housing with 
a diameter of only 4 centimeters was designed so that the hot 
and cold sides of the thermal converter are coupled 
particularly well with the industrial environment, without 
reducing the accuracy of the high-precision acceleration 
sensor (Fig. 8). 
a) 
  b) 
 
Figure 8.  a) Assembly concept of the radio sensor system with integrated 
 
thermal energy havesting, b) Implemented prototype 
227
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

A design tool has been implemented to facilitate the 
future development of wireless sensor systems with 
embedded energy harvesting. This software provides the 
system specific parameters from component library. The 
parameters can be adjusted by the hardware designer to 
layout the power supply of self-powered wireless sensor 
nodes. After selection of the conversion method, the type of 
physical size of the harvesting unit can be suitably 
configured. In addition, parasitic coupling effects are taken 
into account. In the example of the thermal converter, this 
applies to additional layers, (e.g., thermal paste and moun-
ting adapter), which have to be taken into account for their 
impact on the energy efficiency (Fig. 9). 
 
  
Figure 9.  Selection of the energy converter and configuration 
Following the energy conversion chain, the parameters 
for the voltage conditioning and energy storage can be 
queried. It is possible to select predefined voltage 
transformers. During simulation the input or output 
impedance at the operation point as well as the converted 
output voltage or current level are considered together with 
non-ideal effects of energy buffers such as leakage current 
and a parasitic internal resistance. In the input mask for 
configuration of the load, the clock frequency of the 
processor is to be set in order to determine the computation 
time for the individual algorithms. This approach allows for 
a first estimation of the energy performance of the wireless 
sensor node to determine the size of the power conversion 
stage and energy buffer so that particularly compact sizes 
can be realized inexpensively. The use of System-C for 
system modeling is also planned to investigate more 
complex algorithms in terms of energy requirements. 
IV. 
INSTALLATION AND MAINTANENCE PER WIRELESS 
NETWORK 
In production halls, there are many sources of 
interference that can affect radio transmission considerably. 
In the early days of radio communication, many problems 
regarding robustness of radio links occur in the industrial 
sector. This led initially to a high skepticism about wireless 
sensors, because the robustness of data transmission in 
industrial environments is particularly important. Mean-
while, there are various solutions to ensure robust radio 
communications. In particular, procedures at the protocol 
level of digital radio communication can reconstruct the 
correct data even when data erasure of multiple bits occurs. 
Therefore, the problem of robust data transmission is well 
under control in most cases, although the increase in energy 
efficiency of robust radio communication still remains an 
important research topic. An energy-efficient TDMA-based 
MAC protocol [11] has been applied. In this single-hop 
network, all sensor nodes receive a time schedule about the 
next communication interval from the base station. 
The installation of wireless sensors can now be done 
quite comfortably. After attaching to a machine, sensor 
nodes identify existing wireless networks and log on. The 
operating parameters of the sensor systems, such as duty 
cycles, can be adjusted via the radio base station. A software 
update via radio link is also possible if new damage patterns 
or changes in communication protocols require reprograming 
the wireless sensor nodes. Thus, the user does not need to 
trigger a time-consuming firmware update for each 
individual sensor nodes via cable. Such a wired repro-
graming of sensor node can be very expensive especially for 
measurement positions, which are hard to reach. 
For the preparation of the field tests, the prototypes were 
first tested in the laboratory by a tunable Shaker, which 
simulated the vibration profile of broken machines. The 
direct field trials were carried out in the harsh environment 
of a paper mill under realistic operating conditions in order 
to obtain more meaningful test results. 
 
Figure 10.  Paper plant in Spremberg [10] 
On the site of the former gas conglomerate, Schwarze 
Pumpe, between Cottbus and Dresden, where earlier lignite 
was refined, paper production has been in full swing since 
April 2005. 170 million euros were invested to build the 
Spremberg mill. With a capacity of 330,000 tons of base 
paper per year, corrugated board is produced from 100 
percent recycled paper. The preparation of a 1000 meter long 
and 5.4 meter wide paper web requires just a minute. Only 
one hour of downtime would cost 5,000 euros. Wireless 
technology significantly reduces material and installation 
costs for copper wire and cable channels about 100 meters 
228
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

total length of the paper machine (Fig. 10), that the initial 
investment for a wireless condition monitoring system offers 
a very short payback time. 
 
Figure 11.  Integration of the ECoMoS sensor network into the process  
 
control system of the paper plant [10]  
The fusion of data from the wireless sensor nodes is 
provided by the base station, the so-called ECoMoS server, 
which is connected by field bus with the control center of the 
paper machine (Fig. 11). During the installation of sensor 
node as well as the exchange of production components the 
kinematic parameters for the in-depth diagnosis has to be 
updated at the ECoMoS server. The ECoMoS server also 
receives the rotation speeds of the individual drives in the 
paper machine and transmits this data to the corresponding 
sensor nodes ted to the server ECoMoS. This procedure is 
done before and after each measuring interval. 
 
 
Figure 12.  Result visualization of the in-depth diagnosis 
If a damage pattern is detected, each sensor node can 
send the raw data via the base station and the ECoMoS 
server to the control center of the paper plant (Fig. 12). So, 
experts can examine the characteristics of serious errors in 
critical cases before costly actions for damage repair are 
initiated. Often, it is sufficient to replace a damaged bearing 
during the regular maintenance interval. 
V. 
SUCCESSFUL PRACTICAL TEST IN THE PAPER FACTORY 
In the first prototype generation, the system parts sensor, 
data processing, radio interface and power supply had been 
designed as modules to be tested in the paper mill separately. 
The second prototype generation as a compact complete 
system was implemented in 2012. Currently, the last work on 
the wireless protocol and the software for the ECoMoS 
server ECoMoS is nearly finished. Firstly, four measuring 
positions in the paper mills were equipped with the ECoMoS 
wireless sensor nodes to demonstrate a successful project 
completion (Fig. 13). Now, this sensor network will be 
progressively extended to the full configuration with 664 
sensor nodes. 
 
(a)
 
(b)
 
Figure 13.  a) Field tests of the second prototype generation,  
b) ECoMoS-Server  in operation 
The wireless sensor network, developed ECoMoS 
project, can be used to detect wear of machines and plants 
that have drives, which are at least temporarily operated at a 
constant speed. There are many such manufacturing 
facilities. If later low-cost wireless sensor systems are 
available, condition monitoring will be used for additional 
229
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

rotating parts such as fans, which are not currently monitored 
due to cost reasons. The bill of material for such sensor node 
ranges from 10 to 300 euros depending on the requirements 
and environment. The cost of an entire sensor network, 
however, is mainly influenced by the production quantity. 
The development costs dominate the overall cost in niche 
applications. For a wide range of applications, however, such 
wireless sensor nodes will be produced in large quantities, so 
that the design and software costs only account for a small 
proportion of total costs. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
The aim of the joint project ECoMoS was to develop a 
wireless sensor network for the condition monitoring of 
industrial machines. The wide range of expertise in the fields 
of measurement technology, wireless communication, energy 
harvesting, module integration and machinery diagnosis 
were necessary to demonstrate the opportunities of modern 
wireless sensors for condition monitoring. The installation of 
sensor networks within plants provides the basis for 
advanced concepts in condition monitoring. Wireless 
solutions for machine diagnosis make it possible to reduce 
installation costs while collecting and evaluating more data 
on the individual sensors. 
As such systems become available, the leverage effect for 
the construction of machines and plants becomes hard to 
predict. Such sensor networks will be connected with cloud 
services, so that the machine diagnosis can be supported by 
external service providers or the system manufacturer. The 
manufacturer would then be in a much better position to 
assess the reliability of their products. It can be observed, for 
instance, whether the construction of machine components 
needs to be improved, or whether it is possible to reduce 
costs, without impairing the reliability. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The joint project ECoMoS was funded by the Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) and 
managedwith support of VDI / VDE Innovation + Technik 
GmbH in Berlin. The project results has achieved by the 
cooperation of the companies IMC Meßgeräte, Elbau, GfM 
Gesellschaft für Maschinen-diagnose, GE Energy, Baumer,  
EnOcean, 
Hamburger 
Rieger 
together 
with 
the 
Fraunhofer IZM and the Technical University Berlin. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Niedermayer, R. Thomasius, D. Polityko, K. Schrank, S. 
Guttowski, W. John, and H. Reichl, “Miniaturization Platform 
for Wireless Sensor Nodes Based on 3D-Packaging 
Technologies,” Proc. of IEEE Int. Conf. IPSN/SPOTS, 
Nashville, TN, Apr. 2006, pp 391–398. 
[2] M. Niedermayer, J. Hefer, and S. Guttowski, “Technology-
Oriented Design of Radio Sensor Nodes,” in Smart Systems 
Integration and Reliability, Ed. B. Michel, Goldenbogen, 
ISBN: 3540238670, Dresden, Germany, 2010 
[3] M. Niedermayer, C. Richter, J. Hefer, S. Guttowski, and H. 
Reichl, “SENESCOPE: A Design Tool for Cost Optimization 
of Wireless Sensor Nodes,” Proc. of IEEE Int. Conf. 
IPSN/SPOTS, San Francisco, CA, Apr. 2009, pp. 313–324. 
[4] M. Niedermayer, “Commercialisation and Application Driven 
Economic Viability of Sensor Technology,” in Comprehen-
sive Materials Processing, Ed. S. Hashmi, Elsevier Science 
Ltd, ISBN: 0080965326, Oxford, UK, 2013 
[5] E. Hohwieler, E. Uhlmann, M. Niedermayer, and B. Hirsch: 
“Self-organizing Production with Distributed Intelligence,” 
Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. on Innovative Production Machines and 
Systems, Ischia, Italy, May 2009, pp. 163–167. 
[6] M. Niedermayer, H. Scholtz, T. Bonim, S. Guttowski, and K. 
D. Lang, “Robust 3D Radio Sensor Systems with Embedded 
Active and Passive Components for Industrial Applications,” 
Proc. Int. Conf. on Sensors and Its Applications SIA, Jeju 
Island, Korea, Nov. 2012, pp. 336–341. 
[7] E. Kravcenko, M. Niedermayer, S. Guttowski, N. Nissen, S. 
Benecke, A. Middendorf, and H. Reichl: “A System-oriented 
Approach for Modeling Energy Harvesting Devices in 
Wireless Sensor-Modules, ” Proc. of 4th Int. Conf. on Sensor 
Technologies and Applications SENSORCOMM, Venice, 
Italy, Jul. 2010, pp. 305–310. 
[8] M. Niedermayer, “Cost-Driven Design of Smart Micro 
Systems,” Artech House Publishers, ISBN: 1608070840, 
Norwood, MA, U.S. 2012 
[9] E. O. Brigham, “The Fast Fourier Transform,”  Prentice-Hall, 
New York, 2002 
[10] R. Wirth, et. al., “Self-Sufficient Condition Monitoring 
System ECoMoS”, Grant 16SV3371-16SV3377, Project 
Report, TIB Hanover, 2013 
[11] S. C. Ergen, P. Varaiya, “TDMA scheduling algorithms for 
wireless sensor networks”, Springer Wireless Network, Vol. 
16, 2010, pp. 985–997.  
 
230
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

