An Integrated Ambient Intelligence System in the Monitoring and Rehabilitation of 
the Disorder of Consciousness. 
 
Francesco Riganello, Luigi 
Flotta, Giuliano Dolce 
Institute S. Anna - RAN (Research 
in Advanced Neuro-rehabilitation),  
Crotone, Italy;   
f.riganello@istitutosantanna.it; 
giulianodolce@libero.it 
 
 
Luigi Piscitelli, Calogero Pace 
Department of Informatics and 
Modeling Electronics and 
Systemistics, University of 
Calabria,   
Cosenza, Italy  
lui.piscitelli@gmail.com; 
calogero.pace@unical.it 
 
 
Walter G. Sannita 
Department of Neuroscience, 
ophthalmology and genetics, 
University of Genova, Genova, 
Italy/Department of Psychiatry, 
State University of New York, 
Stony Brook,  NY, USA.  
wgs@dism.unige.it
Abstract—Ambient Intelligence (AmI) collectively refers to a 
family of sensitive electronic systems responsive to humans and 
mediating in the human interaction with devices and 
environment. This novel paradigm of information technology 
complies with the international standards for the functional 
integration of biomedical domotics and informatics in hospital 
and homecare. We have designed and implemented an AmI 
system with sensor networks for the continuous automatic 
monitoring of subjects with severe brain damage and disorder 
of consciousness hospitalized in the S. Anna-RAN Institute for 
medical care and rehabilitation. The system was designed to 
allow real-time analyses of relevant environmental parameters 
and the subjects’ vital signs. Main purposes are to identify: 1- 
partially preserved or recovered circadian/ultradian rhythms; 
2) functional changes potentially associated to prognostic 
indicators; 3) momentary subject/environment interactions or 
functional changes possibly indicative of residual/recovered 
responsiveness; 4) predictive models of responsiveness. The 
system also supports the clinician in decision making. In this 
respect, AmI should be regarded as equivalent to a traditional 
laboratory 
for 
data 
collection 
and 
processing, 
with 
substantially reduced dedicated equipment and staff and 
limited costs. Moreover, the AmI should provide an accurate 
system of observation of the patient-ambient interaction, 
offering a better support to the clinical decision in the 
rehabilitation phase. 
Keywords-Monitoring Systems; Decision Making; Disorders 
of Consciousness; Ambient Intelligence; Sensory Device . 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The label Ambient Intelligence (AmI) collectively 
indicates a family of electronic systems that are sensitive and 
responsive to humans and mediate in the human interaction 
with devices and environment. It provides pervasive but 
unobtrusive sensing and computing devices and ubiquitous 
networking for human/environment interaction [1]. This  
novel paradigm of information technology complies with the 
international Integrating Healthcare Enterprise board (IHE) 
[2] and eHealth HL7 technological standards [3][4] for the 
functional 
integration 
of 
biomedical 
domotics 
and 
informatics in hospital and home care. The European 
Commission charted a path for research on AmI in 2001 [5]. 
The use of biomedical robotics and informatics in hospitals 
is also involved in the processes for medical decision making 
- a complex aspect of the patient’s care whereby a high level 
of cognitive processing is required to manipulate large 
datasets of disparate kind, origin and significance [6]–[8]. 
Subjects with disorder of consciousness  due to severe brain 
injury who are in the vegetative (VS/UWS) or minimally 
conscious (MCS) states [9]–[12] need constant monitoring; a 
continuous stream of clinical/neurobiological/ behavioral 
information is required for appropriate care by the medical 
and nursing staff and to optimize the rehabilitation therapy 
[13]. A dedicated AmI system has been designed and 
developed for this purposes, to provide an accurate system of 
observation of the patient-ambient interaction and to have a 
better support to the clinical decision in the rehabilitation 
phase.  In section II of the paper is described the method of 
data acquisition; the section III is dedicated to the biometric 
and environmental nodes, while the section IV is dedicated 
to the data analysis; the section V contains a brief description 
of the Heart Rate Variability and the importance of its 
analysis in the rehabilitation therapy; finally the section VI 
reports the conclusions. 
II. 
DATA ACQUISITION  
Daily medical and nursing care and the rehabilitative 
protocols in hospital require multi- and cross-disciplinary 
activities. Data acquisition and analyses are core facilities in 
the rehabilitation process, with both scientific and applicative 
implications; 
computational 
environments 
capable 
of 
integrating heterogeneous representations from different 
fields are also mandatory in this context. Such environments 
should integrate heterogeneous formalisms in the same 
model and assist the modeller in designing and implementing 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

new models based  on new knowledge acquired in the 
rehabilitation environment.  
We have designed and implemented an AmI system with ad 
hoc sensor networks for the continuous monitoring of 
subjects in VS/UWS or MCS hospitalized in the S. Anna -
RAN Institute for medical care and rehabilitation. The 
system can be implemented to allow exporting the facility to 
homecare with control in remote. The acquisition and 
integration procedures are implemented to record, store and 
process both biometric and environmental data from 
dedicated nodes. The monitoring system is designed to allow 
real time analyses of the subject’s vital signs and of the 
environmental parameters in which he/she lives (Figures 1 
and 2). Samples of recorded data are shown in figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 1: Block diagram of the monitoring system 
 
 
Figure 2: System overall architecture. 
                              
 
Figure 3: Sample plot of data from the patient and ambient parameters. 
From top to bottom: humidity,  luminosity, noise, room temperature, HR, 
HRV and Patient temperature. 
III. 
BIOMETRIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL NODES 
Data transmission from the subject to the biometric node 
is realized via Bluetooth by mean of Zephyr Bioharness 3 
devices [14]–[16] positioned on a chest strap. Electrodes are 
built to monitor heart rate, heart rate variability, respiration 
rate, temperature, movement and oxigen saturation. 
Specifically: 
 
Two electrodes for  heart rate and heart rate variability; 
 
A sensor on the strap right side for respiration; 
 
A triaxial accelerometer incorporated in the device to 
detect the posture angle and activity indexes; 
 
An infrared temperature sensor to measure skin 
temperature. 
 
A photoplethysmographic sensor to measure PO2. 
Four sensors detect environmental parameters: 
 
Temperature (Texas Instruments LM 35); 
 
Relative Humidity (Honeywell HIH 3605); 
 
Noise (Omnidirectional condenser electret microphone); 
 
Light intensity (Light Dependent Resistor). 
 
The Texas Instrument LM35 is a high-precision 
integrated sensor for detecting ambient temperature. It has a 
linearly 
proportional 
output 
voltage-temperature 
characteristic, with scale factor: +10 mV/°C and a range of 
measurements from -55°C to 150 °C, with ± 0,5°C accuracy 
at 25 °C in addition to the low current draw. The system core 
is based on a microcontroller. The Honeywell HIH 3605 
Environmental Relative Humidity sensor is an integrated 
sensor with linear voltage-relative output, low current draw, 
fast response in time and high accuracy. It works, with a 5 V 
voltage supply in the 0-100 % range; accuracy is ± 2%. The 
datasheet provides formulas to calculate the relative 
humidity and compensate for temperature in respect to the 
relative humidity. The device has three terminals. Light 
intensity is detected by mean of a light sensor using a light 
dependency resistor (LDR) that through its conditioning 
circuit returns a voltage signal that is converted into light 
intensity. It is a passive sensor relay for the variation in a 
semiconductor electric resistance due to the incidence of 
electromagnetic radiation with wavelength from 1mm to 10 
nm. The LDR used in the prototype has a range of operating 
temperature between -30°C and 70°C.  At dark, it offers a 
resistance of 2 MΩ and response time of 30 ms. The 
characteristic of the spectrum response is similar at human 
eye, with peak value at 560 nm. The Condenser Electret 
Microphone is an omnidirectional microphone to detect 
environmental noise. Its operative sensitivity of -38 dB ± 3 
dB at f = 1 kHz, with operating 2-10V range offers a signal- 
to-noise ratio of 58 dB and a frequency spectrum similar to 
that of the human ear (20 ÷ 20000 Hz). The MSP430 family 
[17][18] is a series of mixed-signal processors for ultra-low 
power signals, with 16-bit Von Neumann architecture, RISC-
based. In our project, the Texas Instruments MSP430F2274 
was used to handle, compute and make a first filtering of the 
signals; low power microcontrollers will allow implement a 
battery-powered device. Each sensor requires a conditioning 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

circuit making the output signals from each sensor suitable 
for transmission, display or recording meeting the 
requirements of the device following in the line. A 
conditioning circuit comprises electronic circuits performing 
each of the following functions: amplification, level shifting, 
filtering, impedance matching, modulation, demodulation. 
The accuracy and reliability of environmental sensors and 
measures have been tested in the Nexus Laboratories of the 
Department of electronic engineering, University of 
Calabria, Italy. 
Msp430 used in this prototype module starts through its 
UART (Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter)[19] 
a serial communication at 9600 baud/sec in configuration 
8N1 (8 data bit, no parity bit, 1 stop bit). The microcontroller 
pins for signal transmission and reception are linked to those 
of the Bluetooth module, which serves as the master 
interacting 
with 
the 
slave 
sensor 
node 
networks 
(environmental and biometric). The bit sent contains digital 
information of parameters monitored from sensors. An 
analogic/digital converter is integrated in microcontroller for 
data transmission; it is a SAR [17], 10 bit resolution, with 
internal reference, set at 1,5 V for greater signal accuracy. 
A. Architecture of the system 
The structure of the system (server) (Figures 2 and 3) has 
been designed to collect data from smaller structures (nodes 
and hosts) distributed in the hospital ambient suitable of, and 
requiring, monitoring. Specifically, each ambient will be 
equipped by a host (personal computer) collecting data to be 
sent to the server and a series of biometric sensors worn by 
the patients, that will send the biometric data to the host. 
Host collects data information from sensor nodes of network 
by Bluetooth communication. Servers will collect all data 
from the network by TCP/IP protocol communication.  
B. Application Software 
A Labview National Instruments environment [20] is 
installed in the host to communicate with biometric and 
environmental devices and to acquire physiological and 
environmental information useful for monitoring. The 
Labview application front panel (Figure 4) serves as a 
graphic user interface for the user to display (in graphs, 
waves or numbers) any measured physical quantity.  
 
 
Figure 4: Front panel Labview application 
The block Visual Instrument Software Architecture (VISA) 
[21], that allow the control of data stream of serial port 
necessary to control in a specific time, is used for handling 
serial communication by means of the G language of  
Labview. The application communicates with the two sensor 
nodes of networks by two similar Bluetooth protocols for the 
procedures of communication and data transfer to share the 
same core characteristics. The information collected by 
Labview is stored in real time in a .txt file.  The weight of 
.txt files of the environmental parameters is 2160 bytes/min, 
while the biometric parameters .txt file weight is composed 
by a linear coefficient characterized by mean weight of one 
parameter (4 bytes) multiplied for the number of parameters 
chosen and the time of recording calculated in seconds. The 
reliability of acquired information (status info) and battery 
status are shown in Table I. In a chosen example of example 
4 biometric parameters, the weight of the .txt file would be 
11.84 Mb/day. 
 
TABLE I: DAILY WEIGHT STORAGE 
 
 
 
C. Information about the rehabilitation process 
     These data are obtained through clinical observations 
ranked according to established rating scales filled in by the 
attending physician and nursing staff. The scales in use are: 
 
The Coma Recovery Scale Revisited – CRS [22]; 
 
The Wessex Head Injury Matrix – WHIM [23]; 
 
The Levels of Cognitive Functions – LCF [24]; 
 
The Nociception Coma Scale – NCF [25]. 
Dedicated web applications have been developed to 
enable medical and nursing staff to fill in each scale item 
with the appropriate values. Data are stored in the central 
database and integrated with the information for further 
processing and correlative studies. 
IV. 
DATA ANALYSIS 
 
The traditional biomedical model treats disease as a 
binary variable, whereby a subject is or is not ill. However, 
most chronic disorders are gradual processes and cannot be 
classified as binary, while the threshold determining severity 
can be ambiguously set (the evolution from VS/UWS to 
MCS is an example in this regard) [11][26]. Many biological 
variables, such as cholesterol, blood pressure, and blood 
glucose are normally distributed in the population and a 
convenient and reliable cutoff can be determined to separate 
disease from health. In the definition of the disease and its 
severity and prognosis, judgment needs to be based on 
knowledge and experience for a correct interpretation of 
clinical and laboratory information [27]. In our project, 
measurements and analyses of datasets with information 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

from environmental and biometric sensors follow a 
straightforward strategy, with major focus on variability, 
either spontaneous or in response to environmental changes 
[28]. Sources of variation are manifold and can reflect 
changes in the functional status or in responsiveness as well 
as the existence of residual endogenous mechanisms of self-
regulation or circadian/ultradian cycles. Functional changes 
in VW/UWS or MCS subjects can also depend on interaction 
with the staff or relatives, result from the nursing or 
rehabilitation procedures, or reflect endogenous mechanisms 
[29]. 
The main lines of research are: 1) identification of 
correlations 
between 
sets 
of 
stimulus-conditions 
administered to subjects with disorder of consciousness and 
changes in the recorded variables [30]–[32], and 2) analysis 
of the two-way interaction between the cardiovascular 
system, the central nervous system and the central autonomic 
network model [33]–[36]. The goals in these lines of 
investigation are: 1) to verify whether circadian/ultradian 
rhythms are partially preserved or have recovered to a 
significant extent in individual VS/UWS or MCS subjects; 2) 
to identify functional processes potentially associated to 
prognostic indicators; 3) to detect momentary interactions 
between the subject and the environment or other functional 
changes 
possibly 
indicative 
of 
residual/recovered 
responsiveness; 4) to develop predictive models of 
responsiveness in patients with disorder of consciousness; 5) 
support the clinician in decision making. 
The Decision Support System implemented to help the 
attending physician is based on R, an Open Source statistical 
package expanded with custom modules [37]; traditional and 
advanced techniques of statistical analysis are also used. 
Among these are: the regression analysis (to identify 
relationships among variables), the Neural network (a 
sophisticated pattern detection algorithm using machine 
learning 
techniques 
to 
generate 
predictions), 
the 
Clustering/Segmentation processes (to create groups for 
applications), the Association Rules techniques (to detect 
related items in a dataset), Bayesian statistics, Data mining, 
Neural network, etc.) [38][39].  
 
V. 
HEART RATE VARIABILITY 
Systematic investigation on the heart rate variability 
(HRV) (i.e. the heart rate fluctuations around the mean value 
over the time sample) is a major scientific and applicative 
approach to the functional understanding of VS/UWS and 
MCS at the Institute S. Anna - RAN [30][35][40][41]. HRV 
reflects in time the momentary function of the cardio-
respiratory control system and is regarded as a reliable index 
of the sympathetic/parasympathetic functional interplay [34] 
and intrinsic influence on heart rate. HRV is also thought to 
provide independent information on the autonomic nervous 
system and its two-way functional integration with the 
central nervous system, to express physiological factors 
modulating the heart rhythm and homeostatic adaptation to 
the changing conditions. It is anatomically and functionally 
described by the central autonomic (nervous) network 
(CAN) model [42][43]. The autonomic system influences 
heart rate adaptation through multiple connections (inputs 
from sensory and baroreceptors within the heart and great 
vessels, 
respiratory 
changes, 
vasomotor 
regulation, 
thermoregulatory system and changes in endocrine function 
and neuroendocrine interaction) [34][44]. HRV indirectly 
reflects the organization of affective, physiological, 
cognitive, and behavioural elements and is emerging as a 
possible descriptor of the brain functional organizations 
contributing to homeostasis and homeostatic responses 
[35][45][46]. Research on the possible patterns of correlation 
between HRV measures and the functional models available 
today is crucial in the diagnosis and prognosis of disorder of 
consciousness and in the online monitoring of patients with 
severe brain injury.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
    The medical care, daily management and rehabilitation of 
subjects with severe brain damage and disorder of 
consciousness require inter- and cross-disciplinary activities. 
This is the basic approach in research on consciousness and 
rehabilitation. The extensive monitoring of all aspects of the 
subject’s functional condition and reactivity in his/her daily 
activity is a prerequisite to understand the real efficacy of 
ambient conditions/changes potentially contributing to the 
recovery of the consciousness in the rehabilitative mileu. In 
this context, we need a reliable computational environment 
capable of integrating the heterogeneous representations 
from different rehabilitative and scientific approaches into 
heterogeneous formalisms in a useful model. To this end, our 
AmI system has been contrived to contribute in the efficient 
representation of the rehabilitative environment, by studying 
and correlating biometric parameters with environmental 
variables. The current development in electronic systems and 
pervasive intelligent devices and computing in the 
surrounding environment is the new trend and a new frontier 
of research in the rehabilitative science. New scenarios of 
application are supported by the ongoing miniaturization of 
electronic circuits and increasing computational power. New 
devices can be implemented at low cost to help researchers 
and clinicians. 
    A major advantage of our AmI system is the integration of 
artificial intelligence technology [6][28][47]–[49] with 
traditional or advanced data acquisition systems such as 
those in use in the monitoring of clinical or functional 
parameters of inpatients or of subjects under remote medical 
control. In this respect, our AmI platform complies with the 
standards of the international IHE board and the eHealth 
HL7 format as  hedge technological approach in the eHealth 
functional integration of biomedical and traditional domotic 
equipments and informatics in hospital and home care. Our 
AmI system has been designed and implemented to monitor 
and help treat and rehabilitate subjects with disorder of 
consciousness. It is a multipurpose hw/sw tool suitable of 
extensive application in patients’ monitoring as well as in 
medicine and neuroscience when large biomedical datasets 
are acquired and measures of spontaneous or condition-
dependent variability are needed. In this respect, AmI should 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

be regarded as equivalent to a traditional laboratory for data 
collection and processing, with substantially reduced 
dedicated equipment and staff, and limited costs, providing 
an accurate system of observation of the patient-ambient 
interaction and a better support to the clinical decision in the 
rehabilitation phase. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
E. Aarts, H. hawig, and S. Schuurmans, ―Ambient 
Intelligence,‖ in The Invisible Future, Denning J., McGraw Hill, 
2001. 
[2] 
K. Anyanwu, A. P. Sheth, J. Cardoso, J. A. Miller, and 
K. J. Kochut, ―Healthcare enterprise process development and 
integration,‖ 2003. 
[3] 
R. Gajanayake, R. Iannella, and T. Sahama, ―Sharing 
with Care: An Information Accountability Perspective,‖ IEEE 
Internet Comput., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 31–38, Jul. 2011. 
[4] 
D. M. López and B. Blobel, ―Architectural Approaches 
for HL7-based Health Information Systems Implementation:,‖ 
Methods Inf. Med., vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 196–204, Mar. 2010. 
[5] 
K. Ducatel, M. Bogdanowicz, F. Scapolo, J. Leijten, and 
J.-C. Burgelman, Scenarios for ambient intelligence in 2010. 
Office for official publications of the European Communities, 
2001. 
[6] 
B. W. Pickering, J. M. Litell, and O. Gajic, ―Ambient 
Intelligence in the Intensive Care Unit: Designing the Electronic 
Medical Record of the Future,‖ in Annual Update in Intensive Care 
and Emergency Medicine 2011, P. J.-L. Vincent, Ed. Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 793–802. 
[7] 
B. W. Pickering, O. Gajic, A. Ahmed, V. Herasevich, 
and M. T. Keegan, ―Data Utilization for Medical Decision Making 
at the Time of Patient Admission to ICU*:,‖ Crit. Care Med., vol. 
41, no. 6, pp. 1502–1510, Jun. 2013. 
[8] 
W. W. Stead, J. R. Searle, H. E. Fessler, J. W. Smith, and 
E. H. Shortliffe, ―Biomedical Informatics: Changing What 
Physicians Need to Know and How They Learn:,‖ Acad. Med., 
vol. 86, no. 4, pp. 429–434, Apr. 2011. 
[9] 
G. G. Celesia and W. G. Sannita, ―Can patients in 
vegetative state experience pain and have conscious awareness?,‖ 
Neurology, vol. 80, no. 4, pp. 328–329, Jan. 2013. 
[10] 
G. Dolce, W. G. Sannita, and for the European Task 
Force on the, ―The vegetative state: A syndrome seeking 
revision?,‖ Brain Inj., vol. 24, no. 13–14, pp. 1628–1629, Dec. 
2010. 
[11] 
S. Laureys, G. G. Celesia, F. Cohadon, J. Lavrijsen, J. 
León-Carrión, W. G. Sannita, L. Sazbon, E. Schmutzhard, K. R. 
von Wild, A. Zeman, G. Dolce, and $author firstName 
$author.lastName, ―Unresponsive wakefulness syndrome: a new 
name for the vegetative state or apallic syndrome,‖ BMC Med., 
vol. 8, no. 1, p. 68, Nov. 2010. 
[12] 
The Multi-Society Task Force on PVS., ―Medical 
aspects of the persistent vegetative state.,‖ N Engl J Med, vol. 330, 
pp. 1499–508, 1572, 1994. 
[13] 
L. Flotta, F. Riganello, and W. G. Sannita, ―Intelligent 
Monitoring of Subjects with Severe Disorder of Consciousness,‖ in 
SENSORDEVICES 2013, The Fourth International Conference on 
Sensor Device Technologies and Applications, 2013, pp. 135–138. 
[14] 
J. A. Johnstone, P. A. Ford, G. Hughes, T. Watson, and 
A. T. Garrett, ―BioharnessTM Multivariable Monitoring Device: 
Part. I: Validity,‖ J. Sports Sci. Med., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 400–408, 
Sep. 2012. 
[15] 
J. A. Johnstone, P. A. Ford, G. Hughes, T. Watson, and 
A. T. Garrett, ―BioharnessTM Multivariable Monitoring Device: 
Part. II: Reliability,‖ J. Sports Sci. Med., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 409–
417, Sep. 2012. 
[16] 
E. Jovanov, D. Raskovic, A. O. Lords, P. Cox, R. 
Adhami, and F. Andrasik, ―Synchronized physiological monitoring 
using a distributed wireless intelligent sensor system,‖ in 
Proceedings of the 25th Annual International Conference of the 
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2003, 2003, 
vol. 2, pp. 1368–1371 Vol.2. 
[17] 
J. H. Davies, MSP430 Microcontroller Basics. Elsevier, 
2008. 
[18] 
J. Polastre, R. Szewczyk, and D. Culler, ―Telos: enabling 
ultra-low power wireless research,‖ in Information Processing in 
Sensor Networks, 2005. IPSN 2005. Fourth International 
Symposium on, 2005, pp. 364–369. 
[19] 
Thakare, ―A Review on Implementation of Serial 
Communication 
by 
Universal 
Asynchronous 
Receiver 
Transmitter,‖ Int. J. Res. Comput. Eng. Electron., vol. 2, no. 1, 
2013. 
[20] 
R. Bitter, T. Mohiuddin, and M. Nawrocki, LabView: 
Advanced Programming Techniques, Second Edition. CRC Press, 
2006. 
[21] 
H. Zhao and Z. Y. Dong, ―Design and Implementation of 
USB-based Microwave Power Sensor,‖ Appl. Mech. Mater., vol. 
347, pp. 1039–1042, 2013. 
[22] 
J. T. Giacino, K. Kalmar, and J. Whyte, ―The JFK Coma 
Recovery 
Scale-Revised: 
Measurement 
characteristics 
and 
diagnostic utility,‖ Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 85, no. 12, pp. 
2020–2029, Dec. 2004. 
[23] 
A. Shiel, S. A. Horn, B. A. Wilson, M. J. Watson, M. J. 
Campbell, and D. L. Mclellan, ―The Wessex Head Injury Matrix 
(WHIM) main scale: a preliminary report on a scale to assess and 
monitor patient recovery after severe head injury,‖ Clin. Rehabil., 
vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 408–416, Jan. 2000. 
[24] 
C. Hagen, D. Malkmus, and P. Durham, ―Rancho Los 
Amigos levels of cognitive functioning scale,‖ Downey CA Prof. 
Staff Assoc., 1972. 
[25] 
C. Schnakers, C. Chatelle, A. Vanhaudenhuyse, S. 
Majerus, D. Ledoux, M. Boly, M.-A. Bruno, P. Boveroux, A. 
Demertzi, G. Moonen, and S. Laureys, ―The Nociception Coma 
Scale: a new tool to assess nociception in disorders of 
consciousness,‖ Pain, vol. 148, no. 2, pp. 215–219, Feb. 2010. 
[26] 
A. Bosco, G. E. Lancioni, M. O. Belardinelli, N. N. 
Singh, M. F. O’Reilly, and J. Sigafoos, ―Vegetative state: efforts to 
curb misdiagnosis,‖ Cogn. Process., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 87–90, Feb. 
2010. 
[27] 
R. M. Kaplan and D. L. Frosch, ―Decision Making in 
Medicine and Health Care,‖ Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol., vol. 1, no. 
1, pp. 525–556, Apr. 2005. 
[28] 
L. Pignolo, F. Riganello, G. Dolce, and W. G. Sannita, 
―Ambient intelligence for monitoring and research in clinical 
neurophysiology and medicine: the MIMERICA* project and 
prototype,‖ Clin. EEG Neurosci., vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 144–149, Apr. 
2013. 
[29] 
F. Riganello, G. Dolce, M. D. Cortese, and W. G. 
Sannita, ―Responsiveness and prognosis in the severe disorder of 
consciousness,‖ Brain Damage Causes Manag. Progn. Schäffer AJ 
Müller J Eds Pp, pp. 117–135, 2010. 
[30] 
A. Candelieri, M. D. Cortese, G. Dolce, F. Riganello, 
and W. G. Sannita, ―Visual Pursuit: Within-Day Variability in the 
Severe Disorder of Consciousness,‖ J. Neurotrauma, vol. 28, no. 
10, pp. 2013–2017, 2011. 
[31] 
F. Riganello, M. D. Cortese, G. Dolce, and W. G. 
Sannita, ―Visual pursuit response in the severe disorder of 
consciousness: modulation by the central autonomic system and a 
predictive model,‖ BMC Neurol., vol. 13, no. 1, p. 164, 2013. 
[32] 
P. Urbenjaphol, C. Jitpanya, and S. Khaoropthum, 
―Effects of the sensory stimulation program on recovery in 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

unconscious patients with traumatic brain injury,‖ J. Neurosci. 
Nurs., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. E10–E16, 2009. 
[33] 
V. Napadow, R. Dhond, G. Conti, N. Makris, E. N. 
Brown, and R. Barbieri, ―Brain correlates of autonomic 
modulation: Combining heart rate variability with fMRI,‖ 
NeuroImage, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 169–177, 2008. 
[34] 
F. Riganello, G. Dolce, and W. Sannita, ―Heart rate 
variability and the central autonomic network in the severe 
disorder of consciousness,‖ J. Rehabil. Med., vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 
495–501, 2012. 
[35] 
F. Riganello, S. Garbarino, and W. G. Sannita, ―Heart 
Rate Variability, Homeostasis, and Brain Function: A Tutorial and 
Review of Application,‖ J. Psychophysiol., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 178–
203, 2012. 
[36] 
R. Lane, K. Mcrae, E. Reiman, K. Chen, G. Ahern, and 
J. Thayer, ―Neural correlates of heart rate variability during 
emotion,‖ NeuroImage, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 213–222, Jan. 2009. 
[37] 
J. Marques de Sá, ―Directional Data,‖ Appl. Stat. Using 
SPSS Stat. MATLAB R, pp. 375–401, 2007. 
[38] 
A. Candelieri, G. Dolce, F. Riganello, and W. G, ―Data 
Mining in Neurology,‖ in Knowledge-Oriented Applications in 
Data Mining, K. Funatsu, Ed. InTech, 2011. 
[39] 
I. H. Witten, E. Frank, and M. A. Hall, Data Mining: 
Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques, Third Edition, 
3 edition. Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2011. 
[40] 
G. Dolce, F. Riganello, M. Quintieri, A. Candelieri, and 
D. Conforti, ―Personal interaction in the vegetative state: A data-
mining study,‖ J. Psychophysiol., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 150–156, 
2008. 
[41] 
F. Riganello, A. Candelieri, M. Quintieri, D. Conforti, 
and G. Dolce, ―Heart rate variability: An index of brain processing 
in vegetative state? An artificial intelligence, data mining study,‖ 
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 121, no. 12, pp. 2024–2034, Dec. 2010. 
[42] 
E. E. Benarroch, ―The central autonomic network: 
functional organization, dysfunction, and perspective,‖ Mayo Clin. 
Proc., vol. 68, no. 10, pp. 988–1001, 1993. 
[43] 
E. Benarroch, W. Singer, and M. Mauermann, 
Autonomic Neurology. Oxford University Press, 2014. 
[44] 
E. E. Benarroch, ―The Autonomic Nervous System: 
Basic Anatomy And Physiology‖ Contin. Lifelong Learn. Neurol., 
vol. 13, pp. 13–32, 2007. 
[45] 
E. E. Benarroch, ―Pain-autonomic interactions,‖ Neurol. 
Sci., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. s130–s133, May 2006. 
[46] 
B. H. Friedman and J. F. Thayer, ―Autonomic balance 
revisited: panic anxiety and heart rate variability,‖ J. Psychosom. 
Res., vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 133–151, 1998. 
[47] 
C. Ramos, J. C. Augusto, and D. Shapiro, ―Ambient 
intelligence—the next step for artificial intelligence,‖ Intell. Syst. 
IEEE, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 15–18, 2008. 
[48] 
G. Riva, ―Ambient intelligence in health care,‖ 
Cyberpsychol. Behav., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 295–300, 2003. 
[49] 
W. Weber, C. Braun, R. Glaser, Y. Gsottberger, M. 
Halik, S. Jung, H. Klauk, C. Lauterbach, G. Schmid, X. Shi, T. F. 
Sturm, G. Stromberg, and U. Zschieschang, ―Ambient intelligence 
- key technologies in the information age,‖ in Electron Devices 
Meeting, 2003. IEDM ’03 Technical Digest. IEEE International, 
2003, pp. 1.1.1–1.1.8. 
 
 
 
 
 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

