2D and 3D Phononic Crystals -
A New Class of (Bio)Chemical Microsensors and Sensor Networks
Ralf Lucklum, Mikhail Zubtsov
Institute for Micro and Sensor Systems
Otto-von-Guericke-University
Magdeburg, Germany
ralf.lucklum@ovgu.de, mikhail.zubtsov@ovgu.de
Yan Pennec
Inst. d’Electronique de Microelectr. et de Nanotechnologie
University Lille 1
Lille, France
yan.pennec@univ-lille1.fr
Frieder Lucklum
Institute for Microsensors, -actuators and -systems
University Bremen
Bremen, Germany
flucklum@imsas.uni-bremen.de
Abstract—We introduce concepts of a new class of acoustic
sensor devices, so-called phononic crystal sensors. Small
volumes of a complex liquid act as network of individually
addressable
acoustic
resonators
in
its
most
promising
realization. Resonance frequency reveals bulk properties of the
mixture, for example the concentration of a compound. We
furthermore suggest an acoustic analog to Photonic Crystal
Enhanced
Microscopy,
PCEM,
a
spatially
distributed
metamaterial microacoustic sensor network for visualization of
liquid and recognition layer properties.
Keywords-phononic
crystal;
metamaterial;
acoustic
microsensor; (bio)chemical sensor
I.
MOTIVATION
Phononic crystals (PC) have been introduced in the early
1990s [1][2]. There are a lot of different phononic crystal
realizations accomplishing translation symmetry in 2D and
3D
designs.
Bulk
phononic
crystals
have
a
periodic
modulation
in
their
density
and
sound
velocities
for
longitudinal and transverse polarization, creating band gaps
at wavelengths commensurate to their lattice constant, i.e.,
acoustic (through liquids) or elastic mechanical (through
solids) waves with certain frequencies cannot travel though
the crystal at least in certain crystallographic directions.
Since one can design properties not known in nature they are
sometimes described as metamaterials. Major efforts in
phononic crystal studies have been devoted to the search of
absolute band gaps in perforated solids or solid/solid
structures. Only recently reports on technical applications
have been published, including sensing. The ability to
magnify the interaction of acoustic waves with matter
through specific geometries that are capable of confining
acoustic waves in a small volume provides the basis for this
novel type of sensor.
Linear or point defects are the characteristic feature of
phononic crystal sensors. Defect modes can be designed to
create a well separated mini-transmission band within the
band gap and appear as transmission peak within the
transmission spectrum of phononic crystals. The position of
the respective mode on the frequency scale, shortly called
peak
frequency,
fp,
is
sensitive
to
defect
properties,
specifically geometry and material properties of the confined
matter. They can be changed by the measurement value of
interest. Promising applications are the measurement of
concentration of some compound, xi, in a liquid confined in
the cavity, concentration of a component, conversion rate
during a chemical reaction, (bio)chemical activity or size of
associates or molecule conformation etc. These values
should become effective via a distinct change in speed of
sound, v [7]-[9], of the liquid mixture:
( )
(
)
(
i )
p
f v x
f v
f
=
=
(1)
or in terms of sensitivity, Sf:
v
f
x
v
S
p
i
f
∂
∂
∂
= ∂
(2)
The key difference to competing microacoustic sensors is
that phononic crystal sensors give access to volumetric
mechanical properties of the mixture whereas most classical
sensors measure properties at the interface to the sensor
element. Since the first term in (2) must be expected to be
small
at
concentrations
relevant
to
(bio)chemical
applications, key design objective of phononic crystals
sensor development is a large second term in (2). It can be
realized by strong confinement of acoustic energy in a high-
Q cavity resonator. A second important issue is that the
respective acoustic cavity mode is the only allowed mode or
that it is at least well separated from other modes. Finally,
the modes must ‘survive’ under experimental conditions.
II.
REALIZATIONS
The first phononic crystal sensor version has been
introduced in [3]. A 2D phononic crystal fabricated in steel
and having a slit cavity perpendicular to the propagation
direction of longitudinal acoustic waves has been published
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

in [4]. The 4-row phononic sub-crystals provide optimized
boundary conditions for the slit cavity resonator. This sample
has been applied to a first technical application [5]. On-going
research deals with the introduction of a disposable liquid
container in response to medical needs [6]. Key design
challenge is insensitivity to unavoidable variations in the
coupling layer between phononic crystal and glass capillary.
A metamaterial sensor applies the so-called extra-
ordinary transmission through a perforated plate [7]. We
have shown that dynamic metastructures are created, defined
by bi-medium oscillatory states at a certain frequency at
normal incidence of plane longitudinal waves. On-going
research is motivated by PCEM [8]. We focus on the
acoustic analog. It is a spatially distributed sensor array for
visualization of liquid and recognition layer properties based
on an individually addressable network of metamaterial
microacoustic elements. Acoustic waves are generated and
detected by phased array US transducers, Figure 1.
A very challenging project is the development of a
tubular phononic crystal [9] and its application as network of
tubular phononic sensors, the so-called tubular bell. This
development is motivated by the fact that pipes and vessels
are the most prominent elements in modern technical
environment and in nature to transport fluids like water or
blood. By keeping the inner surface of the tube cylinder free
of any obstacles, one of the major concerns in chemical,
biochemical, and petrol or food industry, as well as in
medicine, will be overcome. Figure 2 shows the first ever
published result of a simulation of one of our ideas.
Additional structural elements are periodically arranged at
the outer wall of the pipe only. We can demonstrate the
appearance
of
band
gap
and
sharp
resonance-like
transmission peaks. The latter are governed by properties of
the liquid inside the pipe.
Another aspect which must be considered at early stage is
the fabrication technology of the sensor element. High-
resolution stereolithography-printing technology enables the
maskless,
single-step
fabrication
of
freeform
3D
microstructures. This allows rapid prototyping of novel
designs, fast optimization and finally customized products.
Figure 3 shows a proof-of-concept 3D design extending the
established 2D array of holes in a solid matrix to all three
Cartesian directions.
III.
CONCLUSIONS
First results prove the excellent perspectives of phononic
crystals as new sensor class. They merge unique features of
ultrasonic sensors and resonant sensors, specifically usage of
ultrasonic wave propagation allowing for separation between
electronics and measurement ‘cell’ and resonant cavities
giving access to high resolution frequency measurement.
However, application as chemical or biosensor introduces
new challenges, e.g. volume and shape of the measurement
cell, disposable materials, and highly variable fabrication
technology.
All these specific aspects again have major influence on the
design of the phononic crystal, the theory behind and the
models
to
compute
band
diagram
and
transmission
spectrum.
On the other hand photonic crystal sensors, the optical
counterpart having a longer history have already found their
application as chemical and biosensors because of their
excellent features like sensitivity, selectivity and reliability.
The obvious analogy of the basic sensor principle, despite
their also obvious difference, justifies further efforts in this
still very young research field.
Figure 1: Idea of the metamaterial microacoustic array
Figure 2: Quarter of a single element of a tubular bell. Colors represent
deformation/pressure results of a numerical analysis (Comsol). Geometric
dimensions scale with wavelength; here the mid-frequency is 1 MHz.
Figure 3: Stereolithography fabrication sample: 11x11x11 3D phononic
crystal with 2 mm lattice constant [10]
1 mm
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

REFERENCES
[1]
M. M. Sigalas and E. N.Economou, “Elastic and acoustic
wave band structure,” Journal of Sound and Vibrations, 158,
377-382, 1992.
[2]
M. S. Kushwaha, P. Halevi, G. Martinez, L. Dobrzynski, and
B. Djafai-Rouhani, “Theory of acoustic band structure of
periodic composites,” Phys. Rev. B, 49, 2313-2322, 1994.
[3]
R. Lucklum and J. Li, “Phononic crystals for liquid sensor
applications,” Meas. Sci. Technol., 20, 124014, 2009.
[4]
R. Lucklum, M. Ke, and M. Zubtsov, “Two-dimensional
phononic crystal sensor based on a cavity mode,” Sens.
Actuators B, 171-172, 271-277, 2012.
[5]
A. Oseev, M. Zubtsov, and R. Lucklum, “Gasoline properties
determination with phononic crystal cavity sensor,” Sens.
Actuators B, 189, 208– 212, 2013.
“
[6]
R. Lucklum, M. Zubtsov, and S. Villa Arango, Cavity
Resonance
Biomedical
Sensor,”
ASME
Proceedings,
doi:10.1115/IMECE2014-38222.
[7]
M. Zubtsov, R. Lucklum, M. Ke, A. Oseev, B. Henning, and
U. Hempel, “2D phononic crystal sensor with normal
incidence of sound,” Sens. Actuators A, 186, 118–124, 2012.
[8]
Y. Zhuo et al., “Single nano particle detection using photonic
crystal enhanced microscopy,” Analyst, 139, 1007-1015,
2014.
[9]
M. Zubtsov and R. Lucklum, “Phononic crystal wave
mechanics in periodically modulated tubular structures,”
ICSV22, proc., in press
[10] F. Lucklum and M. Vellekoop, “Rapid Prototyping of 3D
Phononic Crystals using High-Resolution Stereolithography
Fabrication”, Eurosensors 2015, proc. in press.
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

