The Localization Problem for Harness: A Multipurpose Robotic Swarm 
 
Ramiro dell’Erba 
Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy 
and Sustainable Economic Development Robotic 
Laboratory 
ENEA 
Rome, Italy 
dellerba@enea.it  
Claudio Moriconi 
Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy 
and Sustainable Economic Development Robotic 
Laboratory 
ENEA 
Rome, Italy 
moriconi@enea.it  
 
 
 
Abstract—This paper deals with the localization problem of an 
underwater robotic swarm in the context of the HARNESS 
project (Human telecontrolled Adaptive Robotic Network of 
SensorS) currently in progress in our laboratory. This system 
is based on cheap autonomous underwater vehicles (AUV) 
organized with swarm rules and conceived to perform tasks, 
ranging from environmental monitoring to terrorism attack 
surveillance. The key aims of the HARNESS project are: the 
development of a novel underwater acoustic channel with very 
high performances in routing and data throughput capacities; 
and the design of a reliable swarm rule-based control system 
with an interface dealing with a supervisor operator acting as a 
priority definition arbiter. A method to determine the shape of 
the swarm, based on trilateration calculation, is proposed.  
Keywords-swarm; underwater; robot; localization. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This paper deals with the localization problem of an 
underwater robotic swarm.  
The HARNESS project [1] seeks to realize an underwater 
multi AUV robotic system, arranged in a swarm organization 
where the classical flocking rules and the Communication 
Network protocol are merged in a novel higher level control. 
It is expected to improve the performance of classical AUV 
technology exploiting the large occupied volume and the 
short distances among the vessels. The speed of surface 
monitoring and the transmission bandpass among the vessels 
and towards the surface should be some of the most 
important results. The availability of a suitable robotic 
swarm could be relevant in many operations: surveillance of 
sensitive sites, fast exploration of relatively wide areas of 
interest, detailed analysis of objects (i.e., archeological 
artifacts) without removing them from their underwater sites. 
The most interesting areas to explore and protect are 
those in proximity to coasts and with depths ranging between 
50 to 200 m. Professional and expensive divers can operate 
only to a maximum of 70-80 meters in recovery operations, 
and simple and fast explorations cannot be performed by 
humans beyond 100 m.  
On the other hand the use of rovers has proven to be 
useful in many cases, but generally expensive mainly 
because they require the support of an equipped ship. 
The use of robotic technologies in ocean surveys, 
inspections, pipe and cable tracking, has been well 
established in the field of marine engineering for many years 
[2] with an important increase in performance in recent years 
[3] as many autonomous underwater vehicle systems moved 
from the prototype stage to scientific, commercial, and 
military uses.  
An AUV must be considered as a real cost alternative to 
other available technologies, such as manned submersibles, 
remotely operated vehicles (ROVs) and towed instruments 
led by ships. However, many problems are still to be solved 
to make AUV competitive especially for the issues relevant 
to power availability, information processing, navigation, 
and control.  
The goal of this paper is to give a presentation of the 
novel concepts in Harness. We will discuss advantages and 
drawbacks of the project concepts and explain the prototype 
under construction. Finally we will focus on the crucial 
problem of localization of the swarm with some proposal for 
an efficient solution suitable to some scenarios.  
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The expected features of Harness could limit the use of 
expensive surface ships to the deployment phase; moreover 
it takes advantage of the parallel exploration of many cheap 
AUVs [4] to reduce work time.  
The concept of robot swarms has been a research theme 
of the scientific community for several years. The realization 
of swarms of different numbers of cooperating robots has 
been successfully attempted, but in the underwater 
environment it is still a challenge. Many of the difficulties 
are relevant to the lack of fast and reliable communication 
links. Swarm research has been inspired by biological 
behaviors, like the one of bees [5][6] to take advantage of 
social activity concepts [7], labor division, task cooperation 
and information sharing. A single-AUV approach is affected 
by operational limits the lack of effective communication 
and the limitation of available sensing that may reduce its 
effectiveness. On the contrary, a multi-robot approach can 
327
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

benefit from its parallel operation and from redundancy and 
greater robustness allowed by the use of multiple agents. 
Another theoretical advantage of the swarm, considered 
as a whole entity that we intend to investigate lies in the 
possibility of performing parallel computation from realizing 
a distributed perception. As an example, landmark 
recognition is a task that can be shared among the different 
nodes taking advantage of the different viewpoints of the 
same target and applying a voting process to increase 
recognition performance. An adequate communication 
network must be available, in order to allow at least the 
exchange of the target identification features, but the 
network under design, based on multiple channels with 
carrier frequencies among 0,3 to 2 MHz promises to be 
adequate.  
This form of distributed perception is a novel attempt that 
cannot be effectively demonstrated in a simulated scenario 
apart for the implementation aspects. The real experiment is 
therefore expected at the end of the project, in a couple of 
years’ time, when a basic swarm of at least ten vessels with 
relevant sensors and communication network will be 
available 
Another project strength is the capability to adopt a 
flexible geometrical distribution of the members depending 
on the task and environment characteristics in particular for 
communication. In the underwater world the physical 
medium makes the acoustical channel the most convenient 
one, since electromagnetic waves are very rapidly dampened. 
Acoustical propagation can offer better performance, but a 
number of effects must equally be taken into account. High 
frequency carriers are dampened too, even if less 
dramatically then their E.M. analogue. Moreover when the 
frequency increases, the propagation within the medium 
shows an extremely narrow direction pattern that prevents 
the easy dispatch of a message among the many nodes with 
mobile and imprecisely identified positions.  
The solution of this puzzle takes advantage of the swarm 
organization and of the possibility of a mutual interaction 
between the spatial distribution of transmission nodes (the 
swarm members themselves) regulated by the flocking rules 
and the transmission protocol. In Figure 1 and Figure 2 two 
examples of adaptive localization of the swarm, for different 
tasks, are shown. The exploitation of ultra-high frequencies 
is enabled by the shortening of distances with positive effects 
also on the multi-path effect and the consequent 
intersymbolic interferences. On the other hand a task request 
for a wider swarm configuration can stimulate the flexible 
protocol to select lower frequencies and slow down the 
communication rate. 
One of the aims of the project is the study and 
implementation of different behaviors in the swarm, to 
generate a collective shaping as a response to environmental 
stimula and to modify the communication parameters in 
order to maximize the performance of the system [8].  
In this case the swarm control must balance the different 
requests of the operator (e.g., modify the mission task), the 
swarm needs and the single member’s management (e.g., 
obstacle avoidance, loss of communication link). 
The result is the selection of collective behaviors that 
must be compatible with all the aforementioned conditions. 
One of the peculiar approaches of Harness is the aim of 
controlling a swarm as a whole by a human supervisor. 
Because of the unique control concept of the swarm this 
action has to be carried out by means of a non-conventional 
procedure. Human commands, given in intrinsically fuzzy 
channels (gesture recognition / voice commands) are 
converted into flocking rule modifications. In this first phase 
the research is limited to the change of the rule parameters; 
the next step will be a selection from amongst a different set 
of rules; and the final goal (if the field tests clearly show the 
need) will be the automatic synthesis of special rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  “Pipe”, configuration  indicates when  the communication is the 
main objective of the geometrical shape to transport data on long distances 
at the maximum allowed speed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Planar distribution to carry out fast and parallel monitor 
operations.  
The communication between swarm and human requires 
a special function. An element of the swarm has to emerge, 
navigate to the sea surface and activate an RF link with the 
console while it continues to maintain the link with the other 
elements.  
 
III. 
THE SWARM VESSEL PROTOTYPE 
In Figure 3 the Venus prototype, a torpedo type realized 
in our laboratory, is shown. Its characteristics are the 
following: 
Max depth 100m; Max speed 2 Knots; Weight about 20 
Kg; Autonomy 3hrs; Dimensions 1.20 m length 0.20 m 
diameter. 
Standard sensors include a stereoscopic camera, sonar, 
accelerometer, compass, depth meter, hydrophones side-scan 
sonar. 
328
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 3.  Low cost Venus AUV 
We are dealing with a system thought to be a component 
of a swarm of about 20 objects. The distances between 
robots ranging between 3 and 50 meters. Therefore, the 
maximum distance possible between two robots is about 
1000 meters, as a very particular alignment case; the average 
value of the distances is about 10 meters. Maximum speed 
should be about 2 knots.  
An optical, high power, transmission device will be used 
for a number of different experimental approaches 
integrating the acoustical data channel and the direct vision 
sensing.  
Optical 
methods 
are 
very 
powerful 
but 
their 
performances are affected by many strongly variable 
parameters like salinity, turbidity, the presence of dissolved 
substances that change the color and the transparency in 
different optical bands and the amount of solar radiation that 
heavily affect the signal to noise ratio.  
The current approach uses a strategy based on the 
variable exploitation of the optical channel depending on the 
environmental conditions. In favorable conditions the 
transmission protocol will freely decide which channel to 
adopt depending on the priority, distance-to-cover and 
dimension of the message itself.  In less favorable conditions 
the optical channel will be limited to the fundamental 
synchronization task, generating a light lamp that will 
optimize the message passing through the optical channel 
(and several other non strictly communicating functions). In 
poor optical conditions strong but very short lamps, will 
ensure references for a safer visual navigation.  
 
IV. 
THE LOCALIZATION PROBLEM 
Localization and mapping is the key of a successful 
navigation in autonomous mobile platform technology and is 
a fundamental task in order to achieve high levels of 
robustness in vehicle positioning and values of the collected 
data. Robot localization and mapping is commonly related to 
cartography, not only for geographic purposes, but for 
biological and ecological studies, for geophysical researches 
and for security surveillance. It combines science, technique 
and computation to build an environment representation to 
correlate spatial information with the data collected [5][6]. 
Compared to a single AUV, a multibody system has the 
need to know and manage its own configuration. This can be 
an advantage if we are able to profit from the large number 
of data points to reduce errors in positioning. The 
localization problem of a swarm can be divided into three 
tasks: 
1. 
Absolute localization, with the meaning of 
localization of a member or of a geometrical locus with 
respect to a fixed reference system (AL) 
2. 
Relative localization of (RL) i.e., the swarm 
configuration. 
3. 
Relative localization of one member with respect to 
neighbors; we call it immediate relative localization (IRL) 
and its meaning will be clarified later. 
Different methodologies are required to solve the three 
tasks. In line with the swarm philosophy each element must 
be able, if connected with the others, to perform the 
localization task. However, the reader’s attention is drawn to 
this last point. We do not mean that each element must 
always do all of the tasks; often there is no need to know all 
of the machines’ positions, but each vessel must be capable 
of doing so using all the internal data, the external data 
communicated by the other elements and the external data 
measured by the robots, including that deduced by 
environmental observation.  
The usefulness of IRL is in achieving a rapid response to 
environmental modifications. If the system has to wait for a 
thorough knowledge of its internal structure before deciding 
the type of response the reaction times could become too 
slow, compared to the dynamics of environmental 
phenomena.  
Schools of fishes change their position in a very quick 
time just looking the movement of the neighbors. In 
principle also IRL is more easily achieved with simple and 
robust signals based on physical fast transient, and possibly 
using a rapid propagation of fields such as optical. Later, if 
necessary, the swarm can re-compute the relative position of 
each member.  
The knowledge of the whole configuration can be useful, 
for instance, in some approaches to the geographic 
identification of a site: the possibility to collect information 
from many “points of view”, by a swarm, allows a 
“distributed site recognition” (a task that we are starting to 
study). This technique leads to landmark recognition with 
less ambiguity. We distinguish the problems because they 
are separate: localization of a single entity is a problem 
relevant to understanding a metric of the space, possibly 
realized only by a sequence of reference points, and to 
placing the entity in relation to the established metrics or 
with to reference points. Localization of a swarm underlines 
the different techniques that can be used together with the 
different information that can be gained. 
For many animals localization may be related to different 
types of metric linked to the search for something critical for 
their life like food. In fact this localization could relate to the 
identification of a source of chemical compound that is 
attractive for the biological or robotic system (which could 
be blood to indicate food or something else indicating 
pollution); the result is a physical field with gradients of 
arbitrarily complex shape. Our position is therefore referred 
to the smell, great or small, of our reference parameters. We 
can move toward the higher value of the field to reach the 
source. In this case the geometric or geographic location is 
meaningless for the success of the mission except when the 
mission itself is finished and the last task is the site 
329
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

identification for further actions. We are locating ourselves 
in the higher concentration food position.  
The previous example of gradient localization is an 
example of topological localization. Its realization is similar 
to the force field potential applied in many obstacle 
avoidance techniques.  
Two different environment representations can be used: 
metric and topological world models. A metric environment 
map, using a unique coordinate system, is theoretically easy 
to implement when you are using distance sensors. However, 
metric maps are not well suited to integrate non-metric 
information as required if you have to match patterns.  
Moreover, metrically consistent map building is a non-trivial 
problem.  
Topological representation models of the world make use 
of graphs of nodes (distinctive places) and connecting edges 
(pathways). The advantage is simplified map building (path 
planning is reduced to direct graph search); moreover sensor 
fusion of non-metric and metric data is easier, because they 
are uniformly treated as attributes to nodes and/or edges. 
However, topological world models, typically, are 
characterized by poor resolution, which is insufficient for 
any other purpose than navigating from one region to 
another. 
Another example is the kinesthetic sense of human body; 
it works with a sensitivity to muscle tension and extension; 
the brain relates these variables to locate the position of the 
body in space. 
It is important to note that such a kind of a map is a 
multidimensional set of associations of features (houses, 
streams, odors) with usually non-linear metrics that allow 
you to switch gradually from a certain place to another place 
via a route typically, but not necessarily, geographical. 
Localization 
of 
a 
swarm 
encompasses 
different 
techniques that can be used together with the different 
information that can be gained by putting them together. This 
can become a great advantage.  
The easiest localization system is the open loop 
estimation; this means that the estimate of position is based 
on expected results of motion commands. Therefore no 
contribution from the sensor is required and no feedback is 
calculated.  
The information that the robot gathers can be divided into 
two kinds; idiothetic and allothetic sources. The distinction 
relates to internal or external sensor source data; as an 
example, if a robot is counting the number of wheel turns 
this is an internal source.  
The allothetic source corresponds to the sensors of the 
robot, like a camera, a microphone, laser or sonar.  A typical 
problem of this last method is "perceptual aliasing"; this 
means that two different places can be perceived as the same. 
For example, in a building, it may be impossible to 
determine your location (sometimes also for humans relying 
solely on visual information, because all the corridors may 
look the same). Without an external reference, like for 
example, acoustic beacons at known positions, the vehicle 
has to rely on proprioceptive information obtained through a 
compass, a Doppler Velocity Logger (DVL) or an Inertial 
Navigation System (INS) [6]. To this, totally internal to the 
robot family belongs one of commonest methods, the dead 
reckoning [9. 
A common dead reckoning sensor is the INS. An INS 
measures the linear acceleration and the angular velocity of 
the vehicle using three accelerometers and three gyroscopes. 
Typical underwater external sensors used to correct 
accumulated errors from the integration of the INS 
measurements, are Doppler Velocity Log Sensors (DVL), 
Ultra Short Baseline (USBL) and Differential Global 
Position Systems (DGPS/GPS); the latter only in the case 
that the vehicle is operating in shallow waters and can come 
out of the water to fix (and eventually communicate) the 
position.  
Independent of the quality of the sensors used, the error 
in the position estimate based on dead-reckoning information 
grows without upper limit. Typical navigation errors are 
about some per cent of distance traveled for vehicles 
traveling within 100 meters of sea. Lower errors can be 
obtained with large and expensive INS systems, but for 
vehicles relying only on a compass and a speed estimate 
these can be higher than 10%, after 100 meters. The error 
can be reset if the AUV comes to the surface by GPS, but 
sometimes this is impossible (under ice for example) or 
undesirable (security operation) [8]. The use of beacons to 
form a Long Baseline (LBL) array limits the operation area 
to a few square kilometers and requires a substantial 
deployment effort, to position the beacons, before operations, 
especially in deep water. This reduces the advantages of 
AUV and requires an expensive ship to support the 
operation. A swarm could be advantageous compared to a 
single vessel, if a high rate of communication is available, to 
reduce the dead reckoning errors. It can collect together all 
the data of all the vessels to minimize the errors in estimating 
position.  
Other methods employ the use of landmarks. If we use 
external references in the localization problem, like humans, 
we have to deal with their definitions and position on a map 
(metric or not). Any kind of landmark is subject to 
classification and identification based on its attributes. 
Unfortunately the identification and positioning of a 
landmark often suffers from ambiguity, owing to the 
multiple solutions of the associate equations. That has the 
meaning of more than one landmark is identified by the same 
features.  
A set of features’ location position estimates can 
basically be thought of as a map. The challenge is to 
combine INS/dead-reckoning and other information with 
sensor observations of features to build a map, locally or 
globally referenced.  
A more modern idea consists of matching measurements 
of one or more geophysical properties, such as bathymetry, 
gravity, or magnetic field, to a known environment map. If 
there is sufficient spatial variation in the parameters being 
measured, there is potential to reduce navigation uncertainty. 
As an example the marine turtle’s migration is monitored by 
magnetometers, measuring the earth’s magnetic field 
variations. However, often, these techniques require a map of 
the environment that is not available. The marine turtle’s 
330
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

migrations are monitored by a three axis magnetometer, but 
the method’s resolution is only 35 nautical miles [10][11].  
V. 
OUR PROPOSAL 
If we have three or (better) four vessels on the surface 
they can be positioned by GPS [12]. Later, using the 
communication system, we can obtained (i.e., from the clock 
time of each communications between the elements) the 
distance between one or more vessels and the “constellation” 
whose position is known. Using the same mathematical 
calculation of the GPS system we can get the Absolute 
Localization of the whole swarm. The vessels on the surface 
(that can be substituted by little boats) could also have the 
advantage to carry a high band pass using laser 
communication system, owing to the easy transmission 
vertical channel; in fact the collimation problem (typical in 
laser communication systems) between vessels, in this case, 
can be partially avoided .  
If we do not have surface vessels we can calculate the 
Relative Localization (i.e., the configuration of the swarm) 
solving the distance equations and using a constellation 
composed by some vessels; unfortunately we have multiple 
possible solutions and to select between them we need some 
more information. A flash, for example, can be used to 
discriminate direction from which the signal has arrived. A 
more clever system is to use a whatever (but known) 
movement of the swarm and to repeat the calculation for 
multiple solutions corresponding to the new possible 
configutation. Now, using the preceding configuration and 
appliyng a coordinate transformation (from the known 
movement), we obtain only one configuration matching both 
the old and the new. At this point we can obtain the 
configuration of these elements of the swarm taking one of 
them as the coordinate origin. Later, when the distances of 
other vessels are available, we can add more elements to 
build the whole swarm configuration.  
VI. 
EQUIPMENT 
The equipment to perform these solutions divide into  
"base requirements", which is the minimum instrumentation 
we anticipate having on the single machine and "desirable 
requirements" for enhanced instrumentation and better 
performance. Quantitative considerations are not considered 
here due to lack of space. 
Each machine is characterized by six degrees of freedom, 
but only two of them (depth and heading) are very easy to 
measure, by means of a depthmeter and a compass. If the 
machine has cylindrical symmetry one is uninfluenced. 
Considering the yaw to be unimportant (we imagine 
navigation in one plane other than for a few moments) we 
understand that the real difficultly is to determine the 
coordinate x-y, of the center of mass; the x-y plane being that 
parallel to the sea bottom.  
The base equipment of all the machines is composed of: 
Network communication, GPS, Depth meter, Inclinometer, 
Compass, Flash, Photodiode, Webcamera, Livery on the 
vessel surface and an electric or magnet device. All these 
components are cheap and available. 
The network is a requirement that exists not only for 
communications but must also be used for data exchange and 
we are interested in its use in sonar ranging for RL. Of 
course a snapshot of any situation suffered in a delay, we 
presume between tenths of a second and one second, should 
be sent, together with the estimated robot speed for the 
correction. The network should be able to shift the working 
frequency from 100 to 1000 Khz (at least two frequencies). 
This number comes out from the consideration of data rate 
and the use of the net as an emergency ping or localization 
signal. The distance we want to cover (maximum 50 meters) 
and the data rate should be between 10 and 100 Kbytes/sec. 
All the data available will be fused and weighted with all 
the data coming from other instruments so as to be more 
precise in localization. More than one algorithm is desirable, 
for example one which is more complex that uses all the 
available data and one which is quicker using only a subset 
of data, depending on the operative conditions and on the 
kind of localization required.  
GPS is used for AL, when a scout (single robot that has 
this task) is on the surface.  
At least a commercial depth meter must be present for 
AL in one dimension.  
A couple of inclinometers is useful to measure the angle 
of position with respect of the land. Another degree of 
freedom can be removed by compass; care must be used in 
case of the presence of magnetic disturbances.  
A photo-diode is used to receive flash lamp sequences for 
light communication; for example a  codified sequence could 
send the heading of one machine to the other (close 
neighbors) so as to adapt themselves. Therefore, to transmit a 
simply codified message by flash, we can transmit a 
sequence; working on color or flash time is more 
complicated, standing the use of a cheaper flash unit. In 
some cases we can use an optical modem. This is a very 
cheap and light instrument, but does not give information on 
the position of the light source. 
A webcamera must be used for image recording. 
Moreover together with an optical flash lamp. Using 
omnidirectional vision it is possible, with synchronized flash 
(or triggered by the first flash and using cumulative vision 
over a few seconds) to get qualitative information on the 
density of the machines. Of course it is not metric 
information but the single machine can get information if it 
is far or too far to the left (for example) from the swarm. 
Moreover flash could be useful in rescuing a single machine 
in difficulty, together with a switch of the network toward 
lower frequency working so as to increase the range.  
The camera can also be used in the livery lecture for IRL 
for fast reaction movement, but it requires a computational 
job that must be simplified; image analysis is much too 
heavy. This last task could be done as a batch as for 
Simultaneous 
Localization 
and 
Mapping 
(SLAM), 
distributing the computational cost on a parallelized machine 
(the swarm itself if the network is adequate). 
The single machine can be equipped with a strong 
electromagnet. The advantage of a static magnetic field is the 
possibility of transmiting (like a flash sequence) some 
information to the other machines. Moreover the hope is, 
331
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

contrary to the light source, to get some quantitative 
information on the RL by means of the magnetic field vector. 
Electromagnetic transmission in sea water has made 
some progress over the last few years. Some opportunities 
are under investigation [13][14]. 
Magnetic (and electric) methods require some further 
consideration. An attempt to localize Rfid by magnetic field  
has been performed in air [13]. We start by considering the 
Earth’s magnetic intensity field. Its scalar value is about 20 
microTesla at the equator and 70 microTesla at the poles. We 
can consider it constant in our area of operation with some 
exceptions. We can generate a perturbation in magnetic 
Earth field to get information on the perturbation position 
(distance or heading direction or some other) from these 
numbers. We have calculated that cheap magnetometers are 
able to do this (also taking in account natural anomalies of 
the magnetic earth). So far, we should now be able to detect 
the spike in the magnetic field (we have calculated it in some 
conditions) superimposed on the Earth's field that we have 
generated in the sea. We get no information from the 
transient of the field but we do measure a change in the 
magnetic Earth fields. We now have two opportunities; one 
is a slow modulation of the field (to reduce attenuation) 
carrying some codified information, such as flash lamp. The 
second is to make an attempt to calculate the position of the 
field generator. This has been done for two objects in open 
space. It is a greater challenge to do this for a multisystem in 
the sea. We are investigating this possibility. Some other 
equipment such as Acoustic pinger, LBL USBL device, 
DVL, AHRS, Electromagnetic devices, Gradient localization 
can increase the performance of the system. A harbor could 
be equipped at not so high a cost, compared to the normal 
cost of surveillance. DVL can be mounted to integrate its 
data with cheaper AHRS (like XSense for example) for AL 
and RL (we avoid INS for the cost). A quantitative measure 
of absorption of electromagnetic waves in the water led to 
the possibility of using Radio frequency modems in sea 
water. Anyway some new electromagnetic underwater 
modems may promise something here and we are 
investigating. Recently, electromagnetic devices for marine 
application 
have 
shown 
an 
improvement 
in 
their 
performance leading to commercial products [15].  These 
new devices need to be investigated  and also whether their 
dimensions are too large for Harness project. Electric and 
static magnetic fields also are under investigation.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this work, we have explained that the Harness project 
could be useful for multipurpose use with particular attention 
to the localization problem. We propose a swarm of 
underwater cooperating robots.  
The advantages lie in the economy of the method, the 
parallelization of the task and the robustness of the system. 
The disadvantage lies in the major control difficulty of the 
swarm, owing to the presence of a new layer named as 
“Swarm control” which has different rules from the 
individual machine control. Many difficulties remain to be 
studied, especially in the communication between swarm 
elements owing to the unfriendly environment that limits the 
communication channel also if different methods are used 
together.  
The localization problem is divided into three different 
tasks related to different work conditions and some classical 
and alternative methods are under investigation. The 
configuration problem of the swarm is solved using the time 
clock of every message exchanged between the elements of 
the swarm and its known movement. Actual work is 
addressed to overcome the principal problems we 
encountered in the realization of the project that are 
communication, control, localization of the swarm within the 
sea and telepresence of the human operator.  
Future work will concern the realization of a 
demonstration by using three prototypes. 
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The Harness project is funded by the Italian Institute 
Technology (IIT).  
IX. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
«HARNESS (Human telecontrolled Adaptive Robotic NEtwork of 
SensorS)». [Online]. Available: 
http://robotica.casaccia.enea.it/index.php?option=com_content&vie
w=article&id=63&Itemid=82&lang=en. [retrieved: Lug, 2012]. 
[2] 
 J. J. Leonard, A. A. Bennett, C. M. Smith, and H. Feder, 
«Autonomous underwater vehicle navigation», in IEEE ICRA 
Workshop on Navigation of Outdoor Autonomous Vehicles, 1998. 
[3] 
 S. Nawaz, M. Hussain, S. Watson, N. Trigoni, and P. N. Green, 
«An Underwater Robotic Network for Monitoring Nuclear Waste 
Storage Pools», 1st International ICST Conference on Sensor 
Systems and Software (SCUBE), pp. 236–255, 2009. 
[4] 
 J. Yuh, «Design and Control of Autonomous Underwater Robots: 
A Survey», Autonomous robot, pp. 7–24, 2000. 
[5] 
 J. Callmer, M. Skoglund, and F. Gustafsson, «Silent Localization 
of Underwater Sensors Using Magnetometers», EURASIP Journal 
on Advances in Signal Processing, vol. 2010, n°. 709318, pp. 
1687–6172, 2010. 
[6] 
 M. Dunbabin, P. Corke, I. Vasilescu, and D. Rus, «Data muffling 
over underwater wireless sensor networks using an autonomous 
underwater vehicle», in Proc. 2006 IEEE Intl. Conf. on Robotics 
and Automation (ICRA), 2006, pp. 2091–2098. 
[7] 
 O. Khatib, V. Kumar, and D. Rus, Experimental Robotics: The 
10th International Symposium on Experimental Robotics. Springer 
Verlag, 2008. 
[8] 
 C. M. S. J. . Leonard and A. A. B. . Shaw, «Concurrent Mapping 
and Localization for Autonomous Underwater Vehicles», presented 
at the Proc. Int. Conf. Field and Service Robotics, 1997. 
[9] 
 K. S. Chong and L. Kleeman, «Accurate odometry and error 
modelling for a mobile robot», in Robotics and Automation, 1997. 
Proceedings., 1997 IEEE International Conference on, 1997, vol. 
4, pp. 2783–2788 vol. 4. 
[10] 
«Archival Fish Tag with RF Transmitting Capabilities». [Online]. 
Available: http://www.tempsensornews.com/biomed/archival-fish-
tag-with-rf-transmitting-capabilities/. [Accessed: Mar, 2011]. 
[11] 
«Desert Star Systems, LLC - Underwater and Defense Systems». 
[Online]. Available: http://www.desertstar.com/. [retrieved: Mar, 
2011]. 
[12] 
 E. W. Grafarend and J. Shan, «GPS solutions: closed forms, 
critical and special configurations of P4P», GPS Solutions, vol. 5, 
n°. 3, pp. 29–41, 2002. 
[13] 
 T. Nara, S. Suzuki, and S. Ando, «A Closed-Form Formula for 
Magnetic Dipole Localization by Measurement of Its Magnetic 
Field and Spatial Gradients», IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, n°. 10, 
pp. 3291–3293, Ott 2006. 
[14] 
«Specifications «SeaSPY «Products «Marine Magnetics 
332
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[Marine magnetometers that do their job smarter.]». [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.marinemagnetics.com/products/seaspy/seaspy-
specifications. [retrieved: Mar, 2011]. 
[15] 
 V. I. Danilov and M. Ianovici, «Magnetic field of thick finite dc 
solenoids», Nuclear Instruments and Methods, vol. 94, n°. 3, pp. 
541–550, 1971. 
 
333
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

