Protocols for Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks - Challenges and Solutions 
Anne-Lena Kampen 
Western Norway University of Applied Sciences  
Bergen, Norway 
e-mail: alk@hvl.no  
 
 
Abstract—The underwater environment poses challenges for 
communication that can make terrestrial solutions ineffective. 
However, the mature terrestrial solutions are based on decades 
of real-world research and experience, proving their 
sustainability and reliability. Although not suitable for direct 
replication, it may be wise to take advantage of these proven 
solutions. With this in mind, it is valuable to study successful 
terrestrial approaches and evaluate their ability to support the 
harsh underwater environment, and to assess how procedures 
and algorithms can be adapted for efficient underwater 
communication. In this paper, we revisit frequently used 
Medium Access Control (MAC) protocols and discuss the 
challenges they face in the underwater environment. In 
addition, underwater challenges related to multi-hop data 
collection are discussed. To improve reception reliability in the 
highly dynamic underwater environment, we focus on 
broadcast solutions that are constrained to avoid network 
flooding. Location-based techniques look very promising in 
this regard. Related to the MAC layer, our recommendation is 
that underwater communication solutions should focus on 
preventing collisions at receiver, while reducing the time 
between packet reception.   
Keywords-UWSN; underwater wireless sensor networks; 
Medium Access Control MAC; underwater routing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The United Nation (UN) sustainability goal #14, life 
below water [1], calls for underwater surveillance solutions 
to monitor the marine environment and strengthen ecosystem 
knowledge. To this end, sensor networks can be essential 
building-blocks in systems used by the ocean industries and 
public surveys for monitoring the seabed and water-column 
conditions. The network can contribute to sustainable 
exploitation of underwater resources by monitoring 
environmental parameters, and ensure responsible growth 
with well-controlled environmental impact.  
Like terrestrial sensor networks, Medium Access Control 
(MAC) and network layer protocols are important to build 
sustainable networks. The goal of the MAC is to wisely 
share the network media between the nodes to provide 
efficient data collection. The network layer enables data 
from remote nodes to reach its destination. The protocols 
must adapt to the technology challenges related to the 
underwater media, such as low propagation speed, low and 
dynamic channel capacity, interference, ambient noise and 
asymmetric links, and so forth. In addition, the sensors are 
mainly battery charged and battery replacement is unfeasible. 
Furthermore, the ocean current may move the sensors. Thus, 
the protocols should provide solutions that cope with the 
dynamic environments and, simultaneously, reduce the 
energy consumption of the nodes.   
Current underwater wireless solutions are mainly based 
on underwater acoustic transmission [2]. The signal 
propagation for acoustic underwater communication is five 
orders of magnitude slower than light speed; in addition, it is 
affected by temperature, salinity and depth [3][4]. The low 
propagation speed presents a fundamental challenge in 
coordinating the access to the shared communication 
medium. The room available for medium access control is 
compressed, and limited channel capacity should not be used 
for resource reservation processes requiring large protocol 
overhead.    
Network layer protocols establish routing paths to enable 
multihop transmission, which can be used to increase the 
area covered by the network and/ or to reduce the output 
power, i.e., reduce transmission range, and save energy. The 
routing paths are formed based on specified criteria that aim 
to support the overall goal for the communication and/or to 
support overall network goals. For instance, the data can be 
transmitted over several paths simultaneously to support 
reliable communication or the data can be sent alternately 
over different available paths to balance the energy 
consumption in the network to prevent early depletion of 
nodes. However, due to the dynamic characteristic of the 
channel, and potential movement of sensor nodes, it is 
difficult to construct proactive routing paths, while reactive 
paths introduce high transmission delay. On the contrary, 
broadcasting can limit the delay and reduce the need for 
proactive configuration. In addition, the reliability is 
improved because the data are transmitted over several paths. 
However, the broadcast should be constrained to reduce 
network traffic and limit the energy consumption of the 
nodes. Thus, the peculiar characteristic of the environment 
means that protocols used in terrestrial communication 
require adjustments 
to provide efficient 
underwater 
communication. To this end, the contribution of this paper is 
to discuss characteristics that are challenging when 
converting basic terrestrial MAC layer protocols for use in 
underwater environment. In addition, network layer 
protocols that enable constrained multicast are investigated. 
Basic multicast should be avoided to prevent excessive 
network traffic as well and excessive energy consumption. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 
we present the related work. MAC layer protocols their 
issues related to the underwater environment are discussed in 
Section 3. Network layer protocols, and their issues, are 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

discussed in Section 4. In Section 5 we present the 
conclusion.   
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The increasing interest in life and resources below water 
has mobilized a wide range of research on underwater sensor 
networks. The communication protocols are important to 
enable efficient operation. Thus, a range of solutions are 
suggested in the literature, and various surveys present and 
discuss selected solutions focusing on various aspects. A 
thorough discussion of MAC protocols for underwater 
acoustic networks is found in [5]. It is emphasized that 
further studies should focus on methods that handle the long 
propagation delay in ways that improve the utilization of the 
available bandwidth. For instance, one way is by allowing 
concurrent transmission as long as packet-collision at the 
receiver is prevented. Boukerche and Sun [6] discuss the 
underwater channel modeling, MAC and routing protocols, 
and localization schemes. It is pointed out that underwater 
environment represents a much more complex environment 
than the hypothesis that the existing approaches are 
commonly 
based 
upon. 
The 
complex 
environment 
characteristics are the reason that we, for network layer 
solutions, focus on constrained broadcast rather than single 
path solutions that are more vulnerable for changing channel 
characteristics. 
Khisa and Moh [7] focus on energy-efficient routing 
protocols, and categorize the protocols using a new 
taxonomy. Energy consumption is also very much in focus 
when discussing localization-based and localization-free 
routing protocols, along with routing issues in [8]. In the 
conclusion, Khalid et al. point out that all protocols have 
pros and cons such that a protocol that is best for all cases 
cannot be found. The same is pointed out in [9] where 
routing protocols for acoustic sensor networks are assessed 
according to feasible application scenarios. An earlier survey 
that gives a nice overview of routing protocols and network 
issues is presented in [10]. Terrestrial routing protocols are 
also compared with Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks 
(UWSNs) in the survey. The survey presented in [11] 
focuses on cross-layer designed routing protocols. The 
authors define cross layer design as a design where 
algorithms from different layers can exchange information 
with each other, and point out that layered designs are better 
for creating adaptive solutions. A substantial part of the 
protocols suggested for UWSNs do, at least to some degree, 
follow the definition of cross-layer solutions defined in the 
paper. For instance, using this definition, all network layer 
protocols that use location or energy level as selection 
criteria will be categorized as cross-layer protocols.     
Our focus is to present the issues that affect the MAC and 
network layer protocols. We review basic MAC layer 
algorithms and describe their weakness related to underwater 
communication. At the network layer, the focus is on 
methods that reduce broadcast. Due to the dynamic 
environment, the links are very unreliable. Broadcast 
communication is therefore advantageous compared to 
communication over pre-decided dedicated links. However, 
simple broadcast is a waste of energy. 
III. 
MAC PROTOCOLS 
MAC protocols have a large impact on the overall 
network performance because they coordinate the nodes’ 
access to the medium. The access must be shared fairly 
between the nodes, the scarce bandwidth resource must be 
efficient utilized, packet collisions should be avoided, and 
the access delay must be limited. In addition, sustainable 
solutions require energy-efficient operations that lengthen 
the network lifetime and reduce the management cost. To 
this end, the impact for the various states of the 
communication processes must be investigated to develop 
the 
most 
optimal 
solution. 
In 
addition, 
dynamic 
environments and low channel capacity require adaptive and 
bandwidth-efficient protocols. 
The access methods generally used can be categorized as 
fixed-assignment protocols, demand-assigned protocols and 
random-access protocols [12]. In fixed-assignment protocols, 
the channel is divided between the nodes such that nodes can 
access the medium without any risk of collisions. Typical 
protocols used are Time Division Mutiple Access (TDMA), 
Frequency Division Multiple Access (FDMA) and Code 
Division Multiple Access (CDMA). These protocols provide 
predictable access delay, and efficient utilization of available 
bandwidth. In addition, no energy is wasted on collisions. 
However, static resource reservation increases the packet 
loss probability in the highly dynamic underwater 
environment. In addition, the assigned resources require 
signaling to renegotiate resources when the network 
topology changes or if nodes require more resources due to 
increased traffic load. 
Demand-assigned protocols provide short term channel 
assignments. Polling schemes belong to this class of 
protocols. The nodes may emit request for channel allocation 
and successful allocation is confirmed back to the nodes with 
description of the allocated resources. The resource may be 
in terms of number and positions of TDMA slots. Time 
slotted communication is illustrated in Figure 1. The 
administration of resources can be distributed to some key-
nodes in the network, for instance to cluster heads in  
clustered networks. However, network-wide resource 
reservation is complex as traffic from nodes in adjacent areas 
can interfere. In addition, underwater currents or seafloor 
changes may move the nodes. Furthermore, efficient TDMA 
requires precise synchronization which is challenging in 
underwater environments due to the long and variable 
transmission delay, however short periods of static and 
predictable propagation delay may provide synchronization 
that is accurate enough [13].  
 
Figure 1. Time slotted communication. TDMA  
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The nodes in random-access protocols are uncoordinated 
and operate in a fully distributed manner. ALOHA is one of 
the earliest and most important protocols in this category. In 
the simplest version of ALOHA, the nodes transmit the 
packets as soon as they are generated. Successfully receiving 
the packet, the receiver transmits an Acknowledgement 
packet (ACK) back to the sender. If the sender does not 
receive ACK, it assumes that a collision has occurred. It 
waits a random amount of time (backoff) before 
retransmitting the packet. ALOHA works well when the 
traffic load is low. Under heavier load the number of 
collisions increases, increasing the delay and energy 
consumption, and reducing the throughput efficiency. In 
slotted ALOHA, the time is divided into timeslots, and 
packet transmission can only start at the beginning of a 
timeslot. The slot time is long enough to accommodate the 
longest allowed packets. Thus, only simultaneously 
transmitted packets can collide. However, because of the 
long transmission delay, this is not true in underwater 
communication. In addition, to avoid collisions, the slot 
length must also take the transmission time as well as packet 
length into consideration. That is, the transmission time 
between the sender and the node that is furthest away, but 
still within the sender’s transmission range (interference 
range), must be considered.  
Another popular random-access protocol is Carrier Sense 
Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance (CSMA/ CA), 
which is a random-access scheme with carrier sense and 
collision avoidance through random backoff.  Different 
backoff algorithms can be used, but they roughly follow the 
following 
procedure: 
To 
avoid 
disrupting 
ongoing 
transmissions the nodes listen (carrier sense) to the channel, 
and choose a random number of backoff slots within a 
contention window. After the channel has been idle for a 
period equal to Distributed Interface Space (DIFS), the 
backoff value is decremented for each idle timeslot observed 
on the channel. As soon as the counter expires, the node 
accesses the medium. See illustration in Figure 2, where 
node A transmits a packet after the channel has been idle for 
DIFS plus the time it takes for the backoff value to be 
counted down. Node B has to wait until the channel has been 
idle for DIFS before it starts counting down the backoff 
value. A collision triggers retransmission with a new random 
selection of backoff time, and for each collision the 
contention window doubles. This is called exponential 
backoff. An explicit ACK is sent by the receiver upon 
successful reception of the packet. Using slotted CSMA, the 
backoff equals a random number of timeslots. Asymmetric 
links affect the communication efficiency especially when 
reliable communication is required. The reason is that when 
ACK messages are lost, the packets will be re-transmitted. 
Re-transmitted packets increase network traffic, which 
increases collision probability and also the energy 
consumption.  
Furthermore, carrier sense protocols are susceptible to 
hidden node problem and unfair access. The slow 
propagation speed can lead to unfair access since there is 
special bias in estimating clear channel. Nodes close to the 
signal source get a clear channel earlier providing them with 
more access opportunities [14]. Another spatial unfairness is 
when nodes closer to the receiver may always win Request 
To Send (RTS) contentions since their requests are always 
received earliest [15]. The hidden node problem is due to the 
distance between the transmitting and receiving node. A 
transmitting node, NT1, cannot detect activity at the receiver, 
Ns, that is caused by a sending node, NT2, whose 
transmission reaches the receiver, but not the node NT1. To 
reduce the hidden-node problem, Request To Send/ Clear To 
Send (RTS/CTS) can be used. After the sending node has 
obtained channel access it sends a RTS packet to the 
receiver. The packet includes a time-field that indicate the 
duration of the overall transaction. Successfully receiving the 
RTS means that there are no hidden nodes that are currently 
creating interference at the receiver side. The sender replies 
with an CTS, which also includes the duration time-field. 
Receiving the CTS the transmitter starts transmitting of the 
data packet. Thus, signaling the data transmission with both 
RTS and CTS, reduced the hidden node problem. In 
addition, neighbors of both the sender and the receiver are 
informed about the transmission and its duration. To account 
for the long transmission delay in underwater environment, 
the nodes must delay data transmission according to the 
longest possible delay, and the relatively long time-span 
increases the probability of transmission from a neighboring 
node. Thus, basic access control processes, such as carrier 
sense, reservation of the media, and ACK are more time-
consuming and more management is required if these 
processes are to be optimized for neighbors at different 
distances.  
Channel utilization and the first-in-first-out fairness 
police may also suffer from the long delay. The latter is the 
case if transmissions arrive out-of-order because the 
propagation delay from various senders is unequal. Channel 
utilization is reduced because collision-free reception is not 
guaranteed although the transmissions from different nodes 
are collision-free. Likewise, concurrent transmission may not 
lead to collision [16]. To improve the media utilization, 
receiver-centric solutions can be used to handle the unequal 
delay that exists between the various transmitting nodes.   
Receivers can arrange the transmission time for the 
transmitters so that collisions are avoided, while avoiding 
that the time between each received packet is unnecessarily 
long, such as suggested in [17]. The major challenge of the 
solution is prediction and management of delays, which 
 
Figure 2. Carrier Sense Multiple Access CSMA  
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

require frequent information exchange between nodes, 
especially under dynamic channel conditions.  
No solution can take all challenges into account. Thus, no 
solutions fit all scenarios as confirmed in the at-sea-
experiment presented in [18], where the performance of three 
well-known MAC layer protocols, namely CSMA, T-Lohi 
[19][20], and Distance Aware Collision Avoidance Protocol 
(DACAP), is evaluated in an extensive sea-test during 
NATO at-sea campaigns. CSMA is the simplest of these 
protocols, where, to prevent collisions, the nodes listen to 
detect if the media is idle before transmission. If not idle, the 
nodes back-off according to an exponential back-off 
mechanism after which it again listens for a silent channel. 
ACK can be used for reliable communication. Applying T-
Lohi, the node transmits a reservation-tone, after which it 
listens to the channel for the duration of a Contention Round 
(CR). If no other tones are heard during CR, the data packet 
is transmitted. Otherwise, it enters back-off state for a 
random number of CR before repeating the procedure. The 
most advanced of the three protocols is DACAP in which 
RTS/ CTS is used to reserve the channel. To warn about 
possible interference, the destination node sends a short 
warning packet to its sender if it overhears control packets 
from other nodes after sending its CTS and before receiving 
the associated data packet. If the sender overhears a control 
packet, or receives a warning form its destination while 
waiting for CTS, it aborts data communication. Using two 
different modems, the results reported in [18] for the three 
different MAC protocols show similar trends, although the 
overall protocol performance is significantly affected by the 
delays and overheads associated with the acoustic modem 
used. Furthermore, the results presented show that different 
traffic load, channel conditions and evaluation metric call for 
different solutions. Basically, solutions should be able to 
adapt, in a distributed way, to dynamically changing 
conditions. Using DACAP, the network performance is 
deteriorated when the traffic load is increased.  ACK packet 
improves packet delivery ratio as long as the link is 
symmetric, however this is not always the case. CSMA 
reduces the transmission attempts since the channel is 
reserved by the data packet itself, however, the whole packet 
has to be retransmitted when collisions occur. The end-to-
end delay of CSMA and DACAP use exponential backoff 
making the delay increase rapidly with increased number of 
retransmissions. Not using exponential backoff, T-Lohi has 
lower end- to- to lay, the price payed is higher packet loss.  
In contrast to single-channel protocols discussed so far, 
multiple-channel protocols rely on several channels for 
communication to increase network throughput, reduce 
channel access delay, and potentially save energy. 
Neighboring nodes can communicate simultaneously, 
provided that they communicate using unequal data 
channels. Furthermore, control signals sent on a different 
channel will not affect the data that is sent. In [21], the 
control channel is slotted such that each node in a 
neighborhood is assigned a unique slot. Thus, also control 
packet are prevented from collisions. The solution suggested 
in [22] present a quorum-based data channel allocation to 
prevents collisions. However, generation and management of 
multichannel protocols is complex, and require advanced 
modems. In addition, if the nodes are equipped with only one 
transceiver, it means that they can only work one channel at 
a time, either on the control channel or on the data channel. 
When this is the case, the handshaking protocols such as 
RTS/CTS must be tuned to prevent triple-hidden terminal 
problem [23]. The triple-hidden problem occurs if two of the 
nodes in a neighborhood are communicating on a data 
channel. Simultaneously, another two nodes use the control 
channel for handshaking and agree to use channel A for data 
communication. The first two nodes will then be unaware of 
the data channel that the last two nodes selected. Thus, if the 
first two nodes want to initiate a new communication, they 
may select data-channel A, creating a collision.     
Central one-hop network solutions simplify media access 
management and general network complexity at the cost of 
network coverage and network dynamic. Collisions can 
easily be avoided using a polling approach where the nodes 
are prohibited from transmission unless polled by the central 
node. The polling sequence is not required to be sequential; 
it can contain repetitions to support nodes with various 
amount of sensor-data [24]. To approach the throughput 
gained using TDMA, [25] suggest a centralized approach. 
The gateway measures the delay to each individual node to 
organize the nodes’ transmission time and sequence. The 
gateway manages the network operation such that the data 
from all the nodes are received in strict order, resembling a 
subdivision frame. Although interesting approaches, they 
require the nodes to stay awake to listen for polling requests.  
To summarize, there is no single solution that works best 
in all scenarios, and there is probably a need for solutions 
that can be adapted to dynamic changes. Furthermore, most 
of the underwater MAC protocols suggested follow 
terrestrial approach, trying to avoid transmission collision, 
although this will not guarantee against collision at reception 
[5]. To efficiently utilize the scarce bandwidth available 
underwater, the focus should be on the receiver side, 
solutions must reduce the time between packet reception 
while simultaneously preventing collisions at the receiver.  
IV. 
NETWORK LAYER PROTOCOLS  
Multi-hop communication can be used to increase the 
area covered by the network, or it can be used to reduce the 
distance between nodes. The advantage of reducing the 
distance is that the nodes’ output power can be reduced to 
save energy. Also, the reduced distance can be used to 
increase the bit rate by increasing the transmission frequency 
and bandwidth. Furthermore, short distance between nodes 
increases the granularity of the surveyed area which may be 
valuable to pick up local variations and trends related to the 
parameters surveyed. On the other hand, longer distances 
between nodes in multi-hop networks can reduce equipment 
and management costs.  
Multihop communication entails challenges such as 
increased network traffic and imbalance in the energy 
consumption in the network. Traffic increases because data 
packets must be forwarded, and management information 
must be exchanged to generate and maintain the routing 
paths. Energy imbalance occurs since the nodes in the 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

vicinity of the sink must forward packets for all remote 
located 
nodes. 
Furthermore, 
the 
harsh 
underwater 
environment makes the generation of routing path more 
challenging. For instance, it is likely that the quality of a 
substantial amount of the links are time varying, thus 
proactively generated paths may not be reliable. Reactively 
created paths, on the other hand, introduce long delay. In 
addition, the links may be unidirectional or asymmetric, 
which makes it difficult to utilize paths that may be well-
working and stable for communication in the correct 
direction. Broadcasting alleviates the challenges related to 
generating routing paths since all candidate paths are tried, 
and no specific routing paths needs to be generated. 
However, the broadcast must be constrained to prevent 
excessive network traffic, and to reduce the energy 
consumption of the nodes.  
Opportunistic routing [26] can be an efficient method to 
constrain broadcasting. The basic idea is that all receivers 
contend to forward packets, i.e., the senders broadcast the 
packets which are forwarded by the most optimal receiver. 
Location-based protocols can be used for opportunistic 
routing in underwater environments. Using a greedy scheme, 
packets are always forwarded by the node located closest to 
the sink. This is illustrated in Figure 3, where the green node 
transmits a packet. The circle around the green node 
illustrates green node’s transmission range. The red node is 
the destination, i.e., the sink. The orange node is the node 
inside the green node’s transmission range that is closest to 
the sink. Thus, the orange node forwards the packet. Only 
local information is used to decide whether the received data 
should be forwarded, no routing data needs to be exchanged. 
For instance, each data packet contains information about the 
destination’s location. Nodes that receive the packet start a 
timer that is proportional to their own distance to the 
destination. If the node overhears the packet being forwarded 
by a neighboring node before its own timer reaches zero, it 
refrains from forwarding the packet. Otherwise, it forwards 
the packet. The long delay in underwater communication 
requires that the timer that sets the holding-time (the time 
between a packet is received until it is potentially forwarded) 
is wisely set. Two aspects must be considered. First, the 
timer must be long enough to ensure that a packet forwarded 
by a more preferred node is received by the less preferred 
node before the timer of the less preferred node expires. 
Remember, due to the underwater environment, it takes time 
for the forwarded packet to reach the less preferred nodes. 
Second, it is likely that the node in the more preferred 
location receives the packet later because it is probably 
located closer to the sink, and further form the transmitter. 
To sum up: wait until the most-preferred node receives the 
packet, then wait for the packet relayed by this most-
preferred node to reach the less-preferred nodes. Taking both 
of these aspects into consideration increases the delay in the 
network. In addition, when the number of potential successor 
nodes is high, a wide range of distinct holding-time-values is 
required to prevent multiple node timers from expiring 
simultaneously. To provide a broad range of distinct holding-
time-values, the average delay in the network increases.  
Location-based opportunistic protocols require that nodes 
know their location. GPS is unfeasible as an underwater 
location service. One method of solving the underwater 
location problem is to let some dedicated nodes, with known 
locations, send out beacons at regular intervals. Based on 
received signal, other nodes can use methods like 
triangulation to determine their own location. Received 
power and/ or time delay of acoustic signals offer better 
precision than when using terrestrial radio signals. However, 
some nodes may be located such that they cannot receive the 
beacons emitted to estimate locations. To prevent data from 
these nodes from being lost, a method such as suggested in 
[27] can be used: The nodes that do not receive location 
information use a reactive protocol to send data to the best-
located neighbor node.  
Routing pipe can be used to reduce the number of 
potential forwarding nodes, and reduce the probability of 
excessive network traffic for opportunistic protocols. In 
addition, it alleviates the increased delay needed to 
accommodate the broad range of distinct holding-time-
values discussed above. Assuming a vector from the sender 
to the target node, the routing pipe is a cylinder with 
adjustable radius centered around that vector. Nodes inside 
the cylinder are candidate forwarding nodes. The transmitted 
packet carries the position of the sender node, the target 
node, and the forwarding nodes to enable the receivers to 
determine whether they are located inside the routing pipe, 
and whether they are located closer to the destination than 
the transmitting node. This is illustrated in Figure 4. The 
green node transmits a packet toward the sink (the red node). 
All nodes within the green circle encircling the green node 
are covered by transmission. The packet is forwarded by the 
 
Figure 3. Opportunistic routing.  
 
Figure 4. Time slotted communication. TDMA  
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

orange node since it is the node inside the pipe (blue shaded 
cylinder) that is closest to the sink. Adjusting the width of 
the cylinder or the transmission range, adjusts the number of 
candidate forwarders. In [28], to reduce the chances of 
forwarding data packets, nodes with less energy than the 
transmitting node intentionally calculates a reduced pipe 
diameter. Thus, they reduce that chance of being inside the 
cylinder formed by the sender-receiver vector and diameter. 
This is done to improve the energy balance in the network.    
A challenge related to location-based routing is the void 
region that may exist in the network. To prevent data loss, 
some measures are needed to find detours around the 
potential voids. A simple algorithm for finding detours 
around voids is to switch to broadcasting when approaching 
voids regions. Other measures to avoid void generally 
require that information is exchanged between the nodes. In 
the depth-based approach suggested in [29], the node 
examines its neighbors to check whether they can provide 
positive progress toward the destination. If not, the node 
requests information from two-hop nodes to adjust its depth 
such that positive forwarding can be resumed. To reduce the 
void problem, and improve the Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR), 
a holding-time that takes several factors into considerations 
is suggested in [30]. Firstly, a reliability index is calculated 
based on the energy of the current node and the energy of the 
forwarding region. In order to limit formation of energy 
holes and thereby increase the reliability, the forwarding 
region with the highest energy is selected. Secondly, an 
advancement factor is used: The depth of the note is 
calculated so that a small decrease in the depth gives an 
exponential increase in priority. This reduces the probability 
of duplicate packet transmissions because the priority 
difference is significant, even for a low change in depth. 
Third, a shortest path index is used. It combines the number 
of hops toward the destination and the average depth of the 
nodes in the next hop.  
Other well-known algorithms used in terrestrial Wireless 
Sensor Networks (WSNs) to reduce broadcasting, such as 
probabilistic and counter-based schemes may be well-worth 
testing in underwater environments. Counter-based schemes 
are based on the fact that broadcasting a message that has 
already been broadcasted by several neighboring nodes will 
not give a substantially increase the area covered. Thus, the 
nodes are prevented from rebroadcast messages if the 
expected additional coverage is limited.  Basically, the nodes 
count the number of times a message is received while 
waiting for medium access. If the counter becomes higher 
than a threshold, the transmission is canceled, otherwise the 
message is transmitted [31][32]. 
In probabilistic schemes, the nodes will rebroadcast 
messages with a probability P. If P = 1 the data packets are 
broadcasted. There is a certain probability that no neighbors 
choose to forward a packet. To ensure the progress of a 
packet towards the destination, the sender can re-emit the 
packet if no forwarded packets are heard. However, to ensure 
the packet’s progress, the sender may need to re-emit the 
packet several times, which increases network traffic. In 
addition, the packet may have been forwarded by nodes 
connected over a unidirectional link, which means that the 
re-emitted packets are a waste of both energy and bandwidth. 
To summarize, due to the dynamically changing channel 
condition and the long propagation delay in the underwater 
environment, broadcasting may be a better solution than 
reusing terrestrial routing protocols that generate specific 
routing paths. Broadcast-based forwarding is likely to 
improve the probability of packets reaching their intended 
destination. However, the broadcasting procedure should be 
constrained to reduce both energy consumption and network 
traffic.        
V. 
CONCLUSION 
MAC and network layer solutions for underwater 
communication require that characteristics such as long 
propagation delay, dynamic channel characteristic and 
limited bandwidth are considered. Long delays are especially 
challenging for MAC protocols. The time available for 
access control is reduced, and the limited channel resources 
should not be depleted by large amount of management 
traffic. For efficient utilization of the limited channel 
capacity, the focus should be on the solutions that both 
reduce the time between received packets, and, at the same 
time, prevent packet collisions at the receiver.  
Dynamic channel properties make it challenging to 
generate fixed routes. To reduce the probability of packets 
being lost during forwarding, we recommend to use 
constrained 
broadcasting 
techniques. 
Location-based 
techniques seem to be especially promising, and should be 
further investigated. 
In our future work, we will perform extended simulations 
of some of the protocols we have discussed in this paper. The 
protocols that show promising simulation results will be 
further evaluated in experimental tests.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. o. E. a. S. A. United Nations, Sustainable Development. 
"Goal 14." United Nations. https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal14 
(retrieved: October 2021.) 
[2] C. M. Gussen et al., "A survey of underwater wireless 
communication technologies," J. Commun. Inf. Sys, vol. 31, 
no. 1, pp. 242-255, 2016. 
[3] S. Gauni et al., "Design and Analysis of Co-operative 
Acoustic and Optical Hybrid Communication for Underwater 
Communication," Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 
117, no. 2, pp. 561-575, 2021. 
[4] E. Zanaj, E. Gambi, B. Zanaj, D. Disha, and N. Kola, 
"Underwater wireless sensor networks: Estimation of acoustic 
channel in shallow water," Applied Sciences, vol. 10, no. 18, 
p. 6393, 2020. 
[5] S. Jiang, "State-of-the-art medium access control (MAC) 
protocols for underwater acoustic networks: A survey based 
on a MAC reference model," IEEE communications surveys 
& tutorials, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 96-131, 2017. 
[6] A. Boukerche and P. Sun, "Design of Algorithms and 
Protocols 
for 
Underwater 
Acoustic 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks," ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 53, no. 6, 
pp. 1-34, 2020. 
[7] S. Khisa and S. Moh, "Survey on Recent Advancements in 
Energy-Efficient Routing Protocols for Underwater Wireless 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Sensor Networks," IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 55045-55062, 
2021. 
[8] M. Khalid et al., "A survey of routing issues and associated 
protocols in underwater wireless sensor networks," Journal of 
Sensors, vol. 2017, 2017. 
[9] Q. Lu and J. Shengming, "A review of routing protocols of 
underwater acoustic sensor networks from application 
perspective," in 2016 IEEE International Conference on 
Communication Systems (ICCS), IEEE, pp. 1-6, 2016.  
[10] M. Ayaz, I. Baig, A. Abdullah, and I. Faye, "A survey on 
routing techniques in underwater wireless sensor networks," 
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 34, no. 
6, pp. 1908-1927, 2011. 
[11] N. Li, J.-F. Martínez, J. M. Meneses Chaus, and M. Eckert, 
"A survey on underwater acoustic sensor network routing 
protocols," Sensors, vol. 16, no. 3, p. 414, 2016. 
[12] H. Karl and A. Willig, Protocols and architectures for wireless 
sensor networks. John Wiley & Sons, 2007. 
[13] A. A. Syed and J. S. Heidemann, "Time Synchronization for 
High Latency Acoustic Networks," in Infocom, vol. 6, pp. 1-
12, 2006.  
[14] W.-H. Liao and C.-C. Huang, "SF-MAC: A spatially fair 
MAC protocol for underwater acoustic sensor networks," 
IEEE sensors journal, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 1686-1694, 2011. 
[15] M. A. Hossain, A. Karmaker, and M. S. Alam, "Resolving 
spatial unfairness problem with reduced-handshaking in 
underwater acoustic sensor network," in 2017 International 
Conference on Wireless Communications, Signal Processing 
and Networking (WiSPNET), IEEE, pp. 2178-2182, 2017.  
[16] K. Kebkal, A. Mashoshin, and N. Morozs, "Solutions for 
underwater 
communication 
and 
positioning 
network 
development," Gyroscopy and navigation, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 
161-179, 2019. 
[17] N. Chirdchoo, W.-S. Soh, and K. C. Chua, "RIPT: A receiver-
initiated reservation-based protocol for underwater acoustic 
networks," 
IEEE 
Journal 
on 
Selected 
Areas 
in 
Communications, vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 1744-1753, 2008. 
[18] R. Petroccia, C. Petrioli, and J. Potter, "Performance 
evaluation of underwater medium access control protocols: 
At-sea experiments," IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, 
vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 547-556, 2017. 
[19] A. A. Syed, W. Ye, and J. Heidemann, "T-Lohi: A new class 
of MAC protocols for underwater acoustic sensor networks," 
in IEEE INFOCOM 2008-The 27th Conference on Computer 
Communications, IEEE, pp. 231-235, 2008.  
[20] A. A. Syed, W. Ye, and J. Heidemann, "Comparison and 
evaluation of the T-Lohi MAC for underwater acoustic sensor 
networks," 
IEEE 
Journal 
on 
Selected 
Areas 
in 
Communications, vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 1731-1743, 2008. 
[21] C. Zidi, F. Bouabdallah, R. Boutaba, and A. Mehaoua, "MC-
UWMAC: A multi-channel MAC protocol for underwater 
sensor networks," in 2017 International Conference on 
Wireless Networks and Mobile Communications (WINCOM), 
IEEE, pp. 1-6, 2017.  
[22] F. Bouabdallah, R. Boutaba, and A. Mehaoua, "Collision 
avoidance energy efficient multi-channel MAC protocol for 
underwater acoustic sensor networks," IEEE Transactions on 
Mobile Computing, vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 2298-2314, 2018. 
[23] Z. Zhou, Z. Peng, J.-H. Cui, and Z. Jiang, "Handling triple 
hidden terminal problems for multichannel MAC in long-
delay underwater sensor networks," IEEE Transactions on 
Mobile Computing, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 139-154, 2011. 
[24] W. Liu et al., "APOLL: Adaptive polling for reconfigurable 
underwater data collection systems," in 2018 OCEANS-
MTS/IEEE Kobe Techno-Oceans (OTO), IEEE, pp. 1-9, 
2018.  
[25] N. Morozs, P. Mitchell, and Y. V. Zakharov, "TDA-MAC: 
TDMA without clock synchronization in underwater acoustic 
networks," IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 1091-1108, 2017. 
[26] V. G. Menon and P. J. Prathap, "Comparative analysis of 
opportunistic routing protocols for underwater acoustic sensor 
networks," in 2016 international conference on emerging 
technological trends (ICETT), IEEE, pp. 1-5, 2016.  
[27] S. Lee and D. Kim, "Underwater hybrid routing protocol for 
UWSNs," in 2013 Fifth International Conference on 
Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN), IEEE, pp. 472-
475, 2013.  
[28] S. M. Mazinani, H. Yousefi, and M. Mirzaie, "A vector-based 
routing protocol in underwater wireless sensor networks," 
Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 100, no. 4, pp. 1569-
1583, 2018. 
[29] R. W. Coutinho, A. Boukerche, L. F. Vieira, and A. A. 
Loureiro, 
"Geographic 
and 
opportunistic 
routing 
for 
underwater 
sensor 
networks," 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Computers, vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 548-561, 2015. 
[30] M. Ismail et al., "Reliable path selection and opportunistic 
routing protocol for underwater wireless sensor networks," 
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 100346-100364, 2020. 
[31] R. Otnes, P. A. van Walree, H. Buen, and H. Song, 
"Underwater acoustic network simulation with lookup tables 
from physical-layer replay," IEEE Journal of Oceanic 
Engineering, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 822-840, 2015. 
[32] Y.-C. Tseng, S.-Y. Ni, Y.-S. Chen, and J.-P. Sheu, "The 
broadcast storm problem in a mobile ad hoc network," 
Wireless networks, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 153-167, 2002. 
 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-917-1
SENSORCOMM 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

