IEEE802.15.4 Performance in Various WSNs Applications 
 
Marwa Salayma, Wail Mardini, Yaser Khamayseh, Muneer Bani Yassein 
Department of Computer Science 
Jordan University of Science and Technology (JUST) 
Irbid, Jordan 
{mksalayma, mardini, yaser, masadeh}@just.edu.jo 
 
Abstract— IEEE802.15.4 is a standard proposed to support 
physical and MAC layers for low data rate Wireless Sensor 
Network (WSN) applications. It provides features that allow 
diverse WSN applications to work at reduced energy 
consumption in low cost. These applications can be classified 
according to the arrival rate of the surrounding phenomena 
and according to the duty cycle. This paper investigates three 
WSN applications with different arrival rates and different 
duty cycles (100% and 50%). This paper performs intensive 
simulation analysis on seven network scenarios with different 
number of nodes. The scenarios are evaluated in terms of 
energy 
consumption, 
average 
end-to-end 
delay 
and 
throughput.  The obtained results reveal that, irrespective of 
application type, both average delay and throughput behaviors 
vary directly, whereas energy consumption varies inversely. 
Results also revealed that as the duty cycle increases, both 
average delay and throughput improve. Improving one of the 
two metrics, by just increasing the duty cycle, assures 
enhancing the other metric, accordingly.  
 
Keywords-Wireless sensor networks; IEEE802.15.4; Beacon 
enabled; 
Arrival 
rate; 
Superframe 
structure; 
Energy 
consumption. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Wired sensors are replaced with wireless ones to form 
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs). A WSN is a collection 
of sensing devices that communicate with each other and 
with the surrounding environment via wireless links [1][2]. 
The main source of power for the sensors is batteries. Due 
to the limited nature of batteries, it is essential to design 
sensor nodes to operate for months or even years [2]. 
Energy conservation is the main interest of literature studies 
in WSNs, which focus on designing WSN energy efficient 
algorithms and standards, one of which is the IEEE802.15.4 
standard [3].  
IEEE802.15.4 standard supports both physical and 
Media Access Control (MAC) layers.  IEEE802.15.4 MAC 
supports two types of devices; Full Functional Devices 
(FFDs) and Reduced Functional Device (RFDs) which 
differ in their capabilities. FFDs can act as a coordinator or 
as a sink node and is typically referred to as PAN 
coordinator (PANc). On the other hand, RFD acts only as an 
ordinary end device [4-6].  Nodes with different types that 
follow the standard can communicate with each other’s 
forming two types of topologies: star and peer to peer. Peer 
to peer topology can be classified as either a mesh or a 
cluster tree topology [6-8].  
 IEEE802.15.4 standard supports three different Radio 
Frequency (RF) bands [4].  The most popular RF band is the 
unlicensed 2.4 GHz. This band offers high data and it 
consumes less power [4]. IEEE802.15.4 MAC operates 
either in beacon enabled or beaconless modes. In beacon 
enabled mode, FFD devices broadcasts beacon frame 
regularly in order to identify itself so that other nodes can 
recognize their master and start associating with it. Beacon 
frame includes information that enables nodes synchronize 
with each other when they need to access the channel 
[9][10]. Furthermore, beacon frame includes information 
that indicates whether there is any pending data for nodes. 
As coordinator sends a beacon frame and follows it by 
another one, the time between those two frames is referred 
to as the Beacon Interval (BI) and it is divided virtually into 
16 equal sized slots. BI duration can be specified through 
Beacon Order parameter (BO) according to the following 
formula [9]: 
 
BI = aBaseSuperframeDuration * 2BO                 (1) 
 
Nodes can use the channel during the whole BI period or 
can sleep for some time. The parameter used to specify this 
time is the Superframe Order (SO) according to the 
following formula [9]: 
 
SD = aBaseSuperframeDuration* 2SO                            (2)
 
 
 where 0 ≤ SO ≤ BO ≤ 14 
 
aBaseSuperframeSuration value depends on the slot 
duration according to the following formula: 
 
aBaseSuperframeDuration= aBaseslotDuration * total 
number of slots  
 
 
                (3) 
 
 Typically, time durations are expressed in terms of 
general time unit that is a symbol. The value of one symbol 
in seconds depends on the chosen RF band. In the 2.4 Ghz 
RF band, a symbol equals to 15.36 ms. These concepts can 
be summarized through one general concept namely, the 
duty cycle (D). It is the percentage of time the node is 
awake in the BI, and mathematically is expressed as follows 
[9][10]:  
 
D=SD/BI * 100%        
 
 
 (4) 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

When a node needs to access the medium, it has to 
locate the beginning of the next time slot to compete for the 
channel, thus, it follows the contention based algorithm 
followed by the standard, that is, the slotted Carrier Sense 
Multiple 
Access/ 
Collision 
Avoidance 
algorithm 
(CSMA/CA); this time portion is referred to as Contention 
Access Period (CAP) [9][10]. Furthermore, the standard 
empowers the PANc with the authority to assign some slots 
excessively for some nodes during which they can utilize 
the channel alone. These time slots are referred to as 
Guaranteed Time Slots (GTS). The optional period, which 
includes those slots, is referred as Contention Free period 
(CFP) and can include maximum of seven GTS. CAP and 
the optional CFP together are referred to as the Active 
Period, and its duration often referred to as SuperFrame 
Duration (SD) [9][10]. More precisely, every time the node 
needs to access the channel, it needs to locate the boundary 
of what is called the slotted/un-slotted CSMA backoff 
period. Thus, the standard deals with time in terms of 
backoff period unit which in beacon enabled mode is 
aligned between the slot boundaries and indicated through 
aUnitBackoffPeriod which equals to 20 symbols or 0.32 ms 
[10]. The length of each period discussed previously is 
assigned through beacon frame which is transmitted in the 
first time slot (slot 0) [4].  
Improving the beacon enabled standard performance is 
directly related to the chosen BO and SO values. These 
parameters need to be chosen carefully to fully utilize the 
scarce resources of WSNs. How to decide the optimal BO 
and SO values that achieve the best performance is an 
application related issue. WSN applications are diverse and 
can be classified according to the percentage of duty cycle 
they work through as well as their packets arrival rate.  For 
example, an application may have packets ready for 
transmission every second but need to be active for 30 
minutes, and hence, shall sleep for the other 30 minutes in 
an hour. Some applications may work through low arrival 
rate such as 0.1 second, thus, can be classified as very active 
applications. Other applications may work through high 
arrival rates such as 2 seconds and classified as inactive 
applications, while many applications wok at low constant 
arrival rate which may increase suddenly according to some 
criteria. Hence, each application has its own special case 
that has much to do in the decision of BO and SO, keeping 
in mind that the optimal building block of any network 
topology consists of seven nodes (piconet).  
Simulation analysis conducted in [11] focus on 
understanding the behavior of beacon enabled PAN 
according to all (BO, SO) possible combinations. However, 
results achieved consider one type of application with 1 
second arrival rate. Moreover, results indicate that it may be 
impossible to achieve high PAN performance in term of all 
metrics. Hence, to generalize this analysis, we need to study 
different arrival rates for different duty cycles to improve 
the standard performance in terms of the three metrics 
irrespective of application type, which is the main goal of 
this paper. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II 
summarizes some of the literature work which is closely 
related to the paper topic, while Section III   illustrates the 
followed methodology, whereas Section IV clarifies and 
discusses the simulation results achieved. Section V 
concludes the paper and offers some ideas for future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Several studies were conducted to analyse the 
performance of the IEEE802.15.4 standard to improve 
energy consumption. Many researches were proposed to 
tune the standard parameters to achieve the best 
performance of the network.  
Salayma et al. [11] investigates the standard beacon 
enabled mode behaviour through intensive simulation 
applied on seven PAN scenarios. It categorizes different 
WSN application  according to duty cycle. It finds out the 
optimal range of (BO, SO) combinations for 1s arrival rate 
applications in terms of energy consumption, average end-
to-end delay and throughput. Moreover, it proposes an 
adaptive algorithm that outperforms the original MAC 
irrespective of the duty cycle. The proposed adaptive 
algorithm converges to the network current performance and 
improves network performance accordingly. However, such 
a work considers only Constant Bit Rate (CBR) applications 
with 1 second interval and results revealed may not reflect 
other WSN applications behavior. 
Neugebauer et al. [12] proposes an algorithm that 
reconfigures only the BO parameter of the IEEE 802.15.4 
superframe 
structure. 
The 
Beacon 
Order 
Adaptive 
Algorithm (BOAA) considers star topology. Changing BO 
depends on the inter-arrival rate which reflects the 
frequency of communication. Adjusting the value of BO 
changes the length of the duty cycle as a result of the 
dynamic changing of the beacon interval. Experimental 
results show that increasing the value of BO contributes to 
saving 
power 
[12]. 
However, 
this 
power 
saving 
improvement is at the expense of sharp increase in the 
delay, because increasing BO would cause nodes to wait for 
more time for the next beacon. Throughput was not taken 
into consideration. This makes BOAA suitable only for 
simple applications.  
Shu et al. [6] proposes an optimization scheme, in order 
to achieve the minimum energy consumption under the 
packet delivery reliability constraints. The objective 
function was achieved after finding the optimal values for 
the two decision variables: BO and SO. The obtained results 
in [6] show that, for a network with number of nodes varies 
from 5 to 35, the optimal BO value is 7. On the other hand, 
for a network with number of nodes is less than 15, the 
optimal SO value is 1. And for the other cases, the optimal 
SO value is 2. However, choosing optimal values for BO 
and SO depends much on the chosen quality of service 
constraints.  
In [13], the performance of the slotted CSMA/CA is 
investigated by studying the effects of SO, BO and Backoff 
Exponent (BE). However, similar study is conducted in [3] 
with different criteria, such as, number of nodes and data 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

frame size. Simulation experiments were conducted for 13 
different values of BO and SO, all with a duty cycle of 
100%. The best range of offered load that achieves the 
optimal trade-off between throughput and average delay 
utility was found to be between 35% and 60%. This study 
does not study the network with sleep period enabled.  
In [14], the IEEE 802.15.4 standard performance is 
evaluated in terms of throughput and packet delivery ratio. 
The study focuses on the Quality of Service QoS for real 
time sensor applications and provides an enhancement to the 
current IEEE 802.15.4 beacon enabled standard by 
dynamically allocating the already existed GTS. The 
standard performance metrics were evaluated through 
varying both BO and SO, while preserving the dynamically 
allocated one GTS. However, the study considers the SO 
and BO values up to 6, due to association latency that may 
result from choosing higher values which is not sufficient 
for WSN applications.  
 In [15], the performance of beacon enabled mode IEEE 
802.15.4 is evaluated in term of energy consumption in a 
large scale clustered tree network. Analysis of the IEEE 
802.15.4  MAC  were performed on  real Zigbee nodes 
applied on home network areas by varying BO values 
between 6 and 10, while fixing SO value to 0. Results reveal 
that power consumption decreases by increasing BO to 
some value (approximately 10) after which it increases. 
However, the study considers only very low duty cycles, 
due to the small fraction of CAP and does not consider the 
effect of SO on the standard performance at all.  
In [16], IEEE 802.15.4 standard performance is 
investigated in terms of throughput, energy consumption 
and reliability by applying the standard on ideal and non-
ideal star topologies. The study focuses is on changing 
number of nodes, while varying some of IEEE 802.15.4 
standard configurations, such as, the availability of 
synchronization, BO and SO. According to the achieved 
results, some recommendations were suggested that aid in 
configuring the standard, configuring applications that 
follow the standard and how to improve the standard. 
However, such recommendations can only be considered 
when applying the standard on the same tested topologies. 
III. 
METHODOLGY AND PROBLEM ANALYSIS 
Simulation work conducted by Salayma et al. [11] 
discusses the standard behavior in terms of total energy 
consumption, average end-to-end delay and throughput for 
seven PAN scenarios with different number of nodes. The 
work in [11] considers one type of applications, and the 
obtained results may not reflect other applications behavior. 
Moreover, results indicate that it may be impossible to 
achieve high PAN performance in term of all metrics. In 
other words, enhancing some metrics performance may be 
sacrificed in order to improve other metrics. Therefore, to 
generalize our analysis, our methodology considers other 
WSN CBR applications. It investigates active applications 
which receive packets very frequently, as well as, inactive 
applications that work through relatively low arrival rates. 
This paper examines different applications; as it studies the 
beacon enabled mode behavior which works through 
different arrival rates at different duty cycles.  
Hence, as a first step, we need to examine what would 
happen as BO and SO increase or decrease by 1 in order to 
realize why, how much and which metric performance is 
needed to be enhanced adaptively. Increasing and 
decreasing BO and SO by 1, means that network shall 
operate through 50% and 100% duty cycles. WSNs 
applications performance is analyzed in terms of the three 
metrics: total energy consumption, average end-to-end delay 
and throughput. Applications differ in packets arrival rate 
which are 0.1s, 1s and 2s. A previously specified (BO, SO) 
combination is allowed to change dynamically at a specified 
time for each application in order to study the effect of 
increasing or decreasing of BO or SO or both by 1. 
We will study the effect of choosing the same optimal 
combinations achieved for 1s arrival rate application on the 
other two applications. According to analysis results 
achieved in [11], it is revealed that (7, 7) is one of the 
combinations that relatively achieve good performance for 
the 1s arrival rate application, it is chosen as a reference 
point to analyze the other two applications behavior.  Hence, 
after 500s, four scenarios are examined, which are 
increasing or decreasing either BO=7 or SO=7 by 1 
resulting in 50% duty cycle and increasing or decreasing 
both BO=SO by 1 achieving a 100% duty cycle. Those 
scenarios examined for the three arrival rates applications 
applied on seven PANs which differ in number of nodes and 
each experiment are conducted five times. Network 
simulation parameters are presented in Table I.   
 
TABLE I. QUALNET SIMULATION PARAMETERS FOR SEVEN 
PAN SCENARIOS 
Parameter 
Value 
Physical and MAC model 
IEEE 802.15.4 
Area 
80 m * 80 m 
Number of nodes 
2-8 
Transmission range 
10 m 
Simulation time 
1000 s 
Channel Frequency 
2.4 GHz 
Data rate 
250 kbps 
Energy model 
MICAZ 
Antenna Height 
0.08 
Traffic 
CBR 
Payload size 
50 byte 
Arrival Rate 
0.1,1, 2 seconds 
BO and SO values 
(6,6) to (8,8) 
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
The following subsections discuss the results obtained for 
each performance metric. We depict the results for four 
PAN scenarios due to space consideration. 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

A. Total Energy Consumption (mWh) 
Four factors contribute in energy consumption and all 
need to be considered in investigating total energy 
consumption behaviour. Those contributors are the total 
energy a node consumes in packets transmission and 
reception, and the energy it dissipates during its idle 
listening and its sleep mode. Figures 1 to 4 depict energy 
consumption behavior for the four scenarios starting from 
one client up to seven clients. 
 
 
Figure 1. Total energy consumed for different arrival rates for 1client.  
 
 
Figure 2. Total energy consumed for different arrival rates for 3 clients.  
 
 
Figure 3. Total energy consumed for different arrival rates for 5 clients.  
 
Figure 4. Total energy consumed for different arrival rates for 7 clients.  
 
Very high arrival rate means frequent transmissions; 
hence, the dominating factor in energy consumption is the 
transmission power. However, after 500s, if the coordinator 
decides to increase or decrease either BO, or SO by 1, then, 
the node has a chance to rest and sleep for half of the BI 
period; thus, node saves energy. On the other hand, in low 
arrival rates applications, there would be more of a chance 
for free time while node is idle, which results in idle 
listening, hence, the dominating power consumption factor 
is idle listening. However, after 500s, if the coordinator 
decides to increase or decrease either BO, or SO by 1, then, 
node shall sleep for half of the BI period, and defer the 
transmission process for the next CAP if it receives a packet 
at the end of CAP. As the number of nodes increases, all the 
transmitting nodes 
may 
collide, which 
will cause 
retransmissions and as a result, energy consumption will 
increase. The obtained results show that for all arrival rates, 
increasing both BO and SO by 1 after 500s decreases energy 
consumption in comparison to the case of decreasing both 
BO and SO; this is because BI becomes longer, which in its 
turn, decreases beacon overhead at PANc.  
B. Average End-to-End Delay (s)  
               
Figures 5 to 8 depict average end-to-end delay behavior 
for the four scenarios starting from one client up to seven 
clients. 
 
 
Figure 5. Average end-to-end delay for different arrival rates for 1 
client. 
 
Figure 6. Average end-to-end delay for different arrival rates for 3 clients.  
 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 7. Average end-to-end delay for different arrival rates for 5 clients  
 
 
Figure 8.  Average end-to-end delay for different arrival rates for 7 clients.  
 
Despite the arrival rate, after 500s, if either BO or SO 
values decrease by 1, then, the duty cycle decreases to   half, 
which cause nodes that have no time to complete their work 
in the current CAP, to wait for the next active period. This 
gets worse in active networks. As arrival rate increases, 
delay is less affected if the duty cycle decreases. However, 
if both BO and SO values are increased or decreased by 1, 
this achieves a full percent duty cycle, which means that 
nodes have more opportunity to use the medium, and this 
will produce the second delay factor, that is, the backoff 
delay. Backoff delay increases as the number of nodes 
increases. As the number of nodes increases, the possibility 
of collision increases, especially in short duty cycles, and 
hence, throughput decreases. This can be noticed at very 
low arrival rate values, such as 0.1 s. This explains why in 
PANs with 5 and 7 clients, delay decreases for the 0.1 s 
arrival rate application; it is simply because the number of 
the successfully arrived packets at the coordinator in a 
second decreases dramatically in active networks 
C. Throughput (bit/s) 
Figures 9 to 12 depict throughputs’ results for the four 
scenarios starting from one client up to seven clients. 
 
 
Figure 9. Throughput for different arrival rates in for 1 client. 
 
 
Figure 10. Throughput for different arrival rates for 3 clients.  
 
 
Figure 11. Throughput for different arrival rates for 5 clients.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Throughput for different arrival rates for 7 clients.  
 
Increasing or decreasing either BO or SO by 1, lessens 
the duty cycle, which cause nodes to wait for the next CAP 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

in order to accomplish the uncompleted transmissions. This 
causes severe collision at the beginning of the next 
superframe structure, which increases as the number of 
nodes increases. Obviously, such situation adversely affects 
throughput. This case is obvious in very active networks 
that follows o.1s arrival rate. It is simply because more 
packets will be lost.  
Increasing both BO and SO by 1 offers nodes longer 
CAP. This increases throughput, which is noticed as the 
number of nodes increases. As the duty cycle decreases, 
both delay and throughput are badly affected. This result is 
two folded: first, if we want to improve the performance, we 
need to avoid low duty cycles by having both BO and SO 
values close to each others as much as possible. In other 
words, we have to increase the duty cycle. Second, 
enhancing delay behavior through increasing the duty cycle, 
shall improve throughput behavior accordingly. This means 
that, we can propose an algorithm that enhances throughput 
just by enhancing delay or vice versa, this can be achieved 
by increasing the duty cycle.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
WSN applications are diverse and can be classified 
according to the percentage of the duty cycle they work 
through and according to their packets arrival rate. Most of 
WSN 
applications 
follow 
IEEE802.15.4 
standard. 
Performance of any WSN application is basically affected 
by the chosen (BO, SO) combination, thus, in order to 
achieve optimal performance, different types of WSN 
applications have to be aware of which (BO, SO) 
combination to activate. Decreasing the duty cycle is 
beneficial for active networks as the sleep periods offer the 
nodes the opportunity to rest; this is obvious in WSNs 
applications that follow 0.1 s. However, despite that 
decreasing duty cycle affects applications total energy 
differently, both delay and throughput behaviors are 
consistent for all arrival rates. In other words, as the duty 
cycle decreases by fixing BO while decreasing SO or vice 
versa, both metrics are adversely affected. As a future work, 
we suggest to design a general algorithm that adaptively 
improves the three metrics as the duty cycle increases 
irrespective of application arrival rate. Moreover, we need 
to investigate low and high arrival rates WSNs applications 
behavior in order to select both the optimal and the cut-off 
(BO, SO) combinations for each application. Such results 
are needed to develop an adaptive and general algorithm 
that adjust the (BO, SO) combination in accordance with the 
changes in the arrival rate.  
REFERENCES 
[1] IF. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and A. Cayirci; 
A survey on sensor networks,  Communications Magazine 
2002. Atlanta, GA, USA, vol. 40(8), pp. 102-114, 2002. 
[2] L. Selavo, A. Wood, Q. Cao, T. Sookoor, H. Liu,  A. 
Srinivasan, and J. Porter,” wireless sensor network for 
environmental 
research”, 
Proc. 
the 
5th 
international 
conference on Embedded networked sensor systems. Sydney, 
Australia Nov.  2007, pp. 103-116. 
[3] A. Koubaa,” Promoting Quality of Service in Wireless Sensor 
Networks”, 
(Submitted 
for 
receiving 
Habilitation 
Qualification in Computer Science) National School of 
Engineering, Sfax, Tunisia, 2011. 
[4] SC. Ergen, “ZigBee/IEEE 802.15. 4 (Summary)”, [accessed 
April 
2013], 
Available 
from 
pages.cs.wisc.edu/~suman/courses/838/papers/zigbee.pdf. 
[5] P. Park,  C. Fischione, and  K. H. Johansson, “Adaptive IEEE 
802.15. 4 protocol for energy efficient, reliable and timely 
communications”, Proc.  the 9th ACM/IEEE international 
conference on information processing in sensor networks. 
Stockholm , April  2010, pp. 327-338.  
[6] F. Shu, T. Sakurai, HL. Vu,  and M. Zukerman, “Optimizing 
the IEEE 802.15. 4 MAC”, Proc.  IEEE Region 10 
Conference (TENCON). Hong Kong,Nov.  2006, pp. 1-4. 
[7] P. Patro, M. Raina, V. Ganapathy, M. Shamaiah, and C. 
Thejaswi , “Analysis and improvement of contention access 
protocol in IEEE 802.15. 4 star network”, Proc. Mobile 
Adhoc and Sensor Systems (MASS 07),  IEEE Internatonal 
Conference.  Piza, Italy, Oct. 2007, pp. 1-8. 
[8] H. Deng, J. Shen, B. Zhang, J. Zheng, J. Ma, and H. Liu, 
“Performance Analysis for Optimal Hybrid Medium Access 
Control in Wireless Sensor Networks”. Proc. Global 
Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM 08). LA, 
USA, Nov. 2008, pp. 1-5.  
[9] E. 
Casilari 
and 
J.M. 
Cano-Garcí, 
“Impact 
of 
the 
Parameterization of IEEE 802.15. 4 Medium Access Layer on 
the Consumption of ZigBee Sensor Motes”, Proc.   The 
Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous 
Computing Systems, Services and Technologies (UBICOMM 
2010). Florence, Italy, Oct. 2010, pp. 117-123. 
[10] X. Li, CJ. Bleakley, and W. Bober, “Enhanced Beacon-
Enabled Mode for improved IEEE 802.15. 4 low data rate 
performance”, Wireless Networks 2012, vol. 18, pp. 59-74. 
[11] M. Salayma, W. Mardini, Y. Khamayseh, and M. Yassein, 
“Optimal Beacon and Superframe Orders in WSNs”, Proc. 
The Fifth International Conference on Future Computational 
Technologies and Applications (IARIA 2013), FUTURE 
COMPUTING 2013, May 2013,  Valencia, Spain, pp. 49-55. 
[12] M. Neugebauer, J. Plonnigs, and K.  Kabitzsch, “A new 
beacon order adaptation algorithm for IEEE 802.15. 4 
networks”, 
Proc. 
The 
Second 
European 
Workshop 
on Wireless Sensor Networks. Belgium 2005, pp.  302-311. 
[13] A. Koubaa and M. Alves, E. Tovar, “A comprehensive 
simulation study of slotted CSMA/CA for IEEE 802.15. 4 
wireless sensor networks”,  IEEE WFCS,  2006, pp.63-70. 
[14] F. Charfi, and M. Bouyahi, “Performance evaluation of 
beacon enabled IEEE 802.15.4 under  NS2”, arXiv preprint 
arXiv 2012, pp. 1204.1495. 
[15] SA. Khan and FA. Khan, “Performance analysis of a zigbee 
beacon 
enabled 
cluster 
tree 
network”, 
Proc. 
Third 
International Conference on Electrical Engineering (ICEE'09). 
LahoreApril 2009, pp. 1-6.. 
[16] J. Hoffert, K. Klues, and O. Orjih “Configuring the IEEE 
802.15. 
4 
MAC 
Layer 
for 
Single-sink 
Wireless 
Sensor”,   Washington University in St. Louis, 2005. 
 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

