Energy-Efficient Posture Classification with Filtered Sensed Data from A Single     
3-Axis Accelerometer Deployed in WSN 
 
Laurentiu Hinoveanu, Jacek Lewandowski, Xiang Fei, Hisbel Arochena, Partheepan Kandaswamy, Zhipeng Dai 
Faculty of Engineering and Computing 
Coventry University, Coventry, UK 
{hinoveal, j.lewandowski, x.fei, h.arochena, kandaswp, daiz}@coventry.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) provide rich 
and detailed measurements of the physical phenomenon that 
they monitor. With the sensed data, a variety of pervasive 
applications can be developed. One category of those 
applications are classifications based on supervised machine 
learning, with one example being postures recognition with 
data from body sensor networks (BSNs). Conventionally for 
accuracy reason, raw data from the BSN sensors, such as 
accelerometers or other inertial devices, is transmitted to the 
central unit for postures identification. It has been well 
known, however, that in most of the battery powered WSNs, 
communication consumes most of the energy. This paper 
explores the possibility of obtaining the same level of 
classification accuracy with the filtered sensed data to 
prolong the lifetime of the WSNs. A special case of posture 
recognition based on Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), 
Naive Bayes and K-Nearest-Neighbours (KNN) has been 
studied, and a mechanism for the posture classification 
based on filtered sensed data has been constructed. Real 
data from a Shimmer node has been collected and the test 
results show that the same level of accuracy can be obtained 
using only two thirds of the raw data. The implementation 
considerations with some prototypes have also been 
provided. 
Keywords - Wireless Sensor Network; classification; 
Artificial Neural Network; Naive Bayes classifier; K-Nearest-
Neighbours 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) provide rich and 
detailed data about the physical phenomenon measured by 
the sensors. With the sensed data, a variety of pervasive 
applications can be developed in areas such as 
environmental monitoring, industrial and manufacturing 
automation, health-care, and military [1]. Among others, 
one category of the applications are classifications based 
on supervised machine learning. One example of such a 
category is posture recognition with data from body sensor 
networks (BSNs) [2]. Conventionally for accuracy 
reasons, raw data from the sensors, such as accelerometers 
or other inertial devices, is transmitted to the central unit 
for training and then postures recognition. It has been well 
known, however, that WSNs communication is one of the 
main factors that contribute to the energy consumption. 
The cost, measured in energy units, of transmitting a single 
bit of information is approximately the same as that 
needed for processing a thousand operations in a typical 
sensor node [3] [4]. Although recent research efforts focus 
on energy harvesting which aim to convert the ambient 
energy from the environment into voltage, current 
technology is only enough to power the sensor node 
continuously for 1% to 20% of its operating time [5]. 
Moreover most of this algorithms is still in experimental 
and prototype stage [6] [7]. Therefore, before energy 
harvesting technology become mature, minimizing the 
amount of communication is still a most effective way of 
prolonging the lifetime of WSNs.  
This paper explores the possibility of obtaining the 
same level of classification accuracy with the filtered 
sensed data compared to the raw data. Presented here BSN 
system, consisting of a single sensor node with one 3-axis 
accelerometer has been deployed for recognizing four 
basic postures. These are: standing, walking, running and 
kneeling. Presented study compares three different 
machine learning algorithms: ANNs, Naive Bayes, and 
KNNs.  The obtained classification accuracy with raw 
sensed data for all three algorithms is over 80% what 
compares favourably with other published results that use 
single 3-axis accelerometer only. With the same BSN 
system, a mechanism of classifying using filtered sensed 
data has been constructed. Real data from test subjects 
have been collected and the test results show that the same 
level of accuracy can be obtained using only two thirds of 
the raw data transmitted from the sensor node. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
presents background on classification algorithms with 
filtered and raw data. Section III outlines our BSN system 
for postures recognition. In Section IV, the mechanisms 
for classification using both the raw data and the proposed 
 
Figure 1. BSN system for postures recognition 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

filtered data are described. In Section V test results are 
evaluated and analysed. Section VI presents ongoing and 
future implementation works while section VII concludes 
the paper. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The classification techniques have been widely 
adopted in developing WSNs applications. Trabelsi et al. 
[8]  formulated the activity recognition problem from 3-d 
acceleration 
data 
measured 
with 
body-worn 
accelerometers as a problem of multidimensional time 
series segmentation and classification. They compared 
supervised and unsupervised classification approaches for 
human activity recognition using body-mounted sensors  
Long et al. [9] used the related Naive Bayes method 
for posture classification using a single tri-axial 
accelerometer placed on the waist, obtaining 80% 
accuracy. 
Djuric-Jovicic et al. [10] designed an ANN based 
algorithm for automatic recognition and classification of 
walking patterns with a wireless inertial measurement 
system.  
Archibald and Fann [11] studied the effect of the 
number of features used on the accuracy of a classiﬁcation 
by an SVM (Support Vector Machine). The study is based 
on a series of classiﬁcation analyses with two 
hyperspectral sensor data. 
Godfrey et al. [12] demonstrated an application of the 
scalar (dot) product technique and vertical velocity 
estimates to detect transitions and their  types with only a 
single tri-axial accelerometer. Activities and postural 
transitions were accurately detected by this simplified low-
power kinematic sensor and corresponding activity 
detection algorithms. As reported they obtained a 
sensitivity and specificity of 86–92% for young healthy 
subjects in a controlled setting and 83–89% for elderly 
healthy subjects in a home environment.  
All the classification mechanisms mentioned above 
take raw or nearly raw sensed data as their input.  
Data filtering in WSNs applications normally refer to 
low-pass filtering [2] or extended Kalman filters (EKF) 
[13], etc., that run on the sensor nodes and operate on the 
current and historical sensed data. 
In [1] and [14] the authors used information fusion 
techniques, more precisely data aggregation techniques, to 
reduce the amount of data traffic. Moreover, Boulis et al. 
[14] presented a distributed estimation algorithm that 
exploits the energy–accuracy trade-off and can be applied 
to a subclass of periodic aggregation problems. However, 
in all cases the aggregated data is to be sent to the remote 
base stations for machine learning based classification.  
III. 
BSN SYSTEM FOR POSTURES RECOGNITION 
Postures recognition can be used in many applications 
for instance to monitor the elderly in order to identify falls 
or other potential hazards to a person’s well-being as a 
result of restricted mobility or other physical impairments. 
A simple prototype BSN system used in this study, 
consists of a Shimmer-2 sensor node equipped with a 
three-axis 
accelerometer 
[15]. 
The 
sensor 
node 
communicates wirelessly with the remote base station via 
Bluetooth radio. The device is attached to the subject’s 
abdominal using an elastic band as shown in Figure 1. In 
this study, four basic body postures were chosen. These 
are: walking, running, standing and kneeling positions. 
The first two are dynamic postures, while the latter two 
are static ones. This set covers the main features of the 
postures that are of interest for elderly postures 
monitoring applications.  
IV. 
METHODS 
There are many classification mechanisms such as 
ANN based, Naive Bayes based, KNN based, among 
others which find their application to posture recognition. 
The idea of an ANN is to straightforwardly quasi-
simulate the fundamental activity of a network of 
neurons, which is based on potential build-ups’ 
mechanism 
for 
biological 
neural 
communication. 
Therefore, in an ANN there exists a function that governs 
the signalling of an adjacent neuron in the next phase 
layer and a random “favouritism” factor in each neuron. 
Usually, that “signalling” function is chosen in such a 
way that its “first derivative” is easily computed, typically 
having a clear association to the original signalling 
function [16]. Some of the preferred functions are the 
exponential 
function 
or 
trigonometric 
functions, 
especially the sine and cosine that in the complex plane 
both contribute to the construction of the complex 
exponential and have easily recognisable derivatives. The 
weights of the interconnections are computed based on a 
“learning factor” provided by the user. These are 
normally within values between 0 and 1. It governs a 
result given by the multiplication of the previous function, 
the “learning rate”, and a “fault term”. These mechanism 
manages the variation in the values obtained from the test 
set and the training set as well as the previous results 
calculated during the training period. The weighting 
factors should be optimized so that the difference between 
the outcomes obtained from the unlabelled test set and the 
facts resulted from the training set is “minimal” [16]. 
Based on the understanding of set theory and the 
classical definition of the probability and of the 
conditional property of it, we could infer Bayes theorem 
as the ratio of a conditional probability of an event M1 
given an event M2 and the conditional probability of M2 
assuming M1 is equal to the ratio between probability for 
event M1 and the probability for the second event, 
presuming that both denominators are not zeroes, 
otherwise those ratios would be mathematically undefined  
[17].  This explanation and a basic assumptions are the 
founding elements of the Naive Bayes classifier. The 
supposition is that the events that govern each of the 
samples in the training set are unrelated with each other, 
which simplifies the calculation of the mutual probability 
to just the multiplication of the probability for each 
instance in the training set  [18]. KNN algorithm is also 
constructed on an assumption which corresponds to the 
principle that the largest quantity of samples, which are 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

all labelled under the same class [19] and are closest to 
the new to-be-classified case, gives the corresponding 
labelling [20]. For further information regarding ANN 
classifier, Naive Bayes classifier, and KNN classifier, 
please refer to [16] [18] and [19]. 
A. Postures Recognition with Raw Sensed Data 
As the postures classification in this study is based on 
supervised machine learning, here we take ANN based 
classification as an example, and describe the general 
procedure as follows: 
1. Determining the features used for postures 
classification: in our case, three dimensional 
accelerations are chosen as the input of the 
classifier; 
2. Assigning values to the four postures as the 
output of the classifier; 
3. Collecting the sensor data that measures the 
features of the four postures. Two sets of data 
should be collected, one for training (supervised 
learning) and the other for testing.  
4. Designing the classifier: for ANN classifiers, the 
structure (or layers) of the neural networks, the 
connections between the neurons, and the 
activation function have to be determined. In our 
case, a three-layer feed-forward back-propagation 
ANN is adopted with full synapses in-between.  
The activation function is the sigmoid function. 
5. Supervised machine learning 
6. Testing the performance of the designed classifier 
on a group of new subjects; 
7. Evaluating the test results: if the performance of 
the designed classifier is not acceptable, either re-
design the classifier or pick up other features for 
the classification. 
Conventionally, both training and testing phases are 
carried out using the raw sensed data received from the 
sensor node. Classifications based on ANN, Naive Bayes, 
and KNN have been adopted and tested respectively. The 
test results and their evaluation are presented in section V. 
B. Postures Recognition with Filtered Sensed Data 
As data transmission in WSNs consumes most of the 
energy, the lifetime of battery-powered WSNs will be 
prolonged if the same accuracy level can be achieved with 
only filtered sensed data. By studying the data from three-
axis accelerometer in time domain, it has been found that 
these four postures feature significantly differ in 
amplitudes and frequencies. For example, the dynamic 
postures (walking and running) and the static postures 
(standing and kneeling) differ in their frequencies; both the 
two dynamic postures and the two static postures differ in 
their amplitudes. Making use of these features we can 
define the filter conditions on which the sensor node 
should send or not the data to the central base station.  In 
this study, the conditions are represented by thresholds on 
the amplitude of the three axial accelerometer. The 
thresholds are chosen so that the filtered data that is 
transmitted to the central base station still captures the 
amplitude features for all four postures. In summary, the 
procedure for postures recognition with filtered sensed 
data consists of three stages as follows: 
1. During the machine learning stage, raw data from 
the three-axis accelerometer is collected and the 
supervised learning is based on the raw data. In 
practice this is workable as the time for data 
collection in this stage is short and controllable 
and thus there is no concern about the lifetime of 
the BSNs. 
2. The second stage is called pre-test stage. This 
stage is similar to the machine learning stage, i.e., 
subjects take the four postures respectively in a 
controlled period of time, and the raw data is 
transmitted. However, this stage is different in that 
the sensed data is from new subjects for test 
purpose. Based on the collected raw data, the 
thresholds for X-axis, Y-axis and Z-axis are 
determined based on the analysis and trials on the 
raw data. In practice, this is also workable with the 
same reason as in the machine learning stage. 
3. The pre-test stage is followed by the test stage. 
The 
three-axis 
accelerometer 
senses 
the 
accelerations, and the Shimmer node filters the 
data based on the thresholds and transmits the 
filtered data to the central base station. On the 
central base station, the classifier recognizes the 
posture based on the received filtered data.  
A case study with detailed recognition process and 
results is presented in section V. 
 
Figure 2.  Sensed raw data from SHIMMER board for X, Y and Z axis for four different positions 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

V. 
RESULTS 
All three classification algorithms were trained and 
tested with two independent sets of data collected from 12 
subjects – data from six subjects with various genders and 
heights were collected for training and another six 
subjects were used for testing. In data collection we have 
used a Shimmer-2 sensor node with a three-axis 
accelerometer that was attached to the abdominal nearby 
the navel of the subjects. Each subject was asked to carry 
out four activities in a row: walking, running, standing 
and kneeling, with each activity being kept for 3 minutes 
following Dijkstra et al. [21] and Foerster et al. 
experiments [22]. Data packets were transmitted via 
Bluetooth radio to the base station where the data was 
stored in a Comma Separated Value (CSV) format. Raw 
data from the three-axis accelerometer for the four 
postures are shown in Figure 2, where it can be seen that 
these four postures feature different frequencies and 
amplitudes on all three axes. The software used in 
analyses and evaluation stage of this study was 
RapidMiner 5.2 [23] freely available open-source data 
mining and analysis system. It provides a cross platform, 
intuitive drag’n’drop GUI interface, which contains 
different machine learning and pattern recognition 
algorithms implemented in Java programming language.  
A.  Postures Recognition with Raw Sensed Data 
With the raw data for both the training and testing 
stage, three classifiers have been constructed. The 
obtained results measured in terms of accuracy of these 
classifiers are reported in Table 1. Based on these results 
it can be seen that with the use of a single three-axis 
accelerometer, the four postures can be recognised with 
over 80% accuracy using all these three classifiers. 
Moreover we can observe that: 
 
ANN classifier can recognise the four postures, 
because in the supervised learning process, the 
features of the postures have been mapped to the 
weights of the interconnections; 
 
Naive Bayes classifier can recognise the four 
postures, because in the supervised learning 
process the features of the postures have been 
mapped to the probabilities for each axis 
 
KNN classifier can recognise the four postures, 
because in the supervised learning process, the 
features of the postures have been classified in 
terms of the distance function chosen which, in 
our case, is the Euclidean metric. 
B. Machine Learning based Postures Recognition with 
Filtered Sensed Data 
The procedure for postures recognition with filtered 
sensed data has been described in section IV.C. During 
the pre-test stage, raw data from a new subject is 
collected. After the analysis and some trials, the 
thresholds for X-axis, Y-axis and Z-axis, denoted as 
XThreshold, YThreshold and ZThreshold respectively, are 
shown in below where avgX, avgY and avgZ refer to the 
average value of the three-axis raw acceleration data from 
the training set respectively, and MaxAmplitudeX, 
MaxAmplitudeY and MaxAmplitudeZ refer to the 
maximum difference in the value of the three-axis raw 
acceleration data from the training set respectively: 
2
10%
MaxAmplitudeX
avgX
XThreshold



 
 (1) 
2
50%
MaxAmplitudeY
avgY
YThreshold



  
 (2) 
2
40%
MaxAmplitudeZ
avgZ
ZThreshold



 
 (3) 
With these thresholds, 1/3 of the raw data is filtered 
out. On the sensor node, the only change on the code is to 
include the condition and action part of the data filtering 
process, as shown below: 
 
With (sensedData) 
If ( 
(sensedData-X > XThreshold) 
and 
 
(sensedData-Y > YThreshold) 
and 
 
(sensedData-Z > ZThreshold)) 
 
then 
(transmit (sensedData)) 
 
 
 
where sensedData refers to the data sensed by the 3-
axis accelerometer. 
When the filtered data is investigated, it is found that 
all the data for the standing posture is filtered out. So in 
the classifying process running on the base station, the 
default posture is set as ‘standing’ and the classifying 
algorithm presents as follows: 
 
 
currentPosture = ‘standing’; 
/* set a timer named postureTimer with the 
period being 1 second */ 
//timeout routine for postureTimer is 
{currentPosture = ‘standing’}  
//main algorithm 
while (classifying) 
{ with (receivedData) 
 
do 
 
{ currentPosture=Classifier(receivedData); 
 
 reset (postureTimer) 
 
} 
 
} 
 
 
 
TABLE 1. ACCURACIES OF THE CLASSIFIERS 
 
Raw Data 
Filtered Data 
ANN 
(500 training cycles, 
0.8 learning rate, 0.0 
momentum) 
86.63% 
86.51% 
Naive Bayes 
86.76% 
81.67% 
KNN (K=10) 
82.60% 
87.73% 
 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Table 1 illustrates the classification results for the 
ANN classifier, Naive Bayes classifier and KNN 
classifier with filtered data respectively, from which it 
turns out: 
 
With filtered data, all these classifiers are able to 
recognize the postures with accuracy being over 
80%.  
 
It is noticed that when using 10-NN, the accuracy 
with filtered data is higher than that with raw 
data. This is because those filtered measurements 
do not represent the features of the postures, thus 
the relative accuracy has improved. 
 
1/3 of the raw data is filtered out in this case. As 
data for standing posture (around 1/4 of the raw 
data) is filtered out, this posture is not identified 
by the classifiers but by the algorithm described 
above. For the rest of the data that is filtered out, 
it had little effect on the accuracy of the 
classifiers as it doesn’t contain the information on 
the features of the postures.  
 
In practice, for different subjects, the thresholds 
may be different. This requires that the 
middleware for the sensor nodes should enable 
on-line parameters (such as the thresholds) re-
configuration.  
VI. 
FUTURE WORKS 
As mentioned above, to make this filtered data based 
postures recognition practical, the underlying WSN 
middleware should facilitate on-line re-configuration, i.e., 
setting the thresholds for the three-axis accelerometer. 
Rule 
Execution 
and 
Event 
Distribution 
(REED) 
middleware has been developed that employs a rule-based 
paradigm to allow sensor networks to be programmed at 
run time. Setting and resetting thresholds can be 
implemented via updating the condition part of the rules 
that run on the sensor nodes. REED has been 
implemented on the GumstixTM GS400K-XM, as shown 
in Figure 3 [24]. So far, with this platform a simple rules 
based test bed has been simulated on the Microchip 
PIC18F4520 that implements the automatic control of the 
temperature based on the higher and lower thresholds. In 
addition, 
a 
publish-subscribe 
service 
has 
been 
implemented enabling notification conditions, expressed 
using thresholds, to be tuned by the subscribers. Future 
work will focus on implementation of the ANN and Naive 
Bayes classifiers for real-time postures recognition with 
use of REED framework. The future works will include 
real-life testing, further study on the mechanisms of 
effective classification with filtered data, and application 
of the research results to other applications such as energy 
monitoring in manufacturing environment. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In 
battery 
powered 
WSNs, 
data 
transmission 
consumes most of the energy. In this paper, a mechanism 
for postures recognition with filtered data is proposed. A 
WSN system consisting of one sensor device has been 
deployed and acceleration data is collected from real 
subjects. Classifiers based on ANN, Naive Bayes and 
KNN 
have 
been 
constructed 
using 
RapidMiner. 
Classifiers were trained with raw training data set.  
Postures recognitions with unfiltered and filtered testing 
data were carried out respectively. Results show that with 
appropriate thresholds, postures recognitions with filtered 
data achieve the same level of accuracy over 80% when 
compared with unfiltered data. So far the underlying 
WSNs middleware that enables on-line parameters such 
as thresholds configuration has been implemented on 
some sensor node platforms. The full implementation of 
the real-time classifier based on ANN, Naive Bayes and 
KNN is still in progress.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This research was carried out as a part of the CASES 
project which is supported by a Marie Curie International 
Research Staff Exchange Scheme Fellowship within the 
7th European Community Framework Programme under 
the grant agreement No 294931. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  E. F. Nakamura, A. A. F. Loureiro, and A. C.  Frery, 
"Information Fusion for Wireless Sensor Networks: 
Methods, 
Models, 
and 
Classifications,"New 
York,NY,USA : ACM, 2007, ACM Computing Surveys 
(CSUR), Vol. 39 (3). 
[2]  H. Ghasemzadeh, V. Loseu, and  R. Jafari,"Collaborative 
Signal Processing for Action Recognition in Body Sensor 
Networks: A Distributed Classiﬁcation Algorithm Using 
Motion Transcripts," New York, NY, USA : ACM, 2010, 
IPSN '10 Proceedings of thr 9th ACM/IEEE International 
Conference 
on 
Information 
Processing 
in 
Sensor 
Networks,pp. 244-255 
[3]  G. J. Pottie and W. J. Kaiser, "Wireless Integrated Network 
Sensors", Communications of the ACM, 2000, Vol. 43(5), 
pp. 51-58. 
[4] V. Jelicic, "Power Management in Wireless Sensor 
Networks with High-Consuming Sensors", [Qualifying 
Doctoral Examination] Zagreb : University of Zagreb, 
[Online] 
2011, 
http://www.fer.unizg.hr/_download/repository/VJelicic,KD
I.pdf [retrieved: June, 2013]. 
 
SetEvent/ 
NtfEvent 
SetEvent/ 
NtfEvent  
PN level App. 
SetEvent/ 
NtfEvent  
Sensor Rule-Engine 
Sensor 
… 
Sensor 
Sensor 
PN REED 
Middware 
SetEvent/ 
NtfEvent 
SetEvent/ 
NtfEvent  
PN level App. 
SetEvent/ 
NtfEvent  
Sensor Rule-Engine 
Sensor 
… 
Sensor 
Sensor 
PN REED 
Middware 
Policy 
Store 
User/ 
Operator 
Policy 
Policy  
Server 
SetEvent/ 
NtfEvent 
Processing Nodes 
SetEvent/ 
NtfEvent 
SetEvent/ 
NtfEvent  
PN level App. 
SetEvent/ 
NtfEvent  
Sensor Rule-Engine 
Sensor 
… 
Sensor 
Sensor 
PN REED 
Middware 
Figure 3. REED based system architecture 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[5]  W. K. G. Seah, Z. A. Eu, and H-P. Tan, "Wireless Sensor 
Networks Powered by Ambient Energy Harvesting (WSN-
HEAP)-Survey and Challenges",Aalborg : IEEE, 2009, 1st 
International Conference on Wireless Communication, 
Vehicular Technology, Information Theory and Aerospace 
& Electronic Systems Technology, Wireless VITAE 2009, 
pp. 1-5. 
[6]  P. Li, Y. Wen, C. Jia, and X. Li, "A Magnetoelectric Energy 
Harvester and Management Circuit",Washington DC, USA, 
2009, PowerMEMS 2009, pp. 21-24. 
[7]  V. R. Challa, M. G. Prasad, and F. T. Fisher, "Towards An 
Autonomous Self-Tuning Vibration Energy Harvesting 
Device for Wireless Sensor Network Applications", IOP 
Publishing, 2011, Smart Materials and Structures, Vol. 
20(2). 
[8]  D. Trabelsi, S. Mohammed, F. Chamroukhi, L. Oukhellou, 
and Y. Amirat, "Supervised and unsupervised classification 
approaches for human activity recognition using body-
mounted sensors", ESANN 2012 proceedings, European 
Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, Computational 
Intelligence and Machine Learning. Bruges (Belgium), 25-
27 April 2012, 
[9]  X. Long, B. Yin, and R. M. Aarts, Single accelerometer-
based daily physical activity classification. In 31st Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE EMBS, Minneapolis, 
USA, September 2-6, 2009, pp. 6107-6110. 
[10] M. Djuric-Jovicic, N. S. Jovicic, I. Milovanovic, S. 
Radovanovic, N. Kresojevic, and M. B. Popovic, 
"Classification of Walking Patterns in Parkinson's Disease 
Patients Based on Inertial Sensor Data", Belgrade : IEEE, 
2010, 10th Symposium on Neural Network Applications in 
Electrical Engineering (NEUREL), pp. 3-6. 
[11] R. Archibald and G. Fann, "Feature Selection and 
Classification of Hyperspectral Images with Support Vector 
Machines", IEEE, 2007, IEEE Geoscience and Remote 
Sensing Letters, Vol. 4(4), pp. 674-677. 
[12] A. Godfrey, A. K. Bourke, G. M. Olaighin, P. van de Ven, 
and J. Nelson, "Activity classification using a single chest 
mounted 
tri-axial 
accelerometer", 
2011, 
Medical 
Engineering and Physics, 33 (9) , pp. 1127-1135. 
[13] R. R. Brooks, P. Ramanathan, and A. M. Sayeed, 
"Distributed Target Classification and Tracking in Sensor 
Networks", IEEE, 2003, Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 
91(8), pp.1163-1171. 
[14] A. Boulis, S. Ganeriwal, and M. B. Srivastava, 
"Aggregation in Sensor Networks: A Energy-Accuracy 
Trade-Off", Elsevier, 2003, Ad Hoc Networks, Vol. 1(2-3), 
pp. 317-331. 
[15] 
Shimmer 
Research, 
"Shimmer", 
[Online] 
2013, 
http://www.shimmer-research.com/ [retrieved: June, 2013]. 
[16] E. Stefanov, "Neural Networks", [Online] 2013, 
http://www.emilstefanov.net/Projects/NeuralNetworks.aspx 
[retrieved: June, 2013]  
[17] E. W. Weisstein, "Conditional Probability", Mathworld-
Wolfram Web Resource, [Online] 2013, 
http://mathworld.wolfram.com/ConditionalProbability.html 
[retrieved: June, 2013] 
[18] StatSoft Inc., "Naive Bayes Classifier", Electronic Statistics 
Textbook, 
[Online] 
2013, 
http://www.statsoft.com/textbook/naive-bayes-classifier/ 
[retrieved: June, 2013]. 
[19] StatSoft Inc.,"K Nearest Neighbours", Electronic Statistics 
Textbook, 
[Online] 
2013, 
http://www.statsoft.com/textbook/k-nearest-neighbors/ 
[retrieved: June, 2013]. 
[20]  IBM, "KNN Algorithms", IBM SPSS Statistics Information 
Center, 
[Online] 
2011, 
http://publib.boulder.ibm.com/infocenter/spssstat/v20r0m0/
index.jsp?topic=%2Fcom.ibm.spss.statistics.help%2Falg_k
nn.htm [retrieved: June, 2013]. 
[21] B. Dijkstra, Y. P.  Kamsma, and W. Zijlstra,  "Detection of 
Gait 
and 
Postures 
using 
a 
Miniaturized 
Triaxial 
Accelerometer-Based System:Accuracy in Patients With 
Mild to Moderate Parkinson's Disease " , Elsevier, August 
2010, Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 
Vol. 91(8), pp. 1272-1277. 
[22]  F. Foerster, M. Smeja, and J. Fahrenberg, "Detection of 
Posture and Motion by Accelerometry: A Validation Study 
in Ambulatory Monitoring", September 1999, Computers 
in Human Behavior, Vol. 15(5), pp. 571-583. 
[23] I. Mierswa, M. Wurst, R. Klinkenberg, M. Scholz, and T. 
Euler,"YALE: Rapid Prototyping for Complex Data 
Mining Tasks", Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2006, Proceedings 
of the 12th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-06), pp. 
935-940. 
 [24] X. Fei and  E. H. Magill, "REED:Flexible Rule Based 
Programming of Wireless Sensor Networks at Runtime", 
Elsevier, 2012, Computer Networks, Vol. 56(14), pp. 3287-
3299. 
 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

