Multi-channel MAC Protocol for Real-time Monitoring  
of Weapon Flight test in Wireless Sensor Networks 
JoonKi Min 
Agency for Defense Development 
 P.O.Box 1, Taean 
Chungnam, Republic of Korea 
dosolchun@add.re.kr 
 
Jookyoung Kim, Youngmi Kwon 
 Dept. of Information Communications 
Engineering, Chungnam National University 
Yuseong-gu, Deajeon, Republic of Korea 
{iliwhoth, ymkwon}@cnu.ac.kr 
YongJae Lee 
Agency for Defense Development 
P.O.Box 1, Taean 
Chungnam, Republic of Korea 
yjlee@add.re.kr  
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we propose the priority based multi-
channel MAC protocol with single radio interface for the real 
time monitoring of the flight test of weapon systems. 
Concurrent transmissions with multi-channel of sensor nodes 
can improve the network throughput compared with single-
channel transmission in wireless sensor networks. Our 
proposed MAC protocol has two operation modes. First is 
'Normal' mode and second is 'Priority' mode. In normal mode, 
nodes are operated on normal CSMA/CA. And nodes have 
different priority depending on a sensed signal level in priority 
mode. High priority nodes can use more transmission channel 
for data send than low priority nodes. This method can 
guarantee successful transmission of important data generated 
by high priority nodes. The Class of a node is determined by 
own sensed data, in ‘Priority’ mode; nodes have three degrees 
– Class A, Class B, and Class C. When a sensed data of each 
node exceeds specific threshold value, each node has specific 
class respectively. High class node has low backoff exponents 
and can use more transmission channel. This mechanism 
allows that high class node has more transmission opportunity. 
It guarantees transmission of important data generated by 
high class nodes. 
Keywords- Multi-Channel; Wireless Sensor Network;  MAC 
Protocol; Weapon Flight Test; Test Command and Control. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) [1-3] are used over a 
wide range such as military application, environmental 
monitoring, medical care, smart buildings and other 
industries. Energy efficiency is a main objective in most of 
the Medium Access Control (MAC) protocols for WSNs [4–
7]. Other parameters such as bandwidth utilization, low-
latency, and scalability are mostly ignored or dealt with as 
secondary objectives. However, bandwidth and low-latency 
are as important as saving energy in some applications such 
as military, surveillance, fire, and intrusion detection which 
are required a real time monitoring. 
Real-time monitoring is one of the prime necessities of a 
flight test of weapon systems for the test command and 
control and the safety of person and property. A flight test of 
weapon systems are very dangerous and occur within short 
spans of time. Besides, the test is performed in a wide area 
and has a difficulty in a wired connection for a transmission 
of sensed data. 
The flight test is an event-triggered application [8] in 
which sensor nodes do not transmit any data unless a 
relevant actual event (i.e. a explosion and a crash) occurs. 
When sensor nodes detect event, they send a sensed data to 
the sink at the same time. It can generate a traffic burst in the 
network. Because an event typically triggers many sensor 
nodes concurrently, the occurrence of traffic bursts produced 
by different nodes is highly correlated in time. Bursty or 
heavy wireless communication in one location (or node) may 
lead to contention for channel access by the nearby sensor 
nodes. WSNs for the flight test are required efficient and 
timely collection of large amounts data with high resolution. 
However with a single channel, WSNs cannot provide these 
requirements because of radio collisions and limited 
bandwidth. 
Existing MAC protocols are not well-suited for real time 
monitoring of such event triggered applications with large 
amount of data. Characteristics of the event in a flight test of 
weapon systems are different from ordinary environment. 
We may not know exactly the event area in a wide test zone 
and the event occurrence time is very short. Therefore,   
schedule based multi-channel protocols is not appropriated to 
a real-time monitoring of a flight test of weapon systems. A 
scheduled multi-channel scheme is needed to negotiate time 
and procedure before data packet transmission between the 
sender and receiver node. A data of a event area is the 
interest information which is more quickly transmitted to 
sink than other area.  
So we design the multi-channel communication protocol 
based 
on 
the 
modified 
Carrier 
Sense 
Multiple 
Access/Collision Avoidance (CSMA/CA) over a single radio 
for WSNs in order to improve network throughput and 
provide reliable and timely communication services for real 
time monitoring of the flight test.  
Proposed MAC protocol adds a specialized priority factor 
under the weapon flight test environment at normal slotted 
CSMA/CA mechanism. This MAC protocol gives high 
transmission priority to the inner nodes of event area than the 
outer nodes. Furthermore, this MAC protocol can get not 
only collision reduction effect between nodes in whole 
sensing area but also guarantee transmission of priority 
nodes. 
Our proposed MAC protocol has two operation modes. 
First is 'Normal' mode and second is 'Priority' mode. In 
83
Copyright (c) The Government of Korea, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

normal mode, nodes are operated on normal CSMA/CA. 
Also nodes have different priority depending on a sensed 
signal level in priority mode. High priority nodes can use 
more transmission channel for data send than low priority 
nodes. This method can guarantee successful transmission of 
important data generated by high priority nodes. Class of a 
node determined by own sensed data, in ‘Priority’ mode and 
class of nodes have 3 degree – Class A, B and C. When 
sensed data at each node exceed specific threshold value, 
each node has specific class. High class node has low 
backoff exponents and can use more transmission channel. 
This mechanism allows that high class node has more 
transmission opportunity. It guarantees transmission of 
important data generated by high class nodes. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
reviews the related works. Section 3 presents the proposed 
scheme based priority in details. Section 4 presents 
performance evaluation through simulations. Finally, Section 
5 concludes this paper with summary and directions for 
future work. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Researchers 
have 
proposed 
multi-channel 
MAC 
protocols [10-15] that exploit multiple channels to increase 
the network throughput by eliminating the contention and 
interference on a single-channel in WSNs. WSNs have some 
limitation such as limited computation, low bandwidth, small 
MAC layer packet size, battery-operated power, and so on. 
Therefore, multi-channel MAC protocol for WSNs should 
consider the minimum control overhead possible in channel 
negotiation. Channel negotiation packets cannot be ignored 
as small overhead.  
Multi-channel MAC protocols can be classified into three 
categories [9]: scheduled protocols [10-12], contention 
protocols [13, 14], and hybrid protocols [15]. 
 
A. Scheduled multi-channel protocols.  
In this scheme, a time slot in TDMA frame for data 
transmission is allotted to every node which is unique in its 
2-hop neighborhood. This guarantees collision-free medium 
access, and protocol does not waist energy and bandwidth on 
competition and collisions.  
MC-LMAC [10] proposed a multi-channel scheme based 
on LMAC which allows the node to utilize new frequency 
channels on-demand, if the network reaches a density limit. 
This method is composed of two phases, one where the 
nodes try to select timeslots according to the single channel 
in LMAC rule and the second involves nodes which are 
unable to grab a timeslot in the first phase invite the neighbor 
nodes which are free to listen to them on an agreed channel 
or time slot.  
TMCP [11] is a tree-based multi-channel protocol for 
data collection applications. The goal is to partition the 
network into multiple subtrees with minimizing the intra-tree 
interference. The protocol partitions the network into 
subtrees and assigns different channels to the nodes residing 
on different trees. TMCP is designed to support convergecast 
traffic and it is difficult to have successful broadcasts due to 
the partitions. Contention inside the branches is not resolved 
since the nodes communicate on the same channel. 
In TFMAC [12], a channel scheduling mechanism is 
used to manage and decide when a node should switch 
channel to support the current communication requirements. 
TFMAC requires Time Synchronization and it uses single 
half duplex transceiver. This protocol divides each channel 
into time slots and the slot scheduling has been done for the 
medium access. The frame has been divided into contention 
access period where the slot scheduling and channel 
allocation has been done and contention free period where 
the data transfer has been done. 
 
B. Contention-based multi-channel MAC protocols  
Contention-based multi-channel MAC protocols use 
neither a predetermined transmission schedule nor the frame 
is divided into time slots. Instead, contention procedure is 
conducted at the beginning of each frame, beforehand every 
transmission, in order to avoid collisions. Contention-based 
MAC protocols allow small delay and high throughput in 
cases of low traffic.  
MMSN [13] and TMMAC [14] have attempted to make 
use of multiple channels by assigning different channels to 
different nodes in a two-hop neighborhood to avoid potential 
interference. They use a different channel from its 
downstream and upstream nodes. Time slots are used to 
coordinate transmissions in these protocols. They also 
require precise time synchronization at nodes with frequent 
channel switching delays and scheduling overheads 
especially for high data traffic. In the multi-hop flow, nodes 
have to switch channels in order to receive and forward 
packets. This causes frequent channel switching and 
potential packet losses. In order to prevent packet loss these 
protocols use some negotiation or scheduling schemes to 
coordinate channel switching and transmission among nodes 
with different channels. They need many orthogonal 
channels for channel assignment in dense networks.  
 
C. Hybrid protocols  
These protocols combine principles from previous two 
methods. The frame is divided into time slots, but slots are 
assigned to receivers instead of transmitters. In the absence 
of traffic, hybrid protocols are more energy efficient then 
scheduled protocols, since each node need to be awaken to 
receive data only once per frame. Although hybrid protocols 
require contention of the potential transmitters at the 
beginning of each slot, contention mechanism is simpler and 
wastes less energy than with contention-based protocols 
since there is always only one receiver.  
Y-MAC [15] is a hybrid multi-channel MAC protocol. to 
TDMA, Y-MAC divides time into frames and slots, where 
each frame contains a broadcast period and a unicast period. 
Every node must wake up at the beginning of a broadcast 
period and nodes contend to access the medium during this 
period. If there are no incoming broadcast messages, each 
node turns off its radio awaiting its first assigned slot in the 
84
Copyright (c) The Government of Korea, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

unicast period. Each slot in the unicast period is assigned to 
only one node for receiving data. This receiver-driven model 
can be more energy-efficient under light traffic conditions, 
because each node samples the medium only in its own 
receive time slots.  
III. 
PROTOCOL DESCRIPTION 
Our proposed MAC protocol is based on the Multi-
Channel 
mechanism. 
Our 
proposed 
MAC 
protocol 
distributes the nodes in a network to multiple channels, so 
this method can reduce collisions between nodes in a 
network and improve network transmission efficiency [16, 
17]. Our MAC protocol has two operation modes. First is 
‘Normal’ mode and second is ‘Priority’ mode. Change of 
this operation mode is controlled by outside signal. In 
‘Normal’ mode, nodes in a network operate on normal 
CSMA/CA what use Multi-channel manner. And, in 
‘Priority’ mode, nodes in a network have priority for data 
transmission. High priority nodes can use more transmission 
channel for data send than low priority nodes. This method 
can guarantee successful transmission of important data 
generated by high priority nodes. 
The Class of a node is determined by own sensed data, in 
‘Priority’ mode; nodes have three degrees – Class A, Class B, 
and Class C. When sensed data at each node exceed specific 
threshold value, each node has specific class. High class 
node has low Backoff Exponents (BE) and can use more 
transmission channel. This mechanism allows that high class 
node has more transmission opportunity. It guarantees 
transmission of important data generated by high class nodes. 
 
A. Normal operation state 
In a general situation, proposed MAC protocol operates 
normal CSMA/CA. But, nodes in a network can use multiple 
channels, and perform not only time backoff but also channel 
backoff [18]. This twin backoff mechanism is more efficient 
to avoid collisions between nodes in a network. All nodes 
have same CW (Contention Window) and BE and can use 
three channels. 
When there is a need to transmit sensed data, they first 
generate backoff value and select transmit channel randomly. 
And perform CCA (Channel Clearance Assessment) at on 
time and selected channel. If selected channel is idle, 
perform data transmit. Nor perform new time and channel 
backoff using new CW and increased BE value. Detail 
description about this procedure represented in Fig. 1. 
B. Priority State 
In Priority state, each node verifies own sensed value. If 
this value exceed specific threshold, that node has 
transmission priority. Nodes what get high priority, has more 
accessible data channel and low BE value. So, these high 
priority nodes can access media more easily than low priority 
nodes. Each node in a network can get one of 3 classes- 
Class A, B and C.  
Class A node can access all channel and has minimum 
max BE value. These nodes can access media easily than 
other class nodes. Class B node can use 2 of 3 channel and 
Class B node only use one data channel and has maximum 
max BE value. Fig. 2 represents procedure of priority state. 
Each node decides own transmission priority when sending 
data generated by pre-determined threshold value.  Follow 
own transmission priority, each node select BE and TX 
channel. After select BE and TX value, each node perform 
CCA on backoff period boundary. If channel is clear, nodes 
perform data sending sequence. But, if channel is buys nodes 
perform backoff sequence. In backoff sequence, a node only 
re-select TX channel. 
Class A node can access not only own channel but also 
channel of class B and C. And, class B node use own 
channel and class C’s channel. All node in a network can 
access class C’s channel. So, in the class C’s channel occur 
many collision between all nodes in a network. We also 
propose channel selection weight factor for reduce this 
collision at common channel. Each node has weight factor 
for select own channel. Nodes in a network select own 
channel more frequently by effect of this weight factor. 
 
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
In this paper, we evaluate our proposed MAC protocol 
via simulation. We compare average media access delay and 
total number of successful media access. First, we compare 
all node in a network can access all channels with our 
proposed MAC protocol. 
Fig. 3 shows average media access delay and total 
number of successful media access by channel allocation 
method. Uniform allocation method means all nodes in a 
network can access same multiple channels and classified 
allocation method mean some node has higher media access 
priority than other nodes. Like table 1, Class A node can 
access all data channel but class B node can access 2 of 3 
data channel and class C node can access only 1 channel. 
 
TABLE I.  
NUMBER OF ALLOCATED CHANNEL 
 
Number of allocated channel 
Uniform allocation 
Priority based allocation 
Class A 
3 
3 
Class B 
3 
2 
Class C 
3 
1 
 
 
Figure 1.   Average Delay and Number of Tx Success. 
85
Copyright (c) The Government of Korea, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

In case of uniform channel allocation method, average 
channel access delay and total number of successful media 
access of each node in a network is very similar. But, in 
priority based allocation mechanism, number of successful 
media access of class A nodes what can use more channel 
than other low priority nodes is larger than other class nodes. 
Next simulation result compare uniform channel 
allocation ratio with priority based channel allocation ratio. 
Allocation ratio represented in table 2. 
 
TABLE II.  
CHANNEL ALLOCATION RATIO 
 
Uniform channel 
allocation ratio 
Priority-based channel 
allocation ratio 
Class A 
1:1:1 
1:1:3 
Class B 
1:2 
Class C 
1 
 
 
Fig. 4 shows number of unused channel at each channel. 
In case of don’t use weight factor for channel allocation, 
almost slot in #1 channel has been used but a lot of slot in #3 
channel – only for class A nodes,  don’t used. But in case of 
we use weight factor for channel allocation, the number of 
unused slot in #3 channel is lower than don’t use weight 
factor. 
 
 
 
 
 
Next Fig. 5 shows simulation result when each class has 
different maximum BE and minimum BE value. Table 3 
shows this BE value. 
 
TABLE III.  
MAXIMUM AND MINIMUN BE VALUE 
 
Same BE 
Different BE 
minBE 
maxBE 
minBE 
maxBE 
Class A 
0 
3 
0 
3 
Class B 
0 
3 
1 
4 
Class C 
0 
3 
2 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Real-time monitoring is one of the prime necessities of a 
flight test for the test and evaluation (T&E) of weapon 
systems. Data of a event area is the interested information 
which is reliable and quickly transmitted to sink than other 
area. 
Existing MAC protocols in WSNs are not well-suited for 
real time monitoring of the flight test with large amount of 
data. Therefore we proposed the new multi-channel MAC 
protocol based on the modified CSMA/CA, which has two 
operation modes. In normal mode, nodes are operated on 
normal CSMA/CA. And nodes have different priority 
depending on a sensed signal level in priority mode. High 
priority nodes can use more transmission channel for data 
send and has lower backoff exponents than low priority 
nodes. It guarantees transmission of important data generated 
by high class nodes.  
In the future, we plan to setup testbed sensor network 
system and evaluate the performance of the proposed MAC. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] F. Akyildiz, T. Melodia, and K. R. Chowdhury, “A survey on 
wireless multimedia sensor networks,” Computer Networks, 
vol. 51, pp. 921-960, 2007. 
[2] C. E-A. Campbell, I.A. Shah, K.K. Loo, “Medium access 
control and transport protocol for wireless sensor networks: 
an overview,” International Journal of Applied Research on 
Information Technology and Computing, ISSN: 0975-8089 
Figure 1.  Ratio of Unused Slot at Each Channel. 
Figure 2.  Average Delay and Number of Tx Success. 
86
Copyright (c) The Government of Korea, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

(Online) and ISSN: 0975-8070 (Print), Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 79-
92, 2010. 
[3] S. Misra, M. Reisslein, and G. Xue, “A survey of multimedia 
streaming 
in 
wireless 
sensor 
networks,” 
IEEE 
Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 10, pp. 18–39, 
2008. 
[4] W. Ye, J. Heidemann, and D. Estrin, “Medium access control 
with coordinated adaptive sleeping for wireless sensor 
networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Net., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 493–
506, June 2004. 
[5] V. Rajendran, K. Obraczka, and J. J. Garcia-Luna-Aceves, 
“Energy-efﬁcient, collision-free medium access control for 
wireless sensor networks,” ACM SenSys, Los Angeles, CA, 
Nov, 2003. 
[6] A. El-Hoiydi, and J. Decotignie, “WiseMAC: An ultra low 
power mac protocol for the downlink of infrastructure 
wireless sensor networks,” Ninth IEEE Symposium on 
Computers and Communication, ISCC04, pp. 244–251, June 
2004. 
[7] M. Buettner, G. Yee, E. Anderson, and R. Han, “X-mac: a 
short preamble mac protocol for duty-cycled wireless 
networks,” 4th ACM Conf. on Embedded Networked Sensor 
Systems (SenSys), Boulder, CO, pp. 307–320, Nov. 2006. 
[8] M.  Ringwald, K. Romer, “BurstMAC - An efficient mac 
protocol for correlated traffic bursts,” in Proc. of the 6th 
International Conference on Networked Sensing Systems 
2009 (INSS 2009), pp. 1-9, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA, 
Jun. 2009. 
[9] M. D. Jovanovic, G. L. Djordjevic, G. S. Nikolic, and B. D. 
Petrovic, “Multi-channel media access control for wireless 
sensor networks: a survey,” Telecommunication in Modern 
Satelite Cable and Broadcasting Services(TELSIKS), 2011 
10th International Conference, pp.741-744(2011) 
[10] O. Incel, L. van Hoesel, P. Jansen, and P. Havinga, “MC-
LMAC: A multi-channel mac protocol for wireless sensor 
networks,” Ad Hoc Networks, pp. 73–94, 2011. 
[11] Y. Wu, J.A. Stankovic, T. He,  and S. Lin, “Realistic and 
efficient multi-channel communications in wireless sensor 
networks,” In Proceedings of the 27th IEEE International 
Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM 2008),  
pp.1193-1201.  
[12] M. Jovanovic, and G. Djordjevic, “TFMAC: Multi-channel 
mac protocol for wireless sensor networks,” TELSIKS'07, 
Conference Proceedings, pp. 23-26, Nis, Serbia, 2007. 
[13] G. Zhou, C. Huang, T. Yan, T. He, J. Stankovic and 
T.Abdelzaher, “MMSN: Multi-frequency media access 
control for wireless sensor networks,” In Proc. Of IEEE 
Infocom, pp. 1-13, 2006.  
[14] J. Zhang, G. Zhou, C. Huang, S. H. Son, and J. A. Stankovic, 
“TMMAC: An energy efﬁcient multi-channel mac protocol 
for adhoc networks,” In Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE 
International Conference on Communications (ICC 2007), 
pages 3554–3561, June 2007. 
[15] Y. Kim, H. Shin, and H. Cha, “Y-mac: An energy-efficient 
multi-channel mac protocol for dense wireless sensor 
networks,” in IPSN ’08: Proceedings of the 7th international 
conference on information processing in sensor networks. 
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2008, pp. 
53–63. 
[16] A. Adya, P.Nahl, J.Padhye, A.Wolman, and L. Zhou. “A 
multi-radio unification protocol for IEEE 802.11 wireless 
networks,” In Proceedings of IEEE Broadnets’04, San Jose. 
CA, 2004. 
[17] P. Kyasanur, and N.H. Vaidya, “Routing and interface 
assignment 
in 
multi-channel 
multi-interface 
wireless 
networks,” In Proceedings of IEE WCNC’05, New Orleans, 
LA 2005. 
[18] R. Maheshwari, H. Gupta, and S. R. Das, “Multi-channel mac 
protocol for wireless networks,” Sensor and AdHoc 
Communications and Network, 2006 
 
Figure 3.  Normal State Procedure Flow Chart. 
87
Copyright (c) The Government of Korea, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
Figure 4.  Priority State Procedure Flow Chart. 
Figure 5.   
88
Copyright (c) The Government of Korea, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

