Benthic Fish Behavior Characterization 
with a Mechanically Scanned Imaging Sonar 
 
 
Wen-Miin Tian 
Department of Marine Environment and Engineering 
National Sun Yet-sen University 
Kaohsiung City, Taiwan 
tiwemi@mail.nsysu.edu.tw 
 
 
Abstract—A point stationary, acoustic-based surveying system 
was proposed to fulfill the necessities of benthic fish behavior 
assessment. The surveying system can be split into two major 
and inter-dependent techniques, i.e., acoustic image acquisition 
and image processing. The first part comprises a high-
frequency, mechanically scanned imaging sonar (MSIS) with 
bottom-fixed, side-looking working configuration. Major 
modules of the proposed image processing procedure include: 
stationary objects subtraction, region and textural feature 
extraction, 
unsupervised 
classification, 
fish 
target 
identification and quantification. For the specific case study 
conducted in a deep water fishpond, it is evident that both 
individual and school fish could be discriminated by image 
frames collected at a randomly selected point with scanning 
range setting at 5 m and frame rate at 75 second. Based on 
spatial and temporal analyses on position and area of the 
discriminated fish targets, it was concluded that fish movement 
pattern in the scanned area followed two distinctive corridors 
with significant different passage rate, i.e., a discrete, periodic 
and high passage rate mode in Corridor#1 and a continuous, 
steady 
and 
low 
passage 
rate 
mode 
in 
Corridor#2. 
Environmental features, such as bank slope, substrate mound 
and float raft represented specific meeting points for dynamic 
aggregations and schooling. Fish tended to converge into 
prominent schools subsequent to interactions with these 
features. The proposed system represented a practical and cost 
effective tool in acquiring image frames with sufficient spatial 
and temporal resolution for the characterization of fish 
behavior. 
Keywords-image sonar; mobile target; image processing; 
unsupervised classification; fish behavior. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Artificial benthic habitats are known to be effective in 
promoting coastal fishery resources and coastal fisheries 
management. A large number of artificial reef programs have 
been conducted world wide, basically in Japan, France, the 
United States of America and Spain among others [1][2]. In 
Taiwan, a long-term, government sponsored project for the 
construction and deployment of artificial reefs to enhance 
commercial fisheries was initiated in 1973. For the last forty 
years, over 220,000 units of various types of artificial reefs 
were deployed in 88 promulgated sites [3]. For the purpose 
to promote an efficient administrative and management 
system, these artificial reef sites were systematically 
surveyed especially by side-scan sonar [4]. Information 
regarding 
geographic 
position 
and 
engineering 
characteristics of these artificial reefs as well as substrate 
composition were collected, evaluated and documented. 
However, due to a shortage of professionals devoted to 
conduct in-situ biological assessment investigation and the 
limitations of 
some 
traditional 
sampling techniques 
employed, the biological effectiveness of the most of these 
artificial reef sites was assessed in a very primitive way.  
From a physics point of view, benthic fish which 
aggregated around artificial reefs is a type of underwater 
mobile object which distributed on or near to the artificial 
reefs and sea bottom. The dimensions of a typical reef fish 
could be varied from as small as several centimeters (e.g., 
juvenile fish) to over 50 cm. The swimming speed and 
behavior of the fish added complexity to an assessment 
system. Nondestructive underwater surveying techniques 
which can offer adequate information for the effective 
detection and evaluation of this type of mobile object to fine 
spatial and temporal scales should therefore include the 
following fundamental requirements, i.e., effective in dark 
and turbid water environment, capable of cover sufficient 
water volume and feasible for extended working time (24 
hours or even over a week). In addition, the quality and 
resolution of the information collected should comply with 
the criteria to the detection, classification or even 
identification of each object individually. 
Underwater acoustic systems are standard tools for 
monitoring fish and other objects in marine and freshwater 
environments [4]-[8]. Advances in acoustic technology and 
analysis software have made this survey method more 
powerful 
in 
recent 
years. 
Based 
on 
deployment 
configurations, these systems can be classified into two 
categories of operation modes, i.e., mobile survey mode (e.g., 
echo sounder and side-scan sonar) and point stationary 
survey mode (e.g., split-beam sonar, sector scanning sonar, 
multi-beam sonar and 3D-sonar). Among them, systems 
operated in mobile survey mode with a vertically oriented, 
hull-mounted transducer are a standard tool for assessment of 
mid-water fish stocks. A significant benefit of this survey 
mode is that large areas can be sampled continuously in a 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

short amount of time [5]. Systems operated in point 
stationary survey mode with fixed-location and side-looking 
sonar techniques are capable of detection, quantification and 
even identification of demersal and benthic fish. They are 
mostly used for anadromous fish abundance estimation, fish 
behavior observation around fixed facilities and may be 
helpful in validation of fish species [7][8]. 
To fulfill the necessities of underwater mobile object 
detection and benthic fishery abundance assessment in a cost 
effective way, a comprehensive research project sponsored 
by National Science Council and National Chung-Shan 
Institute of Science and Technology was conducted. Based 
on theoretical evaluations, a point stationary, acoustic-based 
surveying system was proposed and implemented. The 
system can be split into two major and inter-dependent 
components, i.e., image acquisition and image processing. 
The first part comprises a high-frequency, mechanically 
scanned imaging sonar (MSIS) with bottom-fixed, side-
looking working configuration. The second part incorporates 
an unsupervised Bayesian classification procedure for fish 
target detection and quantification. The objective of this 
paper was dedicated in evaluating the practicality and 
characteristics of the proposed surveying system. 
Performance of the proposed sonar equipment in 
detecting mobile objects is discussed in Section 2. Image 
processing procedures and techniques are described in 
Section 3. A comprehensive evaluation of the entire 
surveying system for the purpose of fish target detection, 
relative abundance quantification and behavior investigation 
is illustrated in Section 4. Finally, results and conclusion 
remarks are shown in Section 5. 
II. 
EQUIPMENT AND ACOUSTIC PRINCIPLES 
MSISs perform scans in a 3D volume by rotating a sonar 
beam through a series of small angle steps. The side-looking 
acoustic pulse is projected perpendicular to the sonar head. 
For each emitted beam, distance vs. echo-amplitude data is 
returned. Thus, accumulating this information along a 
complete 360o sector, a composite acoustic image of the 
surroundings can be obtained [9]. Commonly, the waiting 
time between each beam is directly proportional to the 
selected range setting and a total of 1,200 pings are needed to 
complete a 360o sector with stepping speed of 0.3o. 
Therefore, these devices have a slow scanning rate of at least 
several seconds per image frame. 
The quality or naturalness of the acoustic images, i.e., 
identifiability of image content, can be degraded by 
distortion due to an unstable transducer. MSISs with bottom-
fixed and completely stationary configuration for image 
acquisition provide a stable mount and there will be no 
effects of yaw or roll-induced movement when the sonar is 
suspended from a cable [10]. This working configuration is, 
therefore, ideal for operations to obtain the highest quality or 
undistorted images. 
The basic principles behind the detection of an object in 
the water with an acoustic system are described by the “sonar 
equation” [11]: 
 
 
V = SL + G – 40logR – 2αR + TS + 2B(θ, φ)       (1) 
where, 
V        = the received intensity of the echo 
SL      = the transmitted source level 
G  
  = the receiving gain of the system 
40logR = the two-way spreading loss, R is the range 
α  
  = the sound attenuation coefficient 
TS  
  = the acoustic target strength 
B(θ,φ)  = the transducer directivity pattern function 
If the value of V is sufficiently greater than background 
noise, the object will be detected. For any given noise level, 
the potential to detect a target is improved with greater 
source level, less propagation loss, greater target size, and 
proximity of the target to the center of the beam. As a result, 
the received echo intensity of an individual target is 
primarily dependent on the sonar equipment (e.g., frequency 
and electronic characteristics), physical properties of 
seawater as well as the physical and behavior properties of 
the target. The importance of these factors is discussed in the 
following sections. 
A. Sonar equipment 
The primary component of the acoustic equipment in this 
investigation is a digital, multi-frequency imaging sonar 
(model 881A, Imagenex), capable of operating at frequencies 
of 1 MHz, 675 kHz and 310 kHz with fan shaped beams of 
0.9ox10o, 1.8ox20o and 4ox40o, respectively. The stepping 
speeds of the sonar are from 0.3o/step to 2.4o/step with range 
scales from 1 m to 200 m. Because the sonar is limited to 
512 by 512 pixels for displaying each frame, the size of the 
frame determines the display resolution and images with 
smaller range length are better resolved. The mid-range area 
insonified by a single ping of the sonar at range setting of 5 
m, frequency of 1 MHz and fan shaped beam of 0.9ox10o is 
3.9 cm (width) by 44 cm (height). The area insonified will 
increase dramatically with increased range length setting due 
to the inherent adjustment of frequency and beam pattern 
settings. The frame update rate of the sonar is controlled by 
the combination of range and stepping speed settings. At 
range scale of 5 m and stepping speed of 0.3o/step, the 
minimum theoretical scanning time for each frame needs 42 
seconds. At the same range scale but faster stepping speed 
(e.g., 0.9o/step), the time could be reduced to 14 seconds. 
B. Environmental and target properties 
Physical properties of seawater, physical and behavior 
properties of the target, as well as the influence of noise to 
the detection of mobile object were discussed in this section. 
As the sound wave passes through the water column, 
transmission loss due to absorption and spreading occurs, 
which reduces the energy strike on the target. In general, 
sound absorption is greater with higher sound frequencies 
and more saline water [11]. 
The two key measurement issues in the acoustic 
quantification of fish are target strength and fish behavior [5]. 
Target strength of a single fish is dependent upon its species, 
length, shape, body structure, orientation relative to the 
transducer, condition of maturity and sonar frequency. Fish 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

behavior, or how the fish is moving and orienting itself, 
includes swimming speed and direction of individual fish. 
The ultimate limit to the detection of a specific target is 
noise. Noise is the background against which sonars must 
detect signals from targets. For the active sonar, noise is 
augmented by reverberations from unwanted sources and the 
signal is an echo from the target. Major sources on noise 
include: thermal noise, noise from the sea, vessel noise and 
biological noise. Reverberation may be classified into 
surface, volume and seabed reverberation. Among them, 
volume reverberation plays an important role in fish 
detection and arises from small organisms, bubbles, 
suspended 
sediment 
particles, 
turbulence 
and 
other 
inhomogeneities in the volume of water being insonified. 
C. Survey design 
Imaging sonar systems have two main functions to 
perform: the detection of objects and the identification of 
such objects [5]. An effective and optimized imaging sonar 
survey in the quantification of fish target should incorporate 
the considerations of the following two aspects, i.e., the 
detectability of the fish (i.e., target strength and fish behavior) 
and the resolution of the sonar image. Theoretically, it is 
capable of detecting any target that produces an echo above 
the background noise level. From a practical point of view, 
to achieve the task of object detection by the application of 
an active imaging sonar system, the minimum requirement is 
that the object must receive five consecutive sonar 
insonifications. On the other hand, for the purpose of 
identification a specific object, a conservative plan should 
include one which chooses scanning speeds and ranges that 
will allow for at least 12 consecutive insonifications in a 
scanning distance equal to the object’s dimension [11][12]. It 
is evident that with range setting of 5 m and stepping speed 
of 0.3o/step, the smallest detectable objects at mid-range of 
the image frame should have a scanning length of 6.5 cm. In 
addition, for an object with scanning length of over 15.6 cm, 
outline and shape of this object might be delineated or 
defined which would improve its characteristics recognition 
or even identification. 
For bottom-fixed, side-looking MSISs, the system 
parameters affecting the number of insonifications an object 
receives are: sonar range scale (which sets pulse repetition 
rate), stepping speed and horizontal beam directivity (i.e., 
horizontal aperture). Among these parameters where the 
operator has control over are range scale and stepping speed. 
Adjustment of system parameters illustrates how acoustic 
surveys can be fine tuned to match the purpose of a specific 
investigation. 
III. 
PROCEDURE FOR IMAGE PROCESSING 
Acoustic data are generally voluminous. Processing such 
data can be overwhelming without the aid of image 
processing software. In fact, the successfulness of image 
processing is highly dependent on quality, resolution and 
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the image acquired, i.e., the 
existence of acoustic diversity is a pre-requisite for the 
detection of fish target [11]. The overall goal of the imaging 
processing software was to aid the operators in detection and 
evaluation of fish target in the MSIS imagery collected in the 
field. Major modules of the proposed image processing 
procedure included: stationary objects subtraction, region 
extraction, textural feature extraction for fixed-sized regions, 
unsupervised classification based on texture features, 
hierarchical cluster analysis and principle feature threshold 
evaluation for fish target detection, and target quantification 
and visualization of the results (see Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Image processing procedure for fish target detection and 
quantification. 
A. Stationary objects subtraction 
The existence of various stationary objects (e.g., seabed 
and anthropogenic structures) in acoustic image frames 
collected by bottom-fixed and side-looking sonar techniques 
is an unexceptional reality. In fact, seabed echoes have levels 
that are 20 to 40 dB higher than fish and their existence in 
the image frames tends to obscure the detection and 
evaluation of fish target [6]. However, due to their stationary 
status in the image frames, these objects could be removed 
straightforward from the image frame by using a pixel-based 
image superposition and subtraction algorithm [13]. The 
result was a modified image frame showing the changes in 
the image area due to fish movement. 
B. Textural feature extraction for fixed-sized regions 
Image texture is an attribute of groups of adjacent pixels, 
therefore, it is useful to group pixels into regions and to 
extract features that describe the texture of the region. A 
square sliding region was used for region extraction in this 
investigation [14]. Region size and sliding distance are, 
therefore, the two major parameters for the algorithm. 
Measurements of texture in images can be one 
dimensional 
(e.g., 
run-length 
and 
fixed-size 
pixel 
neighborhoods) or two dimensional (e.g., grey level co-
occurrence 
matrices, 
fractal 
dimension and 
wavelet 
transform) [14]. In this investigation, three textural features 
(mean, entropy and homogeneity) were proposed and 
incorporated into the classification system [15][16]. Among 
them the mean pixel intensity is one dimensional feature and 
the other two are two dimensional features. For a specific 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

region, the mean is the average of the intensity value of the 
unquantized pixel values for this region. The entropy and 
homogeneity are computed based on the grey level co-
occurrence matrix (GLCM) for this region [15]. 
C. Feature classification 
The goal of classification is to assign the regions of an 
image to an ‘appropriate’ class in such a way that some error 
measure 
is 
minimized. 
An 
unsupervised 
Bayesian 
classification system, i.e., AutoClass, was used to cluster 
regions from acoustic images [16]. Three texture features 
with equivalent weight were used in this process. 
D. Target identification 
Like any unsupervised classification routine, it cannot 
give these classified classes descriptive names or assign 
target to a specific class. To fulfill the necessity of target 
class 
identification 
among 
classified 
classes, 
two 
independent approaches were proposed in this investigation, 
i.e., a hierarchical cluster analysis and principal feature 
threshold evaluation. The hierarchical cluster analysis of the 
classified classes was based on the posterior probabilities and 
the algorithm of between-groups linkage with Euclidean 
distances. The results of the analysis are illustrated in a 
dendrogram and the similarity among classes can be 
evaluated based on the sure group clicking value. Target 
cluster detection through principal feature threshold method 
was conducted by visual inspection of scatter plots of cluster 
averaged textural features. Under this circumstance, a single 
textural feature threshold or a combination of multiple 
thresholds among textural features might suffice for the 
discrimination of the fish target class among classified 
classes. 
E. Target quantification and visualization of the results 
Region growing technique was employed to isolate 
contiguous target blocks to a single detected target. 
Visualization of the results was accomplished by mapping 
the representative pixels of the specific region classified as 
fish target cluster and those of non-fish target clusters into a 
distinctive binary plot. Physical properties of each fish target 
were therefore quantized which includes center coordinates, 
perimeter, area and shape factor as well as averaged value of 
textural features (i.e., mean, entropy and homogeneity). 
IV. 
CASE STUDY AND RESULTS 
A comprehensive evaluation of the entire surveying 
system with consecutive image acquisition and image 
processing for the purpose of fish target detection, relative 
abundance quantification and behavior investigation was 
performed in a deep water aquaculture pond in 2010. The 
pond covers an area with dimensions of 70 by 90 m (6,300 
m2) and an averaged depth of 3 m was reported. Due to the 
existence of suspended particulate matters, water clarity of 
this pond is quite poor which makes video observations 
completely obscured. Approximately 20,000 milk fish 
(Chanos chanos), each about 40 cm in length, were cultured 
in the pond. The MSIS was deployed at a randomly selected 
point near to the southern dike and 4 m off the pond bank 
where a small plastic pipe raft was deployed previously for 
the purpose of a surface working platform. Acoustic image 
frames collected with range setting at 5 m, stepping speed at 
0.3o/step and gain setting at 20 dB were selected for detailed 
analyses. Under these specific settings, each frame provided 
a viewing area of 78.5 m2 (1.2% to the pond area) with 
spatial resolution of 2 x 2 cm per pixel, temporal resolution 
or scanning rate of 75 seconds per frame and maximum 
scanning speed of 42 cm/sec. A total of 46 consecutive 
image frames was acquired in this case study which lasted 
for an hour at around noon time (i.e., 12:54 to 13:54 local 
time). 
A. Image processing program verification and calibration 
Image processing computer program developed for fish 
target detection and relative abundance estimation was 
verified and optimal system parameters were determined 
with the modified image frames (i.e., stationary objects 
subtracted) of two typical examples (i.e., EX#1 and EX#2 in 
Figure 2). In this case, the entire image frames were used to 
generate the synthetic background frame for the purpose of 
stationary objects subtraction process. 
 
Figure 2.  Two typical examples illustrated bottom features (raw image 
frame) and the readily discriminated fish targets (modified image frame). 
Feature extraction is a dominant issue in target detection 
from images. Values for a number of different parameters 
related to feature extraction and classification need to be 
determined, which include: region size, region sliding 
distance, number of grey levels and number of clustered 
classes. An evaluation process based on producer’s and 
consumer’s accuracy was adopted in this investigation [14]. 
Optimal region size and region sliding distance for this 
specific type of image frames were evaluated and determined 
empirically. Initial investigation illustrated that a region 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

sliding distance of 4 pixels and 16 grey levels are acceptable 
selections in this case. Based on these sliding distance and 
grey levels, ten sets of square region sizes from 6x6 to 24x24 
were systematically evaluated. For these experiments, 
AutoClass was set to execute for 4 attempts as suggested by 
the computer program, all regions were used for 
classification, and AutoClass was allowed to determine the 
optimum number of classes. In most cases, AutoClass would 
cluster the features into 9 classes. Performance evaluation 
was conducted by comparing manually depicted target pixels 
and computer classified target pixels of the two examples 
where manual detections were assumed without error. 
Results of the evaluation indicated that the 8x8 region size, 
with maximum value of producer’s accuracy (85% and 78%, 
with respect to EX#1 and EX#2), was the optimal region size 
for the detection of fish target in this case. The relatively low 
producer’s accuracy in EX#2 was correlated with a relatively 
high amount of fish target off the acoustic beam axis which 
was omitted by the manual detections and therefore caused 
the difference between manually depicted target pixels and 
computer classified target pixels. 
Binary 
visualization 
and 
characteristic 
properties 
quantification of the detected fish targets of EX#1 were 
illustrated in Table 1. Basic fish target information extracted 
in this case included positional parameters (Cartesian and 
Polar Coordination), morphological descriptors (e.g., area, 
perimeter, shape factor and/or length) and energetic 
characteristics (e.g., acoustic energy reflected and indices of 
internal variation). In addition, information regarding size of 
detected fish target (in ‘block’ of 4x4 pixels), abundance 
variations and cumulative area of fish target by frame, which 
are associated with fish abundance and behavior patterns in 
the insonified volume, were estimated and enumerated for 
further investigation. 
As criteria for fish target class identification is concerned, 
both hierarchical cluster analysis and principal feature 
threshold criterion were systematically tested and evaluated. 
It is evident that both procedures are effective in 
discriminating fish target class among classified classes. 
However, for principal feature threshold method, a 
combination of two thresholds among textural features (i.e., 
mean and homogeneity) is more efficient than a single 
textural feature threshold. An automatic image processing 
computer procedure with limited human intervention is 
therefore developed and verified. 
TABLE 1.  
BASIC FISH TARGET INFORMATION EXTRACTED IN EX#1 
INCLUDED POSITIONAL, MORPHOLOGICAL AND ENERGETIC PARAMETERS. 
 
B. Results and discussion 
Both surficial and bottom stationary environmental and 
anthropogenic features within the scanned volume of this 
randomly selected test point were imaged and recognized. At 
the water surface, a meter-sized floating object (i.e., the 
plastic pipe raft) is located at a location closed to the bank 
slope. On the bottom, among a relatively flat, muddy and 
stiff substrate, two types of explicit features are identified 
which include a continuous and moderately steeped bank 
slope at the pond bank area and several prominent mud 
mounds at the off bank area (see Figure 2). These features 
offered strong reflecting surfaces and therefore stronger echo 
intensities were generated at these areas in the image frames. 
Quantitative information of fish targets  discriminated 
from the consecutive 46 image frames was generated and 
exported to text formats for evaluating the characteristics of 
the 
proposed 
surveying 
system 
especially 
in 
the 
quantification of fish behavior related issues. A total of 2,928 
individual and school fish targets were tabulated and based 
on the basic target area counting unit adopted in this 
investigation (i.e., “block” of 4x4 pixel), target area size or 
type of  target varied from 1 block (#b-1) to as large as 171 
blocks (#b-171). Among them, #b-1 and #b-2 are strictly 
linked to individual fish, whereas #b-5 can be considered as 
a minimum threshold for a fish school or closely spaced 
individuals. By the relationship of abundance of detection at 
each type of target in a semi-logarithmic plot (see Figure 3), 
two distinct categories, which are strictly related to fish 
behavior, were observed. The first category (i.e., Cat#1: 
Individual-School Mixture) followed an approximately 
linearly and continuously declined trend from #b-1 to #b-16 
where number of target abundance varied by nearly two 
logarithmic cycles from 1,160 to 13. The second category 
(Cat#2: Prominent Schools) exhibited a level off trend from 
#b-17 up to #b-171. Based on a mutual consideration of 
target area size (type of target), number of abundance and 
continuity of distribution, the contents of the second category 
were further classified into two sub-categories by #B-40, i.e., 
Cat-2(A): Large School Set (#B-17 to #B-39) and Cat-2(B): 
Giant School Set (#B-40 and above).  
Target Size (block)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Abundance of Detection (count)
1
10
100
1000
10000
Cat#1: 
Individual-School Mixture
Cat#2: 
Prominent Schools
Cat#2(A): 
large school target
Cat#2(B): 
giant school target
 
Figure 3.  Number of detected target in logarithmic scale vs. target size (in 
the unit of ‘block’ of 4x4 pixels) collected in 46 image frames. 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Quantitative evaluation of fish behavior from a spatial 
point of view was conducted by two measures, i.e., target 
area distribution by polar angle sectors (see Figure 4) and the 
relationship between fish target and environmental features 
(see Figure 5). Fish targets and environmental features, when 
presented and analyzed together, can provide valuable 
information about population dynamics and aggregation 
location with respect to these environmental features and 
surrounding environment. Two fish movement corridors in 
parallel with the pond bank were concluded (i.e., Corridor#1 
and Corridor#2), which guided the mass movement and 
direction of travel of both individual and school fish (see 
Figure 5). Among them, Corridor#1, which is bordered by 
the pond bank, extends off bank to a distance of 5m in 
wideness and includes the floating raft within its coverage. A 
proportion of 73% detected targets by area were located in 
Corridor#1 and only 27% were located in Corridor#2. Nearly 
all of the targets which fit in Cat#2 (i.e., Prominent Schools 
Category) were located in Corridor#1 at specific locations 
such as bank slope area, substrate mound area and the area 
around the floating raft. In addition, all of the targets in Cat-
2(B) (i.e., Giant School Set) were located at only two 
restricted areas in the vicinity of the floating raft. 
Alternatively, in Corridor#2, only six targets which fit in 
Cat-2(A) (i.e., Large School Set in the Prominent Schools 
Category) were located specifically on the substrate mound.  
Polar Angle (degree)
0
90
180
270
360
Target Area Fraction (%)
0
2
4
6
8
Cat#1
Cat#2
corridor#2 ( 40o ~ 200o )
target area:  27 %
corridor#1 ( 200o ~ 40o )
target area:  73 %
 
Figure 4.  Target area distribution by polar angle sectors. Two fish 
movement corridors were concluded (i.e., Corridor#1 and Corridor#2). 
Time-dependent variations of target area in each frame 
were evaluated by means of total integrated area and area by 
the Prominent Schools Category (see Figure 6). Values of 
the total integrated area varied significantly by a factor of 11 
times from a maximum value of 10,224 pixels to a minimum 
of 896 pixels with average and standard deviation of 
3893±2081 pixels. Periodic fluctuations in target areas 
through time were observed evidently, which included five 
key epochs with total integrated area over 6,000 pixels. 
Combined with time-dependent variations of target area 
through fish movement corridors illustrated that major fish 
movement patterns in the scanned area followed a 
continuous, steady and low passage rate mode (Corridor#2) 
(see Figure 7) superimposed a discrete, periodic and high 
passage rate mode (Corridor#1). A total of eight discrete and 
high passage rate events were discriminated and an averaged 
period of about seven minutes in time was concluded for 
each discrete and high passage rate event. During each event, 
the fish converged into large and giant schools subsequent to 
interactions with environmental features such as bank slope, 
substrate mound and the float raft.  
 
Figure 5.  Relationship between fish target and environmental features. 
Two fish movement corridors were recognized. Arrows outline a general 
travel direction of the fish target. Blue and red circle represent large and 
giant school fish respectively. 
Time ( minute )
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Fish Target Area ( pixel )
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
total integrated 
Prominent Schools
 
Figure 6.  Time-dependent variations of fish target area. 
Time ( minute )
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Fish Target Area ( pixel )
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
total integrated in Corridor#2
Prominent Schools in Corridor#2
 
Figure 7.  Time-dependent variations of target area in Corridor#2 followed 
a continuous, steady and low passage rate mode. 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Based on spatial and temporal analyses on position and 
area of discriminated fish targets, it was concluded that fish 
movement behavior in the scanned area followed two 
distinct patterns in two separate corridors with significant 
different passage rate, i.e., a discrete, periodic and high 
passage rate (73%) mode in Corridor#1 and a continuous, 
steady and low passage rate (27%) mode in Corridor#2. 
Environmental features, such as bank slope, substrate mound 
and the float raft represented specific meeting points for 
dynamic aggregations and schooling. Fish tended to 
converge into large and even giant schools subsequent to 
interactions with these features. The fish converging effects 
of these environmental features varied in proportion with fish 
passage rate. In addition, behavior characteristics suggested 
by the first category (i.e., Cat#1: Individual-School Mixture), 
defined in the abundance and target size relationship, could 
be correlated with schooling and erratic behavior as well as 
swift swimming activity and chasing, occasional leaping and 
water-slapping activities of milk fish [17]. Behavior 
characteristics represented by the second category (Cat#2: 
Prominent Schools) were correlated with the existence of 
principal environmental features which acted as meeting 
points for swimming fish to converge into prominent schools.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
A point stationary, acoustic-based surveying system, 
which incorporated acoustic image acquisition and image 
processing techniques, was developed and evaluated for its 
applicability in fulfilling the necessities of time-dependent 
benthic fish behavior investigation. 
For the specific case study conducted in a deep water 
fishpond, it is evident that both individual and school fish 
could be discriminated by image frames collected at a 
randomly selected point with range setting at 5 m and frame 
rate at 75 second. Based on this investigation, fish movement 
behavior in the scanned area followed two distinct patterns, 
i.e., a discrete, periodic and high passage rate mode in 
Corridor#1 and a continuous, steady and low passage rate 
mode in Corridor#2. Environmental features, such as bank 
slope, substrate mound and float raft represented specific 
meeting points for dynamic aggregations and schooling. Fish 
tended to converge into large and even giant schools 
subsequent to interactions with these features. 
The proposed system, which is an effective sampling tool 
due to its large sampling volume and the target-identification 
power, represented a practical and cost effective tool for the 
characterization of fish behavior. Other related issues such as 
the determination of fish swimming speed and length by the 
proposed system will be discussed in additional publications. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by National Science Council 
(101-2221-E-110-014) and National Chung-Shan Institute 
of Science and Technology (CSIST-0884-V104). 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. F. Vik, Japanese Artificial Reef Technology, Maryland, 
USA: Aquabio, Inc. 1982. 
[2] W. Jr. Seaman and L. M. Sprague, “Artificial habitat practices 
in aquatic system,” in Artificial habitats for marine and 
freshwater fisheries, W. Jr. Seaman and L. M. Sprague, Eds. 
New York, USA: Academic, 1991, pp. 1-16. 
[3] Fishery Administration Taiwan, Coastal Fishery Resources, 
Available from: fttp://www.fa.gov.tw [retrieved: July 2014]. 
[4] W. 
M. 
Tian, 
“Side-scan 
sonar 
techniques 
for the 
characterization of physical properties of artificial benthic 
habitats,” Brazilian Journal of Oceanography, vol. 59 (special 
issue CARAH), April 2011, pp. 77-90, doi: 10.1590/S1679-
87592011000500010. 
[5] D. N. MacLennan and E. J. Simmonds, Fisheries Acoustics, 
London, England: Chapman & Hall, 1992. 
[6] W. M. Tian, “Integrated method for the detection and location 
of underwater pipelines”, Applied Acoustics, vol. 69, April 
2008, pp. 387-398, doi:10.1016/j.apacoust.2007.05.001. 
[7] R. A. Moursund, T. J. Carlson, and R. D. Peters, “A fisheries 
application of a dual-frequency identification sonar acoustic 
camera,” ICES Journal of Marine Science, vol. 60, March 
2003, pp. 678–683, doi:10.1016/S1054–3139(03)00036-5. 
[8] J. A. Holmes, G. M. W. Cronkite, H. J. Enzenhofer, and T. J. 
Mulligan, “Accuracy and precision of fish-count data from a 
‘dual frequency identification sonar’ (DIDSON) imaging 
system,” ICES Journal of Marine Science, vol. 63, April 2006, 
pp. 543–555, doi:10.1016/j.icesjms.2005.08.015. 
[9] Imagenex Technology Corp, Imagenex model 881A Digital 
Multi-Frequency Imaging Sonar, Port Coquitlam, Canada: 
Imagenex Technology Corp, 2007. 
[10] Konsberg Mesotech, Use of Scanning and Side-scan Sonar for 
Body Recovery, Port Coquitlam, Canada: Konsgerg Mesotech, 
2002. 
[11] X. Lurton, An Introduction to Underwater Acoustics: 
Principles 
and 
Applications, 
Chichester, 
UK: 
Praxis 
Publishing, 2002. 
[12] J. P. Fish and H. A. Carr, Sound Underwater Images—A 
guide to the generation and interpretation of side scan sonar 
data, Orleans, MA: Lower Cape Publishing, 1990. 
[13] N. O. Handegard and K. Williams, “Automated tracking of 
fish in trawls using the DIDSON (Dual frequency 
IDentification SONar),” ICES Journal of Marine Science, vol. 
65, March 2008, pp. 636–644, doi:10.1093/icesjms/fsn029. 
[14] J. B. Campbell, Introduction to Remote Sensing, 3rd ed., 
NewYork, USA: The Guilford Press, 2002. 
[15] Ph. Blondel, “Automatic Mine Detection by Textural 
Analysis of COTS Sidescan Sonar Imagery,” International 
Journal of Remote Sensing, vol. 21, Dec. 2000, pp. 3115-
3128, doi:10.1080/01431160050144983. 
[16] S. Bridges, J. Hodges, B. Wooley, D. Karpovich, and G. B. 
Smith, 
“Knowledge 
Discovery 
in 
an 
Oceanographic 
Database,” Applied Intelligence, vol. 11, Sep. 1999, pp. 135-
148,  doi: 10.1023/A:1008395129406. 
[17] I. C. Liau and E. M. Leano, Milkfish Aquaculture in Asia, 
Keelung, Taiwan:  National Taiwan Ocean University, 2010. 
 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

