SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013. ISBN: 978-1-61208-296-7
90
New Architecture for Efﬁcient Data Sampling in Wireless Sensor Network Devices
Jerker Delsing, John Borg, Jonny Johansson
Lule˚a University of Technology
EISLAB
Lule˚a, Sweden
jerker.delsing@ltu.se, johan.borg@ltu.se, jonny.johansson@ltu.se
Abstract—When discussing powering wireless sensor net-
work nodes, there are a few major energy consumers: com-
munications, microcontroller and the sensor. We propose a
wireless sensor network platform architecture minimizing the
energy consumption of sensing. The architecture proposed
herein is based on a reactive approach to sensing. A number
of possible hardware approaches are evaluated and compared.
This comparison indicates that analog storage between the
sensing element and the sensor electronics can be a feasible
method for reducing the energy consumption of the system.
Keywords-low power WSN sensing; WSN node architecture;
wireless sensor network node.
I. INTRODUCTION
One of the most common questions regarding wireless
sensor networks, WSN, is what the power consumption at
the sensor node must be. Much work has been done on low-
powered sensor nodes and their communication abilities: see,
for example, [1]–[7]. Some speciﬁc examples are schemes
handling the reduction of communication [8], effective rout-
ing and multihop schemes, and the reactive partial waking
up of WSN nodes [9].
Most often, the sensing element itself is disregarded from
an energy budget point of view. The current state of the
art for sensor interfacing is to convert the sensor data to
digital form. The most common approach is using an A/D
converter. Other well known approaches involves letting the
sensor data inﬂuence a digital pulse train of which we easily
can measure parameters like frequency, pulse width or duty
cycle. None of these approaches puts the power consumption
of the sensor into focus. All of these approaches are based
on the assumption that all data should be transfered to some
computational stage on the WSN node or any device higher
up in the system architecture.
In this paper, we propose an architecture for low power
interfacing of a sensing element to a WSN node. The
architecture exploits the idea of detecting no or discardable
changes in data. Such detection should then inhibit further
processing of sensor data as early as possible. The proposed
architecture is based on a reactive wake-up chain starting at
the sensing element itself.
The basis for this WSN node architecture is the deter-
mination of changes in sensing element data as early as
Figure 1.
Traditional WSN node architecture, A1
possible. In many real systems, data changes are small and
are most often not of interest to the surrounding system.
From an energy consumption point of view, we like to
keep as much of the WSN node asleep as possible when
determining whether a data sample constitutes a signiﬁcant
change compared with the previous sample.
Consider a WSN node architecture as in Figure 1. The
most frequently used approach is to read the data into the
µP store and compare it with the previous data. Energy is
spent on sensing element sampling, signal ampliﬁcation and
ﬁltering, A/D conversion and data comparison in the µP.
This is the architecture you will ﬁnd in most WSN and IoT
(Internet of Things) nodes currently available see e.g. [10],
[11].
This paper will, from an energy consumption point of
view compare this generic WSN sensor interface architecture
to architectures enabling early detection of discardable data
changes.
A. WSN node architecture
Three different architectures targeting the early detection
of useful data will be described and discussed from an
energy usage perspective. As a base line, the generic ar-
chitecture in Figure 1 will be used.
The ﬁrst opportunity for comparison is by adding a digital
memory and comparison function after the A/D conversion,
as shown in Figure 2. Energy is spent on sensor sampling,
signal ampliﬁcation and ﬁltering, A/D conversion and stor-
age and comparison of the data in digital memory. Enabling
the µP to sleep while performing sensor data sampling if
there are no changes or small changes in sensor data will

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013. ISBN: 978-1-61208-298-1
91
Figure 2. WSN node architecture, A2, with external digital sensor memory
and comparison logic.
use energy only for the HW cost of digital memory, some
conﬁgurable logic (to allow for the setting of change limits)
and sending a wake-up signal to the µP.
Figure 3.
Illustration of level trigger sampling of a periodic signal.
Yet, one possibility is to replace the conventional A/D
converter in the structures above with an Asyncronous,
or Level-Crossing, ADC. As introduced in [12], [13], the
level crossing ADC samples the signal when it passes a
pre-determined threshold level, instead of at discrete time
intervals as performed in traditional ADCs. Thus, the main
output of the level-crossing ADC is the time elapsed as
the signal has moved between two pre-determined levels,
Figure 3. This architecture offers a couple of advantages
over traditional techniques. Firstly, it allow the use of fewer
quantization levels, as long as the time measurement can
be performed with sufﬁcient accuracy. Secondly, and in the
context of this paper more important, the activity of the
device is controlled by the behaviour of the signal that
is to be sampled, allowing event-deriven data acquisition
[14]. In the sensing scenario, the device will inherently idle
as long as the signal stays between two threshold levels.
Accordingly, no data is fed through to higher levels in the
system, allowing for these to be help idle. These possibilities
in the design of sensor front ends have been explored for
Ultrasound measurement systems [15], as well as for other
energy constrained sensor applications [16].
In terms of energy cost, the A/D conversion is dominant in
the scenarios dicussed above. Thus, it is of interest to explore
Figure 4. WSN node architecture, A3, with level triggered A/D conversion.
Figure 5.
WSN node architecture, A4, with external analog memory and
comparison logic before the A/D conversion.
the possibilities to completely remove the A/D converter.
One scenario to achieve this is shown in Figure 4. Here, we
introduce an analog memory with the capability of storing
and comparing at least two values with associated logic
and signalling to the µP. In this setup, energy is spent
on sensor sampling, signal ampliﬁcation, and ﬁltering, and
analog storage with its associated logic. Thus, the uP can
sleep during sensning element data sampling if there are no,
or small, changes in the sensed data.
Two ways to implement the analog memory are the use
of Charge couple devices (CCD) and switched capacitor
storage.CCDs operate by transferring stored charge packets
along the surface of a semiconductor by manipulating the
potentials of gate electrodes placed close to the semiconduc-
tor surface [17]. This forms essentially an analog shift
register. While these devices has most commonly been used
as image sensors, a number of works have over the years
applied them as analog delay elements in signal processing
applications.One critical advantage of using CCDs in analog
delay circuits is the fact that as long as they are operated at a
constant clock frequency, they are completely insensitive to
matching between storage cells. In addition, the unique pos-
sibility of non-destructive readout at intermediate locations
along the device have given rise to CCD based analog ﬁnite
impulse response ﬁlters [18]. However, in order to move the
charge packets along the surface of the semiconductor the
potentials at the gates needs to change as a function of time.
The charge required to affect the required change in potential
is comparable to the total charge currently being transported
through the device. Thus, for a CCD the power dissipation
depends not only on the charge packet size required to attain

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013. ISBN: 978-1-61208-298-1
92
the required SNR, but also directly on the number of storage
elements.
In contrast to CCDs, the only charge required when
storing an analog sample using a switch capacitor analog
memory is the charge required for the signal it self and some
small charge for driving the sampling switch. The charge
will stay on its capacitor without further intervention until it
becomes corrupted due to leakage. It can retrieved indepen-
dently on any other stored charges on other capacitors in a
random-access manner if desired. Switched capacitor analog
memories are however subject to the mismatch between
capacitors. Both CCDs and switched capacitor analog mem-
ories present interesting alternatives to direct digitalization
in systems a signal needs to be delayed before digitalization,
or where it is deemed simpler do sample the signal at a high
rate and later digitize the stored signal at a slower rate [19].
II. ENERGY ANALYSIS OF ARCHITECTURE
The time scale on which the property being measured can
be expected to change is of major importance in the choice
of data acquisition architecture.
In systems designed for rapidly changing signals the
time-dependent corruption of reference values stored in
analog circuits (e.g., due to leakage currents) is of minor
consequence and the power required for the comparators
represents a signiﬁcant improvement compared to continu-
ously digitizing the signal at the rate required to capture all
relevant information present in the input signal.
At time scales where storage of analog values is unfea-
sible, some improvements may still be attainable by using
a level crossing ADC (Analog to Digital Converter) where
digital registers and a DAC (Digital to Analog Converter) is
used for generating the analog reference value(s).
If the signal changes sufﬁciently slowly the minimal static
power consumption required of even the best continuous-
time circuits exceed the average consuption of a regular
sampling data acquisition system. Here, dedicated logic con-
trolling the sampling process, comparing to digital thresh-
olds and waking the microcontroller only when signiﬁcant
changes have occurred can yield some improvements, if the
added complexity can be justiﬁed. A sampling architecture
is of course also favorable in any measurement system
where the sensor it self accounts for a signiﬁcant fraction of
the power dissipation yet can be powered down efﬁciently
between measurements.
Below, we comment on the procedure for calculation of
power consumption for the components used in the different
architectures.
• Analog memory
From the voltage noise on a capacitor at equilibrium,
vn =
p
kBT/C
(1)
the minimal capacitor, and thus average energy per
sample required for some speciﬁed SNR can be cal-
culated. For example to reach an SNR of 60 dB with
a signal amplitude of 0.5 V, a capacitance of about
30 fF is required. If unipolar charge is stored, the
average energy to store samples from a sinusoidal input
signal would be about 22 fJ. This compares favorably
to the best ADCs in the literature (e.g., 1V 11fJ per
conversion-step 10bit 10MS/s asynchronous SAR ADC
in 0.18 µm CMOS consumes 11pJ per 10-bit sample).
A switched capacitor memory consumes this energy
once per stored value. On the other hand, in a CCD all
data is shifted one step at each data acquisition. Thus,
the CCD will consume an energy n times the value
above per sample, where n is the number of storage
positions in the CCD.
This method gives an estimate of the theoretical mini-
mum power required to store analog values, and is used
as a lower bound.
• Time sampling ADC
Publication of performance for this type of converter is
still relatively sparse. For this paper, we use data from
[15], [16].
• ADC
ADC performance data have been collected based on
[20]. The data presented in the tables below is calcu-
lated based on the therein presented Figure of merit of
100 fJ/conversion step, relevant for work published in
2011.
• Ampliﬁer
Ampliﬁer data are taken from commercially available
devices.
• Microcontroller
Micro contoler data is taken from commercially avail-
able devices
• Digital logic
Data i taken from estimates of number gates and data
on commercially available gate consumption.
To analyze the energy consumption of the presented
architectures, we will use four different sensing situations:
• Temperature sensing using a PT100 element as the
sensing element
– bandwidth 1 Hz
– resolution 10 bits
• Accelerometer measurement
– bandwidth 1 kHz
– resolution 10 bits
• Microphone - sound recording
– bandwidth 20 kHz
– resolution 14 bits
• Ultrasound pulse echo measurement in liquid - piezo
ceramic transducers
– bandwidth 1 MHz - 10 MHz

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013. ISBN: 978-1-61208-298-1
93
– resolution 10 bits
This analysis is conducted using published state-of-the-art
data (from our group and others) and data from commercial
devices. This way, we can build an accurate picture of the
total energy consumption of the proposed architectures. No
circuit simulations are made here, nor have we built any
complete devices.
The energy analysis is based on the following model. The
total electrical power Ptot consumed by a WSN node can
be described as:
Ptot = Psens + Pcond + PA−mem + PAD + PD−mem + PµP
(2)
The total energy usage is then obtained by introducing the
time needed for each operation (after which it can be turned
off). To make the analysis reasonably simple, we assume
that the architecture supports turning off Esens, Econd, once
data has been stored either in analog or digital form.
For data sampling from one sensor, we assume a sensing
and conditioning time tsenscond, an analog storing time
tA−mem, an A/D time tAD, a digital memory time tD−mem
and a µP time tµP . Thus, we obtain the total power Etot
used for data sampling from one sensor as:
Etot = Psens ∗ tsens + Pcond ∗ tcond + PA−mem ∗ tA−mem+
PAD ∗ tAD + PD−mem ∗ tD−mem + PµP ∗ tµP
(3)
Provided that we have some understanding of the real
values of these energies and times, we can calculate the total
power consumption. In the following equation, we will do
this for two sensor types, a PT-100 sensor and an ultrasonic
pulse echo sensor, for each of the three architecture types
A1, (see Figure 1), A2 (see Figure 2), A3 (see Figure 4),
and A4 (see Figure 5).
A. Energy analysis PT-100 sensor
In this case, we assume the power consumption and time
needed for a PT-100 sensor and its associated electronics,
according to table I. For each of the three different architec-
tures in Figures 1-4, we then calculate the expected span of
energy consumption energy consumption based on data in
Table I. The results if given in Table V. Based on the long
time scales, analog memories and level triggered A/D have
not been considered for this application.
B. Energy analysis accelerometer measurement
Here, we discuss the power consumption associated with
the measurement of acceleration using a MEMS based 3D
accelerometer. A potential usage scenario is given in Figure
6, where vibrations from passing by automotive are detected
and processed. In Table II, the power consumption and
related timing for the sensor and associated electronics are
given. For each of the four architectures A1-A4 of Figure
Table I
ENERGY CONSUMPTION AND TIMING FOR A PT100 WSN SENSOR
NODE.
Device
Energy consumption
Time awake [µs]
PT100
0.1-1 mW [21], [22]
10
Conditioning electronics
0.6 µW [23]
10
Analog memory
n/a
n/a
A/D (10 bit)
0.2 nW
cont
level trigged A/D
n/a
n/a
Digital memory
0.01-0.1 mW
1(storage time)
µP
1-10 mW [24]
30
Figure 6.
The application of accelerometer equipped WSN nodes for road
application [25]
1-5, we then calculate the expected span of (maximum and
minimum) energy consumption based on data in Table II.
The results are given in Table V.
Table II
ENERGY CONSUMPTION AND TIMING FOR AN 3D ACCELEROMETER
EQUIPPED WSN SENSOR NODE.
Device
Energy consump-
tion
Time awake [µs]
Acelerometer
0.01 mW [26]
1
(1
µs
long
pulse excitation
Ampliﬁer and ﬁltering
1 µW [27]
10-20 (signal du-
ration + startup
time)
Analog memory
n/a
n/a
A/D (10 bit)
0.2 µW
cont
level trigged A/D
25 µW
cont
Digital memory
0.01-0.1 mW
10 (storage time)
µP
1-10 mW
30 (300 clock cy-
cles at 10MHz)

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013. ISBN: 978-1-61208-298-1
94
Figure 7.
The application of microphone equipped WSN nodes for noise
detection in automative test application
C. Energy analysis. Microphone - sound recording
Here, we discuss the power consumption and timing
needed for the recording of short sounds. The WSN node is
equipped with an capacitor based microphone. A potential
usage scenario is given in Figure 7 In Table III, the power
consumption and related timing for the sensor and associated
electronics is given. For each of the four different architec-
tures A1-A4 of Figures 1-5, we then calculate the expected
span of (maximum and minimum) energy consumption
based on data in Table III. The results if given in Table
V.
Table III
ENERGY CONSUMPTION AND TIMING FOR AN MICROPHONE EQUIPPED
WSN SENSOR NODE.
Device
Energy consump-
tion
Time awake [µs]
Microphone
0.01 mW
1
Ampliﬁer and ﬁltering
0.04 mW [28]
cont
Analog memory
1 nW
cont
A/D
4 µW
cont
level trigged A/D
n/a
n/a
Digital memory
0.01-0.1 mW
10 (storage time)
µP
1-10 mW
30 (300 clock cy-
cles at 10MHz)
D. Energy analysis ultrasound sensor 1-10 MHz
Here, we discuss the power consumption and time needed
for a piezo electric transducer in an ultrasound pulse echo
system used in liquid or solid media. A typical pulse echo
measuring situation with typical sound signals is shown in
Figure 8. In Table IV, the power consumption and related
timing for the sensor and associated electronics areis given.
Figure 8.
Ultrasound pulse echo measurement with associated acoustic
signals
For each of the four architectures A1-A4 of Figure 1-
5, we then calculate the expected span of (maximum and
minimum) energy consumption based on data in Table IV.
The results if given in Table V.
Table IV
ENERGY CONSUMPTION AND TIMING FOR AN ULTRASOUND WSN
SENSOR NODE.
Device
Energy consump-
tion
Time awake [µs]
Piezo excitation
0.01 mW [26]
1
(1
µs
long
pulse excitation
Ampliﬁer and ﬁltering
5 mW [29]
cont
Analog memory
0.5 µW
cont
A/D (10 bit)
2 mW
cont
level trigged A/D
175 mW
cont
Digital memory
0.01-0.1 mW
10 (storage time)
µP
1-10 mW
30 (300 clock cy-
cles at 10MHz)
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Under the assumptions that we made, we have compiled
power consumption data for four sensing scenarios. Data
is given in table are shown in Table I til IV. The scenario
operating energy consumption is computed for a 1 second
period according to Equation 2 and shown in Table V.
Table V
LOW AND HIGH END ENERGY CONSUMPTION DATA IN JOULE FOR THE
FOUR USAGE SCENARIOS AND THE 4 WSN NODE ARCHITECTURES.
A1
A2
A3
A4
Tlow
10−3
3 ∗ 10−8
Thigh
10−2
3 ∗ 10−7
Acclow
10−3
2 ∗ 10−7
3 ∗ 10−5
Acchigh
10−2
5 ∗ 10−7
3 ∗ 10−5
Microlow
10−3
4 ∗ 10−5
Microhigh
10−2
4 ∗ 10−5
USlow
8 ∗ 10−3
7 ∗ 10−3
2 ∗ 10−1
5 ∗ 10−3
UShigh
2 ∗ 10−2
7 ∗ 10−3
2 ∗ 10−1
5 ∗ 10−3

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013. ISBN: 978-1-61208-298-1
95
It is obvious that the µP uses a large amount of energy.
Thus, any architecture that can avoid waking up the µP has
clear advantages from an energy consumption point of view.
This puts reactive architectures enabling the sleep fo the µP
at favor.
For the discussed reactive architectures the results indi-
cates a dividing line between sensor signals having lower
frequency (~20kHz) and sensors of having higher frequency
content. Another indicated dividing line is how many bits
of resolution that is needed. More bits eats more power for
particularly traditional A/D converters.
The following general conclusions can be made:
• For low frequency sensor signal
– uP energy cost dominates
– A/D + digital memory comparison is favorable
• For higher frequency sensors
– Data conversion energy cost dominates
– Analog memory storage and comparison has the
most potential
• Reactive architecture gives in all cases an improved
energy budget
Thus, it is clear that in a sensing situation with a dynamic
sensor signal, such as ultrasound, avoiding A/D conversion
is a promising approach. If analog memory and comparison
techniques can be developed similar to what we have seen
for A/D converters, analog storage architecture will be a
strong contender for future WSN designs.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK
The reactive architecture proposed here for minimal en-
ergy consumption of sensing on WSN platforms is promis-
ing. Based on an analysis of current state-of-the-art sen-
sor interface electronics, an approach using analog storage
provides interesting data when compared with more mature
technology such as ADC and ADC combined with memory
logic.
Future work will reveal whether if a reactive architecture
based on an analog storage approach will show improve-
ments in energy consumption similar to those of advanced
ADC. If such improvements are shown, the analog storage
approach has clear merit for use in future WSN node
designs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the ESIS project [30]
supported by EU structural funds the Artemis Arrowhead
project [31] for ﬁnancial support.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan,
“Energy-efﬁcient communication protocol for wireless sensor
networks,” in Proc. Hawaii Intl. Conf. System Sciences,
Hawaii, Jan 4-7 2000, pp. 3005–3014.
[2] J. Eliasson, M. Lundberg, and P. Lindgren, “Time syn-
chronous bluetooth sensor network,” in Proc- IEEE Concumer
Communication and Networking Conference, CCNC, 2006.
[3] M. Lundberg, J. Eliasson, L. Svensson, and P. Lindgren,
“Context aware power optimization of wireless embedded
internet system,” in Proceedings IEEE IMTC, 2004.
[4] J. Eliasson, P. Lindgren, J. Delsing, S. J. Thompson, and
Y.-B. Chen, “A power management architecture for wireless
sensor nodes,” in Proc IEEE Wireless Communication and
Networking Conference, WCNC, 2007.
[5] V. Loscri, G. Morabito, and S. Marano, “A two level hierarchy
for low energy adaptive clustering hierarchy (TL-LEACH),”
in Proc. 62nd IEEE Vehicular Technology Confere)nce (VTC-
Fall, Dallas, 25-28 September 2008, pp. 1809–1813.
[6] Y. Xu, J. Heidman, and D. Estrin, “Geography-informed
energy conservation for ad hoc routing,” in Proc. Mobicom,
2001, pp. 70–84.
[7] J. Delsing and P. Lindgren, “Sensor communication tech-
nology towards ambient intelligence, a review,” Meas. Sci.
Technol., vol. 16, pp. 37–46, 2005.
[8] J. Lu, F. Valois, M. Dohler, and M.-Y. Wu, “Optimized data
aggregation in wsns using adaptive arma,” in Proceeedings
Sensorcomm 2010, 2010, pp. 115–120.
[9] S. G. Hong, N. S. Kim, C. S. Pyo, and W. W. Kim, “Hybrid
sensor module and data processing using low-power wakeup
in wsn,” in Proceeedings Sensorcomm 2010, 2010, pp. 191–
195.
[10] EISTEC. (2013) Eistec. [Online]. Available: http://www.
eistec.se
[11] Memsic. (2011, Dec) Wireless modules. [Online]. Available:
http://www.memsic.com/wireless-sensor-networks/
[12] N. Sayiner, H. Sorensen, and T. Viswanathan, “A level-
crossing sampling scheme for a/d conversion,” Circuits and
Systems II: Analog and Digital Signal Processing, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 335 –339, apr 1996.
[13] E. Allier, G. Sicard, L. Fesquet, and M. Renaudin, “A
new class of asynchronous a/d converters based on time
quantization,” in Asynchronous Circuits and Systems, 2003.
Proceedings. Ninth International Symposium on, May 2003,
pp. 196 – 205.
[14] Y. Tsividis, “Event-driven data acquisition and digital signal
processing a tutorial,” Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 577 –581, aug. 2010.
[15] K. Kozmin, J. Johansson, and J. Delsing, “Level-crossing
adc performance evaluation toward ultrasound application,”
Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, IEEE Transactions
on, vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 1708 –1719, aug. 2009.
[16] M. Trakimas and S. Sonkusale, “An adaptive resolution
asynchronous adc architecture for data compression in energy
constrained sensing applications,” Circuits and Systems I:
Regular Papers, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 58, no. 5, pp.
921 –934, may 2011.

Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013. ISBN: 978-1-61208-298-1
96
[17] R. Baertsch, W. Engeler, I. Goldberg, H.S., C. Puckette, and
J. Tiemann, “The design and operation of practical charge-
transfer transversal ﬁlters,” Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Journal
of, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 65 – 74, feb 1976.
[18] D. D. Buss, D. R. Collins, W. H. Bailey, and C. R. Reeves,
“Transversal ﬁltering using charge-transfer devices,” Solid-
State Circuits, IEEE Journal of, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 138–146,
1973.
[19] G. Haller and B. Wooley, “A 700-mhz switched-capacitor ana-
log waveform sampling circuit,” Solid-State Circuits, IEEE
Journal of, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 500 –508, apr 1994.
[20] B.
Murmann.
Adc
performance
survey
1997-2013.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.stanford.edu/∼murmann/
adcsurvey.html
[21] Pentronic. Resistance thermometer theory. [Online]. Avail-
able:
http://www.pentronic.com/Theory/Pt100sensor/tabid/
188/language/en-GB/Default.aspx
[22] ——.
The
effect
of
2,3
or
4
wire
connection
using
pt100/rtds.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//www.pentronic.com/Portals/0/PDF/En/Useful%20links%
20pdf/The effect of 2 3 4 wires on Pt100 060210.pdf
[23] Lpv521, nanopower op. [Online]. Available: http://www.ti.
com/product/lpv521
[24] Data sheet m16c. [Online]. Available: www.renesas.com
[25] W. Birk, J. Eliasson, P. Lindgren, E. Osipov, and L. Riliskis,
Road surface networks technology enablers for enhanced ITS.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 152 – 159.
[26] J. Johansson and J. Delsing, “Energy and pulse control
possibilities using ultra-tight integration of electronics and
piezoelectric ceramics,” in Proc. UFFC, vol. 3, 2004, pp.
206–2210.
[27] (2009)
Microchip
mcp6141.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/DeviceDoc/21668d.pdf
[28] Maxim
max9914.
[Online].
Available:
http://datasheets.
maximintegrated.com/en/ds/MAX9914-MAX9917.pdf
[29] Texas instruments opa683. [Online]. Available: http://www.
ti.com/product/opa683
[30] [Online]. Available: www.esis.se
[31] [Online]. Available: www.arrohead.eu

