Passive SAW Based RFID Systems Finding their Way to Harsh Environment 
Applications 
 
Alfred Binder, Gudrun Bruckner, Jochen Bardong 
Carinthian Tech Research AG 
Villach, Austria 
alfred.binder@ctr.at 
 
 
Abstract—While 
CMOS 
(Complementary 
Metal 
Oxide 
Semiconductor) transponders clearly take the lead in the high 
volume markets, SAW (Surface Acoustic Wave) transponders 
continuously develop in niche applications for special 
industrial needs. Based on a completely different physical 
principle, SAW transponders draw their potential for harsh 
environment applications from their inherent temperature 
stability, 
radiation 
hardness 
and 
their 
low 
energy 
consumption. Obviously, SAW transponders for harsh 
environment are no low cost solutions and are therefore used 
for tracking of high value industrial goods and additional 
sensor telemetry like temperature sensing. The present work 
explains aspects of SAW transponder design to meet harsh 
environment specifications for temperatures up to 400°C. This 
includes the improvement of interdigital transducer stability 
through an Al/Ti sandwich structure, packaging aspects and 
robust metal antenna designs. An overview of application 
examples is given for heavy industries like steel production, oil 
and gas exploitation and automotive varnishing lines. Finally, a 
research 
outlook 
for 
high 
temperature 
RFID 
(Radio 
Frequency Identification) solutions will be given targeting 
applications at 600°C and higher. 
Keywords - Passive SAW transponders, SAW RFID system, 
harsh environment, wireless sensor 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
SAW based RFID systems exist for a while now. One 
brand is the “SOFIS” from Siemens. It is a system mainly 
used for railway applications with references back to 1995 
[1]. Among other applications it is for instance installed in 
the wheelset diagnostic system in the Eurotunnel, 
France/UK. The “OIS-W” system from Baumer Ident (now 
Identec Solutions) is another SAW RFID system among the 
first systems on the market. It specializes on car varnishing 
lines and was one of the first transponders with a specified 
cycling temperature up to 200°C [2]. One of the first 
drawbacks of SAW RFID tags was the limited code size. 
This issue was addressed by RF SAW, Inc. with the proposal 
of a global SAW ID Tag comprising a 128-bit tag platform, 
realizing a 64 bit EPC tag including anti-collision, multi-
level error detection and other features [3]. While SAW 
RFID systems outperformed CMOS RFID systems until the 
early 2000's in terms of range, this is not the case anymore 
through the development of UHF (Ultra High Frequency) 
systems, which have a range up to several meters necessary 
in logistic applications. CMOS RFID transponders have the 
major advantage of being programmed during operation. 
Further they have the possibility to run communication 
protocols and encryption algorithms. Last but not least 
CMOS RFID transponders are very price competitive due to 
the economics of scale. Although CMOS transponders are 
established in many industrial logistic applications there is a 
number of interesting harsh environment niches for SAW 
RFID transponders and it is the intention of this work to 
show the technical progress of these systems and their key 
applications done at Carinthian Tech Research AG. Section 
II presents the basic principle of SAW transponders. In 
Section III, typical specifications for harsh environment are 
discussed and necessary SAW transponder adaptations are 
explained to meet these specifications. Harsh environment 
applications that were supplied in the past few years are 
presented in Section IV. Section V concludes and gives an 
outlook on future research targets in the field.  
II. 
FUNCTION 
A RF interrogation signal is transmitted by a transceiver 
and picked up by the antenna of the passive SAW 
transponder. The interdigital transducer (IDT) converts the 
received signal into a surface acoustic wave by the converse 
piezoelectric effect. The SAW propagates towards reflectors 
distributed in a characteristic barcode-like pattern and is 
partially reflected at each reflector. The acoustic wave 
packets returning to the IDT are re-converted into electrical 
signals by the IDT and re-transmitted to the transceiver by 
the transponder antenna. This response contains information 
about the number and location of reflectors as well as the 
propagation and reflection properties of the SAW. Common 
transceiver concepts to read out SAW RFID transponder are 
FMCW (frequency modulated continuous wave) or FSCW 
(frequency step continuous wave) radar designs in the open 
ISM band at 2.4 GHz. The bandwidth of 80 MHz in this 
band allows for a reasonable resolution of the transponder 
response. The acquired frequency domain data from the CW 
radar are converted in a time domain signal using inverse fast 
Fourier transformation (IFFT), where the pulses caused by 
each reflector are further evaluated according to the code 
design [4]. There are various ways to implement a code 
design in a SAW RFID transponder. A pulse position code as 
shown in Fig. 1 was developed [5]. Each reflector is assigned 
to a time slot in a digit block. Each of the n blocks can 
contain m different reflector positions resulting in mn 
different codes.  
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
antenna 
reflector 1 
digit block 1 
SAW device 
IDT 
digit position m1 
digit block n 
reflector n 
digit position mn 
R1 R2 
R3 
 
Figure 1.  Pulse position code of SAW RFID transponder. 
The reflectors R1, R2 and R3 are fixed and are used for 
optional temperature measurement. The SAW RFID 
transponder is processed on YZ-cut LiNbO3 (LN YZ) due to 
its high electro-acoustic coupling coefficient and large TCD 
(temperature coefficient of delay) of -95 ppm/°C for 
temperature telemetry.  
III. 
HARSH ENVIRONMENT SPECIFICATIONS 
In industry "harsh environment" is a general term to 
describe working conditions, which are more stringent than 
what is considered as "normal". For this reason a detailed 
specification is needed for the exact working conditions.  
Generally, elevated temperatures and/or pressure in 
combination with mechanical abrasion, heavy shock loads 
or vibrations are to be considered. Some applications use 
high radiation doses or cryogenic temperatures. An 
exemplary overview of some typical harsh environment 
specifications is given below in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
OVERVIEW OF HARSH ENVIRONMENT SPECIFICATIONS 
Application / Industry 
Specification 
Tracking/Tracing of 
investment goods /steel 
industry 
Temperature: 200°C – 300°C 
Long read ranges of several meters 
Mechanical collision, steel/slag 
splashes 
Identification of slide-gate 
plates / steel industry 
Temperature: 200°C – 380°C 
Shock loads and mechanical collision 
Drill pipes / Oil and Gas  
Temperature: 250 °C 
Pressure: 1300 bar 
Range: 0.5 m 
Varnish line / Automotive  
Temperature: 220 °C cyclic 
Range: several meters 
Annealing of light alloy rim / 
Automotive 
Temperature: 150°C - 540°C(max)  
Range: < 1 m 
Autoclaving 
Temperature: 200°C 
Pressure: 12 bar 
Saturated  steam 
Sterilisation (Gamma) 
Food sterilization: 10 kGy 
Medical sterilization: 50 kGy 
Cell banks / Life Science 
Temperature: -196°C 
Range: 10 cm – 20 cm 
 
In addition to harsh environment specifications of the 
transponder system specifications have often to be taken 
into account. Due to the hot environment reader antennas 
are exposed to temperatures exceeding 100°C. Often long 
RF cable lengths have to be installed as there is no space for 
reader electronics near to the reader antennas. Another 
practical problem is the heavy RF pollution of the ISM band 
in industrial environments. The SAW transceiver being 
limited to 10mW EIRP according to EN300440 contributes 
very little to this RF pollution. A typical industrial 
environment also contains a lot of metallic surfaces causing 
multipath propagation of the RF signal and even unwanted 
resonances. In some cases precaution has to be done using 
shielding or attenuation means.   
IV. 
RUGGEDIZED SAW TRANSPONDER DESIGN 
Generally, SAW devices are mass produced for the 
telecom market, but consequent cost optimizations lead to 
devices which are not suitable for harsh environment. 
Necessary adaptations are concerned with IDT metallization, 
packaging and antenna design, which are described below.  
A. IDT Metallisation 
Annealing experiments revealed that a single Al/Ti stack 
with a thickness of 50 nm degraded within 450 hours at 
300°C [6]. The observed agglomeration is known to start 
with the Tammann temperature, which is defined as half the 
melting point of the bulk material (expressed in Kelvin). 
The thermal stability of the IDT metallization was 
significantly enhanced by putting two Al/Ti stacks 
(sandwich) on top of each other (Fig. 2). The Al/Ti 
sandwich has a total thickness of 70 nm and results in a 
tenfold better thermal stability. 
Al
LiNbO3 (LN)
Al
Al
Ti
Al/Ti stack
Al/Ti sandwich
Ti, TixNb1-xO2
LiNbO3 (LN)
Ti, TixNb1-xO2
 
 
Figure 2.  Scheme of the Al/Ti and Al/Ti sandwich metallisation. 
 
Figure 3.  Amplitude of the minimum signal level after long-time 
annealing at 300°C. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
Figure 4.  Amplitude of the minimum signal level after temperature 
cycling from 30°C to 230°C. 
In the long-time annealing in Fig. 3, the devices show a run-
in effect during the first 1000 hours, where the signal 
amplitude actually increases. After 4350 hours (more than 6 
months) the first of ten devices dropped below the rejection 
limit of 3 dB. The effect of temperature cycling was tested 
by sequential cooling of 15 devices every 15 minutes from 
30°C to 230°C. The development of signal amplitudes over 
cycles was measured. As can be seen from Fig. 4 even after 
5600 cycles no device fell below the rejection limit. The 
deviations in the peak amplitude are presumably artifacts of 
the measurement (e.g., variations of the electrical contact 
resistance due to oxidation of contact pins). 
B. Packaging 
The bare SAW die is very sensitive to surface pollution. 
Thus it has to be hermetically sealed and protected with inert 
gas (N2). Metal housings have a very good thermal stability, 
which is limited by the glass feed-through at approximately 
450°C. The SAW is die-bonded to the metal housing using a 
silver-filled polyimide adhesive. Silicon based adhesives can 
only be used up to +250°C maximum. Ceramic adhesives 
were found to be inappropriate as they are too brittle to 
assimilate the non-uniform expansion of LN YZ substrate 
(13.4 ppm/°C along the a-axis and 4.1 ppm/°C along the c-
axis). Wire bonding was performed using a 25 µm Al bond 
wire (wedge-wedge). The lid is welded to the socket using 
projection welding. Metallic housings were manufactured for 
different application purposes. A TO39 housing as shown in 
Fig. 5 can serve as a simple and cost effective housing for 
applications up to 400°C without further specifications on 
space requirements or mechanical pressure. On the other 
hand a TO39 housing can be used for cryogenic applications 
when the housing is enclosed in vacuum instead of nitrogen. 
A small custom housing with dimensions of 1.9 x 3.1 x 10.0 
mm3 was developed for applications that require a good 
thermal contact between tagged object and SAW transponder 
(Fig. 6). For high pressure applications like oil and gas 
exploitation a custom Inconel housing was designed (Fig. 7). 
 
Figure 5.  Transponder housing TO39, diameter 10 mm x 4 mm. 
 
Figure 6.  Custom Kovar housing 1.9 x 3.1 x 10.0 mm3. 
 
Figure 7.  Custom Inconel housing for high pressure applications, 
diameter 9.1 mm x 5.1 mm. 
The basic design was taken from TO39 standard, but all 
wall thicknesses were increased to withstand pressure up to 
1300 bar. The diameter of the feed-through was changed 
from 1.5 mm to 1.3 mm to reduce the pressure on the glass. 
C. Antenna design and transponder assembly 
The antenna has to operate in the same working 
conditions as the transponder. For operation temperatures 
exceeding +250°C full metal antennas were designed. The 
electrical interconnection between transponder and antenna 
is laser welded, providing better temperature stability 
compared to soldering. Another aspect of the antenna design 
is to protect the transponder from mechanical shock loads 
and vibrations. This has been achieved by the development 
of a ruggedized slot antenna (Fig. 8).  
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 8.  Ruggedized, stainless steel slot antenna 100 mm x  40 mm with 
a thickness of 5 mm. 
 
Figure 9.  Metal circular patch antenna and PEEK housing,  
assembled: 95 mm x 64 mm x 17 mm. 
The antenna is made of 5 mm thick stainless steel and is 
typically mounted on metal surfaces, which act as a reflector 
to increase the signal gain. As transponder housing a 
standard TO39 is used. The TO39 is well protected inside a 
cavity of the antenna. Whereas the slot antenna is linear 
polarized, a circular polarized metallic patch antenna has 
been developed. Fig. 9 shows the patch antenna, which is 
placed in between a carrier box made of PEEK (Polyether 
ether ketone). The metal patch antenna replaces a former 
design based on a PCB patch antenna and solder 
connections. The solution with metal antenna and welded 
electrical connection proved to be much more stable in 
temperature cycling conditions up to 220°C.  
V. 
APPLICATIONS 
The applications presented below give an overview of 
implemented RFID installations and pilots carried out in the 
past five years. The main asset of passive SAW RFID 
transponders in all those cases were the operability at 
temperatures >200°C, meaning that tags do not only 
withstand, but can also be read out at higher temperatures.  
A. RFID in steel plant 
RFID applications in the steel plant are motivated by the 
logistics optimization of moving investment goods or 
consumables. One of the main topics is the retraceability of 
the steel grade or the slag as a by-product for further process 
treatment [7]. Sometimes the transmitted temperature of the 
SAW tag is interesting add-on information.  
1) Identification of a steel ladle 
SAW RFID tags have been installed on the steel coating of 
steel ladles. The tags are positioned with a distance to the 
steel coating not to be in direct contact with the outer 
temperature of +300°C to +400°C. The tags are protected 
against slag splashes with refractory material on the outside 
(Fig. 10). The ladle is tracked along 10 different process 
positions in the steel plant. As the ladle moves along the 
plant the range between installed reader antennas and tag 
varies between 2 m and 5 m. At 5 m range stability 
problems of the SAW transponder read-out were reported. 
In the ongoing test, SAW RFID tags were long-term stable 
for several months. Through automated ladle tracking, 
process logistics is optimized, security is increased and a 
better retraceability achieved. 
 
 
Figure 10.  SAW RFID installation on a steel ladle (Georgsmarienhütte, 
Germany). 
Reader antenna 
SAW RFID 
transponder 
SAW RFID transponder & 
metallic circular patch antenna 
carrier box 
made of PEEK 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

2) Identification of slide gate plates 
A slide gate is steel equipment used to control the steel flow 
during casting. The core element is a sliding valve made of 
two plates (Fig. 11). These slide gate plates are refractory 
wear elements. Being crucial parts exposed to high 
temperatures, they must be replaced before a critical degree 
of wear has been reached. Failure (e.g., breakthrough of 
liquid metal) can cause great damage. An RFID and 
temperature monitoring system gives the manufacturer 
better control over the usage and the logistics are 
documented. Although at the center of the slide gate plates 
the temperature equals 1540°C, the melting temperature of 
steel, the temperature rapidly decreases towards the edges. 
A SAW transponder was installed on the outer rim (Fig. 12) 
of the plate. It faces a cavity in the slide gate mechanics, 
where a ruggedized reader antenna was mounted. The 
temperatures during casting were moderate around 250°C as 
cooling was applied. The maximum temperature was 
reached with 320°C on the maintenance station, when 
cooling is switched off. During a pilot test of several weeks 
about 100 slide gate plates were tested. All SAW 
transponders remained functional over all casts. In average a 
slight signal degradation of 2 dB to 5 dB was observed [8].  
 
Slide gate plates
Slide gate plates
 
Figure 11.  Cut of a slide gate mechanics to control the steel flow during 
casting (RHI AG, Austria). 
 
Figure 12.  SAW RFID installation on slide gate plate (RHI AG, Austria). 
B. Asset tracking in the oil and gas industry 
CMOS RFID transponder for down-hole equipment 
which are based on glass encapsulated low frequency (LF) 
transponder withstand the operating conditions, but have 
small read ranges. Applications like the automatic down-
hole asset monitoring [9] call for significantly longer read 
ranges > 0.5 m. For a deep well specification temperatures 
up to 250°C and pressures up to 1300 bar have to be 
considered. A custom Inconel housing (Fig. 7) was 
developed to meet these requirements. The Inconel housing 
is connected to a spiral antenna and encapsulated in PEEK. 
The PEEK radome has a sacrificial layer to allow for wear 
on the tool in down-hole operation. The SAW RFID 
transponder is mounted in a bore hole with a depth of 16 
mm via a press fit (Fig. 13). Although first down-hole tests 
with a few tags are promising a test with a representative 
number of tags is still due. The oil and gas industry 
demands a RFID solution for drill pipes to be applicable in 
static and dynamic cases for life-cycle management and 
asset predictability. The latter is more difficult as the pipes 
have to be read in and out dynamically at the rig. A rig floor 
reader has been designed which consists of a circular 
arrangement of reader antennas around the pipe. As the drill 
pipes are inserted the reader identifies them at arbitrary 
angular position. By tracking the pipe usage time and 
known parameters as well depth, well type and drilling 
method a fatigue prediction for each pipe can be derived. 
The benefit of this database is to preclude drilling down-
time and fishing costs due to pipe breakage. Also a load-
dependent maintenance of drill pipes can be implemented.  
C. Automotive varnishing line 
In automotive paint shops the varnish has to be cured at 
elevated temperatures >200°C. As different car bodies run 
through the paint shop each body has to be identified to start 
the correct painting process. Starting in the bodyshell work 
the SAW RFID transponder is mounted. At the assembly  
 
 
Figure 13.  SAW RFID inserted into drill pipe collar/tool joint (HM 
Energy, LLC, USA). 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 14.  SAW RFID in an automotive varnishing line (Identec Solutions, 
Austria). 
stands in the bodyshell work, before and after the paint shop 
and at some working areas in the end assembly the 
transponder is read out. In this way the car body is 
identified, processes are triggered and the car is consistently 
tracked within the networked assembly stands. The SAW 
RFID transponder according to Fig. 9 is attached to each car 
body. The transponder does not remain on the car body, but 
is recycled in the process. Fig. 14 shows the mounting of the 
transponder and in 1.5 m distance the read-out antenna. The 
main advantage of SAW RFID in this application is that the 
transponder offers a long lifetime and further the code can 
be read at elevated temperatures. One of the drawbacks of 
using SAW is the fixed code, which cannot be changed in 
the field. This has been solved using a code conversion table 
on the host side. 
VI. 
RESEARCH OUTLOOK FOR A 600°C SAW RFID 
TRANSPONDER 
State of the art SAW RFID transponder surpass the 
operation temperature of CMOS RFID transponder, but the 
SAW technology offers more potential to increase the 
current operation limit of +350°C to +400°C by far. Key 
elements of a high temperature SAW transponder that works 
beyond 600°C are the availability of a suitable substrate and 
IDT metallization. Aubert, et.al., have experimentally 
studied a Ir/Ti/AlN/Sapphire structure that exhibits a good 
stability of up to 1050°C for several hours [10]. The 
measurements were carried out on 392 MHz devices. The 
main degradation which occurred was due to agglomeration 
of the Iridium electrodes. Based on this very promising 
result, future research has to focus on the design and 
verification of 2.4 GHz devices. The ISM band at 2.4 GHz is 
a good choice due to the legal availability of 80 MHz 
bandwidth needed for pulse position coding. A second 
research focus has to deal with a suitable high temperature 
package. Metallic packages fail at 450°C because of the 
glass feed-through. Either a brazed ceramic feed-through or 
whole 
ceramic 
packages 
with 
a 
thermally 
stable 
metallization have to be developed. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The work describes optimization of the thermal stability 
of Lithium Niobate based SAW RFID transponders, 
including IDT metallization, packaging and antenna design. 
At 300°C a thermal stability and operability of >4000 hours 
was achieved, thereby outperforming standard CMOS RFID 
transponders by far. The given application examples of 
industry pilots and ongoing RFID installations demonstrate 
the good potential SAW RFID transponders for harsh 
environment.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the industrial partners 
Georgsmarienhütte GmbH, RHI AG, Identec Solutions AG 
and HM Energy, LLC for the successful cooperation.  This 
project has been supported within the COMET – 
Competence Centers for Excellent Technologies Programme 
by BMVIT, BMWFJ and the federal provinces of Carinthia 
and Styria. 
REFERENCES 
[1] SOFIS 
Surface 
acoustic 
wave 
identification 
system, 
www.mobility.siemens.com/.../ds_sofis_en.pdf, Siemens AG. 
[2] OIS-W Datasheet, Baumer Ident, WD.0014.EN – Edition 3 
August 2003. 
[3] C. S. Hartmann, P. Brown, and J. Bellamy, “Design of Global 
SAW RFID Tag Devices,” Proceedings of the Second 
International Symposium on Acoustic Wave Devices For 
Future Mobile Communication Systems, Chiba University, 
Japan, March 2004. 
[4] A. Stelzer, M. Pichler, S. Schieblhofer, , and S. Schuster, 
“Identification of SAW ID-tags using an FSCW interrogation 
unit and model-based evaluation,” UFFC  IEEE Transactions, 
2004, pp. 1413-1420.  
[5] R.Hauser, et.al. “A wireless SAW-based temperature sensor 
for harsh environment,” Proceedings of IEEE, Sensors 2004, 
pp. 860 – 863, vol.2. 
[6] R. Fachberger, G. Bruckner, and A. Binder, “Durability of 
SAW 
transponders 
for 
wireless 
sensing 
in 
harsh 
environment,”Sensors, 2008 IEEE,  pp. 811 – 814. 
[7] A. Binder, “SAW Transponder – RFID for Extreme 
Conditions,” in Deploying RFID – Challenges, Solutions, and 
Open Issues, ISBN 978-953-307-380-4, DOI: 10.5772/17526, 
2011. 
[8] R. Fachberger, A. Binder, and A. Erlacher, “SAW-RFID and 
temperature monitoring of slide gate plates,” Sensors, 2009 
IEEE, pp. 1514-1517. 
[9] US patent application US 20120075113 A1. 
[10] T. Aubert, O. Elmazria, J. Bardong, G. Bruckner, and B. 
Assouar “Is AlN/Sapphire bilayer structure an alternative to 
Langasite for ultra-high-temperature SAW applications ?,” 
Ultrasonic Symposium Proceedings, 2011 IEEE, pp. 2082-
2085.
 
Reader antenna 
SAW RFID 
transponder 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

