Multi Sensor Atmospheric Icing Station Performance in Cold Climate- 
A Case Study 
 
1 Muhammad S. Virk, 2Taimur Rashid, 3Umair N. Mughal, 4Kamran Zaman. 5Mohamed Y. Mustafa 
Department of Technology, Narvik University College, Narvik, Norway 
Email: 1msv@hin.no, 2timavion58@gmail.com, 3unm@hin.no, 4kamimehr@yahoo.com, 5myfm@hin.no.  
 
Abstract— To amicably acquire the data through sensors is 
posing a big challenge in harsh cold climatic conditions. In 
comparison to operation under ambient weather conditions, 
cold region has more challenges to offer in terms of system 
performance and consistent reliable measurements. The 
drastic changes are evident in sensors measurement over a 
period right from the start of installation and normal routine 
operations till its degradation. The range of factors influencing 
the system performance is quite diverse in nature and always 
not easy to ascertain, but with the introduction of standardized 
design, installation, integration, and maintenance procedures 
the mean time between failures can be increased considerably. 
In the said context, cold and harsh environment plays an 
important role in provoking the undesirable events. This paper 
discusses the system performance of a custom based 
meteorological ice monitoring station installed in Northern 
Norway. The overall system design in perspective of data 
acquisition and logging is analyzed along with pinpointing of 
the degradation of the sensors and associated data validation 
over a period of time. The impact of the variations in climatic 
conditions is presented including the probable causes affecting 
the system performance in brief.  
 
Keywords-atmospheric icing; sensors; operation; performance; 
cold region. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Heavy icing loads and icing events are crucial 
parameters for structural design in cold climatic regions. 
The unpredictability elements in such situations could easily 
cause extensive ice loading on equipment/sensors and 
structures within no time. Simultaneously, human activities 
are increasingly extending to the cold climate regions due to 
the availability of extensive unexplored natural resources, 
where, atmospheric icing not only creates human 
inconveniences, but also affects human activities especially 
in the construction industry (communication towers and ski 
lifts), energy distribution (power network cables and 
towers), maritime activities, aviation conditions on the 
ground, meteorological observations and wind energy power 
production [1]. Various structures such as, power network 
cables, telecommunication masts, and others have been 
damaged or destroyed on numerous occasions due to the 
added mass of ice or an increase in aerodynamic interaction 
leading to unacceptable movements [2]. To avoid certain 
situations and for a better preparedness and more reaction 
time for preventive measures, it is essential to predict such 
events involving extensive databases over longer periods of 
time.  
 
 Atmospheric icing on structures occurs in conditions 
where cooling of an air mass causes super cooling of water 
droplets resident in the air mass. Water droplets in the earth 
atmosphere can remain in the liquid state at air temperature 
as low as -40 o C, before spontaneous freezing occurs 
[3],[4]. The rate of atmospheric ice accretion on a structure 
is governed by two processes; the impingement of super 
cooled water droplets on the structure surface and surface 
thermodynamics, which determine what portion of the water 
droplets, will freeze or, on the other hand, cause melting of 
previously accreted ice. The systems installed under cold 
climate conditions to monitor atmospheric icing are 
subjected, directly or indirectly, to harsh environmental 
conditions affecting their performance and resulting in 
intermittent or unreliable behavior. The unpredictable nature 
of the climatic changes leads to uncertain behavior of the 
equipment, which can ultimately lead to missing project 
timelines, loss of significant data and excessive utilization 
of resources and capital. Therefore, detailed knowledge of 
frequency and duration of icing events, as well as, 
maximum ice loads are crucial parameters for the design of 
structures in cold regions. 
 
To achieve this goal, an atmospheric ice monitoring 
station based on metrological equipment was designed 
within the ColdTech-RT3 project at Narvik University 
College, Norway. The system was installed at the mountain 
height, ‘Fagernsfjellet (1007 m.a.s.l., 68 ̊ 25’20’’ N, 17 ̊ 
27’26’’ E) located east from the Ofotfjorden and towards the 
north east from Beisfjorden on the western coast of Norway, 
as shown in Fig.1. The region is affected by the Gulf streams 
flowing across the North Atlantic Ocean, which retains the 
coastal area at sea level ice free. The mountain faces the 
open sea from the south across the SW towards the west. Air 
masses related to these streams are usually humid and have 
air temperatures favorable for atmospheric icing during the 
winter season (-25<T ºC <0). The objective of this paper is to 
analyze the performance of metrological sensors under harsh 
cold environment; practical issues are highlighted based on 
their impact on the overall system performance. 
 
 
 
 
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Location of HiN atmospheric icing station, 
Fagernsfjellet, Narvik, Norway. 
This paper is arranged in three main sections. In the 
section two, the design of a remote icing station is briefly 
explained. This section is followed by the performance 
evaluation of this icing station (Section III). In the last 
section, the reasons for the station failure are evaluated 
based upon the experience and some technical flaws, which 
are planned to be avoided in the next installation. 
II. 
DESIGN OF THE ATMOSPHERIC ICING STATION 
 
The multi-sensor ice monitoring station used for this 
study was comprised of a multifunctional weather sensor 
(Lambrecht – ELOS IND) along with an ice load monitor 
(Ice Monitor- Combitech) and a (HoloOptics T44) icing rate 
monitor. A robust industrial scale data logging system 
Campbell Scientific (CR1000) was used for data-logging 
over a longer period of time in harsh cold conditions. The 
multifunctional weather station measures five parameters 
namely: wind speed and direction, temperature, humidity, 
atmospheric pressure and dew point. The ice monitor yields 
the accreted ice mass, whereas the HoloOptics icing rate 
monitor gives the icing rate. The data acquisition (DAQ) 
system and dc-power distribution/supply units (used for 
icing station) were housed inside the small winterized 
cabinet 
mounted 
inside 
the 
available 
facility 
at 
Fagernsfjellet, utilized for skiing and tourism.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. HiN Atmospheric icing station at 
Fagernsfjellet, Norway 
The main power source for this station was acquired 
from the existing facility at the site. The data retrieval 
option was exercisable through RS-232 port through which 
data could be accessed, stored, deleted, overwritten, and 
appended by the vendor software interface.  The overall 
system breakdown in terms of sensors and major elements is 
shown in Fig. 2. 
III. 
ATMOSPHERIC ICING STATION PERFORMANCE 
 
The sensors used for HiN atmospheric icing station were 
designed for cold climate and the performance parameter 
were expected to satisfy the desired outcome, but still these 
were affected by the cold environment with the uncertainty 
element inside and the sensors output was evident after the 
data-retrieval. Icing station was installed at Fagernesfjellet 
during the 2nd week of October, 2012. To have a quality 
check on the icing station data, icing station was planned to 
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

be inspected periodically after its installation, but this task 
could not be accomplished several times mainly due to harsh 
weather conditions and associated facility’s maintenance 
problems and  logistics, which were also linked to the 
alternative mode of transportation to the site (cable car and 
snow bikes). The installed equipment could only be reached 
and tested first time four months after its installation. Initial 
analysis of retrieved data from the icing station showed that 
from the installation date the system component’s operations 
were normal as expected, but within a few days the 
HoloOptics sensor malfunctioned and started to provide 
erroneous icing rates. Similarly, after seamless operations of 
one week the atmospheric temperature and relative humidity 
parameters from the Lambrecht – ELOS IND were defective. 
The remaining parameters of Lambrecht – ELOS IND, such 
as: wind speed, direction and dew point were satisfactory for 
the following two months but turned erroneous for the 
remaining period of operation leaving the ice load monitor as 
the only valid amongst the data-set recorded in the logger 
system. 
Occurrences 
along 
with 
related 
measured 
observations to have a vivid understanding of the system’s 
performance in the duration span of approximately six 
months after installation are shown in Table 1. 
 
TABLE 1  
ATMOSPHERIC ICING STATION OPERATING PARAMETERS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The equipment maintenance checks were performed in 
more details after data retrieval. Initial investigation at the 
station site disclosed that degradation of atmospheric icing 
station component performance was mainly the result of 
weather changes specifically related to the region where the 
combination of several climate factors negatively impacted 
the sensors, both in terms of the mechanical and electrical 
failures. Heavy ice deposition on the exposed components 
of sensors, power extension (interface) and frequent power 
break downs of the associated facility (through which the 
main power was supplied) caused the malfunctioning of the 
sensors.  
Despite the fact that sensors used in the reported ice 
monitoring station were designed to withstand harsh cold 
weather conditions, the weather sensor malfunctioned 
unexpectedly at cold conditions. The minimum atmospheric 
temperature reached -25 oC at the installation site and varied 
considerably; it was observed that the equipment got 
unserviceable at 0 oC. It is worth mentioning here that the 
weather sensors were functional at -25 oC during this study, 
but analysis of atmospheric data for the last 12 hours prior 
to failure of the weather sensor indicated that the initial 
crash occurred at 0 oC, average wind speed was 6 m/sec, 
relative humidity was 93.5%, and most importantly, the 
average icing loads on ice monitor were quite high. Analysis 
confirms the combination of extreme weather conditions 
leading to heavy ice loads at the time of malfunctioning of 
the weather sensor.  Wind direction and wind speed data for 
the period of 12 hours preceding the crash of the weather 
sensors are presented in Fig. 3.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Wind speed and wind direction data for the seamless 
period of 12 hours prior to malfunctioning of the weather sensor. 
 
It is observed from Fig.3 that wind was southwesterly 
at an average speed of 4 to 8 m/s. The southwesterly side of 
mount Fagernesfjellet faces the Beisfjord and the Ofotfjord 
of the Atlantic, which means that the wind is loaded with 
water droplets.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4. Atmospheric temperature and due point data for the 
seamless period of 12 hours prior to malfunctioning of the 
weather sensor. 
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Atmospheric temperature and due point data for the 
seamless period of 12 hours prior to malfunctioning of the 
weather sensor is represented in Fig. 4. It is observed that 
temperature was generally below freezing. It is also 
observed that the dew point was less than average 
temperature for the last few hours, which can be interpreted 
as a cause of freezing of the water droplets in the air mass 
blowing across the weather station. Those reasons coupled 
with the wind data indicating the presence of water vapors 
in the air blowing from the sea and dropping temperatures 
and dew point to below freezing will cause ice accretion 
once the droplets get in contact with freezing particles or 
surfaces such as the icing station or other objects in the 
region. Those expectations are confirmed by the available 
measurements of humidity and ice loads represented in Fig. 
5 below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Relative humidity and icing load data for the seamless 
period of 12 hours prior to malfunctioning of the weather sensor 
 
 
Fluctuations are observed in ice load measurements, 
but those fluctuations are in correlation with variations in 
humidity. The ice load readings are highest at lower 
humidity due to the fact that some of the humidity in the air 
is transformed into accreted ice on the system components. 
IV. 
REASONS OF SYSTEM FAILURE 
 
The dimension of operational problems faced in cold 
climate is quite different from the operations in normal 
atmospheric conditions. More often, the factors not 
significant at all in the normal conditions become extremely 
critical in cold climate regions. Investigations were carried 
out to track down possible reasons of the HiN icing station’s 
components failure from operational point of view. Analysis 
showed that in addition to the harsh weather conditions, a 
combination of various design and operational aspects could 
also lead to the system’s failure in harsh conditions. In the 
following, we present some noteworthy causes in this 
regard. 
 
a) Intermittent Power Source 
The system installed at the location takes power from 
the available commercial facility, where high load machines 
are being operated. Due to the demographic location of the 
site in terms of accessibility and complicated power 
infrastructure available in terms of maintenance, several 
power breakdowns have been frequently reported. The 
instantaneous power surge could be one reason that has 
affected the sensors operations.   
 
b) Electrostatic Discharge 
The electrostatic discharge phenomena could not be 
fully neglected in weather station breakdown. For 
snowstorms, temperature gradients in the ice particles 
produce charge separation because the concentration of H+ 
and OH- ions in ice increases rapidly with increasing 
temperature. H+ ions are much more mobile within the ice 
crystal than OH- ions. As a result, the colder part of an ice 
particle becomes positively charged, leaving the warmer 
part charged negatively [5]. The resulting electrostatic 
phenomena due to blizzard can be hazardous for the control 
circuitry inside the sensor module, provided the said 
consideration is not catered for in the design. Over and 
above this fact, the proper maintenance of earthing at the 
site becomes all the more critical in this perspective. 
 
c)  Data Links / Interfaces Winterization 
Interface links between the components are data and 
power based. Data links might include the Ethernet/serial 
links with supporting routing cables or interface panels, 
whereas, power links have distribution panels, supplying 
power requirements to the computing and sensing 
equipment. Interface links along with power support 
systems have direct and/or indirect exposure to cold climatic 
conditions and they are under sudden transitional states, 
hence are most vulnerable to degradation and failure. 
 
d) Power Cable Insulation 
Electrical insulation of external power cables can be 
another possible cause of system failure. Many of the 
insulations normally used on electrical wires and cables are 
not compatible with colder temperatures. Cracking of the 
insulation exposes the conductor to the environment 
creating a serious hazard. This is particularly a problem for 
the 
extension 
cords 
used 
outdoors. 
Several 
polyvinylchloride (PVC) insulations that are commonly 
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

used as electrical insulation do not withstand flexing at low 
temperatures, in the range of or below -30ºC, PVC 
insulations crack and peel off leaving exposed conductors, 
which can cause short circuiting or develop grounding 
problems making data unreliable[6],[7]. 
 
e) Material & Winterization 
The sensitivity of problems encountered in cold regions 
is largely a function of materials used in the sensor 
construction and degree of stress, under which they are 
operated. Some materials get stronger at cold temperatures 
while other materials can be altered to become more cold 
tolerant [6],[8]. Similarly, sensor winterization can be 
another possible reason for this failure. Sensors must be 
properly winterized to make them possible to use during 
winter and reduce cold related wear and breakage [9].  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
 
Based on the experience from the operation of a multi-
sensor ice monitoring station, it is evident that factors 
leading to sensor failure in cold climate regions are 
generally overlooked. Failure of the sensor components 
during this expedition has raised questions regarding the 
standards specified for the design of sensors for cold 
regions. Anticipated and preventive design, monitoring, and 
maintenance culture should be invoked as a regular practice, 
which could encounter the unpredictable impact of cold 
harsh environment upon sensor operation and performance. 
The problem areas identified and discussed can be utilized 
as guidelines for better design, integration, installation, and 
maintenance of sensors installed in remote cold regions. 
  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
       The work reported in this paper was partially funded by 
the Research Council of Norway, project no. 195153/160 
and partially by the consortium of the project ColdTech- 
Sustainable Cold Climate Technology. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1. 
M.S.Virk, Numerical study of atmospheric ice 
accretion on various geometric cross sections. 
Wind engineering, 2011. 35(5). 
2. 
T.G.Myers and J.P.F. Charpin., A mathematical 
model for atmospheric ice accretion and water flow 
on a cold surface. Heat & Mass Transfer, 2004. 47: 
p. 5483-5500. 
3. 
Kathleen.F.Jones and K.Z.Egelhofer, Computer 
model of atmospheric ice accretion on transmission 
lines. 
4. 
I.J.Battan, Cloud physics and cloud shedding1962, 
New York: Doubleday and Co. 
5. 
J.L.Shorter, The electrification of snowstorms and 
sandstorms 
1963, 
1963: 
Dept 
of 
physics 
Manchester College of Science & Technology. 
6. 
Dean.R.Freitag and T. McFadden., Introduction to 
Cold Regions Engineering1996, New York: ASCE 
Press. 725. 
7. 
D.V.Rosato and R.T. Schwartz, Environmental 
effects on polymeric materials. vol. 1. 1968, New 
York: John Wiley & Sons. 
8. 
P.K.Dutta, Behavior of materials at cold regions 
temperatures, 1988, U S Army Corps of Engineers, 
COld Regions and Engineering Lab (CRREL): 
Hanover. p. 72. 
9. 
D.Diemand, Winterization and winter operation of 
automotive and conctruction equipment in Cold 
regions technical digest ; no. 92-11992, U S Army 
Crops of engineers, cold region reseeach and 
engineering lab: Hanover. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

