TomoSense: Towards Low Cost Multi-Device
Aware Independent Planar Surface Sensing
Andrzej Romanowski, Przemysław Kucharski,
Krzysztof Grudzie´n, Laurent Babout
Institute of Applied Computer Science
Lodz University of Technology
Łód´z, Poland
Email: {pkuchars,androm,kgrudzi,lbabout}@kis.p.lodz.pl
Abstract—We present a plane surface non-invasive sensing
system for creating new cross-device interaction in the wild
based on electrical capacitance tomography (ECT) measurement
setup. The core element of the system is the plane capacitance
sensor consisting of 32 electrodes built into an experimental
tabletop assembly coupled with the spatial-awareness concept.
The interaction is enabled taking the advantage of the principle
of physical objects interfering with the electrostatic ﬁeld in
proximity of the surface, which is shown here for a set of mobile
devices. The presented system is independent, i.e. does not require
any external sensing methods to be coupled with in order to detect
devices in the proximity. Additionally, no technical requirement
concerning the type of interaction device is posed hence, we
enable to embed devices world into the natural environment.
Moreover, the system design and operational foundations in terms
of both simplicity and measurement protocol make the equipment
easily scalable. All these properties open way to elaborate new
interaction techniques that are even more allusive. This paper
offers a glimpse of technical details of the system as well as
discussion on the further exploration of the TomoSense potential.
Keywords- capacitance sensing; interactive surface; ECT;
multi-device sensing, spatial-awareness.
I. INTRODUCTION
Spatial awareness concept is a key to development of
multi device systems and especially interactions in these multi
device environments, such as presented in [1, 3]. Recent work
on sensemaking shows speciﬁc scenarios for multi device
interactions emerging, while the range of possible areas where
users already use multiple devices simultaneously grows [4].
However, the methods for determination of mutual position
of devices are not perfect. Most of published research and
applications involve techniques that require mounting external
sensors/cameras and/or satisfaction of conditions, such as the
line-of-sight for camera based systems or direct contact with
special surface such as the specialized interactive tabletop dis-
plays in order to elaborate spatial-awareness for these systems.
Consequently, most of them are either difﬁcult to deploy in-
the-wild conditions or spatial-awareness can be explored in the
laboratory conditions only. Therefore, we propose TomoSense:
an ECT-based prototype sensing system constituted of a plane
capacitance sensor easy to be embedded within an ordinary
table and a process tomography measurement equipment
coupled with a dedicated measurement protocol. TomoSense
enables to identify devices in the close proximity of the
electrodes that are hidden below the plane (i.e. table) surface
thus enabling ad hoc interactions in different locations, as
proposed in [2]. This paper covers a short technical overview
of the prototype concept as well as ﬁrst results and discussion
on the further studies.
However, while a number of interaction techniques have
been proposed, the method of sensing the relative position
of the devices still remains a challenge. Past experiments
often used stationary and costly sensing, such as interactive
tabletops [1] or motion tracking systems [2]. Alternatively,
Rädle et al. [3] developed a Kinect-based system for spatial
awareness that required placing a sensor above the surface on
which the devices were placed. All of the past approaches
have certain limitations, such as the need for line-of-sight
for camera-based systems, or the need for direct contact with
the surface for interactive tables. As a consequence of these
constraints, studies of multi-device systems either do not use
spatial awareness or focus solely on laboratory experiments
[4], [5] . As more and more users carry multiple mobile
devices simultaneously [6], a need emerges for a versatile
sensing method that would enable in situ studies and create
possibilities for a wide deployment.
This paper introduces TomoSense — an electrical capaci-
tance tomography sensor embedded in an ordinary table that
enables identifying devices on and above the table and acquir-
ing positional information. TomoSense is a research prototype
that enables more ubiquitous positional sensing for devices
and approximates the concept of an interactive tablecloth (a
concept ﬁrst proposed by Müller-Tomfelde and Fjeld [7]) —
the possibility to create ad-hoc interactive surfaces in any
location. Here, we provide a description of TomoSense, details
of the sensing method used, preliminary insights from its
application to device sensing and plans for future studies as
further development of a concept initially postulated here [8].
II. TOMOSENSE
TomoSense is a rectangular planar sensor dedicated to
electrical process tomography measurement modality that con-
sists of 32 electrodes arranged in 4 rows and 8 columns all
embedded just below the surface of an ordinary table. Fig. 1
is a photo of the table with a sensor intentionally (showing
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

the principle of operation, while to be easily hidden with an
opaque layer during normal operation) visible underneath the
transparent plastic layer (3mm thickness) of the upper table
surface. It is worth to note that, while we use an ordinary
utility table for our experiments, the system itself can be a
part of virtually any other surface as well. The table presented
as an example here has a size of 610mm x 450mm, while
each electrode is 95mm x 60mm with the gaps in between
the electrodes of 10mm. The bottom part of sensor (10mm
below the table surface) was electrically screened in order to
improve the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and thus improving
the sensing properties of the system in the space above the
sensor. Electrical capacitance tomography is based on the
principle of measuring the change of capacitance between
all the consecutive pairs of sensing electrodes (irrespective of
their position or orientation) quickly switching the excitation
to successive electrodes, while grounding the rest. Experiments
were conducted with sensor of 32 electrodes located as shown
in Figure 1, using 32 channel quality equipment enabling real
time on-the-ﬂy monitoring of the measurement space; further
details on ECT process tomography can be found here [6]. In
order to better illustrate the working concept of the proposed
system, we show here 2D reconstructed images (using basic
LBP algorithm), while it is reasonable to store and process
only the relative position of the devices omitting the imaging
and visualization at all in further research work [6].
Electrical capacitance tomography is based on the principle
of measuring the change of capacitance between consecutive
pairs of sensing electrodes, irrespective of their position or
orientation. In order to conduct the measurement, one of
the electrodes is excited with a certain electrical potential
(in the range of 5 − 15V ) while the rest of electrodes are
grounded. This work was conducted using a custom-made
32 channel research-grade ECT device. The device is fully
ﬂexible as it allows to adjust the interchannel gains of separate
measurement channels. All the electrodes in TomoSense are
connected to the device and monitored in real time.
III. SENSING
A typical electrical capacitance tomography system con-
sists of three major components (Figure 2); the ECT sen-
sor with electrodes placed around the monitoring object,
the data-acquisition ECT measurement unit, which excites
the electrodes and measures the capacitance between each
pair of electrodes, and the computer with complementary
software installed, for image reconstruction, image analysis
and sensitivity matrix of the used ECT sensor. Typically,
used sensors consisting of N electrodes (e.g. N = 8, 12, 16)
lead to M capacitance measurements M = (N − 1) ∗ N/2,
(M = 28, 66, 120) [9]. The number of the amounted electrodes
in ECT sensor is related to image acquisition rate and the
required resolutions. The use of 12 electrodes allows the
acquisition of 100 frames per second. In the presented ECT
sensor (N = 32) and with the applied ECT measurement
unit, the acquisition rate was at 11 frames per second that
gives M = 496 measurement records for one frame. The
Fig. 1.
Photo of TomoSense - top view of the system with a single mobile
device (iPhone 6) placed on the table. Note the size of the sensed surface
relative to the smartdevice.
measured capacitance records are collected in a matrix where
i, j represent the numbers of the electrodes in between the
successive pairs of measurement electrodes [10]. The changes
of capacitance between each pair of electrodes are dependent
mainly on the permittivity value of the space between elec-
trodes and the distance between electrodes. In order to prepare
the image of permittivity distribution in space between each
pair of electrodes, it is necessary to calculate the sensitivity
matrix, which provides information about the inﬂuence of the
level of permittivity changes in each part of the measurement
space (in our case, above the table) on particular capacitance
measurements [11]. Before starting the reconstruction process,
the sensitivity matrix has to be calculated. The measure-
ment procedure is conducted by connecting each electrode
to an ECT system. The measurement of capacitance C was
conducted between each pair of electrodes, C1−2, C1−3, ...,
C1−32, C2−3, C2−4, ... , C2−32, ... , C31−32. The measure-
ment vector M1x496 consist of N
= 496 measurements.
The reference vector for empty measurement space Mref is
recorded in order to eliminate the inﬂuence of the distance
between the distant electrodes on the results. The sensing area
is divided into 23x30 pixels. The reference data is used to
create the reconstructed image of the objects placed on or
above the surface of TomoTable. In order to obtain the image,
a sensitivity weight matrix W496x690 is calculated. It provides
information on how the changes in each pixel inﬂuence the
measurements of capacitances between each pair of electrodes.
The values of weight matrix are calculated based on distance
of a pixel from a given electrode. For electrodes located farther
away from each other, the inﬂuence on pixel changing is much
smaller than for adjacent electrodes. The resulting image I
is obtained by ﬁrst subtracting Mref from M to obtain the
relative measurement vector Me and then multiplying Me by
the weight matrix W.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Fig. 2.
Components of ECT
IV. PRELIMINARY RESULTS
Figures 3 and 4 show the reconstructed images of the
distribution of the objects on the sensed surface. The exam-
ples shown here illustrate different possible conﬁgurations of
devices and varying alignment with respect to the electrode
array.
While it is apparent that an object is present on the sensed
surface, its exact location is harder to determine. This is caused
by the fact that the capacitance between adjacent electrodes
(when the sensed surface is empty) increases with the distance
between the electrodes. That is why a reference vector needs
to be obtained before any object detection is performed.
Our next observation is that the introduction of mobile de-
vices onto the sensed surface produced an easily sensed change
in capacitance. The differences of capacitance we observed
are in range of a few picofarads (from 6pf (empty space) to
14pf (space with a mobile device)). The advanced research
system we used can detect differences in the range of fF and
thus a lower grade device would be sufﬁcient. Consequently,
ECT sensing for mobile devices does not require highly
accurate capacitance sensors, which creates opportunities for
low-cost deployments. The number of elements into which
the sensor plane was discretised in order to conduct the image
Fig. 3.
Two iPhone 6 units placed on TomoTable and the resulting
reconstructed image. Top: The phone on the upper left-hand side is located
above the center of one electrode and covering two adjacent electrodes
partially. The phone on the lower right-hand side is placed in between four
adjacent electrodes covering only about one fourth of each of them. Bottom:
The reconstructed 2D image of the device conﬁguration view on top. The
color scale show measurement intensity that varies empty space (blue) to the
solid body of a device (dark red).
reconstruction is relatively low and the resolution of the image
is relatively low (e.g. compared to an interactive table). The
image reconstruction procedure applied here was a simpliﬁed
version of the LBP algorithm — a fairly naïve one that
neglects the nonlinear character of the electrical ﬁeld response
to the objects present in the measurement space. Albeit using
basic reconstruction method and choosing low resolution of
the visualization (23x30 pixels) the size and orientation of
the devices can be easily seen on the resulting reconstructed
image. As a reference, we we show two cases with different
orientation of the devices with respect to each other as well to
the sensing electrodes area and the table itself (upper photos on
Fig. 3 and Fig. 4) as well as the resulting reconstructed images
of the distribution of the objects on the sensed surface (bottom
pictures on Fig. 3 and Fig. 4). There are observable differences
in the produced images depending on how the devices are
positioned in relation to the electrodes and other devices. This
showcases the potential of electrical capacitance tomography
to provide accurate sensing for multi-device systems.
There are observable differences in the produced images
depending on how the devices are positioned in relation to
the electrode array and other devices. This showcases the
potential of electrical capacitance tomography to provide accu-
rate sensing for multi-device systems, namely we demonstrate
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Fig. 4.
An iPhone 6 and an iPad mini placed on TomoTable and the resulting
reconstructed image. Top: The spatial arrangement of the devices is more
chaotic and more likely in an in-the-wild scenario. The rotation of the devices
is misaligned with TomoTable’s electrode array. Bottom: The reconstructed
2D image of the two devices. The color scale show measurement intensity
that varies empty space (blue) to the solid body of a device (dark red).
it is feasible to: (1) localize the position of the device (2)
distinguish the size (3) detect the rotation angle and (4) sense
several distinct devices.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we demonstrated that TomoSense detects
on-top placed devices with ease; measurement records taken
during experiments revealed signiﬁcant changes in sensed
capacitance and these varied from a few to over a dozen in
the range of picoFarads (from 6pF for empty space to 14pF
when sensing a device), while the ECT unit is capable to work
in far more narrow range of femtoFarads. With this, we can
conclude that it is possible to use a custom made device with
lower sensitivity capacitance measurement devices for future
wide deployment. One can observe that, even for the same
type of devices, the particular position of the device with
respect to electrode distribution (coverage over the distinct
electrodes area) inﬂuences the values of reconstructed pixels
(Fig. 2). This property may provide additional knowledge
about devices orientation with respect to electrodes positions
and hence shall improve the eventual spatial position calcu-
lations. ECT normally can produce tens up to hundreds of
images per second for the all-inter-electrode measurement vec-
tors. However, using contextual knowledge of the monitored
process, such as the speciﬁc movements of mobile devices as
reported here [5], we can adjust the measurement protocol. The
protocol may support more rapid detection of spatial location
with the aid of the "traveling measurement window" concept
using a mask of 9 or 16 electrodes. While spatial awareness
becomes an important feature in a class of applications such
as sense making in a multi device environment, a question of
a balance between required sensing accuracy vs. complexity
and ease of application remains open. The proposed prototype
offers limited spatial resolution compared to infrared based
positioning. However, further research on reﬁning the design
(in terms of different electrode arrangements coupled with
dedicated measurement protocols as well as contextual data
processing algorithms) shall provide sufﬁcient accuracy for
spatial-aware based multi device applications. On the other
hand, our design preserves the biggest advantage over the other
modality systems, i.e. the possibility to be easily embedded
into different surfaces and, therefore, to keep the promise of
in-the-wild applicability. It will be interesting to test the device
for advanced domain expert analytical meetings for last stage
of scientiﬁc crowdsourcing applications [12]. Lastly, with the
improved prototype, it is worth to conduct in-situ study on
possible ways of interaction with various everyday objects.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Wozniak, B. Schmidt, L. Lischke, Z. Franjcic, A. E. Yantaç, and
M. Fjeld, “Mochatop: Building ad-hoc data spaces with multiple
devices,” in CHI ’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, ser. CHI EA ’14.
ACM, 2014, pp. 2329–2334.
[2] K. Hasan, D. Ahlström, and P. Irani, “Ad-binning: leveraging around
device space for storing, browsing and retrieving mobile device
content,” Proceedings of CHI 2013, pp. 899–908, 2013.
[3] R. Rädle, H.-C. Jetter, N. Marquardt, H. Reiterer, and Y. Rogers,
“Huddlelamp: Spatially-aware mobile displays for ad-hoc around-the-
table collaboration,” in Proceedings of the Ninth ACM International
Conference on Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces - ITS ’14.
ACM
Press, 11 2014, pp. 45–54.
[4] P. Hamilton and D. J. Wigdor, “Conductor: enabling and understanding
cross-device interaction,” in Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM
conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’14.
ACM
Press, 4 2014, pp. 2773–2782.
[5] A. Lucero, T. Jokela, A. Palin, V. Aaltonen, and J. Nikara, “Easygroups:
binding mobile devices for collaborative interactions,” in Proceedings
of the 2012 ACM annual conference extended abstracts on Human
Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts - CHI EA ’12.
ACM Press, 5 2012, p. 2189.
[6] K. Zickuhr, “Tablet ownership 2013,” Pew Research Center report,
pewinternet.com, p. 11, 2013.
[7] C. Müller-Tomfelde and M. Fjeld, “Tabletops: Interactive horizontal
displays for ubiquitous computing,” Computer, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 78–81,
2012.
[8] P.
Kucharski,
A.
Romanowski,
K.
Grudzie´n,
and
P.
Wo´zniak,
“TomoTable: Towards Multi-Device Spatial Awareness Based on
Independent Plane Sensing,” in Cross Surface 2016 at ACM CHI’16,
2016.
[9] A. Romanowski, K. Grudzien, R. A. Williams, and R. West, “A review
of data analysis methods for electrical industrial process tomography
applications,” in Proceedings of the 2005 4th World Congress on
Industrial Process Tomography – WCIPT4 Japan, vol. 2. VCIPT, 2005,
pp. 916–921.
[10] D. Sankowski and J. Sikora, Electrical Capacitance Tomography: The-
oretical Basis and Applications, 2010.
[11] Z. Ye, R. Banasiak, and M. Soleimani, “Planar array 3d electrical
capacitive tomography,” Insight, vol. 55, pp. 675–680, 2013.
[12] C. Chen, P. W. Wo´zniak, A. Romanowski, M. Obaid, T. Jaworski,
J. Kucharski, K. Grudzie´n, S. Zhao, and M. Fjeld, “Using crowdsourcing
for scientiﬁc analysis of industrial tomographic images,” ACM Trans.
Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 52:1–52:25, Jul. 2016.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

