Self-adaptive Localization using Signal Strength Measurements
Michal Marks∗†, Ewa Niewiadomska-Szynkiewicz∗†
∗ Institute of Control and Computation Engineering
Warsaw University of Technology
ul. Nowowiejska 15/19
00-665 Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: ens@ia.pw.edu.pl, mmarks@ia.pw.edu.pl
† Research and Academic Computer Network (NASK)
ul. Wawozowa 18
02-796 Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: ewan@nask.pl, mmarks@nask.pl
Abstract—The paper treats the problem of localization in
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN). In our work, we present
and evaluate the localization system that can be used to
calculate the geographical positions of network nodes. The
search for the accurate positions of nodes is performed
using a signal strength measurements and known positions
of a set of selected sensors equipped with GPS system.
Our scheme uses node to node distance estimates calculated
based on RSSI (Received Signal Strength Indicator). The
proposed solution is self-adaptive, since the transformation
of RSSI measurements into distances is done automatically
using information about strength of signals received by
nodes equipped with GPS. We focus on the performance
of our approach to localization, and discuss the accuracy
of position calculation for various methods of inter-node
distances estimation. The use and efﬁciency of the proposed
localization system is illustrated by numerical examples
performed in our WSN Localization Simulator.
Keywords-wireless sensor networks; localization; Received
Signal Strength Indicator; RSSI; signal measurements; op-
timization; simulated annealing; simulator
I. INTRODUCTION
The goal of localization is to assign geographic coordi-
nates to each node in the sensor network in the deployment
area. Wireless sensor network localization is a complex
problem that can be solved in different ways [1]. A number
of research and commercial location systems for WSNs
have been developed. They differ in their assumptions
about the network conﬁguration, distribution of calculation
processes, mobility and ﬁnally the hardware’s capabilities,
[2], [3], [4].
Recently proposed localization techniques consist in
identiﬁcation of approximate location of nodes based on
merely partial information on the location of the set of
nodes in a sensor network. An anchor is deﬁned as a node
that is aware of its own location, either through GPS or
manual pre-programming during deployment. Identiﬁca-
tion of the location of other nodes is up to an algorithm
locating non-anchors. Considering hardware’s capabilities
of network nodes we can distinguish two classes of
methods:
• range based (distance-based) methods,
• range free (connectivity based) methods.
Figure 1.
The scheme of localization process
The former is deﬁned by protocols that use absolute
point to point distance estimates (ranges) or angle esti-
mates in location calculation. The latter makes no assump-
tion about the availability or validity of such information,
and use only connectivity information to locate the entire
sensor network. The popular range free solutions are
hop-counting techniques. Distance-based methods require
the additional equipment but through that much better
resolution can be reached than in case of connectivity
based ones.
In general, to solve the distance-based localization
problem it is necessary to combine two techniques: sig-
nal processing and algorithms transforming measurements
into the coordinates of the nodes in the network. Hence,
distance-based localization schemes operate in two stages,
as shown in Fig. 1:
• Distance estimation stage – estimation of inter-node
distances based on inter-node transmissions.
• Position calculation stage – calculation of geographic
coordinates of nodes forming the network.
The paper is structured as follows: We formulate the
localization problem in Section II. In Section III, we pro-
vide a short overview of popular radio signal measurement
techniques and discuss the signal propagation modeling. In
Section IV, the localization process using our localization
system is described. The results of numerical experiments
are summarized in Section V. In Section VI, we present
conclusions.
73
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

II. DISTANCE-BASED LOCALIZATION TECHNIQUES
We are concerned with the distance-based approach
to localization. Let us consider a WSN formed by M
sensors (anchor nodes) with known position expressed as
l-dimensional coordinates ak ∈ Rl, k = 1, . . . , M and N
sensors (non-anchor nodes) xi ∈ Rl, i = 1, . . . , N with
unknown locations. Our goal is to estimate the coordinates
of non-anchor nodes. We can formulate the optimization
problem with the performance measure J considering
estimated Euclidean distances of all neighbor nodes
min
ˆx
n
J =
M
X
k=1
X
j∈Nk
(||ak − ˆxj||2 − ˜dkj)2
+
N
X
i=1
X
j∈Ni
(||ˆxi − ˆxj||2 − ˜dij)2o
,
(1)
where ˆxi and ˆxj denote estimated positions of nodes i
and j, ˜dkj and ˜dij distances between pairs of nodes (k, j)
and (i, j) calculated based on radio signal measurements,
Nk = {(k, j) : dkj ≤ r}, Ni = {(i, j) : dij ≤ r} sets of
neighbors of anchor and non-anchor nodes (j = 1 . . . , N),
and r maximal transmission range.
The stochastic optimization algorithms can be used to
solve the problem (1). Kannan, Mao and Vucetic in [5]
present the results of location calculation for simulated
annealing method. We propose the hybrid technique that
uses a combination of the trilateration method, along with
simulated annealing (TSA: Trilateration & Simulated An-
nealing). TSA was described in details in [6]. It operates
in two phases:
• Phase 1 – the auxiliary solution (localization) is
provided using the geometry of triangles.
• Phase 2 – the solution of the phase 1 is improved by
applying stochastic optimization.
III. RANGE ESTIMATION
As it was mentioned in Section I using range based
methods we can reach much better resolution than in
case of range free ones. However in order to do that the
additional equipment is usually required. Each of popular
techniques – widely described in literature [2], [1] – such
as Angle of Arrival (AoA), Time of Arrival (ToA), Time
Difference of Arrival (TDoA) needs an additional stuff
such as antennas or accurately synchronized clocks. The
only exception from these requirements is a Received
Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) technique.
RSSI is considered as the simplest and cheapest method
amongst the wireless distance estimation techniques, since
it does not require additional hardware for distance mea-
surements and is unlikely to signiﬁcantly impact local
power consumption, sensor size and thus cost. Main
disadvantage of using RSSI is low accuracy. In respect to
wireless channel models (Section III-A) received power
should be a function of distance. However, the RSSI
values have a high variability and they cannot be treated
as a good distance estimates [7], [8]. On the other hand
some authors indicate that new radio transceivers can give
RSSI measurements good enough to be a reasonable link
estimator [9], [10].
A. The radio signal propagation modeling
Propagation models are generally focused on predicting
the average received signal strength at a given distance
from the transmitter, as well as the variability of the signal
strength in close spatial proximity to a particular location.
Propagation models that predict the mean signal strength
for an arbitrary transmitter-receiver separation distance
are useful in estimating the radio coverage area of a
transmitter and are called large-scale propagation models,
since they characterize signal strength over large distances
(hundreds or thousands of meters). On the other hand,
propagation models that characterize the rapid ﬂuctuations
of the received signal strength over very short travel
distances or short time durations are called small-scale
models [11].
In this paper we concentrate on the stationary net-
works and do not consider small ﬂuctuations of the
signal strength in time. Hence the large-scale model is
used further. Both theoretical and measurement based
propagation models indicate that average received signal
power decreases logarithmically with distance, whether in
outdoor or indoor radio channels [11]. The mean large-
scale path loss can be expressed as a function of distance:
PL(d)[dB] = PL(d0)[dB] + 10nlog
 d
d0

,
(2)
where d is the transmitter-receiver distance, d0 is a ref-
erence distance (for IEEE 802.15.4 radio typically the
value of d0 is taken to be 1 m) and n is the path loss
exponent (rate at which signal decays). The value of
n depends on the speciﬁc propagation environment and
should be obtained through curve ﬁtting of empirical data.
An empirical experiment is also the best way to select an
appropriate path loss for the reference distance d0 [12].
The received signal strength P r at a distance d is:
P r(d)[dBm] = P t[dBm] − PL(d)[dB],
(3)
where P t denotes the power of transmitter.
IV. LOCALIZATION PROCESS
As it was mentioned in Section I our localization system
operates in two stages: the distance estimation stage and
the position calculation stage.
A. Distance estimation stage
The signal propagation model outlined in Section III-A
allows us to estimate the distance if we know the power
of received signal. Hence, in our research we used RSSI
measurements. The objective of the distance estimation
stage is to tune parameters of propagation model (2-3)
wrt a given network technology and deployment area.
Calibration procedure achieves this goal automatically –
by exploiting information (pair o values: RSSI and true
physical distance) obtained for the links connecting anchor
to anchor node. Therefore the localization can be called
74
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

self-adaptive since the algorithm is capable of calibrating
own parameters without additional information about the
environment.
Consider WSN with M anchor nodes with known
coordinates ak ∈ Rl, k = 1, . . . , M as deﬁned in Section
II. For each pair (i, j) of anchors which is in transmission
range we can measure received signal strength P r
ij . The
set of such pairs is as follows:
Ψ = {(P r
ij, dij) : ||ai − aj||2 < r},
(4)
where dij is known true physical distance between anchors
i and j, and r transmission range.
Using (2) and (3) we can estimate the average distance
between nodes i and j as a function of received signal
strength P r
ij:
˜dij = d0 · 10
P t−P L(d0)
10n
· 10−
1
10n P r
ij,
(5)
where d0 denotes the reference distance, PL(d0) the path
loss at the reference distance, n the path loss exponent
and P t output power of the transmitter. It should be
pointed that the goal of the calibration procedure is only
to predict a value of the distance d for known value
of P r
ij, not to ﬁnd the exact value of the parameters
n, P t, d0, PL(d0). Hence, we can simplify the equation
(5) introducing parameters α and β:
˜dij = α · 10β·P r
ij,
(6)
where α = d0 · 10
P t−P L(d0)
10n
and β = −
1
10n. It seems to
be reasonable to ﬁt the RSSI-distance curve based on two
parameters not four.
It is obvious that this average distance differs vastly
from the true physical distance between selected nodes,
but there is no chance to ﬁt the curve describing signal
propagation to all samples from Ψ. An ordinary least
square (OLS) method can be used to calculate values of
parameters α and β that minimize the error between the
true physical and estimated distances:
min
αols,βols
X
(P r
ij,dij)∈Ψ

αols · 10βols·P r
ij − dij
2
.
(7)
The set Ψ contains distances and RSSI measurements for
anchor to anchor connections. It should be pointed here
that errors caused by the signal diffraction, reﬂection and
scattering are very high and increase with distance. For
anchors distributed randomly it is very probably that they
are not very close to each other and because of errors
RSSI measurements are similar for different distances, see
Fig. 2. In (7) all samples have the same signiﬁcance (both
empty and ﬁlled boxes in Fig. 2).
In order to overcome this property and improve the
signiﬁcance of ”outliers” the weighted least square (WLS)
approach was incorporated. The RSSI values scope was
divided into a few ranges (indicated by a vertical lines in
Fig. 2), which have the same impact on the minimized
performance function. The set of anchor to anchor mea-
surements can be given by a sum of separate subsets:
Ψ = Ψ1 ∪ ...Ψk... ∪ Ψn.
(8)
Figure 2.
Samples from the set Ψ for random topology.
The optimization problem for WLS approach is formulated
as follows:
min
αwls,βwls
X
Ψk∈Ψ

 1
|Ψk|
X
(P r
ij,dij)∈Ψk

αwls · 10βwls·P r
ij − dij
2

.
(9)
Finally, in order to make calibration stage more robust
the geometric combined least square method (GCLS) is
proposed. In this approach parameters αgcls and βgcls are
expressed as:
αgcls = √αols · αwls,
βgcls = βols + βwls
2
.
(10)
The parameters α and β obtained as a solution of opti-
mization problems OLS (7), WLS (9) and GCLS (10) are
used to transform the RSSI measurements characterizing
the whole network into the matrix of appropriate distances,
which is used in the next stage.
B. Position calculation stage
In the position calculation stage the measurements of
inter-node distances are used to estimate the coordinates
of non-anchor nodes in the network. We propose two-
phase method – TSA to solve the optimization problem
(1). We describe its performance in case of WSN placed
on a plane.
1) Phase 1 (trilateration): In the ﬁrst phase the initial
localization is provided using the geometry of triangles.
To determine the relative location of a non-anchor on a
2D plane using trilateration alone, generally at least three
neighbors with known positions are needed. Hence, all
nodes are divided into two groups: group A of nodes
with known location (in the beginning only M anchor
nodes) and group B of nodes with unknown location (in
the beginning N non-anchor nodes). In each step of the
algorithm node i from the group B is chosen. Next, three
75
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

nodes from the group A that are within node i radio range
are randomly selected. If such nodes exist the location
of node i is calculated, node i is moved to the group
A. Otherwise, another node from the group B is selected
and the operation is repeated. The ﬁrst phase stops when
there are no more nodes that can be localized based on
the available information about all nodes localization. It
switches to the second phase.
2) Phase 2 (stochastic optimization): Due to the dis-
tance measurement uncertainty the coordinates calculated
in the ﬁrst phase are estimated with non-zero errors.
In addition the position of nodes that have less than
three localized neighbors can not be estimated. Hence,
the solution of the ﬁrst phase is modiﬁed by applying
stochastic optimization method. A Simulated Annealing
(SA) was considered in our research [13].
From the numerical experiments it was observed that
the increased value of the location error is usually driven
by incorrect location estimates calculated for a few nodes.
The additional functionality (correction) was introduced
to remove incorrect solutions involved by the distances
measurement errors. The additional constraints were intro-
duced to the optimization problem. The detail description
of the correction algorithm can be found in [6].
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In [6], we presented performance evaluation of TSA
method in case of simpliﬁed model for distances approx-
imation. We estimated the nodes’ locations for known
values of distance measurements, and focused only on
localization phase. It is obvious that in real application
inter-node distance have to be calculated based on radio
signals measurements. Therefore, in this work we focus on
self-adaptive distance calculation based on signal strengths
and calibration of propagation models.
In order to evaluate our two-phase method extended by
the calibration procedure many numerical tests were per-
formed using our new software tool – WSN Localization
Simulator (Fig. 3). All the calculations were carried out
on the machine Intel Core2 Duo E6600 – 2.4GHz, 2GB
RAM. The average results obtained during ﬁve runs of
each localization task are presented in tables and ﬁgures.
In this paper we present the results for the centralized TSA
algorithm (each sensor node gather the measurements of
distances between its and all the neighbors and pass them
to a central station for analysis, after which the computed
positions are transported back into the network).
A. Network topology generation
Network models considered in this work were created
using generator built in our simulator, which is based on
Link Layer Model for MATLAB provided by M. Zuniga
and B. Krishnamachari [14]. This tool allows to generate
link layer models for wireless sensor networks. In our
software we focus on wireless channel modeling. No radio
modulation and encoding were considered. The sample
network topology – presented in Fig. 4 – was generated
using parameters collected in Table I. The sensor network
Figure 3.
WSN Localization Simulator
Figure 4.
Sample network topology. Anchor nodes marked with dia-
monds and non-anchor nodes marked with circles. Connections between
anchor nodes used for model calibration are marked by lines.
consisting of 200 nodes – 20 anchor nodes (marked
with diamonds) and 180 non-anchor nodes (marked with
circles) was considered.
B. Distance estimation stage evaluation
The comparative study of different methods of inter-
node distances estimation was performed. Fig. 5 depicts
the relationship between the RSSI measurements and
the true physical distances for the considered task. In
Fig. 5a the RSSI measurements only for anchors are
presented – these data are used for signal propagation
model calibration. The Fig. 5b depicts the measurements
for all connections. The ﬁtting curves obtained during
calibration process are marked with the red line for the
ordinary least square method, with the green line for the
weighted least square method and with the blue line for the
geometric combined least square method. As we can see
the propagation model for the ordinary least square method
76
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Table I
LINK LAYER MODEL PARAMETERS USED IN EXPERIMENTS
Parameter
Value
PATH LOSS EXPONENT
3.2
SHADOWING STANDARD DEVIATION
2.8
PL D0
35.0 dB
D0
1.0 m
OUTPUT POWER
0.0 dBm
NOISE FLOOR
-105.0 dBm
ASYMMETRY
0 (NO)
TERRAIN DIMENSIONS X
1000.0 m
TERRAIN DIMENSIONS Y
1000.0 m
NUMBER OF NODES
200
TOPOLOGY
3 (RANDOM)
Table II
COMPARISON OF DISTANCE AND LOCALIZATION ERRORS FOR OLS,
WLS AND GCLS METHODS USED IN CALIBRATION STAGE
Method
DE
LE
Ordinary least square (OLS)
19.22%
3.34 (0.65*)
Weighted least square (WLS)
17.65%
4.32 (0.97*)
Geometric combined least square (GCLS)
18.21%
3.95 (0.48*)
* the variance of results obtained from ﬁve runs of each task.
is prone to overestimating calculated distances between the
nodes.
The differences between the true physical distances and
those obtained from propagation model are presented in
Fig. 6. The error is deﬁned as DE = | d− ˜d
d |. It can be
observed that WLS and GCLS methods effects in smaller
maximum error. The differences in results of considered
method increase in case of low density networks with big
distances between anchor nodes.
C. Position calculation stage evaluation
The distance estimation stage produces inputs to the
localization process. The estimates of inter-node distances
are used to compute the coordinates of non-anchor nodes
in the network. Due to the measurement uncertainty it is
difﬁcult to ﬁnd a good metric to compare the obtained
results. To evaluate the performance of tested algorithms
we have used the mean error between the estimated and
the true physical location of the non-anchor nodes in the
network, deﬁned as follows:
LE = 1
n ·
n
X
i=1
(||ˆxi − xi||)2
r2
i
· 100%,
(11)
where LE denotes a localization error, xi the true position
of the sensor node i in the network, ˆxi estimated location
of the sensor node i and r the radio transmission range.
The localization error LE is expressed as a percentage
error. It is normalized with respect to the radio range to
allow comparison of results obtained for different size and
range networks. The results of the localization stage are
presented in Table II.
It should be underlined that the localization accuracy is
more than satisfactory. The localization errors are below
Figure 5.
Distance as a function of RSSI measurements.
5% for different calibration methods, while the mean error
in distance measurements is about 20%. It means that our
approach allows to obtain accurate location estimates even
in case of very inaccurate distance measurements.
VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
We have presented the design and evaluation of our
hybrid two-phase scheme for estimating the locations of
nodes with unknown positions in WSN system. Emphasis
was placed on the inter-node distances estimation based on
received signal strength indicator. We have evaluated our
algorithm, through analysis and simulation. Our evaluation
demonstrates that the TSA method provides quite accurate
location estimates. In our current research, we apply
our algorithm to the testbed network of sensors in the
laboratory.
77
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Figure 6.
Distance errors histograms.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by National Science
Centre grant N N514 672940.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Karl and A. Willig, Protocols and Architectures for
Wireless Sensor Networks.
Wiley, 2005.
[2] G. Mao, B. Fidan, and B. D. O. Anderson, “Wireless sensor
network localization techniques,” Computer Networks: The
International Journal of Computer and Telecommunica-
tions Networking, vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 2529–2553, 2007.
[3] A. Awad, T. Frunzke, and F. Dressler, “Adaptive distance
estimation and localization in wsn using rssi measures,” in
Digital System Design Architectures, Methods and Tools,
2007. DSD 2007. 10th Euromicro Conference on, 2007,
pp. 471 –478.
[4] X. Zhang, Y. Wu, and X. Wei, “Localization algorithms in
wireless sensor networks using nonmetric multidimensional
scaling with rssi for precision agriculture,” in Computer and
Automation Engineering (ICCAE), 2010 The 2nd Interna-
tional Conference on, vol. 5, 2010, pp. 556 –559.
[5] A. A. Kannan, G. Mao, and B. Vucetic, “Simulated anneal-
ing based localization in wireless sensor network,” in LCN
’05: Proceedings of the The IEEE Conference on Local
Computer Networks 30th Anniversary.
Washington, DC,
USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2005, pp. 513–514.
[6] M. Marks and E. Niewiadomska-Szynkiewicz, “Two-phase
stochastic optimization to sensor network localization,”
in SENSORCOMM 2007: Proceedings of the interna-
tional conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications.
IEEE Computer Society, 2007, pp. 134–139.
[7] K. Benkic, M. Malajner, P. Planinsic, and Z. Cucej, “Us-
ing rssi value for distance estimation in wireless sensor
networks based on zigbee,” in Systems, Signals and Image
Processing, 2008. IWSSIP 2008. 15th International Con-
ference on, 2008, pp. 303 –306.
[8] V. Ramadurai and M. L. Sichitiu, “Localization in wireless
sensor networks: A probabilistic approach,” in Proceedings
of International Conference on Wireless Networks (ICWN
2003), Las Vegas, June 2003, pp. 300–305.
[9] P. Barsocchi, S. Lenzi, S. Chessa, and G. Giunta, “Virtual
calibration for rssi-based indoor localization with ieee
802.15.4,” in Communications, 2009. ICC ’09. IEEE In-
ternational Conference on, 2009, pp. 1 –5.
[10] K. Srinivasan and P. Levis, “Rssi is under appreciated,”
in In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Embedded
Networked Sensors (EmNets, 2006.
[11] T. Rappapport, Wireless communications: principles and
practice, second edition ed., ser. Communications Engi-
neering and Emerging Technologies Series.
Prentice Hall,
2002.
[12] J. Gibson, The mobile communications handbook, second
edition ed., ser. Electrical Engineering Handbook Series.
CRC Press, 1999.
[13] E. Niewiadomska-Szynkiewicz and M. Marks, “Optimiza-
tion schemes for wireless sensor network localization,” In-
ternational Journal of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, vol. 19, no. 2, 2009.
[14] M. Zuniga and B. Krishnamachari, “Analyzing the transi-
tional region in low power wireless links,” in In First IEEE
International Conference on Sensor and Ad hoc Commu-
nications and Networks (SECON, Santa Clara, 2004, pp.
517–526.
78
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

