Love Wave Sensors Functionalized with Cobalt Corroles or Metalloporphyrines 
Applied to the Detection of Carbon Monoxide 
 
 
Meddy Vanotti, Virginie Blondeau-Patissier, 
Sylvain Ballandras 
Times and frequency department 
FEMTO-ST Institute 
 Besançon, France 
e-mail : meddy.vanotti@femto-st.fr 
e-mail : virginie.blondeau@femto-st.fr 
 
 
Sylvain Ballandras 
Senseor 
Mougins, France 
e-mail : ballandr@femto-st.fr 
 
 
 
Abstract - This article described highly sensitive gas sensors for 
monitoring low ppm or ppb concentrations of carbon 
monoxide using phase variations at constant frequency of Love 
waves generated by a surface acoustic wave device.  The 
sensing material for gas detection employed in this study is a 
silica layer modified with one of three compounds that assure a 
selective trapping of CO. The authors demonstrate that surface 
acoustic wave devices with non-conductive sensing layers as 
described can be used for molecular recognition such as to 
detect carbon monoxide molecules. This article reported an 
interest and original work. 
 
Keywords- CO detection; SAW device; porphyrine; cobalt 
corroles. 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Carbon Monoxide (CO) is produced by incomplete 
combustion. Because of its intrinsic properties, it is naturally 
undetectable 
by 
human 
body. 
His 
toxicity 
and 
undetectability make him a dangerous compound. This 
observation leads to the necessity of developing a device 
able to detect the presence of CO in the air. 
The strong demand for the development of lab-on-chip 
analysis devices has pushed to investigate many different 
approaches in that matter. Among these, the use of surface 
acoustic waves has received a particular interest during the 
last decade. Specially, pure shear guided waves in stratified 
substrates such as amorphous silica on quartz allowing for 
the use of Love waves appears as an attractive solution to 
fabricate devices able to operate in water, since shear waves 
are not radiated in fluids and because of their noticeable 
sensitivity to gravimetric effects related to surface 
adsorption. Many devices based on delay line configurations 
have been built and tested with various successes. However, 
the use of resonators instead of delay lines is expected to 
provide better sensing capabilities particularly when 
monitoring phase shifts at constant frequency due to 
gravimetric effects. For Surface Acoustic Wave devices 
(SAW), mass sensitivity is given by the Sauerbrey relation 
(1).  
 
 
 
(1) 
 
 
where fo is the resonance frequency of the unperturbed 
SAW sensor, A is the active area, ∆m and ∆f are mass and 
frequency variations, respectively.  SAW devices working at 
125 MHz are used in these developments. The sensibility of 
these devices is about 250cm²/g.     
Besides, a great variety of artificial receptors particularly 
useful for chemical sensors development have been 
fabricated, 
benefiting 
from 
progresses 
of 
synthetic 
chemistry methodologies. SAWs (Fig. 1) have allowed for 
demonstrating the exploitation of CO molecular trapping   
occurring in non-conductive sensing layers [1]. We propose 
in this paper to compare the performance of different 
compounds used as sensing layer. We have monitored phase 
variations of SAW devices, functionalized with three 
different sensing layers, when loaded with CO molecules. 
The three tested compounds  are cobalt corroles [5,10,15-
Tris(2,6-dichlorophenyl) corrolato]Co(III)] (Fig. 2) [2] and 
two 
metalloporphyrines 
[Fe(II)-(5,10,15,20-tetrakis(3,5-
dihydroxyphenyl)porphyrin] [3, 4] referred as porphyrine #5 
and [5,10,15,20-tetrakis (3,5-dimethoxyphenyl) porphyrin) 
Mn(III)] referred as porphyrine #6 (Fig. 4) . 
 
 
Figure 1.  SAW device 
 
54
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
Figure 2.  Scheme of a cobalt corrole [5,10,15-Tris(2,6-
dichlorophenyl)corrolato]cobalt(III)]) 
 
II. EXPERIMENTS 
For Love-wave-based sensors, since the acoustic wave 
generated by the transducers is mainly a surface acoustic 
wave, it reveals extremely sensitive to perturbations 
occurring at the surface of the device. Modification of the 
acoustic wave propagation conditions in the silica guiding 
layer leads to the modification of the physical characteristics 
of the wave. During the tests, CO sensors have been 
exposed to changes of several experimental parameters 
(temperature, flow, pressure, presence of gas). In order to 
exclusively 
extract the 
information 
concerning 
CO 
adsorption, we used a specific differential setup comprising 
two SAW devices. In contrast to previous experiments 
[1][3] the experiments were conducted at atmospheric 
pressure to more closely simulate sensor application 
conditions. To this end, a dedicated gas test setup, optimized 
for CO detection, has been developed.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. X-ray spectra of SAW devices before functionalization deposition 
(first); after porphyrines #5 spray coating (second); after cobalt corroles 
spray coating (third) 
 
Figure 4.  Scheme of an organometallic prophyrin (M: central metal atom) 
M-(5,10,15,20-tetrakis(3,5-dimethoxyphenyl)porphyrin) 
 
A crucial point of the development of SAW sensor is the 
functionalization of its active surface with chemical 
treatment able to assure the selective trapping of CO. 
Sensing layers were synthesized following literature methods 
[2][4][5]. Prophyrins and cobalt corroles were dissolved in a 
proper solvent (10-3 M in CHCl3) and deposited by spray 
coating. Love-wave devices used, consists in delay lines built 
on (AT, Z) cut of quartz. The wave guidance is achieved by 
depositing a 2.5 µm thick silica overlay onto the InterDigited 
Transducers (IDTs) and the propagation path as well. The 
Love wave is generated and detected using IDTs composed 
of 50 pairs of 4-finger-per-wavelength electrodes made of 
200 nm thick evaporated aluminium.  
In order to ensure the presence of the functionalization, 
we made a XPS (X ray Photon Spectroscopy) analysis of the 
surface of  SAW devices before and after the deposition of 
cobalt corroles and porphyrines. A few spectra are reported 
here. The resulting wide scans are presented in Fig. 3. The 
raising of two peaks characteristic of the presence of silicon 
(Si2p and Si2s), oxygen (O1s) and the presence of small 
peaks of carbon due to pollution can be observed on the bare 
device’s spectrum showing the absence of functionalization 
onto the silica composed surface. After cobalt corroles 
deposition, we note the augmentation of the carbon peak 
and the appearance of two peaks showing the presence of 
nitrogen and cobalt. A decrease of O1s and silicon intensity 
peaks has been observed. This tends to prove that a thin film 
has been effectively deposited onto the surface. The 
apparition of a nitrogen peak also confirms the presence of 
an overlay onto the silica surface due to four atoms of 
nitrogen surrounding the organometallic atom. Analyses of 
devices that have been covered with porphyrines #5 and #6 
show Fe and Mn organometallic peaks. The oxygen peak is 
still higher than in presence of corroles due to –OH groups 
on both. The XPS analysis has yield evidences of the 
deposition of the two compounds onto the SAW device’s 
surface. It has also allowed for the chemical characterisation 
of these functionalizations. 
An experimental bench has especially been developed for 
high sensitivity detection of CO (Fig. 5).  In order to proceed 
to differential acquisition [6] allowing for minimizing the 
influence of changing experimental parameters preventing  
 
55
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
Figure 5.  Scheme of our specific cell for toxic gas detection. 
 
the CO detection, two sensors are used. One coated with 
corroles sensitive to CO [1][2] and the other non-
functionalized used as a reference. 
The cell is equipped with three mass flow meters driven 
by a controller allowing the dilution of CO with N2 and O2. 
Moreover, a primary pump provides vacuum conditions that 
permit a faster regeneration of the sensitive area of the 
sensors, making it reusable. 
 
III. MOTIVATION AND RESULTS 
We report here the results obtained for CO detection 
using SAW devices functionalized with cobalt corroles and 
metalloporphyrines, which reversibly interact with gaseous 
analytes by coordination with the central metal atom. One 
can see in Fig. 6 the trend of a phase variation due to CO 
adsorption onto the surface of a device functionalized with 
cobalt corroles. The experiments have been achieved at least 
three times to validate the results. We obtained the same 
trends with devices functionalized with porphyrines, with 
slightly different slopes. In every case, we confirm 
reversibility of the adsorption. We have monitored the 
respective phase shift velocity undergone by the Love wave, 
propagating within the guiding layer of the devices 
functionalized with each compounds, versus the CO 
concentration of the gas injected in the test cell and confirm 
a linear correlation (Figure 7, 8 and 9). 
 
 
Figure 6.  Phase variation due to CO adsorption onto the SAW device 
surface. 
 
Figure 7.  Graphic representation of the phase shift velocity obtained with 
porphyrine #5 versus CO concentration at atmospheric pressure. 
 
 
Figure 8. Graphic representation of the phase shift velocity obtained with 
cobalt corroles versus CO concentration at atmospheric pressure. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Graphic representation of the phase shift velocity obtained with 
porphyrine #6 versus CO concentration at atmospheric pressure. 
56
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

TABLE I.  
FUNCTIONALIZATIONS PERFORMANCES 
 
Functionalization type  
Porphyrine n°5 
Cobalt corroles 
Porphyrine n°6 
Detection 
threshold 
450 ppb 
900 ppb 
2ppm 
Corresponding 
phase 
shift 
velocity  
-0.04 UA/s a 
-0.05 UA/s a 
-0.05 UA/s a 
a. UA: Arbitrary Units 
 
Porphyrine #6 enables us to detect at least a CO 
concentration of about some ppm. With cobalt corroles, the 
detection threshold is situated below one ppm. We note that 
the porphyrine #5 provides a clear detection of a minimum 
of 450ppb CO concentration [Table I].  
We also note that the phase shift velocity induced by the 
injection of 900ppb with porphyrine #5 is about four times 
higher than with corroles. This reflects the highest 
sensitivity of porphyrine #5 with CO. 
Since porphyrine #5 induces phase shifts velocity four 
times larger than what we get with cobalt corroles we can 
conclude that this compound represents the preferred 
solution for CO detection at atmospheric pressure. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Blondeau-Patissier, M. Vanotti, J.M. Friedt, R. Paolesse, S. 
Ballandras, 
Detection 
of 
carbon 
monoxide 
with 
a  
metalloporphyrin film on quartz microbalalnce and Love 
wave device, Eurosensors, Linz, 2010  
[2] J. M. Barbe, G. Canard, S. Brandès, F. Jérome, G. Dubois, 
and R. Guilard, Metallocorolles as sensing components for 
gas sensors: remarkable affinity and selectivity of cobalt(III) 
corolles for CO vs. O2 et N2, Dalton, 2004, pp. 1208-1214. 
[3] R.Paolesse et al., Porphyrin Based Chemical Sensors, 
Encyclopedia of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology. H. Nalwa 
Ed. American Science Publishers, 2004, vol 9, pp. 21-43  
[4] J.B. Kim, A.A. Adler, and F.R. Longo, Synthesis of poprhyrin 
from monopyrroles, D. Dolphin (Ed.). The Porphyrins, vol. 1, 
Academic Press, New York, 1978, pp. 85–100.  
[5] R. Paolesse, C. Di Natale, A. Macagnano, F. Davide, T. 
Boschi, and A. D’Amico, Self-assembled monolayers of 
mercaptoporphyrins as sensing material for quartz crystal 
microbalance chemical sensors, Sens. Actuators B 47, 1998, 
pp. 70–76.  
[6] D. Rabus, J.M. Friedt, S. Ballandras, G. Martin, E. Carry, and 
V. Blondeau-Patissier, A High Sensitivity Open Loop 
Electronics for Gravimetric Acoustic Wave-Based Sensors, 
EFTF, 2010 
 
 
57
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

