A Formal Graph-Based Model Applied to Cluster Communication in Wireless 
Sensor Networks  
Laura M. Rodríguez Peralta, Eduardo Ismael 
Hernández 
Engineering Department,  
UPAEP University 
Puebla, México 
lauramargarita.rodriguez01@upaep.mx, 
eduardo.ismael@upaep.mx 
Lina M. P. L. Brito 
M-ITI (Madeira Interactive Technologies Institute) 
Exact Sciences and Engineering Competence Center, 
University of Madeira (UMa),  
Madeira, Portugal  
lina@uma.pt 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— In several application scenarios, like the case of 
structural monitoring, it is important to model and represent 
the Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) to be deployed. To model 
the components and properties of an entire WSN types of 
collaboration in WSNs, we have created the Collaborative 
Wireless Sensor Networks (CWSN) model. This model also 
models the different types of collaboration that occur in a 
WSN. Our main goal is to provide a theoretical mathematical 
foundation that can model and analyze WSNs. Our approach is 
based on graph theory and propositional logic. The main 
contribution of this paper is applying the CWSN model to 
describe and represent a WSN. The use of the CWSN model 
brings several advantages, such as enabling the graphical 
representation of the state of the network and of several 
important properties: i) the network topology; ii) the 
transmission 
between 
nodes 
considering 
a 
multi-hop 
communication; iii) the transmission hierarchy; iv) the 
evolution of the networks through a succession of graphs; and 
so on. 
Keywords: wireless sensor networks; cluster; graphs; 
comunication; classical proposition logic, network modeling. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
WSNs are a special case of wireless ad hoc networks, but 
characterized by specific constraints. Besides energy 
restrictions, sensor nodes suffer from other resource 
limitations: they have reduced memory and processing 
capabilities; and, due to short transmission range, nodes can 
only communicate locally, with a certain number of local 
neighbors [1] [2] [3] [4]. In many cases, these networks are 
subject to highly dynamic conditions, caused by nodes’ 
mobility, hardware failures, lack of battery, or other factors. 
To overcome these limitations, nodes have to collaborate in 
order to accomplish their tasks: sensing, signal processing, 
computing, routing, localization, security, etc. Therefore, 
WSNs are, by nature, collaborative networks [5].  
There are quite a few works in the literature concerning 
collaboration in WSNs; however, they only focus a specific 
type of collaboration, which is associated with the 
accomplishment of a specific task. In [6], we proposed a 
formal and hierarchical model of cooperative work, the 
Collaborative Wireless Sensor Networks (CWSN) model, 
which is designed specifically for WSNs. It allows not only 
the modeling of collaborative work (based in CSCW - 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work [7] - concepts), but 
also the modeling and visual representation of all the entities 
that can compose a WSN, as well as its properties. 
Moreover, CWSN is a generic model since it can be applied 
to heterogeneous networks. We have used first-order logic to 
formalize and describe the proposed model. We further 
employ graph-theory to describe how communication occurs 
within a cluster. This formal description of clusters’ 
communication is based on directed graphs; nodes are 
labeled with the signal +/-, respectively indicating if a node 
is active or not [6] .  
In this paper, we focus on using the graphical 
representation of the CSWN model to represent the state of 
the network and its properties. This graphical representation 
allows the user to comprehend what is occurring in a certain 
moment of the WSN lifetime, by easily visualizing the 
communication interactions, the state of the nodes (active or 
not), the state of the links, etc. This will allow enriching the 
proposed model and giving the user a better understanding of 
the components and the state of the WSN as well, through a 
more complete visual representation of the WSN. This is the 
main contribution of this paper. 
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we 
briefly describe the related work. In Section 3, the CWSN 
model and its entities are briefly presented. Then, a 
comparison between CWSN and other models is presented. 
The advantages of the model are, also, outlined. Section 4 
presents the SAVER project, an application example of our 
model. Section 5 provides some conclusions and future work 
perspectives.  
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
There are several works that try to model some aspects of 
WSNs. We have observed that the great majority of works 
focus on modeling of connectivity or mobility problems, or 
even on both problems. Moreover, we have identified other 
modeling concerns, such as: communication models, 
interference models, data aggregation models, coverage 
models, and signal processing models. On the contrary, the 
CWSN model intends to model a whole WSN, i.e., it tries to 
consider the most complete set possible of entities that can 
exist in a WSN, and their respective attributes. 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Regarding the works focusing collaboration in WSNs, 
the great majority of them covers a specific type of 
collaboration, which is associated with the accomplishment 
of a certain task, such as: signal processing [8], sensing [9], 
computing [10], routing [11], localization [12], security [13], 
task scheduling [14], heuristics [15], calibration [16], 
resource 
allocation 
[17], 
time 
synchronization 
[18], 
transmission [19], etc., and also works concerning 
collaboration between wireless sensor nodes and other kind 
of devices (heterogeneous groupware collaboration) [20], 
[21] to support some specific applications (for example, 
collaboration between sensor nodes and PDAs, in a fire 
fighting scenario).  
According to the literature, the only work that presents a 
model for collaborative work, in sensor networks, was 
proposed by Liu et al. [22]. It is the Sensor Networks 
Supported 
Cooperative 
Work 
(SNSCW) 
model, 
a 
hierarchical model that essentially divides cooperation in 
sensor networks in two layers; the first one relates to 
cooperation between humans and sensor nodes; the second 
one relates to cooperation between the sensor nodes. This 
model was designed for sensor networks.  
However, the SNSCW model only allows the modeling 
of collaboration itself. On the contrary, the CWSN model, 
which has been presented in [6], is a formal model that was 
created specifically to describe WSNs. However, the CWSN 
model allows not only the modeling of collaborative work 
(based in CSCW concepts), but also the modeling, 
formalization and visual representation of the entities that 
can constitute a WSN (different types of nodes, clusters, 
relationships, sessions, obstacles, etc.), as well as its 
attributes. Moreover, it allows the representation of the 
WSN’s hierarchy and of the network evolution. 
The CWSN model formalizes the most significant 
properties of each entity through first-order logic. Even 
though the CWSN model is a graph-based model, it includes 
other objects [6] in order to make the modeling of the 
various entities of a WSN possible. This is of paramount 
importance to completely represent a WSN. 
WSNs are extremely dynamic systems, both in the sense 
that their characteristics change over their lifetime and for 
the fact that sensor networks’ technology (hardware and 
software) is subject to fast changes. To overcome this issue, 
the CWSN model can be updated or extended, through the 
introduction of new entities and/or new attributes. Therefore, 
another key point of this model is its scalability, since it can 
easily evolve. 
III. 
THE CWSN MODEL  
The CWSN model is a formal model of collaborative 
work that was specifically created to describe WSNs. This 
model allows the representation of the entities (different 
types of nodes, clusters, relationships, sessions, obstacles, 
etc.) and properties of a WSN, of its hierarchy, and of the 
network evolution; therefore, it allows not only the 
modeling of collaborative work (based in CSCW concepts), 
but 
also 
the 
modeling, 
formalization 
and 
visual 
representation of a whole WSN.  
The CWSN model formalizes all the properties of each 
entity through first-order logic. Also, CWSN is a graph-
based model; however, it includes other objects in order to 
make possible the modeling and visual representation of all 
the entities that can compose a WSN. This is of paramount 
importance to completely represent a WSN. 
A. CWSN Model Definitions  
We define entities as all the components that might exist 
in a WSN. The symbol, the concept and the description of 
all the entities included in the proposed model are illustrated 
in Table I.  
A WSN can have different types of nodes: ordinary 
wireless sensor nodes, anchor nodes, one or more sink 
nodes (also known as base stations) and a gateway. The sink 
node and the anchor node are wireless sensor nodes with 
special functions. 
A cluster is a group of nodes, created according to: 
geographical area, type of sensor nodes, type of 
phenomenon, task to be performed, etc., providing the WSN 
with a hierarchical structure. If nodes are grouped in 
clusters, one of the members of each cluster becomes the 
cluster head (there is only one cluster head per cluster). In 
this case, all nodes in the cluster have to send collected data 
to the cluster head (for instance, the more powerful node or 
the router, in case of a ZigBee-based WSN), which, in turn, 
is responsible for sending data to a sink node. 
If two nodes collaborate, there is a relationship between 
them. Associated with a relationship there is always an 
exchange of data, which corresponds to the data flow entity. 
Collected data (temperature, humidity, light, etc.) can be 
sent to other nodes using one or more types of signals 
(radio, ultrasound, acoustical, etc.).  
Obstacles are objects (for, e.g., building, tree, rock, etc.) 
that may obstruct the line-of-sight between two or more 
nodes, not allowing for direct communication between 
them. So, they can influence the relationships created. 
The user is the entity who interacts with the WSN, 
defining the application, querying the network, visualizing 
data, customizing the work of the sensor nodes, etc. 
Several collaborative sessions can be established when 
monitoring a WSN, and they can exist simultaneously or 
not. Basically, new sessions may be established based on 
new queries a user makes on the WSN. 
And, last but not least, as the battery is the most critical 
resource of a sensor node, it is really important that the user 
knows the state of the battery of each sensor. That is why 
the battery is also an entity of our model.  
3.1 CWSN Model Formalization 
In this section, we formalize the model’s entities and 
their main properties, using both first-order logic and graph 
theory.  
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

1) Definitions: We can formulate the sensor network as a 
graph G(V,E). V (vertices) represents the set of sensor 
nodes, and E (edges) describes the adjacency relation 
between nodes. That is, for two nodes u, v ∈ V:  
(u, v)∈ E, if, and only if, v is adjacent to u. If a node u is 
within a node v’s transmission range, we say that u is 
adjacent to v, or equivalently, that u is a neighbor of v. In 
the absence of interference, this relation is typically 
symmetric (or bidirectional), i.e., if a node u can hear a node 
v, also v can hear u. 
An arrow between two nodes represents a relationship 
between them. A relationship can be established based on: 
localization, phenomenon, type of sensor node, etc. The 
arrow represents a producer-consumer relationship. Let us 
consider two nodes A and B; the arrow 
 means 
that node A transmits data to node B. So, node B consumes 
information from node A. The transmission of data between 
both nodes follows the format TypeOfSignal.Data (
), verifying the consumer-producer property.  
So, according to the specifications of the CWSN model, a 
WSN can be represented using labeled and directed graphs; 
the labels are associated to the edges and are designated by 
data flow. TypeOfSignal.Data identifies these labels. The 
labels inform the user about the type of signal that is being 
used by the sensor nodes for transmitting data (for, e.g., radio 
frequency, ultrasounds, acoustical, etc.), and about the type 
of data that is being collected and sent to the sink node (for, 
e.g., temperature, humidity, light, acceleration, etc.). These 
labels are important because they allow the user to become 
more aware of the state and the behavior of the WSN, since 
the labels add information that goes beyond the mere 
representation of the communication interactions between 
nodes.  
Let’s represent the total number of sensor nodes that 
constitute the WSN by Nr, with N = {1, 2, …, Nr} and a 
wireless sensor node by Ni, with i ∈ N. The WSN has a 
limited lifetime, which can vary from some hours to several 
months or years. Let us denote the lifetime of the network 
(in seconds) by LT, with T = {1, 2, …, LT}, and the jth 
second of life of the network by tj, with j ∈ T . 
2) Sensor Node (Ni): A sensor node (Ni) is defined by:  
Ni = {ID, TS, CM, CT, R, PS, L, TM, S, PD, 
CN} 
Table II defines and formalizes the properties that are 
important to identify a sensor node (Ni). This Table serves as 
an example for the type of formalization that has been 
proposed for the remaining entities, presenting a formal 
description of their most important properties [6].  
3) Sink Node (SK): The sink node is the node to which data 
collected by ordinary sensor nodes is sent. It is responsible 
for sending data to the gateway being the only node that can 
do it, what verifies the flow control property. Regarding 
mobility, two cases must be distinguished: the Stationary 
Sink Node (StSK), with the localization of the sink being 
well-known and independent of time; and the Mobile Sink 
Node (MbSK), where the localization of the sink node varies 
as it moves along the WSN.  . 
4) Anchor Node (A): If the localization (L) of wireless 
sensor nodes is unknown (usually, due to an ad hoc 
deployment), it may be necessary to have some anchor 
nodes to help these sensor nodes to determine their own 
localization. So, an anchor node differs from a sensor node 
because its localization is always well known. This can be 
achieved either by equipping the anchor node with a GPS 
receiver or by manually configuring its position prior to 
deployment. Regarding mobility, an anchor node (A) can 
be: 
§ 
Stationary (StA): In this case: TM (StA) = St 
§ 
Mobile (MbA). In this case: TM (MbA) = {ContMb, Des} or 
TM (MbA) = {OcMb, Des} 
5) Network (WSN): So, a WSN can be defined by the 
following properties:  
WSN = {To, M, H, Nr, A, C, D, Hi, NSK, NA, 
NC, NO, LT}.  
6) Session (Sei): A session is the essential unit of a 
collaborative activity, which can be created based on 
different queries posed by the user. Depending on the WSN 
specific application, sessions can take place in parallel or in 
sequence; or they can be synchronous or asynchronous. 
Thus, in a certain moment, there may be several 
collaborative sessions in a WSN. A session (Sei) can also be 
formulated as a subgraph, g, of the WSN, with g(V,E) ⊆ 
G(V, E). Accordingly, some properties of the entities 
network and the sensor node are inherited.. Similarly to a 
sensor node (Ni), a session (Sei) can be in one of two states: 
Active (Ac), or Inactive (In) when its objective is fulfilled. 
So: 
S(Sei) = Ac  or  S(Sei) = In. 
Besides, similarly to the entity network, each session can 
have a group of active sensor nodes, a group of inactive 
sensor nodes and a group of relationships and data flows. So, 
a session (Sei) is defined by the following properties:  
Sei = {SeiID, SeObj, S, DTx, SeTLife, To, M, H, 
A, C, D, Hi, Nr, NSK, NA, NC, NO}. 
Note that the topology (To) has the same definition as in 
Table II; however, considering a specific instant of time, the 
topology of the session (Sei) may be different from the 
topology of the WSN.  
Also, considering the number of nodes, number of anchor 
nodes, number of sink nodes, number of clusters and number 
of obstacles, note that:  
Nr (Sei) ≤ Nr (WSN), NA (Sei) ≤ NA (WSN), NSK 
(Sei) ≤ NSK (WSN), NC (Sei) ≤ NC (WSN), NO 
(Sei) ≤ NO (WSN), and SeTLife (WSN) ≤ SeTLife 
(Sei)
A
B
 
{TypeOfSignal.Data}
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE I.  
DEFINITION OF THE ENTITIES CAN CONSTITUTE A WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORK. 
Symbol 
Concept 
Description 
 
Sensor node 
Nodes can be either stationary or mobile. Also, they can be in one of three possible states: active, sleep mode (in 
order to save energy), or inactive. 
 
Sink node/ 
Base Station 
Node to which data collected by ordinary nodes is sent; being responsible to send data to the gateway. If there is only 
one sink node, all data collected by sensor nodes has to be sent to it. Otherwise, data may be sent to any sink node 
and, in this case, sink nodes must be able to communicate to each other 
 
Anchor node 
Node with known localization, which support the other sensor nodes in the localization process 
 
Cluster 
Group of nodes, created according to: geographical area, type of sensor, type of phenomenon, task, etc. 
 
Cluster Head 
Sensor node to whom all sensor nodes in the cluster send the collected data; it is responsible for sending the received 
data to the Sink node.  
 
Relationship 
The arrow represents a relationship between nodes A and B. It also represents and adjacency relation between nodes 
A and B; nodes A and B are neighbors. 
A relationship can be established based on: localization, phenomenon, type of sensor node, etc. 
 
Data flow 
This label identifies both the type of signal being used (radio frequency, ultrasound, acoustical or light) and the type 
of data being transmitted between nodes (temperature, humidity, light, sound, video, internal voltage, etc.).  
 
Gateway 
Device responsible to send the data to the user, through the Internet or satellite. 
 
Obstacle 
An object (building, tree, rock, etc.) which may obstruct the line-of-sight between two or more nodes; depending on 
the type of signal that is being used by nodes (radio frequency, optical, acoustical, etc.), the obstacles may even not 
allow for communication between nodes. 
 
Session 
In a certain moment, there may be several collaborative sessions in a WSN. A session can be established based on 
the objective (type of phenomenon to monitor, geographical area to monitor, etc.) of the WSN. 
 
Battery 
It represents the percentage of the sensor node’s remaining battery. 
 
User 
Person that interacts with the WSN, querying the network, visualizing data, etc. The user customizes the work of the 
sensor nodes; the data collected by sensor nodes is used by the users’ application. 
 
 
 
7) Cluster (C): If a clustering algorithm is applied [23], 
clusters will be formed. Sensor nodes are grouped into 
clusters, mainly to support scalability (for managing a high 
number of nodes). But, besides supporting scalability, 
clustering can have several different objectives, such as: 
load balancing, fault tolerance, network connectivity, 
maximal network longevity, etc. Each cluster has a leader, 
the cluster head (CH). So, a cluster (C) is defined by:  
C = {CID, CH, Stb, NrC, IaC-To, IeCH-Con, 
CMet}. 
Even though clustering is influenced by the network and 
link layer protocols, some attributes can be identified.  
8) Cluster Head (CH): The cluster head (CH) can be elected 
by the sensors in a cluster or pre-assigned by the network 
designer. Also, CHs may be the richest nodes in resources 
of the whole network. So, a cluster head (CH) is defined by 
[23]: 
CH = {CHID, TM, TN, Ro}. 
B. Main Properties Represented by the CWSN Model 
The CWSN enables the graphical representation of 
several 
important 
properties, 
like 
nodes’ 
mobility, 
connectivity and communication, network heterogeneity and 
stability, network coverage, consumer-producer and flow 
control, as well as the graphical representation of other 
important aspects, like, the occurrence of failures, the 
network topology, the established routing paths, or the 
communication modality used by nodes and the type of 
sensed data. However, some aspects like signal interference 
was not considered in the CWSN model. The representation 
of some of these network properties, like mobility of nodes 
or topology changes, is possible through the representation 
of the network evolution. In other words, the model 
represents a screenshot of a WSN in a specific moment of 
time. As time goes by, several aspects of a particular WSN 
can change: (i) the state of the nodes can change; (ii) new 
nodes can be deployed; (iii) the topology can suffer 
modifications; (iv) new clusters can be created; (v) new 
obstacles can appear; etc. In the CWSN model, these 
network changes are naturally represented through a 
succession of figures as exemplified in Figure 1,  
Figure 1 represents a modification in the topology of the 
network caused by the elimination of an obstacle. The 
obstacle was located between nodes N4 and N1, impeding 
direct communication between these two nodes. For some 
reason (the obstacle may be static, like a tree or building, or 
it may move, like an animal or a car), the obstacle 
A
CH
{TypeOfSignal.Data}
A
B
SK
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

disappeared. Consequently, connectivity and, therefore, 
communication was established between the referred nodes. 
Thus, the CWSN model also addresses the analysis of 
temporal information. This can be used as an input for 
creating a real-time tool that allows visualization and 
representation of a WSN, as we have demonstrated in [25], 
where the CWSN model was translated into XML language, 
which was used as an input for the tool. 
Figure 1.  Modelling a change in the network topology, applying the CWSN Model. 
C. Comparing the CWSN  Model With Other Models For 
WSNs  
Table III allows a quick overview of the main differences 
between the CWSN model and other models that have been 
applied to model these networks.  
The remaining state-of-the-art models mostly address the 
modelling of a single issue of WSNs, addressing up to two 
issues (like mobility and connectivity) in the most complete 
modelling cases. Contrarily to these models, instead of 
focusing on modelling some specific problem of WSNs, the 
CWSN model is used to systematically describe and 
represent the features and properties of all the components 
that might constitute a WSN. So far, no other model has 
covered so many aspects of a WSN as the CWSN model 
does. 
For example, unlike the SNSCW model [22], our model 
does not only model the cooperation within the network, but 
also the entire WSN. The CWSN model also allows the 
representation of the network hierarchy, from the collected 
data to the user (passing through the clusters, the session 
and the WSN). Moreover, the CWSN model is generic, in 
the sense that it can model heterogeneous networks and that 
it can be applied to any type of wireless sensors, (regardless 
its size, its hardware characteristics, the types of signals it 
can measure, etc.). It can also be applied to any WSN 
despite its specific application. So, it is possible to use all 
the entities defined in the model to represent a specific 
scenario of any application (monitoring a forest, a vineyard, 
a volcano, a museum, a natural catastrophe, etc.).  
Besides, any changes that might occur on a certain 
application scenario (new collaborative sessions, new 
clusters, nodes moving, etc.) can be represented by a 
sequence of figures; hence, the CWSN model allows the 
representation of each state of the network and its evolution. 
Regarding collaboration, the model includes some 
fundamental CSCW [7] concepts (for, e.g., session, 
relationship, data flow and groups) and properties (for, e.g., 
consumer-producer and flow control). Thus, analyzing 
Table III, it is possible to conclude that the CWSN model 
presents important advantages over the state-of-the-art 
models presented in section II. 
D. Contributions of the CWSN model 
WSNs are extremely dynamic systems, both in the sense 
that their characteristics change over their lifetime and for 
the fact that sensor networks’ technology (hardware and 
software) is subject to fast changes. To overcome this issue, 
the CWSN model can be updated or extended, through the 
introduction of new entities and/or new properties. 
Therefore, another key point of this model is scalability, 
since it can easily evolve. 
The CWSN model itself models the most important 
components of the WSN. As such, their advantages are: 
§ 
The CWSN model provides a grammar for formally 
modeling an entire WSN, i.e., all the entities that can 
exist in a WSN, and their respective attributes.  
§ 
It also allows to visually and graphically representing a 
whole WSN, including not only its entities, but a very 
important aspect to users and network managers, the 
network topology. Basically, the CWSN model 
provides a common framework for describing and 
representing any WSN.  
§ 
Moreover, the CWSN model allows representing the 
network hierarchy, from the collected data to the user, 
SK
{RF.(Te, Hu, Li, Iv)}
N1
{RF.(Te, Hu, Li, Iv)}
{RF.(Te, Hu, Li, Iv)}
N3
N2
N4
C1
N6
N5
SK
{RF.(Te, Hu, Li, Iv)}
N1
{RF.(Te, Hu, Li, Iv)}
{RF.(Te, Hu, Li, Iv)}
N3
N2
N4
N6
N5
C1
T1
T2
time
(…)
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

passing through the sensor nodes, the clusters, the 
sessions and, finally, the whole WSN. 
§ 
Besides, any changes that might occur on a certain 
application scenario (mobility of nodes, failure of 
nodes, topology changes, new collaborative sessions, 
new clusters, etc.) can be represented by a sequence of 
sub-graphs; hence, the CWSN model allows the 
representation of each state of the network and its 
evolution. 
§ 
Furthermore, the CWSN model is generic, since it can 
model heterogeneous networks; it can be applied to any 
type of wireless sensor nodes (regardless their size, 
their hardware characteristics, the types of signals they 
can measure, etc.), and to describe and represent any 
WSN, despite of its specific application. So, it is 
possible to use all the entities defined in the model to 
represent a specific network scenario of any application 
(monitoring a forest, a vineyard, a volcano, a museum, 
a natural catastrophe, etc.).  
IV. 
THE CWSN MODEL APPLIED TO STRUCTURAL 
HEALTH MONITORING 
The use of WSNs have brought several advantages in 
structural monitoring and the establishment of structural 
health compared to conventional methods where computers 
connected to accelerometers are used. In conventional 
methods, it is necessary to install cables through the 
structure, disturbing its normal operation and generating 
maintenance cost. Compared with conventional methods, 
WSNs provide the same functionality at a much lower price 
and a more flexible monitoring. Another problem is the high 
equipment and wiring installation and maintenance cost.  
The cost of a conventional system with a computer and a 
piezoelectric accelerometer is about USD 40000 per 
sampling point. The estimated cost of the proposed system, 
in this work is less than USD 200 per point. In WSNs no 
wiring is required, making installation and maintenance 
much easier and inexpensive. Moreover, the use of WSNs 
allows Structural Analysis of VulnerabilitiEs of buildings 
through wiReless sensor networks (SAVER) platform to be 
deployed and operate even if the building is in operation. It 
does not cause further visual impact due to its small size, 
low power consumption and installation flexibility. The 
advantage of structural health monitoring based on WSNs 
can be extended if the MEMS acceleration sensor type is 
used. The MEMS accelerometer is a silicon chip, which is 
very compact in size, low power consumption and cheap. 
Without MEMS, a small WSN, even low-power and low-
cost accelerometer, would be degraded. 
Thus, the SAVER platform will aim at gathering 
information to establish the vulnerability level of structural 
health of buildings. Such information will be used in 
decision making for both schemes and prevention programs, 
and for post-seismic evaluation. 
The SAVER platform will be able to monitor and 
display information in real-time. It will determine from the 
implementation of several methods for estimating seismic 
response and damage detection, the level of structural 
vulnerability of buildings. In addition, our platform will 
offer several services that will notify users about potential 
risks of the structure through alarms, email and SMS. 
Besides, it will have a Web based monitoring platform and a 
mobile app for Android and I-Phone. Also, this platform 
will 
generate 
graphs, 
reports 
and 
statistics. 
Some 
preliminary results of the SAVER project was publish in 
[26]. 
The expected results, in SAVER project, intend to give 
the basis for the analysis of buildings and gather instrumental 
data that can be useful for decision-making of institutions 
and users that are responsible for infrastructure and 
buildings. Furthermore, in this project, we pretend to provide 
the necessary information to implement methods of 
vulnerability analysis and therefore, to estimate the seismic 
risk of buildings, such as hospitals or schools.  
SAVER project will be validated in the building B 
(Figure 2) of UPAEP University, located in Puebla city in 
México. This building is structured based on reinforced 
concrete rigid frames. Furthermore, it is regular in plan and 
consists of four levels with a height of 3.15 m each one, so 
it has a total height of 12.60 m. In the transversal direction, 
it has a bay of 10.50 m. In the longitudinal direction, the 
building has eight bays of 6 m each one, so that it has a total 
length of 48 m. The structural elements are composed of 
beams and columns. The beams, in transversal direction, 
have square cross section at all levels. 
In the longitudinal direction at level 1 and 4, they have 
variable prismatic section, while in level 2 and 3 are 
rectangular. All columns in each level have variable 
hexagonal section. Floor system has 0.25 m thickness and is 
prefabricated. The building has masonry walls with 0.15 m 
thickness. This building was built in 1984. In recent studies, 
we have determined a high level of structural vulnerability. 
But, these studies were made using only three wired sensors. 
In order to obtain a better vulnerability estimation, we intend 
to instrument this building using the SAVER platform. The 
proposed topology for this building is shown in Figure 3.  
We are planning to install 12 sensor nodes. Each node 
has two sensors, a temperature sensor and an acceleration 
sensor. Using CWSN model, we can visualize the interaction 
among the sensors and their relationship. Figure 4 shows the 
WSN of the Building B. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE II.  
DEFINITION OF THE PROPERTIES OF THE ENTITY A SENSOR NODE (NI). 
 
Properties 
Description / Formalization 
Sensor Node (Ni) 
Identifier (ID) 
Each sensor node has a unique identifier (ID) 
ID (Ni) = i , i ∈ ℕ 
Types of sensors 
(TS) 
A sensor node (Ni) can have several types of sensors, each one measuring a different phenomenon: light (Li), temperature (Te), humidity (Hu), 
sound (Sd), internal voltage (Iv), acceleration (Ac), pressure (Pr), vibration (Vb), received signal strength indicator (RSSI), etc. 
So, TS (Ni) ⊆ {Li, Te, Hu, Sd, Iv, Ac, Pr, Vb, RSSI, ...} 
Communication 
modality (CM) 
A number of communication modalities can be used, such as: radio (RF), light (Li), ultrasound (US), acoustical (Ac), optical (Opt), hybrid 
(Hy). 
So, CM (Ni) ⊆ {RF, Li, US, Ac, Opt, Hy} 
Communication 
Technology (CT) 
A sensor node (Ni) can use different communication technologies. So far, three technologies have been proposed: ZigBee (ZB), which 
corresponds to IEEE 802.15.4; Bluetooth (BT); IEEE 802.11 (Wi-Fi). 
So, CT (Ni) ⊆ {ZB, BT, Wi-Fi} 
Transmission 
Range (R) 
Let Pt be the nominal transmission power of a node. PR;j  i is the received power of a signal propagated from node i to node j. A received 
power PR;j  i above a given threshold Pth will provide sufficient SNR (Signal to Noise Ratio) in the receiver to decode the transmission.  
The nominal transmission range for successful communication can be defined as [19]: R = Pt/Pth 
Note that due to the instability in the transmission range, the area a wireless sensor node can reach is not necessarily a circle and the range can 
vary between r=(1-ε).R and R, ε>0 [19]. 
Power Supply (PS) 
Energy can be supplied by batteries (that are, usually, of very limited capacity), solar cells or an external and unlimited power supply (only 
possible if nodes are stationary and in indoor applications).  
§ 
Battery (B); 
§ 
Solar cells (SC); 
§ 
External and unlimited power supply (VDC); 
§ 
Hybrid (Hy) – for, e.g., battery and solar cells; 
§ 
Etc. 
PS (StSK) ⊆ {B, SC, VDC, Hy, etc.} 
However, the great majority of sensor nodes are equipped with batteries. The lifetime of a sensor node (Ni) is limited by its battery, depending 
on its capacity and type. The battery can be defined by: 
§ 
Type of battery: TB, with TB (Ni) ∈ {lithium, alkaline, li-ion, AA, external power supply, solar cells, electromagnetic and piezoelectric 
transducers, etc.} 
§ 
Capacity (voltage): CB (Ni) [V] 
§ 
Remaining capacity at time tj: PBNi (tj) [%] 
BNi (tj) = {TB (Ni), CB (Ni), PBNi (tj)}  
Localization (L) 
Let LNi (tj), with i ∈ N and j ∈ T , denote the location of node Ni at time tj.  
The type of deployment affects important properties of the network (node density, node locations, etc.). The deployment of sensor nodes may 
be: 
§ 
Random (ad hoc deployment, for, e.g. dropped by an aircraft). In this case, the localization of a node is unknown:  
LNi (tj) = (x, y, z), where x, y, z ∈ ℝ are unknown. 
§ 
Manual: sensor nodes are deployed in pre-determined positions. In this case, the localization of a node is well-known:  
LNi (tj) = (a, b, c), where a, b, c ∈ ℝ are known. 
Product 
Description (PD) 
Alphanumeric that identifies the brand and the model of the sensor node. 
PD (Ni) = {Brand (Ni), Model (Ni)} 
Consumer 
Node 
(CN) 
Often referred to as parent node, is the node to which the sensor node Ni is sending data at time tj. Considering for example a relationship 
between nodes A and B; if node A is transmitting to node B, then B is the consumer node since it is receiving the data.  
Type of Mobility 
(TM) 
A sensor node (Ni) can be: 
§ 
Stationary (St): LNi (t1) = LNi (t2) = … = LNi (tLT) 
§ 
Mobile (Mb): The period of mobility can be occasional or continuous: 
Occasional (Oc), when long periods of immobility occur: 
∃ j, l ∈ T : LNi (tj)  ≠ LNi (tl), and j ≠ l   ∧  ∃ r, s ∈ T : LNi (r)  = LNi (r+1) = … = LNi (s), and s >> r 
Continuous (Cont): ∀ j∈ T  \ {LT} LNi (tj+1)  ≠ LNi (tj) 
Mobility can still be classified in: 
§ 
Incidental (Inc), for, e.g., due to environmental influences ≈ Occasional 
§ 
Desired (Des), whether active or passive, which can be applied to any period of mobility (occasional or continuous). 
So, TM (Ni) ∈ {St, {OcMb, Inc}, {OcMb, Des}, {ContMb, Inc}, {ContMb, Des}} 
State (S) 
Depending on its power mode, the node Ni can be in one of two states (S): 
 Active (Ac): Node that is in the active state. Its color will depend on the cluster it belongs to, since each cluster will be represented by a 
different color. By default, the green color will be used. 
 
 Sleep Mode (Sm): Node that is in the sleep mode, in order to save energy. Colored in grey color. 
 
 Inactive (In): Node that is damaged, or has some failure or has run out of energy. Colored in black color. 
So, S (Ni) ∈ {Ac, Sm, In} 
 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE III.  
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE MODELS CREATED FOR WSNS.
Model 
Modelling issues 
Graph-
based 
CSCW 
concepts 
Collabor
ation 
levels 
Graphical 
representation 
of the WSN 
Formal 
model 
Kenniche and 
Ravelomananana 
(2010) 
Topology 
YES 
NO 
NO 
YES 
(topology) 
NO 
SNSCW  
(Liu et al., 2006b) 
Cooperation 
NO 
YES 
YES 
(two) 
NO 
YES 
Wang (2011) 
Coverage 
no 
no 
no 
no 
Deployment 
and topology 
control 
Bonaci et al. 
(2010) 
Behaviour of the 
WSN under attack 
yes 
no 
no 
no 
Network 
security 
Wu and Chung 
(2009) 
Sensing and 
Coverage 
no 
no 
no 
no 
Deployment 
and topology 
control 
Ni et al. (2009) 
Sensor faults 
no 
no 
no 
no 
Fault detection 
Wüchner et al. 
(2010) 
Performance 
no 
no 
no 
no 
Evaluation of 
performance 
and energy 
efficiency 
CWSN  
The whole WSN 
and 
collaboration 
hierarchy 
YES 
YES 
YES 
(five) 
YES 
(whole WSN) 
YES 
 
The spatial distribution of the sensors is established from 
the geometry of each building. But it is necessary to deploy 
each sensor at least one in the geometric center of each level, 
and one sensor on the corner of the roof. If the longitudinal 
dimension of the building is large, it is suggested deploy 
some sensors in one border of the building. It is important to 
monitor also the ground response using a free field sensor. 
 
Figure 2.  Building B of the UPAEP University 
Figure 5 shows the WSN deployed in Building B, but 
represented using the entities proposed by the CWSN model. 
Basically, this representation clearly shows that only one 
session is established, but more importantly, it shows the 
structure of the WSN and the interactions that will take place 
between the different types of nodes that compose it. For 
instance, it shows that nodes are grouped in two clusters. 
Using the CWSN model, it becomes evident the type of 
data collected by each node. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Topology of the WSN installed in the Building B 
The problem to establish the structural health on 
buildings will be reduced if we use the CWSN model. The 
model can provide a tool for getting instrumental 
information about the structural properties, like acceleration 
on each storey as well as some structural dynamic 
parameters. If we use a sensor that can measure the 
acceleration (Ac) at each storey and considering that each 
sensor can provide the record of (Ac), in three orthogonal 
directions, respect to the building (longitudinal, transversal 
and vertical), the CWSN model can be implemented in order 
to estimate the structural vulnerability level. For this reason, 
we need to compute first the lateral displacement and then 
the structural damage parameter ψ, which is defined as the 
inter-storey drift. Lateral displacement can be estimated if 
we use a procedure that involves two integration steps of 
each acceleration record for longitudinal and transversal 
directions. In this implementation we can define the specific 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

properties for each Sensor Node (Ni), for example, we can 
use three Types of sensors (TS): Ac, Te and lv; 
Communication modality (CM) can be defined as radio; for 
the Communication Technology (CT) we can be use ZigBee 
(ZB); the Power Supply (PS) can be a Hybrid type (Hy); the 
Localization (L) can be defined as Manual.  
In order to show the advantages of the SAVER platform, 
we present a structural vulnerability function for building B 
(Figure 4). The vulnerability function describes the damage 
level d(ψ) in terms of inter-storey drift (ψ). The values of 
damage are from 0 to 1. A damage equals to 0 indicates fully 
health condition and damage equals to 1.0 indicates collapse 
of the building. The vulnerability function was estimated 
using only one accelerometer located in three different points 
on the building. We recorded three acceleration records 
(ambient vibration), but these records were in three different 
intervals of time. This is a big limitation that can be covered 
by the SAVER platform, because the acceleration records 
must be at the same interval of time. The CWSN model can 
represent this easely, since it defines the evolution of the 
network, which can be represented through a succession of 
graphs.  
 
Figure 4.  Typical vulnerability function to establish the strructural health 
condition on Building B 
The modelling and representation of the deployed WSN 
using the CWSN model can bring several advantages from 
the user and network manager’s points of view. The main 
contribution of the CWSN model is to standardize ways to 
model a WSN and provide a unified view of such a network 
regardless of what aspects are considered. Moreover, it 
allows the user and the network manager to become more 
aware of the composition and state of the whole network. 
That is, the CWSN model allows for visually representing 
several details about the WSN that has been deployed, what 
provides them with a more intuitive and prompt 
understanding of the WSN.  
 
Figure 5.  Modeling Building B’s WSN 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The CWSN model also defines the evolution of the 
network, which can be represented through a succession of 
graphs.  
In this paper, we presented the CWSN model, which is 
based on the CSCW methodology and specifically designed 
for WSNs. The great advantage of using this model to 
represent WSNs is that, besides modeling collaboration, it 
can also model the entire WSN. Also, this model allows for 
the representation of each state of the network and its 
evolution. Moreover, the CWSN model is generic, in the 
sense that it can be applied to heterogeneous WSNs, and 
scalable, as it can be updated if any modifications need to be 
introduced. The CWSN model was formalized in first-order 
logic. This attribution allows knowing which edges are 
active and which are not. In other words, we are able to 
identify which nodes are transmitting information. If some 
failure occurs on the process of transmission, our approach 
allows identifying this situation. 
We consider that some advantages of the CWSN model 
arise from the fact of being formal and based on graphs.  
The attributes defined for each entity of the CWSN model 
cover several dimensions. Thus, this model can be used as a 
framework for developing more generic software solutions 
for WSNs. Given the fact of being a broad and generic 
model, also confers the CWSN model with the ability of 
being applied to describe any WSN regardless of its 
application scenario. 
We also believe that this model can assist network designers 
in making better decisions regarding the organization and 
management of the network. This contribution becomes 
more significant given that the CWSN model was used as a 
basis to implement an awareness tool and a sessions’ 
managing tool for WSNs, which will be described in the 
next chapter.  
Internet
Online 
monitoring
C1
C2
	  
SK
{Ac.Te, Iv}
N2
N10
N9
N3
N7
{Ac.Te, Iv}
{Ac.Te, Iv}
{Ac.Te, Iv}
{Ac.Te, Iv}
{Ac.Te, Iv}
{Ac.Te, Iv}
{Ac, Te, Iv}
N4
N5
{Ac.Te, Iv}
{Ac.Te, Iv}
N11
{Ac.Te, Iv}
CH2
CH1
N1
{Ac.Te, Iv}
N6
{Ac.Te, Iv}
N8
{Ac.Te, Iv}
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Moreover, the CWSN model can be used to automatically 
generate some graphs of the WSN that will allow for 
identifying routing paths, detecting damaged/failed nodes or 
links, etc. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] I., Su, W. Akyildiz, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, 
“Wireless sensors networks: a survey”, Computer Networks,, 
38, 2002, pp. 393-422,.  
[2] L. Brito  and L. M. Rodríguez Peralta, "Wireless Sensor 
Networks: Basic Concepts", in Encyclopedia of Networked 
and Virtual Organizations, Idea Groups, vol. I, 2008, pp. 57-
64, ISBN: 978-1-59904-885-7,.  
[3] S. Tilak, N. Abu-Ghazaleh, and W. Heinzelman, “A 
taxonomy of wireless micro-sensors network models”, Mobile 
Computing and Communication Review, vol. 6, no. 2, April 
2002, pp. 28-36. 
[4] M. Tubaishat and S. Madria, “Sensor Networks: an 
Overview”, IEEE Potentials, May 2003, vol. 22, n. 2, pp. 20-
23. 
[5] K. Römer and F. Mattern, “The Design Space of Wireless 
Sensor Networks”, IEEE Wireless Communications. 11, 6, 
December 2004 , pp. 54-61. 
[6] L. Brito and L. M. Rodríguez Peralta, “A Collaborative 
Model for Wireless Sensor Networks Applied to Museums’ 
Environmental Monitoring”, Proc. of the 5th International 
Conference on Cooperative Design, Visualization and 
Engineering (CDVE’2008), 5220/2008, Mallorca, Spain,, 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer Verlag, 
September 2008, pp. 107-116. 
[7] K. 
Mills, 
“Computer-Supported 
Cooperative 
Work 
Challenges”, Encyclopedia of Library and Information 
Science, 2003. 
[8] P. Ramanathan, K. Saluja and Y. Hu, “Collaborative Sensor 
Signal Processing for Target Detection, Localization and 
Tracking”, 23rd Army Science Conference. Orlando, USA 
2002. 
[9] K. C. Wang and P. Ramanathan, “Collaborative Sensing 
Using Sensors of Uncoordinated Mobility”, Int. Conference 
on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems, LNCS, vol. 
3560, Springer, Marina del Rey, USA (2005), pp. 293—306. 
[10] L. Iftode, C. Borcea and P. Kang, “Cooperative Computing in 
Sensor Networks”, Handbook of Sensor Networks: Compact 
Wireless and Wired Sensing Systems. Mohammad Ilyas (ed.), 
CRC Press, 2004. 
[11] G. Chen, T. D. Guo, W. G. Yang and T. Zhao, “An improved 
ant-based routing protocol in Wireless Sensor Networks”,  Int. 
Conference on 
Collaborative 
Computing: 
Networking, 
Applications and Worksharing (CollaborateCom 2006), 
Atlanta, USA, 2006, pp. 1—7. 
[12] D. Dardari, and A. Conti, “A Sub-Optimal Hierarchical 
Maximum 
Likelihood 
Algorithm 
for 
Collaborative 
Localization in Ad-Hoc Networks”,  IEEE Communications 
Society Conference on Sensor and Ad Hoc Communications 
and Networks (SECON 2004), Santa Clara, USA 2004, pp. 
425—429.. 
[13] A. Chadha, Y. Liu, and S. Das, “Group Key Distribution via 
Local Collaboration in Wireless Sensor Networks”, IEEE 
Communications Society Conference on Sensor and Ad Hoc 
Communications and Networks (SECON 2005), Santa Clara, 
USA, 2005, pp. 46—54. 
[14] H. Sanli, R. Poornachandran and H. Cam, “Collaborative 
Two-Level Task Scheduling for Wireless Sensor Nodes with 
Multiple Sensing Units”, IEEE Communications Society 
Conference on Sensor and Ad Hoc Communications and 
Networks (SECON 2005), Santa Clara, USA, 2005, pp. 350- 
361. 
[15] R. Reghelin, and A. Fröhlich, “A Decentralized Location 
System for Sensor Networks Using Cooperative Calibration 
and Heuristics”, 9th ACM Int. Symposium on Modeling 
Analysis and Simulation of Wireless and Mobile Systems 
(MSWiM’06), Torremolinos, Spain, 2006, pp. 139-146. 
[16] V. Bychkovskiy, S. Megerian, D. Estrin and M. Potkonjak, 
“A Collaborative Approach to In-Place Sensor Calibration”, 
2nd Int. Workshop on Information Processing in Sensor 
Networks (IPSN’03), Palo Alto, USA, 2003, pp. 301—316. 
[17] S. Giannecchini, M. Caccamo, and  C. S. Shih, “Collaborative 
resource allocation in wireless sensor networks”, 16th 
Euromicro Conference on Real-Time Systems (ECRTS’04), 
Catania, Italy, 2004,  pp. 35—44. 
[18] A. Hu and S. Servetto, “Algorithmic Aspects of the Time 
Synchronization Problem in Large-Scale Sensor Networks”, 
Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 10, Springer Science 
+ Business Media Inc., 2005, pp. 491--503. 
[19] A. Krohn, M. Beigl, C. Decker, T. Riedel, T. Zimmer and D. 
Varona, “Increasing Connectivity in Wireless Sensor Network 
using Cooperative Transmission”, 3rd Int. Conference on 
Networked Sensing Systems (INSS). Chicago, USA, 2006. 
[20] L. Cheng, T. Lian, Y. Zhang and  Q. Ye, “Monitoring 
Wireless Sensor Networks by Heterogeneous Collaborative 
Groupware”. Sensors for Industry Conference (Sicon/04). 
New Orleans, USA, 2004. 
[21] Z. Chaczko, F. Ahmad, and V. Mahadevan, “Wireless Sensors 
in Network Based Collaborative Environments”,  6th Int. 
Conference on Information Technology Based Higher 
Education and Training (ITHET 2005), 2005, pp. F3A-7- 
F3A-13. 
[22] L. Liu, H. Ma, D. Tao and D. Zhang, “A Hierarchical 
Cooperation 
Model 
for 
Sensor 
Networks 
Supported 
Cooperative Work”, 10th Int. Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD’06), 2006, 
pp. 1-6.  
[23] B. Krishnamachari, D. Estrin, and S. Wicker, “The impact of 
Data Aggregation in Wireless Sensor Networks”, Proceedings 
of IEEE 22nd Int. Conf. on Distributed Computing Systems 
Workshops, 2002, pp. 575-578. 
[24] S. Hussain, U. Farooq, K. Zia, and M. Akhlaq, “An Extended 
Topology for Zone-Based Location Aware Dynamic Sensor 
Networks”, 
Proc. 
National 
Conference 
on 
Emerging 
Technologies (NCET), Szabist Karachi, Pakistan, Dec. 2004. 
[25] L. M. Rodríguez Peralta, L. M. P. Leão Brito, Teixeira Gouveia B.A., 
Sousa D.J.G., and Alves C.S., “Automatic monitoring and control of 
museums’ environment based on Wireless Sensor Networks”, 
Electronic Journal of Structural Engineering (EJSE), Special Issue: 
Wireless Sensor Networks and Practical Applications, 2010, pp. 12 – 
34, ISSN 1443-9255. 
[26] L. M. Rodríguez Peralta E. Ismael Hernández, S. A. Cardeña 
Moreno, D. Martínez Jiménez, and A. E. Muñoz Guarneros, 
“Towards to a platform of monitoring based in WSN to 
estimate the structural health of buildings”, Second European 
Conference on Earthquake Engineering and Seismology 
(2ECEES), Istanbul, Turkey, August, 2014, pp. 24-29. 
 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

