A Portable Intelligent Bladder Irrigation Device for Long-Term Care Management
Center Patients
Ming-Huang Chen, Ming-Chien Hung and Chen-Hsun Weng
Medical Device Innovation Center
National Cheng Kung University
Tainan, Taiwn
email: dearthund1@yahoo.com.tw, 9999lv@gmail.com, B88501113@gmail.com
Abstract—Urinary tract infection (UTI) is the most common
nosocomial infection in many hospitals, accounting for 30% to
40% of all nosocomial infections. About 90% of them are
related to long-term indwelling catheters, such as long-term
care
patients,
diabetics,
pregnant
women,
patients
with
Parkinson's disease, cortical stroke, brain tumors. Bacterial
invasion of the human urinary system caused by inflammation
of the bladder causes the bladder cells to induce cytokine
secretion, including IL-1α、β、TNF-α, IL-6, IL-8 and IL-
10, resulting in leukocyte aggregation, bleeding, and edema.
This condition can lead to chronic nephritis, and severe cases
can develop sepsis and even death. In this study, we developed
a portable intelligent irrigation device based on activated
carbon to assist the long-term use of urinary catheters in
patients. Its principle works mainly through the activated
carbon itself. The developed device has a large specific surface
area and adsorption properties and can inhibit bacterial
growth, while the adsorption of bacteria produced by internal
and external toxins can slow down the pathogenicity of
bacteria in organisms.
Keywords-bladder irrigation; urinary tract infection; activated
carbon.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Bladder irrigation is a procedure in which sterile fluid is
used to prevent clot retention/ infection by continuously
irrigating
the
bladder
via
a
catheter.
Irrigation
fluid
management requires timely application of the right amount
of detergent solutions. Competition for solutions, limited
liquid resources and concerns for patients are making good
irrigation management a challenge. In the world, Urinary
Tract Infection (UTI) is the most common nosocomial
infection in many hospitals [1][2]. Therefore, irrigation is a
priority. However, poorly designed and planned irrigation
management procedures and practices undermine the efforts
to improve patients health and exposes people and the
environment to risks. Many hospitals could benefit from
having a proper irrigation schedule in place.
Just the right amount of irrigation needs to be determined.
Too little irrigation can cause UTI; on the other hand,
irrigation that is done too frequently can cause damage of the
mucous membrane. There are many types of irrigation
systems available on the market. The most common type is
Continuous
Bladder
Irrigation
(CBI)
and
it
is
a
supplementary approach for irrigation management after
surgery in order to prevent clot retention, cystospasm, and
hemorrhage postoperatively. Although CBI is widely used to
prevent clot retention and infection, it is not easy for nurses
to transport the CBI device and bring it to each patient.
Nurses are responsible for ensuring a continuous flow of
prescribed solution during the whole procedure. Thus, it is
imperative to assess the blocked catheter by checking the
color of the drainage bag and controlling the flow rate.
Currently, the flow rate of irrigation fluid is controlled
manually by a nurse according to the color of drainage fluid.
In this study, digital controllers using microcontrollers and
analog controllers will be developed. These controllers are
based on the measurement of the bladder tension. There are
many types of sensors on the market that can be used to
measure the tension, such as [3]. Some of these sensors are
based on the resistance principle and some are based on the
capacitance
principle.
Complementary
Metal
Oxide
Semiconductor (CMOS) technology [3] is one of such
technologies, which benefited from the communication and
computing technologies. It should be pointed out that
medical devices may themselves not require the sub-micron
scaling of the CMOS technologies, but such developments,
which generally serve in the first place for research purposes,
can easily be translated into a medical device application.
Further, claims of the field are shaped by biological media as
novel resources. In this study, the integration of CMOS
devices with various emerging sensing elements, utilizing
techniques, such as surface activation by chemical means is
quite promising in the field of research involving the
development of CMOS-based sensors for bladder irrigation
devices. The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In
Section II, we present the materials and fabrication method.
In Section III, we show the results and discussion. Finally,
we conclude in Section IV.
II.
MATERIALS AND FABRICATION METHODS
Bladder irrigation is one of the most effective measures
to prevent urinary tract infection in patients with long-term
indwelling catheter [4]. The operation of traditional artificial
bladder
irrigation
is
complicated
and
needs
constant
monitoring. Based on traditional artificial bladder irrigation
technology, a kind of intelligent bladder irrigator and its
control system are designed. The control system includes
Programmable Logic Controller (PLC) and touch screen. By
using a weighing sensor to monitor the weight of the
infusion bag in real time, the irrigator control pinch valve
can switch the infusion tube automatically. Bladder irrigation
can be carried out automatically by using this intelligent
bladder irrigator.
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

In order to assure a clean environment and to minimize
the possible influence of environmental conditions in the
experiments,
a
measurement
cell
was
designed
and
fabricated. The use of this microfluidic chamber minimizes
both the sample volume and the amount of reagents needed
for detection, reducing thus the cost of the assay.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The portable intelligent bladder irrigation device is the
main part of the electronic system and its duty is to apply an
electrical voltage and convert the electrochemical signal
between the electrodes into an analog input. Figure 1 shows
the device contains an analog digital converter ADS1256
from Texas Instruments (ADC), which turns the signal and
sends it to the microcontroller composed of a FreeScale
MC56F8037
commercial
card
(DSP,
Digital
Signal
Processor). Finally, the data is sent to the control software
by means of a USB connection.
Figure 1. The electronic system
In order to integrate the intelligent bladder irrigation
device with electrical connection pads, we have realized an
integration scheme, in which the microchip is squeezed
between a custom PolyMethylMethAcrylate (PMMA) fluidic
adapter and a Printed Circuit Board (PCB), as shown in
Figure 2. The electrical connections were realized between
the electrical pads of the fabricated chip and the PCB, in
which the conductive layers are oriented vertically in the
thickness direction, making contact from top to bottom.
These connectors prevent the use of fragile bond wires that
may compromise fluidic integration, as well as the larger
footprints that are required when using spring loaded
connectors. Moreover, using the given integration scheme,
the device replacement can easily be done within a minute.
For men or women, a bladder irrigation device measures
the Escherichia Coli in the bladder, urethra, and abdomen. A
catheter in the bladder fills the bladder with fluid and
measures Escherichia Coli in urine. Another catheter, placed
in the vagina for women or the rectum for men, reflects the
Escherichia Coli in the abdomen. A bladder irrigation device
can reveal detrusor over activity, stress incontinence from
sphincter weakness, or weak pelvic floor muscles. Figure 3
shows the number of E.Coli could be reduced by the bladder
irrigation device.
Key protection cover
Protective shell(front)
Tactile Switches
Printed circuit board
Suction Pump
Fixed frame
Protective shell (back)
battery
Figure 2. The bladder irrigation device
Sample reading
time
Figure 3. The bladder irrigation device measures the Escherichia coli in the
bladder
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this work, we have demonstrated an intelligent
bladder irrigation device and a CMOS sensor to detect E.
Coli in an artificial urinary bladder. It was capable of
performing
detection
in
an
automated
fashion
while
consuming fewer volumes of reagents using activated
carbon.
REFERENCES
[1] J. A. Buitrago, S. C. Transplant, B. D.a Cruz, R. B., J. M.
Estrella, Managing hemorrhagic cystitis in BMT patients using
continuous bladder irrigation. Biol. Blood Marrow Transplant.
vol.19, 2, pp.S357, 2013.
[2] V. T. Raup, A. M. Potretzke, B. J. Manley, J. A. Brockman, S.
B. Bhayani, Hemorrhagic cystitis requiring bladder irrigation is
associated with poor mortality in hospitalized stem cell transplant
patients. Int. Braz. J. Urol. Off., no. 41, pp.1126–1131, 2015.
[3] M. N. Dakurah, C. Koo, W. Choi, and Y. H. Joung,
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Implantable Bladder Sensors: A Methodological Review. Int
Neurourol J. vol. 19, 3, pp. 133–141, 2015.
[4] J. Luo, Q. Zeng, J. Xiao, L. Huang, Recognition of drainage
fluid color of continuous bladder irrigation for doctors and nurses
of urological department. J. Nur. (China), vol.8, pp.18–20, 2010.
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

