Temperature Monitoring in Tissue Phantoms via Spatially Resolved Measurement of
Longitudinal Wave Speed
Mario Wolf, Lukas Timmermann, Andr´e Juhrig,
Katharina Rath, and Elfgard K¨uhnicke
Solid State Electronics Laboratories
Technical University of Dresden
Dresden, Germany
Email: mario.wolf@tu-dresden.de
Felix Krujatz
Institute of Natural Materials Technology
Technical University of Dresden
Dresden, Germany
Email: felix.krujatz@tu-dresden.de
Abstract—To optimize hyperthermia in cancer therapy, a mon-
itoring of temperature in the tumor and in the surrounding
tissue is necessary during the therapy. As the use of Computer
Tomography (CT) or Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is
hardly possible during the operation, ultrasonic measurements
serve as a very good alternative. This contribution introduces a
method to measure the longitudinal wave speed spatially resolved
by analyzing the reﬂected ultrasonic signals from small scatterers
in a tissue phantom without needing any large reﬂectors at known
positions. The measurements are done with pre-focused annular-
arrays and the recorded signals are focused synthetically. This
allows to determine the resulting signal amplitude in a ﬁxed
time window as a function of the assumed longitudinal wave
speed used for focusing. The amplitude becomes maximal if the
assumed sound velocity is equal to the actual one. Sliding the
analysis window through the whole signal allows to determine the
mean longitudinal wave speed for each depth. As the longitudinal
wave speed depends on temperature, this gives the temperature
distribution along the acoustic axis of the transducer. To qualify
the technique, measurements are done on a tissue phantom
for constant sound velocity. The capabilities of the method are
demonstrated by monitoring the temperature distribution during
local heating of a tisuue phantom. Additionally, the reachable
accuracy, as well as reachable temporal and local resolution are
discussed.
Keywords–Ultrasound; Temperature Monitoring; Annular Ar-
rays; Tissue phantoms.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Hyperthermia for cancer therapy is a promising alternative
to the widely spread radio- or chemotherapy [1]. It works
by thermal destruction of the tumour, e.g., by High Intensity
Focussed Ultrasound (HIFU) or radio frequency ablation. A
minimal temperature of 45 ◦C to 63 ◦C (according to literature
[2][3]) is necessary for a successful therapy. Whereas the
temperature in the surrounding tissue should be as low as
possible to avoid tissue injury. Especially if there are vessels
near the tumour they cause a heat transport resulting in
a too low temperature in the tumour and a possible heat
accumulation in other tissue. Due to these complications, a
temperature monitoring during the hyperthermia surgery is
needed. Although imaging techniques like CT or MRI can be
used to determine a temperature distribution, they are hardly
applicable during the surgery. So, ultrasound is the preferred
method.
The classical approach to monitor temperature changes
evaluates the displacement of scatterers in the tissue caused
by thermal expansion [4]. This approach has some signiﬁcant
drawbacks: First, the sound velocity increases with temper-
ature, which reduces the time of ﬂight of the echo of one
reﬂector. In opposite, the thermal expansion increases the
distance and thereby the time of ﬂight. This reduces the
sensitivity and in worst case, there is no change in time
of ﬂight with a change in temperature. Second, the thermal
expansion coefﬁcient is unknown and there is a large variation
not only between different types of tissue but also individual.
This results in a temperature distribution localised at a wrong
position.
This contribution indroduces an approach to monitor the
temperature distribution within a tissue phantom. Evaluating
the backscattered echoes gained with an annular array, allows a
synthetic focussing to determine the longitudinal wave velocity
within the phantom locally resolved. As this sound velocity is
a function of temperature, the temperature distribution can be
determined from the sound velocity proﬁle.
Note that in this contribution sound velocity always means
the longitudinal wave speed. Effects of denaturation, which
also change the longitudinal wave speed are neglected and
will be the objective of future work. Section II describes the
used experimental set-up, Section III explains the developed
measuring technique and Section IV gives the results of the
experiments. Finally, Section V concludes the paper and gives
perspectives for future work.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP
Preliminary examination had been necessary to develop a
tissue phantom with acoustic properties similar to tissue, which
models the scattering of tissue and which also changes its prop-
erties with increasing temperature, when denaturation occurs in
tissue. To develop the measuring technique material with stable
and reproducible properties had been required, so that using
real tissue was not possible. As bulk material we selected a gel
of 5%-polyacrylamide, consisting of 26.9% acrylamide, 1.4%
bisacrylamide, 71.7% water or egg-white as well as ammonium
persulphate and N, N, N ′, N ′-Tetramethylethylendiamine to
start polymerisation. As scattering particles we use Chlorella
Vulgaris, a robust monocellular green algae, which can be
cultivated easily. The resulting gel-phantom is placed in a
water basin where it can be heated and where the ultrasonic
measurements can be performed. Figure 1 shows a Cross
section of algae in the gel, obtained with an optical microscope.
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 2 shows the basic set-up with the gel (left) in a
water basin and the ultrasound annular array (right). For data
acquisition, a measuring board with 8 channels, a sampling
rate of 125 MS/s and a samplesize of 14 bit is used.
Figure 1. Cross section of the algae in the polyacrylamide-gel, obtained with
a optical microscope.
Figure 2. Experimental set-up with gel (left, green) in a water basin and the
used annular array, on the right.
A custom-made annular array with a centre frequency of
10 MHz is used. Its structure has been optimized for the
measurements and it has been developed for high temperatures
as the common ones would not resist them. Figure 3 shows
the structure of the array. The whole piezoelectric material is
curved spherically with a radius of curvature of 50 mm. All
elements have the same active area, and so their natural focus
is in the same depth. This is necessary for effective focussing.
The inner and outer radii as well as the r and z coordinates,
used for focussing, see (2), are given in Table I. Also, the
central element is a ring because there is a tube along the
rotation axis of the transducer. For some experimental set-ups,
gas, which was solved in the water, cumulates in the curvature
of the transducer during the heating. The tube can be used to
pump off this gas.
If the phantom is placed in a water basin, it can be heated
only to an overall temperature, independent of location. An
alternative set-up, which allows to generate a temperature
gradient, is shown in Figure 4. At the bottom, there is a basin
Figure 3. Structure of the used annular array; white: active area, grey:
passive area.
TABLE I. RADII OF THE RINGS OF THE ANNULAR ARRAY.
Element-No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
ri [mm]
0,5
5,05
7,13
8,72
10,07
11,25
ra [mm]
3,59
6,18
7,96
9,42
10,68
11,80
reff [mm]
2,56
5,64
7,56
9,08
10,38
11,53
zeff [mm]
0,07
0,32
0,57
0,83
1,09
1,37
with water, which is kept at a temperature of 4 ◦C. A second
basin ﬁlled with the phantom material is placed above. It has
a baseplate of metal for a good thermal coupling. On the top,
there is a heating surface with a small hole in the middle, where
the array can be placed. As the lateral dimensions are much
larger than the height of the set-up (diameter of 20 cm and
height of 6 cm), a one-dimensional temperature distribution
can be assumed near the rotation axis of the gel.
US‐Transducer
Heat 
source
Cooling
Figure 4. Schematic depiction of the experimental set-up to generate an
temperature gradient. There is a cooling at the bottom and a heating surface
at the top.
III.
MEASURING METHOD
To evaluate the measured data, synthetic focussing is used.
This means that each element is driven separately and the
reﬂected wave is recognized on each element. The resulting
signal for each element is digitized and stored separately.
Although this reduces the signal to noise ratio, it can be used to
superpose the recorded signals afterwards, whereby the delay
times between the signals can be chosen arbitrarily.
Figure 5 shows an example a signal by emitting and
receiving with the central element, averaged over 1000 signals
to improve the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). At the top, the
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

whole signal is shown, including the surface echo from water
to gel (42 µs), the back-wall echo from gel to aluminium
(105 µs) and a multiple reﬂection in the aluminium plate
(118 µs). Figure 5 (bottom) shows a zoom on the surface
echo. Whereas there are no previous echoes, there can be
seen many echoes after the surface echo. These echoes are
backscattered from the algae. Similar signals are obtained for
all 36 combinations of emitters and receivers.
Figure 5. Recorded signal by emitting and receiving with the central ring;
top: whole echo including surface echo and back-wall echoes; bottom: signal
part including surface echoes and backscattered echoes from the algae
For the following considerations, it shall be assumed that
the amplitude of the wave, backscattered from an algae,
is proportional to the amplitude of the incident wave. The
amplitude becomes maximal if the focus is located at the
scatterer.
Figure 7 shows the calculated sound ﬁelds for focussing in
to different depth, to 35 mm, at the top and to 45mm at the
bottom. Different focussing regimes are used:
left:
cMed = cF ok, focussing works correktly;
middle: using focussing regime for cF ok
=
1200 m/s
in the same medium, resulting focus is too near
at the transducer,
right:
focussing with the same regime as at the left, but
in a medium wich cMed
=
1200 m/s, focus
shifts away from transducer
As Figure 7 shows, the resulting focus of an annular array
depends on the transducer geometry, the sound velocity of the
propagation medium and the used set of delay times and it
shows that focussing only works correctly, if the sound velocity
used for focussing is similar to the one of the medium.
So, the goal is to ﬁnd that set of delay times for focussing
where the resulting signal amplitude becomes maximal. How
the sound velocity is connected to the set of focussing times
is described in the following section.
A. Synthetic Focussing
Synthetic focussing means that the signals are superposed
with an arbitrary delay time.
SF ok =
6
X
n=1
6
X
m=1
Smn(t − ∆tm − ∆tn + 2∆t1)
(1)
where Smn is the signal emitted from element m and
received from element n. As the signals are obtained by
scattering and not by a specular reﬂection, it is sufﬁcient
to calculate the different propagation path lengths from each
element to an arbitrary assigned focus point on the acoustic
axis of the array and dividing the differences by the sound
velocity, The different propagation paths are illustrated in
Figure 6.
Fok1
Fok2
Fok1
Fok2
Fok1
Fok2
Fok1
Fok2
Fok1
Fok2
Fok1
Fok2
P2(zeff,2,reff,2)
 sn = cMed(
 tn-
 t1)
Figure 6. Illustration of the path length differences to generate a virtual
curvature.
∆tn =
q
(zF ok − zeff,n)2 + r2
eff,n
cMed
(2)
with zeff,n and reff,n are the coordinates, which are used
for ring no. n. They are given in Table I. The resulting times
are accumulated in a matrix: the focussing regime F, which
only depends on the assigned focus point zF ok and the used
(assumed) sound velocity cF ok.
F(zF ok, cF ok) = [∆t1, ∆t2, ..., ∆tN]
(3)
Note that the possible focussing range is limited. It involves
the range from the near ﬁeld length of a single element to the
near ﬁeld length of the whole array.
B. Determination of average sound velocity
The determination of the average sound velocity works by
the following steps:
-
choosing a time frame at an arbitrary position of the
signal with a width of about 1 µs
-
determination of the time of ﬂight tmax where the
signal, emitted and received with the central element,
has its maximal amplitude
-
assumption of a (reasonable) testing sound velocity
cT est and of the corresponding position of the scatterer
zT est = cT est tmax/2
-
focussing all signals using (1) with the para-meters
zT est and cT est and determination of resulting signal
energy as well as the resulting signal amplitude
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 7. Calculated sound ﬁelds for focussing in to different depth; top:
35 mm, bottom: 45mm, for different media und different focussing regimes
-
variation of cT est
and taking up signal energy
E(cT est) and Amplitude A(cT est) as a function of
the testing sound velocity
-
determination
of the
correct
average sound
ve-
locity by determining the maximum of both of
the
curves
cmed,A
=
argmax(A(ctest)),
cmed,E = argmax(E(ctest))
-
plausibility check via comparing the maximal ampli-
tude Amax with the averaged amplitude ¯A and the
requirement Amax > 2 ¯A (if only noise is evaluated
they will be nearly similar)
-
stepwise shifting of the time frame through the
recorded signal and determination of the average
sound velocity cav,i locally resolved.
The width of the time frame is determined by the demand
that the frame should be much longer than the signal length
of about 0.4 µs but not that large, that several echoes are in
one window. Also the testing sound velocities should be in a
reasonable range. As the sound velocity of tissue is in a range
of 1500 m/s to 1700 m/s values below 1000 m/s or above
2500 m/s are not useful.
Figure 8 shows an example of a resulting curve of deter-
mined signal energy versus testing sound velocity. If there are
not sufﬁcient scatterers in the frame, the resulting energy is
nearly constant and there is no signiﬁcant maximum. In this
case, the determined sound velocity is neglected.
After determining the correct average sound velocities cav,i
for each frame position, the position zi of the scattering algae
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
ctest [m/s]
0
0.5
1
normalised 
 signal energy
Figure 8. Evaluation of the resulting signal energy as a function of the used
testing sound velocity.
can be determined. The value of cav,i is the average sound
velocity from the transducer to the corresponding focus depth.
To determine the local sound velocity, which is only averaged
from one position to the next, (4) can be used:
cloc,i = cav,izi − cav,i−1zi−1
zi − zi−1
(4)
To determine the temperature distribution additionally, only
the dependence of sound velocity from temperature is needed.
IV.
RESULTS
Figure 9 shows a determined sound velocity proﬁle with
sound velocity versus time of ﬂight (top) and sound velocity
versus reﬂector position (bottom). As this is a measurement for
constant temperature (and so for constant sound velocity), the
observable deviations can be interpreted as the uncertainty of
the technique. The measurement uncertainty is about ±15 m/s
or 2%, independent if signal energy or signal amplitude are
evaluated.
After validating the measurement technique for constant
sound velocities, it shall be used to monitor a heating process.
The experimental set-up shown in Figure 4 was used to gen-
erate a temperature gradient. Measurements were starting with
switching on the heat source. One measure was started each
20 s and the introduced algorithm was applied on the measured
data. The results are shown in Figure 10. Each column of the
picture represents one reconstructed sound velocity proﬁle as
it is shown in Figure 9, whereby the sound velocity is colour-
coded. So, the y-axis represents the measuring depth and it is
directed in a way that the heat source and the transducer would
be above and the cooling would be below the picture. The x-
axis represents the progressing duration of the measurements.
It is easily notable that a sound velocity gradient appears with
increasing measurement duration. Note that there is already a
small gradient when the measurement starts. The reason is that
the bottom is kept to 4 ◦C whereas the top of the gel-phantom
has room temperature of about 20 ◦C.
V.
CONCLUSION
This contribution introduced and qualiﬁed a new measure-
ment technique to measure temperatures respectively sound
velocity locally and temporarily resolved in tissue phantoms.
As an absolute value for the sound velocity is measured, it is
not only possible to determine a relative change of temperature,
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 9. Reconstructed sound velocity proﬁles, evaluating signal energy
(blue) and signal amplitude (red); top: sound velocity versus time of ﬂight,
bottom: sound velocity versus measurement depth
Figure 10. Resulting monitored temperature proﬁle; colour-coded:
determined sound velocity, y-axis: time of ﬂight respectively measurement
depth, x-axis: duration of the measurements.
like in the classic approach, but it is possible to relate the
temperature to ﬁxed measurement positions. The technique
works independently of the thermal expansion of the tissue.
Currently, the measurement uncertainty of the technique
is about 2% the reachable local resolution is about 1 mm
at 10 MHz. The temporal resolution depends on the total
duration of the experiment. For durations of a few minutes it
is possible to measure each second. For longer experiments a
measure can be performed each 20 s. It is mainly limited by
memory capacity and by the available data transfer rates of
the measurement hardware.
To improve the reachable accuracy, examination of the used
focussing regimes are necessary. Improved regimes result in a
smaller focus area, so that the evaluation algorithm is more
sensitiv to the sound velocity.
Enhancing the signal to noise ratio of the used electronics,
especially of the ampliﬁers in the receive channels, allows
to reduce the necessary number of averaged signals and so
to enhance the possible temporal resolution. Examinations
with transducers with another frequency range are planned to
examine the relation between frequency and local resolution.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft (DFG) for the ﬁnancial support in the ongoing
project: 260366138, and SONAXIS for developing and man-
ufacturing the array transducer for high temperatures.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Shen, Y. Chen, and G. Ren, “An improved tumour temperature
measurement and control method for superﬁcial tumour ultrasound
hyperthermia therapeutic system,” in Journal of Physics: Conference
Series, vol. 48, no. 1.
IOP Publishing, 2006, p. 653.
[2]
H.-Y. Tseng, G.-B. Lee, C.-Y. Lee, Y.-H. Shih, and X.-Z. Lin, “Localised
heating of tumours utilising injectable magnetic nanoparticles for hyper-
thermia cancer therapy,” IET nanobiotechnology, vol. 3, no. 2, 2009, pp.
46–54.
[3]
D. A. Iero, L. Crocco, and T. Isernia, “Thermal and microwave con-
strained focusing for patient-speciﬁc breast cancer hyperthermia: A
robustness assessment,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 62, no. 2, 2014, pp. 814–821.
[4]
A. Anand, D. Savery, and C. Hall, “Three-dimensional spatial and tempo-
ral temperature imaging in gel phantoms using backscattered ultrasound,”
IEEE transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and frequency control,
vol. 54, no. 1, 2007, pp. 23–31.
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

