TCR, Responsivity, and Noise Properties of Carbon Nanotube-polymer Bolometric IR 
Detectors 
Will Riedel, Gustavo E. Fernandes, Jin Ho Kim, Jimmy Xu 
School of Engineering 
Brown University 
Providence, RI 02912 USA 
william_riedel@brown.edu, gustavo_fernandes@brown.edu, jin_ho_kim@brown.edu, jimmy_xu@brown.edu 
 
 
Abstract—We investigate the temperature coefficient of 
resistance and noise properties of polymer-infiltrated carbon 
nanotube membranes and their applications to infrared 
detection. In agreement with previous work the noise is found 
to be dominated by a 1/f contribution. We found, however, that 
small bolometric time constants, of ~ 10ms, are achievable in 
this system in reasonably large “pixels” of 50 m X 50 m, 
which is beneficial to future applications. Contrary to our 
expectations, the polymer-nanotube system did not exhibit a 
large temperature coefficient of resistance. The possible 
reasons are discussed.  
Keywords-Bolometer; Infrared Detection; Carbon Nanotube;  
polymer.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Bolometric detection relies on the fact that the resistance 
of an object is a function of its temperature [1]. When a 
sensing element absorbs radiation, it heats up, increasing its 
temperature and changing its resistance. For short enough 
wavelengths (e.g., visible and near IR) conventional band 
gap photodetectors offer better sensitivity and speed, and are 
thus the preferred platform. As the wavelength increases 
(and the required band gap decreases), cryogenic cooling 
becomes a requirement for such band gap photodetectors. 
Bolometers, on the other hand, can operate in uncooled 
mode typically with wide operating temperature ranges 
(although they can too benefit from cooling).  
There are two contributions to the resistance of a random 
network of carbon nanotubes (CNTs): the resistance down 
the length of a nanotube (i.e., the single nanotube 
resistance), and the contact resistances between neighboring 
nanotubes [2]. Because of the large conductivity of 
individual CNTs, the CNT network resistance is dominated 
by the contact resistances. Such contact resistances depend 
on the probability of electron tunneling between adjacent 
nanotubes. In a simple approximation the intertube electron 
tunneling probability can be modeled in the framework of a 
thermal activation process, i.e., it is found to be proportional 
to exp(-E/kBT), where E is an activation energy 
corresponding to the mean potential energy of the intertube 
contact gaps and T is the temperature [3]. According to this 
simplified picture, the CNT network conductivity is 
proportional to exp(-E/kBT) and its reciprocal, the 
resistivity, to exp(E/kBT). The temperature coefficient of 
resistance (TCR), which is given by dln(R)/dT, where R is 
the sample resistance, becomes proportional to -E/(kBT2) 
and is  thus also directly proportional to the activation 
energy. In principle, thus, the CNT network TCR could be 
increased via engineering of the activation energy E. 
Various recent works have explored CNT bolometers [4-
7], and found TCR values in the neighborhood of ~-0.5%/K 
at room temperature. Such small TCR suggests that E is 
rather small for an unmodified CNT network.   
However, polymers may present a readily available 
possibility for boosting the TCR and thus the performance 
of CNT bolometers. It is well known that certain polymers 
can be well incorporated into CNT networks [2]. Passivation 
of the CNTs by the polymer chains can also readily be 
achieved. In the latter case the polymer may infiltrate 
between the intertube gaps, thus providing a means to boost 
the intertube activation energy E. This may be expected to 
occur via a number of different processes including residual 
trapping of charges in the polymer, alteration of the 
intertube distances via thermal expansion, and changes in 
the dielectric permittivity in the intertube tunneling gap, all 
of which effectively change the shape and height/width of 
the intertube potential barriers. 
In this paper, we test a simple CNT bolometric system 
consisting of 20 nm thin membranes of randomly oriented 
overlapping CNTs embedded in a polymer medium (Fig. 1). 
Among other bolometric parameters, we characterize its 
TCR, responsivity and noise figures and compare with 
values obtained after a hydrogel polymer is applied onto the 
membrane. We find that for reasonably small device sizes 
(50 m X 50 m) very short time constants are achievable 
with the fabrication strategies employed here and discuss its 
potential 
implications 
to 
bolometric 
detection. 
No 
significant boost is observed in the TCR however, the 
reasons for which are discussed and believed to be related 
with the fabrication procedure employed. The noise figure 
of the CNT-polymer system shows a strong 1/f contribution, 
which is consistent with previous reports and indicates that 
the presence of polymer does not change the noise 
characteristic of the system. 
  
 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

  
 
 
Figure 1. (a) Scanning electron microscope image of a 20 nm thick CNT 
membrane used in this work. The scale bar is 300 nm.. (b) top-view 
schematic of a single device, with gold electrical contacts (orange) 
connected to each side of the CNT-polymer composite pixel (gray). 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
A. Sample Fabrication 
Square pixels of size 50 µm X 50 µm and 200 µm X 200 
µm were fabricated as follows. First, a 20 nm thick film of 
carbon nanotubes was made by filtration though a 
membrane filter of a water-dispersed CNT solution. The 
commercially available CNT solution consists of sodium 
dodecyl sulfate (SDS) functionalized CNTs dispersed in 
water.  The films were then transferred to a glass substrate 
via contact printing [8], and metallic contacts were defined 
directly atop the CNT film by photolithography. We used 
Shipley S1818 photoresist spun at 2000 rpm for 30 seconds 
which was exposed for 3 minutes using a Karl-Suss mask 
aligner. The exposed samples were then developed for 1 
minute in MF-321 developer. After development, a 6 nm 
adhesion layer of titanium was evaporated using electron 
beam evaporation, followed by 75 nm of gold by thermal 
evaporation 
without 
breaking 
vacuum. 
Liftoff 
was 
performed in acetone to complete the contacts. Finally, a 
second photolithography process identical to the first was 
used to define the CNT pixels in the region between 
contacts. The remainder of the CNT membrane was etched 
away by plasma using a Trion reactive ion etch system. The 
input gas flows were 9 standard cubic centimeters per 
minute (sccm) argon and 13 sccm oxygen, at a pressure of 
50 millitorr and input power of 100 W for 45 seconds. Next, 
the photoresist was removed in acetone. Wires were bonded 
to the contact pads using silver paste. Finally, approximately 
one 1 L drop of an aqueous poly(Nisopropylacrylamide) 
hydrogel solution (10 mg/mL)  mixed with 1% SDS was 
applied to each pixel using a micropipette and  the samples 
were annealed at 80 °C for several hours to remove residual 
moisture from the polymer. Measurements were then 
repeated on the samples with polymer. 
 
B. TCR Measurement 
The sheet resistances of the samples were measured in a 
sealed environmental chamber kept steady at room 
temperature (~ 22 °C) and 1 atm. The relative humidity 
(RH) value inside the measurement chamber was controlled 
by adjusting the flow of wet and dry N2 (wet N2 was 
obtained by flowing dry N2 through a water bubbler) and 
monitored with a hygrometer. For this work the RH was 
fixed at 80% for all measurements, to enable partial 
hydration of the hydrogel medium at lower temperatures 
and thus to enhance the effect of hydrogel addition. The 
samples were mounted on a thermoelectric heater/cooler 
plate inside the chamber which allowed the sample 
temperature to be varied. Sheet resistance measurements 
were taken at sample temperatures between 2 and 45 °C in 
increments of 1 °C. Two source measure units (Model 236, 
Keithley) were used for the electrical measurements. The 
sample temperature was adjusted and controlled via a 
temperature controller (LDC 3722B, ILX Lightwave) and 
monitored by a thermocouple that was mounted onto the Al 
block that served as sample stage in the chamber. 
 
C. Responsivity Measurement 
The photoresponse was measured at constant current by 
measuring the voltage drop across the films with a lock in 
amplifier 
(SRS830, 
Stanford 
Research). 
Two-point 
measurements were deemed adequate based on negligible 
contact resistance found through four-point measurements 
in previous studies. Illumination was provided by a 650 nm 
laser diode with a power intensity 3W/cm2 The 
measurements were performed at room pressure with the 
atmosphere in the environmental chamber kept at a constant 
temperature of 22 °C. The sample temperature was 
controlled independently.  
Previous measurements showed that the Seebeck 
coefficient for CNT’s is ~30 µV/K [10]. With an estimated 
temperature change in the sample of less than 1 K at DC, the 
resulting potential is too small to affect the measurement, so 
no adjustment was made for the Seebeck voltage. 
From this data, one can construct plots of the responsivity 
as a function of the modulation frequency of the laser diode, 
from which the thermal conductance and capacitance of the 
sample through non-linear curve fitting, as described below. 
 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Fig. 2 shows the resistance and TCR for the 50µm sample 
of as a function of temperature. The resistance varies nearly 
linearly with temperature, and the TCR fluctuates near -
0.2%/°C, which is similar to results for pure carbon samples 
[4-6]. The behavior is consistent over the entire measured 
temperature range. We note that the negative TCR obtained 
indicated that the conductivity in these CNT membranes is 
indeed dominated by contact effects (instead of by the 2/3 
metallic CNTs traditionally present in such membranes). 
However, the addition of polymer did not significantly 
improve the TCR compared with previous studies on CNT 
films [4-6]. The choice of high relative humidity for the 
measurement was made so that the hydrogel would 
(a) 
(b) 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

experience hydration and swelling, especially at the lower 
temperatures (i.e., at or below the dew point temperature), 
and thus significantly alter the intertube distances. However, 
no signature of such a process was observed. 
The photoresponse also did not show any major 
enhancements. Fig. 3 shows the measured responsivity as a 
function of modulation frequency for the 50 µm sample at 
15 °C. The device exhibits behavior that conforms to the 
well known responsivity formula [1]: 
 
 
(1) 
where ib is the bias current, α is the TCR, η is the 
absorption coefficient, G is the thermal conductance and τ = 
C/G, where C is the thermal capacitance. However, the drop 
off is more gradual than that of the model. In this case the 
model was weighted to fit the low frequency behavior more 
closely so as to not underestimate the time constant. The 
obtained values of G can C for both samples are given in 
Table 1. 
The time constants obtained from fitting (Table I) are 
very fast for a bolometric system. Although the response 
speed is partially the result of high thermal conductance due 
to the direct contact of the devices with the substrate, there 
is much room for design adjustment in our structures to 
improve the poor responsivity while still maintaining an 
effective time constant. For example, in order to improve 
the responsivity, the substrate thermal conductivity could be 
reduced, or alternatively the thermal coupling between film 
and substrate could be modified by addition of a thin 
thermally insulating film between the substrate and the CNT 
membrane.  
To complete our analysis, we investigate the noise 
behavior of these bolometers. The plots of the predicted and 
measured noise levels for the 50 µm device are plotted vs. 
frequency in Fig. 4. The magnitude of noise decreases with 
frequency, indicating that 1/f noise is indeed the dominant 
source. Additionally, the measured noise agrees reasonably 
well with the empirical formula previously established by 
Snow [9] for pure CNT devices: 
 
Figure 2. Resistance (black) and TCR (red) vs. Temperature for device of 
side length 50 µm. 
 
 
Figure 3. Responsivity vs. Frequency for device of side length 50 µm. 
Black dots are the measured values, red line is the modeled behavior using 
parameters estimated by curve fitting. Here the time constant τ = 12 ms. 
 
 
(2) 
where L is the side length of the sample, V is the applied 
voltage bias, and f is the frequency of modulation. The 
addition of the polymer does not appear to have a 
substantial effect on the noise levels in the system. Near 
DC, the signal-to-noise ratio of the detector is only about 
10, contributing to poor performance at this frequency. At 
higher frequencies, however, this ratio improves, and the 
NEP and detectivity improve as well. 
Interestingly, when the photoresponse measurements are 
made using only a standard resistor, 1/f noise still dominates 
the system at low frequencies, although the magnitude is 
lower.  
 
 
TABLE I. MEASURED DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS 
 
200 µm sample 
50 µm sample 
Thermal Conductance (µW/K) 
422 
38 
Thermal Capacitance (µJ/K) 
14 
0.46 
Time Constant τ (ms) 
34 
12 
Responsivity (V/W) 
1.1 
12.6 
0 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 4. Noise voltage vs. Frequency for devices of side length 50 µm. 
The black data points indicate measured values, and the red line indicates 
the empirical formula given by Snow et al. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 CNT-polymer composite bolometric detectors as small 
as 50 µm x 50 µm were fabricated and characterized. 
Measurements revealed that the polymer does not have a 
significant impact on the TCR or time constant of the 
devices. Short time constants near 10 ms were achieved, 
suggesting the potential for use in high speed bolometric 
imaging applications, which are sought after. 
Contrary to our expectations, the inclusion of a humidity 
absorbing polymer did not lead to large TCR or indeed any 
dramatic changes in behavior of these bolometers compared 
to previous reports on CNT bolometers. We hypothesize 
that this may have been a result of our device fabrication 
strategy. Although aqueous solutions of CNT were used to 
fabricate the CNT membranes, the subsequent processing 
with acetone and the liftout procedure may have stripped the 
surfactants (SDS) off the CNTs thus rendering them 
hydrophobic, which may ultimately have prevented the 
water based polymer solution from infiltrating into the 
membrane and indeed filling the intertube contact gaps. 
Further work is thus necessary in order to make the 
fabrication procedure compatible with polymer addition. 
Possibly, soaking the patterned devices with SDS just prior 
to polymer application may improve polymer infiltration 
into the CNT membrane. The sensitivity could also be 
improved through suspension of the devices, but this will 
inevitably come at a cost in terms of response time. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
    The development of the composite material was made 
possible by a grant from AFOSR (P.M. L. Lee) and the 
exploration of its potential for bolometric IR detection was 
supported by DARPA (P.M. N. Dhar) and ARL (P.M. M 
Dubey). 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. C. Liddiard, "Thin-Film resistance bolometer IR 
detectors," Infrared Physics, vol. 24, pp. 57-64,  
[2] D. H. Zhang, K. Ryu, X.  Liu, E. Polikarpov, J. Ly, M. E. 
Tompson, C. Zhou, “Transparent, conductive, and flexible 
carbon nanotube films and their application in organic light-
emitting diodes,” Nano Letters 6, 1880-1886, (2006) 
[3] Cite P. Sheng, E. K. Sichel, J. I. Gittleman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
1978, 40, 1197 
[4] M. E. Itkis, F. Borondics, A. P. Yu, and R.0020C. Haddon, 
"Bolometric infrared photoresponse of suspended single-
walled carbon nanotube films," Science, vol. 312, pp. 413-
416, 2006. 
[5] R. T. Lu, Z. Z. Li, G. W. Xu, and J. Z. Wu, "Suspending 
single-wall carbon nanotube thin film infrared bolometers on 
microchannels," Applied Physics Letters, vol. 94, p. 163110, 
2009. 
[6] A. E. Aliev, "Bolometric detector on the basis of single-wall 
carbon nanotube/polymer composite," Infrared Physics & 
Technology, vol. 51, pp. 541-545, 2008. 
[7] M. B. Jakubinek, M. A. White, M. F. Mu, and K. I. Winey, 
"Temperature 
dependence 
of 
thermal 
conductivity 
enhancement in single-walled carbon nanotube/polystyrene 
composites," Applied Physics Letters, vol. 96, pp. 083105-
083108, 2010. 
[8] Z. C. Wu, Z. H. Chen, X. Du, J. M. Logan, J. Sippel, M. 
Nikolou, K. Kamaras, J. R. Reynolds, D. B. Tanner, A. F. 
Hebard, and A. G. Rinzler, "Transparent, conductive carbon 
nanotube films," Science, vol. 305, pp. 1273-1276, 2004. 
[9] E. S. Snow, J. P. Novak, P. M. Campbell, and D. Park, 
"Random networks of carbon nanotubes as an electronic 
material," Applied Physics Letters, vol. 82, pp. 2145-2147, 
2003. 
[10] S. Jung, K. B.  Kim, G. Fernandes, J. H. Kim, F Wahab, J. M. 
Xu. “Enhanced thermoelectric power in nanopatterned carbon 
nanotube film,” Nanotechnology, vol. 23, 2012. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

