Near Real-Time Oceanographic Data Management through Sensor Web 
Enablement (SWE) Standards 
Latest devepolments 
E. Partescano, A. Giorgetti, A. Brosich 
OGS (Istituto Nazionale di Oceanografia e di Geofisica Sperimentale) 
Borgo Grotta Gigante-Sgonico (TS), Italy 
e-mail: epartescano@ogs.trieste.it
 
 
 
Abstract—Realizing a system to harmonize and disseminate 
heterogeneous 
data, 
collected 
by 
different 
meteo-
oceanographic buoys is a challenge. In this paper, we describe 
a procedure for data validation, conversion in a homogeneous 
and standard format and dissemination adopting Sensor Web 
Enablement 
(SWE) 
using 
XML 
(eXtensible 
Markup 
Language) 
and 
OGC 
(Open 
Geospatial 
Consortium) 
standards. To meet the needs of different scientific 
communities as RITMARE (La Ricerca ITaliana per il 
MARE), Jerico (Towards a joint European research 
infrastructure network for coastal observatories), MyOcean, 
ODIP (Ocean Data Interoperability Platform), FixO3 (Fixed-
point Open Ocean Observatories), we decided to adopt SWE 
standard allowing interoperability between data in near real-
time, using SensorML (Sensor Model Language) and O&M 
(Observations and Measurements) standards in a Sensor 
Observation Service. With last developments, we are able to 
distribute new collected data in real-time. 
Keywords-Sensor 
Web; 
Real 
Time 
data; 
Marine 
Observations. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
“The OGC's Sensor Web Enablement (SWE) standards 
enable developers to make all types of sensors, transducers 
and sensor data repositories discoverable, accessible and 
usable via the Web”[1]. 
A meteo-oceanographic buoy is an array of sensors that 
monitor environmental parameters, such as temperature, 
salinity, meteorological conditions, etc. 
Measurements made from different sensor systems are 
acquired using heterogeneous data formats. 
The first objective is data sharing; maintaining 
interoperability and resilience; the second request is to 
provide new collected data to national and international 
communities, as RITMARE, JERICO, MyOcean and FixO3. 
To satisfy both issues and to share open access (near) real-
time data and homogeneous data, we used new technologies 
such as the SWE, using SensorML and O&M standard in a 
Sensor Observation Service (SOS).  
In detail, in this paper, we describe the methodology 
adopted illustrating each element included into the procedure 
(Section II) and we synthetized the aims of this paper in 
Section III. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
This system developed by OGS (Istituto Nazionale di 
Oceanografia e di Geofisica Sperimentale), is the answer for 
the need to find a standard procedure to share (near) real-
time data collected by the meteo-oceanographic MAMBO1 
buoy (in the North Adriatic Sea) and the observatory site 
E2M3A (in the South Adriatic Sea). This procedure has 
seven different elements [2] (Figure 1): 
 
• 
two different buoys that acquire data in (near) real-
time: the meteo-marine buoy Monitoraggio AMBientale 
Operativo (MAMBO1), placed in the Gulf of Trieste, 
equipped with a meteorological station and two multi-
parametric probes, and the E2-M3A, situated in the 
South Adriatic Sea, hosting the meteo station including 
a radiometer aimed, to collect air-sea interaction 
measurements, and a mooring with sensors for physical 
and biochemical parameters [3]; 
 
• 
RTLoader (Real-Time Loader) permits to store in 
a database real-time heterogeneous data, coming from 
different kind of instruments and with different formats. 
This is possible converting XML standard into an object 
language, using Java Architecture for XML Binding 
(JAXB). It allows converting heterogeneous ASCII files 
formats in a unique XML common format. After this, 
the software “XML2DB” converts XML input into Java 
objects and then inserts the measurements and the 
associated metadata into a PostgreSQL database; 
 
• 
RTValidator checks, in the database, the quality of 
the data, applying some different algorithms developed 
following the European protocols [4][5] eventually 
tuned to the regional statistics [6]. The validation 
process assigns a quality flag without changing or 
deleting any data points; 
 
• 
RTWs is the RESTful Web Service used to extract 
data from the database accepting simple request 
parameterized with temporal range and the output 
format. It is written using Java and open source libraries 
like Spring and Jersey; 
 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

• 
RTWeb is the web interface that allows querying 
the database using the Web Service RTWs. It extracts 
data into a down-loadable file, satisfying the conditions 
selected by the users; 
 
• 
RTObservations 
is 
a 
real-time 
automatic 
procedure that permits to insert Observations into the 
Sensor Observation Service. This new element can load 
in near real-time data into a SOS, using an OGC 
standard format O&M. This is possible applying a 
Batch() operation and a POST request using JSON as 
payload.  
 
• 
RTSOS is an OGC Sensor Observation Service 
(SOS) that enables to integrate real-time observations 
of heterogeneous sensors into a Spatial 
Data 
Infrastructure. It works using standard requests (e.g., 
DescribeSensor()). The descriptions of sensors and 
observations are stored in a PostgreSQL/PostGIS 
database using standard metadata format (respectively 
SensorML 
and 
O&M) 
and 
standard 
requests 
(InsertSensor() and InsertObservation()). Then, the data 
can be obtained by request GetObservation() and geo-
located by GetFeatureOfInterset() [7].  
Also a Web interface was used, in order to visualize 
observations, the sensors position, their observed 
properties and long term trends of observations. It has 
been 
implemented 
using 
JavaScript 
toolkits 
(OpenLayers, GeoExt and ExtJS) [8]. 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
To answer the needs of different scientific communities 
as RITMARE, Jerico, MyOcean, ODIP and FixO3, we 
developed an automatic system to store in near real-time data 
acquired by two different meteo-oceanographic buoys. Also, 
we decided to use an innovative technology, adopting OGC 
standards as SensorML and O&M, using a Sensor  
Observation Service (SOS), to disseminate these data. A new 
element is developed, the RTObservations, to store 
automatically the near real-time data into a Sensor 
Observation Service, using standard requests. This solution 
gives us the possibility to share open access and standardized 
data and to have the opportunity to cooperate, analyze and 
use new technologies. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, 
Universities and Research (MIUR) under RITMARE 
Project. We also acknowledge funding from the European 
Program (JERICO, FixO3 and SeaDataNet II). 
REFERENCES 
[1] Open Geospatial Consortium: Sensor Web Enablement 
(SWE) [Online]. Available from: http://www.opengeospatial. 
org. 
[2] E. Partescano, et al., “A (Near) Real-time Validation and 
Standardization System Tested for MAMBO1 Meteo-marine 
Fixed Station”, SENSORNETS 2014 - 3° International 
Conference on Sensor Networks 2014 Lisbon, 7-9 January. 
[3] M. Ravaioli, et al., “The RITMARE Italian Fixed-point 
Observatory Network (IFON) for marine environmental 
monitoring: 
a 
case 
study”, 
Journal 
of 
Operational 
Oceanography. Special Issue - “Proceedings of the 3rd Italian 
GNOO Conference on operational oceanography, innovative 
technologies and applications”. Submitted (2015). 
[4] SeaDataNet: Data Quality Control Procedures, Version 2.0, 
May 2010, 78 pp. (http://www.seadatanet.org/content/ 
download/18414/119624/file/SeaDataNet_QC_procedures_V
2_(May_2010).pdf).  
[5] UNESCO: GTSPP Real-Time Quality Control Manual, First 
Revised Edition. IOC Manuals and Guides No. 22, Revised 
Edition. (IOC/2010/MG/22Rev.) 2010, 145 pp. 
[6] B. Manca, M. Burca, A. Giorgetti, C. Coatanoan, M. J. Garcia 
and A. Iona: Physical and biochemical vertical profiles in the 
Mediterranean regions: an important tool to trace the 
climatology of water masses and to validate incoming data 
from operational oceanography. J. Mar. Sys., 48 2004, pp. 83-
116. 
[7] RTSOS: OGS’s Sensor Observation Service [Online]. 
Available from: http://nodc.ogs.trieste.it/SOS4. 
[8] RTWEB: OGS’s Web interface [Online]. Available from: 
http://nodc.ogs.trieste.it/SOSclient/. 
Figure 1. Work flow 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

