Development of a Mobile Cardiac Wellness Application and Integrated Wearable 
Sensor Suite  
Paul J Fortier 
Benjamin Viall 
Electrical and Computer Engineering  
University of Massachusetts Dartmouth 
North Dartmouth, MA., USA 
pfortier@umassd.edu 
bviall@umassd.edu  
 
 
Abstract— This paper describes the design process for a mobile 
patient-centric, self-monitoring, symptom recognition and self 
intervention system supporting chronic cardiac disease 
management. The system design was undertaken in five 
phases, refining our concept from crude prototype to brass-
board system ready for product development and experimental 
testing. Our system is composed of a mobile smart phone and 
wearable sensor suite linked through blue tooth and cell phone 
technology to a backend data repository, data mining, 
knowledge discovery, knowledge evolution and knowledge 
processing 
system, 
providing 
clinical 
data 
collection, 
procedural 
collection, 
intervention 
planning, 
medical 
situational assessment and health status feedback for users. 
The system aids patients in learning to recognize disease 
specific symptoms and understand the effect on their health of 
adherence to interventions. 
Keywords- Collaboration tools, Sensor Design, Cardiac 
 
          Wellness 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cardiovascular disease represents a significant public 
health 
problem 
affecting 
approximately 
6 
million 
Americans last year alone at a cost of 37.2 Billion dollars 
[1]. Heart failure, as a chronic and progressive illness, 
primarily of the elderly, has a negative effect on patients’ 
quality of life with symptoms affecting well being, limiting 
normal daily living activities, and increasing the risk of 
multiple hospitalizations [2]. Faulty self-care behaviors 
including the inability to recognize symptoms and seek 
timely treatment are linked to hospitalization in this 
population [3]. Self-care of heart failure is difficult for many 
patients since it involves daily monitoring of symptoms, 
dietary 
restrictions, 
and 
correctly 
taking 
multiple 
medications [4].  
Symptom awareness and monitoring, important for self-
care, are confounded by the often insidious yet subtle 
changes in severity of symptoms, as well as due to advanced 
age and cognition, leading to discounting of early symptoms 
of heart failure decompensation, such as fatigue and 
dyspnea, to aging [5].  
Recent heart failure medical management advances 
include the use of implanted devices to provide early cues to 
decompensation through monitoring of heart rate, fluid 
status, and heart rhythms [6]. Unfortunately, not all persons 
with heart failure are able to receive such devices for a 
variety of reasons including cost, eligibility and geographic 
proximity to a clinic that monitors such devices. Wearable 
low cost devices easily placed by a patient or clinician are 
needed to support more frequent access to real-time cardiac 
physiologic data [7]. 
A number of researchers are attempting to develop 
interventions 
to 
improve 
symptom 
recognition, 
interpretation and ultimately improve treatment seeking 
behaviors [8]. Before tailored, patient centric heart failure 
care models can be developed, more information is needed 
about the process of symptom recognition and the validity 
of health related feedback in improving self-care in heart 
failure patients. Currently, no research has shared data 
derived from technological monitoring processes with 
patients themselves with the goal of making them an active 
partner in the process of performing self-care. Increasing 
patient’s ability to identify and report these correlates may 
increase the ability to develop interventions that improve 
symptom recognition and treatment seeking behaviors.  
The problem with conventional out-patient post cardiac 
disease management is the inability to monitor and assess 
patient health status in real-time within the home setting. 
Most post hospitalization care protocols require patient 
visitation by a clinician to assess health and progress. These 
visitations occur sporadically and are not necessarily 
focused on patient needs.  Patients in such home care 
settings do not typically comprehend their own disease 
status or changes correctly. Patients have not been trained 
before leaving the hospital environment on what symptoms 
are important and how to assess subtle, yet important 
changes to these symptoms.  
Our research fills the need for tools that aid both the 
patient and clinician in improving individual patient 
outcomes.  The primary function of our tool is to assist 
patients through simple interactions and feedback in learning 
how to recognize the relative status of their health condition, 
to recognize and understand symptom and status changes 
either positively or negatively and to develop and put into 
301
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

place self interventions to implement in between clinical 
health care professional encounters. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The theoretical framework that guides our study is the 
situation specific Theory of Heart Failure Self-Care, fig. 1. 
The theory posits that self-care is a naturalistic decision 
making process consisting of two types of behaviors: self-
care maintenance and self-care management. In self-care 
maintenance, persons with heart failure follow the advice of 
a provider to take medications, follow a diet and make 
healthy lifestyle choices such as getting a flu shot [9,10]. 
Self-care management is an active process of heart failure 
symptom 
monitoring 
that 
begins 
with 
recognizing 
symptoms, evaluating the symptoms, deciding on a course 
of action, taking action and finally evaluating the 
effectiveness of the selected course of action (treatment 
evaluation). All of these behaviors require practice to 
develop skills and confidence in the ability to undertake the 
behaviors.  
The self-care management portion of the model is 
patient-centered with the patient making treatment decisions 
based on knowledge and context. Often self-care decision 
making is embedded in other processes and not a discrete 
task thus increasing the complexity of the process. 
  
Symptom 
recognition, 
evaluation 
and 
treatment 
implementation are critical yet extremely hard to realize 
goals in chronic heart failure patient populations [11]. Prior 
research suggests that a number of factors influence self-
care behaviors in persons with heart failure.  First, patients 
fail to recognize the symptoms of an acute heart failure 
exacerbation leading to delay in seeking treatment, resulting 
in costly hospitalizations [12,13]. Second, knowledge about 
appropriate self-care actions to maintain health in heart 
failure is low [14]. Finally, making linkages between acute 
symptoms and appropriate actions requires practice and 
education beyond the hospitalization period. 
 
               Figure 1: Theory of heart Failure Self-care [10] 
 
In patients with cognitive changes, the ability to make 
linkages between symptoms and actions may require new 
interventions to support the development of this critical self-
care behavior. 
III. 
MOBILE CHRONIC HEART FAILURE  
MONITORING AND ASSESSMENT 
In our mobile monitoring system, physiologic and 
perceptual mobile instruments are used to gather patient 
specific information. Gathered data include, physiologic 
measurements, perceptual measurements, psychosocial 
measurements, health history and ontological information. 
This information is collected and fused into our system’s 
knowledge base using four forms of case equivalence 
(structural equivalence, functional equivalence, conceptual 
equivalence and temporal equivalence) forming new clinical 
use cases mined for new clinical knowledge [15].  The 
detection of patterns and sequences in time oriented clinical 
data is an important component of our analysis and takes 
into account subtle differences in how individual patients 
react to their malady and care interventions. [16].   
Health monitoring, wellness and assessment application 
algorithms use these and a variety of other data sets to assess 
patient status and develop patient-centered interventions. For 
example, the physiological data sets are collected through the 
wearable sensors, during home visits, during clinical visits 
and during unplanned health crisis events providing a means 
to construct a temporal map of the patient’s physiologic 
health viewable at any instance of time or range of time. 
IV. 
SYSTEM DESIGN, ARCHITECTURE AND OPERATIONS 
The need to develop a more effective and seamless 
integration of all forms of related data into health care 
delivery has been described for over a decade [17,18], with 
progress mostly in health care related business processes.  
Our System and user interface design included the nurse and 
patient from the beginning to improve on acceptance and 
use.   
Clinical knowledge is created during interactions 
between the patient and the nurse, between a patient and 
automated system or nurse and automated system with all 
clinical events stored in a knowledge base, fig. 2. Patient 
centric medical knowledge is made available to nurses and 
patients to aid in outcome improvement through two 
collaborative applications [19,20,21]. 
 
       Figure 2: Clinical knowledge creation model 
 
 
302
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Our system is intended to mimic a knowledgeable 
mentor, guiding users (both patient’s and nurses) through 
clinical data collection, situational assessment and decisions 
using information specific to the individual patient. Through 
iterative use, successful health management strategies can 
be learned, practiced and honed. Another desired outcome is 
the ability to uncover new practice knowledge using data 
mining methods which have seen very limited use to date in 
non-hospital based health care settings.   
V. 
SYSTEM OPERATIONS AND USE  
To improve both patient and clinicians ability to 
recognize subtle changes in symptoms requires more 
frequent collection, analysis and presentation of patient 
physiologic and perceptual data be performed. Our system 
uses a mobile smart phone and wearable sensor suite linked 
through blue tooth technology connected with a backend 
data repository, data mining and knowledge processing 
system, fig. 3, to improve data collection, real-time 
assessment and interventional decision support.  
The front end patient and nurse mobile monitoring 
devices and patient wearable sensors act as the clinical data 
collection, procedural collection, intervention planning, 
medical situational assessment and instructional feedback 
platform. The backend inference engine is based on the 
integration 
of 
case-based 
and 
rule-based 
reasoning 
subsystems [22]. Clinical knowledge is represented as a set 
of data rules and associated meta-rules, ranked using 
evidence-based 
and 
usage 
relationships 
[23]. 
An 
approximate answer to a clinical problem is derived using 
rules and similarity computations [24,25,26] computed 
under four different contexts, depending on the phase of the 
decision process that the nurse or patients are in [15,22].  
Figure 3: System conceptual architecture 
 
In order to improve the efficiency of case lookup, multi-
context clusters of cases are formed using declarative, 
procedural and semantic context.  Similarity searches focus 
on multiple events temporal sequences to determine how 
this patient’s present scenario relates to past cases [24] both 
general and specific. For trend analysis the system examines 
how data items transition over time [23] and relate to past 
cases stored in the knowledge repository or represented in 
the knowledge ontology.  
A nurse can invoke the patient collaboration application 
to perform a remote virtual home visit, to extract both 
spatial 
and 
temporal 
physiologic 
and 
perceptual 
measurements. A nurse, selects patients from those assigned 
and available on their device screen, selects and performs a 
variety of physical and psychological health assessments, 
evaluates patient status using collected and historic 
information and plans patient interventions focused on 
accomplishing desired patient outcomes (e.g. improved 
quality of life), fig. 4. 
The clinical nursing mode application provides for active 
patient monitoring and extraction of stored and real-time 
measurements, configurable as an automated process.  A 
second application supports nurse visual assessment of 
assigned patients. At the highest view, a nurse can request 
visual annotations (e.g. colored icons, green for all is well, 
yellow for some issues, orange for serious issues and red for 
dire issues) to indicate patient aggregated health assessment. 
Using visual patient representations a clinician can easily 
select a specific patient data set to drill down into for prior 
and present assessments using a variety of visual aids. For 
example, through trend analysis graphs, fig. 5, indicating 
improvement or degradation, or detailed physiologic graphs 
showing 
real-time 
measurements 
and 
historical 
measurements with expanded details available due to events 
such as a clinical office visit or hospitalization (e.g. blood 
workups, etc.). 
The nurse can further choose intervention analysis and 
planning tools to examine which form of intervention is best 
suited for this specific patient [22]. The clinician can also 
reconfigure the patient wearable sensor suite or cell phone 
applications to change the periodicity of measurements as 
well as sensor sensitivity or even add new applications as 
they become available.  
A second collaborative application supports patient self 
reporting and self analysis of health and wellness status. 
Patients select applications supporting lifestyle, physiologic 
and psychological assessments. Applications implement 
questionnaire based instruments such as the Duke Activity 
Status Index (DASI) or Heart Failure Somatic Awareness 
Scale index (HFSA). Once self evaluations are completed, 
patients can transmit data to the backend database or store 
locally. Self reporting and patient symptom self recognition 
is based on the symptom self recognition model [10], fig. 1. 
This model requires patients to be actively engaged in their 
health management. Using the tool set, a patient can further 
use visual assessment tools to examine progress of their self 
health management plan. Such feedback supports patient 
learning. 
A third self management and intervention mobile 
application, allows a patient to explore a set of self 
interventions to (e.g. exercise regime, diet alteration, etc.) 
 
303
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

aid in symptom and overall health management. Patients can   
 
Figure 4: Clinician Example usage sequence 
 
examine what the impact on their health could potentially be 
if they adhere to a specific intervention.  Collaborative 
patient self management has been shown [27, 28, 29] to be 
an effective tool in helping patients understand, respond to 
and manage their health condition making them an active 
participant in their self care.  
 
             Figure 5: Trend analysis graph 
VI. 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
Phase one of five phases within our design odyssey 
(fig.6) involved the design of all sensors from scratch so that 
each could be designed with the end system on a chip (SOC) 
goal in mind. During this phase of design (completed fall 
2010) all components were designed and tested using a 
microprocessor as the core computing engine, along with 
discrete printed circuit board (PCB) designs for each of the 
seven sensors. 
The electro cardiogram (ECG) Sensor, fig. 7 (top left), 
was designed using a three lead concept. The sensor 
operates by measuring the electrical activity called action 
potential generated by the heart muscles during heart 
contractions, 
representing 
a 
graphical 
mapping 
of 
measurements taken of the heart’s electrical activity over 
time. The signals generated are measured using electrodes 
that convert the electrical potential into a measureable 
voltage signal. Our 
sensor operates by extracting 
measurements using a two lead approach with the third 
being body ground. The two electrodes rest on the right and 
left chest. The measured voltage is in the 1 to 5 mV range 
and is measured from the AgCL electrodes. The signal is 
then amplified using a high gain (e.g. 100) amplification 
factor.   
                    
Figure 6: System Design Phases 
 
The amplified signal is then isolated and filtered using a 
band pass filter (e.g. 0.04 – 150 HZ). The transducer output 
is then sent to a digital signal processor that extracts out the 
ECG signal, determines the principally important points 
(PIP) and then sends these to the core processing engine for 
ECG classification. Our sensor classifies ECG signals into 
one of six classes; normal, slow-fast heart rate, irregular 
heart rhythm, abnormality in ECG P wave, abnormality in 
ECG QRS wave, or abnormality within the ECG QRS wave 
and the ECG P waves combined.  
The Oxygen Saturation sensor (SO2) sensor was 
designed using tradition pulse oximetry concepts. Two light 
emitting diodes are used that produce red and infrared beams 
at 660 nm and 940 nm respectively. These signals are pulsed 
at approximately 30 times per second with a synchronous on 
cycle, followed by a pause cycle allowing for compensation 
due to ambient light. A photo-detector is used to measure the 
received light using the transmission method. The received 
red and infrared signals are extracted and used to compute a 
ratio of red to infrared light measured. This ratio is then used 
to compute the SO2 percentage. In general typical ratios of .5 
equate to an SO2 of 100%, a ratio of 1 to an SO2 rate of 82% 
and a ratio of 2 to an SO2 of 0%. Our computations and 
calibrations use models well known in the industry. The SO2 
sensor front end design is shown in fig. 7 (bottom left).  
The present sensors were implemented on a PCB and 
subsequently re-implemented in a mixed signal FPGA core. 
We are presently in the process of taking the core designs 
and redesigning for a mixed signal system on a chip (SOC) 
which will then be fabricated into our final form factor (e.g. 
the smart band aid, fig. 6, phase 5). 
The third sensor is a simple temperature sensor. The 
design of the temperature sensor was accomplished using a 2 
wire thin film resistive temperature detector (RTD) and a 
simple translation component that interprets the detected 
 
 
304
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

voltages across the RTD wires and converts these into a 
temperature using a simple model. Using these basic sensors, 
all other cardiac measurements (e.g. blood pressure, blood 
flow, pulse rate, respiration rate) are derived using synthetic 
sensor concepts built using synthetic models [30]. 
  
Figure 7: ECG/O2 Sensors Design and Integration 
 
For example, to calculate the pulse rate the ECG wave 
interval is tracked and counted. The count of waveforms per 
minute is then used to compute a pulse rate averaged over 
time to reflect the clients pulse. Likewise for respiration rate, 
the ECG can be used to extract out a background variation 
signal in the amplitude of the ECG peaks in synch with the 
clients respiration rate.  
Likewise the client’s blood pressure and blood flow can 
also be calculated from the ECG and SO2 values generated 
from the sensors using relationships exhibited in the signals 
along with functions derived from the client’s physiology or 
using an additional acoustic transducer that measures flow 
variations. Our final design will choose one based on a least 
number of transducers principle.  
The block diagram for our sensor is shown in fig.8. There 
are many novel features being developed as part of our 
system. First, we have adopted a cost cutting approach in 
terms of dollars, size, weight and power driven by the use of 
a minimum number of physical transducers to deliver the 
required measurements effectively and non-intrusively [31]. 
Secondly, we have gone for a single system on a chip design 
that will minimize the number of electronic elements that 
will be integrated into the final form factor (the smart band 
aid).  Third, we have integrated the sensor processing with a 
cell phone mobile application to minimize the need for 
extensive on chip storage. Data storage needs will be limited 
to a maximum of three days of sensor readings based on 
present calculations. 
The SOC sensor suite also consists of position and 
motion sensors integrated on chip allowing us to compensate 
for motion artifacts, reducing false alarms and producing 
more accurate readings based upon a patient’s true 
movements. The entire device is linked to a cell phone via a 
blue tooth transmit and receive component integrated on the 
chip. The only external component needed is the antenna. 
Three internal subsections are used to compute ECG, SO2 
and temperature readings from the raw transducer 
measurements. These measurements are then used in the 
synthetic sensor derivation unit (fig.8) to synthetically derive 
all other measurements. All physical and derived cardiac 
measurements are then used by the cardiac wellness engine 
(along with mobile phone based psychological assessments) 
to compute a patients relative cardiac health and cardiac 
health events (to signal adverse conditions automatically). 
The board level version of the system, fig. 6 phase 3, will 
be completed by August 2011. This system was designed by 
a team of graduate computer engineering students, led by the 
authors who will complete all integration, testing and 
fielding of the system in an experimental study to begin in 
January of 2012.  The final product, shown in fig.6 phase 5, 
is projected to be available after the completion of the 
experimental study which runs for an 18 month period.  
 
Figure 8: Wearable Sensor Architecture and Interface 
VII. SUMMARY 
We presented a novel mobile collaborative decision support 
tool consisting of an integrated non-intrusive sensor suite, 
mobile smart phone application and backend server. The 
system is designed for patient and clinical nurses and 
utilizes specific patient physiologic and psychosocial 
information and evidence-based nursing knowledge to offer 
real-time guidance to the patient and clinician mimicking 
that of an expert mentor. The system’s architecture is 
presented from three different viewpoints; an informational 
view, an operational perspective and a architecturall design 
view. In the informational description, we utilized multiple 
sources of information to construct patient specific health 
assessments and wellness measures based on real-time and 
historic patient-centric data. In the operational system 
description, particular emphasis was placed on describing 
the steps patients and clinicians utilize in performing data 
collection actions, patient assessments, patient evaluations 
and intervention planning and execution. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported in part by the National Science 
Foundation under grant #EIA0218909 and NUWCDIVNPT 
under N00178-04-D-4109-N410. 
REFERENCES 
 
 
305
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

[1] American Heart Association. Heart and Stroke  Statistical 
Update 
2009. 
Retrieved 
on 
3/12/2010, 
http://amhrt.org/statistics/index.html. 
[2] American Heat Association, “Heart failure hospitalization 
rates rise among nation’s seniors”, American Heart 
Association heart disease and stroke statistics: 2008 update. 
http://amhrt.org/statistics/index.htmlRetrieved on 12/12/2008. 
[3] C.Annema, M.Luttik, and T. Jaarsma,. Reasons for 
readmission in heart failure: Perspectives of patients, 
caregivers, cardiologists and heart failure nurses.  Heart & 
Lung, 38(5),2009, pp. 427-434. 
[4] K.Grady, K. Dracup, G. Kennedy, D. Moser, M. Piano, L. 
Stevenson, and J. Young, “Team management of patients with 
heart failure: a statement for healthcare professionals”, 
Cardiovascular Nursing Council of the American Heart 
Association. Circulation 2000; 102, pp. 2443-2456. 
[5] E. Stoller, L. Forster, R. Pollow, and W. Tisdale, “Lay 
evaluation of symptoms by older people: An assessment of 
potential risk”. Health Education Quarterly 1993; 20, pp.505-
522. 
[6] E. Popojes and J. Bochmer, “On device monitoring and 
predicting heart failure exacerbation”. Current Treatment 
options in Cardiovasc Medicine 2008; 10: pp. 371-379. 
[7] J. McManus, J. Salinas, and J. Holcomb, "The Ability to 
Capture “Real-Time” Physiologic Patient Data Using the 
Trauma Vitals System During Air Transport National 
Association of EMS Physicians, Registry Resort, Naples, FL 
from http://www.allacademic.com/meta/p61904_index.html, 
accessed 7/19/2011. 
[8] C. Jurgens, “Soamatic awareness, uncertainty, and delay in 
care seeking in acute heart failure”. Research in Nursing & 
Health, 2006; 29: pp 74-86. 
[9] B. Carlson, B. Riegel, and D.Moser, “Self care abilities of 
patients with heart failure”. Heart and Lung, 30(5), 2001, pp. 
351-359. 
[10] B. Riegel,and V. Dickson,. A situation-specific theory of 
heart failure self-care. Journal of Cardiovascular Nursing, 23, 
2008, pp. 190-196. 
[11] C. Lee, N. Tkacs, and B. Riegel, The influence of heart failure 
self care on health outcomes: Hypothetical cardio-protective 
mechanisms. Journal of Cardiovascular Nursing, 24(3), 2009, 
pp. 179-187. 
[12] L. Evangelista, K. Dracup, and L. Doering, "Treatment-
seeking delays in heart failure patients". The Journal of Heart 
and Lung Transplantation, vol 19, 2000, pp. 932-938. 
[13] C. Jurgens, D. Moser, R. Armola, B. Carlson, K. Sethares, 
and B. Riegel, Symptom Clusters of Heart Failure, Research 
in Nursing and Health, 2009, Vol. 32, No. 5, pp. 551-560. 
[14] N. Artinian, M. Magnan, M. Sloan, and M. Lange, "Self-care 
behaviors among patients with heart failure", Heart & Lung, 
2002, vol 31, pp. 161-172. 
[15] T. Mitsa, P. Fortier, G. Yang, A. Shrestha, N. Dluhy, and 
E.O’Neill,  “A Dynamic, Client-Centric Point-of-care System 
for the Novice Nurse”, Communications of the Association 
for Information Systems Journal, Information Systems and 
Healthcare XXI: Volume 19 Article 36, June, 2007. Available 
at http://aisel.aisnet.org/cais/vol19/iss1/36  
[16] M. Prcela, D. Gamberger, and A. Jovic, Semantic web 
ontology utilization for heart failure expert system design, 
Medical Informatics Europe, pp. 851-856, 2008. 
[17] J. Sensemeier, “Advancing the state of data integration in 
healthcare”.  Journal of Healthcare Information Management, 
17(4), pp. 58-61, 2003. 
[18] P. Brown, and P. Sonken, “Evaluation of the Quality of 
Information 
Retrieval 
of 
Clinical 
Findings 
from 
a 
Computerized 
Patient 
Database 
Using 
a 
Semantic 
Terminological Model”, JAMIA, vol. 7/4, 2000, pp. 392-403. 
[19] A. 
Chapyala, 
Data 
Mining 
in 
Home 
Health 
Care 
Management, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, ECE 
Technical Report UMD-ECE-TR-2009-101, 1/23, 2009. 
[20] R. Antony, Development of Hit Ratio Algorithm and 
Matching Priority Index Supporting Patient Case Indexing, 
University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, ECE Technical 
Report UMD-ECE-TR-2009-102, 3/6, 2009. 
[21] A. Sishtla, Similarity Search Using Frequent Case and Rule 
Based Indexing Techniques, University of Massachusetts 
Dartmouth, ECE Technical Report UMD-ECE-TR-2008-103, 
3/28, 2008. 
[22] P. Fortier, “Improving student nurses clinical care experience 
through the use of a computerized Mobile hand-held Decision 
Support System”, IADIS mobile learning Conference, April, 
2008, pp. 10. 
[23] D. Wang, “Mining T-outliers in High Dimensional Time 
Series Financial Data”. Ph.D. Dissertation, ECE department, 
University of Massachusetts Dartmouth. 2005. 
[24] B. Joshi., Assessing the Significance of MLHFQ Attributes 
from a Spatial/temporal Perspective using Data Mining 
Techniques, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, ECE 
Technical Report UMD-ECE-TR-2008-104, 12/16, 2008. 
[25] S. Chandran, Improving Chronic Heart Failure Nurse Care 
Through Mobile Monitoring of Subtle Behavioral / 
Physiological 
Changes, 
University 
of 
Massachusetts 
Dartmouth, ECE Technical Report UMD-ECE-TR-2008-105, 
12/16, 2008. 
[26] P. Narra, Improving Chronic Heart Failure Patient Self Care 
Through Mobile Monitoring of Subtle Behavioral / 
Physiological 
Changes, 
University 
of 
Massachusetts 
Dartmouth, ECE Technical Report UMD-ECE-TR-2008-106, 
12/ 16, 2008. 
[27] A. Jovicic A. Holroyd-Leduc, and S. Straus, Effects of self 
management intervention on health outcomes of patients with 
heart failure: a systematic review of randomized controlled 
trials, BMC Cardiovascular Disorders, Volume 6 Number 43, 
2006,  8 pp. 
[28] T. Koerlling M. Johnson, R. Cody, and K. Aaronson, 
“Discharge education improves clinical outcomes in patients 
with chronic heart failure”, Circulation, Volume 111, Number 
2, 2000, pp 179-185. 
[29] T. Rector S. Kubo, and J. Cohn, “Patients’ self assessment of 
their congestive heart failure, Part 2: Content, reliability and 
validity of a new measure, The Minnesota Living with Heart 
Failure questionnaire”, Heart Failure, Volume 3, 1987, pp 
198-209. 
[30] P. Fortier and K. Dasari, Examining the Role of Metadata in 
Testing IED Detection Systems, International Test and 
Evaluation Asssociation Journal - Sept 2009; Volume 30-3  
pp.  421-433.  
[31] P. Fortier, O.Aljaroudi, P.Boddu, P.Chaiyasucheeva, R. 
Kanjee, A.Tannous, and W.Turner, “Design of a Flexible 
Cardiac Health Monitor - Supporting Patient/Clinician Subtle 
Cardiac Symptom Recognition”, Poster, IEEE Sensors 2011. 
 
306
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

