VANETs Networking Protocols: An Analytical Study
Samira Harrabi
ENSI University
Mannouba, Tunisia
Email: samira.harrabi@gmail.com
Ines Ben Jaffar
ESCT University
Mannouba,Tunisia
Email: ines.benjaafar@gmail.com
Khaled Ghedira
ISG University
Tunis, Tunisia
Email: khaled.ghedira@anpr.tn
Abstract—Vehicular Ad hoc NETworks (VANETs) are considered
as a class of Mobile Ad hoc NETworks (MANETs). The VANETs
are a set of vehicles that are capable of exchanging data
dynamically and without needing any pre-existing and ﬁxed
network infrastructure. Each node sends and receives messages
in its communication area. Thus, message routing is done through
a routing protocol. Despite the fact that the VANETs are a
subgroup of the MANETs, they possess exceptional network
behaviors like high mobility and dynamic topology, which make
the MANETs routing protocols unsuitable for the VANETs. This
paper summarizes the different protocols used for routing in
the VANETs that focuses on a vehicle-to-vehicle communication.
Utilizing an OMNET++ simulator, the experimental results are
discussed to compare the presented routing protocol categories.
Keywords–VANET; Routing protocols; OMNET++.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A Vehicular Ad hoc NETwork (VANET) is a commu-
nication network between vehicles equipped with comput-
ers, network devices and various types of sensors [1]. In
the VANET, vehicles communicate with each other via a
Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) communication and with the road-
side through a Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) communication.
Fig. 1 shows an example of the VANET.
Figure 1. Example of VANET scenario.
Even though the VANET is a subclass of a Mobile Ad-hoc
NETwork (MANET), it has speciﬁc network characteristics, as
follows [2]:
•
High mobility
The VANETs are characterized by a high mobility of
vehicles. Therefore, a node may join or leave the network
in a very short time, which makes a very frequent change
of the topology. In addition, routing problems can occur
when communication links are broken suddenly due to an
important velocity value, i.e., an intermittent connectivity
problem.
• Communication environment
The environments considered by the VANET are often un-
favorable particularly in urban areas. Vehicle movements
are related to road structures (intersections, trafﬁc signs,
etc.) and road base stations (infrastructure) in highways
or within a metropolitan area. The constraints imposed
by this type of environment, such as radio obstacles and
impacts of multipath propagation, affect the quality of
services as well as radio transmissions.
• Constraint of energy
Unlike the MANET, where the energy constraint is an
addressed challenge issue, the VANETs energy is not a
critical behavior because the components of the VANET
have no limit in terms of energy and may have multiple
communication interfaces.
• Density Variation
The density of nodes in the VANET is not uniform. For
example, in an urban environment the density is much
higher than in rural areas. The number of vehicles in an
intersection or in a trafﬁc jam is more important than in
another area where trafﬁc is often ﬂuid. In addition, the
density is different depending on the night or the day, and
/ or peak or break hours. This density diversity makes it
difﬁcult to design routing protocols.
• Network partitioning
This problem mainly occurs when the node density is low.
Then, the vehicles move in isolated and non-connected
groups. Therefore, it becomes difﬁcult in this case to
ensure end-to-end communications.
From the above characteristics, it is evident that designing a
suitable routing protocol for the VANET is a big challenge. In
addition, the presented behaviors make the MANET routing
algorithms unsuitable for the VANET [3]. Hence, routing in
the VANET has been the subject of many research works
and several protocols have been proposed [4][5][7][8][9][10].
Based on the path creation manner, as well as the maintenance
of routes, we can classify the VANET routing protocols
into two major categories: hierarchical and non-hierarchical
protocols. The aim of this paper is to study the impact of the
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

VANETs properties on all routing protocols.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
Section 2 deals with the classiﬁcation of the routing protocols.
Section 3 presents the simulation results and gives a compar-
ison of the various algorithms. In Section 4, we conclude the
paper.
II.
ROUTING PROTOCOLS IN VANETS
Routing is an important mechanism for the VANET,
through which vehicles can communicate together, even if they
are not in a direct communication range. To route a message,
each protocol possesses a speciﬁc strategy to ﬁnd and maintain
a path. Based on this speciﬁcity, we can classify the VANET
routing protocols into two major categories: hierarchical and
non-hierarchical protocols.
A. Non - Hierarchical Protocols
This family of protocols is known as uniform or ﬂat routing
protocols which consider that all the nodes are equal, in the
same hierarchical level, having the same roles and functions.
Therefore, no hierarchy is deﬁned between the network nodes.
Each node sends and receives routing control messages [11].
Based only on its position, the node takes a decision to
route packets. They are further divided into two classes:
topology-based routing protocols and geographical position-
based protocols.
1) Topology Based Routing Protocols:
There are three routing categories that deﬁne this family, which
are proactive, reactive and hybrid routing protocols.
(a) Proactive Routing Protocols
In proactive protocols, each node keeps knowledge of the
entire network topology. This image is updated periodi-
cally or every topological modiﬁcation by an exchange of
control messages. Routing tables are maintained through
these packages and routes are determined on the basis of
this knowledge [12]. The proactive routing protocols are
investigated as follows [13]:
• Global State Routing protocol (GSR)
The GSR [14] is a link-state protocol where each
node knows the global network topology saved in
the routing table, which enables it to calculate routes
and reach each destination. Unlike other protocols, the
GSR nodes do not broadcast their links-state to all the
network nodes, but only send its neighbors. This link-
state includes the delay to reach every neighbors node.
Consequently, the rate of control packets ﬂooding in
the network can be reduced. However, due to the high
mobility of nodes that provide instability of links, the
control overhead can increase.
• Destination-Sequenced Distance-Vector (DSDV)
The DSDV [15] is a distance vector protocol, where
each node maintains a routing table containing informa-
tion about all reachable destinations. This information
includes the intermediate nodes used to join the des-
tination, the number of hops between the source and
the destination node as well as the Sequence Number
(SN) stamped by the recipient node, which can be an
intermediate node or the destination node itself. The SN
is used to differ the novel established route from the
old one. Each node sends, periodically, its routing table
to its neighbors. Other update packets are also sent
after changing in the network topology. These packages
include only the routing information affected by this
variation.
Once a node receives an update packet, it compares
it with the existing information stored in its routing
table. An updating in the entire routing table starts if the
received information is newer with a larger sequence
number or if they have the same sequence number but
with a shorter distance (lower hops number). Neverthe-
less, the routing problem, in terms of performance, is
that the DSDV engenders a large volume of control
packets and consumes a large part of the available
bandwidth.
• Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR)
The main goal of the OLSR [16] is to provide the
shortest possible path to reach a destination in terms
of hops number based on the Dijkstra algorithm [17].
Its contribution is in using the Multi-Point Relaying
(MPR) method. The idea behind this method is as
follows. To reach all of its 2-hop-link neighbors, each
node builds a set of nodes called the MPR. Every
MPR node is used to route and forward the received
messages. The other neighbors which are not MPRs
can only read and execute packets.
(b) Reactive Routing Protocols
These protocols are known as on-demand routing proto-
cols because the routes are established only when a node
wants to join a destination and only the used routes are
maintained [12]. In this case, unlike proactive protocols,
an additional delay is required at the beginning of each
search; i.e., when a node intends to transmit packets, a
route discovery phase is initiated by broadcasting a route
search message. Any node that receives this message and
does not have information about the destination broad-
casts the message. Consequently, a route search packet
is transmitted from point to point in all or part of the
network. This mechanism is called the ﬂooding technique
[18]. The reactive routing protocols are reviewed as
follows:
• Dynamic Source Routing (DSR)
This protocol uses the source routing technique in
which the source node includes the complete route in
the packet header to reach the destination node [19].
Therefore, the intermediate nodes do not need to update
the information on the crossing path. The DSR is based
on two phases that are the route discovery and the road
maintenance.
• Ad hoc On-demand Distance Vector (AODV)
The AODV [20] uses the number of hops as a metric to
select an available route. Like the DSDV, this reactive
protocol utilizes the principle of the sequence number
in order to use the most new or fresh roads. There are
three types of packets utilized by the AODV which
are: the Route REQuest (RREQ) packet, the Route
REPly (RREP) packet and the Route ERRor (RERR)
packet. In addition, the AODV invokes a HELLO
control packet that veriﬁes the route connectivity. Like
the DSR, the AODV uses two mechanisms which are
the route discovery and the road maintenance. While
the ﬁrst step is used to ﬁnd a route to reach a des-
tination, the second mechanism is necessary to detect
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

and announce broken links caused by the mobility of
nodes.
(c) Hybrid Routing Protocols
Hybrid protocols combine the two previous categories.
A proactive technique is used in a limited network area
around the source node where the number of hops is
not more than four hops. Otherwise, the reactive method
is used for the distant nodes [21]. The advantage of
the hybrid protocols is that they adapt better to large
networks. However, this type of protocol combines the
cons of proactive and reactive routing protocols such as
the regular exchange of control packets and the ﬂooding
of the whole network in order to ﬁnd a route and join a
distant node.
• Zone Routing Protocol (ZRP)
It divides the network into different zones. For each
node, it deﬁnes a routing zone expressed in a maximal
number of hops. Inside this area, the ZRP uses a
proactive protocol; and outside of this routing zone, it
uses a reactive protocol [22]. Based on various compar-
ative and behavioral studies of topology-based routing
protocols in the VANET [23][24][25], the previous
protocols are compared and tabulated in Table 1.
2) Geographical Position Based Protocols:
Geographical protocols are based on two phases: the location
of the destination node and the routing of packets to this node
[26]. However, these protocols require a node location service
for the routing packets in the network. Yet, most of these
protocols generate a lot of control packets which can increase
the network congestion. Various protocols belong to this type.
(a) Greedy Perimeter Stateless Routing (GPSR)
The routing technique of the GPSR [27] is based on two
phases. The ﬁrst step is to select of the next transmitter
node which will have the role to retransmit packets. This
procedure is based on the position information of the
neighboring and destination packet. This step is necessary
to choose the nearest node to the destination. The second
part of the GPSR is to get around the obstacles as well as
the empty geographical areas where no transmitter node
exists.
(b) Movement-based Routing Algorithm (MORA)
To take an adaptable retransmission decision, MORA [28]
used the position and movement direction of vehicles.
This method takes into consideration the dynamic changes
in the network.
(c) Vehicle-Assisted Data Delivery (VADD)
The VADD [29] uses the predictable movement of ve-
hicles to take a retransmission decision. It particularly
uses the information on the trafﬁc road to estimate the
transmission delay. Therefore, the packets will be routed
along a path with the lowest time.
(d) Greedy Trafﬁc-Aware Routing protocol (GyTAR)
The main goal of this protocol is to route data to the
nearest node considering the speciﬁc factors to this kind
of network environments. The GyTAR [30] protocol as-
sumes that each vehicle knows its current position using
the GPS service. In order to make routing decisions, a
source node has to know the destination position.
(e) Urban Multi hop Broadcast Protocol (UMB)
In order to reduce collisions problems and effectively
utilize the bandwidth, the UMB [31] is based on the multi-
TABLE I. A COMPARISON STUDY OF TOPOLOGY BASED
ROUTING PROTOCOLS IN VANET.
Pros
Cons
DSR
-Beacon less.
- The control overhead is
high.
-It has small overload on
the network.
-Unnecessary
ﬂooding
burden the network.
-It reduces load on the
network.
-In high mobility pattern,
it performs worse.
-No periodical update is
required in DSR.
-Unable to repair broken
links locally.
AODV
-It uses destination se-
quence number.
-More time is needed
to
establish
a
route
compared
to
other
approaches.
-It
reduces
excessive
memory
requirements
and
the
route
redundancy.
- It provide a heavy con-
trol overhead.
-AODV responses to the
link failure in the net-
work.
-It consumes extra band-
width.
-It can be applied to large
scale ad hoc network.
GSR
-Packet
delivery
ratio
of GSR is better than
AODV and DSR.
-
It
neglects
the
sit-
uation like sparse net-
work where there are not
enough nodes for for-
warding packets.
-GSR is scalable than
AODV and DSR.
-GSR shows higher rout-
ing overhead than Gy-
TAR because of using
hello messages as control
messages.
DSDV
-It solves routing loop
problem.
-It takes up a large vol-
ume of available band-
width.
-It reduces the count to
inﬁnity problem.
-It is unsuitable for high
density and dynamic net-
works.
-It maintains only the
best route.
OLSR
-It is suitable for high
density and dynamic net-
works.
-The control packet over-
head is high.
-The number of trans-
mission is less.
ZRP
-It reduces the control
overhead.
-It combines the draw-
backs of reactive and re-
active protocols.
hop diffusion algorithm for inter vehicular networks.
Unlike the ﬂooding protocols, the UMB assigns a sending
packet process to the most distant nodes without knowing
any information about the network topology.
The UMB is based on two phases: the ﬁrst is called
directional broadcast where the vehicle selects a source
node for relaying a data without any information about
the network topology. The second is called intersection
broadcast where the packet disseminates in all directions.
The main advantage of the UMB protocol is that it
performs well in terms of multi-hop broadcast reliability
in urban channels.
(f) Anchor-based Street and Trafﬁc Aware Routing (A-
STAR)
This protocol uses particularly the information about city
bus routes in order to identify a route anchor with a high
connectivity for routing packets. The A-STAR [32] adopts
a routing approach based on the anchor, which reﬂects the
characteristics of the streets. A point is associated with
each street according to its capacity (large or small Street
serviced by a number of different buses). Information
about the roads provided by buses give an idea on the
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

charge of the vehicular network in each street. This gives
an image of the city in different times.
(g) Distributed Vehicular Broadcasting (DV-CAST)
The DV-CAST [33] is designed to be used for a multi-hop
routing technique. This protocol shows three scenarios
of movement for broadcasting vehicles: dense trafﬁc sce-
nario, sparse trafﬁc scenario, and regular trafﬁc scenario.
Lots of studies have demonstrated that the DV-CAST
provides an elevated control overhead and delay in end-
to-end packet transmissions.
Their used essential characters, illustrated in different
survey papers, deal with position-based routing protocols
in the VANET [34][35]. The previous protocols are com-
pared and presented in Table 2.
TABLE II. A COMPARISON STUDY OF POSITION BASED ROUTING
PROTOCOLS IN VANET.
Pros
Cons
GPSR
-To forward the packet a
node needs to remember
only one hop neighbor
location.
- For high mobility char-
acteristics of node, stale
information of neighbors
position
is
often
con-
tained
in
the
sending
nodes neighbor table.
- Forwarding packet de-
cisions are made dynam-
ically.
- Though the destination
node is moving its in-
formation in the packet
header
of
intermediate
node is never updated.
MORA -It performs well in high
dynamic topology.
- Complex metrics used
to forwarding packets.
VADD
- It is suitable for multi-
hop packet transmitting.
- Trafﬁc road is high.
- Packet delivery rate is
high.
GyTAR - Number of transmis-
sion is less.
- Control packet over-
head is high.
- Efﬁcient for high dy-
namic network.
- It is on the basis of a
roadside units to deﬁne
vehicle number.
UMB
-It performs well at high
packet loads and vehicle
trafﬁc densities.
- It broadcasts message
without any topology in-
formation that can in-
crease rate of dropped
packet.
- It solves packet colli-
sion problem.
A-
STAR
- In low trafﬁc density,
A-STAR
ensures
for
ﬁnding
an
end-to-end
connection.
- The packet delivery ra-
tio of A-STAR is lower
than GSR and GPSR.
- A-STAR uses a new
local recovery
strategy
which is more suitable
for city environment.
-To ﬁnd a path from
source to destination it
uses
static
information
based on city bus routes
which causes connectiv-
ity problem on some por-
tion of streets.
-
Path
selection
of
A-STAR
ensures
high
connectivity though its
packet delivery ratio is
lower
than
GSR
and
GPSR.
DV-
CAST
-By using ﬂag variable
check whether the packet
is redundant or not.
-
Control
overhead
is
high.
- End to end data transfer
delay is high.
B. Hierarchical Routing Protocols
In this type of routing protocols, the neighboring vehicles
form a group of nodes or a cluster. Each cluster is managed by
a leader node, called the cluster-head [36]. Each cluster head
is responsible for managing the nodes, not only in the same
group but also between the neighboring clusters. The clustering
operation and the manager node selection are of two necessary
steps. Several protocols are classiﬁed under this routing type,
namely:
1) Hierarchical Cluster Based (HCB):
This protocol is designed especially for high mobility networks
and it is based on a two-layer communication architecture.
While in the ﬁrst layer the nodes can communicate with each
other via a multi hop path based on their unique interface
radio, there exist [37] nodes in the second layer that also have
another radio communication interface.
2) Cluster Based Location Routing (CBLR):
For this protocol, each cluster head maintains a routing table
containing the addresses and geographical locations of the
nodes in its own group and for the neighboring clusters [38].
When a source node wants sending a data to a destination, the
leader node checks if the destination is in the same group or
not. If it is, it sends the packet to the nearest neighbor of the
destination.
3) Cluster-Based Directional Routing Protocol (CBDRP):
To form a cluster, this protocol uses the vehicle movement
direction as a metric. Consequently, the nodes get the same
direction form a group [39]. The source node sends the packet
to its cluster head, which forwards the message to the leader
node of the destination group, which in turn transmits it to the
destination.
4) Cluster Based Routing Protocol (CBRP):
The CBRP [40] uses geographical information to form a
cluster. To locate a node, the geographical areas are divided
into a grid form. The node existing in a grid will be selected
as a cluster head., The selected node must broadcast a LEAD
message to inform its neighbor vehicles or a LEAVE message
if it leaves the grid. Both the LEAVE and LEAD messages
contain the position of their grid.
On the basis of diverse behavioral studies of hierarchical
protocols in the VANET [41][42], the above cited methods
are compared and presented in Table 3.
TABLE III. A COMPARISON STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL ROUTING
PROTOCOLS IN VANET.
Pros
Cons
HCB
- Intra-cluster routing is
performed independently
in each cluster.
- Number of retransmission is
high.
-Cluster heads exchange
membership information
periodically
to
enable
inter-cluster routing.
- packet loss rate is high.
CBLR
-It is suitable for high
mobility network.
- Digital map is used.
- Number of retransmission is
high.
-Control packet overhead
is low.
CBDRP -Link stability problem
solve in VANET.
-Control packet overhead is
average.
-Reliable and rapid data
transfer.
-Number of retransmission is
high.
CBR
-Routing
overhead
is
less.
- It doesnt consider velocity
and direction of a vehicle.
Fig. 2 summarizes the taxonomy of different routing pro-
tocols in the VANET.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure 2. Toxonomy of different routing protocols.
As one can see in Fig. 2, a VANET routing protocol may be
classiﬁed according to various criteria reﬂecting a fundamental
design.
III.
SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
Unlike the previous part, where we compared the various
routing protocols of the same category based on their important
parameters, in this section we compare the different routing
categories on the basis of simulation results. To achieve this
goal, we chose from each routing family a single protocol.
Consequently, we evaluated the performance of the AODV
[20], the DSDV [15], the GPSR [27] and the CBRP [40]
routing protocols using OMNET++ [43] and MATLAB [44]
tools.
We selected three performance metrics, which are the average
of the end-to-end delay, the throughput, and the Packet Deliver
Ratio (PDR).
• The end-to-end delay (E2E delay): It deﬁnes all the
delays caused during the routing process, such as
transmission/re-transmission delays at the MAC layer, the
transfer delay, and the route discovery delay.
• Throughput: The throughput is the most important metric
because we are concerned with the number of transmitted
messages. It is described as the total number of received
packets at a destination out of the total simulation time.
• Packet deliver ratio (PDR): The rate of the number of
delivered packets to the best destination deﬁnes the PDR.
The simulation parameters are listed in Table 4.
TABLE IV. SIMULATION PARAMETERS.
Parameter
value
Transmission rate
54Mbps.
Simulation time
200-1400s.
Playground Dimensions
1300m x 1300m.
Routing protocols
AODV,DSDV,GPRS, and CBRP.
Transmission range
150m.
Number of nodes
30.
Mac type
IEEE 802.11p
A. E2E Delay
Fig. 3 depicts the E2E delay average measured for the
previously discussed methods with a variation in the simulation
time from 200 to 1400s. In this routing case, the number of
vehicles is ﬁxed to 30. We can notice that at [200,800], and
despite the increase in the E2E delay average value of the
GPSR from 5% at 500 to reach 13% at 800 s, it outperforms
the AODV, DSDV and CBRP protocols. Nevertheless, at [800,
1400], the CBRP demonstrates a good behavior. On the other
hand, the topology-based routing protocols represented by both
the AODV and DSDV methods show a bad performance in
terms of E2E delay in the entire simulation time.
Figure 3. E2E Delay vs. simulation time.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

B. Throughput
In Fig. 4, the results of the measured throughput for the four
methods depend on the simulation time. The results indicate a
more efﬁcient behavior of topology-based routing protocols in
comparison with the GPSR and the CBRP when the simulation
time grows. As illustrated in the ﬁgure below, the AODV
exhibits the highest throughput value in spite of the ﬂuctuations
from different simulation times.
We observe also that although its throughput value is mostly
half of the AODV value, the DSDV shows good results com-
pared to the GPSR and CBRP protocols which demonstrates
a bad behavior in terms of throughput rate.
FIGURE 4. THROUGHPUT VS. SIMULATION TIME.
C.
Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR)
In Fig. 5, the PDR of the AODV, the DSDV, the CBRP and
the GPRS are presented when the simulation time is varied
from 200 to 1400s. It can be seen that the CBRP, the DSDV
and the AODV demonstrate a better performance than the
GPSR, with a slight difference counted for the CBRP.
As compared to the cluster-based routing protocol and the
topology-based methods, the GPSR exhibits the lowest per-
formance level. The reason behind the bad behavior in terms
of packet delivery ratio is due to the feature of the GPSR in
which it takes into consideration the geographical position of
nodes that cannot be an ideal metric. However, the clustering
technique provides a more stability for the CBRP. As a result,
Fig. 5 shows a PDR over 1 for the CBRP.
FIGURE 5. PDR VS. SIMULATION TIME.
Table 5 presents a numerical comparison of the AODV,
DSDV, CBRP and GPSR routing protocols in terms of through-
put, E2E delay and packet delivery ratio in the cases where
the simulation time has minimum and maximum values.
TABLE V. NUMERICAL COMPARISON BETWEEN AODV, DSDV,
CBRP, AND GPSR PROTOCOLS.
Simulation
time
is
200s
Simulation
time
is
100s
Throughput
(byte/s)
E2E
De-
lay)
PDR
Throughput
(byte/s)
E2E
De-
lay)
PDR
AODV
400000
34.9%
1
500000
35%
1
DSDV
250000
31%
1
300000
34.8%
1
GPSR
20000
11%
0.6
10000
7%
0.1
CBRP
520
10%
1
40000
7.5%
1
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The key difference of Vehicular Ad hoc Network (VANET)
and Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET) is the exceptional
mobility pattern and quick variability variable of network
topology.
Thus, the most important aim of this paper is to
categorize different mobile ad hoc routing protocols and to
evaluate these methods in the VANET. In this paper, we have
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

reviewed and compared the different routing categories. From
the results of our comparative study, we have examined the
topology-based routing protocols, the AODV and the DSDV,
against the position-based routing protocol, the GPSR, as
well as the cluster-based routing protocol, the CBRP. We
have demonstrated that the GPSR outperforms the AODV,
the DSDV and the CBRP in terms of E2E delay with a
low simulation speed. Nevertheless, the CBRP demonstrates
a good behavior when the simulation time grows. We have
also found that the topology-based routing protocols show a
bad performance in the entire simulation time.
On the one hand, the results of the measured throughput have
depicted a more efﬁcient behavior of topology-based routing
protocols in comparison with the GPSR and the CBRP despite
the ﬂuctuations from different simulation times. On the other
hand, the GPSR have exhibited the lowest performance level
in terms of packet delivery ratio compared to the CBRP, the
DSDV and the AODV. From this study, it is evident that each
routing protocol category has its network speciﬁcity, which
makes it efﬁcient in one case and inefﬁcient in another.
The novelty of this paper is to compare and evaluate all
the categories routing protocols and show the impact of the
VANET properties on each class.
As a future work, we intend to improve the AODV protocol
to make it more efﬁcient and effective in vehicular networks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are thankful to the anonymous reviewers for
their useful comments and suggestions that helped us to
improve the quality of this paper.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. H. Hartenstein and K.P. Laberteaux, ”A tutorial survey on vehicular
ad hoc networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 46, no. 6, June
2008, pp. 164-171.
[2]
Venkatesh, A. Indra, and R.Murali, ”Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks
(Vanets): Issues and applications,” Journal of Analysis and Computation,
vol. 8, no. 1, (January-June 2012), pp. 31-45.
[3]
P. Ranjan and K.- K. Ahirwar, ”Comparative Study of VANET and
MANET Routing Protocols,” Proc. of the International Conference on
Advanced Computing and Communication Technologies (ACCT 11),
India, 2011, pp. 517-523.
[4]
P. Salvoa, F. Cuomoa, A. Baiocchia, and I. Rubinb, ” Investigating
VANET dissemination protocols performance under high throughput
conditions,” Vehicular Communications, vol. 2, Issue 4, October 2015,
pp. 185-194.
[5]
A. Gorrieri and G. Ferrari, ” Irresponsible AODV routing,” Vehicular
Communications, vol. 2, Issue 1, January 2015, pp. 47-57.
[6]
C. Li, C. Zhao, L. Zhu, H. Lin, and J. Li, ”Geographic routing protocol
for vehicular ad hoc networks in city scenarios: a proposal and analysis
”International Journal of Communication Systems, vol.27, Issue 12,
December 2014, pp. 4126-4143.
[7]
Y.-S. Chen, Ch.-S. Hsu, and Ch.-H. Cheng, ”Network mobility protocol
for vehicular ad hoc networks, ” International Journal of Communication
Systems ”, vol. 27, Issue 11, November 2014, pp. 3042-3063, doi:
10.1002/dac.2525.
[8]
W. Xiaonan and Q. Huanyan, ”Constructing a VANET based on cluster
chains,” International Journal of Communication Systems, vol. 27, Issue
11, November 2014, pp. 2497-2517, doi: 10.1002/dac.2484.
[9]
S. Harrabi, W. Chainbi, and K. Ghedira, ” A Multi-Agent Proac-
tive Routing Protocol for Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks,” The 2014
International Symposium on Networks, Computers and Communi-
cations (ISNCC 14 ) , Hammamet- Tunisia, June 2014, pp. 1-6,
doi:10.1109/SNCC.2014.6866523.
[10]
K.-Z. Ghafoor, K. Abu Bakar, and H.-N. AL-Hashimi, ”A Novel
Delay- and Reliability-Aware Inter-Vehicle Routing Protocol,” Interna-
tional Journal of Network Protocols and Algorithms, vol. 2, no. 2, 2010,
pp. 66-88, doi: 10.5296/npa.v2i2.427.
[11]
K. Petteri, ” Classiﬁcation of ad hoc routing protocols, ” Finnish
Defence Forces, Naval Academy, Finland, 2002.
[12]
B. D. Shivahare, C. Wahi, and Shalini Shivhare, ”Comparison Of
Proactive And Reactive Routing Protocols In Mobile Adhoc Network
Using Routing Protocol Property”, International Journal of Emerging
Technology and Advanced Engineering, vol.2, Issue 3, March 2012, pp.
356-359.
[13]
S. Dhankhar and S. Agrawal ”VANETs: A Survey on Routing Protocols
and Issues, ”International Journal of Innovative Research in Science,
Engineering and Technology, vol. 3, Issue 6, June 2014, pp. 13427-
13435.
[14]
T. -W. Chen, and M. Gerla, ”Global state routing: A new routing
scheme for ad-hoc wireless networks,” In IEEE International Conference
on Communications (ICC 98), Atlanta, GA, June 1998, pp. 171-175, doi:
10.1109/ICC.1998.682615.
[15]
R. R. More and S.V. Sankpal, ”Performance evaluation of an efﬁcient
dsdv routing protocols for ad hoc networks”, ITSI Transactions on
Electrical and Electronics Engineering, vol.1, Issue 4, 2013, pp. 15-18.
[16]
T. Clausen and P. Jacquet ”Optimized Link State Routing Protocol
(OLSR),” RFC 3626, Network Working Group, Oct. 2003.
[17]
J. Yi, E. Cizeron, S. Hamma, B. Parrein, and P. Lesage, ” Implementa-
tion of multipath and multiple descriptions coding in olsr,” In Proceeding
of 4th OLSR Introp/Workshop, Ottawa- Canada, 2008.
[18]
G.-C, Gilbert, J.-W. Branch, and B.-K. Szymanski,” A Self-selection
Technique for Flooding and Routing in Wireless Ad-hoc Networks,”
International Journal of Network and Systems Management, vol. 14, no.
3, September 2006, pp. 359-380.
[19]
D. -B. Johnson and D.-A. Maltz,” Dynamic Source Routing in Ad Hoc
Wireless Networks, ” In Mobile Computing, chapter 5, Vol. 353 of the
series. The Kluwer International Series in Engineering and Computer
Science, 1996, pp. 153-181.
[20]
C. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer, and S. Das, ” Ad hoc on-demand
distance vector (AODV) routing” IETF RFC, 3561, July 2003, doi:
10.17487/RFC3561.
[21]
B. Maria, B. Nabil, S.- K. Deep, EL. Driss, ”Recent study of rout-
ing protocols in VANET: survey and taxonomy,” In The 1st Interna-
tional Workshop on Vehicular Networks and Telematics (WVNT 13),
Marrakech-Morocco, 2013.
[22]
Z. J. Haas, ”The Zone Routing Protocol (ZRP) for ad hocnetworks,”
Internet Draft, Nov. 1997.
[23]
A.-B. Kathole and Y. Pande,” Survey Of Topology Based Reactive
Routing Protocols In Vanet,” International Journal of Scientiﬁc and
Engineering Research, Vol. 4, Issue 6, June 2013, pp. 39-44.
[24]
S. Negi and S. Rani,” Comparative Study of Topology based Routing
Protocols in VANET,” International Journal of Computer Science and
Information Technology and Security (IJCSITS), vol. 5, no. 3, June 2015,
pp. 290-294.
[25]
S. Makhija and S. Malik,” Performance Evaluation Of Topology Based
Routing Protocols In VANET,” International Journal of Computer Sci-
ence (IIJCS), vol. 1, Issue 2, July 2013, pp. 21-28.
[26]
S. Allal and S. Boudjit, ”Geocast Routing Protocol for Vanet: Survey
and Geometry Driven Scheme Proposal,” Journal of Internet Services
and Information Security, vol. 3, 2013, pp. 20-36.
[27]
B. Karp and H.-T. Kung, ”GPSR: Greedy perimeter stateless routing
for wireless networks,” in Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (MobiCom 00),
Massachusetts, August 2000.
[28]
F. Granelli, G. Boato, and D. Kliazovich, ” MORA: A movement-based
routing algorithm for vehicle ad hoc networks,” In IEEE Workshop on
Automotive Networking and Applications (AutoNet 06), San Francisco,
2006.
[29]
J. Zhao and G. Cao, ”VADD: vehicle-assisted data delivery in vehicular
Ad hoc networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 57,
no. 3, 2008, pp. 1910-1922.
[30]
M. Jerbi, R. Meraihi, S.-M. Senouci, and Y. Ghamri-Doudane, ”Gy-
TAR: improved greedy trafﬁc aware routing protocol for vehicular ad
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

hoc networks in city environments,” in Proceedings of the 3rd ACM
International Workshop on Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET 06),
pp. 88-89, ACM, Los Angeles, September 2006.
[31]
G. Korkmaz, E. Ekici, F. Ozgner, and U. Ozguner, ”Urban multi-
hop broadcast protocol for inter-vehicle communication systems,” In
Proceedings of the 1st ACM international workshop on Vehicular ad
hoc networks(VANET 04), USA, 2004, pp. 76-85.
[32]
B.-C. Seet, G. Liu, B.-S. Lee, C.-H. Foh, K.-J.Wong, and K.-K. Lee,
” A-STAR: A mobile ad hoc routing strategy for metropolis vehicular
communications,” In Networking, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004 , pp.
989-999.
[33]
O. K. Tonguz, N. Wisitpongphan, and F. Bai, ” DV-CAST: A dis-
tributed vehicular broadcast protocol for vehicular ad hoc networks”
IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 17, no. 2, 2010, pp. 47-57, doi:
10.1109/MWC.2010.5450660.
[34]
A. Kurien and A. Diana,” Survey on Various Position Based Routing
Protocols in Vehicular Ad Hoc Network,” International Journal of Engi-
neering Research and Technology (IJERT), vol. 2, Issue 12, December
2013, pp. 3119-3123.
[35]
A. Soni and D. K. Xaxa,” Position Based Routing protocols in VANET
for Better Link Quality: A Survey,” International Journal of Science and
Research (IJSR), vol. 4, Issue 4, August 2015, pp. 2493-2496.
[36]
F. Li and Y. Wang, ”Routing in vehicular ad hoc networks: A survey,”
IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 2, no. 2, June 2007, pp. 1222.
[37]
Y. Xia, C. K. Yeo, and B. S. Lee, ”Hierarchical cluster based routing
for highly mobile heterogeneous MANET,” in Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Network and Service Security (N2S 09), France,
June 2009, pp. 1-6.
[38]
R. A. Santns, R. M. Edwards, A. Edwards, and D. Belis, ”A novel
cluster-based location routing algorithm for inter-vehicular communi-
cation,” Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, IEEE
proceedings of the 15th Annual Symposium, Barcelona- Spain, 2004.
[39]
T. Song, W. Xia, T. Song, and L. Shen,” A Cluster-Based Directional
Routing Protocol in VANET,” 12th IEEE International Conference on
Communication and Mobile Computing (ICCT), Nanjing, 2010, pp.
1172-1175, doi: 10.1109/ICCT.2010.5689132.
[40]
M. Jiang, J. Li, and Y. C. Tay, ”Cluster Based Routing Protocol (CBRP)
(Internet-Draft draft-ietf-manetcbrp- spec-01.txt),” in National University
of Singapore, I. E. T. F. (IETF), Ed., 1999, pp. 1-27.
[41]
U. Nagaraj, M. U. Kharat, and P. Dhamal,” Study of Various Routing
Protocols in VANET,” International Journal of Computer Science and
Technology ( IJCST), vol. 2, Issue 4, (October- December 2011), pp.
45-52.
[42]
V. A. Gajbhiye and R. W. Jasutkar,”A Review and Comparative Study
of Routing Protocols for VANET,” IJACKD Journal of research, vol. 2,
Issue 1, February 2013 , pp. 11-16.
[43]
OMNET++, URL : https://omnetpp.org/omnetpp/ [accessed: 2016-07-
14].
[44]
MATLAB,
URL
:http://www.mathworks.com/products/matlab/
[ac-
cessed: 2016-07-14].
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

