SAFESENS – Smart Sensors for Fire Safety
First Responders Occupancy, Activity and Vital Signs Monitoring
Brendan O’Flynn, Michael Walsh,
Tyndall National Institute
University College Cork,
Cork, Ireland
email: brendan.oflynn@tyndall.ie
michael.walsh@tyndall.ie
Eduardo M. Pereira, Piyush
Agrawal
UTRC: United Technologies Research
Center
4th Floor, Penrose Wharf Business
Centre
Penrose Quay, Cork, Ireland
email: pereirem@utrc.utc.com
AgrawaP@utrc.utc.com
Tino Fuchs
Robert Bosch GmbH
Renningen, 70465 Stuttgart, Germany
email: Tino.Fuchs2@de.bosch.com
Jos Oudenhoven
Holst Centre-imec
High Tech Campus 31
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
email: jos.oudenhoven@imec-nl.nl
Axel Nackaerts
NXP Semiconductors Belgium
Interleuvenlaan 80
Leuven, Belgium
email: axel.nackaerts@nxp.com
Tanja Braun, Klaus-Dieter Lang
Technical University Berlin
Gustav-Meyer-Allee 25
Berlin, Germany
email: tanja.braun@tu-berlin.de
klausdieter.lang@izm.fraunhofer.de
Christian Dils
Fraunhofer IZM
Gustav-Meyer-Allee 25
Berlin, Germany
email:
christian.dils@izm.fraunhofer.de
Abstract
-
This
paper
describes
the
development
and
implementation of the SAFESENS (Sensor technologies for
enhanced safety and security of buildings and its occupants)
location
tracking
and
first
responder
monitoring
demonstrator. An international research collaboration has
developed a state-of-the-art wireless indoor location tracking
systems for first responders focused initially on fire fighter
monitoring. Integrating multiple gas sensors and presence
detection technologies into building safety sensors and personal
monitors has resulted in more accurate and reliable fire and
occupancy
detection
information
which
is
invaluable
to
firefighters in carrying out their duties in hostile environments.
This demonstration system is capable of tracking occupancy
levels in an indoor environment, as well as the specific location
of fire fighters within those buildings, using a multi-sensor
hybrid tracking system. This ultra-wideband indoor tracking
system is one of the first of its kind to provide indoor
localisation capability to sub meter accuracies with combined
Bluetooth low energy capability for low power communications
and additional inertial, temperature and pressure sensors. This
facilitates increased precision in accuracy detection through
data fusion, as well as the capability to communicate directly
with smartphones and the cloud, without the need for
additional gateway support. Glove based, wearable technology
has been developed to monitor the vital signs of the first
responder and provide this data in real time. The helmet
mounted, wearable technology will also incorporate novel
electrochemical sensors which have been developed to be able
to monitor the presence of dangerous gasses in the vicinity of
the firefighter and again to provide this information in real
time to the fire fighter controller. A SAFESENS demonstrator
is currently deployed in Tyndall and is providing real time
occupancy levels of the different areas in the building as well as
the capability to track the location of the first responders, their
health and the presence of explosive gasses in their vicinity.
Keywords - Gas Sensors; Body Area Networks; Activity
Tracking; Vital Signs Monitoring; Occupancy Detection.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The SAFESENS indoor first responder localisation and
activity monitoring system [1] is designed based on latest
available gas and activity tracking sensor technologies. It
incorporates several solutions to an emergency situation
including people counting for an efficient rescue operation
and first responder location finding. To meet the most
demanding application needs, we have designed a sensor
board along with the wireless network infrastructure which
is capable of delivering the next generation of safety
devices. The aim of this document is to describe the indoor
localisation
platform
of
the
SAFESENS
project,
the
interconnection
of
the
different
parts
of
the
system
(SAFESENS boards, AXIS Cameras, Raspberry Pi and
Server) and location calculation part of the server software.
The objectives of the Tyndall National Institute (TNI) in this
project, is to develop a wearable [2] indoor localization and
activity monitoring system for first responders during
emergency situations. In parallel, novel explosive gas sensor
technologies and physiological health monitoring systems
are being integrated into the fire fighters apparel to monitor
their health and well-being as they are tracked through the
system as presented in Figure 1.
Figure 1.
Deployment Area – Tyndall National Institute UCC.
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

This paper describes the development and validation of
the SAFESENS system technologies. Section II describes
the chosen architecture of the overall system. Section III
describes the localization and activity tracking system
development.
Section
IV
describes
the
Vital
signs
monitoring technologies used to monitor the first responders
health status. Section V describes the development of the
explosive gas sensor. Section VI describes the Occupancy
sensing developed in the project and the validation results
are described in Section VII. Finally, conclusions and
summary are contained in Section VIII
II.
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
There are 8 separate system building blocks comprising
the SAFESENS system: the server, mobile gateway (fire
fighter’s smartphone), Ultra Wide Band (UWB) localisation
[3] Access Points, Raspberry Pi, Occupancy detection
camera,
Fire fighter
tracking
Node, the Physiological
monitoring system and the explosive gas detector. With the
implemented sensor platform, we are able to collect real
time, real world data for research and analysis. The system
architecture is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2.
SAFESENS Demonstrator System Architecture.
The Smartphone carried by the firefighter acts as the
integration system harvesting the sensory data sets from the
firefighters apparel and sending it to the server for
processing,
running
python
based
analytic/localisation
engines and to facilitate visualisation of the data streams.
III.
LOCATION AND ACTIVITY TRACKING
A. Introduction to First Responder Activity Monitoring
A significant number of firefighters are injured every
year in the line of duty [4]. Tracking firefighters while
deployed in dangerous environments is critical to mitigate
risk to the personnel. In large buildings, there is often a
requirement to enter and deal with fires from multiple
directions in order to prevent the fire from spreading. Line
of sight is often obscured with smoke and debris [5] and
there is also the possibility that parts of the structure may be
unstable and subject to collapse. Information relating to the
position and activity status of the firefighter is therefore
critical in helping the subject to navigate the environment
and to enable safe extraction in the Non Line of Sight
(NLOS) case [6]. This information is also valuable in search
and rescue situations, to enable more optimal and efficient
use of personnel on the ground.
B. SAFESENS Localisation Technologies
The SAFESENS project has developed a Personnel
Safety Monitor, the purpose of which is to become a tool for
first responders and their commanders to help with indoor
navigation in obscured conditions in a fire situation, and to
give an assessment of the safety of the first responder. For
indoor localisation, a system is required that is independent
of
the
existing
building
infrastructure,
since
this
infrastructure may become unreliable or damaged in a fire
situation. SAFESENS has integrated into the platform a
hybrid inertial, positional and navigation module illustrated
in Figure 3. The modules’ onboard sensors are capable of
providing information to enable activity to be classified and
position to be determined in deployment scenarios where
there is little supporting existing wireless infrastructure in
place.
Figure 3.
Hybrid Inertial, Positional and Navigation Module
The hybrid inertial, positional and navigation module is
designed to be worn by each first responder attached to the
straps of their Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus (SCBA).
The hardware comprises inertial and magnetic sensors
(accelerometer, gyro, and magnetometer), a barometer, a
temperature and humidity sensor, an Ultra-Wide Band
(UWB) ranging transceiver and a Bluetooth Low-Energy
(BLE) transceiver. The module communicates sensor data to
a smartphone carried by the firefighter employing BLE
which in turn transmits data to a central server for
processing. Ranging data is given by the UWB transceiver
which measures the range between the worn module and the
nearby anchors to track the firefighter [7]. Anchors can be
stationary units deployed as part of the exercise or
alternatively,
other
modules
worn
by
accompanying
firefighters. The firefighter’s position and current activity is
calculated on the central server as illustrated in the system
architecture diagram in Figure 2.
IV.
VITAL SIGNS MONITORING
A. SAFESENS Vital Signs Monitoring
The integration of vital physiological measurements
could help commanders to better predict the firefighter’s or
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

other first responder’s health condition while performing
critical tasks or in harsh environments. An important vital
parameter is the heart rate which can be calculated and
monitored from either Electrocardiography (ECG) or Photo
Plethysmography
(PPG)
signals.
Fabric-based,
dry
electrodes have been intensively investigated for wearable
ECG measurements but still need complex algorithms to
eliminate motion [8]. In the SAFESENS project, we are
focusing on reflective PPG measurements based on optical
sensors which are more precise in mobile conditions when
the sensor is attached to the skin in an appropriate way [9].
The skin volume changes due to blood pressure variations
and thus correlates to the heart rate. An algorithm first
removes the impact of ambient light leakage and motion
artefacts, and determines the pulse period. By measuring the
PPG at multiple wavelengths, it is possible to detect changes
in blood composition. For instance, the change from
hæmoglobin (Hb) to oxygenated hæmoglobin (HbO2) can be
detected by a relative change in red and infrared absorption
[10].
B. Integrating electronics into a firefighter glove
The SAFESENS firefighter glove demonstrator consists
of a selected multi-chip package featuring 3 emitters (green,
red, infrared) and one detector in a small package (4.7mm x
2.5mm x 0.9mm) enabling the measurement of the heart rate
and pulse oximetry. The chip is integrated into an EN
659:2003 + A1:2008 certified, professional leather glove for
the fire brigade and features the highest industrial cut
resistance and fire blocking levels. The sensor position is
designed to be placed in an unobtrusive body area: the base
of the left hands’ index finger (assuming right-handed
fireman) allowing the user to touch objects without feeling
the electronics. In order to contact the sensor and skin, a
small hole was pierced into the glove. The controller unit is
placed in a little pocket at the edge of the cuff at a distance
of 250mm to the sensor.
Figure 4.
SAFESENS Firefighter Glove Demonstrator: X-ray images of
the Textile-integrated Stretchable Electronic System
A soft and expandable circuit board was developed to
integrate the components into the glove. The Stretchable
Circuit Board (SCB) consists of thermoplastic elastomers
and copper conductor tracks in a meandering shape as 2-D
spring elements. Thus, the SCB withstands bending and
stretching making it a suitable technology for the integration
of electronics into textiles. The components were assembled
on the SCB by low-temperature soldering (SnBi) and under
filled with an epoxy material for improved reliability against
mechanical stress. The system was applied to a fire retardant
nonwoven and finally laminated onto the inner textile layer
of the glove [11][12][13], as shown in Figure 4.
C. Signal acquisition and processing
The sensor front-end is a single integrated circuit
containing all necessary analog circuits to drive the LEDs
and to determine the photocurrent from the photodiode, and
a full-featured ARM M0+ microcontroller core to run the
algorithms for the heart rate and the blood oxygenation
calculations. A second IC contains the wireless transceiver
to connect the sensor to a Personal Area Network. In the
demonstrator, the sensor communicates over a Bluetooth
Low Energy link, with a protocol fully compatible with the
indoor localization module. The PPG sensor can either
transmit continuous measurements or act on user-selectable
alarm thresholds.
V.
FLAMMABLE GAS SENSING
A. Introduction to Flammable Gas detection
In the process of a burning building, a flashover is a
much feared stage. A flashover occurs at the moment when
temperatures are so high that present flammable materials
and gasses will spontaneously combust. Flammable gasses
pose a particular risk during flashovers. Before a flashover,
the high temperature results in partial decomposition and
release of flammable gasses. When sufficient oxygen is
present, or is introduced due to opening or breaking of doors
and windows, spontaneous combustion will occur that will
accelerate the propagation of fire and pose a severe safety
threat to the fire fighters. To be aware of the flashover risks,
it is advantageous to be able to detect the presence of
flammable gasses.
B. SAFESENS technology developed for gas detection
In the SAFESENS project, it is envisioned that the first
responders bring gas sensors to the scene that are integrated
in their current equipment. The helmet was chosen as the
most suitable location for the gas sensor, since it is a rigid
structure that is in close contact with the surrounding
atmosphere.
Hydrogen may be detected using a Pd-Ni alloy as a thin
film deposited onto a silicon wafer substrate, which changes
its electrical resistance in the presence of H2, which can be
electrically transduced.
Methane
may be detected
using an amperometric
electrochemical sensor. In this type of electrochemical
sensor, a chemical reaction takes place that involves
electron transfer in the chemical reaction pathway. By
leading these electrons through an external circuit an
accurate current measurement can be performed, that is
directly related to the amount of gas that is reacting. The
amount of reacting gas is in its turn linearly related to the
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

amount of gas in the surrounding atmosphere. In the
SAFESENS project, a thin film methane sensor was
developed, that uses an ionic liquid as the electrolyte.
Previously, it was reported that such sensors can detect
ethylene [14], and ammonia [15].
The hydrogen sensor is based on an alloy system
described in [16]. Instead of using a van der Paw structure, a
Wheatstone half-bridge was realized, which gives first order
temperature compensation. The Pd-Ni film was deposited
using a co-sputter process from pure Pd and Ni sputter
targets. Film thickness was in the range of 100nm.
The methane sensor is based on the ammonia sensor that
was previously described in [15]. In brief, a system of
interdigitated platinum micro electrodes is made on a silicon
substrate. The third electrode is a gold electrode that
meanders between these interdigitated electrode, and serves
as a pseudo reference electrode. On top of these electrodes,
a thin film of an ionic liquid is deposited, to obtain an
electrochemical cell sensitive to methane. The chosen ionic
liquid is [C4mpy][NTf2], as this system results in an
electrochemical cell that is sensitive to methane [17].
VI.
OCCUPANCY MONITORING
A. Introduction to Occupancy Monitoring Systems
Occupancy estimation uses the readings from a sensor
network to extract more contextual information of the
building usage. It can enable the idea of smart building in
different ways by: i) improving the comfort of the occupants
by controlling lights, temperature, and humidity based on
occupancy; ii) reducing energy costs by controlling lights
and Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC)
equipment
based
on
occupancy;
iii)
improving
the
convenience; iv) providing real-time occupancy in fire
events. It can also offer technical advantages in a two-fold
way: i) cost-benefit trade-off analysis for the selection of
sensors and their placement; ii) complementary sensor
measurements based on models of building usage.
B. SAFESENS Technologies for Occupancy Detection
The challenge of real-time occupancy estimation is to
determine the number of people in different areas of a
building over time. Under such operational settings, an
estimation variance, along with a confidence level, should
be provided within a short delay and fast update rate.
Due to the high deployment cost and large errors that
people counting sensors suffer from, measuring occupancy
throughout a building from sensors alone is not sufficiently
accurate. Indeed, data collection from sensors is not perfect,
and it is assumed that each sensor is subject to noise and
environment clutter. Also, if sparsely deployed, the ability
of sensors to detect occupancy change is limited by their
coverage. In this way, occupancy estimation largely depends
on the existing sensor technologies.
Occupancy estimation aims to adaptively correct noise
and lack of observability errors by subdividing the approach
into two sub-problems [18]:
i) modelling, investigates how to build a model to utilize
prior knowledge and to simulate the occupants' movement
behaviors in the building;
ii) estimation, defined as the process to obtain the hidden
state
of
a
system
given
a
model
and
incomplete
observational data.
In
SAFESENS,
the
modelling
follows
the
spatial
topology of the floor, as in [19], where each graph node is
considered a state. It can assume either an occupancy state,
related to any zone of the building, or a flow state, which
reflects the uncertainty in how people move from zone to
zone. This modelling permits to divide the building into
non-overlapping zones, defined by a hierarchy of different
spatial scales, namely floor-level, zone-level and room-
level.
For the estimation, a Kalman filter (KF) framework is
adopted. Due to the non-linearity of the underlying data
(pedestrian behavior) and the adopted linear modelling
approach, we study the performance of linear and non-linear
kalman estimators, such as Ensemble KF (EnKF), bank-of-
filters-based (IMM, MMAE), among others.
VII.
RESULTS
A. Data Visualisation on the Smart App
To validate our system, and to do more real life
experiments, we have installed a demo of the SAFESENS
localisation platform at Tyndall near the canteen area. Under
heavy NLOS and with limited available anchor nodes, the
system can achieve 0.5m accuracy. Figure 5 shows the
visualization front end for the SAFESENS system.
Figure 5.
Occupancy and Firefighter Data Visualisation.
B. Location Tracking and Activity Monitoring
The positioning and tracking performance of the module
has been evaluated. An additional calibration step was
added to account for antenna delay and to improve ranging
performance. The experiments comprise of an evaluation of
the
mobile
performance
employing
a
Least
Square
Estimation (LSE) algorithm. Results before and after
calibration are illustrated in Figures 6 and 7, respectively.
For each experiment, a reference path (shown in the figures
below in blue) was determined for the mobile subject and
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

communicated via markers on the floor. The tag was
instrumented on the arm of the subject, who subsequently
simulated the emergency responder walking along the
reference path. The green path illustrates the calculated
trajectory of the subject employing the module. The results
indicate that the tolerances are acceptable for the prescribed
application. Results for the activity classification machine
learning algorithms are presented in [20].
Figure 6.
SAFESENS hybrid inertial, positional and navigation module
mobile tracking performance prior to calibration
Figure 7.
SAFESENS hybrid inertial, positional and navigation module
mobile tracking performance following calibration
1)
Vital Signs
The vital signs monitor is implemented as a finger ring
embedded in the firefighter glove. It can operate in two
different modes: high-resolution heart-rate, or combined
heart-rate and blood oxygenation. The heart rate does not
require multiple wavelengths, and thus a more optimal LED
firing pattern can be selected to either lower the total power
consumption or increase the sampling rate.
Estimation of the blood oxygenation requires alternate
firing of red and infra-red (IR) Light Emitting Diodes
(LEDs), and a more complex algorithm. An example of the
captured data is shown in Figure 8.
Figure 8.
Captured infrared and red PPG signals.
The PEFAC algorithm [21] was selected for the heart
rate detection. This method estimates the heart rate from the
frequency spectrum. By expressing the frequency in the log-
domain, the distance between the fundamental frequency
and its harmonics doesn't depend on the absolute value of
the fundamental frequency. By convolving the spectrum
with a matched filter, the spectra of the harmonics are
accumulated and noise is rejected. The oxygen saturation
(SpO2) is then derived from the ratio of ratios R, which is
defined by equation 1:
ܴ =
(஺஼/஽஼)భ
(஺஼/஽஼)మ
(1)
Where AC and DC are the peak-to-peak amplitude and
the baseline of the PPG pulse, respectively. These values are
found by applying a min/max envelope tracker on the
cleaned PPG signal. The following relationship between the
ratio R and the SpO2 is then used as in equation 2:
ܵ݌ܱଶ =
ఌ೏భିோ(ூమ/ூభ)ఌ೏మ
ோቀ಺మ
಺భቁ(ఌ೚మିఌ೏మ)ା(ఌ೏భିఌ೚భ)
(2)
Where εo and εd are the extinction coefficients for HbO2
and Hb. The constants l1 and l2 are the path-lengths for the
two wavelengths and depend strongly on the scattering
coefficient. For the two wavelengths, in the red and infrared
regions which are used in the glove ring sensor (IR 950nm
and red 660nm), l1 and l2 are expected to differ and they are
unknown. SpO2 can be derived from R through the
calibration process by assuming that l2/l1 is a constant that is
independent of inter-subject variability in the circulatory
system. In this case, the coefficients are constants and can
be determined through calibration. If the parameter l2/l1
changes between different subjects, in particular between
the healthy subjects on whose fingers the calibration was
performed and the fireman wearing the glove, inaccuracy in
the SpO2 measurement is to be expected. Relative changes
for a single subject are accurate.
C. Flammable Gas Sensing
The hydrogen sensor was evaluated using humidified
synthetic air with different amounts of H2 added, in the
range from 0.02% to 2% volume concentration. The gas was
fed to the sensor with a nozzle with a flow of 1slm (standard
liter per minute). The sensor chip was externally heated to
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

temperatures of up to 140°C. It was found that 0.02%
concentration already results in a detectable sensor signal.
For concentrations above 0.5%, saturation of the signal
began to be observed. Response time t90 was found to be in
the range of 100s. Further reduction of response time is to
be achieved by using Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD) in
order to generate a porous Pd-Ni layer, facilitating the H2
transport into the layer.
The methane sensor was evaluated in a gas mixing
chamber, where gas flows of methane were mixed with
compressed dry air. Initial experiments consisted of cyclic
voltammetry, where the voltage of the sensor is scanned to
observe at which voltage the largest effect of methane
exposure is observed. In Figure 9, the cyclic voltammogram
of the sensor with and without 5% methane exposure is
plotted. The difference between the current levels is plotted
with the dotted line, and should be evaluated on the right Y-
axis. The difference between the observed currents is small
compared to the background current. To make the difference
more visible, the currents with and without methane
exposure were subtracted, and plotted. From these plots, it
becomes clear that the largest current difference is observed
between -0.5 and -1.5 V. The extreme voltages near -2 and
+2 V are excluded, because water electrolysis will occur at
these voltages when measurements are performed in humid
air, which will interfere with the detection of methane.
Figure 9.
Cyclic voltammetry to determine most suitable voltage level
for methane detection.
To determine the response of the sensor, the voltage was
fixed, and the current was used as an indicator of the
methane exposure. In Figure 10, the current that is resulting
of 5% methane is given.
Figure 10.
Current response to an exposure of 5% methane
This figure shows that the sensor has a fast response
time, and that the gas level can already be detected within a
few seconds, which is crucial for first responders.
D. Occupancy Detection
The deployment scenario is very particular since it
depends
on
the
physical
venue,
the
sensor
network
characteristics and the application domain. Therefore, the
solutions will perform very differently from scenario to
scenario. For these reasons, the conducted experiments
consider the combination of three characteristics: i) physical
layout; ii) sensor topology; iii) data modelling (e.g.,
synthetic-random, synthetic- pedestrian; real sensors).
Due to lack of space, we here only present the results for
some estimators and for one tested scenario, which consists
of 6 rooms, with two different sensor topologies: TA) two
camera sensors with oblique view towards ground-floor,
situated in two rooms, and a camera sensor with top-down
view, positioned between two rooms; TB) camera sensor in
each room and the same top-down view camera between
two rooms. The data was simulated using the Helbing social
force model [22], rules for interactions between occupants
and obstacle avoidance awareness. The simulation considers
a total occupancy up to 6 people during 9000 samples
(approximately lasting 7.5 minutes).
As expected, having a sensor in every zone dramatically
improves
the
overall
estimation.
Considering
all
the
experiments, we verified that the linear estimators are
preferred for local measurements but they show degradation
of performance through time, as well as for global
estimation. An interesting conclusion is that a bank of linear
filters solutions show competitive results, which might open
further investigation issues regarding their extension to the
combination of linear and non-linear estimators to balance
local with global estimation. For more details, please refer
to [23].
TABLE I.
EVALUATION
METRICS
FOR
EACH
ESTIMATOR FOR T = 90000 SAMPLES
Estimator
Topology
MSE
Precision
Recall
F-
measure
KF
TA
1.445
99.81
53.85
69.96
TB
0.665
99.88
68.42
81.21
EnKF
TA
1.734
93.74
51.51
66.49
TB
1.003
97.42
56.47
71.50
HF
TA
1.553
99.88
49.67
66.61
TB
1.554
99.88
49.94
66.59
IF
TA
2.826
99.56
49.36
66.01
TB
1.482
99.60
50.95
67.41
UKF
TA
1.373
99.37
54.76
70.61
TB
0.657
99.88
68.44
81.22
IMM
TA
1.384
99.86
53.76
69.90
TB
0.781
97.60
63.81
77.17
MMAE
TA
1.423
99.81
53.92
70.01
TB
0.664
99.88
68.42
81.22
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
-0,8
-0,4
0
0,4
0,8
-2,5
-1,5
-0,5
0,5
1,5
2,5
Current difference (nA)
Current (µA)
Voltage (V)
No Exposure
Methane Exposure
Difference
0,07
0,08
0,09
0,1
0,11
0,12
-5
0
5
10
Current (µA)
Time (s)
t = 0 s
exposure to
5% methane
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

VIII.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The SAFESENS system is currently deployed in the
Tyndall National Institute in Cork, Ireland where the
integration activity focuses on the occupancy detection and
firefighter
activity
tracking.
The
deployment
activity
continues to progress so as to integrate datasets from the
other sensors integrated in the system, to improve accuracy
of the sensor readings and develop robust communications
mechanisms
to
augment
the
infrastructure
based
communications currently used in the demonstration activity
which is Wi-Fi based. This will focus on UWB based Media
Access Control (MAC), routing and scheduling protocols to
maximize energy efficiency and minimize system latencies.
The smart phone application is currently under development
to integrate data sets from all sensors for upload to the data
server for analytics and final demonstration.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by ENIAC-JU-2013-1(621272),
via
the SAFESENS project
(Sensor Technologies for
Enhanced
Safety
and
Security
of
Buildings
and
its
Occupants).
The authors would like to acknowledge the support of
National funding agencies including Enterprise Ireland. This
publication has emanated from research supported in part by
a research grant from Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) and
is co-funded under the European Regional Development
Fund under Grant Number 13/RC/2077. The authors would
also like to thank VDI/VDE Innovation, Technik GmbH and
BMBF.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Tedesco, J. Khodjaev, and B. O'Flynn, "A novel first
responders
location
tracking
system:
Architecture
and
functional requirements”. Microwave Symposium (MMS),
2015 IEEE 15th Mediterranean, pp. 1-4. IEEE, 2015.
[2]
M. Walsh, S. Tedesco, T. Ye, and B. O'Flynn. "A wearable
hybrid IEEE 802.15. 4-2011 ultra-wideband/inertial sensor
platform for ambulatory tracking, “ In Proceedings of the 9th
International Conference on Body Area Networks, pp. 352-
357.
ICST
(Institute
for
Computer
Sciences,
Social-
Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering), 2014.
[3]
T. Ye, M. Walsh, P. Haigh, J. Barton, and B. O'Flynn.
"Experimental impulse radio IEEE 802.15. 4a UWB based
wireless sensor localization technology: Characterization,
reliability and ranging” In ISSC 2011, 22nd IET Irish Signals
and Systems Conference, Dublin, Ireland. 23-24 Jun 2011.
[4]
N. N. Brushlinsky, M. Ahrens, S. V. Sokolov, and P. Wagner,
“World Fire Statistics. Technical report 21”, Center of Fire
Statistics, International Association of Fire and Rescue
Services, 2016.
[5]
J. Khodjaev, P. Yongwan, and A. S. Malik, "Survey of NLOS
identification and error mitigation problems in UWB-based
positioning algorithms for dense environments” annals of
telecommunications-annales des télécommunications 65, no.
5-6 (2010), pp. 301-311.
[6]
J. Khodjaev, S. Tedesco, and B. O'Flynn. "Improved NLOS
Error Mitigation Based on LTS Algorithm, “ Progress In
Electromagnetics Research Letters 58 (2016), pp. 133-139.
[7]
J. Khodjaev, A. Narzullaev, Y. Park, W. Jung, J. Lee, and S.
Kim. "Performance Improvement of Asynchronous UWB
Position
Location
Algorithm
Using
Multiple
Pulse
Transmission,
“In Positioning,
Navigation
and
Communication, 2007. WPNC'07. 4th Workshop on, pp. 167-
170. IEEE, 2007.
[8]
Y. M. Chi, T. P. Jung, and G. Cauwenberghs, "Dry-Contact
and
Noncontact
Biopotential Electrodes:
Methodological
Review," in IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering, vol. 3,
no. ,pp. 106-119, 2010.
[9]
S.
Sudin
et
al.,
"Wearable
heart
rate
monitor
using
photoplethysmography for motion," 2014 IEEE Conference
on Biomedical Engineering and Sciences (IECBES), Kuala
Lumpur, 2014, pp. 1015-1018.
[10] D.
Damianou,
“The
Wavelength
Dependence
of
the
Photoplethysmogram and its Implication to Pulse Oximetry”,
PhD Thesis, University of Nottingham, October, 1995
[11] T. Loher et al., "Stretchable electronic systems," 2006 8th
Electronics Packaging Technology Conference, Singapore,
2006, pp. 271-276.
[12] M. Seckel, "Umsetzung einer elektronischen Schaltung auf
Basis eines dehnbaren Schaltungsträgers“ Diploma thesis,
University of Applied Sciences, Berlin, 2008.
[13] R. Vieroth, T. Loeher, M. Seckel, C. Dils, C. Kallmayer, A.
Ostmann,
and
H.
Reichl.
"Stretchable
Circuit
Board
Technology and Application," 2009 International Symposium
on Wearable Computers, Linz, 2009, pp. 33-36.
[14] M. A. G. Zevenbergen, D. Wouters, V.-A. T. Dam, S. H.
Brongersma, and M. Crego-Calama “Electrochemical Sensing
of Ethylene Employing a Thin Ionic-Liquid Layer” Analytical
Chemistry 83 (2011), pp. 6300-6307.
[15] J.F.M. Oudenhoven, W. Knoben, and R. van Schaijk,
“Electrochemical Detection of Ammonia Using a Thin Ionic
Liquid Film as the Electrolyte” Procedia Engineering 120
(2015), pp. 983-986.
[16] R. C. Hughes and W. K. Schubert, Thin films of Pd/Ni alloys
for detection of high hydrogen concentrations. 1992. J. Appl.
Phys. 71(1), pp. 542-544.
[17] Z. Wang, M. Guo, G. A. Baker, J. R. Stetter, L. Lin, A. J.
Mason
and
X.
Zeng,
Methane–oxygen
electrochemical
coupling in an ionic liquid: a robust sensor for simultaneous
quantification. Analyst, 139(20), pp. 5140-5147.
[18] H. T. Wang, Q. S. Jia, C. Song, R. Yuan, and X Guan, 2010,
December.
Estimation
of
occupancy
level
in
indoor
environment based on heterogeneous information fusion. In
Decision and Control (CDC), 2010 49th IEEE Conference on
(pp. 5086-5091). IEEE.
[19] R. Tomastik, S. Narayanan, A. Banaszuk, and S. Meyn, 2010.
Model-based real-time estimation of building occupancy
during emergency egress. In Pedestrian and Evacuation
Dynamics 2008 (pp. 215-224). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[20] S. Scheurer, S. Tedesco, K. N. Brown, and B. O'Flynn
"Human
Activity
Recognition
for
Emergency
First
Responders via Body-Worn Inertial Sensors", BSN'17, 14th
International Conference on Wearable and Implantable Body
Sensor Networks, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, May 9-12,
2017, pp. 5-8.
[21] S. Gonzalez and M. Brookes, "PEFAC-a pitch estimation
algorithm robust
to
high
levels
of
noise"
IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, pp.
518-530, 2014.
[22] D. Helbing, and P. Molnar, 1995. Social force model for
pedestrian dynamics. Physical review E, 51(5), pp.4282.
[23] E. M, Pereira, and P Agrawal, 2017, March. Linear vs Non-
linear Estimators Comparison for Estimation of Building
Occupancy in Normal Pedestrian Behavior. In 56th IEEE
Conference
on
Decision
and
Control
(CDC),
2017
(submitted).
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

