Feasibility of Charge Transfer Based Atmospheric Ice Sensing
Taimur Rashid, Umair N. Mughal & Muhammad S. Virk
Atmospheric Icing Research Team
Narvik University College
Narvik, Norway
Email: unm@hin.no
Abstract—The atmospheric icing parameters are being measured
nowadays with the aid of more customized yet limited commercial
equipment. The parameters include atmospheric ice detection,
icing load and icing rate. The robustness of such equipment is
usually under scrutiny when it comes to cold/harsh environment
operations. This phenomenon was experienced consistently by
the atmospheric Icing research team at Narvik University College
during data retrieval exercises from its atmospheric icing stations
installed at Fargnesfjellet during 2012-13. In this paper it is
aimed to address the potential feasibility to produce a robust
hardware addressing the icing measurements signals, which
includes instrumentation hardware giving icing indications, icing
type and icing rate measurements in a single platform (not
commercially available till date).
Keywords–Atmospheric Icing Sensor; Icing Type; Icing Rate;
Charge Transfer; Zero Crossover; Cold Regions.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Charge transfer method adhere to the capacitive prin-
ciple and can detect anything that is either conductive or
has different dielectric properties than the sensors electrodes
surroundings. Any object, conductive or non-conductive, that
is brought in the vicinity of the electrode, has its own dielectric
properties that will alter the capacitance between the electrode
and the sensor housing and, in turn, will produce a measurable
response. Also, certain sensor gauge the change by generating
an electric ﬁeld (e-ﬁeld) and measuring the attenuation suffered
by this ﬁeld. The prime area of focus is to detect the ice at the
ﬁrst instance based on its physical properties. The measured
signal is then required to be calibrated in order to achieve
reasonably wide range of measurements; differentiated based
on the liquid water content in the ice. This would enable to
lay the foundation of measuring icing thickness and icing rate.
Atmospheric icing on structures occurs in conditions where
cooling of an air mass causes super cooling of water droplets
resident in the air mass. Water droplets in the earth atmosphere
can remain in the liquid state at air temperature as low as
−40◦[C], before spontaneous freezing occurs [2][3]. Generally
an icing event is deﬁned as periods of time where the temper-
ature is below 0◦[C] and the relative humidity is above 95%.
According to ISO 12494 standard [4], ice accretion can be de-
ﬁned as any process of ice build-up and snow accretion on the
surface of the object exposed to atmosphere [4], [5]. Primarily
Atmospheric icing can be classiﬁed in two main categories on
the basis of the physical properties of atmospheric ice. These
will vary depending upon the meteorological conditions and
are termed as precipitation icing (freezing precipitation and
wet snow) and in-cloud icing (rime/glaze, including fog). In
Northern part of Europe particularly in Norway, it is primarily
freezing fog which causes ice accumulation on structures and
this occurs mainly at high altitudes [6]. The ice accretion relies
heavily on temperature, liquid water content and droplet size.
The ice appearance and its physical properties are inﬂuenced
by the atmospheric and weather conditions. Table I mentions
these affecting parameters, whereas other elements such as
compressive strength (yield and crushing), shear strength, etc.,
might describe the nature of ice accretion on the subject
item exposed in the environment. The object exposed will
have different ice accretion based on its dimensions and its
orientation to the direction of icing wind blowing. Table I
shows major outline of the basic meteorological parameters
handling the ice accretion process.
TABLE I. TYPICAL PROPERTIES OF ACCRETED ATMOSPHERIC ICE [5]
Type of ice
Density (kg/m3)
Cohesion
General appearance
Colour
Shape
Glaze
900
strong
transparent
evenly
distributed/icicles
Wet snow
300-600
weak, strong
white
evenly dis-
tributed/eccentric
Hard rime
600-900
strong
opaque
eccentric, pointing
windward
Soft rime
200-600
low to
medium
white
eccentric pointing
windward
This paper is divided in six sections. Section II is an
overview of different ice sensing techniques followed by
section III, which outlines the critical reasons of system failure
in cold region domains. Section IV deals with a detailed
description of Charge Transfer Scheme whereas section V
deals with the associated tradeoff. This paper is ended with
conclusion section VI.
II.
ICE SENSING TECHNIQUES
The ISO issued in 2001 a standard for ice accretion
on all kinds of structures, except for electric overhead line
conductors. In this recommendation, a standard ice-measuring
device is described in ISO 12494 [4] as a smooth circular
cylinder having diameter of 30 mm placed vertically in the axis
and rotating around the axis. The cylindrical length should be
of 0.5m, but, in case of heavy ice accretion expectation, the
length should be altered to 1m. If the cylinder cannot rotate
freely due to wind drag, it may be provided with a motorized
mechanism to force the rotation. The speed of rotation is not
critical in terms of vertical collection. The vertical cylinder
is not fully appropriate for freezing rain in the wet growth
stage. To achieve this, it is preferred to use sets of horizontal
collectors (rods), which are oriented orthogonally as in case of
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Soviet standard ice collector Popov [9] or the Canadian Passive
Ice Meter (PIM) as described in IEC 60826 [10]. Ice Sensing
techniques come under the umbrella of icing instrumentation.
To know about Ice sensing it is required to comprehend the
phenomena of icing caused by the Meteorological parameters.
Drage [6] describes the complexity of Meteorological Icing
based on the factors such as object shape, wind speed, air
temperature, liquid water content and droplet size distribution.
There is a lot of room to improve these measurements
as new developments being carried out on focusing on these
parameters, Makkonen [11]. Different research institutes and
industries are involved in ice detection instruments manu-
facturing. But it is important to notice that many of them
are still in the prototyping phase and few amongst those
have launched their products in the market. The ISO 12494
standard ice sensor has been manufactured in one version in
Swedish Combitech: automatic weighing, free rotation) and
two in Finland (Digita: automatic weighing, forced rotation,
Lehtonen [12], FMI: manual weighing, forced rotation). The
devices/instruments identical with ISO ice collector have been
used in the past at some locations as well Rothig [13]. For the
purpose of the meteorological icing detection, few market sys-
tems (Rosemount Goodrich) and few prototypes are available
in the name of Holo Optics, Infralytic, Vibrometer/Boschung.
Also some available prototypes available for the ice rate
analysis uses active infra-red techniques but the robustness
and reliability of the equipment under harsh conditions is still
questionable. The electrical impedance and weight measure-
ment based icing equipment are more specialized, focusing
on a speciﬁc parameter. There is a deﬁnite need of an icing
system capable of measuring the instantaneous icing rate and
thickness along with the ice type detection mechanism. This
could provide an advantage to anticipate the ice accretion and
load based on the valid detection of icing type.
III.
GENERAL REASONS OF SYSTEM FAILURE IN COLD
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
As mentioned in Rashid et. al. [26] that the dimension of
operational problems faced in cold climate is quite different
from the operations in normal atmospheric conditions. More
often the factors not signiﬁcant at all in the normal conditions
become extremely critical in cold climate regions. Investiga-
tions were carried out to track down possible reasons of the
HiN icing station’s components failure from operational point
of view. Analysis showed that in addition to the harsh weather
conditions, a combination of various design and operational
aspects could also lead to the system’s failure in harsh condi-
tions. Following are some noteworthy causes in this regard.
A. Intermittent Power Source
The system installed at the location takes power from the
available commercial facility, where high load machines are
being operated. Due to the demographic location of the site
in terms of accessibility and complicated power infrastructure
available in terms of maintenance, several power breakdowns
have been frequently reported. The instantaneous power surge
could be one reason that has affected the sensors operations.
B. Electrostatic Discharge
The electrostatic discharge phenomena could not be fully
neglected in weather station breakdown. For snowstorms,
temperature gradients in the ice particles produce charge
separation because the concentration of H+ and OH− ions
in ice increases rapidly with increasing temperature. H+ ions
are much more mobile within the ice crystal than OH− ions.
As a result, the colder part of an ice particle becomes positively
charged, leaving the warmer part charged negatively [21].
The resulting electrostatic phenomena due to blizzard can be
hazardous for the control circuitry inside the sensor module,
provided the said consideration is not catered for in the design.
Over and above this fact, the proper maintenance of earthing
at the site becomes all the more critical in this perspective.
C. Data Links / Interfaces Winterization
Interface links between the components are data and power
based. Data links might include the Ethernet/serial links with
supporting routing cables or interface panels, whereas, power
links have distribution panels, supplying power requirements
to the computing and sensing equipment. Interface links along
with power support systems have direct and/or indirect expo-
sure to cold climatic conditions and they are under sudden
transitional states, hence are most vulnerable to degradation
and failure.
D. Power Cable Insulation
Electrical insulation of external power cables can be an-
other possible cause of system failure. Many of the insulations
normally used on electrical wires and cables are not compatible
with colder temperatures. Cracking of the insulation exposes
the conductor to the environment creating a serious hazard.
This is particularly a problem for the extension cords used
outdoors. Several polyvinylchloride (PVC) insulations that
are commonly used as electrical insulation do not withstand
ﬂexing at low temperatures, in the range of or below −30◦[C],
PVC insulations crack and peel off leaving exposed conduc-
tors, which can cause short circuiting or develop grounding
problems making data unreliable [24], [25].
E. Material & Winterization
The sensitivity of problems encountered in cold regions is
largely a function of materials used in the sensor construction
and degree of stress, under which they are operated. Some
materials get stronger at cold temperatures while other mate-
rials can be altered to become more cold tolerant [24], [22].
Similarly, sensor winterization can be another possible reason
for this failure. Sensors must be properly winterized to make
them possible to use during winter and reduce cold related
wear and breakage [23].
IV.
CHARGE TRANSFER CAPACITANCE BASED ICE
DETECTION
It can be said that a diversiﬁed sensing technique is
required for ice detection, which is robust enough to face the
harsh environmental conditions. The reliability and consistency
of the measured results add on to the signiﬁcant requirements
during the measurement process. The ice detection and mea-
surement through its capacitive properties could be a viable
option in this scenario as suggested by Mughal et. al. [14].
Capacitive sensors are considered amongst the reliable and
robust sensing options. A capacitive ice detector for monitoring
ice formation in power lines has been reported in Michael J.
Moser [17]. Furthermore, charge induction based ice detectors
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

is reported in [16] (mounted in the surface of the road). This ice
detector can detect the presence of icing over the road/runway
without measuring the icing rate and type of the ice.
To consider other viable options, proximity and touch
sensing techniques can be considered. These are widely used in
sensing human capacitance. Most of the daily home appliances,
mobiles, industrial applications and gadgets use this detection
principle as an integral part of their system design. The
technique for proximity or nearness detection of human skin
has matured over the years and customized microelectrome-
chanical systems MEMS devices are available for integration
as per the requirement of the design. However, use of this
approach is not tested for the purpose of ice detection and has
not been reported yet. This technique could be applied for ice
detection including the water layer along with icing because of
its advantages based on implementation ﬂexibility and design
robustness.
A. Working Principle
The nearness of the ice on the surface can be measured
with the appropriate use of selection of dielectric material
and charge transfer process. The ﬁeld generated due to charge
transfer can be thought of as a forced ﬁeld applied, which
ultimately can be measured in return when the presence of
ice is detected on the surface. To amicably use this technique
sensor’s electrode should be adequately designed for detecting
the proximity of the target material with a quantiﬁed output.
The ﬁeld is self-generated through any type of conductive
material and the response is processed in a customized way to
compute the changes in the measurement. The technique can
be thought of as an active measurement methodology where
self-generated ﬁeld is repeated to a known threshold level and
de-activated to analyze the properties of the material during
the silent phase ﬁeld generated. The charge transfer technology
can be implemented / tested for two different schemes based
on capacitive sensing
i Self-capacitance oriented
ii Mutual capacitance oriented
In Self-Capacitance approach, the electrode used for sens-
ing is a single conductive plate; second plate of capacitor is
in fact the circuitry or earth ground. The sensing electrode
is merely an open circuit plate or alternatively describing we
can measure the self-capacitance of this plate. Electrode is
underneath the dielectric panel so there is no direct galvanic
connection to measuring circuit in the presence of ice or other
substance. This technique is aimed to make detection measure-
ments in case of external object presence near electrode. The
detection is made because of the effect that its presence has
on the capacitance of the electrode. The equivalent circuit of
the self-capacitance circuit is shown in Figure 1.
Here, GND is the printed circuit board PCB ground and
EARTH is earth ground. The coupling capacitance between
ground and earth is few tens of pico-farad. Sampling capacitors
store the charge during burst of pulses applied to the electrodes
and normally have recommended values in nano-farads, which
are further tuned to the design requirement to achieve larger
detection threshold. Therefore, key highlights are
•
Assuming Cs >> Cx, and Cf >> Cx and Ct
•
Cx and Ct are of parameters of interest
Figure 1. Self Capacitance Equivalent Circuit, [1]
•
Increasing Cs = Increased differential sensitivity and
makes the burst length longer and improves resolution
In Mutual capacitance approach, each sensing electrode
pair contains a ﬁeld drive electrode and a receive electrode
as shown in Figure 2.
Influencing Object 
Source 
Control 
Circuitry 
Dielectric 
Electrodes 
Figure 2. Ice Detection by Mutual Capacitance (Broad Scope)
Figure 3. Mutual Capacitance Equivalent Circuit, [18]
Signal that couples through the mutual capacitance of the
electrode structure is collected onto a sample capacitor, which
is switched by the chip synchronously with the drive pulses.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

A burst of pulses is used to improve the signal to noise ratio;
the number of pulses in each burst also affects the gain of the
circuit, since more pulses will result in more collected charge
and hence will provide more signal [18].
By modifying the burst pulse length, the gain of the circuit
can be easily changed to suit various electrode sizes, panel
materials, and panel thicknesses. After the burst completes,
the charge on the sample capacitor is converted using a slope
conversion resistor which is driven high, and a zero crossing
is detected to result in a timer value, which is proportional to
the pair electrode charge coupling, which also reﬂects charge
absorption caused by external intruding material. The presence
of intruding object absorbs charge, so the measured signal
decreases with its presence. The burst phase causes the charge
on the sample capacitor to ramp in a negative direction, and the
slope conversion causes a ramp in the positive direction on the
capacitor; the net effect is that the conversion process is dual
slope, and is largely independent of the value of the sample
capacitor and is highly stable over time and temperature [19].
B. Cold Climate Implications & Performance
Both capacitive mechanism are majorly comprised of elec-
trode sets and PCB hardware. The electrode design has the
ﬂexibility to adopt any shape as it is ﬂexible enough to be
mounted on any type of support. The electrode plate can
be covered with different types of dielectric material much
more resistant to harsh weather and climatic effects; since
there are large number of thin dielectric materials available
commercially nowadays. Figure 4 shows the simple operational
scheme of the overall charge transfer based icing sensor design.
Figure 4. Operational Scheme of Charge transfer Ice sensing
The only exposed part is the electrode, which may be
the copper trace on a printed circuit board covered with
weather resistant dielectric material of known parameters. The
weather resistant dielectric coating/covering can ensure the
protection required to avoid corrosion of the plate. The low
voltage requirement [milli-volts] of the MEMS devices makes
the design feasible for battery operated system in a remote
location.
1) Electrode Panel Selection: The ﬂexibility of electrode
conﬁguration provides different schemes in terms of shapes
and forms. The layout of the electrode for charge transfer
scheme is focused on the maximum transferring of charge
either to the adjacent electrode (receive) or provide effective
ground loading. Common electrode materials include copper,
carbon and silver ink. The lower the [Ω/sq] resistivity of
the material, the better as it makes control of any RC time
constants (which play key role in detection measurement)
much easier. The [Ω/sq] rating choice is coupled with the
shape and size of the electrode. Larger in length and thin
electrodes or traces build up resistance extremely quickly, even
for relatively low resistivity. Common front panel materials in-
clude glass, plexiglass and polycarbonate. The panel thickness
and its dielectric constant εr play a large part in determining
the strength of electric ﬁeld at the surface of the control panel.
Glass has higher εr than most plastics as higher numbers
deduce the ﬁelds to propagate more effectively. Thus a 5[mm]
panel with εr of 8 will perform similarly in sensitivity to a
2.5[mm] panel with an epsilon of 4, considering all other
factors equal. A panel up to 10[mm] thick is quite usable,
depending on electrode spacing and size [17]. The circuit sen-
sitivity needs to be adjusted during development to compensate
for panel thickness, dielectric constant and electrode size. With
increase in thickness of material signal to noise ratio SNR
worsens hence always thickness of the front panel material is to
be kept small. Materials with high relative dielectric constants
are also preferable for front panels as they help to increase
SNR.
V.
TRADE-OFF
The self and mutual charge transfer techniques are pri-
marily differentiated based on the electrode conﬁguration.
The single electrode and its multiple scheme implanted on
a single surface adheres to ground loading inﬂuence for the
measurement, which eventually will attributes to the sensitivity
of the ice measurement. The main tradeoffs amongst the self
and mutual capacitance techniques are sensitivity, range, noise
rejection, ground loading and probability of false detection.
The self-capacitance design is more sensitive in nature. The
ﬁeld is spreads outwards the electrode in the dielectric en-
vironment and ground loading is provided by the external
inﬂuencing of the object, in our case will be ice or a water
ﬁlm. But with increase in sensitivity comes the inclusion of the
noise in the circuitry, which is un-desirable. The noise in self
capacitance might be increased so sensitivity tuning is the vital
for design based on this methodology. The sensitivity in case
of capacitive based design has several factors ranging from
the electrodes design to the charging/discharging mechanism
affecting the sensitivity of the sensor. This includes electrode
dimensions and shape, ground loadi ng, return path, supply
voltage and charging pulses duration.
VI.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The atmospheric icing detection and measurement in harsh
cold climate is a demanding challenge. The need is more
demanding with the latest developments in the high north
regions to explore for energy ventures, which have initiated the
infrastructure and channelizing of resources. The ice accretion
and winterization factors can be very easily overlooked during
the development process, which has the lasting impact in cost
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

related damages. Therefore, icing parameters like rate, type,
thickness could play vital role in areas for instance deicing
feed-back mechanism for efﬁcient ice removal, creation of
geographical ice maps of the particular region and many
more. The icing parameters discussed need reliable sensing
methodology for acquisition and measurement in the harsh
cold regions.
A preliminary series of experimentation were performed in
Cold Room Chamber of Narvik University College. The ice
samples used were collected from the freezing process of the
commercially available freezers. The charge transfer technique
outputs zero crossover due to the dielectric variation between
different samples shows clear potential this effective/potential
technique for Cold Regions. The zero crossover is a real time
technique and hence the delays associated with this technique
are minimum. The results can be seen in Fig. 5.
Figure 5. Ice and Water Detection Ranges
The charge transfer based techniques well known for
human capacitance application can be utilized for icing rate,
type and thickness. The self or mutual capacitance basics can
be employed in the design based on charge transfer method.
The electrode conﬁguration schemes can be used in pairs
or as an individual based on the optimum tradeoff amongst
the design options. A small printed circuit board aided with
the speciﬁc electrode conﬁguration can be manufactured as a
basic prototyping icing sensor. The beneﬁt of reshaping the
electrodes and design to any form with capability to change
different dielectric material suitable to harsh environment can
be used as a starting point to develop a robust prototype. This
would enable to detect and measure the icing parameters in
real time embedded platform with low power consumption;
which is ideal for remote installations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We acknowledge the research funding from Research
Council of Norway, project no. 195153/160 and partially by
the consortium of the ColdTech RT3 project - Sustainable Cold
Climate Technology.
REFERENCES
[1]
http://www.ineltek.com/ru/ﬁles/Capacitive Touch Intro 2011 05.pdf.
Last accession date 23rd March 2014.
[2]
K. F. Jones and K. Z. Egelhofer, “Computer model of atmospheric ice
accretion on transmission lines”, CRREL Report, 1991.
[3]
L. J. Battan, “Cloud physics: A Popular Introduction to Applied
Meteorology”, Dover Publications, ISBN 978-0486428857, 2003.
[4]
H. F. Foder, “ISO 12494 - Atmospheric icing on structures and how
to use it”, ISO 12494:2001, ISBN 1-880653-51-6, June 2001.
[5]
S. Fikke, G. Ronsten, A. Heimo, S. Kunz, M. Ostrozlik, P. E.
Persson, J. Sabata, B. Wareing, B. Wichura, J. Chum, T. Laakso,
K. Santti, and L. Makkonen, “Cost 727 - Atmospheric icing on
structures; measurement and data collection on icing”, ISSN 1422-
1381, MeteoSwiss, 2007.
[6]
M. Drage, “Atmospheric icing and meteorological variables - Full
Scale Experiments and Testing of Models”, Phd Thesis, Department
of Geophysics, Bergen University, Norway, 2005.
[7]
J. Martinec, “Expected snow loads on structures from incomplete
hydrological data”, Journal of Glaciology,1977, pp. 185195.
[8]
W. Gareth, “Remote sensing of snow and ice”, Chapman & Hall
Publishers, ISBN 978-0415298315, 2006.
[9]
N.I. Popov and V. V. Holodov, “On the applicability of icing measure-
ments (in russian)”, Trudy GGO 408, 1978, pp. 4448.
[10]
, “Design criteria of overhead transmission lines”, IEC 60826, 2003.
[11]
L. Makkonen, “Analysis of rotating multicylinder data in measuring
cloud droplet size and liquid water content”, Journal of Atmospheric
and Oceanic Technology, 9(3), 1992, pp. 258263.
[12]
P. Lehtonen, “Experience on the iso reference collector”, Experience
on the iso reference collector. 8th IWAIS,Reykjavik, Iceland, 2000,
page 357.
[13]
H. Rothig, “A device for continuous measuring and recording of
ice accretion”, Abhandlungen-Meteorologische Dienst DDR 107 (in
German), 1973, pp. 2630.
[14]
U. N. Mughal, T. Rashid, M. S. Virk, and P. O. Nyman, “E driven
technology for Cold Regions”, CogInfo Comm, ISBN 978-1-4799-
1546-0/13, 2013, pp. 683686.
[15]
J. M. Moser, B. George, and H. Z, “Icing detector for overhead power
transmission lines”, IEEE I2MTC, 2009, pp. 11051109
[16]
A. Troiano, E. Pasero, and L. Mesin, “New system for detecting road
ice formation”, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measure-
ment, 60(3), March 2011, pp. 1091 1101.
[17]
http://www.atmel.com/Images/doc10752.pdf. Last accession date 2rd
May 2014.
[18]
http://www.atmel.com/images/qmatrix white paper 100.pdf. Last ac-
cession date 25th Feb 2014.
[19]
http://www.atmel.com/Images/qt60240 r8.06.pdf. Last accession date
25th March 2014.
[20]
K. B. Shravan, U. N. Mughal, and M. S. Virk, “Experimental study
of relative permittivity of atmospheric ice”, International Journal of
Energy and Environment, 4(3), 2013, pp. 369-376,
[21]
J. Latham, “The electriﬁcation of snowstorms and sandstorms”, Journal
of Royal Meteorological Society, 90(383), January 1964, pp. 91-95.
[22]
P. K. Dutta, “Behavior of materials at Cold Region Temperatures”,
U.S Army Corps of Engineers, Cold Regions of Engineering Lab
(CRREL), Hanover, 1988.
[23]
D. Diemand, “Winterization and winter operation of automotive and
construction equipment”, U.S Army Corps of Engineers, Cold Region
Research and Engineering Lab. Hanover, 1992.
[24]
D. R. Freitag and T. T. McFadden, “Introduction to Cold Regions
Engineering”, ASCE Press. 75, 1966.
[25]
D. Rosato and R. T. Schwartz, “Environmental effects on polymeric
materials”, John Wiley and Sons, 1968.
[26]
M. S. Virk, T. Rashid, U. N. Mughal, K. Zaman, and M. Y. Mustafa,
“Multi Sensor Atmospheric Icing Station Performance in Cold Climate
- A Case Study”, The Seventh International Conference on Sensor
Technologies and Applications, ISBN 978-161208-296-7, August 25-
31, 2013, pp. 220:224.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

