Crude Oil Detection using CMOS Image Sensor and UV LED
Sangwoo Oh, Moonjin Lee
Maritime Safety Research Division
Korea Research Institute of Ships and Ocean Engineering
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
swoh@kriso.re.kr, moonjin.lee@kriso.re.kr
Dongmin Seo, Kiyoung Ann, Sungkyu Seo†
Department of Electronics and Information Engineering
Korea University
Sejong, Republic of Korea
ehdals20907@korea.ac.kr, aky0902@korea.ac.kr,
sseo@korea.ac.kr
Abstract—Crude oil detection in the sea is an important task
for the prevention of oil spill and the oceanic environment
management. To measure the crude oil which is dissolved in
the seawater, a sensor based on the fluorescence spectroscopy
is widely used, because it is made up of hydrocarbon
compounds. However, most of these sensors use an ultraviolet
mercury lamp, several optical filters, and the photomultiplier
tube (PMT). These components make the sensing platform
large and expensive.
To address these issues,
we have
developed the fluorometer, which is composed of optical
devices having cost effectiveness and compact size, such as
complementary
metal-oxide-semiconductor
(CMOS)
image
sensor and ultraviolet (UV) light-emitting diode (LED). In this
paper, we provide the sensing platform, the principal sensing
mechanism and the test results, which were obtained by an
experiment using two different crude oils. Through these
results, we can show the sensing performance of our novel
fluorometer for the detection of crude oil.
Keywords-crude oil detection; fluorometer; in-situ sensor;
CMOS image sensor; UV LEDs.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Contamination evaluation of oil spilled in sea water is a
critical step in the procedures of ocean recovery. To this end,
a number of sensing systems have been developed to assess
the degrees of the residual contaminants in the sea water
[1][3][5][6][7]. Among those various sensing modalities, the
fluorescence spectroscopy based system has been widely
accepted because it can precisely quantify the concentration
of total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPHs) which is a mixture
of toxic chemicals originated from crude oil [2][4][8].
The main components of the fluorescence spectroscopy
system are an ultraviolet (UV) light source, e.g., UV mercury
lamp,
the
monochromator,
multiple
excitation/emission
filters, and a photomultiplier tube (PMT) optical sensor.
However,
those
key
components
of
the
fluorescence
spectroscopy make the system often expensive and bulky,
limiting the widespread use of the fluorescence sensing
system especially for the sea water monitoring.
In this work, we introduce a compact and cost-effective
fluorometer which is only composed of compact and low-
cost optoelectronic components such as complementary
metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) image sensor, i.e., ~14
USD per chip, and UV light-emitting diode (LED), i.e., ~5
USD per chip.
In this paper, we will provide the design of our sensing
platform, the principal sensing mechanism and the test
results, which were obtained by an experiment using two
different crude oils.
II.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
To
demonstrate
the
performance
of
this
simple
fluorometer, two different crude oils from Iraq and Russia
were utilized. Figure 1 shows the schematic representation
and experimental setup of our proposed compact and cost-
effective
fluorometer.
The
main
characteristic
of
the
proposed system is to employ the CMOS image sensor and
UV LED for its sensor and light source. Since the CMOS
image sensor has more than 5 mega pixels, corresponding to
the
same
numbers
of
the
sensors,
variation
of
the
fluorescence measurements was much smaller than that of
the PMT, an expensive high-end single pixel photo-detector
most widely accepted by oil spilled sea water detection
systems commercially available.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 2 shows the oil detection performance of the
proposed system. To determine the limit of detection (LOD)
of the proposed system, each oil sample was diluted by
hexane solutions ranging from 1,000 ppm to 100 ppb and the
measurements were triplicated at each concentration. In
Figure 2, the averaged pixel intensity at each concentration
has been calculated to plot the sensorgram. Figure 3 shows
the raw digital images of the fluorescence emission from the
various concentrations of the crude oils, captured by the
CMOS image sensor.
With this result, we can draw the dynamic detection
range of the proposed sensing platform. In the case of
Russian crude oil, it has a linear detection range from 1 ppm
to 1000 ppm, whereas, in the case of Iraqi crude oil, the light
intensity acquired by CMOS image sensor was saturated
between 100 ppm and 1000 ppm. Thus, the dynamic
detection range of that case is from 1 ppm to 100 ppm.
Through these two experiments, we can see that the amount
of TPHs in Iraqi crude oil is more than that in Russian crude
oil.
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. Schematic diagram and experimental setup of the proposed
compact and cost-effective fluorometer.
Figure 2. Fluorescence based oil detection results of the proposed system
for crude oils from Iraq and Russia.
Figure 3. Raw CMOS images of the fluorescence emission from the various concentrations of the crude oils.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
In summary, a compact and cost-effective fluorometer
using UV LED and CMOS image sensor for crude oil
detection was proposed and demonstrated. According to
the experimental results, the LOD of the proposed simple
system was ranging from 1 ppm to 100 ppm or 1,000 ppm,
which is comparable to that of a commercial fluorescence
spectroscopy system, i.e., TD-500D (Turner Designs
Hydrocarbon Instruments, USA). In this presentation, we
will also discuss another experimental protocol that can
push the LOD of the proposed system down to ~10 ppb.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Korea Research
Institute of Ships and
Ocean Engineering (KRISO)
Endowment-Grant (PES2240).
REFERENCES
[1]
A. MacLean, C. Moran, W. Johnstone, B. Culshaw, D.
Marsh and P. Parker, “Detection of hydrocarbon fuel spills
using a distributed fibre optic sensor,” Sensors and
Actuators A, vol. 109, pp. 60–67, 2003.
[2]
C. Chase, S. Bibber and T. Muniz, “Development of a Non
contact Oil Spill Detection System,” Proceedings of
MTS/IEEE Oceans, vol. 2, pp. 1352-1357, 2005.
[3]
H. Denkilkian, A. Koulakezian, R. Ohannessian, M.
Joujou, A. Chehab and I. Elhajj, “Wireless Sensor for
Continuous Real-Time Oil Spill Thickness and Location
Measurement,” IEEE Transaction on Instrumentation and
Measurement, vol. 58, pp. 4001-4011, 2009.
[4]
S. Jocis, and A. Vuorenkoski, “Spectral Fluorescence
Characteristics of Commercially Available Hydrocarbon
Sensors,” Proceedings of the National Conference on
Undergraduate Research (NCUR), pp. 231-241, 2014.
[5]
S. Oh, M. Lee and H. Choi, “Development of Hydrocarbon
Oil Detection Sensor using the Swelling Property of
Silicone Rubber,” Journal of the Korean Society for Marine
Environmental Engineering, vol. 14, pp. 280-286, 2011.
[6]
S. Oh and M. Lee, “Oil Spill Detection Mechanism using
Single-wavelength LED and CCD,” Journal of the Korean
Society for Marine Environmental Engineering, Vol. 15,
pp. 323-329, 2012.
[7]
S. Oh and M. Lee, “Oil Thickness Measurement by Light
Absorption Analysis,” Journal of the Korean Society for
Marine Environment and Energy, Vol. 16, pp. 263-267,
2013.
[8]
V. Malkov and D. Sievert, “Oil-in-Water Fluorescence
Sensor in Wastewater and Other Industrial Applications,”
Power Plant Chemistry, vol. 12, pp. 144-154, 2010.
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

