Triboelectric-Based Energy Harvesting Face Mask Using Recyclable Materials 
Brady Miller, Samantha Barker and Reza Rashidi 
Department of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering Technology, State University of New York, Alfred State College 
Alfred, NY, USA 
e-mail: rashidr@alfredstate.edu 
 
Abstract— This paper presents the development of a face mask 
that 
includes 
a 
triboelectric 
nanogenerator 
utilizing 
movements due to pressure changes when speaking to power 
an 
embedded 
temperature 
sensor. 
The 
triboelectric 
nanogenerator (TENG) produces electricity using common 
materials including printer papers, ball-point pen inks, and 
sheets of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE). The pen ink is 
painted onto the paper containing arrays of 2 cm long slots 
that are 200 μm in width. The paper with holes is placed on the 
top of a PTFE layer followed by another layer of ink-covered 
paper without holes. This layer-on-layer device is inserted into 
the front of the face mask. When the wearer speaks, the 
acoustic energy travels through the slots and vibrates the 
PTFE and inked-paper layers. Electrons are transferred from 
the ink to the plastic through these forms of movement. The 
electricity generation is due to the transfer of electrons 
between the negative and positive mediums, which electrically 
charges each side of the TENG.  The electricity generated is 
transported to a thermistor located near the chin and ear and 
embedded in the mask band to sense the temperature of the 
wearer’s skin. Testing was conducted using a Bluetooth 
speaker to create soundwaves that initiated the triboelectric 
effect. The song that was used to test was “Back in Black” by 
the band AC/DC. The mask generated a peak-to-peak voltage 
of 1.72 V and 2.48 V at 70 dB and 80 dB, respectively. 
Keywords-triboelectric nanogenerator; TENG; paper; PTFE; 
recyclable materials; face mask; thermistor. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Sustainability has become an ethical standard in 
engineering as the world drives towards creating more eco-
friendly energy options from sources, such as solar, wind, 
hydro, geothermal and fuel cells. However, these modern 
alternative energy sources require high-tech and expensive 
equipment for effective fabrication. This greatly impacts the 
widespread availability for such energy sources and therefore 
prevents the majority of the population from using these 
types of energy. The high costs of alternative energy sources 
gatekeeps 
alternative 
energy 
from 
lower 
income 
communities [1], resulting in the continued reliance of 
current energy sources that are harmful to the environment. 
Moreover, the size of these alternative energy methods has 
restricted its applications. Since the use of portable devices 
has risen so greatly in the past few decades, energy 
consumption has also greatly increased; therefore, the need 
for portable-sized energy harvesters is at an all-time high. In 
recent years, the push for generators on a micro scale has 
greatly increased [2]. Energy harvesters have been used to 
power various systems and devices, such as wearable devices 
[3], wireless sensor networks [4], buildings [5], tactile 
sensors 
[6], 
biomedical 
devices 
[7], 
and 
roadway 
applications [8]. Most of these harvesters utilize vibration as 
the most available energy source in many environments, 
such as vehicles [9] and human body [10]. This type of 
energy source can be converted into electrical energy using 
triboelectric [11], piezoelectric [12], electrostatic [13], and 
electromagnetic [14] methods. Various energy harvesting 
devices have been demonstrated by this group [15][16][17]. 
Triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) are a form of 
energy harvesters that use motion frequency for self-
generation. TENGs function through pairs with one side 
abundant in positive charges and the other being abundant in 
negative charges. Some positively charged materials include 
silicon oxide [18], stainless steel and aluminum [19]. Some 
negatively charged materials include silicon [18], polyvinyl 
chloride (PVC) [20], and polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) 
[19]. The triboelectric effect occurs when these two sides 
touch at a high frequency. There are two main motions that 
are looked at when using the triboelectric effect: sliding 
motion and tapping motion. At the point of contact, a 
chemical bond is formed between the two surfaces, called 
adhesion, and electrons are transferred from the negative half 
to the positive half to equalize their electrochemical 
potential. TENGs are effective energy harvesters for 
applications that require high voltage and low current. This 
research intends to use a voltage drop across a thermistor to 
calculate a temperature reading of the wearer. This focus 
requires the need for higher voltages as opposed to current, 
making triboelectric a desired choice. The requirement for 
the nanogenerator to be small enough to fit into a face mask 
also promotes the decision on the use of triboelectric. 
TENGs are an effective method of alternative energy 
harvesting because of their wide variety of applications, such 
as bicycles [21], clothing [22], and portable power sources 
[23]; however, these applications are primarily focused on 
bodily movement. TENGs may also be used to harvest 
energy through the vibrations of acoustic frequency [19][24].  
While the applications of TENGs are still growing, the 
development of paper-based nanogenerators has allowed for 
an easily accessible, inexpensive method for alternative 
energy harvesting [25]. Further research has drifted towards 
the implementation of other low-cost materials into TENG 
fabrication, such as papers [20][24], pencil graphite [26], pen 
ink [27], and PTFE. The combination of these low-cost and 
easily accessible materials will allow for the wider 
distribution and use of alternative energy harvesting 
methods. This is particularly important for applications that 
demand low-cost, recyclable devices. The implementation of 
these recyclable materials allows for simple, environmentally 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

friendly, and sustainable applications. Paper is also a flexible 
material that provides ample movement necessary for TENG 
applications. This flexibility has allowed for further TENG 
development in which paper may act as both a structure 
component of the application and a functioning half of the 
triboelectric pair [24][27]. Face masks are a disposable 
supply that require low-cost components. The masks in the 
market currently focus on protecting others from coming in 
contact with any germ or virus. In addition, face masks can 
be designed to trap water droplets produced from respiration 
[28] in order to control the spread of infected particles.  
This paper proposes a face mask that utilizes low-cost, 
paper-based TENG to generate electricity from the vibrations 
caused by breath and speech [29] and to power an embedded 
temperature sensor within the mask itself. To best of our 
knowledge, this is the first time that a self-sustained, 
temperature monitoring face mask design using triboelectric 
nanogenerators fabricated with recyclable materials is 
demonstrated. In the paper-based TENG, pencil graphite and 
pen ink can act as conductive electrodes to facilitate the 
transfer of charges. These materials are thin and easily 
manageable when being applied to a TENG layer. However, 
the pencil graphite was determined by sources to be 
unreliable when deformation occurs to the paper layer [27]; 
therefore, pen ink is a much more desirable conductive 
electrode for this TENG application. The paper layer is 
painted with a layer of pen ink to form one half of the 
triboelectric pair, and it will be used in an application to 
address a resultant issue of the current COVID-19 pandemic. 
The pen ink used in this paper is a more cost-effective 
solution compared with the silver nanowire [20], evaporated 
silver [25], or copper [24] coatings used on a soft paper as an 
electrification layer generating triboelectric charges upon 
contacting with a mating membrane. 
Previous self-powered mask designs were established to 
deactivate virus-infected particles [30]; however, these 
claims were only validated through simulation. The proposed 
TENG design for the face mask in this paper has been 
developed and tested for the next step of the mask 
development. The mask design, while keeping people safe 
from spreading the virus, will be able to read the wearer’s 
temperature. This ability will allow an early detection of a 
user that may contract the virus. This is particularly more 
important for the environments where a contagious or deadly 
virus, such as COVID-19 exists, and mask wearers may want 
to monitor their body temperature without touching another 
device. A consideration for this design will be that the 
addition of the triboelectric generating layers will give the 
mask an added layer of bulk and protection from the spread 
of diseased particles. While the temperature sensor, and 
wiring will give the mask an added weight plus material that 
could cause a discomfort to the user if not implemented 
correctly. The added size and weight of the materials have 
been considered to prioritize user comfort. This paper will 
focus on only the mask design and its triboelectric energy 
harvester. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows:  Section II  
describes the design, working principle, flow simulation, and 
fabrication and assembly of the device. Section III presents 
the testing method and tools, testing results, the discussion 
on the results, and the future work. Finally, the conclusions 
are discussed in Section IV.  
II. 
DESIGN AND FABRICATION 
A. Nanogenerator Design 
Ballpoint pen ink was determined to be a more stable 
conductive material than pencil graphite [27]. Therefore, it 
was the best option to use for easily accessible materials. A 
layer of ballpoint pen ink was painted onto an A4 style 
standard sheet of paper. All the ink from seven traditional 
ballpoint pens was used on the sheet of paper. Once the pen 
ink was applied, a small painting brush was used to smooth 
out any uneven spots of the ink and make the layer uniform. 
This layer acts as the conductive electrode for the paper 
TENG. The entire sheet of paper being covered in pen ink 
eases the machining process with the laser cutter itself. Since 
the laser uses a grid patterned metal as a template for cutting, 
a full sheet eliminates potential error in cuts that could be off 
centered or not perfectly symmetrical. 
A laser-cutting method was used to create the design with 
a pattern of slots cut into the ink-painted paper, as shown in  
Figure 1. The pattern consists of four columns. The two 
central columns consist of sixty-eight rows each. The column 
centered in the topmost portion of the shape contains sixteen 
slots. The column centered in the lower portion of the shape 
contains eight slots. The placement of the columns is 
designed to properly utilize available surface area while 
maintaining uniformity and the ability to catch the vibrations 
from breath and speech. The distance between each row is 
evenly distributed.  
 
 
Figure 1. AutoCAD design of paper with slots for laser cutting. 
 
Prior research indicated that the highest output occurs 
when 20% of the surface area is void and the hole diameter 
is 200 μm [24]. Through calculation, this design was 
determined to contain 19.92% void-to-surface area ratio.  
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The slots are distributed in an evenly spaced pattern to 
ensure consistent energy harvesting. 
B. Working Principle 
The diffraction of sound waves is the desired form of 
energy creation and harvesting. The closeness of the slots 
directs the acoustic waves through them. The wave 
interference creates an outbound resultant wave that is of 
some amplitude compared to the incoming waves. Resultant 
waves will cause an increase in the number of waves feeding 
through the two layers of the triboelectric pair. As the 
number of waves increase between the layers of the pair, 
vibrations will occur therefore allowing the transfer of 
electrons to occur. Increasing the frequency and amplitude of 
the waves will directly increase the resultant waves allowing 
for more energy to be created. Diagram of sound wave 
interference is depicted in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Diagram of sound wave interference. 
 
The triboelectric pair of materials for the TENG design is 
paper and PTFE [31]. The enlarged view shown in Figure 3 
gives the layout layer by layer of the TENG. Printer paper is 
covered with a layer of ball point pen ink, it is then machined 
by the laser cuter to create the slits. The layer is placed on 
the top of a PTFE plastic layer. Directly under this plastic 
layer is another layer of pen ink spread across paper. These 
layers are solid and do not contain any slits. The pattern of 
slots in the paper will allow vibration to move the 
triboelectric pairs and generate energy to power an indicator 
LED. 
 
Figure 3. Material layers of the TENG. 
C. Flow Simulation 
A flow simulation in SolidWorks was performed to 
determine the pattern of air flow within the TENG. This 
simulation was used to determine the likelihood of vibration 
within the TENG to produce optimal transfers of charges. As 
shown in Figure 4, the velocity contours give a 
representation of how the air is going to move through the 
slots of the TENG. As the air flows through the slots, a wave 
effect is produced within the TENG. This wave effect will 
allow the layers of the triboelectric pair to vibrate against 
each other, which will facilitate the triboelectric effect to 
occur. The figure shows the direction of the voice and breath 
from the wearer. These two waveforms contact the slits in 
the paper layer that interferes and creates a resultant wave 
that vibrates the layers together. The resultant vibrating wave 
is shown affecting the contours between the layer with slits 
and the plastic layer. The vibrations continue through the 
paper layer and affect the contours past the plastic layer into 
the second layer of paper.  
 
Figure 4. SolidWorks flow simulation of the design with the TENG 
highlighted in blue. The blue arrows represent the direction of the incoming 
human voice and breath. The layers of the TENG itself is depicted in a 
close-up view. The small black arrows in the figure itself represent the 
movement of the air contours intertwined between the layers of the TENG. 
 
The external velocity representing a human’s breath was 
set as an input of 1.3 m/s. As the contours travel between the 
layers of the TENG, a wave is created. Since the slots of the 
material are placed closely together, the waves that travel 
through will interfere with each other; this interference 
creates resultant waves, which maximizes the number of 
waves between the layers. This resultant wave is the main 
source of movement needed to create the transfer of 
electrons between the two triboelectric pairs. 
D. Fabrication and Assembly 
The nanogenerator consists of two sections of paper with 
measurements of 8 cm width, 6 cm in length, and 0.01 mm 
thickness. A piece of PTFE plastic was cut to the same 
measurements as the paper. An evenly distributed layer of 
ink was spread across an A4 sheet of printer paper. The pen 
ink cartridge was removed from the barrel of the pen and the 
ink flowed freely from the cartridge onto the paper. Using a 
small paint brush, the ink was spread evenly across the 
surface until the entire sheet was coated. Having a full sheet 
of paper coated in ink allowed for easier machining with a 
Fusion 40 carbon dioxide laser cutter. The laser cutter uses a 
grid system to align and cut material and using a full sheet of 
paper eliminates potential error in cuts that could be off 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

centered or not perfectly symmetrical. The full sheet of paper 
promotes stability and accuracy during the cutting procedure. 
Using AutoCAD, the design template for the slot 
configuration was uploaded to the laser cutter. This data was 
uploaded in different cuts; each row of slots was one separate 
cut; the next cut was the perimeter of the nanogenerator 
itself. The laser cutter allows the user to change the cutting 
speed and power of the laser for each job that is uploaded to 
it. The following job settings are specific to the Fusion M2 
40 Epilog Laser only. The jobs associated with the cutting of 
the slots had a power setting of 15% and a speed of 50%. 
Cutting time was approximately six minutes for all cuts to be 
finished. The speed of the process could be lower than six 
minutes with an increase to the cutter speed, but this setting 
was utilized to assure the material was cut all the way 
through. A plastic insert was also cut using the solid 
configuration of the paper inset. Although PTFE is not 
harmful to the human respiratory system [30], another layer 
of normal filter material can be added to the inner side of the 
face mask to avoid any potential hazard. Figure 5(a) shows 
different layers of the triboelectric nanogenerator fabricated 
using common printer paper and PTFE plastic and the laser-
cut configuration of the TENG paper inserts. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 5. a) TENG layers: paper inserts (images left and write) with plastic 
insert (middle image). b) Assembled TENG in mask frame placed into cloth 
mask with wires for testing purposes. 
 
Six nanogenerators were cut with the laser. These 
nanogenerator sets were then connected in series to 
maximize the voltage output of the assembled TENG. The 
assembled TENG was then placed into the plastic mask 
frame where it will sit when placed into the mask. Another 
plastic frame is placed on top of the assembled TENG to 
hold it in place. When the TENG is layered between the two 
frames, it can be placed into any cloth mask. Figure 5(b) 
shows the assembled TENG within the mask frames and the 
thermistor placed within a cloth mask. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The testing procedure involved using a Bluetooth speaker 
to create acoustic sound waves. Although the type of sound 
generated by the speaker may not be similar to the one 
produced by the human, the electronic speaker is the most 
reliable device generating consistent sound for the proof of 
concept and testing purposes. The TENG was placed on top 
of the speaker and music was played from a mobile 
electronic device. The selected song for this testing process 
was “Back in Black” by AC/DC. The energy created was 
recorded using a NI-6003 Data Acquisition Card through the 
LabVIEW 
software. 
The 
voltage 
detected 
directly 
corresponded to the volume and rhythm of the music.  
In order to get the optimum voltage results, different 
sound intensities were applied to the mask and voltage as a 
function of time was measured. It was found that sound 
pressure levels of 70 dB and 80 dB yield the most output. 
Therefore, these two sound levels were used and the effect 
was recorded as the voltage outputs. Figure 6 shows the 
generated voltage as a function of time at two sound pressure 
levels.     
 
   (a) 
 
    (b) 
Figure 6. Generated voltages of the developed TENG as a function of time 
at two sound pressure levels of 70 dB (a) and 80 dB (b). 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The graphs shown illustrate a direct change from an 
instrumental section back to singing at different decibel 
levels. It is clear that the graphs contain both major and 
minor vibrational cycles in both sound pressure levels. The 
minor cycles are within each major cycle. Comparing the 
graphs of two sound pressure levels implied that the graph of 
70 dB level experienced a higher frequency than that of 80 
dB level. This is likely because the layers get a better chance 
to move against each other in 70 dB case. On the other hand, 
the graph of 80 dB pressure level shows a higher peak-to-
peak voltage amplitude than that of 70 dB level. This is 
likely because of the longer time that the triboelectric 
harvester layers take to move against each other, resulting in 
a more travel between layers and so more voltage amplitude. 
 
     (a) 
 
     (b) 
Figure 7. Zoomed graphs of Figure 6 focusing on individual major cycles 
(generated voltages as a function of time) at two sound pressure levels of 
70 dB (a) and 80 dB (b). 
 
TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF VOLTAGE AND FREQUENCY VALUES 
OF TESTING RESULTS SHOWN IN FIGURES 6 TO 8. 
Cycle 
Type 
Parameter 
Sound Pressure 
Level (SPL)  
70 dB 
80 dB 
Major 
Cycles 
Peak-to-Peak Voltage (V) 
1.72 
2.48 
Frequency (Hz) 
2.27 
1.61 
Minor 
Cycles 
Peak-to-Peak Voltage (V) 
0.60 
0.38 
Frequency (Hz) 
51.3 
52.2 
 
In order to analyze cycles in each graph, zoomed graphs 
focusing on individual major cycles were plotted, as shown 
in Figure 7. It appears that minor cycles in the two sound 
pressure levels may have different frequencies and voltage 
amplitudes. In order to look into this, individual minor cycles 
were developed for both 70 dB and 80 dB sound pressure 
levels, as shown in Figure 8.  
 
     (a) 
 
     (b) 
Figure 8. Zoomed graphs of Figure 8 focusing on individual minor cycles 
(generated voltages as a function of time) at two sound pressure levels of 
70 dB (a) and 80 dB (b). 
 
Comparing the two graphs indicates that peak-to-peak 
voltage amplitude in 70 dB pressure level is significantly 
higher that of 80 dB case while frequency of graph of 80 dB 
pressure level is slightly higher than that of 70 dB case. It is 
most likely the paper layers vibrate locally in a way that the 
contact between layers will stay locally longer. Table 1 
summaries the voltage and frequency values in all cases. 
The highest voltage drop recorded resulted in 2.48 PP-V. 
In the next research following this work, a thermistor 
temperature sensor and LED will be used in conjunction with 
Arduino coding to track body temperature and act as an 
indicator for feverish temperatures. The major drawback of 
the triboelectric nanogenerator used in the facemask is the 
low current harvested which limits a continuous temperature 
monitoring. This limitation will be overcome using a tiny 
battery charger used to store the power generated by the 
nanogenerator and power the thermistor as needed. In 
addition, further testing will be performed using the sound 
generated by human respiration.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
A novel paper-based triboelectric nanogenerator was 
used to develop the groundwork of a self-powered face 
mask. This TENG uses low-cost, easily accessible, and 
recyclable materials to act as the triboelectric pair. These 
recyclable materials are paper layered in pen ink and PTFE 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

plastic. The triboelectric effect was facilitated within the 
mask through the vibrations of acoustic frequency. The 
purpose of this TENG is to power a temperature sensor to 
indicate feverish body temperatures on the wearer.  
Acoustic energy was used to generate vibrations within 
the layers of the triboelectric pair. Slots were laser-cut into 
the paper layer to create a void for sound waves to move 
through. The slots were also placed closely together to 
generate wave interference and maximize the number of 
waves travelling in the TENG to create optimal vibrations. 
These vibrations allowed for the materials to touch and 
transfer electrons. The triboelectric effect of this design was 
also enabled through an up-down-and-around sliding motion 
to mimic the movement of the mask wearer’s jaw. The 
combination of these two motions was able to generate a 
voltage within the TENG. The produced TENG generated a 
maximum peak-to-peak voltage of 2.47 V at the sound 
pressure level of 80 dB.  
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Dillahunt, J. Mankoff, E. Paulos, and S. Fussell, “It's not 
all about ’green’: energy use in low-income communities,” in 
Proceedings of the 11th international conference on 
Ubiquitous computing, pp. 255-264, September 2009. 
[2] Z. L. Wang, “On Maxwell's displacement current for energy 
and sensors: the origin of nanogenerators,” in Materials 
Today, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 74-82, March 2017. 
[3] H. Zheng et al., “Concurrent harvesting of ambient energy by 
hybrid nanogenerators for wearable self-powered systems and 
active remote sensing,” in ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, vol. 
10, no. 17, pp. 14708–14715, April 2018. 
[4] M. H. Anisi, G. Abdul-Salaam, M. Y. I. Idris, A. W. A. 
Wahab, and I. Ahmedy, “Energy harvesting and battery 
power based routing in wireless sensor networks,” in Wireless 
Networks, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 249–266, Jan. 2017. 
[5] X. Yue et al., “Development of an indoor photovoltaic energy 
harvesting module for autonomous sensors in building air 
quality applications,” in IEEE Internet Things Journal, vol. 4, 
no. 6, pp. 2092–2103, 20 September 2017. 
[6] K. Kim, G. Song, C. Park, and K. S. Yun, “Multifunctional 
woven structure operating as triboelectric energy harvester, 
capacitive tactile sensor array, and piezoresistive strain sensor 
array,” in Sensors, vol. 17, no. 11, p. 2582, 9 November 2017. 
[7] Q. Shi, T. Wang, and C. Lee, “MEMS based broadband 
piezoelectric ultrasonic energy harvester (PUEH) for enabling 
self-powered implantable biomedical devices,” in Scientific 
Reports, vol. 6, no. 24946, pp. 1-10, 26 April 2016. 
[8] I. Jung, Y. H. Shin, S. Kim, J. Y. Choi, and C. Y. Kang, 
“Flexible piezoelectric polymer-based energy harvesting for 
roadway applications,” in Applied Energy, vol. 197, pp. 222-
229, 1 July 2017. 
[9] M. A. Abdullah and J. F. Jamil, “Harvesting energy from the 
vibration of suspension of a passenger vehicle,” in Proc. 
Recent Adv. Mech. Mech. Eng., pp. 128–133, 2015. 
[10] S. Wu et al., “An electromagnetic wearable 3-DoF resonance 
human body motion energy harvester using ferrofluid as a 
lubricant,” in Applied Energy, vol. 197, pp. 364–374, 2017. 
[11] J. He et al., “Triboelectric-piezoelectric-electromagnetic 
hybrid nanogenerator for high-efficient vibration energy 
harvesting and self-powered wireless monitoring system,” in 
Nano Energy, vol. 43, pp. 326–339, January 2018. 
[12] Y. Liao and H. Sodano, "Optimal power, power limit and 
damping of vibration based piezoelectric power harvesters," 
in Smart Materials and Structures 27, no. 7, p. 075057, 2018. 
[13] X. Ma and X. Zhang, “Low cost electrostatic vibration energy 
harvesters 
based 
on 
negatively-charged 
polypropylene 
cellular films with a folded structure,” in Smart Materials and 
Structures, vol. 26, no. 8, p. 085001, 20 June 2017. 
[14] M. L. Seol, S. B. Jeon, J. W. Han, and Y. K. Choi, 
“Ferrofluid-based 
triboelectric-electromagnetic 
hybrid 
generator for sensitive and sustainable vibration energy 
harvesting,” in Nano Energy, vol. 31, pp. 233–238, 2017. 
[15] R. Hall and R. Rashidi. "Multi-Directional Universal Energy 
Harvesting Ball," in Micromachines 12, no. 4, p. 457, 2021. 
[16] J. Bianconi, J. Hallett, J. Pealo, and R. Rashidi. "A hybrid 
piezoelectric and inductive rotational energy harvester," in 
IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 
vol. 626, no. 1, p. 012004. 2019. 
[17] R. Rashidi, N. Summerville, and M. Nasri. "Magnetically 
actuated piezoelectric-based rotational energy harvester with 
enhanced output in wide range of rotating speeds." in IEEE 
Transactions on Magnetics 55, no. 9, pp. 1-8, 2019. 
[18] C. Chen et al., “Micro triboelectric ultrasonic device for 
acoustic energy transfer and signal communication,” in 
Nature Communications, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1-9, 2020. 
[19] N. Cui et al., “High performance sound driven triboelectric 
nanogenerator for harvesting noise energy,” in Nano Energy, 
vol. 15, pp. 321-328, July 2015. 
[20] C. Wu, T. W. Kima, S. Sung, J. H. Park, and F. Li, “Ultrasoft 
and cuttable paper-based triboelectric nanogenerators for 
mechanical energy harvesting,” in Nano Energy, vol. 44, pp. 
279-287, February 2018. 
[21] S. Khalid, I. Raouf, A. Khan, N. Kim, and H.S. Kim, “A 
review of human-powered energy harvesting for smart 
electronics: recent progress and challenges,” in International 
Journal of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing-Green 
Technology, vol. 6, pp. 1-31, 29 July 2019. 
[22] S. Wang, L. Lin, and Z. L. Wang, “Nanoscale triboelectric-
effect-enabled energy conversion for sustainably powering 
portable electronics,” in Nano Letters, vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 
6339-6346, 6 November 2012. 
[23] H. Zhang et al., “Single-electrode-based rotating triboelectric 
nanogenerator for harvesting energy from tires,” in ACS 
Nano, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 680-689, 2014. 
[24] X. Fan et al., “Ultrathin, rollable, paper-based triboelectric 
nanogenerator for acoustic energy harvesting and self-
powered sound recording,” in ACS Nano, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 
4236-4243, 19 March 2015. 
[25] Q. Zhong et al., “A paper-based nanogenerator as a power 
source and active sensor,” in Energy & Environmental 
Science, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1779-1784, 28 March 2013. 
[26] X. S. Zhang, M. Su, J. Brugger, and B. Kim, “Penciling a 
triboelectric nanogenerator on paper for autonomous power 
MEMS applications,” in Nano Energy, vol. 33, pp. 393-401, 
March 2017. 
[27] K. Xia et al., “Painting a high-output triboelectric 
nanogenerator on paper for harvesting energy from human 
body motion,” in Nano Energy, vol. 50, pp. 571-580, 2018. 
[28] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Considerations 
for wearing masks,” United States of America, 2020. 
[29] R. A. Lester and J. D. Hoit, “Nasal and oral inspiration during 
natural speech breathing,” in Journal of Speech, Language, 
and Hearing Research, vol.57, no.3, pp.734-742, 1 June 2014. 
[30] B. Ghatak et al., “Design of a Self-powered Smart Mask for 
COVID-19,” in arXiv:2005.08305 [physics.med-ph], 2020. 
[31] D. W. Kim, S. W. Kim, and U. Jeong, “Lipids: source of 
static electricity of regenerative natural substances and 
nondestructive energy harvesting,” in Advanced Materials, 
vol. 30, no. 52, p. 1804949, 2 November 2018. 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

