Remote Health Monitoring Device for the Elderly 
Development of an Affordable and Easy-to-use Breathing Monitoring Device 
Matthew Clark, Jaerock Kwon, Girma Tewolde 
Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Kettering University 
Flint, MI, USA 
{clar8299, jkwon, gtewolde}@kettering.edu 
 
 
Abstract— In the USA, the oldest of the baby-boomer 
generation just started to reach retirement age a few years ago. 
In the years to come, a much larger percentage of the 
population will be dependent on others for their daily care. 
There are not many low-cost monitoring devices available on 
the market to help caregivers keep dependent elderly people 
comfortable and healthy in a home setting without a monthly 
service charge. The device presented in this paper addresses 
this challenge to provide caregivers an emergency alert system 
for the elderly based on monitoring of their breathing activities 
and room temperature measurements. The device also allows 
the dependents to make on demand request for assistance. The 
remote communication is enabled through the cellular 
telephone services; so there is no special or additional 
subscription services needed. This is essential to make the 
device more affordable for the elderly.  
Keywords-health monitoring; remote elderly monitoring; 
breathing monitoring; emergency alert. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The oldest of the baby-boomer generation just started to 
reach retirement age a few years ago. In the years to come a 
much larger percentage of the population will be dependent 
on others for their daily care. In fact, the ratio of caregivers 
to boomers needing care in 2010 was 7.2 to 1 and is expected 
to decrease to 2.9 to 1 by 2050 [1].  
Being a caregiver for an elderly relative can be a very 
demanding experience. Therefore, there will be higher 
demand on devices that help caregivers to remotely monitor 
the elderly. Unlike the devices in the market that are 
available for newborn care, there are not many products for 
home use intended for elderly monitoring applications. Such 
devices would be of critical value for caregivers to help keep 
elderly dependents comfortable and healthy in a home 
setting without a monthly service charge. 
There are only a handful of elderly monitoring devices on 
the market that offer features such as help at the push of a 
button and fall detection. Not only are these devices lacking 
potential life-saving features such as movement detection 
and room temperature monitoring, they also require a 
monthly service fee in addition to an existing telephone line. 
For example, Philips Lifeline, a popular elderly monitoring 
device, requires a subscription with plans starting at $29.95 
per month [2]. 
In the research community, there are a few systems that 
have been developed for breathing monitoring of the elderly. 
For example, Fook et al. [3] present non-intrusive respiratory 
monitoring system for detection of life threatening systems 
in bed ridden patients. The system uses Fiber Bragg Grating 
pressure sensors mounted on beds for continuous monitoring 
of the respiratory rate of patients without requiring them to 
wear any device.  
In the wearable bio sensors category, there are a number 
of devices available for many different monitoring 
applications. As an example, Chan et al. [4] present wireless 
patch sensor for remote monitoring of heart rate, respiration, 
activity, and falls. 
The goal of our project is to monitor breathing movement 
of elderly dependents and provide the capability to send 
automatic alerts to health care professionals in case of 
abnormalities. Data analysis is conducted to study the nature 
of the data and minimize false alarms, so users do not lose 
confidence in the device and stop using it. Additional feature 
of temperature monitoring is also incorporated to ensure that 
the dependent stays in a comfortable environment. If the 
room temperature exceeds a pre-set limit, an automatic alert 
is sent to the care giver. The device also allows the 
dependent to request assistance on demand, by pressing a 
help button. 
Here is a list of criteria that our monitoring device will 
meet in order to benefit both the caregivers and the 
dependent elderly. 
 
The device must alert the caregiver if no breathing 
movement is detected. This will allow the caregiver 
to get emergency help right away. 
 
The device must not produce false breathing 
movement alarms. False alarms would dramatically 
decrease the usefulness of the motion detection 
feature and could frustrate users to the point of not 
using the feature. 
 
The device must be able to monitor room 
temperature and alert the caregiver if the temperature 
is outside of the preset range. This will help ensure 
the dependent elderly is comfortable. 
 
The device must allow the dependent elderly to 
request assistance. This request could be for 
anything from needing a drink to needing help 
getting to the bathroom. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The next 
section details the hardware design of the monitoring device. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Section III presents the software design, which is made up of 
the software running on the embedded microcontroller and 
the software for the Smartphone app. Finally, the project 
results are discussed and concluding remarks as well as 
future recommendations provided. 
II. 
MONITORING HARDWARE DESIGN 
The critical component of this project is the breathing 
detection sensor. The sensor pad shown in Figure 1 is created 
for breathing movement detection. This unit is made up of 
one pressure sensor and three piezo vibration sensors. It is 
built by placing the sensors between two clear plastic folder 
dividers. The folders are held together using both extra 
strength double sided tape as well as epoxy. Electrical tape is 
also used to hold the wires together where they exit the 
sensor pad. The sensors were positioned in a way to help 
minimize the risk of false alarms. The vibration sensors are 
spread out to detect movement in different areas of the 
sensor pad and the pressure sensor is located near the 
vibration sensors to make sure the dependent is on the sensor 
pad correctly before enabling breathing alerts. Lastly, there 
are four pieces of Velcro on the back of the sensor pad. 
These were used to help the sensor pad stay in position when 
using it in a recliner. A rectangular piece of cotton fabric is 
purchased and Velcro sewn to it. This fabric could then be 
draped over the back of the recliner and the sensor pad could 
be securely placed on it. 
 
 
The data collection and processing of the breathing 
sensor 
device 
is 
handled 
by 
the 
Arduino 
Uno 
microcontroller, which offers 6 analog inputs and 14 digital 
I/O pins. This is a commonly available and inexpensive 
microcontroller that is excellent for quick proof-of-concept 
and prototyping.  
Wireless 
communication 
between 
the 
Arduino 
microcontroller and Android devices is done using a 
Bluetooth interface module. For this project, the Bluetooth 
Mate Silver [5] is used, which gave reliable connection and 
reasonably good range. 
A temperature sensor is used for monitoring the room 
temperature. For this purpose, the Maxim Integrated 
temperature sensor DS18B20 [6], shown in Figure 2, is 
chosen due to its low cost and adjustable precision 
temperature sensing. 
 
Inside of the breathing sensor pad there is one FlexiForce 
Pressure Sensor for the sole purpose of enabling motion 
detection when pressure is applied. There are also three piezo 
vibration sensors spread out inside the sensor pad to detect 
breathing movement. 
An LCD screen is used for the primary purpose of 
displaying the current room temperature. A basic 16x2 
character LCD is sufficient for the task, since the information 
to be displayed is simple alphanumeric characters. The LCD 
is equipped with a backlight to improve its readability in a 
dark room. A toggle switch is connected to the backlight 
control pins to allow the user control the backlight on or off. 
A large red pushbutton switch is used to allow the 
dependents to press it when they require assistance. The 
choice or the large size is to make it easier for an elderly 
person to find it when looking to press the pushbutton. 
Two LEDs are mounted on the front panel of the device 
for use as indicator lights. A green LED is used to indicate 
that the dependent is on the sensor pad and the breathing 
monitoring is active. A red LED is used as a warning 
indicator. It would blink for a short duration if the help 
button is pressed or if no breathing motion is detected while 
a dependent elderly is on the sensor. 
An actual prototype of the circuitry for the control system 
is shown in Figure 3 below. In the final implementation the 
microcontroller and all the other components will be 
assembled on a printed circuit board, to make a clean and 
robust device. 
 
The wiring diagrams that describe the circuit design are 
shown in Figures 4 and 5. To reduce complexity of the 
diagrams the LCD diagram is shown in a separate figure. 
 
 Sensor pad. (a) Vibration sensor; (b) Pressure sensor;            
Figure 1. 
(c) Velcro that is used to help the sensor pad stay in position. 
 
 Maxim Integrated DS18B20 temperature sensor 
Figure 2. 
 
 Initial prototype of the control system 
Figure 3. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
All of the user interface elements that the dependent 
elderly needs to interact with are conveniently mounted on 
the device enclosure. As seen in Figure 6 below, the LCD 
screen and LEDs are mounted on the front of the box for 
easy viewing whereas the toggle switch and help button are 
mounted on top for easy pressing. 
 
 
This prototype system is powered by a 9V battery. The 
design is verified to meet its functional requirements through 
basic testing by the authors and a few random subjects.  
III. 
MONITORING SOFTWARE DESIGN 
There are two software programs developed for the 
monitoring system. The Arduino software dealt with data 
from the various hardware and sensors whereas the primary 
purpose of the Android software is to get data from the 
monitoring device and send text message alerts to healthcare 
providers when needed. 
The Arduino application starts by initializing all of the 
variables and hardware components. It then constantly loops 
through the various functions which include checking for a 
pushed button, updating the room temperature, sending data 
to the Android device, checking for breathing movement, 
and toggling the LEDs if necessary. Software timers are used 
to limit how often the room temperature is checked and how 
often information is sent to the Android device. These timers 
are also used to create breathing movement detection time 
frames which will be further discussed later. 
When the Android application starts, it loads previously 
saved data such as the contact phone number and the desired 
room temperature range. If this data has not been updated it 
will load the default room temperature range of 70-80°F and 
notify the user that they need to enter a phone number so that 
alerts can be sent. At start-up the application also 
automatically connects to the Arduino Bluetooth board.  A 
new thread is created that waits to receive data from the 
Arduino. Each time data is received, the user interface 
elements such as the current temperature are updated. The 
data is also evaluated to determine if a text message needs to 
be sent. Further details about this are discussed later. 
A simple data structure is created for the communication 
between the Arduino and Android devices. During every 
communication, the Arduino device sends data made up of 
two integers separated by a colon. The first number is the 
current temperature (in Fahrenheit) and the second is an alert 
code (Table I). For example, "77:0" would mean the current 
room temperature is 77°F and there are no alerts. 
 
 
 Wiring diagram excluding LCD 
Figure 4. 
 
 Wiring diagram for an LCD and a switch 
Figure 5. 
 
 Monitor front view. (a) LCD backlight toggle switch;        
Figure 6. 
(b) Pushbutton; (c) LCD screen; (d) Green and Red LEDs 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

TABLE I.  
ALERT CODES 
Alert Code 
Alert Type 
0 
No alert 
1 
Help button was pressed 
2 
Movement not detected 
 
Alert codes are used to inform the care provider if they 
need to give attention to the user. They could be triggered by 
the user pressing the help button, or automatically by the 
sensor when it determines that the breathing state of the 
person is below a specified threshold value. 
A. Breathing Movement Detection 
Breathing movement detection is a bit complex. To be 
enabled, the reading from the pressure sensor pin has to be at 
least 0.3 volts. When enabled, there are motion detection 
time windows. Each window is 25 seconds long. During 
these windows the software keeps track of the minimum and 
maximum readings for each of the three vibration sensors. At 
the end of the window, it takes the difference for each of the 
sensor's minimum and maximum values and compares the 
difference with set threshold values. This method was found 
to work well experimentally for detecting the difference 
between a breathing person (Figure 7) and a non-breathing 
object (Figure 8). If all three differences are below the set 
threshold values, the emergency alert is set and sent to the 
Android device. This also enables fast toggling of the red 
LED for 8 seconds. After each detection window ends, all of 
the variables are reset to prepare for the next window. 
 
 
B. Android Application – Caregiver Assistant 
The Android application, titled Caregiver Assistant, has 
been designed and tested to operate on any Android device 
with OS 2.3 or newer. The application allows the user to 
change settings such as the desired room temperature range 
and the phone number where text alerts are sent. It also acts 
as a second room temperature display. Figure 9 shows what 
the application looks like with each section labeled. 
The first thing the Android application does after it 
establishes a Bluetooth connection with the Arduino device 
is to send it a short message. This is how the Arduino device 
is notified that the Android device has been connected. 
Following this the Arduino immediately sends temperature 
data that is displayed on the Android device right away. 
 
 
 
 
In the Android application, there is a thread that waits to 
receive data from the Arduino device. Once data is received 
a few things occur. First the information needs to be split to 
separate the temperature from the alert code. Next, the 
temperature on the display is updated. It also checks this 
updated temperature value to see if it is outside of the range 
in the current settings. If it is outside of the range, then a text 
message alert is sent indicating that the room temperature is 
either too warm or too cold. It then looks at the alert code. 
As stated earlier, if the alert code is 0 then nothing needs to 
 
 Sensor data for a breathing person 
Figure 7. 
 
 Sensor data for a non-breathing object 
Figure 8. 
 
Figure 9.  Android application user interface. (a) Temperature status 
indicator; (b) Minimum room temperature setting; (c) Maximum room 
temperature setting; (d) Current room temperature display; (e) Alert 
phone number display and update field 
810-111-2222 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

be done. If the code is not 0 then it would send the text 
message alert for either a button press or no breathing 
detected. Sample text messages for all of these instances can 
be seen in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
PREDEFINED TEXT MESSAGES 
Alert Type 
Text Message 
Temperature Alert 
Temperature Warning - Current room 
temperature is 62 which is outside of the 
current desired range 
Alert Code = 1  
(Button Press) 
I need assistance (Button pressed) 
Alert Code = 2 
 (Emergency) 
EMERGENCY - Help ASAP 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In this section the analysis of the device’s operation is 
presented. After initial testing of the breathing monitoring 
device that was presented in this paper the following 
observations are made from evaluations on how well the 
system meets its initial requirements. 
 
The device must alert the caregiver if no breathing 
motion is detected 
o An emergency text message is sent to the 
caregiver if not enough movement is detected. 
 
The device must not produce false breathing 
movement alarms 
o A pressure sensor is included in the sensor pad 
to disable motion sensing when the user is not 
on the sensor pad. This eliminates false alarms 
caused by the user not sitting on the sensor 
pad. 
o Data was collected both with people and with 
non-breathing objects on the sensor pad. Using 
the data, thresholds for each vibration sensor 
were set accordingly. This eliminates false 
alarms when the user is on the sensor pad. 
 
The device must be able to monitor room 
temperature and alert the caregiver if the temperature 
is outside of the entered range. 
o The caregiver can use the Android application 
to set a desired room temperature range. 
o A text message alert is sent to the caregiver if 
the temperature goes outside of the range 
indicated in the Android application. 
 
The device must allow the dependent to request 
assistance. 
o The dependent can press a large red button if 
they need the caregiver for any reason.  
o The device will send a text message to the 
caregiver, indicating that the button was 
pressed and the dependent needs help. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A prototype of a fully-functional elderly monitoring 
device was developed that is able to monitor breathing 
movement and room temperature, and alert the caregiver 
whenever assistance is needed. Overall, the proposed system 
was successful as each of the system criteria was met, as 
demonstrated in the previous section. Similar to competing 
devices, the alerts require a phone service that supports text 
messages and a smartphone that can run Android App. 
However, by sending the alerts to a caregiver or family 
member directly, the proposed system eliminates the 
additional service fee that the competition requires to operate 
their call centers. 
Although the presented elderly monitoring device was 
successful, the following improvements could be considered 
to make the device even better. 
 
Implement a wireless version of the sensor pad for 
easier device placement 
 
Add an option to allow fall risk alerts. An alert can 
be sent to the caregiver if the elderly dependent gets 
up.  
 
Add the ability to add multiple contact phone 
numbers within the Android application, allowing 
more than one person to be contacted in emergency 
situations. 
 
Add a momentary toggle switch to allow the user to 
cycle through various predefined text messages 
instead of only being able to use the general "I need 
help" message. 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. Hamilton, Baby boomers may have no one to care for 
them in old age. Los Angeles Times. [Online]. Available 
from: http://www.latimes.com/business/money/la-fi-mo-baby-
boomers-may-have-no-one-to-care-for-them-in-old-age-
20130826,0,2883385.story#axzz2v7YvAMTE 
[Retreived: 
September 15, 2014] 
[2] Philips, What Lifeline Costs. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.lifelinesys.com/content/lifeline-products/what-
lifeline-costs, 2014 [Retreived: September 15, 2014] 
[3] V. F. S. Fook, et al., “Non-intrusive respiratory monitoring 
system using Fiber Bragg Grating sensor,” 10th International 
Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications, and 
Services, 
July 
2008, 
pp. 
160-164, 
doi: 
10.1109/HEALTH.2008.4600128. 
[4] A. M. Chan, N. Selvaraj, N. Ferdosi, and R. Narasimhan, 
“Wireless patch sensor for remote monitoring of heart rate, 
respiration, activity, and falls,” 35th Annual International 
conference of the IEEE EMBS, July 2013, pp. 6115-6118, 
doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2013.6610948. 
[5] Bluetooth 
Mate 
Silver. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.sparkfun.com/products/12576 
[Retreived: 
September 15, 2014] 
[6] Maxim Integrated DS18B20 Prgrammable resolution 1-wire 
digital 
thermometer. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.maximintegrated.com/en/products/analog/sensors-
and-sensor-interface/DS18B20.html [Retreived: September 
15, 2014] 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

