Non-Invasive Cognitive Radio for Firm Real-Time
Sensor Applications in heterogeneous Radio
Environments
Horst Hellbr¨uck, Tim Esemann, Uwe Mackenroth, Marius Ciepluch, Arnaud M¨oschwitzer, Malte Ziethen
L¨ubeck University of Applied Sciences, Germany,
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Email: {hellbrueck,esemann,mackenroth}@fh-luebeck.de,
{marius.ciepluch,arnaud.matteo.moeschwitzer,malte.ziethen}@stud.fh-luebeck.de
Abstract—Some applications in Sensor Networks need ﬁrm
real-time support in order to work properly. The difference
to hard real-time systems is that this type of application can
withstand minor violations of the maximum delay and minimum
throughput if these violations are limited. Many standards like
IEEE 802.15.4 provide standardized means to ensure delay
and bandwidth constraints which work well when there are
no interferers in the same frequency band. However, in a
heterogeneous environment today these approaches fail when the
interference is not aware of the IEEE 802.15.4 trafﬁc. Switching
the channel is one option to avoid this kind of interference. We
suggest a new non-invasive cognitive radio protocol approach
where all participants follow simple rules to enable ﬁrm real-time
conditions in decentralized design. As a demonstrator we use a
three-fold pendulum with ﬁrm real-time signal delay constraints
of 5ms. The contributions of the paper comprise evaluation
results by real measurements with the demonstrator system.
Index Terms—Wireless Sensor; Cognitive Radio; Firm Real-
time; Protocol;
I. INTRODUCTION
Today’s radio standards were continuously improved and
engineered in the past. Therefore, new ﬁelds of application
for wireless systems are enabled [1]. Systems which were
impossible to setup can now be implemented. Especially
wireless control system can gain from this development. Real-
time applications are one example for a new application area
of wireless technologies. Such applications can be divided
into hard, ﬁrm and soft real-time applications [2]. In hard
real-time missing a single system deadline results in a total
system failure. Firm real-time systems tolerate missing a
deadline infrequently until a certain marginal degradation of
the system performance. Soft real-time applications accept
missing deadlines and the corresponding degradation of the
system performance. In our work, we implement a ﬁrm
real-time application, the control of a three-fold pendulum,
as a demonstrator to evaluate the performance of our new
developed non-invasive cognitive radio sensor protocol.
Another important effect of the successful radio standards
is that more and more wireless systems are deployed for
all kinds of applications. With this increasing utilization of
radio links the available frequency spectrum becomes a scarce
resource. One typical example for such a heterogeneous radio
environment is the 2.4GHz frequency band, utilized inter alia
by WLAN, Bluetooth and IEEE 802.15.4. Cognitive systems,
also known as Cognitive Radios (CR), are currently under
investigation [3], [4]. They are aware of the current radio envi-
ronment and have the potential to reach coexistence of wireless
systems even in the future within heterogeneous environments.
Our approach uses CR techniques to detect concurrent radio
links and adapt transmission parameters accordingly to avoid
collisions and reach ﬁrm real-time characteristics.
Therefore, contribution of our work is threefold. First, we
present a new non-invasive cognitive radio protocol for a
sensor application with ﬁrm real-time requirements. Our solu-
tion is based on a decentralized rule based approach beyond
existing reservation and synchronous Time Division Multiple
Access (TDMA) schemes. Second, we provide solutions in a
heterogonous radio environment by switching to free channels
without an additional control channel. We detect own data
packets, interfering packets using same wireless technology
AND other interfering wireless technologies. Third, we present
a ﬁrm real-time demonstrator based on 802.15.4 physical
layer with delay requirements less than 5ms to evaluate and
prove the effectiveness of the approach. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that such a non-invasive
cognitive radio sensor protocol including demonstrator in such
a heterogeneous environment has been presented.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section II
will introduce related work and demonstrate the need for new
approaches. We will describe our approach in more detail in
Section III. Section IV presents our new cognitive radio sensor
protocol. In Section V we describe the demonstrator that was
used for the evaluation. The results of our evaluation are shown
in Section VI. The paper will conclude with a short summary
and presents future work in Section VII.
II. RELATED WORK
Cognitive Radios are developed to ﬁnd and utilize free
frequency channels in a heterogeneous radio environment.
Haykin [5] deﬁnes a Cognitive Radio (CR) as an intelligent
wireless system that is aware of its surrounding radio envi-
ronment. It changes its operating parameters according to the
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

learning from the environment. Akyildiz et al. [3] describe the
tasks which are required for an adaptive operation in an open
radio environment, referred to as the cognitive cycle. There-
fore, a Cognitive Radio has to follow three steps, Spectrum
Sensing, Spectrum Analysis and Spectrum Decision. Spec-
trum Sensing monitors the actual occupancy of the spectrum.
According to the monitored and analyzed results (Spectrum
Analysis) the CR decides for a suitable dynamic spectrum
access (Spectrum Decision). Akan et al. [4] describe the main
design principles, potential advantages and application areas
for Cognitive Radio Sensor Networks. It is shown that wireless
sensor nodes equipped with cognitive radio can beneﬁt from
potential advantages of dynamic spectrum access. As already
mentioned, one major task of a CR is to perform Spectrum
Sensing. A detailed summary of spectrum sensing schemes
is given by Y¨ucek and Arslan [6]. Two important schemes -
which are also utilized in our work - are energy detection and
matched ﬁlter. Energy detection simply measures the energy
transmitted by other wireless nodes over a corresponding
frequency channel to detect if the channel is free or occupied.
Matched ﬁlter analyzes the received data to check if a channel
is occupied by a concurrent radio link with the same radio
technology. Therefore, prior knowledge of concurrent radio
links is required to demodulate and decode received signals.
CRs deploy the Spectrum Decision over a common control
channel according to the results of Spectrum Sensing and
corresponding Spectrum Analysis.
Another important issue to be solved in our work is to guar-
antee certain Quality of Service (QoS) requirements by an ap-
propriate MAC protocol. Chen et al. [7] propose an improved
low-latency IEEE 802.15.4 MAC protocol. The improvement
includes the modiﬁcation of the superframe structure and the
reduction of the MAC overhead. The contention access period
is removed within the modiﬁed superframe. Therefore, the
guaranteed time slots need to be pre-allocated to each of the
participating devices. Additionally, the MAC layer data frame
overhead is reduced. It only includes a payload of one byte and
a frame checksum of two bytes. With these modiﬁcations the
latency for 20 participating devices can be reduced from 17ms
to 8ms. Another example for guaranteeing real-time services
with IEEE 802.15.4 is presented by Yoo et al. in [8]. The
approach proposes a modiﬁcation of the guaranteed time slot
allocation, but does not reach a real-time interval smaller than
10ms. Both schemes do not consider a heterogeneous radio
environment and therefore can react on occurring interference.
The WirelessHART standard was developed by companies
to meet the stringent requirements of control applications as
presented by Song et al. in [9]. It adopts the IEEE 802.15.4
physical layer. On top of that it deﬁnes an own MAC. The
MAC layer utilizes CSMA, TDMA and channel hopping to
avoid interference with other concurrent radio links. Mesh
topology with a network manager which conﬁgures the net-
work, schedules and manages the communication between the
nodes. Even though it avoids channels with interference it does
not meet the requirements of real-time intervals smaller than
10ms.
Our approach follows the idea to avoid channels with inter-
ference or other concurrent IEEE 802.15.4 links. This idea,
switching to another channel when an interference occurs,
was also presented in one of our previous work in a different
context in [10].
The control of a single inverted pendulum over an IEEE
802.15.4 wireless sensor and actuator network was presented
by Hernandez et al. in [11]. The proposed approach provides
only a sampling period of 32ms and also cannot deal with
interference on the used frequency channel. The 3fold pendu-
lum in our work needs control cycles less than 5ms. In [12]
Yang et al., present the control of even two inverted pendulum,
but for wireless communication an IEEE 802.11b radio link
was used and also a heterogeneous radio environment was not
considered.
III. APPROACH
To achieve ﬁrm real-time requirements in heterogeneous
environments we make assumptions about the environment.
First, there is free spectrum available, so called holes that
change dynamically over time as we cannot solve the problem
if there are no resources left. We further assume that the
application data trafﬁc is variable bit rate (VBR) where the
system without the presence of interference is capable to
fulﬁll the required real-time characteristics like data rate and
delay with a certain margin left to tolerate some interference.
Additionally we restrict the solution of this problem for single-
hop scenarios in this work. Multi-hop scenarios need more
complex solutions to provide the required QoS for ﬁrm real-
time requirements. We plan to extend our approach to multi-
hop capabilities in the future. To achieve this goal the system
needs to be aware of the environment in the sense of Cognitive
Radio Research.
We describe the idea with the help of a scenario where there
are many sensor sources and a single data sink. The approach
is not limited to this setup but for now this speciﬁc scenario
helps to understand the design.
Channel Switching: In our approach sources and sinks
agree on a channel usage sequence similar to a hopping
sequence in frequency hopping. This happens before starting
the system and can be dynamically adapted if needed. The
predeﬁned channel usage sequence improves the performance
of the system as in the case of interference the nodes implicitly
agree to hop to the next channel even if the interference does
not allow to communicate on the actual channel. In contrast
to other approaches previously published that are based on
Cognitive Radio, we do not assume a dedicated reliable control
channel for resource planning and cooperation.
The channel usage sequence can be extended in the future
by blacklisting like Adaptive Frequency Hopping (AFH) does
for Bluetooth. The advantage of blacklisting is that interfer-
ences of crowded channels can be omitted and the system
has a better chance to achieve the QoS requirements of the
application.
Detecting Interferences: To avoid ambiguity only one
dedicated node in the network listens to the medium to detect
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

interferences of other wireless technologies. This node is
called Full Cognitive Node (FCN). Consequently, we name the
other nodes Reduced Cognitive Nodes (RCN). If the measured
interference of the FCN reaches a limit, this node sends a
packet switch RF channel to all nodes. All reduced cognitive
nodes in the network listen to these packets continuously and
switch accordingly.
Additionally, all cognitive nodes switch channels if they
receive a large packet that violates the predeﬁned timing
constraints of the application. The latter decision is helpful if
other applications on nearby nodes start to send large packets.
Optionally, the FCN can send an additional switch RF channel
in this case too if delay constraints allow so.
Non-Invasive Behavior: Instead of starting to negotiate
resource usage with the other applications we implement a
non-invasive strategy by switching to another channel as fast
as possible to keep the ﬁrm real-time constraints. We prefer
this strategy as cooperation between wireless ﬁrm real-time
applications is standardized only in optional sections of the
speciﬁcations. Therefore, in real scenarios, we cannot assume
that all wireless nodes in range are capable of this cooperation.
In the following, we summarize the approach starting from
the detection to the switching rules. All nodes count, measure,
analyze received data and apply a matched ﬁlter. The FCN
additionally detects interference of other concurrent wireless
transmissions by energy detection or more advanced schemes.
Cognitive nodes switch to a new channel based on a predeﬁned
channel usage sequence in either two cases: (1) A large packet
or (2) a switch RF channel packet is received. Thereby, we
have deﬁned a simple robust decentralized rule based system.
We discuss some details of the implementation in the next
section.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
In this section, we provide more details of the protocol
using ﬂow charts and present the timing model to calculate
the parameter settings.
Start
Pkt. 
Received?
Is it a
Pkt. ?
Yes
No
Process 
Packet
No
Switch RF 
Channel
Yes
Start
Yes
 Pkt. 
Length >
lTH?
No
Fig. 1.
Flow Diagram of Receiving Process Reduced Cognitive Node
The reduced cognitive node is kept very simple and does
not have any timing conditions as can be seen in Figure 1.
The only parameter needed for the protocol is the threshold
length of a packet lT H in bytes if a ﬁxed data rate is used in the
system or in packet duration if adaptive data rates like in IEEE
802.11 occur. In IEEE 802.11 depending on the signal to noise
ratio and capabilities the transmission rate is between 1Mbps
up to 11Mbps in IEEE 802.11b, but downwards compatible to
original IEEE 802.11.
Yes (Interference 
              detected)
Start
Pkt. 
Received?
Pkt. 
Length >
lTH?
Yes
Measure 
Sig. Strength 
(RSSI)
No
RSSI > 
RSSITH
Process 
Packet
No
Switch RF 
Channel
Yes
Send Packet 
„Switch RF 
Channel“ to 
Clients
Yes
No
tlast = time()
time()-tlast 
> tTH
No
Fig. 2.
Flow Diagram of Interference Mitigation Full Cognitive Node
For detection of the interfering signals we need access
to the signals on the RF-Chip. We identiﬁed the following
characteristics for concurrent transmissions and noise or other
radio interference that can be measured with common RF-
Chips.
• Interfering packets change the RSSI value of the receiver
due to the preamble signal.
• Nearby transmitters result in high RSSI values.
• After the complete preamble the RF-Chip enters the state
”receiving”.
In contrast, noise or other radio interference results in the
following characteristics.
• Interfering signals change the RSSI value of the receiver.
• Strong interference results in high RSSI values.
• Even with long periods of interference the RF-Chip does
not enter the state ”receiving”.
Figure 3 illustrates the typical scenario where for a short
time the FCN detects the violation of the critical RSSI
threshold and starts a timer. When the interference stops before
the timer expired, the FCN resets its timer again.
In Figure 4, the timer expires after the threshold tT H so
that the FCN decides to send a packet ”switch RF channel”
to all nodes. If the RSSI is suitable to send, the FCN can
send this packet successfully and all nodes change channels
synchronously.
Figure 5 illustrates the case when interfering packets from
other applications using the same channel occur. In Figure 5
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

t
RSSI Threshold
RSSI
Short
Interference
Detection
Timer
t<tTH
Fig. 3.
Short Interference FCN
t
RSSI Threshold
RSSI
Interference
Detection
Timer
t>tTH
Send RF Packet 
when possible
Fig. 4.
Long Interference FCN
we see the case where a large packet is transmitted that
violates the packet length threshold lT H. All nodes will switch
channels accordingly. The Reduced Cognitive Nodes will start
to measure with the reception of the packet without the
ﬁrst part where the RSSI value hits the threshold. Table I
summarizes the settings for our Protocol.
TABLE I
SETTING FOR NON-INVASIVE COGNITIVE RADIO
Parameter
Value
Description
RSSIT H
> CSMAT H
Threshold where Interference De-
tection Timer of FCN is started
tT H
> tmaxDelay
Threshold
when
nodes
switch
channel due to long Interference
lT H
> tmaxDelay
Threshold
when
nodes
switch
channel due to large packets
t
RSSI Threshold
RSSI
Preamble
Detection
Timer
t<tTH
Header Data 
Long Packet
Timer
Send RF Packet 
when possible
l>lTH
Fig. 5.
Large Interfering Packet FCN
V. DEMONSTRATOR
The demonstrator for our new approach is a threefold
pendulum which is controlled by a Matlab-driven Target-PC.
The control loop of the system consists of sensors measuring
angle values from all bearings of the pendulum. On a PC,
a Matlab application calculates a control value, accordingly.
Due to the weight and the handling of the cables it is not
possible to mount wired sensors to each of the bearings.
Therefore, wireless sensors with rotary encoders are mounted
on each bearing. The wireless sensors in our systems are
Reduced Cognitive Nodes as described in Section IV. A Full
Cognitive Node collects the angle information from the RCNs
and transfers it to the PC via serial interface. The setup of the
demonstrator is depicted in Figure 6.
PC
Control
Box
RCN
RCN
Motor
FCN
Fig. 6.
Demonstrator - 3fold Pendulum
For real-time applications the packet size needs to be small
to fulﬁll the timing constraints. The packet consists of 8 Bytes
in ﬁve ﬁelds as illustrated in Figure 7.
PAN ID
(8 Bit)
Pkt. Type 
(8 Bit)
Source Address 
(16 Bit)
Payload (16Bit)
8
16
32
64 Bit
CRC (16 Bit)
48
Fig. 7.
Packet Format
The PAN ID allows to distinguish own or interfering pack-
ets. The packet type can be Registration Request, Registration
Response or Data. The source ﬁeld speciﬁes the originator
of the packet and Data as well as CRC contain the obvious
content.
As shown in Figure 8, each client working as a RCN
starts to search for a FCN node. FCNs operate as a data sink
transferring the data to the PC via serial interface. The RCN
hops according to the channel usage sequence searching for a
FCN that answers its request. In the reply the FCN returns also
the timing conditions and could add further optional settings
like a new channel usage sequence. Register Reply packets
need to be considered also by already connected nodes as
timing conditions like maximum waiting time might change
during runtime in our setup. The RCN nodes send their data
in a round robin fashion in a non-invasive manner by waiting
according to the settings of the FCN in the reply packet as
illustrated in Figure 9.
206
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 8.
Protocol
Start
Pkt. 
Received?
Is it a
Pkt.?
Yes
No
Process 
Packet
No
Switch RF 
Channel
Yes
Send Packet 
P(αnew)
αlast= αnew
tlast = time()
αnew != αlast
αnew = 
readSensor()
Yes (New Sensor Value)
No
Wait
No
Fig. 9.
Complete Flow Diagram of Reduced Cognitive Node
VI. EVALUATION
The demonstrator introduced in Section V serves for evalua-
tion of the cognitive radio sensor protocol. It is a very intuitive
measurement tool for prooﬁng the keeping of the ﬁrm real-
time requirements as the violations of the requested max-delay
of 5 ms can be noticed by strong control movements of the
system. For the evaluation setup an additional interfering wire-
less sensor was introduced to the radio environment as well
as a WLAN IEEE 802.11g access point. The corresponding
network topology is shown in Figure 10.
To demonstrate the effect of a concurrent transmitter, the
transmitted and captured angle information were displayed
in Figure 11 to Figure 13. In Figure 11, both angle values,
transmitted by two RCNs and received by the FCN, are
displayed in the time interval of 5s. During this reference
measurement we switched off all interferences.
RCN
FCN
RCN
Concurrent
Transmitter
WLAN
Fig. 10.
Radio Environment for Evaluation
-300
-200
-100
 0
 100
 200
 300
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
Angle Value
Time (s)
from 1st RCN
from 2nd RCN
Fig. 11.
Complete Measurement Cycle for two Sensors as RCNs
In the next setup, an interfering wireless sensor transmits
short packets with 40Bytes every 5ms. The length of packets is
shorter than the deﬁned threshold of 50Bytes according to the
timing constraints The transmission of 50Bytes with 250kbps
bit rate lasts for 50*8b/250kbps resulting in approx. 2ms which
is less than the maximum delay of 5ms. The transmission
of the nodes themselves also lasts for approx. 1ms including
internal processing and RF Chip processing. Therefore, these
disruptions can be tolerated by the pendulum and consequently
no channel switching is necessary. The inﬂuence on the
measured angle values can be seen in Figure 12.
-80
-75
-70
-65
-60
-55
-50
-45
-40
 1.85
 1.86
 1.87
 1.88
 1.89
 1.9
Angle Value
Time (s)
with interfering short packet
no interference
Fig. 12.
Received Angle Values from one RCN with and without interfering
IEEE 802.15.4 Packets of Size 40Byte
The displayed angle values show two evaluation runs,
without interference (dashed line) and with interfering packets
with length of 40Byte (solid line). In Figure 12, each 5ms a
short distortion of the captured angle values occurs. Due to
the fact that these short interfering packets can be tolerated
no channels switching was invoked as predicted. This is why
we see these effects occur consecutively.
207
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

In the last setup, a concurrent wireless sensor transmits
packets of size 70Byte which is above the deﬁned threshold.
The resulting angle values are depicted in Figure 13.
-80
-75
-70
-65
-60
-55
-50
-45
-40
 1.85
 1.86
 1.87
 1.88
 1.89
 1.9
Angle Value
Time (s)
with interfering long packet
no interference
Fig. 13.
Received Angle Values from one RCN with and without interfering
IEEE 802.15.4 Packets of Size 70Byte
At 1.855s, the concurrent wireless sensor transmits a packet
of 70Bytes which causes a distortion of the captured angle
value and a corresponding channel switch. After all nodes
have switched to the next channel, values are smooth again
at time 1.872 and no consecutive distortions of the angle
value occur. If the nodes switch to a channel where WLAN
is transmitting, measurements show the same behavior as it
shows with large interfering packets. After switching to a new
channel the values are smooth again.
Figure 14 shows the frequency spectrum in a waterfall plot
to illustrate the switching to the next channel.
Fig. 14.
Switching to the next Channel due to interfering large packets
The top of the plot displays the past whereas the bottom
displays the most recent measurements. In the beginning, only
the RCNs are transmitting their angle information. As soon
as the concurrent wireless sensor starts its transmission, all
RCNs and FCN switch to the next channel and proceed with
the transmission of the angle information.
The presented evaluation results demonstrate the correct
functionality of the system and illustrate the cognitive capa-
bilities of the sensor application.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented a new non-invasive cognitive
radio protocol for a sensor application with ﬁrm real-time
requirements. Our decentralized rule based approach works
beyond existing reservation and synchronous Time Division
Multiple Access (TDMA) schemes. We demonstrated that we
provide solutions in a heterogonous radio environment by a
ﬁrm real-time demonstrator based on 802.15.4 Our approach
detects own data packets, concurrent transmissions using same
wireless technology AND other interfering wireless technolo-
gies. Finally, we present the control of a pendulum with
delay requirements less than 5ms to evaluate and prove the
effectiveness of the approach.
For the future, we will complete the protocol with blacklist-
ing of crowded channels and security mechanisms that avoid
the risk that unauthorized nodes send packets ”switch RF
channel”. Furthermore we will work on multi-hop capabilities.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by the Federal Ministry
of Education and Research of Germany: F¨orderkennzeichen
17N3809, SoFT.
REFERENCES
[1] C. F. Garcia-Hernandez, P. H. Ibarg¨uengoytia-Gonzalez, J. Garcia-
Hernandez, and J. A. Perez-Diaz, “Wireless sensor networks and ap-
plications: a survey,” International Journal of Computer Science and
Network Security, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 264 –273, 2007, survey.
[2] P. A. Laplante, Real-time systems design and analysis - an engineer’s
handbook (3. ed.).
IEEE, 2004.
[3] I. Akyildiz, W. Y. Lee, and K. Chowdhury, “Crahns: Cognitive radio ad
hoc networks,” Ad Hoc Networks (Elsevier) Journal, vol. 7, no. 5, pp.
’810–836’, Jul. 2009.
[4] O. B. Akan, O. B. Karli, and O. Ergul, “Cognitive radio sensor
networks,” Netwrk. Mag. of Global Internetwkg., vol. 23, no. 4, pp.
34–40, Jul. 2009.
[5] S. Haykin, “Cognitive radio: brain-empowered wireless communica-
tions,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 23,
no. 2, pp. ’201–220’, Feb. 2005.
[6] T. Y¨ucek and H. Arslan, “A survey of spectrum sensing algorithms for
cognitive radio applications,” IEEE Communications Survey & Tutorials,
vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 116–130, 2009.
[7] F. Chen, T. Talanis, R. German, and F. Dressler, “Real-time Enabled
IEEE 802.15.4 Sensor Networks in Industrial Automation,” in IEEE
Symposium on Industrial Embedded Systems (SIES 2009).
Lausanne,
Switzerland: IEEE, July 2009, pp. 136–139.
[8] S. eun Yoo, P. K. Chong, D. Kim, Y. Doh, M.-L. Pham, E. Choi,
and J. Huh, “Guaranteeing Real-Time Services for Industrial Wireless
Sensor Networks With IEEE 802.15.4,” vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 3868–3876,
November 2010.
[9] J. Song, S. Han, A. Mok, D. Chen, M. Lucas, M. Nixon, and W. Pratt,
“WirelessHART: Applying Wireless Technology in Real-Time Industrial
Process Control,” in IEEE Real-Time and Embedded Technology and
Applications Symposium (RTAS 2008).
St.Louis, USA: IEEE, 2008,
pp. 377–386.
[10] T. Esemann and H. Hellbr¨uck, “Non-invasive cognition driven spectrum
access in medical application via baseband processing,” in Proceedings
of the 7th Karlsruhe Workshop on Software Radios, Karlsruhe, Germany,
Mar. 2012.
[11] A. Hernandez, J. Faria, J. Araujo, P. Park, H. Sandberg, and K. H.
Johansson, “Inverted Pendulum Control over an IEEE 802.15.4 Wireless
Sensor and Actuator Network,” in Proceedings of the European Wireless
Sensor Networks (EWSN), Bonn, 2011.
[12] A. Yang, G. Irwin, W. Naeem, and K. Li, “Application of wireless
network control to a two inverted pendulum system,” in Proceedings
of the 22nd IET Irish Signals and Systems Conference, Dublin, 2011.
208
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

