Using Mutual Charge Scheme to Measure Salinity of Ice
Umair N. Mughal & Bhushan Nikumbh
Atmospheric Icing Research Team
Department of Industrial Engineering
Narvik University College
Narvik, Norway
Email: unm@hin.no
Abstract—For offshore measurements in Cold Regions, salinity
of ice is also a critical parameter (together with many other
parameters such as icing type, load, icing rate and melting rate) to
be identiﬁed in order to optimize the performance of anti/de icing
systems. Although there are some available sensory solutions in
the market to measure real time salinity levels of water, however
there are still not many real time techniques or solutions to
measure the salinity of ice. In this research task, mutual charge
transfer technique is utilized to measure the zero crossover values
of different samples of ice and water with varying salt ratios. The
aim of this paper is therefore to discuss the testing methodology
and testing results.
Keywords–Atmospheric Icing Sensor; Offshore; Salinity; Zero
Cross Over; Mutual Charge Transfer.
I.
INTRODUCTION
For safer operations in High North, ﬁrstly it is important
to understand the difﬁculties that may lead to people and
inventory hazards. Continues melting of ice in high north is
leading to accelerate the research and development activities
towards this part of the world [1]. In order to plan for
technological advancements in Cold Regions, it is critical
to carefully understand the ice accretion characteristics on
vulnerable structures and inventory. Icing on offshore struc-
tures have not yet been considered as major hindrance by
maritime industry, however it may not be justiﬁed in near
future. Feedback about icing parameters such as icing rate,
type and icing load are considered to be very important for an
Intelligent Anti/De Icing system. However, if such a system is
utilized during an Offshore Application then real time salinity
measurements are also considered to be critically associated
with the ice accretion on structures. This leads to deﬁne
atmospheric icing and sea spray icing. Atmospheric Icing is
formed during the supercooled transition of water, it freezes
as soon as it comes into contact with a cooled surface at
temperature far below the freezing point. This ice accretion
produces a hard layer of ice on all surfaces and is responsible
for different challenges for safe operations specially related
with communication, navigation and logistics. Nevertheless, if
the offshore vessel is small than this accretion also effects its
stability. Also if the sea spray icing also occurs at the same
time then it ampliﬁes the risk the accident. Sea Spray Icing is in
fact more critical risk than the atmospheric icing. As the name
suggests, this icing is more saline in nature (freezing point
of salt water is −1.7◦ → −1.9◦C till −30◦C and critically
depend upon salinity levels). It may be initiated when the
portion of vessel meets the ocean waves or the blowing wind
brings transports the water from ocean crests. It is however
more dependent on the relative speed of the vessel and the wind
(typically it starts at 8m/s) and typically limited to 15 → 20m
above sea level. The advantage of this icing is that it supports
the melting and cleaning of ice formed on the deck. However,
if the scuppers freeze or the railing are covered with ice, then
this water is trapped and frozen [2]. It is a general observation
that in arctic seas, icing activity continues throughout the year
and the ocean’s density is effected more by salinity than by
temperature. However, during ﬁrst two quarters (January till
June) atmospheric icing is common whereas during the third
quarter (July till October) sea spray icing leads the activity
by 50% leaving behind 45% for mixed icing and 9% for
atmospheric icing. Generally, during an offshore operation
atmospheric icing is not very critical as there it generally
occurs on higher parts of ships, which typically get covered
with 1 → 2cm (typically surrounding air temperature is
0◦ → −20◦C and wind speed is less than 10m/s) of thick
ice. However, during sea spray icing and mixed icing, ice
thickness reaches 1m in some cases. Table I reﬂects some
icing intensities and prevailing surrounding parameters [2].
TABLE I. TYPICAL ICING INTENSITIES DURING OFFSHORE ACTIVITY [2]
Intensity Category
Icing Intensity
Temperature
Wind Speed
ton/hr
cm/hr
◦C
m/s
Slow
< 1.5
< 1
0 → 3
Any Speed
≤ −3
< 7
Fast
1.5 →
4
1 → 3
−3◦ → −8
7 → 15
Very Fast
> 4
> 3
≤ −8
> 15
This paper is divided into ﬁve sections. As already dis-
cussed, Section I is an introduction to form the basis to
measure salinity as an important parameter for real time
offshore measurements. In the next section II, it is aimed to
describe the present salinity measurement techniques, which
are presently limited to remote sensing only. Section III will
be an overview of mutual charge transfer scheme and in section
IV hardware, experimental setup and results will be discussed.
In section V, the results will be discussed followed by the
conclusions and future work.
II.
PRESENT SALINITY MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES
The present real time salinity measurement techniques are
restricted to measure the salinity of water. Salinometer (and
Total Dissolved Solids ’TDS’ meter) is a conventional instru-
ment, which is designed to measure the salinity of dissolved
salt content in a solution.
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Technically salinity increases the conductivity of a solu-
tion, therefore the measuring sensor normally have electrical
conductivity meter calibrated according to the salinity levels.
Salinity also changes the speciﬁc gravity of the solution
therefore it is also measured through hydrometer sometimes.
However, in marine aquarium, sometimes a refractometer is
used to measure the salinity and speciﬁc gravity of the water.
Presently the sea surface salinity variations are detected
using remote sensing techniques such as using passive mi-
crowave technology (typically in the range of 1 − 3GHzL &
S bands). The clouds are transparent to such radiation, however
sea ice emit such radiation at relatively low energy levels,
which are difﬁcult to measure over a smaller area [3][4]. Since
2002, NASA uses Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer-
Earth Observing System (AMSR-E) sensor installed on Aqua
Satellite for measuring the time series of sea ice data to
complement the available sea ice data from 1972 [4]. The
ﬁrst global salinity map of Earth’s Ocean Surface is revealed
by NASA’s Aquarius Instrument by recording the data from
August 25 till September 2011, see Fig. 1.
Figure 1. Salt of the Earth by Aquarius, NASA [5]
A review of available atmospheric ice sensing techniques is
available in [9] followed by the electromagnetism techniques to
detect atmospheric ice [11]. A detailed mathematical descrip-
tion to detect atmospheric icing using dielectric based sensing
technique, in particular using standard Debye relation [12](see
(1)) and its extended versions is available in [10].
ε = ε∞ + εs − ε∞
1 + iωτo
− iσ
εoω
(1)
where ε is the complex frequency dependent dielectric
permittivity; εs is the static dielectric permittivity of material;
ε∞ is the high frequency complex dielectric permittivity of the
material; ε◦ is the dielectric permittivity of the free space; ω
is the angular frequency of the signal; τ◦ is the relaxation time
of the material and σ is the conductivity of the material.
Similarly using the real part of the Debye dielectric permit-
tivity relation [12](see (1)) at 50MHz a relation to derive the
brine volume fraction and bulk salinity in the ﬁrst year sea have
been developed by Backstrom and Eicken [6]. In [6], three
different experiments were conducted using the commercially
available capacitive probes such as Stevens Water Monitoring
Systems Hydraprobe [7][8] in order to ﬁnd the possibility
to measure both the absolute values of the bulk salinity and
changes in bulk salinity. They found good results with large
temporal and spacial resolutions, within a reasonable error
limit particularly during initial freezing and during ice melt.
However, presently there is no available sensor, which can
distinguish between different samples of accreted ice with
varying salinity levels and deliver the results in a real time.
III.
MUTUAL CHARGE TRANSFER
To sense capacitance changes of one order is not difﬁcult;
similarly capacitance changes of 10% is although difﬁcult
but still not trivial. However, if the capacitance changes are
within 1%, in the presence of environmental changes then
the measurements can be quite challenging [13]. The charge
transfer technique to measure ice carry unique advantage of
design ﬂexibility in terms of implementation. The commonly
used proximity and capacitive MEMS devices are capable to
the inﬂuence of dielectric presence. The implementation of
this technique has matured over the years and presently they
are widely used in industrial automation, human sensory gad-
getries (human ﬁnger capacitance is around 100pF) and auto-
mobiles even in freezing domains without much variations. The
water rejection techniques (water capacitance approximately
50pF but largely depends upon dimensions of the sensor) are
incorporated in most of these devices. Recently ice detection
and melting rate measurement results have been reported in
[15] followed by some basic experimentation results [16], it is
found that this technique have enough potential to detect and
measure atmospheric icing parameters by lowering the voltage
sensitivity thresholds (see [17]).
The self or mutual capacitance basics can be employed in
the design based on charge transfer method. A small printed
circuit board aided with the speciﬁc electrode conﬁguration
can be manufactured as a basic prototyping icing sensor. The
beneﬁt of reshaping the electrodes and design to any form
with capability to change different dielectric material suitable
to harsh environment can be used as a starting point to develop
a prototype. This would enable to detect and measure the icing
parameters in real time embedded platform with low power
consumption, which is ideal for remote installations. The pre-
sented design is principally based on the mutual charge transfer
(QMatrix) based icing detection, which is advised by Atmel to
work better in high humidity or damp environments where the
frequency of water droplets and moisture to be collected on
the sensor is higher [18]. Furthermore the preference to mutual
charge transfer was based due to the following constrains,
a) Sensitivity: The self capacitance design are more
sensitive in nature. As the electric ﬁeld is spread outwards
through the electrode, in the presence of dielectric, ground
loading is provided by the external inﬂuencing of the object,
in our case will be ice or a water ﬁlm. But with increase in
sensitivity comes the inclusion of the noise in the circuitry,
which is un-desirable. The noise in self capacitance might be
increased so sensitivity tuning is the vital for design based
on this methodology. The other factors, which can effect
sensitivity are,
•
Electrode dimensions and shape
•
Ground loading
•
Return path
•
Supply voltage
•
Charging pulses duration
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

b) RF interference rejection: The mutual capacitance
have pairs of electrodes that are always connected to a low
impedance circuit, and due to the fact that their electric ﬁelds
are compact and self-shielded. The pair of electrodes do not
respond well to external interference in the environment. In
addition, the patent MEMS device QT60240 used for the
experimentation are spread-spectrum technology based, that is
highly efﬁcient for suppressing both radiated emissions and
external ﬁelds susceptibility. Control panels made with this
technology routinely pass susceptibility tests exceeding ﬁeld
strengths of 20V/m.
c) Dimensional
Beneﬁt:
Also
mutual
capacitance
through charge transfer principle is preferable when key area
for detection is to be deﬁned. To isolate the areas of detection
within a speciﬁc limit, this works in efﬁcient manner as
compared to the self capacitance. With mutual principle, the
PCB tracks for detection circuitry can contain longer routing
tracks, which could be the important consideration in the
prototype embedded design.
d) Moisture suppression: The mutual approach pro-
vides two moisture suppression characteristics not present
in any other capacitive methodology. First, the presence of
a localized water ﬁlm (due to condensation, mist, or tiny
droplets) will induce only a small increase in signal coupling.
The contributions to signal coupling caused by moisture will
have an inﬂuence into the measurement but in the wrong
direction of signal of normal readings and hence will cater
the false detections. Secondly, the presence of moisture layer,
which can conduct charge away are also minimized by the
use of narrow gate timings. This results in limiting the charge
accumulated to a narrow time slot window immediately after
the charging pulse edge. As water ﬁlm can be modeled as a
distributed RC network with a time-dependent characteristic,
the beneﬁt of narrow gate times (microsecond or less) will
greatly suppress the effects of a water ﬁlms signal potential
reduction, further reducing the chances of a false detection.
However, this utility of the patented charge transfer based
on mutual capacitance have to be modiﬁed in ice detection
prototype hardware. Hence, the capability of the prototype
hardware to distinguish between the thin water ﬁlm and ice
have to be included through PCB design circuity and charge
transfer pulses adjustment.
e) Other beneﬁts:
•
Temperature stability
•
Low power modes
During this research work, experimentation were per-
formed to analyze the measurable response of the icing and
liquid ranges with variable salinity levels along with the state
transition rates. The initial design was aimed to distinguish the
saline ice and saline water layer formation. Later on the design
incorporated the saline ice level measurements. The design is
kept in the consideration of harsh climatic performance and
remote installation mechanism ﬂexible enough to be mounted
on various Onshore and Offshore platforms or other sensors
as like MuVi-Graphene, see [19]. The necessary condition
for a robust ﬂat plate capacitive sensor was to have uniform
and sufﬁcient ice deposition on its surface; this has been
experimentally demonstrated by Mughal & Virk [20].
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
A. Hardware Setup
The hardware implementation of the computing hardware
and electrode for icing measurement is shown in Fig. 2. The
embedded algorithm of computing hardware was performed
using Atmel Studio 6 on the AVR series 8-bit microcontroller
with associated peripherals. The in circuit programming was
assisted using Atmel STK 500 development kit. The patented
charge transfer process is executed by the QT60240 device and
several charge/discharge cycles are executed based on burst
of pulses ranging from 500µs → 2ms. The micro-controller
initializes the communication through I2C protocol and de-
termines the change in the zero crossing of detected slope
for each charging pulse. Generally, the negative DC voltage
ramp for the signal is around −250mV , which is achieved
by the synchronous switching of capacitors and slope drive
cause the zero crossing. The τzerocrossover value (differential
time measured) is acquired by the µcontroller and stored in
a buffer array at the same time. The buffered τZero Crossover
value is converted to RS232 protocol and sent at the baud
rate of 19200bits/s. The resulting data was displayed in a
DAQ factory (data acquisition development software) based
user interface for further analysis and experimentation for
optimizing sensor conﬁguration.
Qt60240 
 (Mems Sensor) 
I2C pullup resistors 
Atmega644PA 
(µ-controller) 
Serial port  Rs232 
(out put) 
TTL to 232 driver 
(Max-232) 
In-Circuit 
Programmer Port 
Electrode 
 X- Connection 
Electrode  
Y- Connection 
Dc Power Input 
(5.5 VDC 500mA) 
Decoupling 
Capacitors 
Charge Storage  
Capacitors 
User Interface 
STK 500 AVR 
Development Kit 
AVR Studio-6 
 Development Environment 
Figure 2. Computing Hardware Module
B. Experimental Setup
A preliminary series of experimentation were performed
in Cold Room Chamber of Narvik University College. There
are three Cold Rooms where a controlled temperature from
+20 → −30◦C can be maintained. A sample of 100ml of
water was used as a standard liquid content. Different levels
of salt 0 → 30g were mixed in this water sample and tested
by pouring these samples on the electrode plate. Similarly
the same salt levels were mixed in different water samples
of 100ml each and allowed to freeze in the local freezer. The
electrode panel was made as a non planar structure where the
electrodes and rest of the pcb circuitry are lying on different
panels (see Fig. 2). This scheme was preferred over the planar
structure (Electrodes and computing hardware on same PCB)
keeping in consideration of the cold climate environment.
The intention was to make a separate robust electrode panel
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

exposed outside the environment to detect and measure the
ice whereas the computing hardware is made on a separate
PCB house inside protected covering. The overall dimension of
electrodes pair used was 26×36mm and the other dimensions
are:
•
X electrode outer border thickness 2.54mm
•
X electrode ﬁnger thickness 1.25mm
•
X-Y inter spacing width 3.8mm
•
Y electrode key thickness 1.25mm
Common front panel dielectric materials include glass,
plexiglass and polycarbonate. However, during this experiment
all season packaging tape 60041 was used. This tape was used
as it has excellent holding power during extreme hot or cold
temperatures and made of pressure-sensitive poly material. The
τZeroCrossover of the electrode plate with only front panel
dielectric tape 60041 was 438µs.
Figure 3. Cold Room Chamber, Narvik University College
C. Results and Discussions
The charge transfer technique outputs τZero Crossover as
a measurement signal. The results of the experiment are
tabulated in Table II and plotted in Fig. 4. The results indicate
that as the percentage salinity ratio %SRice of ice is varying
from 0 → 23% the τZero Crossover signal varies from 600 →
1250µs. Hence, a linear relationship can be found between
%SRice and τZero Crossover with an effective slope of 28µs
(see (2)). However, when the %SRwater of water is plotted
against τZero Crossover signal, then the slope is not effective to
demonstrate the linear variation, however this result do indicate
the difference between fresh and saline water (see (3)). The
Intercept of this curve is intentionally ﬁxed at 2100µs in order
to indicate the linear relationship between the changing salinity
levels in water. One of the possible reason of mutual transfer
scheme to not indicate the %SRwater can be associated with
the water slippage leaving behind small puddles of water on
the electrode plate.
%SRice = 28τzero crossover + 559
(2)
%SRwater = 1.38τzero crossover + 2100
(3)
TABLE II. SALINE WATER AND ICE TESTING RESULTS
Saline Water
Volume of
Waterml
Mass of Salt
g
Salt Water
Ratio %
Zero Cross
Over µs
100
0
0
600
100
5
4.47
700
100
10
9.11
750
100
20
16.7
1000
100
30
23.1
1250
Saline Ice
Mass of Ice
g
Mass of Salt
g
Salt Ice
Ratio %
Zero
CrossOver
Value µs
99.7
0
0
1823
99.7
5
4.47
2089
99.7
10
9.11
2120
99.7
20
16.7
2117
99.7
30
23.1
2137
Figure 4. Real Time Ice Salinity Measurements
During the experimentation at room temperature the melt-
ing of ice layer/block occurred as a natural process, which
could be the case in real environment. This phenomena could
also be observed from the τzerocrossover measurement as it
varies with the melting of ice layer upon the electrode till it
slides over the electrode leaving behind the water puddle over
the electrode.
D. Limitation
The measurements taken are independently experimented
based on the charge transfer technique. The ice samples used
were frozen using commercially available freezers.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
The icing detection and salinity measurements in harsh
cold climate is a demanding challenge. Particularly during
an offshore activity, the need is more demanding with the
latest developments in the technology and resources. If the
parameters such as ice accretion and salinity are measured in
real time, then expected damages can be reduced by using them
as feedback variables in an intelligent anti/de icing system.
The charge transfer technique outputs τZero Crossover as a
measurement signal. This is a real time output to indicate
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

percentage salinity ratio of ice hence there are minimum
delays associated with this technique. This is already proven
technology therefore the implementation of this technique have
matured even in freezing domains without much variations.
The results of this experiment indicate that it is possible
to use this technology for offshore platforms to indicate the
percentage salinity levels in ice. From present experiment, it
is also found that this technique is not useful to indicate the
salinity level in water, however it do indicate the presence of
salt in fresh water. These results are largely dependent upon the
size of electrode plate, plate design and front dielectric panel
material and thickness. Hence, optimizing the complete plate
design can signiﬁcantly improve the results. The electrode
plate can be covered with different types of dielectric material
much more resistant to harsh weather and climatic effects;
since there are large number of thin dielectric materials avail-
able commercially nowadays. The weather resistant dielectric
coating/covering can ensure the protection required to avoid
corrosion of the plate. The low voltage requirement mV of the
MEMS devices makes the design feasible for battery operated
system in a remote location.
It was also quite difﬁcult to delay the melting process of
the saline ice sample (as the freezing temperature of saline
ice is lower than fresh water ice) during experimentation.
This problem was minimized by maintaining a temperature
of −5◦C in the Cold Room Chamber (see Fig. 3) at Narvik
University College.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work reported in this paper was partially funded by the
Research Council of Norway, project no. 195153 and partially
by the consortium of the project ColdTech- Sustainable Cold
Climate Technology.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Arctic Regions and its Concerns, Threats and Potential Chal-
lenges”, Technical Report, 2010.
[2]
“Probability
of
Icing”,
Available
from
http://www.fni.no/insrop/doc dataprobability of icing.html,
Last Cited: June 14th, 2015.
[3]
D. S. E. Lagerloef, “Preliminary Assesment of the Scientiﬁc and
Technical Merits for Salinity Remote Sensing from Satellite”,
Final Report of the ﬁrst workshop by Salinity Sea Ice Working
Group (SSIWG), La JOlla, CA, USA, 7-8 Februay 1998.
[4]
“Remote
Sensing:
Passive
Microwave”,
Available
from
http://nsidc.org/cryosphere/seaice/study/passive remote sensing.html,
Last Cited: June 14th, 2015.
[5]
“NASA’s
Salt
of
the
Earth:
Aquar-
ius
Reveals
First
Map”,
Available
from
http://www.nasa.gov/mission pages/aquarius/multimedia/gallery/pia14786.html,
Last Cited: June 14th, 2015.
[6]
L. G. E. Backstrom and H. Eicken, “Capacitance probe mea-
surements of brine volume and bulk salinity in the ﬁrst year sea
ice”, Journal of Cold Regions Science and Technology, 2006,
pp. 167-180.
[7]
J. E. Campbell, “Dielectric Properties of moist soils at rf
and microwave frequencies”, PhD Thesis, Dartmouth College,
Hanover, NH, 1988.
[8]
J. E. Campbell, “Dielectric properties and inﬂuence of conduc-
tivity in soils at one to ﬁfty megahertz”, Soil Science of America
Journal, 54(2), 1990, pp. 332-341.
[9]
U. N. Mughal and M. S. Virk, “Atmospheric icing sensors -
An insight”, The Seventh International Conference on Sensor
Technologies and Applications, ISBN 978-161208-296-7, Au-
gust 25-31, 2013, pp. 191-199.
[10]
U. N. Mughal, M. S. Virk, and M. Y. Mustafa, “Dielectric based
sensing of atmospheric ice”, AIP Conference Proceedings,
1570(212), 2013.
[11]
U. N. Mughal, M. S. Virk, and M. Y. Mustafa, “Atmospheric
Icing Sensors - a conceptual review using matter and icing
electromegnatisim”, International Journal of Multiphysics, 6(4),
2012, pp. 341-353.
[12]
P. Debye, Polar molecules, Dover, New York, 1929.
[13]
“Capacitive Sensing Techniques and Considerations”, Available
from http://www.cypress.com/?docID=3346, Last Cited: June
14th, 2015.
[14]
K. B. Shravan, U. N. Mughal, and M. S. Virk, “Experimental
study of relative permittivity of atmospheric ice”, International
Journal of Energy and Environment, 4(3), 2013, pp. 369-376.
[15]
T. Rashid, U. N. Mughal, and M. S. Virk, “Charge Transfer
Scheme for Atmospheric Ice Sensing”, Sensors and Transducers
Journal, 184(1), 2015, pp. 146-152.
[16]
T. Rashid, U. N. Mughal, and M. S. Virk, “Cognitive Adaptabil-
ity of Capacitive Sensors for Cold Regions”, IEEE Conference
on Coginitive Infofocommunications, Vietri Sul Mari, Salerno,
Italy, 2014, pp. 289-294.
[17]
“Atmel AVR3002: Moisture Tolerant QTouch Design”, Avail-
able from: http://www.atmel.com/images/doc42017.pdf, Last
Cited: June 14th, 2015.
[18]
“Proximity
Design
Guide”,
Available
from:
http://www.atmel.com/Images/doc10760.pdf,
Last
Cited:
June 14th, 2015.
[19]
U. N. Mughal and M. S. Virk, “Cognitive Decision Making
for measuring icing load for Cold Regions”, IEEE Conference
on Coginitive Infofocommunications, Vietri Sul Mari, Salerno,
Italy, 2014, pp. 283-288.
[20]
U. N. Mughal, M. S. Virk, K. Kosugi, and S. Mochizuki,
“Experimental Validation of Icing Load Using Rotary Physics”,
Manuscript Submitted in the Journal of Cold Regions Science
and Technology, Elsevier, 2014.
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

