Lab-on-Phone: A Laboratory-on-Phone System
Jorge Mario Garz´on Rey, Juan Manuel Soto Valencia, Fredy Segura-Quijano
Departamento de Ingenier´ıa El´ectrica y Electr´onica
Centro de Microelectr´onica (CMUA) - Universidad de los Andes
Bogot´a D.C., Colombia
Email:{jm.garzon131, jm.soto569, fsegura}@uniandes.edu.co
Abstract—This paper presents a novel approach deﬁned as
“Lab-on-Phone” which is a new “Dielectric Footprint Measure”
platform, specially for food quality control with storage and
administration processes over the Internet. It can also be
used for other types of products making minimal changes.
A small acquisition device, with an inter-digitized capacitor
sensor sends measurements to a smartphone via Near Field
Communication
(NFC)
protocol.
An
Android
application
installed
on
the
smartphone
displays
these
measurements
in a graph and sends them to a web server via Wi-Fi or
cellphone network. For example, Lab-on-Phone allows users
to know on site the food quality, and to companies, to have a
quality control sensor network with a data base and a web server.
Keywords—Near Field Communication (NFC); measurement
platform; wireless measure; data acquisition; food quality control;
ultralow power sensors; wireless sensors
I. INTRODUCTION
Near Field Communication (NFC) technology, is a wire-
less communication technology in the frequency range of
13.56 MHz. NFC can be used to transmit information between
two NFC devices, to read/write a Radio Frequency IDentiﬁca-
tion (RFID) card or tag, or to both simulate them [1]. One of
the main features of NFC technology is the less than 100 ms
set up time, and there is no necessity of pairing. NFC have a
communication range of 10 cm and a maximum data rate is
424 kbps.
There is a wide ﬁeld of applications for the NFC technology
in the ﬁelds of transport and payment; however, there are a
lot of other applications involving NFC technology. American
Thermal Instruments created an NFC tag capable of measuring
temperature. The tag is read by an NFC-enabled phone with
the LOG-IC Mobile App. The application allows monitoring
the temperature anywhere and exporting data immediately to
anyone via email or can be uploaded to the cloud. It also shows
a report of temperatures measured including charts and graphs.
The main goal, according to the manufacturer, is to be able
to protect critical shipments all the way down to the last mile
[2]. A ﬁnal example of the wide range of NFC applications is
SleepTrak, a combo device-application that uses an armband
to track symptoms associated with inefﬁcient sleep (recording
how active you are during sleep, for example). The armband
is read via NFC the next morning, and the app analyzes the
data and provides suggestions for better sleep habits [3].
There are a lot of other examples showing that NFC tech-
nology is expanding all over the world. According to recent
reports from Juniper Research about forecasts for the global
NFC market, global NFC retail transaction values are expected
to reach $110 bn in 2017 [4]; mobile NFC metro tickets are
going to be used by 1 of 8 mobile users in the US and Western
Europe by 2016 [5]; and 1 in 4 mobile users in the same region
will pay in-store using NFC by 2017 [6]. An analysis made
by Frost & Sullivan states that 53 % of phones are going to
be NFC-enabled by 2015 [7]. London buses have added NFC
technology to their card readers for a contactless payments
with debit or credit cards. With a agreements between the bus
system and the software industry will be possible to pay a bus
ticket with a NFC-enable smartphone [8].
NFC will step smartphones to a new level of interaction
and functionality, and will give the users the possibility to
use its phones almost in every action that involves money,
registration, identiﬁcation, veriﬁcation and much more other
applications so that practically the only thing they will be
carrying in their pockets will be the phone. For example,
Google created the concept of an electronic wallet in which
all credit and debit cards information are linked to the user
Google account and can be accessed at anytime through a
computer or a smart phone with Android OS and Google
Wallet application. With Google Wallet users can use their
NFC-enabled phones as a contactless payment card [9].
In the ﬁeld of microsensors, there are a great variety and
classiﬁcations. An alternative is the case of capacitive sensors,
which can have a planar geometry based on parallel plates or
inter-digitized plates. In this article inter-digitized capacitive
sensors are described; they can be useful for measuring
changes in the dielectric constant due to contact of any
material with the sensor surface.
Inter-digitized electrode capacitive sensors have been used
in numerous applications such as soil, grain, and paper mois-
ture content monitoring; rain detection, proximity sensors,
touch switches and biomedical sensors. Implementations have
been made with several technologies and materials includ-
ing sensors with printed circuit board technology [10]. The
electrode overlapping area or the relative permittivity of the
dielectric in the vicinity of the electrodes can be sensed by
monitoring the changes in the structures capacitance [11].
Several investigations reported advances in the area of
sensors, but left out the area of instrumentation. Most of the
works that measure changes in capacitance use sophisticated
equipment such as LCR-821 meter, impedance analyzer or
similar, that are very expensive, bulky and complex to be
used due to their variety of functions. This means that it is
important to implement small systems with low cost even if
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

they are designed for a reduced set of applications.
Having described the NFC protocol characteristics and the
advantages and applications of capacitive sensors, this paper
aims to develop a generic platform, which can be used in the
ﬁeld in a comfortable and complete way. This platform allows
to take measurements with a capacitive sensor and commu-
nicate the results to a mobile device, such as a smartphone
via NFC protocol. In the mobile platform, the measured data
or historical data can be displayed and can be sent to a web
server via Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi) protocol or General Packet
Radio Service (GPRS), allowing multiple people to view the
measurements for analysis and perform tracing procedures,
almost in real time from any computer with Internet access.
There are previous studies about NFC implantable Medical
Devices, which show that NFC technology can be used for
data and power transmission to implantable devices without
any health consequence [12]. For wireless measurement de-
vices, NFC provides a noninvasive communication interface to
smartphones in order to take advantage of their computation
capacity and communication ﬂexibility. For example, a generic
NFC-enabled Measurement System for remote monitoring is
described in [13]. This is a beneﬁcial solution for low-power
data acquisition in portable devices [14]. In the case of passive
or semi-passive sensors, it is possible to use a batteryless
acquisition system by feeding it with the power from the
carrier signal of the NFC connection [15].
NFC-enabled phones provide long range Global System for
Mobile Communications (GSM) and General Packet Radio
Service (GPRS), services that can be used to establish a remote
monitoring. Lab-on-Phone advantage is a novel portable plat-
form of Dielectric Footprint Measure for food quality control
providing storage and administration over the Internet, it is a
small acquisition device with the size of a credit card, with
a capacitor sensor that sends measurements to smartphones
via NFC protocol. An Android application installed on the
smartphone sends sensors information to a web server via Wi-
Fi or cellphone network. Lab-on-Phone allows users to get to
know on site the food quality, and companies to have a quality
control sensor network with a data base and a web server.
In the next section, there will be a description of the system
architecture and functionality. In Section III, early results are
presented for a system validation based on commercial boards.
Finally, Section IV summarizes the presented approach and
future works.
II. LAB-ON-PHONE SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
Figure 1 shows Lab-on-Phone system architecture, includ-
ing a full chain of acquisition, processing, storage and analysis
infrastructure. Lab-on-Phone is itself a multiuser and multi-
purpose system. The ﬁrst layer of the system is based on a
Measure Card, which is a small acquisition device, the size
of a credit card, with a capacitor sensor. The Measure Card
is enabled to send measurements to a smartphone via NFC
protocol. An Android application installed on the smartphone
processes the sensor measurements and gives an on-site result
to the user. If the device has a data plan or Wi-Fi access, the
measurements are send to a web server through this medium.
The web server stores the measurements information from
multiple smartphones and controls privacy. Lab-on-Phone also
include a set of web applications, which allow accessing data
from everywhere and any platform with Internet access.
Fig. 1.
System Architecture Diagram Block.
The Lab-on-Phone system helps people to have certainty
about the quality of the product they buy and will also helps
companies to avoid loses. For example, in Latin America, it
is common to ﬁnd adulterated liquors sold as original and
there is not an onsite platform to ensure both consumers
and authorities about the liquor quality. Although, this paper
proposes Lab-on-Phone platform for food quality control;
the tool can also be used to ﬁnd out about the quality of
almost any product for ﬁnal consumers. The governments
may take advantage of Lab-on-Phone to detect adulterated
liquors suppliers or to have a record of the quality of food
and beverages people are having.
A. Measure Card: acquisition system and sensor
The Measure Card is basically a small board with an
Interdigitated Capacitor Sensor which sends measurements to
a smartphone via NFC technology. An Interdigitated Capacitor
Sensor can detect conductivity and dielectric constant of ﬂuids.
This type of sensor has a low-cost fabrication process and
can be easily integrated with other sensing components. A
low power microprocessor reads the sensor using a single
slope Analog-to-Digital Converter (ADC) strategy. In other
words, the microprocessor measures the discharger time of
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

the Interdigitated capacitor. The measurement data is stored
in a Dual Interface Electrically Erasable Programmable Read-
Only Memory (EEPROM - M24LR16E), which is accessed
by the microcontroller via Inter-Integrated Circuit (I2C) pro-
tocol. This EEPROM memory can also be accessed via NFC
communication.
The Measure Card may have an LC sensor, which is a planar
coil with an Interdigitated Capacitor, which uses the same
strategy of detecting the conductivity and dielectric constant
of ﬂuids but it needs a different read strategy based on a self-
resonant frequency, meaning the sensor may be wireless. These
type of sensor is also inexpensive; so, it can be disposable as
well.
The harvesting strategy is possible having a wireless power-
ing via the carrier signal of the NFC technology, this way the
proposed Measure Card is a low cost board with Interdigitated
Capacitor and it could be batteryless or wireless powering.
The Measure Card implementation uses M24LR16E-A [16],
which consist of a dual interface EEPROM connected to an
I2C bus and a 20 mm x 40 mm 13.56 MHz etched Radio
Frequency (RF) antenna (Figure 2). The integrated circuit (IC)
can be feed with the RF energy ﬁeld of the external device
or with an external 1.8 to 5.5 Volts power source. The chip
comes with the option of Energy Harvesting; so, the unused
energy in the connection and in the command transmission in
RF mode can be used to feed another electronic component
like a Light-Emitting Diode (LED) or an IC. The RF interface
works with the ISO 15693 protocol allowing an NFC device
to be able to communicate with it. The minimum data rate is
6.62 kbits/s and the maximum is 52.97 kBits/s.
Fig. 2.
M24LR16E-A Diagram Block [16]. In the middle can be seen the
EEPROM component that can be accessed by an NFC device (left block) or
a microcontroller by I2C protocol (right block).
In the Figure 3, the memory area set up is shown. The mem-
ory can be divided into the storing area and the conﬁguration
area.
The storing area is divided into 16 sectors of 32 blocks
of 32 bits. Each sector can be read/write protected in RF or
I2C modes with the corresponding Sector Security Status 5-
bit registry or the Write Lock bit registry respectively. In the
conﬁguration area, the passwords for read/write protection, the
tag identiﬁers (UID, DSFID, AFI) and the conﬁguration byte
are stored.
Fig. 3.
M24LR16E-A Memory Structure. The registers above represent the
data memory divided in sectors. Each one can be write/read protected by its
corresponding Sector Security Status (SSS) that can be set in the conﬁguration
area (bottom registers).
B. Comunication interfaces
NFC Forum is the world association that established all
the set of speciﬁcations related with NFC Technology. The
set of speciﬁcations includes the deﬁnition of the NFC Data
Exchange Format (NDEF) [17], which deﬁnes a format for
the exchange of information between NFC applications. There
are also deﬁned Record Type Deﬁnitions (RTD) that specify
the types of the data that can be sent in a NDEF message.
The Simple NDEF Exchange Protocol (SNEP) [18] is a high
level protocol deﬁned by the NFC Forum for the exchange
of NDEF messages between applications. The SNEP works
above the Logical Link Control Protocol (LLCP), which
deﬁnes the way data transmission is made through the physical
medium. The LLCP [19] allows two packets transmission
modes (Payload Data Units - PDUs): connection-oriented and
connectionless. Connection-oriented transport provides a data
transmission service with sequenced and guaranteed delivery
of service data units unlike connectionless transport, which
provides an unacknowledged data transmission service with
minimum protocol complexity. NFC Forum has created also
speciﬁcations for four different tags types.
NFC devices can operate with RFID technologies like
ISO/IEC 14443 (Type A and B) used by Mifare Type A (NXP
smartcard technology), Calypso (European Cards) or EMV
(Europay, Mastercard or Visa cards) cards; JIS6319-4 used
by Felica Cards (Sony Smartcard System); ISO15693 used
by RFID cards with a range up to 1.5 meters, obviously this
will be reduced if the card is read with NFC technology; or
ISODEP 14443-4 which is a transmission protocol used in
proximity cards used for identiﬁcation.
The dual interface Memory M24LR16E-A uses ISO15693
standard [16] which allows communication with more than
one tag at the same time, but it is not going to be a common
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

stage of our application. The protocol deﬁnes the structure of
the requests made by the RFID device, as shown in Figure 4.
Fig. 4.
ISO15693 Request Format.
The ﬁrst ﬁeld is the Start Of Frame (SOF), which indicates
to the tag, the beginning of a new command. The 8-bit
Request ﬂags ﬁeld indicates the tag features of the command
and the communication like subcarrier mode, data rate or
mode selection. The 8-bit command code ﬁeld indicates the
command to be executed on the tag as well. The parameters,
data ﬁelds length and information depend on the command to
be executed. The next ﬁeld contains the Cyclic Redundancy
Check 16-bit (CRC-16-bit) value, of the previous ﬁelds (with-
out the SOF) for content veriﬁcation at the reception. Finally,
there is an End Of Frame (EOF) which indicates the tag the
end of the request.
As in the previous case, the response starts and ends with
an SOF and EOF frames respectively. The 8-bit Response
ﬂags ﬁeld indicates if there was an error, if this is the case,
the error information is given in the 8-bit parameters ﬁeld. The
data ﬁeld carries information related to the request made by
the RF device. Next to it, there is a 16-bit CRC for content
veriﬁcation at the RF device. In the Figure 5, the response
format the tag sends to the RF device is shown.
Fig. 5.
ISO15693 Response Format.
This protocol has deﬁned a lot of commands for read-
ing or writing individual or multiple blocks in the storing
area and the conﬁguration area. The main commands used
in the application were the following: Read Single Block,
Write Single Block, Get system Info, Write sector password,
Present sector password, ReadCfg (for reading the conﬁgu-
ration byte), WriteEHCfg (for writing the Energy Harvesting
conﬁguration), ReadEHCfg (for reading the Energy Harvesting
conﬁguration) and WriteDOCfg (for writing the conﬁguration
byte).
Data tag acquisition is included with any device with
Android OS and NFC technology. The Android OS provides
an API for NFC access from the applications [20]. When an
NFC tag comes close to the RF radio of the NFC hardware,
the operating system automatically parses it and notiﬁes ap-
plications designed to manage NFC tags related to it. The
API is speciﬁcally designed for operations with NFC tags;
however, it also has support for other RFID protocols including
ISO 15693. For this protocol, the API provides the following
methods:
• close() Disable I/O operations to the tag from this
TagTechnology object, and release resources.
• connect() Enable I/O operations to the tag from this
TagTechnology object.
• get(Tag tag) Get an instance of NfcV for the given tag.
• getDsfId() Return the DSF ID bytes from tag discovery.
• getMaxTransceiveLength() Return the maximum number
of bytes that can be sent with transceive(byte[]).
• getResponseFlags() Return the Response Flag bytes from
tag discovery.
• getTag() Get the Tag object backing this TagTechnology
object.
• isConnected() Helper to indicate if I/O operations should
be possible.
• transceive(byte[] data) Send raw NFC-V commands to
the tag and receive the response.
After the operating system notiﬁes the application that an
ISO 15693 tag has been discovered, the application connects to
the tag via the connect() method and start sending commands
via transceive() method which receives as input argument the
command going to be sent as an array of bytes. This method
returns the response given by the tag, after executing the
request. For the development of the application, a library with
all the commands in the ISO15693 protocol was built.
For
sending
information
through
the
network
the
org.apache.http
[21]
packet
available
in
the
Android
Development Environment was used. This packet provides
the core interfaces and classes of the HTTP components,
and deal with the fundamental requirements for using the
HTTP protocol, such as representing a message including
its headers and optional entity. In order to prepare messages
before sending or after receiving them, there are interceptors
for requests and responses. The more important classes for
communication with a server are HTTPClient, HTTPPost, and
HTTPGet. HTTPClient encapsulate a smorgasbord of objects
required to execute HTTP requests while handling cookies,
authentication, connection management, and other features.
HTTPPost can be used to request that the origin server accept
the entity enclosed in the request as a new subordinate of the
resource identiﬁed by the Request-URI in the Request-Line.
HttpGet is used to retrieve whatever information (in the form
of an entity) is identiﬁed by the Request-URI.
In the application, after receiving the data of the measure
from the tag an HTTP post request is created with this
information. Then the request is executed via an HTTPClient,
which sends it to the Internet Protocol (IP) server via internet.
Access to the internet can be made via Wi-Fi or a mobile
network (GPRS, GSM, 3G, 4G); in that case, if the smartphone
has a data plan, the measurements can be sent to the server
from anywhere with a mobile network access and can be
tracked from any computer with internet almost in real-time.
The measure information taken from the tag is stored in a
Java Script Object Notation (JSON) object, and then put as an
entity in the http request. JSON is a useful format for storing
name-value pairs of any type. If the application does not have
an available connection to the internet; then the applications
waits until it is available to send it to the server.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

C. Data storage, information processing
The information acquired from the sensor is stored in any
type of external memory (SD Card typically, by default) or in
the internal memory, if there is no external memory or if the
user opts to store it there. Android provides a very practical
set of functions to manage this process. On the other hand,
the information send to the server via HTTPPost method is
processed in the server side by a PHP algorithm and stored in
a MySql database. The database can be viewed from a web
page stored in the web server (the same with the PHP code).
D. User interfaces and applications
The platform has two types of user. The ﬁrst user or ﬁeld
user is the one with the sensor and the phone in the ﬁeld
or site where the measurement is taken. The user puts the
card with the sensor in the direct solution or surface where
the measurement is desired to be made. Then the user must
approach the phone to the sensor. When the phone approaches
close enough for NFC communication, the application pop-ups
automatically and begin to acquire the measurements from
the sensor. The data transmission stops as soon as the user
takes away the phone from the card. When the application
receives a measurement, it append the actual phone’s time and
date, the exact position taken from the gps if available, or the
approximate position from the local network, and the phone id
(which must be registered in the server database). The Android
application allows that the user visualize the data in a chart.
The other type of user is the one monitoring the mea-
surements from the web application. It allows visualizing
data in the database to different ﬁeld users and also sending
notiﬁcations to them. When a user sends data to the server
via HTTPPost, it performs a user-password validation before
storing data in the database. The web application can only be
accessed by registered users.
III. RESULTS
Fig. 6.
Implemented acquisition system. From left to right we show the
sensor (Interdigitated capacitance) immersed in a solution, a microcontroller
and a dual interface EEPROM which is below the phone.
Figure 6 shows the implemented acquisition system using
an ANT1-M24LR16E antenna STMicroelectronics reference
board, including a MSP430G2553 on a LaunchPab board
from Texas Instruments. The Interdigitated Capacitor Sensors
was designed and manufactured on the Printed Circuits Board
laboratory at Universidad de los Andes.
The Android Application was developed for Android 4.0.3
Version (Ice Cream Sandwich) and tested in a Sony Xperia
Sola with the same version of OS, NFC technology, GPS, Wi-
Fi, GSM, HSDPA, EDGE, GPRS, Dual-core 1 GHz Cortex-A9
and 512MB of RAM.
For the web server and the database, a LAMP Server was
installed in an Ubuntu Server 12.04.1. The apache version
of the web server is 2.2.22. The MySql version is 5.5.29.
Figure 7 shows an example of web application screenshot
where we can observe of measurements sent from the android
application, after reading the card via Wi-Fi and 3G. The web
application was programmed to update its information every
30 seconds; in no case the transmission overlaped this time,
which showed monitoring the measurements made by ﬁeld
users can performed almost instantly.
Fig. 7.
Web application interface. The measurements send by the phone with
information of the place, time, date and device identiﬁcation are showed in a
table. There is also a table showing the registered devices that are allowed to
send data to the server.
To validated de implementation we used ethanol (99 %),
methanol (99 %) and a traditional Colombian Liqueur (Ethanol
27%) . The sensor was previously characterized using an
impedance analyzer HP4194A in order to identify the solu-
tions.
Finally, all the proposed system was tested. For this val-
idation, the acquisition system measure capacitance sensor
discharge time. As Table I shows, the system was able to
determinate a difference between discharge time for each
alcohol. The proposed system was able to successfully identify
and differentiate each alcohol.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Fig. 8.
Capacitance Measurements. The capacitance has a unique peak in a
different frequency for each one of the solutions.
TABLE I
DISCHARGE TIMES
Alcohol
Discharge Time [ms]
Ethanol
64 ±0.5
Colombian Liqueur
69 ±0.5
Methanol
72 ±0.5
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
This paper presented a novel approach deﬁned as “Lab-on-
Phone”, that is a new “Dielectric Footprint Measure” platform,
specially for food quality control with storage and admin-
istration over the Internet. The platform uses the principle
of inter-digitized capacitors as the sensor element. For the
measurement with the sensor, the system uses the same energy
generated by the device NFC component reading card.
The entire measurement chain has been tested in all its
phases, including the sensor measurement, data adquision with
NFC communication, the mobile application, sending data to
the cloud and the application on the server.
The present work does not focus on the development of
sensors, but in the development of a novel platform taking
advantage of the smartphone beneﬁts.
The stage was developed with NFC commercial kits. As
future work, we propose the development of a smaller card
that integrates a sensor capacitive coupling, a low-power
microcontroller for acquisition and processing, and a dual
interface memory that can be accessed by the microcontroller
and NFC device. We also propose the use of other types of
sensors, such as LC resonators.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge the CleanRoom
Laboratory and Printed Circuits Board Manufacturer Labora-
tory staff at Universidad de los Andes for their support.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Finkenzeller, “RFID Handbook. Fundamentals and Applications in
Contactless Smart Cards, Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation and Near Field
Communication,” 2010.
[2] A. T. Instruments. Nfc logger. Retrieved: July, 2013. [Online].
Available:
http://www.americanthermal.com/products/log-ic/products/
nfc/nfc-logger
[3] S. Clark. Sleeptrak nfc sleep monitoring service goes live. NFCworld.
Retrieved: July, 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.nfcworld.com/
2011/10/03/310431/sleeptrak-nfc-sleep-monitoring-service-goes-live/
[4] W. Holden. Mobile nfc growth forecast scaled back to 110bn in
transactions by 2017 as iphone 5 omits chipset. Juniper Research.
Retrieved: July, 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.juniperresearch.
com/viewpressrelease.php?pr=353
[5] D. Snow. Mobile nfc metro tickets to be used by 1 in 8 mobile
users in the us and western europe by 2016. Juniper Research.
Retrieved: July, 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.juniperresearch.
com/viewpressrelease.php?pr=288
[6] W. Holden. More than 1 in 4 mobile users in the us and western
europe will pay in-store using nfc by 2017. Juniper Research.
Retrieved: July, 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.juniperresearch.
com/viewpressrelease.php?pr=315
[7] D.
Murphy.
53
per
cent
of
phones
nfc-enabled
by
2015.
Mobile
Marketing
Magazine.
Retrieved:
July,
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http://mobilemarketingmagazine.com/content/
53-cent-phones-nfc-enabled-2015-says-frost
[8] S.
Shead.
Nfc
is
just
the
ticket
for
london
buses
as
payments
go
contactless.
ZDNet.
Retrieved:
July,
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.zdnet.com/uk/
nfc-is-just-the-ticket-for-london-buses-as-payments-go-contactless-/
7000008739/
[9] Google. Google wallet. Retrieved: July, 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://www.google.com/wallet/index.html
[10] F. Segura-Quijano, J. F. Osma, E. A. Unigarro, and D. A. Sanz, “Low
cost wireless passive microsensors for the detection of hazardous,”
Sensors and Actuators B, vol. 178, pp. 26–33, 2013.
[11] D. J. Elton, Z. Hartzog, J. Richard, M. E. Baginski, A. K. Rane, and
R. N. Dean, “A capacitive fringing ﬁeld sensor design for moisture mea-
surement based on printed circuit board technology,” IEEE Transactions
on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 61-4, pp. 1105–1112, 2012.
[12] E. Freudenthal, D. Herrera, F. Kautz, C. Natividad, A. Ogrey, J. Sipla,
A. Sosa, C. Betancourt, and L. Estevez, “Suitability of nfc for medical
device communication and power delivery,” in Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Workshop, 2007 IEEE Dallas, 2007, pp. 51–54.
[13] C. Opperman and G. Hancke, “A generic nfc-enabled measurement
system for remote monitoring and control of client-side equipment,”
in Near Field Communication (NFC), 2011 3rd International Workshop
on, 2011, pp. 44–49.
[14] O. C.A. and G. Hancke, “Using nfc-enabled phones for remote data
acquisition and digital control,” in AFRICON, 2011, 2011, pp. 1–6.
[15] H. Mika, H. Mikko, and Y.-o. Arto, “Practical implementations of
passive and semi-passive nfc enabled sensors,” in Near Field Commu-
nication, 2009. NFC ’09. First International Workshop on, 2009, pp.
69–74.
[16] M24LR16E-R DataSheet. 16-bit EEPROM with password protection,
dual interface and energy harvesting: 400 kHz I2C bus and ISO 15693
RF protocol at 13.56 MHz, 2012.
[17] NFC Data Exchange Format (NDEF) Technical Speciﬁcation. NFC
ForumTM. NDEF 1.0. NFCForum-TS-NDEF 1.0., 2006-07-24.
[18] Simple NDEF Exchange Protocol Technical Speciﬁcation. NFC Fo-
rumTM. SNEP 1.0. NFCForum-TS-SNEP 1.0, 2011-08-31.
[19] Logical Control Link Protocol Technical Speciﬁcation. NFCForumTM.
LLCP 1.1. NFCForum-TS-LLCP 1.1, 2011-06-20.
[20] Android.
Near
ﬁeld
communication.
Google.
Retrieved:
July,
2013. [Online]. Available: http://developer.android.com/guide/topics/
connectivity/nfc/index.html
[21] T. A. S. Foundation. Httpcomponents. Retrieved: July, 2013. [Online].
Available: http://hc.apache.org/
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

