HCI Preliminary Study and Implementation for a 
LoRa based SAR System 
Christos Bouras  
Computer Engineering and Informatics 
University of Patras 
Patras, Greece 
email: bouras@ceid.upatras.gr 
Apostolos Gkamas 
University Ecclesiastical Academy of 
Vella 
Ioannina, Greece 
email: gkamas@aeavellas.gr 
Spyridon Aniceto Katsampiris Salgado 
Computer Engineering and Informatics 
University of Patras 
Patras, Greece 
email: ksalgado@ceid.upatras.gr  
Abstract— The subject of this paper is the study and 
implementation of a Long Range (LoRa) based Search and Rescue 
system that can help in the localization of people having a high risk 
of going missing. These people may suffer from dementia, 
attention disturbance, and distraction, or disease in the autism 
spectrum, and it is of great importance to be found in a specific 
time frame, as their life can be in danger. The system is based on 
LoRa network architecture that enables both long-range 
communication and low energy consumption. In this paper, 
aspects of the human-computer interaction were taken into 
consideration in contrast to the majority of the related papers, and 
the proposed system is evaluated using heuristic evaluation and 
questionnaires. 
Keywords—IoT; LoRa; LPWAN; UX; HCI 
I. INTRODUCTION 
A large percentage of individuals with dementia are at risk 
of wandering and go missing. These people may be injured, 
causing trauma to themselves and their families and caregivers, 
and necessitate the use of costly Search and Rescue (SAR) 
operations. Furthermore, according to a study, about half of 
children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) have attempted 
to elude parental control at least once and eventually go missing 
while walking.  
In this context, the Internet of Things (IoT) can benefit vastly 
the SAR operations. The widespread use of fitness trackers, 
Global Positioning System (GPS) devices, smartwatches, and 
other portable IoT technology opens up new avenues for 
improving protection and caring for people with a high 
probability to go missing. The technologies are ranging from 
gait and behavior analysis to GPS trackers that assist in the 
localization of the missing. As a result, such systems have some 
requirements that should be met to operate effective. The core 
requirements are a) the communication technology and 
protocols, b) the localization accuracy, c) the energy 
consumption and d) Human-Computer Interaction (HCI). 
As far as the communication technologies are concerned 
different wireless technologies can facilitate such systems each 
technology posing different advantages and disadvantages. For 
outdoor monitoring systems, a new class of wireless 
technologies has been created. This class is called Low Power 
Wide Area Networks (LPWAN) and the main characteristics of 
this class is the low energy consumption, the long-range 
communication, and the low cost. One of the most important 
technology is the Long Range (LoRa) technology. As far as the 
localization process is concerned the GPS technology is widely 
used, because it provides high localization accuracy, but this 
accuracy comes with a price in terms of energy consumption. 
Thus, a combination of LoRa use and a localization process 
based on LoRa instead of the GPS may enable a new potential 
for the SAR systems. 
From a HCI standing point, such systems have a lot of 
parameters that affect the user experience, because there are 
many stakeholders, for example, the person that wears the 
portable device, the supervisor that uses the interactive interface 
through which the location is monitored. HCI is a 
multidisciplinary area of research that focuses on the 
architecture of computer technology, specifically the interaction 
between humans (users) and computers. HCI, which was 
originally concerned with computers, has since grown to include 
nearly all aspects of information technology architecture, and in 
our case IoT systems.  
Many systems have been proposed for SAR systems. In [1] 
the authors studied a LoRa based system, and in [2] have studied 
a LoRa based system focusing on localization algorithms for 
LoRa. In contrast to the above works, in this paper, we focus on 
the human-computer interaction aspects of such a system. The 
authors of [3] employ IoT in conjunction with an Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicle (UAV) for SAR missions. Specifically, the usage 
of UAVs provides supporting information to rescuers. In this 
paper, the focus is given on wearable device-based localization 
monitoring, without the costly UAV technology employed. In 
[4] the authors provide a study on the feasibility of machine 
learning algorithms used to GPS data to anticipate the potential 
paths of dementia patients. The authors propose that prediction 
models for each individual may be generated based on the 
frequency with which the user wears the wearable device, and 
therefore GPS data is gathered. In addition, in the [5], the authors 
built a GPS-based fall detection system to broadcast the position 
where the individual fell. The primary drawback of the works 
[4][5] is that, in contrast to LoRa, GPS quickly consumes the 
battery of the IoT device. 
The goal of this research work is to create a SAR system 
based on LoRa using wearable devices. In contrast to other 
similar systems, in this paper, a human-centered approach has 
been followed to understand the stakeholder’s requirements and 
needs, following the Norman Interaction Model and Design 
Thinking frameworks. Moreover, heuristic evaluation was 
conducted, and a small-scale experiment was conducted with a 
small number of participants and a questionnaire was 
disseminated to them. It is important to note that the 
experiment’s goal was not the fully understand the users, so the 
results did not reach statistical significance but to expose some 
more usability issues to be improved in the next iterations. Also, 
some mechanisms of energy consumption were integrated from 
our previous works such as [6]-[10]. 
The structure of the paper is the following: the next section 
explains the motivation of the work. Section III gives an 
overview of the IoT concepts and explains the wireless 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

technology that is used. Section IV gives an overview of the 
SAR domain, for a better understanding of the reader about the 
scenario use. Section V provides information about the HCI-
based procedure of the implementation. In section VI the system 
parts and architecture are presented, and in Section VII the 
evaluation process of the interface is presented. Lastly, the 
conclusion and future work is presented. 
II. MOTIVATION 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and other causes of dementia are 
major public health concerns. There are reportedly about 5.4 
million people in the United States who have dementia, with 70-
80% of all people with dementia in the United States being cared 
for at home by a family member [12] with 15 million nurses 
providing an estimated 18.2 billion hours of treatment annually. 
It is projected that 60% of dementia patients will wander [12]. 
Wandering can occur as a result of a person with dementia, such 
as Alzheimer's, being unable to recall his or her name or address, 
and becoming disoriented even in familiar surroundings. 
Wandering and getting lost can happen during the mild, 
moderate, or serious stages of AD and can be risky (leading to 
falls and injuries, institutionalization, and death) as well as 
stressful for families and caregivers [12]. Having dementia over 
a longer period, the severity of dementia (though wandering can 
occur at any stage), the prevalence of a sleep disorder, 
deterioration in day-to-day functioning, and behavioral 
disturbances such as anxiety and depression are all associated 
with wandering [13]. Thus, we can conclude that it is of 
paramount importance to monitor the people suffering from 
such diseases, to find them when they get lost. 
Moreover, ASD affects about one of every 59 children in the 
United States, a neurodevelopmental condition marked by 
chronic deficiencies in social cognition and social contact, as 
well as limited and repeated patterns of conduct. Some people 
with 
ASD 
exhibit 
maladaptive 
behaviors, 
such 
as 
wandering/elopement, which is described as leaving a 
controlled, secure environment without the consent or 
permission of a caregiver. It is estimated that almost half of 
children with ASD aged 4 years and older have participated in 
elopement activity at least once, and of those who have eloped, 
about one-quarter went missing for a period of time that worried 
caregivers. Children with ASD are at a higher risk of serious 
injury or death as a result of this action.  Drowning, in fact, has 
been found to be one of the leading causes of death among 
people with ASD, and wandering was cited as the most prevalent 
activity that resulted in drowning deaths. In a convenience 
survey of 1218 children with ASD aged 4 to 17 years, 24 percent 
had a history of elopement and were in danger of drowning [14]. 
According to the 2011 Pathways research survey [15], more 
than 25% of parents of children with ASD used fencing, gates, 
locks, alarms, or other barriers to avoid elopement in the 
previous year; 3.5% of parents reported using an electronic 
tracking system for their infant. The tracking systems are 
handheld systems that use a variety of technologies, such as GPS 
technology, wireless networks, Bluetooth, or radiofrequency 
communications, to locate a child's location in real-time. Any 
monitoring system can also be configured to define safe zones, 
giving parents the option of being alerted if their child enters a 
potentially dangerous environment, such as a swimming pool. 
Although these features cannot physically prevent elopement, 
tracking systems can likely increase parents' quality of life by 
giving them peace of mind in understanding that they may be 
able to react to elopement episodes more easily and locate their 
children. Andersen et al. [14] conducted a 2019 report to assess 
the efficacy, burden, and cost of multiple elopement avoidance 
measures in a cohort of children with ASD. They discovered that 
only 6% of households have ever used GPS trackers, and they 
confirmed that GPS trackers were considered by parents to be 
less reliable, more difficult to adopt, and more costly than certain 
physical approaches. They did, however, just look at GPS 
trackers, while this kind of system can use a range of 
technologies. Furthermore, their sample of GPS-enabled 
children was limited (n=534), significantly restricting the 
accuracy (and presumably generalizability) of their results. 
III. INTERNET OF THINGS 
There is a lot of discussions nowadays about various 
innovations that take place in the field of computer engineering 
and informatics, one of these being the IoT. IoT is mainly multi-
parametric, and for this reason, a plethora of technologies, 
protocols, and prototypes are used in order to support the notion 
of IoT. Some features with which categorization of the wireless 
technologies can be done are the communication range, the 
energy consumption, etc. Thus, wireless technologies can be 
categorized into technologies of short-range communication, 
cellular technologies, and LPWAN. 
The LPWAN technologies come to fulfill the gap between 
short-range 
communication 
technologies 
and 
cellular 
technologies, as their main features are the energy-efficiency, 
long-range communication, and low cost, usually compromising 
the latency and throughput. LPWANs are designed to co-operate 
with existing short-range radio and cellular IoT networks; 
though, the user or application must decide which network(s) to 
use, according to the application’s needs and requirements. 
LPWANs are usually accepted to have a target range of a few 
kilometers in urban areas and tens of kilometers in rural areas 
around 10 km in Line of Sight (LoS) conditions. One important 
LPWAN technology is called LoRa [19]. 
LoRa technology is a broader term that consists of two main 
parts. The first one is called LoRa that defines the physical layer 
of the technology and the modulation technique. The other part 
called Long Range Wide Area Network (LoRaWAN) refers to 
the open specification protocol developed by the LoRa Alliance 
which is an inclusive community in which any person or 
organization is welcome to participate. LoRa is predominantly a 
manufacturing-driven 
business 
model, 
with 
Semtech 
transceivers being the only ones available, in contrast to Sigfox 
that follows a subscriber business model or the NB-IoT that 
operates in the licensed spectrum.  
IV. SEARCH AND RESCUE 
In this section, the requirements in terms of the hardware, 
and other constraints are being discussed. First of all, a 
requirement is that the wearable device that the person should 
wear. This device should support a technology that can connect 
to the internet, in many cases such as in suburban conditions 
where broadband or cellular wireless technologies are out of 
range. Also, this device should support all the necessary sensors 
that help in the decision of the emergency state, such sensors 
could be heart rate sensors, etc. Furthermore, all the networking 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

components and technologies such as cellular towers, 
femtocells, LoRa Gateway should be present, or the operator of 
such a SAR system should take special care in order for the 
wearable device to be able to have supplementary modules that 
support different technologies.  
Another part that is of paramount importance in such 
systems is localization accuracy. Especially, in the wild and 
places with mountainous environments, a difference in the 
localization could be costly to the SAR operations. This can 
happen as an error of a 500m radius could make the rescuers 
climb a hill, or descend a canyon, wasting both valuable 
resources but most importantly, wasting vital time as the person 
that has been lost can be in danger. Also, the data rate is 
important, too. In the scenarios where the person that is missing 
is for example suffering from ASD, the person can move freely, 
something that leads to a new problem: the need for almost real-
time monitoring. One technology that can provide real-time 
localization with high accuracy is the well-known and widely 
used GPS. The GPS, formerly known as Navstar, is a satellite-
based radio navigation system, that is widely used. 
One of the drawbacks of GPS use for SAR scenarios is the 
fact that is highly energy-consuming. Despite its high accuracy, 
the battery life of the energy-constrained wearable devices is 
reduced dramatically, when the GPS module is enabled. In order 
to understand the importance of the large battery lifetime and 
consequently the energy consumption, it is good to examine the 
[20]. The [20] studies the existence of a rule for the selection of 
SAR operations based on the search time duration, in order to 
maximize the rescue of the living missing people. For a large 
number of survivors n = 1439, the average value of the search 
duration is 7.9 hours with a maximum duration of 323 hours or 
about 13 days. Specifically, by an estimated cut-off point of 51 
hours, almost all the survivors have been located, whereas by 
100 hours almost all the lost persons, dead or alive have been 
located (not rescued). Therefore, the battery life must be large 
enough to give the necessary time to the rescuers to locate and 
rescue the people. It is worth noting that it is important for the 
SAR operations to have “contact” with the wearable device, 
even though the wearable device’s battery is not fully charged. 
V. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
In this section, the system architecture is presented. The 
system consists of 4 main parts: a) End Devices (ED); in this 
study the wearable is based on Dialog’s DA 14861 platform with 
a LoRa module integrated. b) The Gateway (GW), which is a 
device responsible for translating the packets transmitted 
through LoRa to Internet packets and vice versa. The GW relays 
the LoRa packets to the respective Network Server (NS). c) The 
NS is a server responsible to supervise and set the network 
parameters. d) The Application Server (AS). In Figure 1, a 
typical deployment of LoRa system is presented, showing each 
LoRa component. Figure  2 shows a DA 14864 wearable device 
incorporating a LoRa module. Figure 2 shows a LoRa GW that 
is placed on the University of Patras Campus. 
As far as the web application is concerned, the main 
technical aspect of the application is the web framework called 
Flask. As far as the front-end development is concerned 
HyperText Markup Language 5 (HTML), Cascading Style 
Sheets 3 (CSS), Bootstrap 4, JavaScript ES6, and jQuery 3.5.1 
were used. For the Relational Database Management System 
(RDMS) the SQLite 3 technology has been used. As far as the 
maps in the web application are concerned the Leaflet has been 
used. The Leaflet is an open-source JavaScript library for 
creating mobile-friendly interactive maps. Figure 3 shows the 
homepage of the web application. 
 
Figure 1. LoRa deployment architecture. 
 
Figure 2. Left: a DA 14861 wearable device, Right: a LoRa GW in the 
University of Patras campus 
The basic scenarios that the system provide to the user are 
the following: a) The user logs in to the system, b) definition of 
the allowed region, c) Location monitoring, d) Set the wearable 
device’s state to an emergency/normal state, 7) See past packet 
information.  
 
Figure 3. The homepage of the web application. 
When a user enters the website, the homepage is the first 
thing that is presented (Figure 3). When the user logs in, a page 
is showed with a personalized message to the user informing 
about the last selected wearable device. Then, the user is 
redirected to the Dashboard page. On this page the user can find 
a leaflet map where the latest position of the person has the 
wearable device, having a tooltip showing the current state of 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

the user (e.g., normal state or emergency state) and the 
timestamp of the latest LoRa packet. Moreover, below the map, 
a table is presented where the latest information of the user and 
the sensor measurements such as the HR, and the pedometer. 
The Dashboard page is presented in Figure 4. Also, there is a 
button with which the user can click it in order to set the 
wearable device to the emergency state, or to cancel the 
emergency state and return to the normal state again. 
 
Figure 4. Dashboard 
If the user needs to add a new region in which the person 
suffering from dementia or ASD should move, and if this person 
exits this region then, the emergency state is triggered. The user 
should click “Actions” ->”Set permitted Area”. On this web 
page, there is text giving guidelines to the user on how to add a 
permitted area Figure 5. Next, there is a map, in which the user 
can draw a circle, representing the permitted area. Then a tooltip 
type form is presented in which the user can add a Title and a 
Description. Furthermore, the user can check the previously 
added permitted areas through the “Check your permitted 
areas”. On this page, the user can see in the map the boundaries 
of the permitted regions and by clicking on the circles the user 
can see the respective details and information. Also, the user can 
check the packet history via the “History” webpage. In this page, 
the user can see the history of the packets received in a tabular. 
In the navigational bar the user can spot and click the option 
“About” where the user can see the Frequently Asked Questions 
(FAQ). Lastly, the user in order to logout has to click on the 
logout option in the navigational bar. When the user clicks on 
the logout option a popup modal is shown that asks for the user’s 
confirmation. 
 
Figure 5. First page in the "Add new allowed region" scenario. 
VI. HCI APPROACH AND EVALUATION 
The main goal of computer systems is to be designed under 
a user-centered approach to help people use them effectively and 
easily. Every computer system has a target group and for this 
reason, it has to follow the appropriate design that will satisfy 
the need and capabilities of that group. Designers of that system 
think that people have a certain task in their mind, and they have 
to deliver them a system without complexity. Furthermore, it is 
very important to make people feel that have control of this 
system. System designers must know how to translate user’s 
needs into system capabilities and the first step in this process 
happens with a good design of a system interface. A well-
designed interface allows people to interact with the system and 
deal with any difficulties without external help while at the same 
time they have full control of the machine. For this reason, the 
topic of user-centered design has become the most important 
concept in the design of interactive systems. The keyword, in 
this case, is the term usability [21].   
Usability criteria 
The following ten usability criteria were isolated from work 
by  Nielsen. 
- 
The first principle is the visibility of system status.  
- 
Match between the system and the physical world.  
- 
User control and freedom.  
- 
Consistency and standards. 
- 
Error prevention.  
- 
Recognition rather than recall.  
- 
Flexibility and Efficiency of use.  
- 
Aesthetic and Minimalistic Design. 
- 
Help users recognize, diagnose and recover from 
errors.  
- 
Help and documentation are the last principles.  
An evaluation based on basic heuristics and the new can give 
valuable results about website usability and how can an existing 
one be more usable and user-friendly. 
Heuristic evaluation is a usability engineering method that 
helps designers find out weak spots and usability problems in 
their designs. For the evaluation problem generally, a small 
group of evaluators for the different background are needed. 
Each evaluator is given sufficient time to test the design in form 
of mockups or prototypes, find usability problems, write them 
down on a catalog and also propose a change. When the 
evaluation process is done for all the evaluators then, they are 
allowed to communicate with each other and discuss their 
findings. This procedure is important because in this way the 
evaluation process is independent and unbiased. Table I presents 
the problems and the heuristics that were violated in each 
problem. 
In May 2021 the evaluation process of the Search and 
Rescue prototype took place in the office of the Laboratory of 
Distributed Systems and Telematics at Rio, Patras. The 
evaluation team consisted of three people: two HCI Master level 
graduates and one engineer specialist on monitoring systems 
with 
a 
background 
in 
Business 
and 
Management 
Administration. Each evaluator has a certain time of arrival and 
in 40 minutes it had to evaluate the prototype alone only with 
the company of the website’s designer that had the role of 
observer. The reason that the evaluation occurred on prototypes 
instead of simply mock-ups was that prototypes allowed the 
changes between different pages of the website to achieve the 
feel of a real functional site.  
Evaluators were given a heuristic evaluation sheet that was 
relevant to the 10 heuristics. There they could note issues and 
problems that would arise and in the next frame their 
recommendation about how the interface could be better. Also, 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

on the left side of the sheet, they could note the severity score 
for each one of the heuristics. The severity follows a particular 
scale: 
• 0-I don’t agree this is a usability problem at all. 
• 1-Cosmetic problems only needed not to be fixed unless 
extra time is available on the project. 
• 2-Minor usability problem: fixing this should be given low 
priority. 
• 3-Major usability problem: important to fix, so should be 
given high priority. 
• 4-Usability catastrophe: imperative to fix this before the 
product can be released. 
TABLE I. LIST OF THE ERRORS DURING THE HEURISTIC EVALUATION. 
Problems  
Heuristic violated 
1. First screen  
Aesthetic and minimalistic design  
2. Menu actions  
Connection between physical and 
digital world  
3. Set a permitted area  
Aesthetic and minimalistic design  
4. Check the permitted 
area  
Consistency of the system  
5. Add permitted area  
Help and documentation + 
navigation  
6.Registration of new 
area, wearables list and 
addition of wearable 
device 
Error prevention  
7. History  
Aesthetic design  
8. Emergency button  
Connection between physical and 
digital world 
9. Emergency state  
Visibility of system status  
10. Window segmentation  
Minimalistic design  
11. Redirecting between 
pages  
Navigation  
12. Design of pages and 
menu  
Responsive design 
 
In the Τable II an example of the problems found in the heuristic 
is presented, and particularly the ninth problem is presented. In 
Figure 4 the screen after the heuristic evaluation is presented. 
After the heuristic evaluation, the necessary improvements 
were made. After this, another iteration was made, but at this 
time a usability questionnaire was given to each one of 10 
random participants, who are frequent internet users that were 
called to test the prototype online, and then, they answered the 
questionnaire. This happened in order to test if there are more 
problems with the interfaces. The study uses a standard 
questionnaire that could help with the formulation and 
validation of the questions. More particular the questionnaire 
that was used was the SUS questionnaire (System Usability 
Scale).  
TABLE II. PROBLEM NO 9. 
Issue 
When the user clicks on the emergency button, 
the system triggers an alarm that means that one 
of the subjects with the wearable device on it has 
been lost. In the prototype form what the system 
did was to notifying users by making the whole 
screen red on every page (Figure 6). This change 
bothered all the participants that did not 
understand what the meaning of the red color 
was. This action violated the heuristic of 
visibility of system status as well as consistency 
and standards. The red screen when the set 
emergency state is active disturbs users 
Problem Severity 
 
5 
Recommendation 
 
Find an alternative way of showing danger and 
emergency Figure 7 
 
 
Figure 6. Initial emergency state case. 
 
Figure 7. Emergency state alert after evaluation. 
The purpose of the work was not to make a statistical 
analysis but to use the questionnaire as an additional means of 
evaluation. After all, the number of participants as was 
mentioned above was small. Considering this situation, the 
answers that are presented are the most characteristic ones.  In 
the first question, 50% of participants agree that they wanted to 
use more frequently a system like Search and Rescue because of 
the purpose it serves, and the rest 50% were divided into neutral 
and disagree answers. This discrepancy occurred because apart 
from the three participants from the evaluation process that had 
an academic background the other participants were high school 
graduates that use frequently websites and the internet. In the 
second question “I found Search and Rescue website 
unnecessary complex” three of the participants were neutral 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

with a scale of 3, five strongly disagree with a 4 scale score and 
the other two participants answer strongly agree with a scale of 
2.  
The fact that 30% of the participants' score was 3 and above 
reveals in combination with the comments through an evaluation 
process that i) some users were not familiar with a technical 
website that is aiming at one certain purpose. The heuristic 
evaluation process had great results as the majority of the users 
feel that the system is not complex. Something that arise also 
from the answer in questions 8 and 9. In question 8 all of the ten 
responds were neutral while in the question 9 only 70% of the 
participants strongly agree (5) about how confident they were 
with the use of the website when only 30% of the answers were 
divided into neutral and disagree. The fact that they were 
engaged with internet websites it was sufficient enough to make 
them feel confident about the use of this particular website. Then 
we calculated the score of the questionnaire, and the score was 
72.5. The general guideline for SUS questionnaires classifies it 
with grade B, which means that the designed system is good and 
is also greater than the average grade of 68.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
As mentioned in the previous sections, the need for an IoT-
based SAR system has been understood and explained, in order 
to save the lives of people that have a high probability to go 
missing. The benefits of such a system can be of paramount 
importance for the person that goes missing, for the peace of 
mind of the caretakers and the people that are responsible for the 
people such as in the case of people suffering from dementia or 
ASD. Also, emerging technologies, such as the LoRa 
technology can help to create SAR systems due to many factors, 
such as it can transmit over long distances and keeps the energy 
consumption at low levels. 
For future work, the examination of different wireless 
technologies such as the Sigfox or 5th Generation networks will 
be taken into consideration. Also, after the COVID 19 pandemic 
is over an ethnographic study should be designed in institutions 
for people suffering from AD or dementia. Finally, another 
aspect that can be studied and examined is the legal part of the 
system that concerns people that can not be fully aware of legal 
concepts, for example, a person who suffers from dementia can 
not practically agree or disagree if the person that is responsible 
about the safety has the right to monitor the position and other 
vital personal information. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Bouras, A. Gkamas, V. Kokkinos, and N. Papachristos, "Real-Time 
Geolocation Approach through LoRa on Internet of Things," 2021 
International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN), 2021, pp. 
186-191, doi: 10.1109/ICOIN50884.2021.9333860. 
[2] G. M. Bianco, R. Giuliano, G. Marrocco, F. Mazzenga, and A. Mejia-
Aguilar, "LoRa System for Search and Rescue: Path-Loss Models and 
Procedures in Mountain Scenarios," in IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 
vol. 
8, 
no. 
3, 
pp. 
1985-1999, 
1 
Feb.1, 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1109/JIOT.2020.3017044. 
[3] S. Kashihara, M. A. Wicaksono, D. Fall, and M. Niswar, "Supportive 
Information to Find Victims from Aerial Video in Search and Rescue 
Operation," 2019 IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things 
and Intelligence System (IoTaIS), BALI, Indonesia, 2019, pp. 56-61, doi: 
10.1109/IoTaIS47347.2019.8980435. 
[4] J. Wojtusiak and R. M. Nia, Location prediction using GPS trackers: Can 
machine learning help locate the missing people with dementia?, Internet 
of 
Things, 
2019, 
100035, 
ISSN 
2542-6605, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2019.01.002. 
[5] S. Nooruddin, M. M. Islam, and F. A. Sharna, An IoT based device-type 
invariant fall detection system, Internet of Things, Volume 9, 2020, 
100130, ISSN 2542-6605, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2019.100130. 
[6] C. J. Bouras, A. Gkamas, S. A. K. Salgado, and N. Papachristos, “A 
Comparative Study of Machine Learning Models for Spreading Factor 
Selection in LoRa Networks:,” International Journal of Wireless 
Networks and Broadband Technologies, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 100–121, Jul. 
2021, doi: 10.4018/IJWNBT.2021070106. 
[7] C. Bouras, A. Gkamas, S. A. K. Salgado, and N. Papachristos, “Spreading 
Factor Selection Mechanism for Transmission over LoRa Networks”, in 
28th International Conference on Telecommunications (ICT 2021), June 
1 - 3, 2021, London, UK , 2021 
[8] C. Bouras, A. Gkamas, and S. A. K. Salgado, “Energy efficient 
mechanism for LoRa networks,” Internet of Things, vol. 13, p. 100360, 
Mar. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.iot.2021.100360. 
[9] C. Bouras, A. Gkamas, and S. Aniceto Katsampiris Salgado, "Exploring 
the energy efficiency for Search and Rescue operations over LoRa," 2021 
11th IFIP International Conference on New Technologies, Mobility and 
Security 
(NTMS), 
2021, 
pp. 
1-5, 
doi: 
10.1109/NTMS49979.2021.9432652. 
[10] C. Bouras, A. Gkamas, S. A. Katsampiris Salgado, and N. Papachristos, 
“Spreading Factor Analysis for LoRa Networks: A Supervised Learning 
Approach,” in Trends and Applications in Information Systems and 
Technologies, vol. 1365, Á. Rocha, H. Adeli, G. Dzemyda, F. Moreira, 
and A. M. Ramalho Correia, Eds. Cham: Springer International 
Publishing, 2021, pp. 344–353. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-72657-7_33. 
[11] “Alzheimer's 
Association”: 
https://www.alz.org/help-
support/caregiving/stages-behaviors/wandering#who [retrieved: October, 
2021]. 
[12] “Mayo 
Clinic”: 
https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-
lifestyle/caregivers/in-depth/alzheimers-caregiver/art-20045847 
[retrieved: October, 2021]. 
[13] N. Ali et al., “Risk assessment of wandering behavior in mild dementia: 
Risk factors of wandering behavior,” Int J Geriatr Psychiatry, vol. 31, no. 
4, pp. 367–374, Apr. 2016, doi: 10.1002/gps.4336. 
[14] C. Anderson et al., “Occurrence and Family Impact of Elopement in 
Children With Autism Spectrum Disorders,” PEDIATRICS, vol. 130, no. 
5, pp. 870–877, Nov. 2012, doi: 10.1542/peds.2012-0762. 
[15] C. E. Rice et al., “Reported Wandering Behavior among Children with 
Autism Spectrum Disorder and/or Intellectual Disability,” The Journal of 
Pediatrics, 
vol. 
174, 
pp. 
232-239.e2, 
Jul. 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.jpeds.2016.03.047. 
[16] A. L. Adams et al., “Search Is a Time-Critical Event: When Search and 
Rescue Missions May Become Futile,” Wilderness & Environmental 
Medicine, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 95–101, Jun. 2007, doi: 10.1580/06-weme-
or-035r1.1. 
[17] J. Long and A. Whitefield, Cognitive Ergonomics and Human-Computer 
Interaction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989. 
[18] A. Lavric and V. Popa, "Internet of Things and LoRa™ Low-Power 
Wide-Area Networks: A survey," 2017 International Symposium on 
Signals, Circuits and Systems (ISSCS), Iasi, Romania, 2017, pp. 1-5, doi: 
10.1109/ISSCS.2017.8034915. 
[19] “LoRa”: https://lora-alliance.org/ [retrieved: October, 2021] 
[20] A. L. Adams et al., “Search Is a Time-Critical Event: When Search and 
Rescue Missions May Become Futile,” Wilderness & Environmental 
Medicine, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 95–101, Jun. 2007, doi: 10.1580/06-weme-
or-035r1.1. 
[21] R. DePaula, “A new era in human computer interaction: the challenges of 
technology as a social proxy,” in Proceedings of the Latin American 
conference on Human-computer interaction - CLIHC ’03, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil, 2003, pp. 219–222. doi: 10.1145/944519.944543. 
 
 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-918-8
SENSORDEVICES 2021 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

