LipoTool: Evaluation of Tissues Compressibility  
 
Manuel Rodrigues Quintas, Tiago F. Andrade, Maria Teresa Restivo, Maria de Fátima Chouzal, Teresa Amaral  
Institute of Mechanical Engineering (Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto branch) 
Porto, Portugal 
e-mail: mrq@fe.up.pt, tfa@fe.up.pt , trestivo@fe.up.pt, fchouzal@fe.up.pt, amaral.tf@gmail.com  
  
 
 
Abstract—Nowadays undernutrition, overweight and obesity 
are very common health problems, with high impact in society 
at individual, social and economic levels. Therefore, the 
quantification and screening of body fat composition is very 
important in the health area. The assessment method based on 
skinfold measurement has well-defined protocols but the 
commercial equipment, considered in the literature, lacks 
technical evolution. Present technologies do not integrate 
devices with novel characteristics and are not adequate for 
large scale studies. They are also limited for efforts in 
developing new algorithms, namely, if based in dynamic tissue 
response. The integrated LipoTool system intends to contribute 
for those goals. Some novel features of LipoTool are presented, 
i.e., end tips alignment and acquisition of the tissue 
compressibility. The paper highlights innovative capacities of 
LipoTool, which transform it into a powerful tool for assessing 
and tracking, training, study and research, with the potential 
to develop new models and different application domains.    
Keywords-skinfold 
calliper; 
data 
recording, 
skinfold 
compressibility, skinfold measurement protocol. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Changes in the nutritional status of an individual are one 
of the most common health problems and with high impact 
in society at individual, social and economic levels [1]. 
Malnutrition, obesity or even the co-existence of both are a 
major world health problem documented by the World 
Health Organization (WHO) [2]. 
According to the WHO, over 50 % of the European adult 
population is overweight or obese. In fact, excess body fat 
may lead to the increase of coronary heart disease, high 
blood pressure, type 2 diabetes, obstructive lung disease, 
arthritis, and some types of cancer [3]. Malnutrition is also 
related to other diseases generating costs to the European 
Health System comparable to those associated with 
overweight and obesity [4]. 
Malnutrition is a global issue that affects billions of 
people. The term malnutrition refers to both undernutrition 
and overnutrition. Traditionally, undernutrition is prevalent 
in developing countries and obesity is an epidemic in 
developed countries. Recently, obesity has been increasing in 
developing countries, leading to a double burden of disease, 
especially in urban settings [5][6]. 
Therefore, the quantification and screening of Body Fat 
(BF) composition is very important in the health area. For 
monitoring BF, several techniques are used being based the 
most usual on the estimation of Body Mass Index (BMI). 
BMI estimation is based on height and weight evaluation, 
although leading to very inaccurate results according to the 
literature [7][8]. The measurement of skinfolds using a 
calliper and the Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis (BIA) 
measurement based in body resistance and reactance are 
techniques 
widely 
used. 
The 
Dual-energy 
X-ray 
Absorptiometry (DXA) for image evaluation is considered a 
valid body fat measuring device [9]. 
The BMI calculation is a highly empirical method that 
only gives a rough idea of body fat. The DXA method has 
great accuracy, but is invasive and requires very expensive 
bulky type equipment, adequate facilities, and expert 
technicians, resulting in high cost/test rate [10]. 
The BIA is the technique that competes directly with the 
skinfold calliper. The BF is calculated based in correlating 
impedance and reactance values obtained by passing an 
alternating electrical current through the body [11]. It is a 
recent and widely used method requiring a convenient 
preparation not often respected. Individual preparation 
before the test typically includes several requirements: 
 
Avoid exercising within 12 hours of the test. 
 
No alcoholic drinks within 48 hours of the test. 
 
Do not drink coffee within 48 hours of the test. 
 
Avoid diuretics within 24 hours of the test. 
 
Urinate completely prior to testing. 
 
Abstain from eating and drinking within 4 hours of 
the test. 
Failure to meet these requirements leads to very poor, 
inaccurate results. 
Skinfold calliper methodology has advantages over other 
techniques because it is a simple method (portable, easy to 
use and not requiring special individual preparation), non-
invasive and low cost; it provides reliable results compared 
with the DXA [12]. 
The measurement protocol prescribes a uniform 
distributed pressure of 10 gf/mm2 [13] to be applied to the 
skinfold by the end tips. After positioning the end tips, three 
seconds should be counted (as recommended), and then, the 
skinfold thickness value may be recorded. With the value of 
skinfold thickness and with the individual anthropometric 
data, the percentage of BF is estimated by selecting an 
equation from a huge set of equations (more than 60) related 
with individual data. 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

In fact, the assessment method based on the skinfold 
measurement has a well-defined protocol but the commercial 
equipment, considered in the literature and available in the 
market, lacks technical evolution. 
The challenge of this work starts precisely from the lack 
of progress and precision that this type of device has 
experienced since its development in the 1960s and aims at 
overcoming these limitations. We designed and tested a 
dedicated BF measurement system called LipoTool. The 
integrated LipoTool system intends 
to achieve all 
requirements for this method: the pressure between end tips 
should be uniform and constant (10 gf/mm2) as established 
by the protocol, to guaranty and to improve the precision and 
measurement resolution, to offer a larger measurement 
range, to minimize or even to discard subjective operator 
errors (thickness reading and measurement time counting), to 
facilitate the recording and monitoring of patient results (data 
recorded in database), to guide the technician through the 
complete procedure, and to provide a database for large scale 
studies. Additionally, the system also intends to allow further 
studies in the health and nutrition fields and even for other 
applications in distinct areas (now, it is possible to record the 
dynamic tissue response during the skinfold compression 
interval). 
The work aims at highlighting new studies and some 
results already available due to the device unique features. 
We believe that new algorithms, namely, based on dynamic 
tissue response will be possible to be developed with 
LipoTool. However, these studies will need samples referred 
to a standard method (for example, to DXA). 
In the present work, Section II describes the integrated 
system LipoTool, comprising a digital skinfold calliper, 
named Adipsmeter, and its communication system with the 
LipoSoft application, highlighting the used technology. 
Section III provides details of the LipoTool performance, 
namely, the constant pressure between end tips according 
with the followed measurement protocol and its novel 
capabilities for evaluating tissue compressibility. This allows 
accurate studies on the effect of the time interval duration for 
skinfold measurement and its significance in the final 
evaluation of %BF. Finally, in the conclusions, it is stressed 
how it can be a powerful tool in the assessing and tracking, 
training, study and research domains, such as nutrition and 
health, forensic sciences, veterinary science and sports. 
II. 
THE LIPOTOOL INTEGRATED SYSTEM 
The technological solution of LipoTool, depicted in 
Figure 1, comprises a new digital skinfold calliper 
Adipsmeter (1), an antenna AirPCOn (2) for wireless 
communication with a computer and a software application 
LipoSoft (3). 
A. The Adipsmeter digital skinfold calliper 
The Adipsmeter mechanical design was studied, 
conceived and implemented in order to guarantee a constant 
pressure value of 10 gf/mm2 between end tips, to increase the 
calliper measurement range and to reduce the measurement 
subjectivity due to five novel features: a constant force 
actuator mechanism, a cam to compensate changes in force,  
 
Figure 1.  LipoTool system. 
a controlled end tips articulation for keeping their clamping 
surfaces parallel to each other over all its opening range, a 
large jaws centre distance permitting greater openings 
without increasing the device size and, finally, a symmetric 
design to make it independent of the operator dominant 
hand. 
The entire mechanism can be seen in Figure 2. The two 
jaws (4) opening is accomplished by the operator through the 
manipulation of a fixed handle (1) and a lever (2). The 
simultaneous opening is achieved because the two jaws 
rotate around fixed axes and are interconnected by means of 
mechanical elements. Jaws closing action is operated by a 
transmission chain connected at the other end to a constant 
force actuator based on an elastic element. This actuator has 
the double effect of being the force element of the system 
while simultaneously eliminating all possible backlash in the 
transmission chain. The inclusion of a cam (3) whose profile 
compensates variations in the length of the applied force 
arm, guarantees the application of a constant force by the 
clamping surface of the end tips (5) to the skinfold under 
measurement. The end tips are hinged at the rotation axes in 
the extremities of the jaws, keeping their clamping surfaces 
parallel to each other at any opening level. This is achieved 
by a movement transmission mechanism that provides a 
constant and uniform pressure on the complete contact area 
between the end tip clamping surfaces and the skinfold. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Schematics of the transmission chain. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

LipoTool is much more convenient and precise than any 
traditional skinfold calliper both in daily use and in large 
scale actions. 
The integration of the mechanical design with electronics 
and informatics design enables to obtain a final resolution of 
0.025 mm, to reduce the time measurement subjectivity, to 
reduce individual reading errors, to follow the tissue 
compressibility, to facilitate the use of the method by 
incorporation of all known equations, and also to integrate a 
database that enables the monitoring of individuals. 
B. The communication and the LipoSoft application 
The transmission rate for the wireless communication 
between the Adipsmeter and LipoSoft (60 samples/s) allows 
to register the dynamic tissue response for any skinfold 
under compression. It is also possible to monitor small 
changes in temperature during the compression process.  
So, studies based on dynamic tissue response will be 
performed using traditional dynamic systems modelling 
techniques, such as time and frequency response, artificial 
neural networks, and genetic algorithms. We think that more 
flexible models could be achieved offering additional 
methods for BF evaluation, overcoming the use of more than 
60 regression equations, at the present. In line with this idea, 
a study using neural networks has been reported by Barbosa, 
et al. [14].  
The 
current 
electronic 
solution 
uses 
Microchip 
Technology Inc. [15] components for both processing and 
wireless communication. For the communication, data 
processing 8-bit microcontrollers were used. For the wireless 
communication, antennas were used with the communication 
protocol MiWi, based on the IEEE 802.15.4 standard for 
Wireless Personal Area Networks (WPANs) [16]. 
The digital measurement sensor of the calliper is an 
encoder of angular type and also includes a temperature 
sensor (miniaturized thermocouple bid). The angular encoder 
is connected directly to the microcontroller through two 
specific ports. The antenna and the temperature converter 
communicate with the microcontroller by Serial Peripheral 
Interface bus (SPI) and the set of buttons (included in the 
Adipsmeter) communicate through digital ports. In the 
AirPCOn 
antenna, 
two 
microcontrollers 
are 
used, 
communicating with Universal Synchronous/Asynchronous 
Receiver/Transmitter (USART) between them. One is used 
to communicate with the computer via Universal Serial Bus 
(USB) and the other with the antenna by SPI, as shown in 
Figure 3. 
The LipoSoft application was developed in Visual 
Basic.NET and communicates with the antenna through the 
USB port. The interface is divided into three blocks: 
Database, Measurement and Results, as shown in Figure 4. 
It is possible to introduce different settings through the 
LipoSoft user interface, as well as to turn off the Adipsmeter. 
III. 
TESTING THE LIPOTOOL PERFORMANCE 
This work presents two methods used for testing this 
novel calliper in terms of mechanical behaviour and 
dynamics evaluation of time interval during skinfold 
thickness evaluation. 
 
Figure 3.  Communications diagram. 
The first goal was achieved by comparing the pressure 
between calliper end tips within the measurement range for 
the Adipsmeter and the Harpenden calliper [17], the latter 
being the market reference. The second objective is to study 
the relevance of the protocol time interval value for 
measuring skinfolds. 
A. Constant pressure between end tips 
According to the protocol, the pressure between end tips 
should be 10 gf/mm2 for the whole measurement range. 
In order to compare the pressure values between end tips, 
their area and the force between them were digitally 
monitored and measured. A mechanical structure able to 
ensure repeatability and the same conditions in force 
measurements for both devices (Adipsmeter and Harpenden) 
was developed integrating a load cell of 5 LBS measurement 
range. An aluminium structure was built for housing the load 
cell (ensuring the force discharge without friction) and room 
for gauge blocks in order to measure force for different 
skinfold callipers accurate opening, from 15 mm to 120 mm.  
The Adipsmeter end tips are articulated; so their surfaces 
are always parallel for any opening. For that reason, the 
measurement process is simple to carry out. In other cases in 
which there is no parallelism between end tips (and so 
between skinfold contact surfaces), which is the case of the 
Harpenden calliper, it is essential to use special care by 
introducing additional calculations for compensating the lack 
of parallelism. Once the force is equally distributed by 
careful design of the mechanical test system, this leads to 
uniformity in the pressure distribution on the surface of the 
end tips, and therefore, in the skinfold surface. 
Figure 5 presents the results from lab tests for comparing 
the Adipsmeter and the Harpenden callipers in terms of 
pressure between the end tip surfaces at different openings. 
Figure 5 shows the evolution of the pressure between end 
tips for different jaw opening along the measurement range 
of each calliper - Harpenden: 0-80 mm; Adipsmeter: 0-120 
mm. It also shows a non-constant pressure between end tips, 
i.e., Harpenden calliper does not accomplish the protocol 
requirement exhibiting a decreasing pressure with the 
opening increase. On the other hand, the Adipsmeter offers 
an increase of 50 % in the measurement range and a constant 
pressure between end tips. 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 4.  LipoSoft interface. 
B. Time interval for skinfold measurement 
LipoTool provides a unique ability by allowing to 
monitor and to register the skinfold behaviour along the 
skinfold measurement. 
This LipoTool functionality permits to evaluate the time 
required for the skinfold measurement by observing the 
dynamic tissue response. 
Studies of the protocol time interval have never been 
done based in an accurate procedure. The LipoTool system is 
able to read skinfold thickness and perform time evaluation 
in an intrinsic and precise digitally automatic way and to 
record 
them 
for 
later 
processing 
and 
evaluation. 
Nevertheless, Lohman [18] and Norton and Olds [19] have 
recommended the use of 2 s and 3 s after applying the 
callipers’ end tips to the skinfold, as result of their empirical 
studies based in huge samples; but, it was impossible to read 
time and thickness with precision as it can be made by 
LipoTool. 
In our study for evaluating tissue compressibility, the 
measurement procedure has followed the International 
Standards for Anthropometric Assessment recommendations 
[20]. A sample of 36 adults (50% women) aged between 21 
and 49 years old was evaluated and all the participants were 
informed of the study purposes as well as the different 
procedures. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Pressure test between end tips for different jaw opening. 
The tricipital skinfold was measured with the LipoTool 
system and the evolution of tissue compressibility during the 
initial 5 s was registered. The body density was estimated 
using the equations of Durnin and Womersley [21] and the % 
BF was estimated using the equation of Siri [22]. All these 
estimations were done in intervals of 0.5 s and the difference 
between these values in consecutive moments was 
calculated. The results are presented in Table 1. 
Observing data from Table 1, it is evident that changes 
over 2.5 s are not meaningful when determining the % BF 
and this suggests the need for revision of the time interval for 
skinfold measurement. 
Figure 6 shows an example of the information recorded 
during 
a 
skinfold 
measurement 
procedure 
for 
a 
heterogeneous set of 10 individuals. The data were processed 
in order to exhibit a normalized evolution of individual 
skinfolds during measuring time allowing a better 
comparison between individual skinfolds behaviour. 
The dynamic evolution of tissue compressibility shows 
very different characteristics among individuals. We believe 
that for each individual it is possible to distinguishing two 
behaviours in the skinfold characteristic. One is related with 
the connective tissue and the other is related with the adipose 
tissue. The first decay rate is higher than the second one. For 
each individual, these decay rate values, respectively, must 
be related with his/her percentage of connective and adipose 
tissue, depicted in Figure 7. 
Further studies may possibly conduct to offer a 
completely new functionality with skinfold callipers’ 
measurement. However, for better characterization of these 
results, a higher resolution prototype must be used. These 
studies  
TABLE I.  
 
BODY FAT PERCENTAGES FOR TRICIPITAL SKINFOLD 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Normalized tissue compression evolution of tricipital skinfolds. 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 7.  Decay rate for distinct behaviours of a skinfold. 
studies also need data simultaneously obtained by this device 
and with a DXA system in order to develop validated 
models. 
These capabilities have been already used in preliminary 
studies in Forensic [23][24] and in Nutrition areas [25][26]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS  
LipoTool presents innovations that allow its use for 
accurate and fast assessment of body composition by 
measuring skinfolds. While retaining the simplicity of any 
skinfold calliper, the innovative capacities of LipoTool 
transform it into a powerful tool for assessing and tracking, 
training, study and research, with the potential to help 
develop new models and different application domains 
which turns, once again, into additional innovation. To 
perform the associated research based on new studies, it is 
fundamental to get data not only from the LipoTool but also 
from a valid body fat measuring recognized standard 
systems. LipoTool is now under market development, which 
will bring later opportunities for new studies.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was funded by the National Science 
Foundation (FCT – Portuguese Foundation for Science and 
Technology) under project (PEst-OE/EME/LA0022/2013 
[27]). 
REFERENCES 
[1] European Parliament Resolution of 25 September 2008 on the 
White Paper on nutrition, overweight and obesity – related 
health issues (2007/2285(INI)) P6_TA(2008)0461. 
[2] World Health Organization (2009) Global health risks: 
mortality and burden of disease attributable to selected major 
risks. ISBN 978 92 4 156387 1 (NLM classification: WA 
105). 
[3] Y. C. Wang, K. McPherson, T. Mars, S. L. Gortmaker, and 
M. Brown, “Health and economic burden of the projected 
obesity trends in the USA and the UK”, The Lancet, vol. 378, 
Issue 9793, 2011, pp. 815 - 825, DOI: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(11)60814-3. 
[4] C. A. Russell, “The impact of malnutrition on healthcare costs 
and economic considerations for the use of oral nutritional 
supplements”, Clinical Nutrition Supplements, vol. 2, iss. 1, 
2007, pp. 25–32, doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2007.04.002. 
[5] A. M. Prentice, “The emerging epidemic of obesity in 
developing countries”, Int. J. Epidemiol, 2006;35(1), pp. 93-9.     
[6] World Health Organization, “Global strategy on diet, physical 
activity and health”, 57th World Health Assembly (WHA), 
2004, ISBN 92 4 159222 2. 
[7] K. J. Rothman, “BMI-related errors in the measurement of 
obesity”, Int J Obes (Lond), 2008, Suppl 3, pp. 56-59, doi: 
10.1038/ijo.2008.87. 
[8] S. B. Heymsfield, T. G. Lohman, Z. Wong, and S. B. Going, 
“Human Body Composition - 2nd edition”, Champaign, IL: 
Human Kinetics, 2005.  
[9] K. J. Ellis, “Human body composition: in vivo methods”, 
Physiol Rev. 2000 Apr;80:2, pp. 649–680. 
[10] S. B. Heymsfield, “Development of imaging methods to 
assess adiposity and metabolism”, Int J Obes (Lond) 
2008;32:7, pp. 76-82. 
[11] A. Fürstenberg and A. Davenport, “Comparison of 
Multifrequency Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis and Dual-
Energy X-ray Absorptiometry Assessments in Outpatient 
Hemodialysis Patients”, American Journal of Kidney 
Diseases 
57(1), 
2010, 
pp. 
123-129, 
doi: 
10.1053/j.ajkd.2010.05.022. Epub.  
[12] H. J. Krämer and H. V. Ulmer, “Two-second standardization 
of the Harpenden Calliper”, European Journal of Applied 
Physiology and Occupational Physiology, 46, 1981, pp. 103-
104. 
[13] D. A. W. Edwards, W. H. Hammond, M. J. R. Healy, J. M. 
Tanner, and R. H. Whitehouse, “Design and Accuracy of 
Callipers for Measuring Subcutaneous Tissue Thickness”, Br 
J Nutr. 1955, 9(2): pp. 133–143.  
[14] M. R. Barbosa, T. Amaral, M. F. Chouzal, and M. T. Restivo, 
“Neural Networks Based Approach to Estimate Body Fat 
(%BF)”. In Controlo 2010, pp. 7-10.  
[15] Microchip Technology Inc. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.microchip.com/ 2014.10.24 
[16] Y. Yang, “Microchip MiWi™ P2P Wireless Protocol”, 
Microchip Technology Inc., 2010. 
[17] Baty International. Harpenden Skinfold Caliper. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.harpenden-skinfold.com/ 
2014.10.24 
[18] T. G. Lohman, “Advances in Body Composition Assessment: 
Current Issues in Exercise Science”, Champaign, IL: Human 
Kinetics, vol. 5, iss. 2, 1992, pp. 3–4, Series Monograph 
No. 3. 
[19] K. Norton and T. Olds, “Anthropometrica”, Sidney, Australia: 
University of New South Wales Press, 1996. 
[20] M. Marfell-Jones, T. Olds, A. Stewart, and L. Carter, 
“International standards for anthropometric assessment”, 
Potchefstroom, South Africa: International Standards for 
Anthropometric Assessment, 2006. 
[21] J. V. Durnin and J. Womersley, “Body fat assessed from total 
body density and its estimation from skinfold thickness: 
measurements on 481 men and women aged from 16 to 72 
years”, British Journal of Nutrition, 32(1), 1974, pp. 77-97. 
[22] W. E. Siri,  “Body composition from fluid spaces and density. 
Analysis of methods”, In Techniques for Measuring Body 
Composition, Edited by: Brozek J, Henschel A., Washington, 
DC , National Academy of Sciences, 1961. 
[23] F. L. Ferreira, “Estimation of cadaveric rigidity – 
modifications of the mechanical properties”, FEUP-MSc 
thesis in Bioengineering, 2013.  
[24] P. Martins, R. N. Jorge, M. Parente, and A. Santos, 
“Necromechanics: death induced changes on the mechanical 
properties of human tissues”, submitted to Part H: Journal of 
Engineering in Medicine, 2014. 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[25] M. T. Restivo, T. F. Amaral, M. F. Chouzal, C. P. Leão, R. S. 
Guerra, E. Marques, J. Mendes, M. Quintas, and J. Mota, "A 
digital Calliper for training and study purposes", Asia Pacific 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2012, vol. 21(2), pp. 182-190. 
[26] T. F. Amaral, T. Restivo, M. R. Quintas, F. Chousal, C. M. 
Silva, and T. F. Andrade, “LIPOTOOL – A New Integrated 
System for Assessment of Body Composition”, XXXIV 
ESPEN 
Congress, 
2012, 
vol. 
7, 
iss. 1, pp. 
177, 
DOI:10.1016/S1744-1161(12)70438-6.  
[27] Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology. [Online]. 
Available from: https://www.fct.pt/apoios/unidades/consulta/ 
vglobal_projecto?idProjecto=132969&idElemConcurso=7579 
2014.10.24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

