Cell Chip to Analyze Cell lines and Cell Cycle Stages Based on  
Electrochemical Method 
Md. Abdul Kafi1, Tae-Hyung Kim2 and Jeong-Woo Choi1,2* 
1Interdisciplinary Program of Integrated Biotechnology and 2Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering,  
Sogang University, 
 #1 Shinsu-dong Mapo-gu, Seoul 121-742, Republic of Korea 
*E-mail: jwchoi@sogang.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract—  Cell chip was fabricated to analyze different cell 
lines and cell cycle-stages based on the electrochemical tools. 
Cell-based biochips are becoming promising tools in the 
various kinds of biotechnology field such as early diagnosis, 
cell therapy and drug screening. In this study, cells were 
immobilized on collagen coated gold surface and subjected to 
voltammetric methods including cyclic voltammetry and 
differential pulse voltammetry. The distinct redox phenomena 
were detected at the cell-electrode interface which varies with 
different kinds of cell lines. Moreover, the redox peaks were 
found to be different from same cell line but in different cell 
cycle stages. A typical sigmoid curve was achieved between the 
electrochemical signals and cell concentrations that proved the 
reproducibility 
of 
electrochemical 
signals. 
Hence, 
our 
developed cell chip based on the electrochemical tool can be 
applied for the differentiation of metastatic cancer cells from 
unknown origin, as well as for the assessment of cell cycle-
dependent effects of drugs or toxins. 
Keywords: 
Cyclic 
voltammetry; 
Differential 
pulse 
voltammetry; Cell cycle progression; Cell chip 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cell analysis plays an important role in many research 
areas such as early diagnosis of diseases, disease treatment 
and drug screening. Among the analytical tool for the living 
cells, cell-based sensor arrays have been proved as 
potentially useful method for studying the effects of drugs 
and cellular responses induced by external stimuli [1]. 
Recently, cell chip based on electrochemical method is 
becoming a popular method due to its simplicity, ease of use 
and the huge potential as a label-free biosensor with high 
sensitivity. 
Several 
amperometric 
or 
electrochemical 
impedance techniques have been tried to detect cell viability 
and cellular functions by discovering the electrochemical 
dynamics at cell-electrode interface [2-4]. However, 
amperometric method was found to be suitable for the 
specific materials which have well-known redox properties 
such as the dopamine or ascorbic acid. Impedance-based 
method is another common electrochemical tool that focuses 
on the changes of impedance induced by the cell attachment 
on the working electrode surface. This method is not 
sensitive to the redox properties of target materials; however, 
the impedance values are the only one indicator of cells and 
are not proper for achieving valuable information from cells 
which can be useful for the intensive cellular research such 
as the differentiation of different kinds of cell lines or 
different cellular response. 
We have previously reported a cell chip that utilized 
electrochemical tool to detect redox properties of target cells. 
Unlike the other method that employed voltammetric method 
for the characterization of living cells, cells can be directly 
attached on the electrode surface by the modification of 
extracellular matrix protein on the working electrode that 
contributed to the increase of cell attachment, as well as the 
enhancement of electrochemical signals. The fabricated cell 
chip was found to be very effective for detecting the effects 
of different kinds of anticancer drugs or environmental 
toxins by analyzing and quantifying the electrochemical 
signals [5,6]. Later, we also extend our work to detect cell 
cycle-dependant 
characteristics 
based 
on 
cell 
chip 
technology [6]. The cell cycle progress through the defined 
sequence of events was detected where several specific 
nuclear and cytosolic changes occurred in each of the events. 
It 
is 
well-known 
that 
double 
thymidine 
or 
thymidine/nocodazole treatment can block the cell cycle 
progression at the synthetic phase or mitotic phase, 
respectively [7]. These two different phages have the 
different cellular composition and induce the changes of 
redox behavior of cells which can be detected by proper 
electrochemical tools. Therefore, cells from different origin 
and cells in different stage of cell cycle can be easily 
differentiated by our cell chip technology that is essential for 
the practical use of cell chip. 
Therefore, in the present study, a cell chip composed of 
collagen modified Au surface was fabricated for the cell 
immobilization and cell cycle synchronization. Cyclic 
voltammetry (CV) and differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) 
were performed to compare signals from neuronal (PC12) 
and non-neuronal (HeLa) cells. Finally, DPV was carried out 
to detect the electrochemical characteristics of PC12 cells 
synchronized at synthetic and mitotic stages.    
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHOD 
A. Electode modification 
A 50 nm thick titanium (Ti) layer was established on the 
silicon substrate and then a 150 nm thick gold (Au) layer was 
deposited by DC magnetron sputtering. The Au surface was 
cleaned with piranha solution as previously described. The 
cleaned Au surface was further polished carefully by the 
sonication in absolute alcohol and double-distilled water for 
5 
min, 
respectively. 
Finally, 
the 
electrode 
was 
electrochemically cleaned by 0.5M H2SO4 until a stable 
cyclic voltammogram was obtained. To develop an 
oligopeptide layer on the Au surface, 0.1 mg/ml of collagen 
147
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

solution diluted with distilled water was added on a freshly 
cleaned Au substrate and incubated for 30 min. Finally, the 
substrate was washed with deionized distilled water and 
dried under N2 gas. All the chemicals used are of analytical 
grade. 
B. Cell  chip chamber design and cell immobilization 
The cell chip chamber (Lab-Tek®, Thermo fisher 
scientific, USA) of 2 cm × 2 cm × 0.5 cm (width × length × 
height) dimensions was created on freshly prepared Au 
working electrodes with an area of 3 cm2.  This created 
approximately a 2.6 mm2 exposure area for cell attachment. 
Polydimethylesyloxane (PDMS) was used to affix substrate 
to the chamber. Then, cells were seeded on the chip surface 
at a known cell density. PC12 cells in passage 3 were used 
for each electrochemical investigation. After 48 hour of 
incubation, the chips were ready for electrochemical analysis. 
All experiments were performed in triplicate using freshly 
prepared chip. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Schematics of cell-chip. The circle shows the steps of 
fabrication: establishment of 150 nm Au on silicon base, collagen coating 
and cell seeding. 
C. Cell cycle synchronization 
Cell on the chip surface was treated with 2mM thymidine 
diluted with a culture medium (RPMI 1640) for 18h, 
followed by 8h of release (replaced by fresh medium) and 
again 2mM thymidine for 18h to block cell at synthetic 
phase. Similarly, another cell was treated initially with 2mM 
thymidine for 18 h, followed by a 4h release with thymidine-
free medium and then, 100 ng/ml nocodazole was treated for 
10h to block cell at mitosis phase. Finally, the cell chip was 
prepared for the measurement of electrochemical signal of 
the cells at the different phases of its growth cycle. A cell 
chip with the same number of unsynchronized cells served as 
control group.   
D. Electrochemical measurements 
The Electrochemical measurements were carried out 
using CHI660C Potentiostat (CH Instruments). The common 
three-electrode configuration was employed 
for the 
electrochemical measurements, while standard Ag/AgCl 
electrode and platinum wire were used as the reference and 
counter electrode, respectively. Prior to the electrochemical 
measurement, living cells on chip surface was washed twice 
with a 10mM phosphate buffered saline (PBS) buffer (pH 
7.4) containing NaCl- 0.138M and KCl -0.0027M. Finally, 
electrochemical measurements were performed using 2 ml of 
PBS working as the electrolyte. Before the measurement, the 
buffer solution was bubbled thoroughly with high-purity 
nitrogen for 30 min. All the measurements were repeated at 
least three times, and the error bars have been shown in the 
figures. 
E. Statistical analysis 
Quantitative data was written as the mean ± SD. The 
intensities of reduction peaks in cyclic voltammogram were 
used for all the quantitative measurements.  
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Figure 1 shows the electrochemical system based on cell 
chip technology. To achieve the accurate cellular responses, 
cells should be maintained on the chip surface as in vivo-like 
condition. It was found that polysaccharides, extracellular 
matrix (ECM) proteins or its components significantly 
enhances the cell attachment on the artificial surface and also 
help the establishment of cell-friendly environment [9,10]. 
Collagen, which is the main constituent of connective tissue 
and a member of ECM proteins, was used to increase cell 
binding affinity to the artificial electrode surface, as well as 
to detect the electro-physiological characteristics of target 
cells sensitively.  
  
 
Figure 2.  Redox behavior of PC12 and HeLa cell on collagen modified 
Au surface. CV was measured using phosphate buffered salilne (PBS) 
(0.01 M, pH 7.4) as electrolyte at a scan rate of 100 mVs−1. All the 
experiment was conducted at 27 ± 1°C. The experiment was repeated three 
times with maintaining identical condition. 
A. Comparative electrochemical analysis of neuronal 
(PC12) and non-neuronal (HeLa) cells 
Cell is the basic structural and functional unit of a tissue that 
possesses unique functionality according to the organs which 
they derived. Therefore, cells derived from different organ 
will have different electrochemical characteristics which can 
be easily detected by our cell chip technology. Gold 
electrode was chosen as working electrode due to the fast 
electron transfer characteristics over the semiconductor or 
148
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

non-metal.  PC12 cells derived from rat pheochromocytoma 
and HeLa cells derived from human cervical cancer were 
analyzed by cell chip and showed quasi-reversible redox 
behavior when subjected to cyclic voltammetric tool. The 
potential window was determined as -0.2 V to 0.8 V and the 
scan rate was 100 mVs-1. A distinct anodic peak and cathodic 
peak from PC12 cells were detect at 75 mV and 350 mV, 
respectively. HeLa cells also gave specific anodic and 
cathodic peak at -75 mV, 150 mV which was different from 
PC12 cells [Figure 2]. This indicates the distinguishable 
differences of redox behavior of two kinds of cell due to the 
differences of their origin. The difference between the 
potential peaks |Epc-Epa| exceeded 100 mV and the peak 
current ratio Ipa/Ipc ≥ 1, indicating the distinct quasi-reversible 
properties of cells [11].  
The cell line specific CV signal was further confirmed by 
another sensitive electrochemical method, differential pulse 
voltammetry (DPV). Considering the potential of anodic 
peak obtained from CV technique, a potential window was 
determined as -0.2 to 0.4 V. Well defined DPV signals were 
measured from both PC12 and HeLa cells as shown in figure 
3. Cathodic peaks were detected at 75 mV and -75 mV for 
PC12 and HeLa cells which were exactly same as the 
potential obtained from CV. Redox peaks were not achieved 
form bare Au surface indicating that cathodic peaks were 
fully originated from the cells on the Au/collagen electrode 
surfaces. Hence, the developed cell chip was proved as 
efficient tool for the differentiation of different kind of 
cancer cell lines. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Differential Pulse voltammogram of PC12 and HeLa cell on 
collagen modified Au surface. DPV was measured using PBS (0.01 M, pH 
7.4) as an electrolyte at a scan rate of 100 mVs−1. Pulse amplitude and 
pulse width were 50 mV and 50 ms, respectively.  
B. Comparative study of electrochemical signal from 
PC12 cells in different cell cycle stages 
Considering the cell line-specific electrochemical signals, 
we hypothesized that same cell line but in different stages of 
growth cycle may have different redox properties. Cells 
generally pass through a number of complex processes 
during its growth cycles including prophase, prometaphase, 
metaphase, anaphase and telophase that lead to the several 
changes in the physiological and morphological aspects [6]. 
These cytological changes may affect the various kinds of 
redox proteins in cell cytosol and contribute to the alterations 
of electrochemical behavior of the cell. To prove our 
hypothesis, PC12 cells on the chip surface were 
synchronized at the synthetic and mitotic phase by chemical 
treatment and were subjected to DPV method. A sharp 
electrochemical signal appeared at +50 mV from the cells at 
synthetic phage and another peak was observed at +150 mV 
from the same PC12 cells at mitotic stage which were 
significantly different from unsynchronized cells (Figure 4). 
Generally, detection of cells in the different phages depends 
on the fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) or western 
blotting method which is expensive and time-consuming. 
Since our cell chip based on electrochemical tool proved the 
potential for the determination of cell cycle stages, this 
method can be useful for the detection of cell cycle-
dependent effects of various kinds of drugs or toxins on 
target cells. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Differential Pulse voltammogram of PC12 cell synchronized at 
synthesis and mitosis phase as compared with unsyncronized (control).  All 
the experimental condition was maintained as mensioned before.  
C. Rreproducibility of electrochemical tool 
The reproducibility of electrochemical signals achieved 
from cell-based chip was determined by varying the 
concentrations of cells synchronized at synthetic phage. 
Various concentrations of cells from 0.25 × 105 cells/ml to 
1.75 × 105 cells/ml were seeded on the chip surface and 
synchronized at synthetic stage. The synchronized cells were 
further subjected to the electrochemical measurements and 
showed the increase of current peak with increasing cell 
concentrations (Figure 5a). A concentration-dependent 
sigmoid curve (r2 = 0.989) was obtained between the current 
intensities and cell numbers (Figure 5b). The concentrations 
of cells from 0.25 × 105 cells/ml to 1.25 × 105 cells/ml 
showed the exponential increases of signals, whereas steady 
state signals were observed after the concentration of 1.25 × 
149
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

105 cells/ml due to the limitation of the chip surface. 
Therefore, a concentration of 1.25 × 105 cell/ml was 
determined to be the optimum concentration for on-chip 
electrochemical monitoring. The relative standard deviation 
of the DPV peak for seven different concentrations of cells 
(n=3) was 5.6%, indicating that the electrochemical cell chip 
possess high sensitivity and reproducibility. Therefore, the 
fabricated chips was proved to be a potential tool for 
characterizing cells of different origin as well as different 
stages of cell cycle electrochemically. 
 
 
Figure 5.  (a) Changes in DPV peak intensities corresponding to the 
various concentrations of PC12 cells on the chip surface (from 0.5× 105 
cells/ml to1.75 × 105 cells/ml), (b) a typical sigmoid curve indicates the 
linear increases in current peaks (Ipc) in a concentration-dependent manner 
(R2 = 0.989). Data are the mean ± standard deviation of three different 
experiments. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
A cell-based chip was fabricated to determine cell line- 
and cell cycle-specific electrochemical signals. Living cells 
immobilized on the collagen modified chip surface gave 
different signals according to the origin of the cell line, as 
well as the stage of cell cycle. PC12 and HeLa cells were 
found to give voltammetric peak at 75 mV and -75 mV, 
respectively. Moreover, two kinds of completely different 
voltammetric signals were obtained from PC12 cells 
synchronized at synthetic and mitotic phases. These results 
suggest that electrochemical signals not only differ from 
different cell lines but also from the different cell cycle 
stages. Finally, various concentrations of cells synchronized 
at synthetic stage were subjected to DPV method and found 
to 
give 
electrochemical 
signals 
which 
showed 
a 
concentration-dependent sigmoid curve (r2 = 0.989) between 
the current intensities and cell numbers. The optimal 
concentration of cells on chip surface was 1.25 × 105 cell/ml 
based on the obtained sigmoid curve. Hence, our developed 
cell chip based on the electrochemical tool can be usefully 
applied for the analysis of metastatic cancer cells from 
unknown origin, as well as for the assessment of cell cycle-
dependent effects of drugs or toxins. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the National Research 
Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea 
government (MEST) (2011-0000384) and by the Nano/Bio 
Science & Technology Program (M10536090001-05N3609-
00110) of the Ministry of Education, Science and 
Technology (MEST), and by the Graduate School of 
Specialization for Biotechnology Program of the Ministry of 
Knowledge Economy (MKE). 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. H. Yea, J. Min, and J. W. Choi, “The fabrication of cell 
chip for use as bio-sensors”, Biochip J., vol. 1, 2007,  pp. 219- 
227. 
[2] J. W. Choi, Y. S. Nam, and M. Fujihira, “Nanoscale 
fabrication of biomolecular layer and its application to 
biodevices”, Biotechnol. Bioprocess Eng. vol. 9, 2004, pp. 
76–85. 
[3] B. S. Kim and J. W. Choi, "Polyelectrolyte multilayer 
microcapsules : self assembly and toward biomedical  
 applications." Biotechnol. Bioprocess. Eng. vol. 12, 2007,  pp. 
323-332. 
[4] M. N. Bery and M. B. Grivrll, “Bioelectrochemistry of Cells 
and Tissues”, Birkhauser, Basel, Verlag, pp. 134, 1995.  
[5] W. A. El-Said, C. -H.. Yea, I. -K. Kwon and J. -W.  Choi, 
“Fabrication of electrical cell chip for the detection of 
anticancer drugs and environmental toxicants effect”, Biochip 
J. vol. 3, 2009, pp. 105-112. 
[6] L. H. Hartwell and T. A., Weinert, “Checkpoints: controls 
that ensure the order of cell cycle events”, Science vol. 246, 
1989, pp.  629-634.  
[7] G. P. Reddy, “Cell cycle: regulatory events in Gl-S transition 
of mammalian cells”, J. Cell Biochem. vol. 54, 1994, pp. 379-
386. 
[8] G. J. Gutierrez, T. Tsuj, J. V. Cross, R. J. Davis, D. J. 
Templeton, W. Jiang and Z. A. Ronai, “JNK-mediated 
Phosphorylation of Cdc25C Regulates Cell Cycle Entry and 
G2/M DNA Damage Checkpoint”, J. Biol. Chem. vol. 285, 19, 
2010, pp. 14217–14228. 
[9] C. H. Streuli and M. J Bissel, “Expression of extra cellular 
matrix components is regulated by substratum”, J. Cell Biol., 
vol. 110, 1990, pp. 1405–1415. 
[10] C. Ploetz, E. I. Zycband and D. E. Birk. “Collagen fibril 
assembly and deposition in the developing dermis: segmental 
deposition in extracellular compartments” J. Struct. Biol., vol. 
106, 1991, pp. 73-81. 
[11] M. A. Kafi, T. -H. Kim, C. -H. Yea, H. Kim, and J. -W. Choi, 
“Effects 
of 
nanopatterned 
RGD 
peptide 
layer 
on 
electrochemical detection of neural cell chip”, Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 
vol. 
26, 
2010, 
pp. 
1359-1365.
150
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

