High Frequency Thick Film Ultrasonic Transducers  
Used for Estimation of Flow-Mediated Vasodilation of the Radial Artery  
  
 
Andrzej Nowicki, Marcin Lewandowski, Ihor Trots                     
Department of Ultrasound 
Institute of the Fundamental Technological Research 
Warsaw, Poland  
email: anowicki@ippt.pan.pl, mlew@ippt.pan.pl, 
igortr@ippt.pan.pl 
Robert Olszewski 
Cardiology and Internal Medicine 
Medical Military Institute  
Warsaw, Poland 
email:rolszewski@wim.mil.pl  
 
 
Abstract - Preceding atherosclerosis is an endothelial 
dysfunction. Therefore there is a growing interest in the 
application of non-invasive clinical tools to assess 
endothelial function. Commercially available ultrasound 
machines can measure flow-mediated vasodilatation  of 
the brachial artery using  maximum 10-12 MHz linear 
probes. The higher the probe frequency, the better the 
axial resolution. Recently, a new technology of 
piezoelectric transducers based on PZT thick film 
technology has been developed in Meggitt (Denmark) as 
a response to a call for devices working at higher 
frequencies. The thick films exhibited at least 30% 
bandwidth broadening comparing to the standard PZ 27 
transducers, resulting in an increase in match filtering 
encoding output by a factor of 1.4-1.5 and finally 
resulting in a signal to noise  gain of the same order. The 
introduction of a high frequency 25-30 MHz ultrasound 
scanner to measure radial artery diameter after reactive 
hyperemia opens a new window for more precise 
imaging of endothelial function. 
 
Keywords-thick film transducers, atherosclerosis, flow mediated 
vasodilation. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
High frequency (HF) ultrasonography is gaining 
increased interest in skin, eye and small animals imaging. 
However, an excessive attenuation of ultrasound at HF 
limits the range of the available frequencies, considering the 
permissible peak pressure of the probing beam. Our 
motivation was to develop the dedicated wobbler scan head 
with the transducer exhibiting wide-bandwidth behavior and 
enabling transmission of wide-band encoded probing pulses 
with peak pressure not exceeding the acceptable levels.  
The issue of maximizing penetration depth with 
concurrent retaining or enhancement of image resolution 
constitutes one of the time invariant challenges in ultrasound 
imaging. Concerns about potential and undesirable side 
effects set limits on the possibility of overcoming the 
frequency dependent attenuation effects by increasing peak 
acoustic amplitudes of the waves probing the tissue. To 
overcome this limitation, a pulse compression technique 
employing 16 bit Complementary Golay Code (CGS) was 
implemented at 25-35 MHz.  In comparison with the other, 
earlier proposed, coded excitation schemes, such as chirp, 
pseudo-random chirp and Barker codes, the CGS allows 
virtually side lobe free operation, [1, 2]. Section II describes 
the influence of the transducer bandwidth on the overall gain 
of the compressed ultrasonic echoes. Section III describes 
the method and the preliminary results of measurements of 
the radial artery diameter. The conclusions close the article. 
  
II. 
WIDE BAND THICK FILM PROBE 
The bandwidth of a Golay coded sequence often 
exceeds fractional bandwidth of the available imaging 
transducer. It results in final gain of the compressed echo 
signal for different spectral widths of CGS. For example, in 
the case of 80% fractional transducer bandwidth, the peak-
to-peak amplitude in compressed signal decreases to 90%. 
For 60% and 50% fractional bandwidth the compressed 
signals decrease to 57% and  50%, respectively. Also, with 
the narrowing of the transducer bandwidth the pulse width 
elongates. In the case of 80% fractional transducer 
bandwidth, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) in 
compressed signal is equal to 37ns. Following transducer 
bandwidth decreasing leads to FWHM widening and for 
60% and 50% fractional transducer bandwidth, the FWHM 
in compressed signal is equal to 61.4ns and 63.5ns, 
respectively. Assuming speed of sound in tissue equals to 
1540 m/s the corresponding spatial FWHM would be equal 
to 57 m, 94.5 m and 97.8 m respectively [1]. The 
bandwidth of the used transducer is shown in Fig.1. 
The proper material for wide band thick film flat and 
concave transducers was developed by  Insensor® - Meggitt 
(Copenhagen, Denmark). The technology based on screen or 
pad printing process offers not only flexibility of defining 
the thickness (i.e., resonant frequency) of the transducers 
through printing the specified number of film layers, but 
also the option of readily selecting the shape of the 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

transducer and semi assembling of the final device since the 
film can be deposited on the appropriate substrate, e.g., of 
porous ceramic with well defined acoustic properties acting 
as backing for the transducer. The printing process offers 
possibility to deposit the piezoceramic film on a focusing 
substrate. The piezoceramic film will follow the curvature 
of the backing forming an active layer of well defined and 
uniform thickness.  The top and bottom electrodes are 
deposited as a part of the printing process and provided with 
leads for electrical connections.  
 
Figure 1. FFT spectrum of the ultrasonic echoes for the thick film 
transducer; central frequency close to 27 MHz, bandwidth= 27.5 MHz. 
  
Piezoceramic thick films have relatively low acoustic 
impedance of approx. 18 MRayls and the acoustic properties 
of the substrate/backing material have been optimized to 
match  it. 
III.         METHODS AND RESULTS 
Compression 
of 
the 
received 
coded 
sequences 
effectively resulted in very short, one wavelength long, 
probing pulses and  allowed for very precise measurements 
of internal diameter of the radial artery. In 1994, Celermajer 
et al [3] described the technique to test the endothelium and 
smooth muscle dependent dilation capability by producing 
the reactive hyperemia in brachial artery. In 2002, Corretti 
et al [4] published the initial guidelines for the ultrasonic 
assessment of flow-mediated vasodilatation (FMD) of the 
brachial artery. Since then numerous reports on the 
technique were published [e.g., 5, 6]. In general 
enthusiastic, however due to the limited axial resolution of 
the commercial US scanners working in 10 MHz frequency 
range, the precision of the diameter measurements was not 
better than 0.2 mm. resulting in considerable ambiguity in 
final estimation of artery diameter dilation. That is why we 
have decided to modify the technique  increasing the 
scanning frequency up to about 30 MHz and tracking the 
dilation of the radial artery instead of brachial one.  
FMD of radial artery was examined in total 12 healthy 
young volunteers (25-35 years) men. The longitudinal scan 
of the radial artery of 36 year old volunteer is shown in 
Fig.2. In vivo and in vitro examinations were performed 
using a high frequency ultrasound scanner uScan developed 
at IPPT PAN. The device operates with a single element  
mechanically wobbling thick film transducer at the 
frequency 25-35 MHz. 
 
Figure 2. Longitudinal scan of the radial artery, systolic diameter= 2 mm 
 
The Radial Artery Reactive Response (RARR) was 
induced by a five  minute artery ischemia through the 
inflated tourniquet on the arm or forearm. Restoration of 
blood flow in the artery is strongly promoting the release of 
nitric oxide NO. The measured initial internal radial artery 
diameter was in range of 1.59-2.25 mm; the maximum 
diameter 2.01-2.60 mm was observed 40-60 seconds after 
tourniquet deflation. 
 
.         IV.         CONCLUSIONS 
In the pilot study, the model of the brachial artery 
ultrasound demonstrated that using HF scanning ultrasound 
allowed to precisely register an increase in the diameter 
dimension of the radial artery ultrasound model already by 
5%. RARR in healthy volunteers, using a transient ischemic 
calling stimulation has shown changes from 30 to 40 %, 
while in the four volunteers after cardiac incidents, these 
changes did not exceed 10 %. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Nowicki, I. Trots, P. Lewin, W. Secomski, R. Tymkiewicz, 
“Influence of the ultrasound transducer bandwidth on 
selection of the complementary Golay bit code length,” 
Ultrasonics, vol. 47, 2007, pp.64 – 73, 2007. 
[2] A. Nowicki et al., “Thick Film Transducers for High 
Frequency Coded Ultrasonography,” Archives of Acoustics, 
36, 4, pp.945–954, 2011. 
[3] D. S. Celermajer et al, “Non-invasive detection of endothelial 
dysfunction inchildren and adults at risk of atherosclerosis,” 
Lancet, 340, pp.1111–1115, 1992. 
[4] M. C. Corretti et al, ”Guidelines for the ultrasound assessment 
ofendothelial-dependent 
flow-mediated 
vasodilation 
of 
thebrachial artery: a report of the International Brachial 
Artery Reactivity Task Force,” J Am Coll Cardiol, 39, 
pp.257–265, 2002. 
[5] R. A. Harris, S. K. Nishiyama, D. W. Wray and  R. S. 
Richardson, “Ultrasound Assessment of Flow-Mediated 
Dilation,” Hypertension, 5, pp.1075-1085, 2010. 
[6] K. E. Pyke, M. E. Tschakovsky, “Peak vs. total reactive 
hyperemia: which determines the magnitude of flow-mediated 
dilation,” J Appl Physiol, 102, pp.1510 -1519, 2007. 
 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

