The Development of ASIC Type GSR Sensor Driven by GHz Pulse Current
Yoshinobu Honkura
Magnedesign Corporation,
Nagoya, Japan
E-mail: yoshinobu.honkura@magnedesign.co.jp
Shinpei Honkura
Nanocoil Corporation,
Nagoya, Japan
E-mail:shinpei.honkura@nanocoil.co.jp
Abstract—In this paper, we observed the GSR effect driven by
GHz pulse current expressed by sine functionality to increase
with increasing of the pulse current frequency. These features
are explained by spin rotation with GHz rotation speed.
Keywords-GSR sensor; GMI sensor; GHz pulse.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Highly
sensitive
micro
magnetic
sensors
based
on
amorphous wire, such as FG sensor [1] introduced in 1987,
GMI sensor [2] introduced in 1999 and GSR sensor [3]
introduced in 2015, have progressed in both of sensitivity and
size for extending Internet of Things (IoT) applications. FG
sensor and MI sensor have been used for electronics compass
[1][2][4], for automotive use, and smart phones [7].
These
three types of sensors are based on the same principle
allowing to measure the voltage Vc of the coil surrounding
the amorphous wire proportional to the external magnetic
field on passing pulse current through the wire, resulting that
they have the same element structures of these sensors and the
same design of these electronics circuits.
The sensitivity is expected in principle to be dependent on
Vc ∞ √ f・N・μH, where f means frequency, N is col turn
numbers and μ is wire permeability. These pulse current
frequencies of FG sensor, MI sensor and GSR sensor have
increased from KHz pulse and MHz pulse [9] to GHZ pulse in
turn. It resulted that GSR sensor shows the largest sensitivity
per element volume.
The deference of frequency brings different electro-
magnetic phenomena, even if the same amorphous wires are
used. FG sensor detects the rotation of axial magnetization
generated in whole cross section of the wire induced by KHz
pulse current. MI sensor based on skin effect induced by MHz
pulse current detects the rotation of axial magnetization of the
skin layer of the wire which is arisen by the movement of 90
degree magnetic wall [9] existing close to the surface [5].
GSR sensor detects a new phenomenon to make the spin
rotation of the electronic spin existing on the surface with tilt
angle toward axis direction dependent on the magnetic field
which is arisen by GHz pulse current so that it can give a sine
functional output relationship between coil voltage and
magnetic field as well as good linearity, no hysteresis and low
noise. We named the above new phenomenon GSR effect.
The sensitivity of GSR sensor is increased with the increase
of the coil turn numbers per length, which can be made by 3
dimensional photolithography technique [9] to produce fine
pitched micro coil. The micro coil with the coil pitch of
5.5μm and the diameter of 16μm is produced by this new
technique. Current GMI sensor has the coil pitch of 30 μm
and the diameter of 32μm. The new coil has 6 times smaller
coil pitch than that of conventional coil. At the same time, the
micro coil is produced directly on the protective film of ASIC
surface [9], so that this new process can develop a very small
ASIC type GSR sensor without the assembling process with
ASIC and the element.
This paper presents 1) the features of GSR sensor, 2) a new
process to produce micro coil and 3) development of various
ASIC type GSR sensors suitable for different applications.
II.
RESEARCH ON GSR EFFECT
A.
Principle of GSR effect
The principle of GSR effect induced in the amorphous wire
with zero magneto-striction is explained using Figure 1. The
wire has a special magnetic domain structure [6] which
consists of surface domains with circular spin, axis magnetic
domains and 90 degree domain wall existing between two
domains. When external magnetic field is applied to the wire
along axis direction, electronic spins in surface domains tilt
toward the axial direction with the angle dependent on the
magnetic field strength. The axis magnetic domains induce
axial direction magnetization. GHz pulse current passes
through the wire to make strong circular magnetic field and
makes only spin rotation with GHz angular velocity but no
movement of the domain wall because of strong skin effect
induced by GHz current pulse. Figure 2 shows the typical
plan structure of GSR element which has one glass coated
amorphous wire, 2 wire electrodes and 2 coil electrodes with
the size of length of 0.16mm and width of 0.23mm. Figure 3
shows an observed result of the wire voltage and the coil
voltage induced by GHz pulse current. The peak coil
15
Copyright (c) The Government of Japan, 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

voltage”is induced on the sharp edges of rising and falling of
the wire pulse current. It is predicted that 1) GSR effect might
increase the coil voltage with the increase of frequency of
GHz pulse current and coil turn numbers. 2) The spin rotation
not accompanied with domain wall movements could improve
magnetic
properties
of
magnetic
noise,
hysteresis
and
linearity as well as sensitivity.
B.
Experimental Procedure
The present GSR element shown in Figure 2 is equipped
with a wire with a composition of Co50.7Fe8.1B13.3Si10.3 [8] and
the permeability of 1800 with a diameter of 10μm. The tested
GSR elements have length of 0.16mm, 0.45mm and 0.96mm,
wire resistance of 3Ω 、 8Ω, 4.5Ω and 13Ω 、 coil turn
numbers of 14, 32, 66 and 148 and coil resistance of 80Ω、
210Ω, 360Ω and 810Ω respectively.
The block diagram and ASIC of electronics circuit for GSR
sensor in Figure 4(a) is similar to a conventional GMI circuit
[1][2][10] but ASIC used in this research has improvements
as follows. The pulse generator can generate pulse currents
with frequency of1GHz to 3GHz. An electronic
switch can operate at a very small interval of 0.1nsec
between on and off. An adjustment circuit can control a
detection timing from 0 to 4 nsec by interval of 0.1 nsec. The
analog circuit has band width of 500 KHz and AD converter
has 16 bits. The I2C communication is used to send data to
MCU. Consumption current is about 0.4mA @ ODR of
5KHz.
The experiments using GSR sensor produced by connecting
with ASIC and GSR elements by wire bonding(Figure 4(b))
are carried out to examine the effects of pulse frequency,
detection timing, coil turn numbers and effective permeability
on magnetic properties such as sensitivity, relationship
between magnetic field and col voltage, measuring rage,
linearity, noise and hysteresis. The effect of frequency is
examined by changing transition time of pulse current Δt 
from 0.2nsec to 1 nsec where pulse frequency f is defined by
f=1/2Δt. 
C.
Results on Features of Coil Voltage of GSR Sensor
A coil voltage of GSR sensor [3] observed under a
frequency of 1.5GHz takes a maximum value about the time
of 1 nsec and then decreases. The maximum value increases
16
Copyright (c) The Government of Japan, 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

with increase of magnetic field and takes opposite value by
positive and negative. It is noted that coil voltages at H=0
A/m which means electric signal voltage is very small
compared to that at H=720 A/m which means magnetic signal
voltage. A relationship between the coil voltage and the
magnetic field at the maximum detection timing of the falling
process is shown in Figure 5. There is a surprising result that
the relationship ship has a sin function expressed by an
equation as V=V0・sin（πH/2Hm）where Hm is defined as
the field strength taking Vmax. The experimental data results
show that Hm is nearly equal to the anisotropy Hk of the
amorphous wire, that is, Hm = 0.96Hk.
Figure 6 shows both linear lines of an inversed voltage by
πH/2Hm=arcsin(V/V0）and a regression line. It is found the
linear relationship between coil voltage and magnetic field
gives good linearity of 0.5% FS and an extension of the
measuring range of 960 A/m (linear approximation) to 7200
A/m (dependent on Hm) .On the contrary, GMI sensor output
is
based
on
BH
curve
of
amorphous
wire
without
mathematical equation so that a collinear approximation is
used not to extend the measuring range. The narrow
measuring range of GMI sensor is one of big disadvantage.
D.
Results on Sensitivity of GSR Sensor
The effect of pulse current frequency on the sensitivity of
GSR sensor type of length =0.26mm is studied by changing
from 1GHz to 3GHz as shown in Figure 7(a). The coil
voltage increases with the increase of frequency following
saturation over 3GHz.
The spins existing in the surface at
the angular velocity ω (＝２πｆ) and the high speed spin
rotation excited by GHz pulse current makes the big coil
voltage V(=-Δφ/Δｔ). The reason to take saturation over
3GHz is because the actual frequency of the pulse current
passing through the wire becomes lower than input
frequency due to the
strong
eddy
current.
The
sensitivity increases proportional to coil turn numbers as
shown in Figure 7(b), where coil turn numbers change from
16 turns to 148 turns keeping their wire lengths of 0.96mm.
The influences of increase of coil resistance and parasitic
capacitance accomplished with increase of coil turn numbers
are not affected as long as present test conditions. The
sensitivity increases proportional to effective permeability as
17
Copyright (c) The Government of Japan, 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

shown in Figure 7(c), where wires tested with intrinsic
permeability of 1800 and the diameter of 10 μm has effective
permeability of 150 and 460 controlled by wire length of
0.16mm and 0.26mm respectively keeping coil turn numbers
of 14. It is found that the sensitivity of GSR sensor is effected
by pulse frequency, detection type of falling or rising, coil
turn numbers and effective permeability.
E.
Results on Other Magnetic Properties
It is surprised the rising detection of GSR sensor makes no
hysteresis as well as falling detection. GSR effect detects only
spin rotation around the wire surface so that hysteresis does
not occur. On the contrary, GMI sensor shows a big hysteresis
[11] in the case of rising detection because it detects axial
magnetization to have the big hysteresis. Rising detection is
important for developing high ODR type GSR sensor of over
1MHz. It means GSR sensor has bigger potential ability than
GMI sensor.
Figure 8 shows the result that σ-noise becomes small to
40μV under H=7200 A/m when falling detection is carried
out around peak position of the coil voltage. It means the
magnetic noise of GSR sensor occurs only 10μV because the
ASIC has own noise of 30 μV. The frequency of pulse current
takes the designated GHz frequency around peak position but
around the initial and ending time of pulse current it rises or
falls slowly to take low frequency of KHz to MHz. High
frequency generates spin rotation accompanied with low noise.
Low frequency induces domain wall movement to make big
noise proportional to magnetic field strength.
Figure 9 shows effects of tension treatment [10] at room
temperature on the sin functional relationship between the
coil voltage and the magnetic field. When the tension changes
from 76kg/mm2 to 10 kg/mm2, the sin function shows
distortion from sine function. The reason is probably that the
tension might enrich the surface domain with circular spins
and press the 90 degree domain wall into the inside of the
wire so that the movement of magnetic walls are suppressed
and GSR effect to give the correct sine function might occur
dominantly.
F.
Summary of the Results
We observed GSR effect based on the spin rotation of
electron spins existing in surface circular magnetic domain
driven by GHz pulse current. The effect makes new features
that coil voltage increases with pulse frequency to make big
sensitivity and its relationship with magnetic field and coil
voltage has the sin functionality to extend the range of
linearity as well as it gives non hysteresis and low noise.
These
features
are
explained
by
spin
rotation
not
accompanied with magnetic wall movements.
III.
DEVELOPMENT OF 3 DIMENSIONAL
PHTOGRAPHY PROCESS FOR A MICRO COIL
We developed a 3 dimensional photography process to
produce a micro coil and to put it on the ASIC surface
directly. The size of GSR sensor can be drastically downsized
by one piece assembling with the element and ASIC as shown
in Figure 10. The element is produced through a following
process shown in Figure 11 where a glass coated amorphous
wire with a diameter of 10μm has a composition of
Co50.7Fe8.1B13.3Si10.3 and permeability of 1800.
18
Copyright (c) The Government of Japan, 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The first step is to form a resign film with the thickness of
10 μm and then to make a groove with a width of 18μm and a
depth of 7μm on the film by RIE etching. Second step is to
produce a bottom coil pattern (Figure 12) with a coil pith of
5.5μm. The 3 dimensional photolithography makes wire
pattern on convex- concave plane controlled by diffraction
phenomenon between mask lattice and convexo-concave
plane in Figure 13. The coil pitch of 5.5μm can be formed by
the combination with mask lattice pitch of 5.5μm
and
groove depth of 7 μm
using the light wave length of 700 nm.
Third step is to set the amorphous wire along the groove
using a wire aliment machine in Figure 14. This machine can
apply the tension of from 50kg/mm2 to 100kg/mm2 o the
wire with the diameter of 10 μm
for improving linearity of
GSR sensor and can align wires with the aliment interval of
±１μm accuracy using the wire as a base line for aliment.
Fourth step is to mold the wire using an adhesive resist. Fifth
step is to produce a wire coil pattern (Figure 15) with a coil
pith of 5.5μm using 3 dimensional photolithography on the
adhesive resist.
The above process can produce a micro coil with the coil
pitch of 5.5μm、the coil diameter of 16μm、the wire length
of 0.10mm to 2mm and coil turn numbers of 10 turn to 1000
turns on the ASIC surface. GSR sensor can achieve the micro
size keeping the good sensor performance.
IV.
DEVELOPMENT OF ASIC TYPE GSR SENSOR
FOR VARIOUS APPLICATIONS
Various prototype GSR Elements are produced shown in
Figure.16. They are divided into one axis type with the length
of 0.16mm, 0.45mm and 0.99mm, two axis type and 3axis
type.
Some
prototype
GSR
sensors
suitable
for
specified
applications [7] [9] are produced by combination with these
elements and the ASIC. The properties of these prototype
GSR sensors are shown in Table 1.
It is notice that the
examination have been carried out using one ASIC which
means that their performance are not optimized for all
elements. This paper suggests that GSR sensor has good
potentiality for some specified applications.
19
Copyright (c) The Government of Japan, 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

A.
Automotive Use Application or Robot Industries
These applications request high accuracy and
precise
magnetic sensors of 16 to 18 bits which needs to equip wide
measuring rang of over 80G as well as high sensitivity, good
linearity, no hysteresis, low noise, low consumption and wide
bandwidth of over 500KHz. Types of X11, X12 and X13 with
the wire length of 0.16mm can give the wide measuring range
of over 80G and the good linearity of o.1%FS, almost no
hysteresis,
low
σ-noise
of
2mG
to6mG,
low
current
consumption of 0.4mA and 2.4mG(240nT)/LSB in condition
of analog circuit bandwidth of 500KHz and ODR of 5KHz. In
addition it is well known that amorphous wire type sensors
equip strong reliability and temperature stability against
outside atmosphere such temperature, magnetic damage and
mechanical stress.
GMI sensor had been expected to be most promising sensor
for automotive use, but it is not used because of its narrow
measuring range of 12G. The prototype of GSR sensor has
wide measuring range of over 80G as well as high total
performance 100 times better than that of commercial ASIC
type GMI sensor. Here the total performance is calculated by
performance index of S/N ratio ×measuring range ×element
size.
B.
Small Size GSR Sensor for in the Body Use
GSR sensor can make very small size possible because GSR
element can be produced directly on ASIC surface. The size
of GSR sensor can make the same size of the ASIC size of
1.2mm ×1.2mm
×0.1mm which is used in this paper. That
means it is promising for in body navigation use.
The magnetic devices with σ-noise of over 10mG for in the
body navigation such as catheters, endoscope and so on are
used , but they have the poor positioning accuracy of 1-2mm.
20
Copyright (c) The Government of Japan, 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

If types of X12 and X13 with the length of 0.45 mm and
0.90mm respectively with σ-noise of 1mG @ ODR of 5KHz
is used, it is expected that the positioning accuracy will
improve to under 0.1mm . These applications request long
and thin shape sensor. These requests are favorable for direct
on-chip type of GSR sensor because wire is long.
C.
Compass for Smart Phone and Mobile Computer
Types of XY and XYZ are operated to output 5 data such a
X1,X2,Y1,Y2 and temperature ＠ODR of 1KHz. Type XY
for 2D compass consists two X axis coil (X1 and X2) and two
Y axis coil (Y1 and Y2) to obtain the magnetic field at the
center position by averaging to have noise of 1.4 mG @ ODR
of 1KHz and the range of 50G. Type XYZ for 3D compass
consists of 2D compass and permalloy parts to detect Z axis
magnetic field. The sensitivity for Z axis magnetic field is
adjusted by the height of the permalloy part. It is important to
form a magnetic circuit by direct connection with the wire
and the permalloy parts. It has noise of 2.7mG@ ODR of
1KHz and the range of 50G.
Types of XY and XYZ are designed suitable for next
generation type compass which requests noise of under 1mG
@ODR of 200Hz and measuring range of 24G compared to
current specification of noise of under 10 mG@ ODR of 50
Hz and the range of 12G. The specification means about 20
times higher than conventional one. Types of XY and XYZ
are not satisfied to the specification but if ASIC performance
or GSR element design are changed to make ODR from
1KHz to 200Hz and the measuring range 50G to 24 G, σ-
noise will decrease from 1.4 ～2.7
to about 0.3 ～0.7 to be
satisfied with the next generation type compass. Next
generation type compass will have high speed and high
accuracy so that it can calculate real time 3 dimensional
attitude. That is, the next generation type compass will mean
a magnetic Gyro-Compass with gyro functionality without
Vibration gyro. This type of GSR sensor must be promising
for smart phone mobile computer, drone, robots and goggles.
D.
pT Sensor for Detecting Biomagnetism
The sensitivity of GSR sensor can increase with the coil turn
numbers increased by the long wires or 4 wires of GSR
element. Gsr sensor must be promising for these applications.
However, the wire resistance of long coil becomes more than
2KΩ
so that we need to make a high power electronic
circuit with VDD of 5V.
Ⅴ. CONCLUSION
We found GSR effect based on spin rotation forced by GHz
pulse current which makes new features with big sensitivity
and the sin functional relationship with magnetic field as well
as
good
linearity,
non-hysteresis
and
low
noise.
We
developed the production technology to produce micro coils
directly formed on the ASIC surface which make small size
GSR sensor possible. Some prototypes of ASIC type GSR
sensor have been produced in consideration for applications
such as automotive use, in the body use, gyro –compass use
and medical use. It is concluded that GSR sensors have big
potentiality to become promising magnetic sensor for many
applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was financially supported by the subsidized
projects of METI, NEDO and Aichi prefecture of Japan. We
wish to acknowledge these supports.
REFERENCES
[1]
Y.
Akane,
“Magnetic
sensors”
Japan
Patent
No.2617498(1987)
[2]
K. Mohri“A micro magnetic sensor based on MI effect”,
Japan Patent No.3645116 (1999)
[3]
Y.Honkura, “High Sensitive Micro sized Magnetometer”,
United States Patent No: US 9,857,436 B2, Jan. 2, 2018
[4]
Y. Honkura; “The Development of MI sensor and its
Applications to Mobile Pone”; AES2012, 2012
[5]
K. Mohri, “Science and technology on magnetic sensors”,
Corona Publishing Co. LTD , 1998
[6]
Yu. Kabanov, A. Zhukov, V. Zhukova and J. Gonzalez,
“Magnetic domain structure of microwires studied by using
the magneto-optical indicator film method, Appl. Phys. Lett.
87, p142507, 2005
[7]
Y. Honkura: “chaptrer 3: Electronics compass and motion
sensor using MI sensor”, new magnetic sensors and their
applications, Triceps Co. Ltd, 2013
[8]
A. Zhukov, M. Ipatov, M.Churyukanova, A. Talaat, J.M.
Blanco and V.Zhukova,“Trends in optimization of giant
magnetoimpedance effect in amorphous and nanocrystalline
materials”, J. Alloys Compound. 727 (2017) 887-901
[9]
Y. Honkura: “ chapter 5 section4: Development of high
sensitive micro magnetic sensor based on GSR effect”, 「
new magnetic sensors and their applications」 Technical
Information Institute Co. LTD (2018)
[10] Y. Honkura; “Equipment and the method to line up magnetic
wires on Si wafer, Japanese Patent No. 5839530 (2015)
[11] Y.
Honkura:
“Magnetic
sensor”,
Japan
patent
No.3801194(2006)
21
Copyright (c) The Government of Japan, 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

