A Column Generation based Heuristic for Maximum Lifetime Coverage
in Wireless Sensor Networks
Karine Deschinkel
LIFC Laboratory, Universit´e de Franche-Comt´e
Belfort, France
Email: karine.deschinkel@univ-fcomte.fr
Abstract—Several studies in recent years have considered
many strategies for increasing sensor network lifetime. We
focus on a centralised management scheme where a large
number of sensors are randomly deployed in a region of
interest to monitor a set of targets and we propose an adaptive
scheduling by dividing sensors into non-disjoint cover sets, each
cover set being active in different period of time. In this paper,
we design a column generation (CG) method based heuristic
for efﬁciently solving the maximum lifetime coverage problem.
We ﬁrst model the problem with a linear programming (LP)
formulation for non-disjoint cover sets where the objective
is to maximise the sum of activation times of cover sets,
with respect the sensor’s battery lifetime. As the number of
cover sets may be exponential to the number of sensors and
targets, an initial set of cover sets is constructed and other
cover sets are generated through the resolution of an auxiliary
problem formulated as a integer programming (IP) problem.
This problem is either solved at optimality by standard branch-
and-bound or solved sub-optimally by a heuristic. Simulation
results show the efﬁciency of the proposed heuristic which
provides near optimal solutions while saving computational
time.
Keywords-target coverage; wireless sensor networks; cen-
tralised method; column generation;
I. INTRODUCTION
Recent years have witnessed signiﬁcant advances in wire-
less sensor networks which emerge as one of the most
promising technologies for the 21st century [1]. In fact,
they present huge potential in several domains ranging
from health care applications to military applications. A
sensor network is composed of a large number of tiny
sensing devices deployed in a region of interest. Each device
has processing and wireless communication capabilities,
which enable to sense its environment, to compute, to
store information and to deliver report messages to a base
station. These sensor nodes run on batteries with limited
capacities. To achieve a long life of the network, it is
important to conserve battery power. Therefore, lifetime
optimisation is one of the most critical issues in wireless
sensor networks. In this paper we concentrate on the target
coverage problem, with the objective of maximizing the
network lifetime by using an adaptative scheduling. We
assume that sensors are randomly sprayed for monitoring a
set of targets with known locations and we also assume the
sensors have location determination capabilities. We propose
energy-aware centralized method by organizing the nodes in
non-disjoint cover sets where each cover set is capable of
monitoring all the monitored targets and by activate these
cover sets successively. Scheduling and grouping sensors
into non-disjoint sets is done by the base station, which
informs every sensor of the time intervals to be activated.
In this paper, the scheduling problem is formulated as a
linear program where the variables are the active times of
the different cover sets. The objective is to maximize the
sum of their active times which corresponds to the network
lifetime such that for any sensor its total active time does not
exceed its initial lifetime. Unfortunately the number of cover
sets may be huge (exponential in number of sensors and
targets). Therefore we develop a resolution method based
on a column generation (CG) process which is a well-
known and widely practiced technique for solving linear
programs with too many variables to include in the initial
formulation explicitly. Our main contribution is to design
a column generation method based heuristic for efﬁciently
solving the maximum lifetime coverage problem.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section II reviews the related work in the ﬁeld. Section III is
devoted to the description of the target coverage problem and
to its formulation by a linear program and explains the basics
of the column generation technique. Next, in Section IV,
we present the different algorithms of the proposed scheme.
Section V discusses implementation details of our algorithms
and shows the simulation results. Section VI concludes the
paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Many works, including centralised, distributed and local-
ized algorithms, have been proposed to extend the network
lifetime. In this paper we focus on centralised algorithms
because distributed algorithms are outside the scope of our
work. Note that centralised coverage algorithms have the
advantage of requiring very low processing power from
the sensor nodes which have usually limited processing
capabilities. Moreover, a recent study conducted in [2]
concludes that there is a threshold in terms of network size
to switch from a localized to a centralized algorithm. Indeed
209
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

the exchange of messages in large networks may consume
a considerable amount of energy in a localized approach
compared to a centralised one.
The authors in [3] and [4] independently highlight that
the use of non-disjoint cover sets may increase the network
lifetime by giving appropriate algorithms. For instance,
Cardei et al. [3] formulate the maximum set covers problem
as a mixed integer programming (MIP) and then apply a
relaxation technique to design a LP-based heuristic of time
complexity O(n3m3) (where m is the number of targets).
They also propose a greedy heuristic with a lower time
complexity O(dm2n) (where d is the number of sensors
that covers the most sparsely covered target). This heuristic
forms individually set covers by covering ﬁrst the most
critical targets as in [5].
In [4], Berman et al. clearly provide a LP formulation
for non-disjoint cover sets. We reuse this formulation in our
work but instead of developping an approximation algorithm
as in [4], we exploit the CG technique to deal with the
huge number of variables in the LP formulation. In [4], the
authors propose an algorithm with an approximation factor
of (1 + ǫ)(1 + 2 log n) for any ǫ > 0 based on the (1 + ǫ)-
approximation of the Garg and K¨onemann algorithm.
More recently Zorbas et al. [6] present a novel algorithm
that can produce both disjoint cover sets as well as non-
disjoint cover sets by using a cost function taking into
account various parameters as the monitoring capabilities of
a sensor, its association with poorly monitored targets and
also its remaining battery life. Through simulations, they
compare their proposed algorithm with other approaches
found in [3] and [5] and show that it exhibits comparable re-
sults in terms of generated cover sets but in faster execution
times.
The closest work to ours are [7] and [8]. In [7] and [8],
the authors adress the problem of maximizing lifetime in
wireless network subject to QoS, energy or coverage re-
quirements. They propose a CG approach to decompose the
original formulation into a master problem and an auxiliary
problem. The auxiliary (AUX) problem is an IP problem in
[8] or a MIP problem in [7] which is solved at optimality
by a branch-and-bound algorithm. In both papers analyses
show that the resolution at optimality of the AUX-problem
is time-consuming. Based on this observation, we propose in
our work a heuristic for adressing the AUX-problem which
produces good solutions in lower computational times.
III. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
We try to produce an adaptive scheduling which allows
sensors to operate alternatively so as to prolong the network
lifetime. For convenience, the notations and assumptions are
described ﬁrst. Then the lifetime problem of sensor network
covering a set of targets is formulated.
A. Notations and assumptions
• m : the number of targets
• n : the number of sensors
• I : the set of targets
• K : the set of sensors
• Si : set of sensors which cover the target i
• Zk : set of targets covered by the sensor k
• Tk : the lifetime of a sensor k, which is time duration
when the sensor k is in the active state all the time
B. Formulation
The problem of monitoring all targets by activate non-
disjoint cover sets successively in order to extend the net-
work lifetime can be formulated as a LP. The variables in
the LP are as follows. tu is the lifetime of the cover set
u, that means that all sensors in the cover set u are active
during the time period tu. We denote by U the set of all
elementary cover sets. The problem is as follows :







max P
u∈U tu
subject to :
P
u∈U akutu ≤ Tk,
∀k ∈ K
tu ∈ R+
(1)
The objective function maximizes the total work time
of all the cover sets. The constraint shows the lifetime
constraint for each sensor k. aku is a binary index which
is set to 1 if sensor k is active in the cover set u and
0 otherwise. An elementary cover set corresponds to a
conﬁguration where all targets are covered as well as no
superﬂuous sensor is activated. However the number of
elementary cover sets is very high.
C. Example
To illustrate our problem we provide a simple example
with only 10 sensors and 4 targets. Table I presents the
sensors which are able to cover each target. We consider
only two cover sets. Each cover set is given as a tuple and
covers all targets.
• Cover set 0 = (0,3,9).
• Cover set 1 = (0,4,8).
Target
Sensors
0
3,4,9
1
4,6,9
2
0,2
3
1,3,5,8
Table I
COLLECTION OF SENSORS TO MONITOR A TARGET
210
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

The linear programming corresponding to this simple
example is the following :























max
t0
+
t1
subject to :
t0
+
t1
≤ 1.00
(sensor 0)
t0
≤ 1.00
(sensor 3)
t1
≤ 1.00
(sensor 4)
t1
≤ 1.00
(sensor 8)
t0
≤ 1.00
(sensor 9)
t0, t1 ∈ (R)+
(2)
t0 and t1 are respectively the lifetimes of the cover sets 0
and 1. The right part of each inequality corresponds to the
maximal lifetime of each sensor. Here sensor lifetime is set
to 1. In this example we do not enumerate all elementary
cover sets, we solve the LP with only two cover sets and the
network lifetime obtained is equal to 1 where t∗
0 = 0.5 and
t∗
1 = 0.5. That means that sensors of cover set 0 are active
during 0.5 time unit and sensors of the cover set 1 are active
during 0.5 time unit. Note that some sensors (1,2,5,6,7) do
not appear in the LP because it is not part of any generated
cover sets. Only sensor 0 has consumed its entire energy. If
we had generated more cover sets, we would have reached
the maximal lifetime of the network which is equal to 2.
For instance, if we add cover set 2 = (2,3,4) and cover set 3
=(1,2,9), the optimal scheduling is obtained with t∗
0 = t∗
1 =
t∗
2 = t∗
3 = 0.5.
D. Column generation method
As the set U of elementary cover sets may be huge we use
a CG technique [9] to solve (1). That means that we solve a
Restricted Master Problem (RMP) with only a subset U ′ ⊆
U of elementary cover sets and we introduce an attractive
cover set if necessary. Given a subset U ′ ⊆ U and the dual
multipliers πk ≡ πk(U ′) for sensors k, the AUX-problem
consists in ﬁnding the most attractive cover set u ∈ U \ U ′,
that means the cover set u with the maximal reduced cost
ru = (1 − P
k∈K akuπk). If ru > 0 then the cover set u is
said to be attractive and it is added in the formulation of the
RMP, otherwise the problem (1) is optimal.
The AUX-problem is to ﬁnd a new feasible cover set u
which maximizes r = (1 − P
k∈A πk), or which minimizes
P
k∈A πk where A denotes the set of active sensors in the
cover set u. If this sum is less than 1, then the new valid
cover set u is added in the Restricted Master Problem. We
formulate the AUX-problem as an IP problem with binary
variables yk for each sensor k which is set to 1 if sensor k
is active in the cover set u, and 0 otherwise. The following
constraints represent the coverage guarantee for each target
i (1 ≤ i ≤ m).
X
k∈Si
yk ≥ 1
∀i ∈ I
The AUX-problem is formulated as follows :







min P
k∈K πkyk
subject to :
P
k∈Si yk ≥ 1
∀i ∈ I
yk ∈ {0, 1}
∀k ∈ K
(3)
Note that the formulation of the AUX-problem corre-
sponds to the model of the classical set covering problem
[10]. This complete CG approach seems to be efﬁcient.
The RMP is formulated as a (LP) (1) where the entire set
U of elementary cover sets must be replaced by a subset
U ′ which contains initially a small number of elementary
cover sets. Then the RMP (1) and the AUX-problem (3)
are solved sequentially and the set U ′ grows up until
no attractive cover set is generated. The optimal solution,
that means the adaptive scheduling of cover sets which
maximizes the network lifetime, is always found. The RMP
is a classical LP problem, thus can be solved in polynomial
time O(n3m3) with the algorithm proposed by Ye [11].
However the AUX-problem, which is a IP problem, may
require a large unacceptable running time (This problem
is also classiﬁed as NP-hard [12]). The intuitive idea is to
speedup the generation of attractive cover sets by the use of
a heuristic. To measure the efﬁciency of our approach, we
design three methods, called respectively the Exact Method,
the Heuristic Method and the Mixed Method. The Exact
Method consists of solving to optimality the AUX-problem
at each step of the column generation process with an IP
solver. For the Heuristic Method, we propose to generate an
attractive cover set taking into account the dual multipliers
of sensors k and without resolving the auxiliary problem at
optimality. In the Mixed Method, in case of impossibility for
the heuristic to generate an attractive cover set, we solve the
(AUX)-problem at optimality. Note that the Exact and the
Mixed methods lead to an optimal scheduling compared to
the Heuristic Method which provides near optimal solution.
The resolution method based on CG technique and its three
versions are explained in more details in the following part.
IV. RESOLUTION METHOD
The resolution method requires to generate some elemen-
tary cover sets to form the set U ′ at the beginning. Note
that the initial number of cover sets will not affect the ﬁnal
optimal output. The generation of elementary cover sets
involves two steps. First, a cover set is generated and is then
analyzed to determine if some sensors are not superﬂuous.
A. Production of cover set
The algorithm 1 ensures the production of a cover set
where all targets are covered. This algorithm does not
produce an elementary cover set because some active sensors
could be superﬂuous. That is why we have to check if it
is possible to desactivate some sensors through algorithm
2. This algorithm is applied for each generated cover set
whatever the generation process.
211
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Algorithm 1 Cover Set Generation(u)
Require: A set of targets I, a set of sensors K
Ensure: A random cover set u
V ← I
u ← ∅
while V is not ∅ do
Select a target i ∈ V randomly
V ← V \ {i}
Select randomly a sensor k ∈ Si to cover the target i
u ← u ∪ {k}
for all targets h ∈ Zk do
V ← V \ {h}
end for
end while
Algorithm 2 Check Elementary Cover Set(u)
Require: A cover set u
Ensure: An elementary cover set u
G ← u
while G is not ∅ do
Select a sensor k ∈ G randomly
Check if it is possible to desactivate sensor k
if yes then
u ← u \ {k}
end if
G ← G \ {k}
end while
B. Generation of an attractive cover set
Once some elementary cover sets are formed and compose
the initial set of variables/columns, the CG process consists
of introducing new attractive columns in the RMP. This task
may be done by the exact resolution of the IP AUX-problem
as written in the algorithm 3 or by using a heuristic as
described in the algorithm 4.
Algorithm 3 Generation Attractive CoverSet Exact(π,u,r)
Require: The dual multipliers πk for each sensor k ∈ K
Ensure: The generated cover set u and the associated
reduced cost r
u ← ∅
r ← 0
Solve the IP (3) with dual multipliers πk
(y∗
k)
∀k ∈ K are the optimal values
for all k ∈ K do
if y∗
k = 1 then
{The sensor k is active}
u ← u ∪ {k}
end if
end for
r ← 1 − P
k∈u πk
Here a heuristic is proposed to provide a new cover set
u such that all targets are covered. Considering the dual
multiplier πk for each sensor k as a cost, the objective
is to activate less expensive sensors in the cover set such
that the resulting reduced cost of this cover set is positive.
We ﬁrst select randomly a target, then we choose a sensor
with minimal cost that covers this target. We repeat the
process until all targets are covered. If there are multiple
sensors of minimum costs, the choice of one of them is made
randomly. The algorithm 4 of complexity O(mn) presents
the generation of an attractive cover set with the heuristic.
As our heuristic integrates a random part, it may be applied
several times (no more than Nb Max Ite iterations) until
a cover set with positive reduced cost is found. Note that
the two generation methods do not necessarily generate an
elementary cover set. Each time an attractive cover set is
generated, we call the algorithm 2 to eliminate superﬂuous
sensors.
Algorithm 4 Generation Attractive CoverSet Heuristic(π,u,r)
Require: The dual multipliers πk for each sensor k ∈ K
Ensure: The generated cover set u and the associated
reduced cost r
V ← I
u ← ∅
r ← 0
while V is not ∅ do
Select a target i ∈ V randomly
Select a sensor k ∈ Si with minimal cost (πk)
V ← V \ {i}
u ← u ∪ {k}
r ← r + πk
for all targets h ∈ Zk do
V ← V \ {h}
end for
end while
r ← 1 − r
C. Global process
The algorithm 5 presents our resolution method based on
CG which provides a cover set’s scheduling to prolong the
network lifetime.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Section V is dedicated to experimental results.
A. Experimental setup and environment
We have implemented the three methods presented in
section IV. Our experiments have been conducted on a
regular Linux workstation with a AMD Athlon(tm) 64 X2
Dual Core Processor 4000+ of 2,1 GHz. Resolution of the
LP or IP problems are respectively carried out the simplex
method and the branch-and-bound method implemented in
212
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Algorithm 5 Resolution Method
U ← ∅
{Generation of E elementary cover sets}
for e = 0 to E do
Cover Set Generation(u)
Check Elementary Cover Set(u)
U ← U ∪ u
end for
Restricted Master Problem Resolution(U)
Stop ← 0
while (Stop = 0) do
r ← 0
{Search of an attractive cover set (3 versions)}
————————————————————–
Version 1 : Exact Method
Generation Attractive CoverSet Exact(π,u,r)
————————————————————–
Version 2 : Heuristic Method
Nb Ite ← 0
while ((r <= 0) and (Nb Ite ≤ Nb Max Ite)) do
Generation Attractive CoverSet Heuristic(π,u,r)
Nb Ite ← Nb Ite + 1
end while
————————————————————–
Version 3 : Mixed Method
Nb Ite ← 0
while ((r <= 0) and (Nb Ite ≤ Nb Max Ite)) do
Generation Attractive CoverSet Heuristic(π,u,r)
Nb Ite ← Nb Ite + 1
end while
if (r <= 0) then
Generation Attractive CoverSet Exact(π,u,r)
end if
————————————————————–
if (r <= 0) then
{the method did not provide an attractive cover set}
Stop ← 1
else
{An attractive cover set is added}
U ← U ∪ {u}
Restricted Master Problem Resolution(U)
end if
end while
GLPK (GNU linear Programming Kit) [13] available in the
public domain.
In this section we evaluate the performance of our al-
gorithms by way of simulations. We simulate a network
with sensor nodes and target points randomly located in a
500m×500m area. We assume the sensing range is equal for
all the sensors in the network and is set to 150m. In the dif-
ferent scenarios we vary the number of randomly deployed
sensor nodes n between 50 and 200 with an increment of 50.
The number m of targets to be covered varies between 30
and 120 with an increment of 30. Each sensor has a lifetime
of 1. The following requirements are satisﬁed: each sensor
covers at least one target and each target is covered by at
least one deployed sensor, the connectivity of the network
is ensured and all sensors are capable of communicating
with the base station. We measure the network lifetime and
the execution times. For each scenario, results are averages
over 10 instances (we generate 10 random topologies per
scenario). In the algorithms we set Nb Max Ite to 10.
The set of elementary cover sets is initialized with (E = 10)
conﬁgurations.
B. Comparison of the execution times
First we compare and comment the CPU execution times
of the different resolution methods. Table II gives the opti-
mal network lifetime and the distribution of the execution
times (in seconds) for the three methods over the 16 scenar-
ios. Results of table II are consistent with those obtained in
the literature : network lifetime and execution times increase
with sensor density, network lifetime decreases with targets
number for a ﬁxed number of sensors because they are more
requested. From the above results, we see that the Mixed
Method can be up to 6 times faster than the Exact Method
which solves an integer programming at each iteration. And
the computing times of the Heuristic Method is really lower
than the others each time that the number of targets exceeds
60. We observe that the Mixed Method uses 1.83 times
on average the algorithm 3 for the resolution of the AUX-
problem at optimality, which is really little but enough to
slow its execution time.
N
M
Lifetime
Exact
Heuristic
Mixed
50
30
3.8
0.25
0.30
0.12
60
3.0
1.03
0.53
0.52
90
2.8
2.95
0.82
1.55
120
2.7
8.40
1.20
4.03
100
30
8.7
3.29
2.97
1.03
60
7.2
26.53
4.25
8.41
90
6.9
243.95
6.82
74.19
120
6.7
749.46
9.70
220.64
150
30
14.7
17.17
14.51
4.94
60
12.3
315.66
22.21
48.96
90
11.8
2365.65
30.61
525.21
120
11.3
9249.81
48.15
1987.04
200
30
19.6
38.80
34.85
9.50
60
17.3
750.40
56.34
126.39
90
16.6
8229.53
132.46
1297.82
120
15.5
28942.49
105.87
4393.04
Table II
EXECUTION TIMES (IN SECONDS) BETWEEN THE 3 METHODS
C. Comparison of the objective value
We compare the optimal solution value obtained with the
Exact Method with approximate solution values obtained
213
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

with the Heuristic Method. And we conclude that the
Heuristic Method is a very efﬁcient method because this
method is able of ﬁnding the same solution value as the
value of the optimal solution in all simulated cases with
computing times drastically lower. We have also tested an
other heuristic which is not presented here due to space
limitations and this second heuristic ﬁnds the same solution
values as the Exact Method with two exceptions over the
160 tests and the difference is equal to 0.0885 in the ﬁrst
case and to 0.2482 in the second case. These results are
very promising and should be conﬁrmed on other problem
instances with a larger number of sensors and targets.
D. Comparison of the number of generated cover sets
Table III gives the distribution 1 of the number of at-
tractive cover sets which have been generated to build an
adaptive scheduling. We see that the scheduling resulting
from the Heuristic Method contains a higher number of
cover sets. We may have expected this result because the
Exact Method always generates the most attractive cover
set at each iteration so that the maximal lifetime of the
network is reached with a minimal number of cover sets.
The Heuristic Method could be improved to generate less
cover sets but more attractive. Nevertheless this method is
very efﬁcient as it quickly produces a good solution by
generating a slightly higher number of cover sets. And it
may be interesting for wireless sensor networks to deal
with a large number of cover sets such that sensor nodes
frequently oscillate between an active and an inactive state
as recommended in [5].
Exact
Heuristic
Mixed
MIN
1.00
1
1.00
FST
10.00
15
16.00
MED
24.50
38
34.00
THD
58.25
74,5
69.50
MAX
130.00
131
124.00
Table III
NUMBER OF GENERATED ATTRACTIVE COVER SETS
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Energy-efﬁciency is crucial in power-limited wireless sen-
sor network, since nodes have signiﬁcant power constraints
(battery life). In this paper we have investigated the problem
of prolonging the network lifetime by organizing sensors
into non-disjoint cover sets which operate sucessively in
order to monitor all targets. We have formulated this problem
as a linear programming where variables are the activation
times of the cover sets and we have proposed a column
generation approach to solve it. Instead of solving the
1MIN stands for MINimum, FST for FirST quantile (25% of the
population), MED for MEDian (50 % of the population), THD for THirD
quantile (75% of the population) and MAX for MAXimum
auxiliary problem to optimality to generate an attractive
cover set, we design a efﬁcient heuristic. Simulation results
show the performance of the heuristic which obtains very
good solutions with very low time complexity. Although the
method is a centralised one, it may be used to measure the
quality of distributed solutions and it can be easily extended
to deal with different QoS requirements.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y.Sankarasubramniam, and E. Cayirci,
“A survey on sensor networks,” IEEE Comm. Magazine, pp.
102–114, 2002.
[2] T. Padmavathy and M. Chitra, “Extending the network life-
time of wireless sensor networks using residual energy extrac-
tionhybrid scheduling algorithm,” Int. J. of Communications,
Network and System Sciences, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 98–106, 2010.
[3] M. Cardei, M. T. Thai, Y. Li, and W. Wu, “Energy-efﬁcient
target coverage in wireless sensor networks,” in in IEEE
Infocom, 2005, pp. 1976–1984.
[4] P. Berman, G. Calinescu, C. Shah, and A. Zelikovsky,
“Power efﬁcient monitoring management in sensor networks,”
in Wireless Communications and Networking Conference,
WCNC. 2004, 2004.
[5] S. Slijepcevic and M. Potkonjak, “Power efﬁcient organi-
zation of wireless sensor networks,” in IEEE International
conference on Communications, 2001, pp. 472–476.
[6] D. Zorbas, D. Glynos, P. Kotzanikolaou, and C. Douligeris,
“Solving coverage problems in wireless sensor networks
using cover sets,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 8, pp. 400–415, June
2010.
[7] A. Alﬁeri, A. Bianco, P. Brandimarte, and C.-F. Chiasserini,
“Maximizing system lifetime in wireless sensor networks,”
European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 181, no. 1,
pp. 390–402, 2007.
[8] Y. Gu, Y. Ji, J. Li, and B. Zhao, “Qos-aware target coverage
in wireless sensor networks,” Wirel. Commun. Mob. Comput.,
vol. 9, pp. 1645–1659, December 2009.
[9] G. Dantzig and P. Wolfe, “Decomposition principle for linear
programs,” Operations Research, pp. 101–111, 1960.
[10] A. Caprara, M. Fischetti, and P. Toth, “Algorithms for the set
covering problem,” Annals of Operations Research, vol. 98,
p. 2000, 1998.
[11] Y. Ye, “An o(n3l)) potential reduction algorithm for linear
programming,” Mathematical Programming, vol. 50, pp. 239–
258, 1991.
[12] M. Garey and D. Johnson, Computers and Intractability; A
Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness.
New York, NY,
USA: W. H. Freeman & Co., 1990.
[13] A. Mahkorin, GNU Linear Programming Kit, Reference Man-
ual, 2010.
214
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

