Distanced Observation of Magnetic Field Anomalies During Periods of Power Failure
and Applications in Remote Classiﬁcation of Electrical Activity
Christopher Duncan, MS
Computational and
Data Sciences
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030
Email: cduncan@masonlive.gmu.edu
Olga Gkountouna, PhD
Computational and
Data Sciences
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030
Email: ogkounto@gmu.edu
Ron Mahabir, PhD
Computational and
Data Sciences
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030
Email: rmahabir@masonlive.gmu.edu
Abstract—During research focusing on radio frequency ﬁeld
transmission detection from broadcasters on known frequencies
at known time and transmission in the magnetic ﬁeld, anomalies
were detected in frequencies outside of the frequency scope of
the original research. Analysis of these anomalies indicated they
were linked to an ongoing power issue in which a fuse had failed
in a power transformer located approximately 1.3 miles from the
magnetic ﬁeld sensor system and antenna. The research crew,
through the use of digital signal processing software, were able to
diagnose the problem and assist electrical crews with ﬁxing the is-
sue while observing the anomaly at a distance that typically would
be outside of the range of detection. The results supplemented
previous research indicating magnetic ﬁeld behavior is dissimilar
to companion electronic ﬁeld behavior during propagation by
demonstration the collection of the magnetic ﬁeld from an RF
broadcaster located within a Faraday cage. The magnetic ﬁeld
was collected for analysis while the RF was undetectable. This
incidental researched supported the potential for use of magnetic
ﬁelds in remote sensing and remote classiﬁcation of electronic
activity. Further data analysis, including a meta-analysis of
previously conducted studies which also produced anomalies
validated that at a distance the magnetic ﬁeld may be a viable
candidate remote sensing of electrical activity, such as power
outages, or radio frequency activity, when a standard electrical
ﬁeld antenna is less suitable.
Keywords–computational; science; magnetic; ﬁelds; low fre-
quency; human; activity; remote; sensing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The broader ﬁeld of remote sensing is typically associated
with the identiﬁcation of vegetation and features of a given area
using active sensors to annotate and compare the reﬂectance
curve signature of varying bands of the electromagnetic spec-
trum. Although typically relegated to passive sensors, it may be
possible to remotely sense and classify activity using passive
sensors to detect activity from varying emission sources and
algorithms for classiﬁcation. The particular interest of this
research was the observation of such emissions and anomalies
in the magnetic ﬁeld at atypical distances and the potential
for use in remote sensing and classiﬁcation applications. The
intent of this research is the validate the potential for magnetic
ﬁelds to serve as a potential dimension of remote sensing and
classiﬁcation of activities, particularly so when frequencies are
lower than standard use and common electrical ﬁeld antennas
become cumbersome due to size requirements.
There are numerous examples of the inﬂuence of magnetic
ﬁelds on biological tissue and activity. For example, studies
have shown that grazing animals typically align north and
south when undisturbed, but near power lines (and subse-
quently the associated magnetic ﬁelds), the alignment changed
[1], and there is even a correlation with the increase in
stroke in some populations during geomagnetic storming [2].
Previous research has identiﬁed the possibility of magnetic
ﬁelds to penetrate a Faraday cage, as well as their ease of
detectability when compared to the associated electrical ﬁeld
and the accompanying antenna size requirements of electrical
ﬁeld detection [3].
Some of the data collected in this research was unintended
and is based on anomaly observations and identiﬁcation in the
magnetic ﬁeld while conducting other research in the magnetic
ﬁeld. Initially the study was setup to collect signatures of basic
electrical activity at a distance, in a controlled environment,
when an anomaly occurred nearby, the focus was changed to
gather data on the anomaly. Consequent to the observation
and identiﬁcation of the anomalies, research teams were able
to assist local utilities in the identiﬁcation and repair of power
lines at a distance of approximately 13 miles.
In Section 2, we will describe the testing setup and method-
ology of the original research being conducted. The section
focuses on physical setup, sensor calibration and the data
collection. In Section 3, the paper focuses on the observation of
anomalies, which changed the focus of the original research
and the processing of the data, including visual analysis of
the anomalies over time in comparison to observed activities.
Section 4 primarily focuses on a forensic scrub of previously
collected data in which anomalies were observed and a com-
parison of those anomalies to known events, and in Section 5
we present our conclusions.
II.
THE TESTING
The original setup of the sensor includes RF shielded boxes
to limit interference, ﬁber optic cable, and battery power for
both the computer and all other equipment. The sensors are
calibrated using Helmholtz coils to create a uniform magnetic
ﬁeld, and the data is handled by custom created digital signal
processing software, which displays the entire collection band
and all 6 axes of the sensors on a waterfall display at once.
The software sample rate is adjusted by the band used, and the
software enables record and life Fourier transform and spectral
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. The live signal waterfall collection screen view from the digital
signal processing computers.
density processing as well as audiometric analysis (in the case
where a signal is a suspected audio transmission). More details
of the setup are provided below.
A. The Setup
Routine research was being conducted in an isolated desert
environment to reduce the man-made electromagnetic interfer-
ence. The intent of the research was waveform analysis of radio
signals transmitted at the UHF band from radios transmitted
at ground level from a distance of approximately 15 miles.
The sensors were battery powered magnetic loop antennas
placed on the ground, on a ridge approximately 500 feet in
altitude above the ground level, isolated in radio frequency
shielded boxes, and fed ﬁber optic cabling to reduce the
likelihood of interference. Two battery powered Linux powered
computers dedicated to digital signal processing were located
within a battery powered trailer and used for digital signal
processing to monitor the entire spectrum of frequencies which
the antenna was able to monitor.
B. Sensor Calibration
To ensure the proper calibration of the sensors and software
in the magnetic ﬁeld, a standard two coil Helmholtz coil
was used, spaced apart approximately 3 feet. The coils were
powered by uniform frequency electricity to create a uniform
magnetic ﬁeld between the two coils. The sensor was placed
between the coils while inside the radio frequency shield box,
and calibration adjustments were made to ensure the frequency
of the detected uniform magnetic ﬁeld matched the frequency
of electricity powering the coils. Sensors were calibrated each
day before the tests were conducted [3].
C. Data Collection and Handling
Data collected by the sensors is displayed as shown in
Figure 1. The display shows a live feed from the antennas in
the entire band, with darker colors indicating stronger signals.
The x axis indicates frequency while the y axis is time, with
the current time being at the top of the screen. The darker
lines signify a strong signal detected in the frequency (x axis)
[3]. The system allows for isolate of speciﬁc frequencies and
conversion to wave form via Fast Fourier transform. Darker or
more condensed dark points appear on the screen (typically in
line form) in areas of stronger frequency presence. A strong
radio signal would place a dark line from top to bottom of the
screen in the frequency of the broadcast and for the duration of
the broadcast. Figure 2 illustrates the the setup and placement
of sensors in relation to power lines and transformers for the
duration of the collection. Exact measurements were made
using Google Maps functionality.
Figure 2. The layout and measurement of the original research site including
distances from power lines and transformer boxes that were the source of
the magnetic anomalies.
Figure 3. Waterfall display of frequency density.
III.
ANOMALY OBSERVATION AND POST FOURIER
TRANSFORM ANALYSIS
The anomaly in question was noticed during routine re-
search as shown in Figure 3. The X axis represents frequency
ranging from .1 Hz to 1000 Hz, and Y axis representing time,
with the most recent being at the top of each waterfall. Each
band represents a different axis of the Cube antenna. The center
band (Y2) shows a total disruption of frequencies at the time of
power loss with the top band (Y1) showing a likely spectral
density loss at time of power loss at approximately 60 Hz.
The reduction of spectral density was signiﬁcant enough to
warrant further examination, particularly given that spectral
density from human activity is often detected in the 50 and 60
Hz range [4], and a power reduction or loss at one location
would not necessarily ensure a total loss of frequency detection
on the display. Prior to the power outage, the signal and decibel
level are stable and appear as expected.
A. Visual Analysis of Power Outage
Shortly after the anomalies were noticed in the waterfall
observation screen, a power truck was observed approaching
a power line approximately 13 miles away. Times were noted
and the data was recorded for analysis as the power company
began working to isolate the problem. A post-Fourier transform
analysis of the incident as shown in Figure 4, focusing on
a single frequency, revealed a clear disruption in power and
violent shifts in both amplitude of the signal and frequency.
B. Visual Analysis of First Fix Attempt
An initial attempt by the power company to re-energize the
power lines, similar to a circuit breaker system, appeared to
have some effect for a few seconds, as shown in Figure 5, but
the power almost immediately failed. Power crews continued
working to identify and isolate the problem. Figure 5 also
demonstrates that while the decibel level dropped drastically,
there was still signal to be detected, although it was relatively
unstable.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 4. Wave form and decibel variation after loss of power due to blown
fuse.
Figure 5. Changes in wave form, decibel level and frequency presence
during the ﬁrst attempt to restore power with a blown fuse.
C. Visual Analysis of Fuse Replacement
Research crews monitoring the sensor and anomalies made
contact with the testing range and power crew, and based
on wave form activity and axis location shown in Figures 3
and 4, as well as post-ﬁx attempt activity shown in Figure
5, speculated that it was likely a fuse that needed replacing.
Crews replaced the fuse located in the transformer box ap-
proximately 1.3 miles from the sensor as shown in Figure 2.
The attempt to restore power following the fuse change was
successful as shown in Figure 6. The return to normal decibel
level and frequency matched the frequency and decibel level
of the power line prior to the blown fuse.
IV.
PRIOR DATA COMPARISON
Following the incidental research, a data scrub for com-
parison was conducted that revealed similar results of much
greater magnitude.
A. Wallops Island Launch
On the 20th of November, 2013 research in the magnetic
ﬁeld was being conducted on Wallops Island against a known
launch of a Minotaur I rocket from Wallops Island, VA. Once
sensor was located approximately 4 miles from the launch site,
while the second was located 50 miles from the launch site.
Collection from the site located 50 miles away was intermittent
and not saved as it was unreliable at best, while data collection
at the 4 mile location was remarkably clear and is displayed
in Figure 7 with an offset of 16 seconds from actual launch,
with times aligning with actual recorded times with a uniform
offset of 16 seconds. The bulk of the detections appear between
Figure 6. Frequency and decibel level normalize after restoration of power
following a fuse change. The change is also depicted on the waterfall.
Figure 7. Waterfall image of the 2013 Wallops Island launch of a Minotaur I
on the 20th of November.
46 and 140 Hz. Detections of the ﬂight were made slightly
beyond 3rd stage ignition which would place the rocket at
approximately 120 Km above the surface of the earth and 170
Km in linear distance away from the launch site.
It was originally assumed that the detections were likely
emissions from rocket but following the analysis of the data
of the power outage, a further review was conducted. To
ensure the frequencies detected were not radio or computer
hardware and no hardware or electronics were found to match
frequencies of detection as shown in Figure 8. Given the
frequency of detection compared to the frequencies used in
Figure 8, it is possible the signals detected were the result
electromagnetic ﬁeld induction by the rocket passing through
the earths magnetic ﬁeld.
V.
CONCLUSION
Previous research documented the apparent ability of mag-
netic ﬁelds associated with a radio frequency broadcast to
penetrate a Faraday cage [3], while the associated radio
frequency remained undetectable. The previous conclusion
warranted further research into the propagation of magnetic
ﬁelds. The results of this inadvertent study serve to validate
the original premise that magnetic ﬁelds appear to behave
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 8. Table 4-12 from the Minotaur I users guide, showing operating,
radio and telemetry frequencies during the use of the Minotaur I [5]
differently than their electrical ﬁeld partners and that further
research is warranted.
Speciﬁcally in this case, waveform and spectral density
coupled with visual isolation were adequate to remotely
classify or ”remotely sense” electrical activity. To further
research the viability of this phenomena and its applicability
in the ﬁeld of remote sensing, research should move to blind
testing methods, as well as electromagnetically challenging
environments. Further research should also include duplication
of this event in varying electromagnetic environments to test
against algorithms for detection when compared to similar but
intentional disruptive events. Results may serve to determine
if a difference in a blown fuse and induced events such as a
light switch can be determined amongst the varying levels of
environmental noise.
Finally, if validated, the potential for characterization of
space launches by electromagnetic ﬁeld detection via magnetic
loop antennas offers yet another axis of data collection in
the ﬁeld of remote sensing of human activity and potentially
in electronic activity classiﬁcation. The potential has a wide
variety of public safety applications, such as alternative and
supplementary geo-location of aircraft travel, including po-
tentially those who have lost power in emergency situations
resulting in a loss of radio and transponder broadcast.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Christopher would like to thank like to thank the public
school system for inspiring him to do better.
The authors collectively would like to thank the College of
Science, the Department of Computational and Data Sciences
and our fans.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Reebs, “Misaligned by Power Lines.” Natural History 118, no. 5 (June
1, 2009): 14. http://search.proquest.com/docview/210652836/ retrieved:
September, 2020
[2]
V. L. Feigin et al., “Geomagnetic Storms Can Trigger Stroke: Evidence
from 6 Large Population-Based Studies in Europe and Australasia,”
Stroke 45, no. 6, June 2014, pp. 1639–1645
[3]
C. Duncan, O. Gkountouna, and R. Mahabir, ”Theoretical Application
of Magnetic Fields at Tremendously Low Frequency in Remote Sensing
and Electronic Activity Classiﬁcation”, Advances in Computer Vision
and Computational Biology, 2020, pp 308-312
[4]
Z. Nieckarz, Imprints of Natural Phenomena and Human Activity Ob-
served During 10 Years of ELF Magnetic Measurements at the Hylaty
Geophysical Station in Poland. Acta Geophysica, 64(6), pp. 2591–2608.
https://doi.org/10.1515/acgeo-2016-0101 retrieved: September, 2020
[5]
Orbital Sciences. Minotaur Users Guide. Minotaur Users Guide, US Air
Force, 2002.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

