Underwater Oil Spill Imaging via UV LED-induced Fluorescence  
 
Sangwoo Oh, Moonjin Lee  
Maritime Safety Research Division 
Korea Research Institute of Ships and Ocean Engineering (KRISO) 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: swoh@kriso.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract—In this research, we describe the concept of 
underwater oil spill imaging technology based on the UV-
induced fluorescence. This imaging system is composed of 
the ultraviolet LED (Light Emitting Diode) lights and the 
CCD (Charge-Coupled Device) image sensor. For the 
identification of the proposed imaging system, we conducted 
the lab-scale validation tests to classify the difference 
between the oil samples and the background. For the 
comparison between oil samples and seawater, we analyzed 
the images acquired from tests which were performed in 
different conditions. Through these tests, we can visualize 
the shape of underwater oil and also distinguish the oil 
samples from seawater. From this experiment using the 
proposed setup, we can confirm the possibility of this system 
for the underwater oil spill imaging system by UV LED-
induced fluorescence. 
Keywords-Underwater oil; Oil spill imaging; UV LED; 
Fluorescence 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Oil spill incidents occur frequently at the sea, despite 
various efforts to reduce the oil spill from ships and 
underwater oilfield facilities. Spilt oil is very harmful for 
every organism in the ocean. For the reduction of oil 
spread on the ocean, rapid monitoring and exact analysis 
of oil spill are considerably essential.  
Until now, a number of in-situ oil spill monitoring 
systems have been developed and some of them have been 
realized [1][2]. They can be largely divided into two parts 
by means of sensing mechanism. The first one is the 
sensor which uses the fluorescence method by UV 
(Ultraviolet) excitation [3] and another is the sensors using 
electrical capacitance detection by RF signals [4]. Theses 
sensors have the functions to analyze their components 
down to the ppb level. However, these sensors cannot get 
the image of underwater oil scene, but only detect the 
presence of oil in the seawater.  
In the first step of oil spill accident, oil normally exists 
on the surface of seawater. But as time goes on, oil 
frequently forms the ball shape, so-called tar ball, and it 
goes down from sea surface. So, to identify the underwater 
oil spill like tar ball oil, it is essential to use the 
visualization tool for the identification of the underwater 
oil.  In the case of oil spill from underwater oilfield facility, 
such as oil leak, the monitoring of underwater oil status is 
necessary for the prevention of it.  
To achieve the visualization of the underwater oil spill, 
we propose a novel underwater oil imaging system which 
is based on the fluorescence phenomenon. This system is 
composed of the UV-LED (Light Emitting Diode) lights 
and the CCD (Charge-Coupled Device) image sensor. For 
the monitoring of the aquatic organism such as 
phytoplankton and coral reef, there are some researches 
which are related to the multispectral imagery in the sea   
[5][6]. However, in the case of underwater oil spill 
monitoring, there are a few studies. 
In this research, we describe the novel underwater oil 
imaging system and an initial experiment to acquire the 
underwater oil image. 
II. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
A. Underwater oil spill imaging system 
The underwater oil spill imaging system which is 
proposed in the research, is composed of the CCD image 
sensor (Basler scA1000-30gm) and UV-LED lights. In 
general, oils which consist of hydrocarbon compounds are 
excited by ultraviolet wavelengths (300-400 nm) and 
fluoresce in the visible wavelength range from 400-600 
nm. The function of UV-LED lights is to excite the 
fluorescence of underwater oil. In this research the CCD 
image sensor is used to capture the fluorescence image of 
underwater oil. The CCD image sensor has a spectral 
range of 400 nm to 900 nm. For filtering the emission of 
reflected light from the underwater oil, we used the lens-
type emission filter. The cutoff bandwidth of it is 400 nm. 
Most reflected light of fluorescent oil have the wavelength 
above 400 nm wavelength, so we used the emission filter 
having the cutoff wavelength of 400 nm. The numerical 
aperture of lens adapted to the CCD image sensor is 2.8.  
B. Experiment 
At the final development step of proposed imaging 
system, the water-proof housing is necessary. However, 
because the purpose of this experiment is to verify the 
sensing methodology which is newly suggested in this 
setup, we simplify the experiment condition. Figure 1 
shows the experimental setup for the verification of the oil 
fluorescence by the proposed underwater imaging system. 
In this experiment, we used the bunker C oil samples  
For the excitation of oils, we blocked the external 
lights (sunlight and artificial light) by a black box and only 
the UV LEDs can illuminate the oil samples.  
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
Figure 1. Experimental setup to identify the underwater oil spill imaging 
using UV LED-induced Fluorescence. 
Three oil samples were contained in the cylindrical 
shape reservoir and the size of it is 3 mm (diameter) x 5 
mm (height). This reservoir is made by polyethylene and it 
is transparent for the UV lights and visible lights. The 
reservoirs were put on the bottom of small scale basin 
which is filled with seawater. 
In this research, we positioned the UV LED lights at 
the same position with CCD image sensor (see Figure 1), 
and captured the image of the fluorescent oil samples by 
the CCD image sensor. (see Figure 2).  
For the quantification between oil samples and 
seawater, we analyzed the spectrum profile of captured 
images. Through it, we can see that the similarity level in 
this experiment is 92%. This analysis was performed in the 
total pixels of acquired image. These calculations of 
quantification process were performed by the verified 
image processing algorithm using MATLAB image 
process module.  
From the processed result of the experiment, we can 
instinctively recognize the difference between the bunker 
C oil samples and seawater.   
III. 
RESULT AND DISCUSSION 
In this research, we describe the novel underwater oil 
imaging system and an initial experiment to get the 
underwater oil image. For the verification of the proposed 
underwater oil imaging system, we conducted the lab scale 
experiments to identify the difference between oil samples 
and seawater.  
For the quantification between oil samples and 
seawater, we analyzed the spectrum profile of captured 
images. Through it, we can instinctively recognize the 
difference between the bunker C oil samples and seawater. 
From this experiment, we can confirm the possibility of 
this system for the underwater oil spill imaging system by 
UV LED-induced fluorescence. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Fluorescent oil imageries acquired by CCD image sensor in the 
experiments (processed by MATLAB).  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this research, a novel underwater oil imaging system 
was suggested. The basic performance of the proposed 
system was identified by conducting the lab scale 
experiment using bunker C oil and seawater. From the 
result of this experiment we can instinctively recognize the 
difference between the bunker C oil samples and seawater. 
Although this experiment is on the first step among the 
whole development process, if we do some more 
development, we can expect that this suggested system can 
be applied to the underwater oil spill imaging system in 
real site.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Korea Research 
Institute of Ships and Ocean Engineering (KRISO) 
Endowment-Grant (PES1870). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. MacLean, C. Moran, W. Johnstone, B. Culshaw, D. Marsh and 
P. Parker, “Detection of hydrocarbon fuel spills using a distributed 
fibre optic sensor,” Sensors and Actuators A, vol. 109, 2003, pp. 
60–67. 
[2] 
G. Griffiths, “Review of oceanographic equipment and sensors for 
the detection and measurement of pollutants,” Southhampton 
Oceanography Center Research and Consultancy Report, 2005, no. 
99, pp. 1-24. 
[3] 
C. Henry and P.O. Roberts, “Background fluorescence values and 
matrix effects observed using smart protocols in the Atlantic 
Ocean and Gulf of Mexico,” International Oil Spill Conference, 
2001, pp. 1203-1207. 
[4] 
J. Andrews, “Automated marine oil spill detection system 
development update,” Marine Environmental Update, US Navy 
SPARWAR Systems Centre, 1997, vol. 97, no. 1, pp. 1-10.  
[5] 
A. C. R. Gleason, R. P. Reid and K. J. Voss, “Automated 
classification of underwater multispectral imagery for coral reef 
monitoring,” Oceans 2007, Vancouver, 2007, pp. 1-8. 
[6] 
D.G. Zawada, “Image processing of underwater multispectral 
imagery,” IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, 2003, vol. 28, no. 
4, pp. 583-594.  
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

