A Preventing Schema to Determinate Structural Damage in Buildings Caused by 
Earthquakes Using a Platform Based in Wireless Sensor Networks 
Laura M. Rodríguez Peralta, Eduardo Ismael-
Hernández, Roberto López Caso, Lorna V. Rosas 
Téllez, Edna P. Santiago Vargas 
Engineering Department 
Universidad Popular Autónoma del Estado de Puebla - 
UPAEP 
Puebla, México 
e-mail: lauramargarita.rodriguez01@upaep.mx, 
eduardo.ismael@upaep.mx, 
roberto.lopez02@upaep.edu.mx, 
lornaveronica.rosas@upaep.mx, 
ednapatricia.santiago@upaep.edu.mx  
Christian Pérez Aguilar 
Faculty of Electronics,  
Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla –  
BUAP  
Puebla, México 
e-mail: cbpa9@msn.com 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a proposal to develop and 
implement analytical and technology tools for estimating the 
level of vulnerability of existing buildings. The proposed 
platform includes the design and implementation of a 
comprehensive structural monitoring platform based on 
wireless sensor networks. This platform is a low cost 
instrument capable of providing the necessary information to 
implement methods of response analysis and consequently 
improve structural damage detection. With the development of 
the system, we will be able to obtain practical criteria and 
automated functions, in order to estimate seismic structural 
vulnerability of existing buildings in a preventive way.  
Keywords-structural vulnerability; seismic events; wireless 
sensor networks; acceleration sensors.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Considering the negative impact of earthquakes on 
society (loss of life and property), the importance of 
mitigating the risk associated with this phenomenon is 
recognized around the world. A strategy for reducing the risk 
of earthquakes involves buildings that can withstand the 
effects of the earthquakes [1]. To reduce the consequences or 
the amount of damage caused by these events, earthquake 
engineering provides criteria, methods, and tools for 
structural designs of such infrastructure. Additionally, 
earthquake engineering includes testing, maintenance, and 
reinforcement on existing buildings. The margins of 
uncertainty that affect our ability to predict and characterize 
seismic intensity level are very high. This uncertainty affects 
our understanding of the relationship between the actual 
properties of the constructions (gravitational loads, stiffness 
and mechanical properties of the structure), and the assumed 
values in the structural design process. The above forces deal 
rigorously with these concepts within a framework based on 
probability analysis applied to seismic risk estimation. 
New buildings are generally designed and built following 
the aforementioned design criteria. However, for existing 
buildings there are several factors that can affect their 
performance against seismic events, namely: the age of the 
building, the absence of a structural maintenance program, 
the presence of damage due to past earthquakes, among 
others. 
Therefore, the development and implementation of 
methods and tools for the structural vulnerability assessment 
can be considered as useful strategy to reduce the costs 
associated with losses in existing buildings due to 
earthquakes [2]. For this purpose, methods for damage 
detection and structural monitoring systems based on sensors 
have been proposed and developed recently. These systems 
have been focused mainly on structural health monitoring of 
bridges, tall buildings, dams and critical infrastructure [3]. 
Most of these systems use wired sensors instead of wireless 
sensors; this can hinder their deployment, especially in 
historical buildings. Another identified problem is related to 
the difficulty for end users to interpret and analyze 
information obtained from monitoring. In addition, the 
investment required to implement and operate these systems 
in most cases is very high, which limits their use to smaller 
buildings and public buildings such as hospitals, school 
buildings, etc. In developing countries, it is very difficult to 
implement these types of systems because of their cost. For 
this reason, it is important to develop low-cost monitoring 
systems in order to estimate the structural vulnerability and 
deploy them on buildings such as schools, hospitals, among 
others. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II includes a 
descriptions of related work. Section III presents the SAVER 
Web-based monitoring platform and a detailed description of 
the structural vulnerability module. Section IV briefly 
presents the SAVER sensor node. Section V presents the 
modeling and deployment of an application example of the 
SAVER project. Finally, section VI provides some 
conclusions and future work perspectives. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) systems are 
emerging tools to help engineers improve the safety and 
maintainability of critical and conventional structures. SHM 
combines a variety of sensing technologies with an 
embedded measurement controller to capture, log, and 
analyze real-time data. SHM systems are designed to reliably 
monitor and test the health and performance of structures. 
Most of the existing solutions of SHM systems around the 
world 
employ 
movement-sensing 
devices, 
like 
accelerometers, but the majority studies use wired networks. 
In addition, most of them are used for detecting only one 
parameter correlated with the damage level and this is 
typically the inter-story drift. This parameter is enough to 
evaluate the performance given the occurrence of an 
earthquake; it means that is useful for evaluating the post-
earthquake condition. But the problem arises when we need 
to evaluate the performance or vulnerability condition before 
an earthquake. In this case we need more information and the 
drift is not enough, because we also need to generate a model 
and obtaining the non-linear response for the structural 
system. 
On the other hand, in the literature we can find some 
studies that apply to Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) for 
structural health monitoring. Among these, we find the work 
of Kim [4]. In this project, Mica2 motes [5] are used to 
determine the structural health of the Golden Gate Bridge 
located in San Francisco CA. Other works are focused on the 
structural health monitoring of offshore wind turbines [6]. 
However, most studies are oriented to the monitoring of 
large structures, i.e., bridges [7][8], dams, etc. This allows us 
to claim that currently there are few efforts to monitor and 
determine 
the 
structural 
vulnerability 
of 
buildings. 
Furthermore, many of the existing systems are focused on 
determining the health status of the buildings during an 
earthquake event with considerable intensity.These systems 
are very useful for a post-seismic evaluation conditions, 
security and stability. Given the great advantages of having a 
structural monitoring system to determine some dynamic 
properties that have strong correlation with the structural 
responses, it is necessary to make efforts for the development 
of such systems. 
The use of WSNs have brought several advantages in 
structural monitoring and the establishment of structural 
health compared to conventional methods where computers 
connected to accelerometers are used. In conventional 
methods, it is necessary to install cables through the 
structure; disturbing its normal operation and generating 
maintenance cost. Other disadvantages are low efficiency, 
high cost, inflexibility and disturbance.  Another problem is 
the high equipment and wiring installation and maintenance 
cost. Compared with conventional methods, WSNs provide 
the same functionality at a much lower price and more 
flexible monitoring. Other advantages are high efficiency, 
flexibility, reliability, and scalability. WSNs are not easy to 
be disturbed by operation equipment and can facilitate 
efficient distributed data processing and real time damage 
detection [8].  
The cost of a conventional system with a computer and a 
force-balanced accelerometer is about USD 20000 per 
sampling point. The estimated cost of the proposed system, 
in this work is less than USD 200 per point. In WSNs, no 
wiring is required; making installation and maintenance 
much easier and inexpensive. More so, the use of WSNs 
allows SAVER platform to be deployed and operate even if 
the building is in operation. It does not cause further visual 
impact due to its small size, low power consumption, and 
installation flexibility. The advantage of structural health 
monitoring based on WSNs can be extended if the Micro-
Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) acceleration sensor 
type is used. The MEMS accelerometer is a silicon chip, 
which is very compact in size, low power consumption, and 
cheap. Without MEMS, a small WSN, even low-power and 
low-cost accelerometer, would be degraded. 
Thus, the Structural Analysis of Vulnerabilities of 
Buildings through Wireless Sensor Networks (SAVER) 
project aims at gathering information to establish the 
structural vulnerability level of buildings. Such information 
will be used in decision making for two schemes: prevention 
programs, and post-seismic evaluation. As mentioned before, 
knowing the structural vulnerability or seismic risk level of a 
specific building could be useful for the owner, because he 
or she can implement retrofit strategies on the building in 
order to recover its structural health condition and avoiding 
possible collapse, structural damage or injuries from users in 
case of a future earthquake. 
The SAVER platform will be able to monitor and display 
information in real-time. It will determine, from the 
implementation of several methods, for estimating seismic 
response and damage detection, the level of structural 
vulnerability of buildings. A complete description of 
SAVER project’s architecture can be found in [9]. 
III. 
WEB BASED WSN MONITORING PLATFORM 
In addition, our platform will offer several services that 
will notify users about potential risks of the structure through 
alarms, email and SMS. Besides, it will have a Web based 
monitoring platform and a mobile app for Android and IOS. 
Also, this platform will generate graphs, reports and 
statistics. Some preliminary results of the SAVER project 
was published in [9]. 
The SAVER Web-based platform provides a building’s 
structural vulnerability analysis, of the different sensors 
inside each building. These reports provide information like 
the power supply and the time capture of each parameter 
[10]. 
The preliminary results of the SAVER project are 
presented in this section. These results principally involve 
the assembly, setup and configuration of a wireless sensor 
network including the sensor node. 
The details of the results obtained so far are described in 
the following sections. 
A. Database description 
For proper operation, nine main tables are handled, 
which have the necessary information to control the sensors 
parameters: 
Building, 
Sensor 
Acceleration, 
Sensor 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TempHum, Node, Cluster, Seism, Acceleration Amplitude, 
User and Scenarios.  
For each building, we store its structure information, its 
features, its location, as well as the location of the nodes 
inside it. Also we store data of clusters, where a cluster is 
composed by a set of nodes. It is important to note that a 
building can be cover by one or more clusters. Each node 
contains four kinds of sensors: one of them is an 
Acceleration Sensor which records three-axial acceleration 
movement 
(longitudinal, 
transversal 
and 
vertical), 
Temperature, Humidity Sensors that record the ambient 
temperature and humidity, respectively, and a GPS sensor. 
This data is used to establish when an earthquake occurs 
by overcoming the condition of an acceleration threshold and 
after this happens; we store the date, time, maximum 
amplitude, and the acceleration and frequency amplitude for 
each axis. All of these are used to calculate the Fourier 
spectrum in terms of frequency (Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Flow of the process. 
The description of the tables is detailed as following: 
 
● 
SensorAcceleration: It stores the longitudinal, 
transversal and vertical records from Acceleration 
Sensor. 
● 
Sensor TempHum: It stores the temperature and 
humidity that occurs in the environment at a 
specific time. 
● 
Node: It stores the ID of each node, as well as the 
Acceleration Sensor ID, the Temperature and 
Humidity Sensor ID, the cluster where the node 
belongs and the localization where the node is 
placed on the building. 
● 
Cluster: Here, the cluster ID and its location are 
stored. 
● 
Building: Here we can store the building´s 
geometry, blueprint per floor in which is showed 
the location of each node, name, use, address, state, 
country, 
latitude, 
longitude, 
topography, 
foundation type, building support type of “x” and 
“y” axis. 
● 
Acceleration 
Amplitude: 
It 
contains 
many 
acceleration amplitudes and Fourier spectrum of 
the records. 
● 
User: It stores the username, password, type of 
user, name, last name, telephone and email of the 
system users. 
● 
Scenarios: It stores pictures of the building, floor 
and room where the sensors are placed. 
 
The SAVER database design is shown in Figure 2. 
 
The “Home” section includes a brief description of the 
project, while the “Building” section is able to display the 
plans and basic information of each building (Figure 3). The 
WSN section shows the topology of the network, including 
its description and real-time location of each sensor inside 
the building. The Structural Vulnerability System (SVS) 
section will provide the generation of vulnerability reports, 
in order to consult the building’s structural health and 
establish its possible rehabilitation strategies. As an example, 
Figure 4 shows the graphs of the longitudinal, transverse and 
vertical ambient vibration records captured each 0.005 
seconds at UPAEP High School. 
B. Structural Vulnerability module 
To evaluate the structural vulnerability we can use a 
diagram as the shown in Figure 5. This procedure was 
originally proposed by Rodríguez Peralta et al. [9] and shows 
the process to establish the structural vulnerability level. This 
level will be associated with a structural damage parameter, 
u. In structural engineering is very well known that damage 
level can be estimated using a function defined as: 
 
                               d(u) = 1− exp(−aum )                             (1) 
 
In this equation, a and m are parameters to be determined 
according with the structural system features (for example if 
the structural system includes frames, walls or a combination 
of this sub-systems); u is the local deformation of interest, 
normalized with respect to its peak value at failure (total 
loss). The damage function for the structural system is 
obtained as function of the corresponding inter-story 
distortion (drift). In this way, the parameter u is related to the 
lateral displacement. The damage function is continuous, for 
that reason the damage levels are given by an interval of 
values. The advantage of our approach is that the lateral 
displacement u can be determined considering two criteria: 
1) using actual seismic records (as similar existing systems 
work for giving a post-event structural health condition); and 
2) using ambient vibration records (that it is the novelty in 
this project). For that reason, in this paper we focus on the 
second criterion, details for the former can be found in [9].
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 2.  SAVER Database schema. 
The second approach, based on ambient vibration 
records, can be used to perform modal analysis and generates 
simplified structural models. These models are necessary for 
carry out the non-linear analysis and getting the parameter u.  
The approach considers several steps, which are described in 
the follow (Figure 5). i) First, it is necessary to synchronize 
the signals with a common time reference and carry out the 
polarization procedure according to the sensor´s orientation 
and the reference system. ii) The baseline correction of the 
original records also is needed. iii) In order to eliminate the 
undesirable components of frequency a signal filtering 
procedure is recommended for this, we can use a 
Butterworth filter. iv) For the ambient vibration records, 
previously corrected in three directions, we can apply the 
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), in order to obtain the 
Amplitude Fourier Spectra. v) With this information 
(Amplitude Fourier Spectra) we can estimate the transfer 
functions, as well as the vibration periods and modal shapes 
(modal analysis). vi) The vibration period and the modal 
shapes can be used for generating a Simplified Reference 
System (SRS) using the criteria proposed by Ismael-
Hernández et al. [11]. The SRS has dynamic properties that 
represent the behavior of the building, however, it is 
necessary to introduce the corresponding transform response 
factors. These factors are also defined in [11]. In order to 
obtain the non-linear response of the SRS, in terms of lateral 
displacement, an adequate hysteresis model will be adopted. 
vii) The non-linear responses can be related with a specified 
seismic scenario, in this step the accelerogram (actual or 
synthetic) is defined. viii) The non-linear response analysis 
on the SRS is carried out and the parameter u is estimated. 
ix) The damage function, given by Equation 1, is evaluated 
considering the u value.  x) Finally, the damage level is 
established and classified. It is important to mention that we 
can use the second approach to verify the structural health 
condition for future seismic scenarios, thus SAVER project 
aims to evaluate the vulnerability previous the occurrence of 
an earthquake. So far, no similar system with this capability 
exists. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Section “Building”. 
 
Figure 4.  Section “SVS”. 
IV. 
SAVER SENSOR NODE 
The sensor node is responsible for the acquisition and 
transmission of data for further analysis and interpretation. 
The node gets Acceleration (vibration) in the three axes (X, 
Y and Z) from the surface where the node is mounted. 
The measurement signals are sent to a Microcontroller 
where they are processed. This is in order to interpret and to 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

make necessary adjustments to the data. Then, the data is 
sent via radio-frequency devices to other sensor nodes.  
The data acquired for the sensor is 12 bits information 
that include acceleration in 3 axes and internal temperature. 
A. Prototype  
The SAVER prototype consists of an Arduino UNO 
micro-controller that is attached with a Xbee shield. The Uno 
is a microcontroller board based on the ATmega328P. It has 
14 digital input/output pins, 6 analog inputs, a USB 
connection, a power jack, an ICSP header and a reset button 
[12]. The micro-controller is attached with a Pololu module 
that contains a LSM303D accelerometer, voltage regulator, 
and a temperature sensor. The radio is a Xbee pro S2B 
operating in 2.4GHz [13], based on the range regulated by 
NOM-121-SCT1-2009 
in 
the 
Mexican 
territory. 
To 
communicate with the sensor, we use SPI and Zigbee 
protocol. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Activities diagram to evaluate the Structural Vulnerability 
Level. 
The LSM303D is a 3D digital linear acceleration sensor 
and a 3D digital magnetic sensor. The LSM303D includes an 
I2C serial bus interface that supports 100 kHz and 400 kHz 
in SPI serial standard interface. The measurement ranges are 
± 2, 4, 6, 8, 16 g, for SAVER node the specific range is ±2g 
with a sensitivity of 0.061 mg/LSB. The energy demand of 
the LSM303D is 300 µA with a linear acceleration 
sensitivity change consumption vs. temperature of ±0.01% 
ºC tested based on 25ºC. The module has two advantages for 
the node. The first is the internal temperature sensor that 
gives the information every period of time and the second is 
the self-test option. When self-test is activated, the device 
output level is given by the algebraic sum of the signals 
produced by the acceleration acting on the sensor and by the 
electrostatic test-force [14]. The frequency programmed for 
the sensor is 100 samples per second according to seismic 
requirements. 
In Figure 6, the final prototype is shown and includes one 
accelerometer and a temperature/humidity sensor. 
The node was tested via PYTHON interface to log the 
collected data in a .txt file and to graph the force applied to 
each axis. With a baud rate of 9600 bauds-per-second (bps), 
the Arduino board acquires data in binary and then processes 
it to transform in g data.  The resolution used was ±2 g with 
and Analog-Digital Converter (ADC) of 16 bits, meaning it 
is expected a number within ±32,767, which are max/min 
absolute values of the sensor. Figure 7 shows the PYTHON 
interface and the acquired data. 
 
Figure 6.  Final prototype of SAVER sensor node. 
 
Figure 7.  PYTHON Interface and Acquired Data from SAVER Sensor 
node. 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Free Digi software, XCTU [15] is used to configure the 
radio devices.  
In the test presented herein, devices are in factory defaults. 
The working cluster is presented in Figure 8. 
Figure 9 shows the data obtained in each of the elements 
of the network. Data is observed using the serial monitor 
Arduino IDE. LSM303D accelerometers are connected to the 
End 
Devices. 
Those 
components 
obtain 
values 
corresponding to the X, Y, Z axes. Window COM4 shows 
the data obtained from an end device. This data is sent to the 
router (window COM6), which will forward it to the 
coordinator. Due to the coordinator is set in API mode, 
values obtained for it are represented in hexadecimal format. 
They are displayed in the window COM8. Ech column 
contains data of X, Y, Z axis respectively, and the Router 
address. 
V. 
WSN DEPLOYMENT IN A BUILDING 
The expected results, in SAVER project, intend to give the 
basis for the analysis of buildings and gather instrumental 
data that can provide the necessary information to implement 
methods of vulnerability analysis and therefore, to estimate 
the seismic risk of buildings, such as hospitals or schools.  
 
Figure 8.  Data from the Coordinator, Router and End Device (Sensor 
Node) displayed on the Serial Monitor Software Arduino IDE. 
 
Figure 9.  Cluster including: 1 Coordinator, 1 Router and 4 Sensor Nodes. 
SAVER project will be validated in the building T that is 
located in the Central Campus of UPAEP University, Puebla 
City Mexico, and was built in 2007. The plan of the building 
has a rectangular geometry with dimensions 24 x 35 m. The 
building has six levels with a height of 3.15 m each one; the 
total height is around 19 m. The building does not have 
regular configuration in plan and elevation; because it 
presents openings and overturning along its height. The use 
of the building is mixed, there are two restaurants, twelve 
lecture rooms, a computer room, three meeting rooms, and 
several office areas and twelve classrooms. The structural 
system is based on steel resisting-moment frames (columns 
and beams). Some columns have circular cross sections and 
the other have squared cross section. The beams are based on 
W standard shapes. The floor systems are based on thin 
composite steel-concrete with 0.12 m thickness. The non-
structural elements (internal walls) are based on drywalls 
with 0.10 m thickness. The external walls are based on 
masonry with 0.15 m thickness. The predominant material 
on the facade is glass. Figure 10 shows a view of the WSN in 
building T. 
 
Figure 10.  Lateral view of the WSN in the building T. 
Ambient vibration records in three points were obtained on 
the building, P01 and P02, which correspond to the 
geometric centroid and the corner at the roof of the building, 
respectively; P03 corresponds to the geometric centroid at 
the ground floor of the building. For each point four records 
were taken considering 15 minutes. A tri-axial forced 
balanced accelerometer (Kinemetrics Basalt Accelerometer) 
was used as an instrument for obtaining the records (Figure 
11). In this stage of our study we only present the modal 
analysis using the Basalt Accelerometer, we are working to 
implement our sensors in order to present a comparison 
between them. 
The procedure for modal analysis presented in Figure 11 is 
summarized in the following lines. Frequencies and periods 
were determined for the first three modes: longitudinal (L), 
transversal (T) and rotational (R). For this, a computer 
program GEOPSY [16] was used in order to obtain the 
Amplitude Fourier Spectrum (AFS) for each record, in this 
way, the horizontal components of the movement 
(longitudinal and transversal) are only considered for 
computing the spectral ratios. The procedure for each of the 
mode is described below. Longitudinal mode (L), the 
numerator corresponds to the AFS in the longitudinal 
component obtained in the geometrical centroid at the roof 
level, and the denominator corresponds to the AFS in the 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

longitudinal component obtained in the geometrical centroid 
at the ground floor. A similar procedure was used for 
transversal and rotational modes. 
 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
2
4
6
8
10
Spectral Ratio
Frequency [Hz]
Quotient P1/P8 Longitudinal channel
 
a) 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
Spectral Ratio
Frequency [Hz]
Quotiente P1/P8 Transverse channel 
 
b) 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
0
2
4
6
8
10
Spectral Ratio
Frequency [Hz]
Quotient P2/P1 Longitudinal channel (Rotation)
 
c) 
Figure 11.   Spectral ratios estimated for the building using ambient 
vibration and a forced balanced accelerometer; a) Longitudinal mode, b) 
Transversal mode, and c) Rotational mode. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
This 
paper 
presented 
the 
SAVER 
project. 
This 
multidisciplinary project proposes a monitoring platform that 
aims at estimating the structural vulnerability and 
preliminary seismic risk level of buildings through wireless 
sensor networks. This platform will offer a low-cost 
technology for monitoring and determining the structural 
health of buildings. The preliminary results of SAVER 
project, that have been obtained so far, were presented. In 
particular, (i) the SAVER architecture, (ii) the sensor node, 
(iii) Web platform, and (iv) the structural vulnerabilities 
analyzer module. This project provides two main advantages 
comparing to commercial solutions: (i) a low-cost, not 
intrusive, and flexible monitoring system, and (ii) a platform 
to estimate the structural vulnerability and risk level. This 
has paramount importance since this platform will provide 
useful tools and information to increase knowledge and 
reduce uncertainty about the buildings’ performance and 
behavior to seismic events. Thus, with this platform we can 
mitigate seismic risk in buildings.  
Finally, the following steps (in short-term) of this research 
that are intended to carry out are: 
• 
Test mBed boards to compare manageability with 
the sensors. 
• 
Compare and implement different accelerometers 
sensors and test humidity in locations where 
SAVER nodes will be located. 
• 
Implement SAVER sensor network and test under 
worst-case scenario conditions. 
• 
In relation to the Structural Vulnerabilities 
Analyzer module is intended to extend its 
functionality and implement the transfer functions 
between the sensor nodes. Likewise, we intend to 
implement 
the 
remaining 
modules 
SAVER 
platform. Develop and implement the models using 
simplified reference systems. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to express my special thanks of gratitude to 
Alejandro E. Jarero Mora, Fernando Coyopol, who have 
collaborated in the SAVER Project. We also appreciate the 
support given by Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología 
(CONACyT-FOINS) through the project number 249071. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
L. Esteva, “Basis for the formulation of seismic design criteria”, (In 
Spanish), Publication 182, Institute of Engineering, National 
University of Mexico, 1968. 
[2] 
E. Ismael-Hernández, D. I. Mora-Pino, A. Herrera-Bautista, J. A. 
Herrera-Hernández, M. A. Spíndola-Palacios, and M. Abhinava-
Krishna, “Structural reliability for school buildings in seismic regions 
of Mexico using ambient vibration”, Proc. 50 SE-EEE, International 
Conference on Earthquake Engineering, Skopje, Macedonia, Paper ID 
200, 8 pages, 2013. 
[3] 
S. Ivanovic, M. Trifunac and M. Torovska, “Ambient vibration test of 
structures - a review”, ISET Journal of Earthquake Technology 
37:407, 37:4, pp. 165-197, 2000. 
[4] 
S. Kim, “Wireless Sensor Networks for Structural Health 
Monitoring”, Master of Science in Computer Science, University of 
California at Berkeley, Department of Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Sciences, 2005. 
[5] 
UC Berkeley, “Hardware Designs”, [retrieved: July, 2016], from 
http://www.tinyos.net/scoop/special/hardware 
[6] 
Ping Wang, Yan Yan, Gui Yun Tian, Omar Bouzid, and Zhiguo Ding, 
“Investigation of Wireless Sensor Networks for Structural Health 
Monitoring,” Journal of Sensors, vol. 2012, Article ID 156329, 7 
pages, 2012. doi:10.1155/2012/156329. 
[7] 
K. C. Jeongyeup Paek, “A Wireless Sensor Network for Structural 
Health Monitoring: Performance and Experience”, Embedded 
Networked Sensors, EmNetS-II, The Second IEEE Workshop on on 
Embedded Networked Sensors, pp. 1-10, Sydney, Australia, 2005. 
[8] 
Guang-Dong Zhou and Ting-Hua Yi, “Recent Developments on 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Nerworks 
Technology 
for 
Bridge 
Health 
Monitoring”, Mathematical problems in Engineering, V. 2013, article 
ID 947867, Hindawi Publishing Corporation, 2013. 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[9] 
L. M. Rodríguez Peralta, E. Ismael Hernández, S. A. Cardeña 
Moreno, D. Martínez Jiménez, and A. E. Muñoz Guarneros, 
“Towards to a platform of monitoring based in WSN to estimate the 
structural health of buildings”, Second European Conference on 
Earthquake Engineering and Seismology (2ECEES), Istanbul, 
Turkey, August, 2014, pp. 24-29. 
[10] Structural Analysis of VulnerabilitiEs of buildings through wiReless 
sensor networks – SAVER, [retrieved: July, 2016], http://saver-
buildings.com/ 
[11] E. Ismael-Hernández, O. Díaz-López and L. Esteva, “Seismic 
vulnerability analysis for optimum design of multistory reinforced 
concrete buildings”, Proc. 13th World Conference on Earthquake 
Engineering, Vancouver, Canada. Paper 514. August, 2004. 
[12] Arduino 
UNO, 
[retrieved: 
July, 
2016], 
https://www.arduino.cc/en/Main/ArduinoBoardUno. 
[13] XBee®/XBee-PRO® ZB RF Modules, Digi International Inc., 
[retrieved: 
July, 
2016], 
https://www.adafruit.com/datasheets/XBee%20ZB%20User%20Man
ual.pdf 
[14] STMicroelectronics, “LSM303D, Ultra-compact high-performance 
eCompass module: 3D accelerometer and 3D magnetometer”, 
[retrieved: 
July, 
2016], 
http://www.st.com/Web/en/resource/technical/document/datasheet/D
M00057547.pdf 
[15] Digi International, “X-CTU (XCTU) software”, [retrieved: July, 
2016], http://www.digi.com/support/kbase/kbaseresultdetl?id=2125 
[16] Wathelet M., (2005), “Geopsy Project”, Europena Project NERIES.  
 
 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

