Heat Balanced Bolometer with Sigma-Delta Interface 
 
Matthieu Denoual, 
Mathieu Pouliquen, 
Gilles Allègre 
GREYC-ENSICAEN 
University of Caen 
Caen, France 
initialname@ensicaen.fr
Damien Brouard,  
Arthur Veith 
ENSICAEN, Caen, France 
name@ecole.ensicaen.fr 
Olivier de Sagazan 
IETR 
University of Rennes 
Rennes, France 
name@univ-rennes1.fr 
Patrick Attia 
NXP-Semiconductors 
Colombelles, France 
name@nxp.com 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a single-loop 2nd order sigma-
delta interface circuit for a bolometer operating in closed-loop 
mode. Switched capacitor circuitry is developed to implement 
the sigma-delta structure. The sigma-delta modulator acts both 
as digital readout circuit and as a mean of heat feedback. The 
design approach of the sigma-delta structure and the feedback 
shaping is explained. The circuit is designed for a realization in 
AMS CMOS 0.35µm technology. 
Keywords-bolometer; 
sigma-delta 
modulator; 
electrical 
substitution; frequency sensor. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Uncooled resistive bolometers are part of the thermal 
infrared detector’s category. In 2010, uncooled resistive 
bolometers represented 95% of the market of infrared 
imaging system [1]. Their operating principle is based on the 
measurement of temperature variations due to the incident 
optical power. In parallel to research work trying to improve 
the sensitivity of the bolometers through material or 
geometry optimization, other research work has focused on 
the development of feedback techniques to operate the 
bolometers in closed-loop mode as constant temperature 
bolometric detectors [2, 3]. All the proposed techniques are 
based on the Electrical Substitution principle that assumes 
that optical power can be substituted by electrically produced 
power. For integration and simplicity reasons, heat feedback 
is produced by Joule effect, considering that heat electrically 
produced can be used to equivalently stimulate the sensing 
resistor of the bolometer. This assumption is the basis of the 
Electrical Substitution (ES) principle also called Electric 
Equivalence principle [3, 4]. The advantages of closed-loop 
operation 
are 
numerous, 
including 
improvement 
of 
bandwidth and reduction of spatial noise. In 2009, a new 
configuration has been proposed for the closed-loop 
operation of resistive bolometers [5]. The so-called 
Capacitively 
Coupled 
Electrical 
Substitution 
(CCES) 
configuration 
exhibits 
the 
advantages 
of 
previous 
configurations without their limitations in terms of additional 
material required or stability issues. Proofs of principle of the 
CCES configuration have been demonstrated through 
successive analogous and digital implementations with 
discrete components [5, 6]. Digital implementation, besides 
the implicit digital measurement output, exhibit extra 
performance compared to analogous implementation because 
of linearization of the system [4, 5]. Recently, smart-
functions using a digital implementation of the CCES 
configuration 
with 
a 
microcontroller 
have 
been 
experimentally demonstrated [7].  
In this work, we aim at integrating the electronic circuitry 
of the CCES configuration for closed-loop operation of 
resistive bolometers and for smart-functions implementation. 
With a view toward integration of lines or matrixes of pixels, 
digital solution using a sigma-delta core is preferred to 
solution using a microcontroller. Consequently, for the first 
time to our knowledge, an integrated sigma-delta interface 
for a bolometer is developed. The sigma-delta modulation is 
attractive because it provides a digital output, linearizes the 
heat feedback path and can be easily implemented in high-
density CMOS technology. Such device will inherit the 
advantages and performance of the previous discrete 
realizations and will be the first step toward fully integrated 
smart infrared imagers.  
The paper is organized as follows. The second section 
describes the principle of the digital closed-loop operation of 
resistive bolometers. The third section presents the design of 
the sigma-delta interface associated with the bolometer. 
Finally, the result section exhibits simulation results that 
illustrate the expected behavior and performance. 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE SYSTEM 
The system is a heat balanced bolometer using heat 
feedback through electrical substitution means. It is 
composed of a resistive bolometer, its readout electronics, 
and a sigma-delta modulator with a feedback shaping block 
for the implementation of the CCES configuration.  
A. Uncooled resistive bolometers 
Resistive bolometers are composed of a sensing resistor 
on a surface thermally insulated from the substrate by 
suspension legs, as illustrated in Fig. 1.  
 
Figure 1.  Top view of a bolometer pixel and equivalent electrical model 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The operating principle is the following: the optical 
infrared (IR) power absorbed onto the surface of the 
bolometer rises the temperature of the sensing resistor (P/T 
conversion). If the sensing resistor (RB) is current biased (IB), 
then the voltage across the resistor (VB) measures the 
temperature variations (T/V conversion). The material of the 
sensing resistor is chosen for its high Temperature 
Coefficient of Resistance (TCR). 
The responsivity of a bolometer characterizes the 
variations of the output voltage signal (VB) depending on the 
infrared input optical power (Popt) [8]. It is expressed by 
(
eff )
eff
B
B
opt
B
1 sτ
G
αηI R
(s)
P
V (s)
R(s)[V/W]
+
=
=
 
(1) 
where α is the TCR of the sensing resistor, η is the 
absorption coefficient of the absorbing surface, Geff and τeff 
are the effective thermal conductance and the effective 
thermal constant respectively [8]. τeff depends on the heat 
capacity Cth of the bolometer as follows: τeff=Cth/Geff. The 
equation (1) indicates that the more the bolometer is 
thermally insulated, i.e. Geff small, the higher the 
responsivity is. However, the more the bolometer is 
thermally insulated, the higher the time constant is, i.e. the 
slower the bolometer is. This is the traditional tradeoff 
between responsitivity and time constant of resistive 
bolometers. Usually, the thermal conductance is designed to 
match the time constants required for imaging applications 
and therefore the responsivity is not optimized. Such tradeoff 
can be released by operation in closed-loop mode. 
B. Closed loop operation of uncooled resistive bolometers 
Like for every sensor and generally speaking system, 
closed-loop configuration has advantages over open-loop 
configuration, including 
reduced time response 
and 
linearization. Closed-loop operation of resistive bolometers 
enables other interesting characteristics such as operation 
around a user defined operating point and simple selection of 
the measurement range. In the case of matrixes of bolometer 
pixels, since the output response in closed-loop is quite 
independent from the nominal resistance value of the sensing 
resistor, the spatial noise due to process discrepancies is 
intrinsically cancelled.  
Closed-loop operation requires heat feedback since the 
incoming signal is power. Fig. 2 illustrates the closed-loop 
configuration of a resistive bolometer. The system is 
controlled in temperature to a dynamic set point defined by a 
bias voltage VBias. G is the gain of the conditioning 
electronics and VT the amplified voltage. The absorbed 
incoming optical power, ηPopt, is considered as a 
perturbation compensated by the Joule power PJ. The closed-
loop system maintains the temperature of the bolometer 
constant by keeping the total amount of power constant. The 
total power corresponds to the Joule power initially applied 
prior to exposure to optical power to elevate the temperature 
of the bolometer. This initial power sets the static thermal 
working point. A controller C(p) is inserted in the loop to 
adjust 
the 
performance 
of 
the 
closed-loop 
system 
(bandwidth, robustness, noise rejection, …). As usually 
R(s).G is large, a simple controller C(p)=1 can be used in a 
first try. 
Bolometers operating in closed-loop mode have been 
developed 
either 
with 
analog 
or 
digital 
feedback 
implementations. Digital implementation is interesting in 
that the feedback path is linearized in a simple way if pulsed 
modulated signals are used [4, 5] and in that the output signal 
is directly digital. The digital pulsed signals can be 
modulated in width (PWM, pulsed width modulation) or in 
density (sigma-delta modulation). The major drawback of 
previously proposed digital implementation [6] is the need 
for a microcontroller with an ADC for the digital feedback 
path. We propose here to use a sigma-delta modulator both 
for the digital conversion and the feedback signal generation. 
This approach is somehow comparable to that of micro-
accelerometers operating in closed-loop mode with sigma-
delta modulators. In the case of lines or matrixes of 
bolometer pixels, this approach should lead to a solution 
better suited for integration. 
The schematic of the sigma-delta feedback loop for the 
bolometer is illustrated in Fig. 3, with a controller C(p)=1.  
The output bitstream corresponding to the measurement 
at the output of the sigma-delta modulator would have to be 
treated by digital filters and decimators to get the output 
signal with the format resolution allowed by the 
oversampling rate. 
The feedback shaping is here to implement the 
capacitively coupled electrical substitution (CCES) that 
enables easy setting of the system. In the case of the CCES 
implementation, the pulsed modulated signal is shifted to 
high frequencies by modulation with a carrier and then 
capacitively coupled onto the sensing resistor of the 
bolometer. The objective is to dissociate the electrical and 
thermal working points according to a frequency basis. It 
uses a high frequency modulated signal for the heat feedback 
voltage applied to the sensing resistor. This implementation 
can be applied to any kind of uncooled resistive bolometer.  
 
The sigma-delta interface for heat balanced bolometer 
using CCES configuration requires two main functional 
blocks:  
(1) a sigma-delta modulator,  
(2) a feedback shaping block.  
 
Figure 2.   Schematic of electrical substitution feedback loop  
 
Figure 3.  Schematic of sigma-delta feedback loop for the bolometer 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

III. 
DESIGN OF THE CIRCUIT 
The design is for AMS 0.35 µm CMOS technology. 
A. Sigma-Delta (Σ∆) modulator 
For stability, linearity and resolution reasons, a single-
loop, single-bit, 2nd order sigma delta architecture was 
chosen for the sigma-delta modulator [9]. The resulting 
architecture is illustrated in Fig. 4. It is composed of two 
integrators with gain a and b respectively -0.5 and -2.0, of a 
comparator and of a 1-bit digital-to-analog converter. 
Compared to classical architectures, here an extra input on 
the first integrator is used to add a component to the signal. 
The role of this input is to set the static thermal working 
point, i.e. the Joule power applied in absence of optical 
signal. The oversampling ratio (OSR) is 256 to ensure at 
least the 98 dB signal-to-noise ratio required for a 16-bit 
resolution according to [9] 
(
) (
)













+ 
−
=
2 +1
2
dB
1
2
1
2 2
10log 3
SNR
n
B
OSR
n
π
π
 (2) 
where B is the number of bits of the quantizer, n is the order 
of the modulator.  
 
Figure 4.  Block diagram of the 2nd order single loop 1-bit Σ∆ modulator 
For integration reasons, switched capacitor circuitry was 
chosen leading to the classical fully-differential structure 
illustrated in Fig. 5. The sigma-delta modulator is clocked at 
5 MHz for an input bandwidth of 10 kHz. Non-overlapping 
two-phase clock signals with delayed outputs are used and 
double sampling correlation is implemented to reduce the 
flicker noise contribution of the OTA [10]. The capacitors 
are 500fF minimum to ensure a kT/C noise small enough 
compared to the quantization noise. 
 
The integrators are built around folded-cascode OTA 
with gain above 60 dB to ensure the chosen resolution [11]. 
Folded-cascode OTA with switched-capacitor common 
mode feedback circuitry was chosen for stability reasons and 
for its high gain-bandwidth product, here over 100 MHz.  
The common mode voltages of the first integrator, Vcm1+ 
and Vcm1-, are used to set the static thermal working point; 
they correspond to the VPbias signal of Fig. 4. These inputs 
can also be used as built-in stimuli useful for self-test, self-
calibration or self-identification as illustrated in [12], i.e. 
useful to upgrade the bolometer into a smart-bolometer. The 
common mode voltage of the second integrator, Vcm2, is 
unique and is set at half the supply voltage.  
B. Feedback shaping block 
The role of the feedback shaping block is to translate to 
high frequency the pulse-density modulated bitstream of the 
sigma-delta modulator output. The feedback shaping block 
involves a Voltage Controlled Oscillator (VCO), a mixer and 
a programmable attenuator as illustrated in Fig. 6.  
The VCO is a chain of inverters forming a ring topology 
whose frequency can be tuned between 70 MHz and 
800 MHz. The mixer consists in a transmission gate 
controlled by the pulse-density modulated bitstream signal 
from the sigma-delta modulator. The programmable 
attenuator is a ladder of cascaded transmission gates with 
different ON resistances. The selected gain, GFB, defines the 
measurement range of the closed-loop system. An 8-bit 
selection word allows changing the measurement range over 
more than two orders of magnitude. The feedback is only 
applied during the integration phase (clk2) not to disturb the 
sampling phase. 
 
Figure 5.  Schematic of the 2nd order sigma-delta modulator 
 
 
Figure 6.  Feedback shaping 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS, EXPECTED PERFORMANCE 
Simulations performed to verify that the design fulfills 
the requirements are time consuming, therefore, once the 
performance validated, the blocks are modeled to carry out 
top-level simulations. The top-level simulations of the 
complete system are performed using Simulink®.  
C. Sigma-Delta simulation 
The electrical simulation results confirm the expected 
performances of the 2nd order sigma-delta modulator. The 
density of the pulses of the bitstream varies linearly 
according to the input signal (Fig. 7).  
Since the voltage to power conversion (V/P) is linear 
with this type of modulation, the feedback path is entirely 
linear. 
D. Complete system 
The top-level simulations illustrate the expected behavior 
of the system and its expected noise performance. The 
models developed in [13] are used for the integrators of the 
sigma-delta modulator and for the noise considerations. 
Typical characteristics taken from [14] are used for the 
bolometer (7 ms time constant and 5x10-8 W/K thermal 
conductance). Fig. 8(a) illustrates the step response of both 
the bolometer in open-loop (output VT) and in closed-loop 
mode when the bolometer is heat-balanced with the sigma-
delta interface directly looped (output corresponding to the 
bitstream after filtering). The input step is 1 µW. The closed-
loop operation is interesting in that the output is directly 
proportional to the incoming power and the time response is 
much faster, i.e. response time (5% final value) below 1 ms.  
Fig. 8(b) illustrates the expected performances in terms 
of noise taking into account the noise sources of sigma-delta 
interface (quantization noise, kT/C noise, clock jitter noise, 
and OTA noise). The noise floor is 100 dB below the 50 µW 
reference signal, this means that the sigma-delta interface 
does not negatively impact the noise performance of the 
system, i.e. the noise performance will still be limited by the 
noise of the bolometer. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, the design of a sigma-delta interface for a 
heat balanced bolometer is presented. This interface enables 
an integrated implementation of the capacitively coupled 
electrical substitution configuration for uncooled resistive 
bolometers. By enclosing the bolometer in a one-bit 
feedback loop, simultaneous heat feedback and analog-to-
digital conversion is achieved. The feedback path enables 
built-in stimulus to be applied and the resulting device is a 
pulsed digital output infrared detector part of so-called 
frequency sensors, with configuration capabilities upgrading 
it into a smart bolometer. Future work will involve the 
characterization and test of the realized prototypes and next 
development will focus on the integration of lines and 
matrixes of pixels.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The planned foundry of the integrated circuit in July 
2012 is funded by the PSOC-INS2I program (n°78518). The 
author would like to thank Aziz Doukkali, Jean-Robert 
Tourret and Philippe Vallerand for fruitful help during the 
design. 
 
Figure 7.  Transient simulation of the sigma-delta modulator. Inset, duty 
cycle versus DC input from transient simulations 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 8.  (a) Step response of the bolometer in open-loop and in closed-
lopp when heat balanced with the sigma-delta interface. (b) Expected 
noise performance of the sigma-delta interface, with a 50 µW input 
reference signal at 100 Hz 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

REFERENCES 
[1] Yole Développement, Uncooled IR Cameras & Detectors for 
Thermography and Vision, Tech. & Market Report, 2010. 
[2] C. D. H. Williams, An appraisal of the noise performance of 
constant temperature bolometric detector systems, Meas. Sci. 
Technol., 1990, vol. 1(322), pp. 322-328.  
[3] M. Galeazzi, An external electronic feedback system applied 
to a cryogenic micro-calorimeter, Rev. Sci. Instr., 1998, vol. 
69(5), pp. 2017-2023. 
[4] R. C. S. Freire, S. Y. C. Catunda, and B. A. Luciano, 
Applications of Thermoresistive Sensors Using the Electric 
Equivalence Principle, IEEE Trans. Instr. Meas., 2009, vol. 
58(6), pp. 1823-1830. 
[5] M. Denoual, G. Allègre, S. Delaunay, and D. Robbes, 
Capacitively coupled electrical substitution for resistive 
bolometer enhancement, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2009, vol. 20, 
doi: 015105. 
[6] M. Denoual, S. Lebargy, 
and G. 
Allègre, 
Digital 
implementation of the capacitively coupled electrical 
substitution for resistive bolometers, Meas. Sci. Technol., 
2010, vol. 21, doi: 015205. 
[7] M. Denoual, O. de Sagazan, P. Attia, and G. Allègre, Smart 
Bolometer: Toward Monolithic Bolometer with Smart 
Functions in Bolometers, INTECH publisher, A. G. Unil 
Perera Editor, 2012, ISBN: 978-953-51-0235-9, pp. 171-196. 
[8] Kruse, P.W. (2001). Uncooled Thermal Imaging: Arrays, 
Systems and Applications, SPIE Optical Engineering Press, 
Bellingham, WA, ISBN: 0-8194-4122-8. 
[9] L. Yao, M. Steyaert, and W. Sansen, Low-Power Low-
Voltage Sigma-Delta Modulators in Nanometer CMOS, The 
Springer International Series in Eng. and Comp. Sc., 2006, 
Vol. 868, ISBN 978-1-4020-4139-6. 
[10] C. Enz and G. Temes, Circuit techniques for reducing the 
effects of op-amp imperfactions: autozeroing, correlated 
double sampling, and chopper stabilization, Proc of IEEE, 
1996, vol.84(11), pp. 1584-1614. 
[11] K. Onodera and A. Abo, A second-order sigma-delta A/D 
converter, 
EE290Y 
project 
June 
1995, 
citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.115.3182 
[retrived: July, 2012]. 
[12] M. Denoual and P. Attia, Top-Level Simulation of a Smart-
Bolometer Using VHDL Modeling», Sens. & Trans., 2012, 
vol. 14-1, pp. 48-64. 
[13] P. Malcovati, S. Brigati, F. Francesconi, F. Maloberti, P. 
Cusinato, and A. Baschirotto, Behavioral modeling of 
switched-capacitor sigma-delta modulators, IEEE Trans. 
Circuits and Systems-I, 2003, Vol. 50, N°.3, pp. 352-364. 
[14] B. Fièque, J.L. Tissot, C. Trouilleau, A. Crastes, and O. 
Legras, 
Uncooled 
microbolometer 
detector 
: 
Recent 
developments at Ulis, Infrared Physics & Technology, 2007, 
vol. 49, pp. 187-191. 
 
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

