Electrochemical Sensors for the Measurement of Relative Humidity and Their 
Signal Processing 
 
Ivan Krejci, Michal Hedl  
Dept. of Technical Studies 
College of Polytechnics Jihlava, VSPJ,  
Jihlava, Czech Republic 
e-mail: krejci19@vspj.cz hedl@student.vspj.cz 
 
Abstract— Highly sensitive and accurate determination of 
relative humidity of technical gases is required in many 
branches of human activities (health care, food packing, etc.). 
In this paper, we introduce a new series of sensors 
manufactured by BVT Technologies taking advantage of the 
hygroscopic material conductivity change with the water vapor 
content. The main topics of the contribution focus on sensor 
signal processing and electronic equipment architecture and its 
design. 
Keywords-relative 
humidity; 
hygroscopic 
material; 
synchronous detection; microcontroller. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The amount of water vapor in a gas mixture is at any 
time less than that required to saturate the gas at a given 
temperature. The actual-to-saturated water vapor content 
ratio is called the relative humidity. It is usually expressed 
in % as 
        RH = (m/M).100, 
                    (1) 
where m is the actual vapor mass in the unit volume of 
the gas and M is the water vapor mass of the same volume of 
the saturated gas. 
There are several methods to measure the relative 
humidity. For precise measurements, where high accuracy 
and resolution are required, the methods taking advantage of 
the impedance or resistance change of materials that absorb 
the tested gas humidity are used. These water absorbing 
materials are called hygroscopic.   
 
Figure 1. Typical resistance versus relative humidity curve of a hygroscopic 
material [1]. 
 
 
Figure 2. The resistive relative humidity sensor placed on the silicon 
substrate. 
 
Figure 1 shows a typical plot of the electrical resistance 
change of a hygroscopic material as a function of increasing 
relative humidity. As can be seen, the measuring apparatus 
should be able to measure the resistance within the range of 
1 kΩ to 10 ΜΩ.  
This measuring method has been selected because it 
enables the use of electrochemical sensors that have been 
specifically developed for this purpose by the local company 
BVT Technologies (www.bvt.cz) [3]. As BVT Technologies 
has no electronic development department, VSPJ (Vysoka 
Skola Polytechnicka Jihlava, www.vspj.cz) was approached 
to propose an electronic design of the sensor signal 
processing unit.  
II. 
SENSOR PERFORMANCE 
Usually, the sensor taking advantage of the hygroscopic 
material resistance measurement is placed on a silicon 
substrate, on which the electrode system composed of the 
substrate itself and the porous gold electrode is placed. It is 
capable of directing the measured gas to the active 
hygroscopic layer. This layer consists of an aluminum base 
on which the active hygroscopic layer of alumina is applied, 
as shown in Figure 2 [2]. 
In our case, a different sensor arrangement has been 
used. The sensor, provided by the local manufacturer of the 
electrochemical sensors, BVT Technologies, uses a 
corundum ceramic base on which the electrode system is 
applied. The electrodes are made of platinum – gold alloy 
and are shaped as two combs, inserted into each other 
(Figure 3) [3]. The electrodes are connected with a sensor 
connector by silver paths, covered by an insulating 
protective layer. 
The electrodes are covered by a hygroscopic alumina 
layer. The sensor dimensions are 25.4 x 7.62 mm and the 
active electrode system takes up a space of 2 x 2 mm.  
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
Figure 3. The BVT Technologies CC1 conductometric sensor. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Real electrochemical sensor, including its dimensions. 
 
A more detailed drawing of the sensor is given in Figure 
4. It provides information about sensor dimensions and 
electrode and protective cover arrangements. 
The main advantages of the resistive humidity sensors 
are the short response time 30 – 50 s as declared by the 
sensor producer [5] and high resolution which can be 
improved by using signal amplification. 
III. 
SIGNAL PROCESSING UNIT 
The electronic design and construction of the signal 
evaluating unit were the main goals of our work. The design 
rules have been determined by assigned parameters. 
A. Required system parameters 
The essential parameter is the range of measured 
resistances which is from 100 Ω to 10 MΩ. Further, if the 
hygroscopic material absorbs water, the polarization of 
electrodes occurs. To prevent it, the sensor must be supplied 
by AC (alternating current), the frequency of which is above 
Warburg frequencies [4], i.e., above 5 kHz. For our 
purposes, the frequency of the supplying signal was 10 kHz. 
To achieve both high precision and high resolution of the 
measured resistance, the use of highly precise analog to 
digital converters (AD converter) was necessary. The 
requirement of the resistance measurement over five 
decades with the precision at least 1%, asks for the use of 
the 24 bit AD converter (the required resolution is 10-5 x  
10-2, it is 10-7, the 24 bit AD converter resolution is 5.9 x  
10-8). As the effective number of bits is less than the AD 
converter’s resolution, an additional digital filtering has to 
be done.  
As 
for 
the 
mechanical 
arrangement, 
minimized 
electronic unit dimensions have been required, comparable 
to a common plug-in flash disc unit. 
For the resistance measurement, the Ohm’s method has 
been selected [6], based on the measurements of the voltage 
drop on the sensor, and current flowing in it. 
Another problem of the applied method of measurement 
is the strain capacity of the sensor. To avoid this problem, 
the synchronous detection must be applied, to separate the 
real resistance from the imaginary reactance.  
 
 
Figure 5. Hygrometer block diagram. DDS – direct digital synthesizer, IUC 
– current/voltage converter, CCS / constant current source, MCU – 
microcontroller. 
 
The relative humidity magnitude depends on the 
temperature. This means, the system must be equipped with 
a precise thermometer capable of the measuring of the 
nearest 0.1 °C.  
The transport of measured results to a host computer is 
provided by a USB 2.0 standard interface (Universal Serial 
Bus). 
 The equipment is designed so that it will create a small 
plug - in unit, which can be directly plugged into a computer 
USB connector (Figure 5). 
B. Electronic design – analog signal processing   
The analog part of the system involves three basic 
building blocks, the Direct Digital Synthesizer (DDS) with 
an amplifier of the AC signal supplying the sensor, and two 
signal traces measuring the voltage drop on the sensor and 
the current flowing through it. The voltage trace consists of 
a linear full-wave rectifier and a low pass filter that rejects 
residual AC signal components. 
The current trace arrangement begins with the current to 
voltage converter (IUC), the output signal of which is 
detected in the full-wave synchronous detector. The sense of 
this detection type is to gain the real part of the measured 
current. After the detection, the output detector signal 
contains a useful DC (Direct Current) component and a 
residual AC component, which is filtered out in the low pass 
filter. The cut-off frequency of the second order low pass 
filters in both traces is 10 Hz. This frequency ensures 
sufficient 126 dB rejection of the residual 20 kHz 
components of the full/wave detected signals. Besides, the 
filters serve as anti-aliasing filters for AD converters (AD 
converter sampling frequency is 250 Hz – see the next 
paragraph).   
The resistance thermometer using a platinum Pt1000 
sensor is the last analog element of the circuit. The sensor is 
supplied from a constant current source (CCS). 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

From the technological point of view, high precision 
operational amplifiers have been used for the analog signal 
processing at the operating frequency, and the chopper 
stabilized amplifiers for the detected signal filtering and for 
the constant current source for supplying the Pt1000 
thermometer. 
C. 
Digital signal processing 
 The digital part of the equipment is controlled by the TI 
microcontroller unit (MCU) MSP430AFE253, which has 
small power consumption  and contains three independent 
24 bit analog to digital converters needed for the system 
realization. The AD converters of the microcontroller can be 
synchronized, 
and 
thus 
they 
offer 
their 
results 
simultanously. As the built-in converters are very fast Σ−∆ 
converters having a low effective number of  bits, it was 
necessary to correct it using oversampling and additional 
digital filtering. The conversion results are obtained by an 
averaging filter taking advantage of the sum of  256 AD 
converter samples, shifted 8 bits right. The AD converter 
sampling period is 4 ms, thus the measurement itself takes 
about 1 s.  
 The microcontroller also controls the direct digital 
synthesizer producing  the AC signal  10 kHz used for the 
sensor supplying. Further on, the microcontroller evaluates  
the measured resistance and calculates the relative humidity 
taking advantage of the polynomial approximation of the 
diagram in Figure 1. The calculated data is sent to a host 
computer via the standard USB link. 
D. Metrological aspects 
The accuracy of the measurement is determined by both 
the sensor calibration and the signal processing. As the 
signal processing has been discussed in the previous 
paragraphs, the calibration of the sensor represents the last 
obstacle in achieving the required parameters. To get the 
best results, the Agilent 34410A – the 6.5 digit multimeter - 
has been used to prepare the resistance standards.  The basic 
measurement procedure measures the sensor conductivity, 
so that the calibration curve is linear, G =I/V (the 
conductance G is given by the current I, divided by the 
voltage V), if the voltage is kept constant. In this case, it is 
necessary to get two points of the line. These points were 
determined 
by 
the 
zero 
and 
maximum 
required 
conductivities of 10.0012 mS (nominal resistance value 100 
Ω).  
 
Figure 6. The absolute value of relative error as a function of  the measured 
resistance. 
  
The calibration was checked using the standards, the 
conventional true values of them were given by the Agilent 
multimeter measurements, and covered all decades of the 
required conductivity range (10 mS – 0.1µS). The results of 
the series of twenty measurements are given in Figure 6. 
The errors in the graph represent the worst results of the 
series. The obtained results show the error dramatically 
increases when high resistances are measured. It is caused 
by lower value of AD converter data, which is influenced by 
the digital noise of the AD converter. A possible 
improvement can be achieved by using an internal 
programmable gain amplifier built in the AD converter. This 
adaptation does not require any changes of the system 
hardware. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The electronic system has been designed and its 
firmware created. The firmware also includes the system 
calibration procedure, described above, together with the 
calibration constants store in the microcontroller internal 
electrically erasable programmable read only memory 
(EEPROM). The system performance, the assembled 
printed circuit board (PCB), is shown in Figure 7a and 
Figure 7b. The PCB dimensions are 59 x 25 mm. If the 
achieved results are compared with the required parameters, 
the results are a little worse than it is required and the design 
needs some improvements, namely as for the calibration 
stability. At present, to get introduced results, it is necessary 
to do the re-calibration of the instrument whenever it is 
switched on. Although this procedure is simple and does not 
require much time, it is a complication of the measuring 
procedure. One possibility of the system accuracy 
improvement is the software adaptation of the sensitivity 
mentioned in the previous paragraph. For 
further 
improvement, it is necessary to re-design the hardware, 
which would involve the use of a better voltage reference 
and a possibility to divide the current range into several 
subranges.  
V. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The system described has been realized within the granted 
project of the College of Polytechnics Jihlava, Czech 
Republic, Nr.1170/4/1710, “The use of electrochemical 
sensors for the relative humidity measurement”. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Brodgesell and B. Liptak, “Instrument Engineers’ Handbook:  
Process Measurement and Analysis”, 4th edition. J. Wiley & Sons, 
N.Y. 2003, pp. 1426. 
[2] J. Fraden, “Handbook of modern sensors: physics, designs and 
applications”. Springer science + business media,  Inc., 2004, pp. 400. 
[3] 
Electronic 
publication 
http://www.bvt.cz/ftp/Senzory/CC1.pdf 
:  
“Conductometric Sensor Substrates – CC1”, Sensor Data Sheet, BVT 
Technologies, 2016, pp. 1, last access April 2017. 
[4] I. Krejci, M. Musil, and P. Smetana, “Impedance Spectrometer for 
Application in Biology and Food Quality Control”, Proceedings of 
XXI IMEKO World Congress, Prague 2015, pp. 2222.   
[5] Electronic mail information - BVT Technologies proposals. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[6] V. Krejci and J. Stupka, “Electrical Measurements” (in Czech), Statni 
Nakladatelstvi Technicke literatury (SNTL), Prague 1973, pp.232. 
 
 
 
Figure 7a. Upper view on the PCB of the electronic unit, the digital signal 
processing part. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7b. Bottom view on the PCB, the analog signal processing part. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

