Hydriney: A Mobile Application to Help in the Control of Kidney Stones Disease 
 
Tânia Valente*, Ivan Miguel Pires*,**, Nuno M. 
Garcia** and Nuno Pombo** 
* Altranportugal 
Lisbon, Portugal 
** Instituto de Telecomunicações, 
Universidade da Beira Interior 
Covilhã, Portugal 
e-mails: tania.ss.valente@gmail.com, impires@it.ubi.pt, 
ngarcia@di.ubi.pt and ngpombo@di.ubi.pt 
João Orvalho 
Instituto Politécnico de Coimbra 
Coimbra, Portugal 
e-mail: orvalho@esec.pt 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— Nephrolithiasis disease requires the management 
and registration of the different values on a daily basis. These 
values include the monitoring of daily water consumption and 
the urinary pH, which should be registered in a mobile 
application. One of the authors of this paper had the disease and 
decided to design and develop the Hydriney application. This 
application meets the needs of people who want to manage all 
aspects of nephrolitiasis condition and keep it under control. 
The application tracks almost all aspects of the kidney stones 
treatment and provides detailed reports, charts, and statistics to 
share with the urologist. The user should set the daily goals and 
transcribe the medicine prescription to the mobile application. 
Then, the application will help him to automate the records for 
better decision-making in treatment of kidney stones disease. 
This paper shows that nephrolithiasis management is a health 
area where Hydriney can enhance the quality of life for people 
living with this condition. 
Keywords- mHealth; Hydriney; Nephrolithiasis; Water 
Consumption; Urinary pH; kidney Stones; Uralyt-U; Calcium 
oxalate; Calcium phosphate; Uric acid. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
One of the most common problems in the urology clinical 
area is the nephrolithiasis disease, popularly known as kidney 
stones (see Figure 1). Mobile devices (e.g., smartphones, 
tablets, and other specific devices) may help in the control of 
the treatment of this disease [1]. 
Kidney stones are solid crystals formed from the salts in 
urine and affect up to 5% of the world population and the 
lifetime risk of passing a kidney stone is about 8-10% [2]. A 
kidney stone is caused by a disruption in the balance between 
solubility and precipitation of salts in the kidneys and the 
urinary tract. 
Some metabolic disorders, genetic conditions, and dietary 
choices might contribute to their development. A stone forms 
when urine is in a “supersaturated” state with insoluble 
crystal-forming substances composed of calcium (Ca), 
calcium oxalate (CaOx), calcium phosphate (CaP) and uric 
acid, due to the dehydration or genetic predisposition to over-
excrete these ions in the urine [4].  
 
Figure 1. Kidney stones [3] 
 
One of the most common reasons why people get kidney 
stones is the lack of sufficient water in the body. The body 
must produce at least 2 liters of urine to reduce risks of kidney 
stones to half [5]. People who live in warm climates and those 
who sweat a lot may be at higher risk than others.  
Going to the doctor and taking medications are important, 
but not sufficient for optimal care. Individuals with kidney 
stones can reduce the short and long term impact of the 
disease by practicing self-management skills. Using mobile 
health technology makes it easier to control kidney stones 
disease. Regarding mobile applications for kidney stones, it 
has been found that most existing solutions are to a specific 
feature “food/diet”. There is the mobile application named 
“StoneMD” [6] that was created by urologists and developers 
and that presents a list of foods (calcium, oxalate and citrates) 
classified and categorized according to the oxalate 
content/nutritional guidelines. If the patient has been 
diagnosed with an oxalate stone condition, there is the 
application named “oxaBrow” that can help him to manage 
his Oxalate Diet [7]. 
There are also several applications for medication like 
“Medisafe” [8] and water consumption control like 
“Waterlogged” [9]. “Medisafe” is one of the most popular 
medication management apps today working as a virtual 
pillbox on patient’s smartphone. “Waterlogged” allows the 
user to set reminders for himself at scheduled intervals to 
drink some water. In order to have a complete and suitable 
app, the Hydriney application was developed.  
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the methods of diagnosis and the types of kidney 
stones. Section III presents the existent treatment methods. 
Section IV presents the mobile application developed. 
Finally, Section V presents the conclusions of this project. 
 
II. 
DIAGNOSIS AND TYPES OF KIDNEY STONES 
The kidney stones diagnosis is suspected by the typical 
symptom of abdominal pain. Often, kidney stones are found 
on an X-Ray or ultrasound taken of someone who complains 
of blood in the urine. Imaging tests, including the X-Rays, are 
usually done to confirm the diagnosis (See Figure 2) [10]. 
 
 
Figure 2. X-Ray with visibility of an opacity of calcic tonality, in red, 
suggesting the presence of a kidney stone at 1cm outside the left kidney 
[10] 
 
Radiologists should measure the size of a kidney stone to 
help estimate the chance it will pass on its own. Stones 
measuring less than 4mm will pass on their own. Kidney 
stones develop when the urine cannot dilute all of the 
substances in it, like Calcium and Uric acid. As example, in 
Figure 3, a Calcium Oxalate stone dehydrate is presented. 
 
 
Figure 3. Surface of a kidney stone with tetragonal crystals of 
Weddellite [11] 
 
There are three major types of kidney stones, including: 
Calcium (Ca), Struvite and Acid Uric stones. These are: 
● 
Calcium (Ca) 
○ 
The most common type of kidney stones, 
that usually are in the form of Calcium 
Oxalate (CaOx); 
○ 
Oxalate is a naturally occurring substance 
found in food and is also made daily by the 
liver [12]; 
○ 
Calcium stones may also occur in the form 
of Calcium Phosphate (CaP); 
○ 
Calcium Phosphate (CaP) stones are much 
less common and typically develop in 
patients with metabolic or hormonal 
disorders [12]; 
○ 
Calcium stones form in an alkaline urine 
with a pH higher than 7. 
● 
Struvite 
○ 
Struvite stones form in response to an 
infection, such as a bacterial urinary tract 
infection; 
○ 
These stones can grow quickly and become 
quite large and occur most commonly in 
women [12]. 
● 
Uric acid stones 
○ 
 These stones tend to form in patients with 
hyperuricosuria and gout diseases.  
○ 
About 15-20% of patients with uric acid 
stones have a history of gout [13];  
○ 
With an urinary pH of less than 5.5, uric 
acid is poorly soluble, but solubility 
increases with a pH greater than 6.5 [14]; 
○ 
These stones are not as visible on a plain 
X-ray. 
 
III. 
TREATMENT OF KIDNEY STONES 
The treatment of kidney stones depends on the type. 
There are medications that the urologist doctor can prescribe 
to allow the stone to pass naturally. For stones with a size less 
than 2.5cm, there is the procedure lithotripsy that uses shock 
waves to break the stone into smaller pieces. Then, the pieces 
can be more easily expelled from the body. For most people 
with recurrent kidney stones, a combination of drinking 
enough fluids, avoiding urinary infections, and specific 
treatment with medications will significantly reduce or stop 
new stone formation. 
Certain medicines, such as Acalka, reduce calcium 
excretion and decrease the chance of having another calcium 
stone. For people who have a high level of uric acid in their 
urine, or who make uric acid stones, the medicine Uralyt-U 
will usually stop the formation of new stones. This medicine 
re-dissolves any crystals that are already present in the urine. 
The administration method of Uralyt-U includes granules (1 
g/dose), that should be taken, 3 times per day and dissolved 
in a glass of water and then drunk. Uralyt-U has a special 
indicator paper, which consists on yellow paper strips and a 
color scale within the range of 5.6 to 8 (See Figure 4). Lower 
numbers are more acidic and higher numbers are less acidic. 
The patient should bring the table every time he visits the 
doctor. 
 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 4. Test stripes of Uralyt-U medicine 
 
At the main meals (every morning, midday and in the 
evening), before taking each dose, the patient should dip one 
paper strip into the fresh urine for a few seconds. The color 
of the strip will change and then it should be compared with 
the color scale.  After matching the paper strip with the color 
scale, the user should register the urinary pH value measure 
in a traditional table. 
IV. 
APPLICATION 
The Hydriney application allows the patient to use it as a 
“personal schedule” of the kidney stones disease. Hydriney 
has innovative features to help improve life with kidney 
stones disease. There is a left side menu following the Google 
design pattern with the following features: Profile; 
Medication; Consumption of H2O; pH of Urine (See Figure 
5). 
A. Profile 
When the application starts, the user is re-directed to the 
“Profile” module. This module, presented in Figure 6, 
focuses on individual parameters like height, weight, age and 
daily water goal, in liters (l). The user must register his weight 
and height for the automatic calculation of the Body Mass 
Index (BMI).  
 
 
Figure 5. Main screen of Hydriney application 
B. Water 
Goals and reminders really help throughout the day. 
Hydriney reminds the user to drink according to the progress 
which is filled with the volumes consumed. 
 
 
Figure 6. Profile screen of Hydriney application 
 
Increasing water intake is important to ensure an urinary 
volume of approximately 2.5 liters per day that is associated 
with the reduced urinary supersaturation with CaOx and a 
significant reduction in stone recurrence [15]. H2O 
Consumption’s feature (See Figure 7) allows the registration 
of water intake with notifications about the need to drink 
water. The screen is divided into two tabs: “Today” and 
“History”. The “Today” tab allows the user to record, 
throughout the day, the water consumption. The user must 
press the bottle (s) corresponding to the water volume that he 
has just to drink. There are 5 bottle standard sizes: 1.5L, 1L, 
0.5L, 0.33L, and 0.10L. 
As the user registers what he drinks, the progress chart 
updates, in real time, the percentage of drinking water in 
relation to the daily goal (see Figure 6). There are also 
automatic notifications to remember the user to drink water, 
helping him to drink more water. After entering the values, 
the application shows in the “History” tab the detailed history 
chart of water consumption related to today, latest month and 
last year. 
C. Medication 
It is not always easy to keep the right time in memory 
taking a medicine or administering of dosage required during 
the treatment. The Hydriney application allows the user to 
detail the schedule of medicines, the dosage options (pills, 
boxes, and others) and medication intervals. This module 
development was inspired by the format of pill boxes with 
dividers (See Figure 8).  
The screen has four divisions/boxes grouped by shift - 
morning, afternoon, evening and dawn. Adding the 
medications to the med cabinet, the user can see any 
interactions between them. 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Each box displays the name of the medicine to take, the 
time to take and the flag whether it has already been taken or 
not. 
 
 
Figure 7. Screen of daily water consumption 
D. pH Measurement 
A metabolic evaluation starts with a 24-h urinary pH 
profile, because pH is used to measure urine acidity [16]. A 
lower urinary pH level increases the risk of the presence of 
different types of kidney stones, promoting the formation of 
calcium oxalate (CaOx) and uric acid stones (UA) [16]. The 
alkalization of the urine is important for the treatment of uric 
acid stones [16].  
After matching the paper strip with the color scale, the 
patient should insert the value measured in the “pH Urine” 
module (See Figure 9).  
As it was previously mentioned, patients taking Uralyt-U 
need to measure and record the urinary pH 3 times per day: 
before breakfast, before lunch and before dinner. 
This feature makes it easier to record the urinary pH, 
replacing the traditional paper table. Thus, it is easier not only 
to register in itself but also the grouping and organization by 
phases of the day. When entering pH measurements, there is 
also a “History” tab that shows a chart with the evolution of 
the urinary pH. Figure 10 shows a scatter chart with the 
evolution of urinary pH for one month.  
The charts improve the understanding of data oscillations 
registered and promote the better disease’s self-monitoring, 
improving the apprehension of the patient's condition by the 
doctor. 
 
 
Figure 8. Screen of daily medication reminders 
 
 
Figure 9. Screen of daily pH measurements 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Chart of daily urinary pH measurements 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper we have presented Hydriney, an application 
tailored for patients with nephrolithiasis. It can effectively 
help patients with their daily tasks. The Hydriney application 
will not replace the patient’s doctor, but will greatly facilitate 
the care of the patient and will help reduce the risk of a 
possible stone recurrence. 
  If patients track different parameters relevant to kidney 
stones self-management, they might start noticing different 
correlations, for example, between their pH Urine and water 
intake. 
This mobile application promises to bring benefits and 
opportunities to the treatment and prevention of kidney 
stones disease for a better quality of life. Using this app the 
user can then take readings, store results, set up timed interval 
logging, or schedule reminders for particular logs he need to 
complete. The mobile application tracks almost all aspects of 
the disease treatment and provides detailed reports, charts and 
statistics. 
By looking for patterns or trends in patients results, the 
doctor could make changes on the disease treatment plan of 
patients. 
Hardware and software tools are now making it easier for 
patients to take greater control. As future work, we intend to 
develop a pH probe using the Arduino platform to interface 
the Hydriney application. The sensor will be immersed in the 
urine sample to read the pH variation. After reading it, the 
data will be transmitted to the microcontroller present in the 
Arduino platform. Then, the Bluetooth integration will 
connect the data to the Hydriney application that will allow 
the user to keep track accurately his urinary pH.  The pH 
sensor will transmit live readings and captures data in real-
time. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This 
work 
was 
supported 
by 
FCT 
project 
UID/EEA/50008/2013. The authors would also like to 
acknowledge the contribution of the COST Actions IC1303 
– AAPELE – Architectures, Algorithms and Protocols for 
Enhanced Living Environments, and CA16226 – Indoor 
living space improvement: Smart Habitat for the Elderly. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. S. Sousa et al., “mHealth Sensors and Applications for 
Personal Aid”, in: Sasan Adibi (ed.), Mobile Health: A 
Technology Road Map (New York: Springer International 
Publishing 2015), pp. 266-267. 
[2] F. Doe and B. Brenner, “Nephrolithiasis. Harrison's Principles 
of Internal Medicine”. 10th ed. New York, NY, McGraw-Hill 
International Book Co, v. 2: pp. 1672-1678, 1983. 
[3] H. Concept, "Human Kidney Stones Medical Concept Stock 
Illustration - Illustration of sick, section: 99255328", 
Dreamstime.com, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.dreamstime.com/stock-illustration-human-
kidney-stones-medical-concept-as-organ-painful-crystaline-
mineral-formations-as-medicine-symbol-cross-
image99255328. [Accessed: 28- Jun- 2018]. 
[4] H. Han et al., “Nutritional management of kidney stones 
(nephrolithiasis)”, Clinical nutrition research, v. 4(3): pp. 137-
152, 2015. 
[5] J. Lemann et al., “Urinary oxalate excretion increases with 
body size and decreases with increasing dietary calcium intake 
among healthy adults”, Kidney international, v.  49(1): pp. 200-
208, 1996. 
[6] B. Becker, "[A mobile app for patients suffering from kidney 
stones]. - PubMed - NCBI", Ncbi.nlm.nih.gov, 2018. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29713752. 
[Accessed: 28-Jun-2018]. 
[7] "oxaBrow", 
Oxabrow.com, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.oxabrow.com/. [Accessed: 28-Jun-2018]. 
[8] "Medisafe", Medisafe.com, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://medisafe.com/. [Accessed: 28-Jun-2018]. 
[9] "Waterlogged: Tracking My Water Consumption - Walt In 
PA", 
Walt 
in 
PA, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.waltinpa.com/2015/09/17/waterlogged-tracking-
my-water-consumption/. [Accessed: 28- Jun- 2018]. 
[10] "Kidney Stone X Ray", Getty Images, 2018. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.gettyimages.pt/detail/fotografia-de-
not%C3%ADcias/intravenous-urography-of-a-35-year-old-
man-fotografia-de-not%C3%ADcias/169370479#intravenous-
urography-of-a-35yearold-man-abdomen-without-
preparation-picture-id169370479. [Accessed: 28- Jun- 2018]. 
[11] "File:Surface of a kidney stone with tetragonal crystals of 
Weddellite (calcium oxalate dihydrate). REM 21.jpg - 
Wikimedia 
Commons", 
Commons.wikimedia.org, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Surface_of_a 
_kidney_stone_with_tetragonal_crystals_of_Weddellite_(calc
ium_oxalate_dihydrate)._REM_21.jpg. [Accessed: 28-Jun-
2018]. 
[12] "Kidney stones - Symptoms and causes", Mayo Clinic, 2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-
conditions/kidney-stones/symptoms-causes/syc-20355755. 
[Accessed: 28-Jun-2018]. 
[13] L. Beara-Lasic, M. H. Pillinger, and D. S. Goldfarb, “Advances 
in the management of gout: critical appraisal of febuxostat in 
the control of hyperuricemia”, International journal of 
nephrology and renovascular disease, v. 3: pp. 1, 2010. 
[14] E. N. Taylor, M. J. Stampfer, and G. C. Curhan, “Dietary 
factors and the risk of incident kidney stones in men: new 
insights after 14 years of follow-up”, Journal of the American 
Society of Nephrology, v. 15(12): pp. 3225-3232, 2004. 
[15] L. Borghi et al., “Urinary volume, water and recurrences in 
idiopathic calcium nephrolithiasis: a 5-year randomized 
prospective study”, The Journal of urology, 1996. 155(3): pp. 
839-843. 
[16] R. A. Anderson, “A complementary approach to urolithiasis 
prevention”, World journal of urology, v. 20(5): pp. 294-301, 
2002. 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

