Ice Detection Experimentation Setup Using Infrared and Active Heating
Taimur Rashid, Hassan A. Khawaja, K. Edvardsen  
Department of Engineering and Safety  
The Arctic University of Norway (UIT) 
Tromsø, Norway 
e-mail: taimur.rashid@uit.no 
 
Abstract—The paper shows the possible implementation of 
Infrared (IR) ice detection technique. The experimental setup is 
implemented  keeping  in  view  of  the  marine  icing  phenomena 
over the ships and offshore structures. The detection mechanism 
is unique from the passive IR detection by introducing the active 
heating concept. The intervention of the active heating 
information inside the IR ice detection system will be able to 
improve the system’s detection capability and disseminate the 
valid information at user interface level. The experimentation 
shows valid detection of ice and no/ice conditions based on 
consistent temperature gradients. 
Keywords—icing; detection; infrared; heat; surface interface;  
I. 
ICING AND INFRARED DETECTION 
In the challenging environment such as below zero 
temperature conditions, ice accretion can occur at a rapid 
pace. This can adversely affect the marine operations in cold 
climate. Taking into account for such conditions, ice detection 
can be useful for the ice mitigation and removal upon the 
marine and offshore structures. Various techniques exist in 
the literature to detect the icing that exploit its physical or 
electromagnetic properties [1]. The parameters measured by 
these ice detectors includes the mass, rate and liquid water 
content [2]. Generally, the atmospheric icing is detected from 
most of these detectors. The other type of icing is marine 
icing that is a safety concern in marine operations inside the 
cold regions. Marine icing is different in nature from the 
atmospheric icing. It involves sea spray influence that is 
produced from the collision of the waves upon the structure 
and wind that shear the high wave crests [3, 4]. The 
subsequent sea spray generated by the collision of waves and 
its shearing travels in the air and freezes on impact with the 
ship superstructure or offshore structure elements. If this type 
of icing continues to occur for a longer duration, it can cause 
an increase in ice loading which could be hazardous if not 
mitigated in time. Such icing conditions are also hazardous 
for human operations. In this case, ice detection can be useful 
to assist the anti/de-icing process. 
 
The techniques mentioned above for ice detection 
include point and area detection of ice.  In the marine 
operations, remote detection of icing could be effective as it 
can assist the detection of a larger surface area. Remote 
monitoring of ice upon surfaces was tested in aviation 
industry where icing on aircraft wing was observed using 
infrared cameras [5]. The effectiveness of infrared 
application in icing for the marine environment needs to be 
investigated. Apart from the aviation industry, infrared 
remote monitoring is being used in various industrial 
applications where the temperature monitoring is critical on 
the larger surface area. Acquiring thermal signature from 
infrared devices gives the advantage to analyze temperature 
profiles of the complete system without any direct contact.   
Studies have shown that infrared cameras can be utilized to 
monitor the cold objects at low temperatures [5]. Recently, 
in the marine operations, specific infrared cameras are 
currently being used to detect the floating sea iceberg, 
which indicates the possible applicability of infrared devices 
in the marine environment. 
 
In this paper, effort is being made to show the infrared 
experimentation setup for detection of marine icing. Lab- 
setup is explained taking into account of the anti/de-icing 
techniques used in ships and offshore structures in marine 
environment. Section-II explains the setup components 
including an infrared camera, heating elements, surface 
material, control and monitoring systems. Setup components 
details are not specified as the experimental setup for ice 
detection is preliminary in nature, therefore, can be modified 
for improvements. Section-III explains the experimental setup 
and section-IV shows the results and discussion regarding 
thermal gradients at ice/no-ice conditions. The paper 
concludes in section-V showing the technique’s effectiveness 
towards ice detection in the marine environment.IR 
Thermography and Thermal Signature Detection at Low 
Temperatures 
II. 
SETUP COMPONENTS 
A. Infra-Red (IR) Camera 
IR camera operates with the incident IR beam. IR light is 
electromagnetic radiation that has a longer wavelength as 
compared to the visible light. It has a spectral range starting 
from the edge of the visible red light from 0.74μm to 300μm. 
The infrared spectral band is generally sub-divided into four 
sub-bands; near infrared (NIR) (0.75–3μm), medium 
wavelength infrared (MWIR) (3–6μm), long wavelength 
infrared (LWIR) (6–15μm) and very long wavelength 
infrared (VLWIR) (15–1000μm) [6]. IR camera working 
principle is based on the thermography imaging. The major 
components of the IR camera are a lens, detector, video 
processing electronics and user interface control as shown in 
Figure 1. The IR camera operates with the incident beam of 
light focusing upon the detector by the lens. The detector 
contains the IR sensitive elements arranged in the array called 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

focal plane array (FPA). These are IR sensitive elements and 
miniature in size (micro- meters). The number of elements 
inside the array determines the resolution of the IR imagery 
produced by the camera [7]. The processing electronics 
interprets the detector signals into the infrared imagery. The 
processing electronics also controls the parameters of the 
captured imagery. The sets of commands can be given to 
processing electronics via user interface. Currently available 
IR cameras generally include a user interface software to 
compute the parameters such as scene temperature, 
calibration, external trigger input and imagery recording. The 
calibration is often required to read out the correct 
temperature across the captured scene. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. IR Camera working principle 
 
Cold temperature scene can also be observed with the help 
of IR camera. The observation of icing surfaces from IR 
thermography has been reported in literature [8] but no 
significant literature is available of marine ice detection in 
cold regions. The application of IR thermography in ice 
detection for ships and offshore structures can be 
experimented to evaluate its capability. 
B. Heating Elements 
IR thermography for ice detection can be challenging 
when uniform scene temperature is observed. The 
thermographic profile of the cold object and the scene 
temperature might be the same in some cases that could lead 
false detection of ice. Furthermore, the reflectivity of the ice 
under certain conditions can indicate a false temperature 
captured by the IR detectors, which requires calibration. 
Normally calibration is done with the known objects 
temperature, which could be a difficult task to perform 
repetitively during the field operations in the cold harsh 
environment.  The false detection problem from IR 
thermography   can   be   minimized   if   the   active   heating 
mechanism is introduced underneath the platform or structure 
upon which ice is accreted. The heating elements will perform 
the major role in generating the known heat signature when 
the ice is accreted over it. The heating elements utilized in the 
experimentation setup could be electro thermal based with the 
strong heat generation capacity. The size of the heating 
elements should be minimum and compact so that they could 
be arranged in the form of arrays as discussed in section-III. 
Few examples of heating elements that could be tested as an 
active heating source for the experimentation are Peltier 
thermoelectric modules (Figure 2a) and Thermal resistive 
elements such as positive thermal coefficient of resistance 
(PTC) as shown in Figure 2b 
Peltier thermoelectric modules are solid state devices 
based on thermoelectric heat pump theory as they behave 
like a heat pump and transfers the heat from one side of the 
device to the other side. As the modules withdraw the 
current, one side becomes immediately hot and another side 
becomes cold. The hot temperature can reach up to hundreds 
of degrees (Co); similarly, cold   side   acquires negative 
temperatures very quickly. On the other hand, the positive 
thermal coefficient of resistance (PTC) heaters works on the 
principle of resistive heating where resistance increases upon 
heating. PTC devices can provide the high-temperature 
range up to 150oC or more depend upon the type of resistive 
 material used and current rating. 
These elements discussed are commercially available in 
miniature sizes (few centimeter) and can be controlled with 
the DC or AC powered control circuitry. The control 
mechanism of these heating elements is significant for the 
experimentation that will be used with IR user interface 
capturing mechanism 
 
 a. Peltier thermoelectric element [9]        b. PTC thermal resistor element [10] 
          
              Figure 2. Heating elements 
C. Surface Interface 
The surface interface is the overlying material above the 
heating elements arrangement. The purpose of the surface 
interface is to supply heat through conduction. The heated 
elements underneath the surface transfer the heat to the icing 
layer accumulated on the overlying surface. Efficient 
conducting materials can be used as surface interface materials 
for the experimentation process.  Metals for instance 
aluminium, iron, copper etc. can be considered as the interface 
materials. 
D. Control Module 
The control module consists of electronic circuitry used to 
control the heating elements. This module recognizes the input 
from the user interface and drives the heating elements through 
its digital output lines. The control module executes the image 
capturing based on producing the external trigger signal. This 
trigger signal drives the infrared camera to capture the image 
for that instance. The final imagery is displayed through the 
imaging interface for temperature profile recording. Thus 
heated elements on/off signals are generated by the control 
module that are in accordance with the IR imagery profile.  
 
Detector 
Processing 
Electronics 
User 
Interface 
Optics  
Control, Video, 
Status, Sync 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

E. User Interface 
The human interface in the experimentation process is the 
mutual interface of IR imagery analysis software and control 
module circuitry. The observation of the IR camera software 
will produce the thermal signature and temperature profiles of 
the icing.  Control module will produce the operating cycles of 
the heating elements to produce the imaging profile. The 
resultant imaging is then analyzed to evaluate the captured 
scene. 
 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
The experimental setup for marine ice detection comprises 
of the components discussed in the section-II. The IR camera 
of MWIR range is used at angle normal to the icing surface. 
This was done to avoid any possible reflections that could lead 
to false temperature detection. The IR resolution of the camera 
used in the experiment is 320 × 240 pixels with the 
temperature sensitivity of 0.050C. The distance of the IR 
camera from the icing surface was kept small (60 cm) such 
that the surface image fits into the camera frame. The reason 
behind was to keep the frame coordinates same for analysis 
and to avoid camera zoom during experimental observations 
on the user interface. Most of the commercially available IR 
cameras include the user interface package. The complete 
proposed setup is shown in Figure 3. 
The  active  heating  control  in  the  IR  ice  detection  is 
provided  by  the  control  module.  The  control  module  is 
responsible for controlling the power on and power off 
timings of the heated elements. The heating elements 
discussed  can also be used as deicing agents. Integration of 
the camera’s user interface with the control module helps to 
synchronize the captured scene  with  the  control  
mechanism.  The  infrared energy  of  a  certain  temperature  
is  released  when  control module drives the heating 
elements. The individual selection of the  heated  elements  
provides  the  flexibility  to   warm  a particular area. This 
helps the IR energy to be captured at the desired locations. 
The IR signature captured can be evaluated in the IR user 
interface software to validate the presence of ice.  
The operating mechanism of the experimental setup 
starts with the capturing of the IR frame without turning on 
the heating elements. Once the image has been captured the 
control module turn on the heating elements and second IR 
frame is captured. The images are saved and post processed 
to evaluate the results. The post processing of the images is 
performed with the patented software tool that is part of the 
user interface. The post processing included the frame 
calibration, temperature profile extraction and plotting the 
results. 
The working principle of an IR camera is based on 
thermography imaging. The major components of the camera 
are lens, detector, video processing electronics and user 
interface control. The incident beam of light is focused by the 
lens upon the detector. The detector contains the IR sensitive 
elements arranged in the array called focal plane array (FPA). 
These are IR sensitive elements and miniature in size (micro-
meters). The resolution of FPA determines the resolution of 
the IR imagery produced by the camera. Many IR cameras 
available have user interface to calculate the scene 
temperature along with imagery recording software. 
Calibration is often required to read out the correct 
temperature across the scene that is captured.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. IR ice detection setup with active heat signature 
 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The experimentation was performed to observe the 
infrared signature of pure ice and water droplets on a heated 
surface. These experiments were performed at room 
temperature. The heated elements were operated by the 
control module. The top of the surface interface was covered 
with pure ice. The pure ice sample was prepared in a round 
shape. The surface area of pure ice sample was 55cm2 with 
the thickness of 0.6 cm. This ice sample was placed on the 
heated area of approximately 64 cm2. The heated elements 
were operated above 1000C for a short period of time (20-30 
seconds). The observations were made on the surface 
temperature from 230C to 1150C. The duration to reach the 
peak temperature was approximately 25 seconds. The IR user 
interface was used to record infrared signatures of the ice 
sample. These isothermal profiles are shown in figure 4. 
The temperature profiles across the cross-sectional area of ice 
sample  were  observed  from  the  isothermal  images  that  
is shown in the figure 5 
 
The temperature profiles of the ice sample show consistent 
temperature recordings from 1.640C to 2.10C (figure 5) at the 
interface temperature of 230C, 800C, 1100C and 1150C. The 
presence of ice can be asserted with the temperature 
recordings around 00C. In the case of non-icing conditions 
above the surface interface, temperature profiles must be on 
the higher scale. 
 
 
IR Camera 
 
Control Module 
Surface Interface 
Digital I/O 
 
IR Signature 
TCP/IP  
User 
Interface 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Pure ice iso-thermal signature on the surface interface 
Figure 5. Pure ice cross sectional surface temperature over known 
heated interface 
 
The other noticeable results were obtained by observing 
the water droplets of different sizes over the surface 
interface as shown in figure 6. The isothermal infrared 
signature shows the presence of droplets in contrast with the 
rest of the surface. These observations were recorded at the 
surface interface temperature of 230C, 380C, 550C and 800C. 
The average temperature recordings of the small and large 
water droplets were performed (figure 6). The water droplets 
temperature increased as expected and a significant difference 
in the temperature was observed between large and small 
water droplets (figure 6). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Water droplets isothermal signature on the surface 
interface 
 
ACKNOWLEDGENMENTS 
The work reported in this paper is funded by the 
MAROFF, project no. 195153/160 in collaboration with 
Faroe Petroleum. We would also like to acknowledge the 
support given by Prof. James Mercer at University of 
Tromsø.  
 
REFERENCES 
1. 
Fikke, S., Cost 727: atmospheric icing on structures. 
Measurements and data collection on icing: State of the Art, 
Publication of MeteoSwiss, 2006. 75(110): p. 1422-1381. 
2. 
Rashid T., Mughal U. N., and  Virk M. S., “Feasibility of 
Charge Transfer Based Atmospheric Ice Detection and 
Measurement,” in International Conference on Sensor 
Technologies and Applications. 2014: p. 27-31. 
3. 
Roebber P., and  Mitten P., “Modelling and  measurement  of 
icing in Canadian waters,” 1987: Atmospheric Environment 
Service. 
4. 
Overland J., “Prediction of vessel icing,” Journal of climate and 
applied meteorology, 1986. 25(12): p. 1793-1806. 
5. 
Gregoris D., Yu S. and  Teti F. “Multispectral  imaging  of  ice,”  
in Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2004. Canadian 
Conference on. 2004. IEEE. p. 2051-2056. 
6. 
Stuart B., “Infrared spectroscopy,” 2005: Wiley Online 
Library. 
7. 
Rogalski A., “Infrared detectors: an overview,” Infrared 
Physics & Technology, 2002. 43(3): p. 187-210. 
8. 
Hori M., “In-situ measured spectral directional emissivity of 
snow and ice in the 8–14 μm atmospheric window,” Remote 
Sensing of Environment, 2006. 100(4): p. 486-502. 
9. 
P. F.  U.K.  Limited,  Peltier  Thermoelectric  Modules.     [cited  
2015; Available from: http://uk.farnell.com/peltier-elements. 
10. P. F.  U.K.  Limited,  PTC  Thermistirs.    [cited  2015;  
Available from: http://uk.farnell.com/epcos/b59886c120a70 
/ptcthermistor/dp/2144030. 
a) Surface Interface at 23oC 
b) Surface Interface at 38oC 
c) Surface Interface at 55oC 
d)  Surface Interface at 80oC 
a)  Surface Interface at 23oC 
b) Surface Interface at 80oC 
c) Surface Interface at 110oC 
d) Surface Interface at 115oC 
58oC 
49oC 
26oC 
24.5oC 
40oC 
35oC 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

