New Advances in Quartz Enhanced Photoacoustic Spectroscopy for Gas Sensing
Applications
Giansergio Menduni, Arianna Elefante, Pietro
Patimisco, Angelo Sampaolo, Marilena Giglio,
Vincenzo Spagnolo
PolySense Lab – Physics Dept., Polytechnic and University
of Bari
Bari, Italy
email: giansergio.menduni@poliba.it;
arianna.elefante@uniba.it; pietro.patimisco@poliba.it;
angelo.sampaolo@uniba.it; marilena.giglio@uniba.it
vincenzoluigi.spagnolo@poliba.it
Vittorio M. N. Passaro
Photonics Research Group, Dept. Of Electrical and
Information Engineering, Polytechnic di Bari,
Bari, Italy
email: vittorio.passaro@poliba.it
Abstract—In this paper, we review the latest advancements in
Quartz-Enhanced Photo-Acoustic Spectroscopy (QEPAS) for
trace-gas sensing. Starting from the QEPAS basic physical
principles, we analyze and discuss the influence of Quartz
Tuning
Forks
(QTFs)
geometry
on
their
optoacoustic
transducer
performance.
Subsequently,
we
provide
an
overview
of
the latest
developments in
QEPAS
sensing
technology employing custom QTFs and novel micro-resonator
configurations. Finally, we report on a novel QEPAS approach
allowing simultaneous dual-gas detection.
Keywords-Quartz-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy; gas
sensing; custom quartz tuning fork; acoustic resonators; dual-
gas detection.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the last few years, gas sensing has gathered an
increasing attention for both industrial applications and
academia research. Examples of gas sensing applications are:
industrial production (like methane/ethane detection in
drilling) [1], automotive industry (like detection of polluting
gases from vehicles) [2], medical applications (breath
analysis) [3], indoor air quality supervision (like detection of
carbon
monoxide)
[4], environmental
monitoring
(like
greenhouse gas monitoring) [5].
A wide range of non-optical gas detection approaches
have been proposed, like laboratory analytical equipment,
semiconductor gas sensors and electrochemical devices [6].
Optical sensors can offer higher sensitivity [7], selectivity
and long-term stability, and are characterized by a long
lifetime and short response time, allowing real-time and in-
situ detection.
Optical gas sensors are mainly based on Lambert-Beer’s
law
of
light
absorption
processes.
Photoacoustic
spectroscopy is one of the most sensitive optical sensing
techniques. It is based on the detection of acoustic waves,
generated as a consequence of the modulated absorption of
light from a specific targeted gas. Absorbed light excites the
gas target molecules into higher energy levels that relax non-
radiatively and generate heat and thereby an increase of
pressure in the localized region of the excitation light beam.
The modulated absorption generates pressure waves, which
can be detected by a microphone.
Quartz-Enhanced
Photo-Acoustic
Spectroscopy
(QEPAS)
is
an
alternative
approach
to
photoacoustic
detection of trace gas utilizing a Quartz Tuning Fork (QTF)
as a sharply resonant acoustic transducer to detect weak
photoacoustic excitation and allowing the use of extremely
small volumes [8][9]. Such an approach removes restrictions
imposed on the gas cell by the acoustic resonance conditions.
QEPAS is a very sensitive technique, for several gases limit
of detection of few parts per billion have been achieved [9].
A record sensitivity of 50 part per trillion (ppt) in 1sec
integration time has been demonstrated for SF6 detection
[10], while implementing an intracavity-based QEPAS
system a detection limit of 900 ppt in 1sec has been achieved
for CO2 trace detection [11][12]. Here, we review the latest
advancements in QEPAS for trace-gas sensing. In Section II,
we report on QEPAS sensing using custom QTFs, in Section
III we discuss the results obtained using single-tube micro-
resonator systems, and in Section IV we report on QEPAS
results obtained using QTFs operating at the 1st overtone
flexural mode. We conclude the work in Section V.
II.
QEPAS WITH CUSTOM QTFS
Prior to 2013, all the QEPAS sensors reported in the
literature employed commercial standard QTFs operating at
the fundamental in-plane flexural resonant mode, with a
frequency of ~ 32.7 kHz. However, the standard QTFs
structure and its operating frequency were optimized for
timing purposes and not for spectroscopic applications. With
the aim of determining the dependence of the QTF
parameters and performance on their relevant dimensions
and identify the optimal design for optoacoustic gas sensing,
we designed and tested a set of QTFs with different values of
spacing between the prongs, their length and thickness, and
crystal thickness. A photograph of one of the realized QTFs
is shown in Figure 1.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 1.
Photograph of custom QTFs. The space between the prongs is
1.5 mm.
We assessed the dependence of the resonance frequency,
the related Q-factor, the fork stiffness, the spring constant,
and the electrical resistance from the QTF dimensions
[13][14]. We also identified the optoacoustic gas sensing
figures of merit and studied their dependence from the QTFs
relevant dimensions. For QEPAS applications, our results
show that the QTF resistivity R should be kept low and the
resonance Q-factor as high as possible. Both conditions can
be obtained by increasing the QTF crystal thickness w and
the ratio T/L between the prong thickness T and length L.
However, the resonance frequency increases as T/L2, and it
should not exceed 40 kHz. Moreover, the smallest possible
prong spacing must be chosen to enhance the amplitude of
the acoustic wave incident on the internal prong surface,
avoiding that the focused laser beam illuminates the QTF.
Therefore, the optimal prong spacing selection is mainly
determined by the wavelength of the exciting laser beam and
its spatial quality.
III.
SINGLE-TUBE MICRO-RESONATOR SYSTEMS
Acoustic micro-resonators are important components to
improve the performance of QEPAS sensors [8][13]. Among
the different QEPAS spectrophone configurations, the on-
beam one showed the strongest acoustic coupling efficiency
between the QTF and the microresonator (mR), resulting in
an optimum signal to noise (SNR) gain factor of ~ 30 [9] for
a
standard
32
kHz-QTF.
The
on-beam
spectrophone
configuration consists of two stainless steel tubes with the
QTF inserted between them. The possibility to operate with
custom QTFs with a prong spacing of up to 1.5 mm, opens
the way to the implementation of a single-tube mR
configuration in an on-beam QEPAS spectrophone (SO-
QEPAS configuration). By implementing the SO-QEPAS
configuration we demonstrated that it is possible to achieve a
signal-to-noise amplification factor of ~130 in comparison
with the bare QTF [15].
IV.
QEPAS WITH QTF OPERATING IN THE 1
ST OVERTONE
FLEXURAL MODE
In QEPAS sensing, the resonance frequency of the QTF
must be limited below 40 kHz to ensure that the transfer of
the excess energy absorbed by the target gas follows
efficiently the fast modulation of the incident laser radiation
[9]. The custom QTF we have realized are characterized by a
fundamental resonance frequency up to one order of
magnitude lower with respect to the standard 32 kHz-QTF
[13][14]. However, the 1st overtone modes frequencies are
also reduced with a decrease of the fundamental resonance
frequency to
~ 3kHz. This
opened
the
way to
the
implementation of QTF overtone flexural modes for QEPAS
trace gas sensing.
A typical calculated vibration profile of the QTF prongs
at the 1st overtone flexural mode for maxima displacements
conditions is shown in Figure 2 as a function of the distance
from the support base for the first overtone mode.
The 1st overtone flexural mode can be modeled as 2-
coupled point-masses, each one positioned at an antinode
and oscillating in counter-phase. The two antinodes identify
the position of the maximum vibration amplitudes along the
prong. When the focusing spot is located at the antinodes
points of the vibration profile, where the maximum vibration
amplitude is allowed, the QEPAS signal is maximized.
Figure 2.
Deformation of the QTF prongs (a) and normalized lateral
displacement for a QTF first overtone mode (b).
By optimizing the QTF design, it is possible to favor the first
overtone flexural mode operation with respect to the
fundamental mode one in terms of QEPAS signal [16],[17].
A.
Single-tube micro-resonator coupled with QTF 1st
overtone flexural mode
The length of the mR is correlated with the sound
wavelength, given by λ = v/f, where v is the sound speed 
(343 m/s in air). Thereby, implementing dual-tube or single-
tube mR for QTFs having resonance frequency < 10 kHz
becomes challenging. As an example, for a frequency as low
as 5 kHz, λ = 6.86 cm.  The optimal length for a single-tube 
mR falls between λ/2 and λ, closer to λ/2., because of the mR 
acoustic coupling with the QTF [9]. These lengths make
optical alignment challenging when operating with mid-IR
and inhibits operations with a THz laser. However, since the
1st overtone frequency is about 6.2 times higher than the
fundamental one, operating at the 1st overtone will require a
significantly more than six times reduced mR length. The
first demonstration of a QEPAS system implementing a QTF
operating at the 1st overtone flexural mode and coupled with
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

a single-tube mR is reported in [18]. Benefiting from the
high overtone resonance frequency (17.7 kHz) and the quasi
1st harmonic acoustic standing waves generated in the SO-
QEPAS configuration, the AmR length was reduced to 14.5
mm. The signal enhancement in the overtone resonance
mode in this SO-QEPAS configuration leads to an overall
sensitivity enhancement factor of ~380 with respect to the
bare custom QTF operating in the fundamental resonance
mode.
B.
Double antinode excited QEPAS
Since the 1st overtone flexural mode can be modeled as
2-coupled point-masses, each one positioned at an antinode
and oscillating in counter-phase, it can be possible to excite
the two resonance antinode points of a custom QTF operated
at the 1st overtone resonance mode simultaneously using one
laser source and two dual-tubes mRs. This approach named
double
antinode
excited
quartz-enhanced
photoacoustic
spectroscopy (DAE-QEPAS) has been demonstrated for the
first time in [19]. Two sets of acoustic mRs were optimized
and assembled at two separated 1st overtone antinode points
of the QTF to improve the spectrophone performance. With
the two antinodes excited by one laser source, the DAE-
QEPAS spectrophone attained a sensitivity gain factor of ~
100 times and ~3 times with respect to the 1st overtone
resonances of the bare custom QTF and a standard on-beam
QEPAS spectrophone, respectively.
C.
Simultaneous dual-gas QEPAS detection
QEPAS sensors require a proper design to perform
chemical analysis of a multi-component gas mixture due to
the fact that the QTF cannot recognize the molecular species
responsible for the generation of the pressure waves. Very
recently, this limitation has been overcome by realizing a
dual-gas QEPAS sensing system based on a QTF frequency
division multiplexing technique [20]. The QTF in a dual-gas
QEPAS sensor is excited simultaneously at the fundamental
and 1st overtone flexural modes by two independently
modulated lasers. The two target gases are detected via
demodulation of the custom QTF piezoelectric signal at the
fundamental frequency f0 and the 1st overtone frequency f1,
respectively, by means of two lock-in amplifiers. The
capability of the QEPAS sensor to perform simultaneous
dual-gas
spectral
detection
was
demonstrated
by
implementing a DFB laser source targeting an acetylene
(C2H2) and a diode laser targeting a H2O absorption line and
reaching normalized noise equivalent absorption factors in
the 10-7 cm−1·W/Hz1/2 range. Further improvements of dual-
gas QEPAS sensors performances will be achieved by
adding dual- or single-tube acoustic micro-resonators to
enhance the generated photo-acoustic wave intensity.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
Recent developments in quart-enhanced photoacoustic
spectroscopy were reviewed. Compared with a standard 32
kHz-QTF,
the
custom
QTFs
result
in
better
sensing
performance,
considering
also
that
they
allowed
to
implement large prongs spacing (up to 1.5 mm) making the
optical alignment less critical, especially with laser sources
having limited spatial beam quality. The simultaneous
reduction of the fundamental resonances modes down to 3
kHz in custom QTFs opened the way to the use of the 1st
overtone mode for QEPAS sensing. Since the 1st overtone
mode is characterized by two antinodes positions, new
approaches, such as the double antinode excited QEPAS and
simultaneous dual-gas detection by exciting simultaneously
the QTF at the fundamental and the 1st overtone flexural
modes, have been demonstrated.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors from Dipartimento Interateneo di Fisica di
Bari acknowledge the financial support from THORLABS
GmbH, within PolySense, a joint-research laboratory.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Sampaolo et al., "Interband cascade laser based quartz-
enhanced photoacoustic sensor for multiple hydrocarbons
detection," Proc. SPIE 10540, Quantum Sensing and Nano
Electronics
and
Photonics
XV,
2018,
105400C;
doi:
10.1117/12.2288336
[2]
C. Di Franco et al., “Optical and electronic NOx sensors for
applications in mechatronics,” Sensors, vol. 9, pp. 3337-3356,
2009.
[3]
P. R. Fortes, J. F. S. Petruci, and I. M. Raimundo, “Optical
Gas Sensors for Exhaled Breath Analysis,” SPIE Press,
Bellingham, Washington, 2017.
[4]
X. Liu et al., “A Survey on Gas Sensing Technology,”
Sensors, vol. 12, pp. 9635-9665, 2012.
[5]
J. Hodgkinson and R. P. Tatam, “Optical gas sensing: a
review,” Meas. Sci. Technol., Vol. 24, 012004, 2013.
[6]
E. Bakker and M. Telting-Diaz, “Electrochemical Sensors,”
Anal. Chem., Vol. 74, pp. 2781–2800, 2002.
[7]
I. Galli et al., “Molecular Gas Sensing Below Parts Per
Trillion: Radiocarbon-Dioxide Optical Detection,” Phys. Rev.
Lett., Vol. 107, 270802, 2011.
[8]
P. Patimisco, A. Sampaolo, L. Dong, F. K. Tittel, and V.
Spagnolo,
“Recent
advances
in
quartz
enhanced
photoacoustic sensing,” Appl. Phys. Rev., Vol. 5, 011106,
2018.
[9]
P. Patimisco, G. Scamarcio, F. K. Tittel, and V. Spagnolo,
"Quartz-Enhanced Photoacoustic Spectroscopy: A Review,"
Sensors, Vol. 14, pp. 6165-6206 (2014).
[10] V. Spagnolo, P. Patimisco, S. Borri, G. Scamarcio, B. E.
Bernacki, and J. Kriesel, “Part-per-trillion level SF6 detection
using a quartz enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy based
sensor with single-mode fiber-coupled quantum cascade laser
excitation,” Opt. Lett., Vol. 37, pp. 460-462, 2012.
[11] S. Borri et al., "Intracavity quartz-enhanced photoacoustic
sensor," Appl. Phys. Lett., Vol. 104, 091114, 2014.
[12] P. Patimisco et al., "High finesse optical cavity coupled with a
quartz-enhanced
photoacoustic
spectroscopic
sensor,"
Analyst, Vol. 140, pp. 736-743, 2015.
[13] P.
Patimisco
et
al.,
"Quartz–enhanced
photoacoustic
spectrophones exploiting custom tuning forks: a review",
Adv. Phys. X, Vol. 2, pp. 169-187, 2016.
[14] P. Patimisco et al., "Analysis of the electro-elastic properties
of custom quartz tuning forks for optoacoustic gas sensing,"
Sensors and Actuators B, Vol. 227, pp. 539-546, 2016.
[15] H. Zheng et al., "Single-tube on-beam quartz-enhanced
photoacoustic spectroscopy," Opt. Lett., Vol. 41, pp. 978-981,
2016.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[16] A.
Sampaolo
et
al.,
"Quartz-enhanced
photoacoustic
spectroscopy exploiting tuning fork overtone modes," Appl.
Phys. Lett., Vol. 107, 231102, 2015.
[17] F. K. Tittel et al., "Analysis of overtone flexural modes
operation in quartz-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy,"
Opt. Ex., Vol.24, pp. A682-A692, 2016.
[18] H. Zheng et al., "Overtone resonance enhanced single-tube
on-beam quartz enhanced photoacoustic spectrophone," Appl.
Phys. Lett., Vol. 109, 111103, 2016.
[19] H. Zheng et al., "Double antinode excited quartz-enhanced
photoacoustic spectrophone," Appl. Phys. Lett., Vol 110,
021110, 2017.
[20] H. Wu et al., "Simultaneous dual-gas QEPAS detection based
on a fundamental and overtone combined vibration of quartz
tuning fork," Appl. Phys. Lett., Vol. 110, 121104, 2017.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

