A Transducer with Inversion Layer Technique for Expanded Lesion Size in HIFU 
Surgery 
Jin Ho Sung, Da Sol Kwon, Eun Young Jeong, Jong Seob Jeong 
Department of Medical Biotechnology, Dongguk University 
Seoul, 04620, Republic of Korea 
madeinjinho@dongguk.edu, kwondas_31@dongguk.edu, chocoeun7@dongguk.edu, jjsspace@dongguk.edu 
 
 
Abstract—In High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) 
surgery, benign or malignant tumors can be treated through 
the thermal and mechanical effects of the focused ultrasound. 
However, the overall HIFU treatment time is relatively long 
compared with the open surgery because the irradiation area 
of the ultrasound beam is very small. In this paper, we present 
a dual-concentric HIFU transducer with inversion layer 
technique to extend the focal region in the axial direction. The 
performance of the proposed technique was demonstrated by 
Finite Element Analysis (FEA) simulation, and the lesion size 
was increased by 97% compared with the conventional single 
element transducer based on the extended -6 dB Depth of 
Focus (DOF). Therefore, the proposed HIFU transducer can be 
one of the useful ways to shorten the total treatment time of the 
HIFU surgery. 
Keywords-finite element analysis; dual-concentric HIFU 
transducer; high intensity focused ultrasound; inversion layer;  
phase inversion. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) surgery, 
one of the main disadvantages is relatively long treatment 
time, mainly due to the small therapeutic area per sonication 
[1]. In order to solve this problem, some researchers have 
developed specially designed HIFU transducers, such as 
toric or split-aperture transducers [2][3]. However, they can 
mainly expand the lesion size in the lateral direction rather 
than the axial direction. In this paper, we propose a dual-
concentric HIFU transducer with inversion layer technique 
that can increase lesion size in the axial direction to treat a 
deeply located target. The performance of the proposed 
technique was demonstrated by Finite Element Analysis 
(FEA) using PZFlex tool (OnScale, Cupertino, CA, USA) [4].  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 
II and Section III, the principle of the proposed technique 
and the simulation results are explained, respectively. The 
conclusions are drawn in Section IV. 
II. 
METHODS 
The proposed HIFU transducer consists of disc-type and 
ring-type elements with the confocal point. Each element is 
driven by two input signals with opposite phases, i.e., 0° and 
180°. In this case, the axial beam pattern with a deep valley 
can be generated [5]. To complement that deep notch point, 
multi-frequency ultrasound generated by the inversion layer 
technique was employed [6]. In other words, a dual-
concentric transducer using inversion layer technique can 
achieve a relatively uniform -6 dB Depth of Focus (DOF). 
Note that DOF is closely related to the lesion size. In the 
FEA simulation, PZT4 (Lead Zirconate Titanate) and 
unloaded epoxy were used for piezoelectric material and kerf 
filler, respectively. To implement inversion layer technique, 
two piezoelectric layers with opposite poling direction were 
employed as shown in Figure 1(b). A conventional single 
element transducer in Figure 1(a) was also designed to 
compare the performance of the proposed transducer. The 
outer diameter of the ring-type element was 31.4 mm, the 
inner diameter of the disc-type element was 22 mm, and a 
kerf width was 0.2 mm. The aperture had a concave shape, 
and the focal length was 35 mm. There was no backing layer 
to maximize the transmitted energy, and water was chosen as 
the medium. 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic diagrams of (a) the conventional single element 
transducer and (b) the proposed transducer. Note that a white arrow indicates 
polling direction of piezoelectric material. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
The simulation results of electrical impedance are shown 
in Figure 2(a) and (b). The conventional single element 
transducer in Figure 2(a) had single-resonance peak at 3 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

MHz frequency, and the proposed transducer in Figure 2(b) 
had dual-resonance peaks at 3 MHz and 6 MHz at the same 
time. This phenomenon may reduce transmitted power, but it 
can be compensated by adjusting driving voltage of the input 
signal. In the sound field simulation, the conventional single 
element transducer had -6 dB DOF of 5.97 mm as shown in 
Figure 3(a), while the proposed transducer in Figure 3(b) had 
-6 dB DOF of 11.74 mm, which is 97% improved compared 
with the conventional single element transducer. The -6 dB 
lateral beamwidths of the conventional single element 
transducer and the proposed transducer were 0.79 mm and 
0.72 mm, respectively. The lateral beamwidth of the 
proposed transducer was slightly reduced (7.7%) compared 
with the conventional single element transducer. Note that -6 
dB lateral beamwidths were obtained based on beam 
projection scheme while the -6 dB DOF was acquired at 
maximum pressure in the axial direction. 
 
Figure 2. Electrical impedance simulation results: (a) the conventional single 
element transducer and (b) the proposed transducer (inner disc-type element). 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we propose the dual-concentric HIFU 
transducer with the inversion layer technique to extend the 
focal length (i.e., -6 dB DOF). The proposed method can 
axially increase the focal length related to the lesion size by 
97% compared with the conventional single element 
transducer and thus shorten the total treatment time of the 
HIFU surgery. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the National Research 
Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea 
government (MSIT) (No. 2018R1A2B6004103). 
 
Figure 3. Sound field simulation results including 2D sound field, lateral 
beam pattern, and axial beam pattern: (a) the conventional single element 
transducer and (b) the proposed transducer.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. T. ter Haar, “Ultrasound focal beam surgery,” Ultrasound 
Med. Biol., vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 1089–1100, 1995.  
[2] D. Melodelima et al., “Thermal ablation produced using a 
surgical toroidal high-intensity focused ultrasound device is 
independent from hepatic inflow occlusion,” Phys. Med. Biol., 
vol. 54, no. 20, pp. 6353–6369, 2009. 
[3] K. Sasaki et al., “Effect of split-focus approach on producing 
larger coagulation in swine liver,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 
29, no. 4, pp. 591–599, 2003. 
[4] Onscale Inc. Web Site: https://pzflex.com/software/. 
[5] J. S. Jeong, “Dual concentric-sectored HIFU transducer with 
phase shifted ultrasound excitation for expanded necrotic 
region: A simulation study,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., 
Ferroelect., Freq. Control, vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 924–931, 2013. 
[6] C. Y. Park, D. S. Kwon, J. H. Sung, and J. S. Jeong, “Dual-
frequency ultrasound transducer using inversion layer 
technique for therapeutic ultrasound surgery,” IEEE Sensors 
J., vol. 17, no. 21, pp. 6859–6866, 2017. 
 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

