Numerical Model of Piezoelectric Lateral Electric Field Excited Resonator as Basic 
Element of Acoustic Sensors
Teplykh A. A, Zaitsev B. D. 
Saratov Branch of Institute of Radio Engineering and 
Electronics nm.V.A.Kotelnikov RAS 
SB IRE nm.V.A.Kotelnikov RAS 
Saratov, Russia 
e-mail: teplykhaa@mail.ru 
Kuznetsova I. E. 
Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics 
nm.V.A.Kotelnikov RAS 
IRE nm.V.A.Kotelnikov RAS 
Moscow, Russia 
e-mail: kuziren@yandex.ru
 
Abstract —Nowadays, piezoelectric lateral electric field excited 
resonators are frequently used for development of various 
acoustic sensors. But, the adequate theory of such resonators is 
absent. In this paper, the numerical method of calculation of 
characteristics of the acoustic oscillations in the piezoelectric 
lateral electric field excited resonators is developed. The 
developed method is based on the finite element analysis and 
allows computing the distribution of the components of the 
mechanical displacement in the piezoelectric plate and electric 
potential in the piezoelectric plate and surrounding vacuum at 
arbitrary frequency of the exciting field. This method allows 
setting various boundary conditions on various parts of a plate 
surface, including a condition of mechanical damping of 
oscillations. This allows calculating the frequency dependence 
of 
the 
real 
and 
imaginary 
parts 
of 
the 
electrical 
impedance/admittance of the resonator. We analyzed a 
piezoelectric lateral electric field excited resonator, which is 
based on a 0.5 mm-thick X-cut lithium niobate plate. Two 
infinitesimally thin metallic electrodes with width of 5 mm 
were deposited on top side of the plate. The electrodes were 
deposited in such a way that the lateral field was oriented 
along the crystallographic Y-axis. Calculations of electric 
impedance were carried out for various values of a gap in 
range 1 - 3 mm between electrodes. These results are in 
quantitative agreement with experimental data. A brief 
description of experimental set up is also presented. 
 
Keywords - acoustic resonator; lateral exciting field; finite 
element analysis; lithium niobate; 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
At present time researchers pay particular attention to the 
piezoelectric lateral electric field excited resonators because 
of development of various acoustoelectrical sensors. One of 
the main problems of the design of such devices is the 
suppression of undesirable acoustic oscillations and ensuring 
a high Q-factor of the resonator. Currently, this problem is 
solved experimentally [1][2] by selection the optimal shape 
of the electrodes and choosing the area of coverage of the 
damping coating. However, this process requires a creation 
of a large amount of experimental samples. Researchers can 
theoretically estimate the efficiency of such resonators using 
the Christoffel - Bechmann method, which allows computing 
the electromechanical coupling coefficient for bulk waves 
excited by a lateral electric field [3][4]. However, this 
method does not take into account the finite aperture of the 
excited waves. Therefore, the problem of more accurate 
theoretical calculation of characteristics and efficiency of 
such resonators is considered as urgent. 
In this paper, we developed a method for calculating the 
acoustic oscillations and the accompanying electric field in 
resonator representing a thin plate of a piezoelectric material 
with two rectangular electrodes on one side. The developed 
method is based on the finite element analysis and allows us 
to find the distribution of components of the mechanical 
displacement in the piezoelectric plate and electric potential 
in the piezoelectric plate and its surrounding vacuum at a 
certain oscillation frequency of the exciting field. This 
method takes into account the different boundary conditions 
on different areas of the resonator surface, and in particular, 
the mechanical damping of the parasitic oscillations, which 
was used in the [1][2].  
In Section II, we give the description of the numerical 
model of resonator. In Section III, we describe the 
experimental set up. In Section IV, we make the comparison 
of theoretical and experimental frequency dependencies of 
real and imaginary parts of electrical impedance of lateral 
electric field excited resonator. Finally, Section V presents 
the conclusions and the future research. 
II. 
THE DESCRIPTION OF NUMERICAL MODEL 
In this paper, we consider a piezoelectric plate limited in 
x and y directions (Figure 1). There are different boundary 
conditions on different parts of plate surface. Value of time-
varying electric potential is given on an infinitely thin 
electrodes e1 and e2. The gap between electrodes is G. 
Special mechanical boundary conditions are specified on 
areas d1 and d2. The rest of plate surface is assumed 
mechanically and electrically free. In the z direction, the 
plate and electrodes assumed to be unlimited. 
 
Figure 1.  The geometry of the problem 
So, we need to find a distribution of mechanical 
displacements within the plate, as well as the electric 
potential distribution inside the plate and in the surrounding 
vacuum. Exciting electric field varies according to harmonic 
law with a frequency of ω. Since there is no other sources of 
vibration excitation the solution must also be time-harmonic 
h 
e1 
y 
x 
w 
e2 
d1 
d2 
G 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

with frequency ω. Thus, this problem may be represented as 
a system of differential equations [5]: 
( , )
0
L ui
  f

                           (1) 
where L is a differential operator, ui is the mechanical 
displacement components, i=1..3 and  is the electric 
potential. So, we need to find functions ui(x, y) and (x, y), 
which satisfy (1). In this work this problem was solved by 
using the Galerkin’s method [5]. For existence and 
uniqueness of the problem solution of (1), the boundary 
conditions must also be specified. As electrical boundary 
conditions, we used the given values of   on the electrodes 
e1 and e2 and continuous of potential on the rest of 
boundary. The mechanical boundary conditions are more 
difficult to formulate properly. In our experiments with the 
resonator with a lateral field [1][2], the space around the 
electrodes and partly electrodes were covered with an 
absorbing varnish. This was done to suppress unwanted 
vibration modes of the plate and improve the quality of the 
resonator. 
To take into account this fact in the theoretical model of 
the resonator, the mechanical boundary conditions were 
formulated as follows. On the surface of piezoelectric plates, 
except for regions d1 and d2, the mechanical boundary 
condition is the absence of the normal components of the 
stress: 
0
ij
j
T n 
.                                       (2) 
In regions d1 and d2, where the damping coating was 
applied, the boundary condition is written as: 
ij
j
ij
j
T n
i Z u
 
.                                   (3) 
Here, Tij is the tensor of mechanical displacement of 
piezoelectric plate, nj is the surface normal, ω is the 
oscillation frequency, Zij is the acoustic impedance of 
damping coating, uj is the mechanical displacement. This 
boundary condition is obtained as a generalization of the 
well known relationship [6] from fluids to anisotropic solids 
p
 Zv
.                                        (4) 
Here, p is the acoustic pressure, v is the oscillation velocity. 
When Zij 0, this condition becomes the condition of the 
free surface Tijnj =0, while Zij  this condition becomes 
the condition of rigidly fixed surface uj=0. In the present case 
Zij = Zij where Z is the acoustic impedance of varnish. 
III. 
THE DESCRIPTION OF EXPERIMENTAL SET UP 
In order to compare the theoretical results with 
experimental data, the lateral electric field excited resonator 
on X-cut lithium niobate plate was made [2]. The scheme of 
this resonator is presented in Figure 2. The shear dimensions 
and thickness of plate were equal 18×18 mm2 and 0.5 mm, 
respectively. Two 200 nm – thick aluminum rectangular 
electrodes with dimensions of 5×10 mm2 were deposited on 
one side of the plate through a special mask in vacuum. The 
electrodes were deposited in such a way that the lateral field 
was oriented along the crystallographic Y-axis (Figure 2). 
This field component excited a longitudinal acoustic wave 
reflected between the plate sides with the largest 
electromechanical coupling coefficient [1]. The gap G 
between electrodes was equal to 1 mm. The area around the 
electrodes and part of electrodes with width of 3 mm were 
coated with a damping layer of absorbing varnish with 
thickness of about 0.2 mm.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  The side (a) and top (b) views of the resonator with the lateral 
exciting electric field: X – cut lithium niobate plate -1, electrodes -2, and 
absorbing coating - 3. 
The frequency dependences of the real and imaginary 
parts of electric impedance of resonator were measured using 
the LCR meter (4285A, Agilent Technologies Inc.). These 
dependences for pointed above resonator are presented in 
Figure 4 by dashed lines. 
IV. 
THE COMPARISON OF THE THEORETICAL AND 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
In accordance with experiment, the calculation was 
performed for the case when the thickness h and width w of 
the plate were equal to 0.5 mm and 18 mm, respectively 
(Figure 1). On the upper surface of the plate, two electrodes 
e1 and e2 were deposited. The lateral electric field was 
oriented along the crystallographic Y-axis. The width of each 
electrode e1 and e2 was equal to 5mm with the gap G 
between them of 1 mm. The width of damping regions d1 
and d2 was of 5 mm and the regions of overlap (d1-e1) and 
(d2- e2) were fixed to 3 mm. 
Since the above-described method of calculation allows 
us to find the distribution of all variables and their 
derivatives for any given frequency, it was possible to build 
electrical impedance depending on the frequency of this 
resonator and compare them with experiment. So, we 
calculated the distribution of the acoustic field and the 
electric potential in the range f = 6-7 MHz. It is clearly seen 
in Figure 3 that the maximum amplitude of the acoustic 
vibrations are located in the gap between the electrodes. 
These oscillations correspond to the longitudinal bulk 
acoustic wave propagating in the vertical direction between 
the boundaries of the plate. This wave is the cause of deep 
2 
1 
Y 
X 
3 
a 
  
 
G 
10 mm. 
 5 mm. 
 5 mm. 
b 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

resonance on frequency dependence of the electrical 
impedance [1][2] shown on Figure 4. 
The theoretical value of the impedance is calculated in 
accordance with the formula: 
2
1
(
) /
Z
J




,                             (5) 
Here, φ2 – φ1 is the potential difference between 
electrodes, J is the displacement current: 
S
D
J
ds
t


 
                                       (6) 
This integral is taken over the both top and bottom surfaces 
of the electrode. The calculated frequency dependencies of 
real and imaginary parts of electrical impedance are 
presented by solid lines in Figure 4. The material constants 
of lithium niobate were taken from [7]. 
 
Figure 3.  Distribution of the components of mechanical displacement and 
electric potential in resonator excited by electric field at frequency 6.55 
MHz 
6
6.2
6.4
6.6
6.8
7
f, MHz
0
40
80
120
160
200
R, kOhm
a
 
6
6.2
6.4
6.6
6.8
7
f, MHz
-120
-80
-40
0
40
80
120
X, kOhm
b
 
Figure 4.  Theoretical and experimental value of the real (a) and imaginary 
(b) components of the electrical impedance of the resonator with a 1mm 
gap between the electrodes. Solid line is theory, dashed line is experiment. 
 
One can see from Figure 4 that a good agreement exists 
between 
theoretical 
and 
experimental 
dependencies. 
Therefore, the difference between values of resonant 
frequency does not exceed 15 kHz. A slightly bigger 
distinction in absolute values of X is explained by the 
parasitic electric capacity of the device, which has not been 
considered in calculation. Moreover, the used material 
constants taken from [7] may differ from actual ones in the 
range ±5% (standard error for modern technology of crystal 
growing process). 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The obtained results have shown the adequacy of the 
developed method for the characteristics calculation for 
resonators excited by a lateral electric field. These results 
will be used in future to develop sensors of fluid properties. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
The work was financially supported by the grant of 
President of Russia MK-5551.2014.9 and the grant of 
Russian Foundation of the Basic Research 12-02-01057a. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. D. Zaitsev, I. E. Kuznetsova, A. M. Shikhabudinov, and A. 
A. Vasiliev, “The research of the piezoelectric crystal 
resonators with the lateral field excitation” in Proc. IEEE Int. 
Ultrasonics Symp., 2010, pp. 946–949. 
[2] B. D. Zaitsev, I. E. Kuznetsova, A. M. Shikhabudinov, A. A. 
Teplykh, and I. A. Borodina, "The study of Piezoelectric 
Lateral-Electric-Field-Excited Resonator" in IEEE TUFFC, 
2014, vol.61, no. 1, pp.166-172.  
[3] D. F. McCann, J. M. McGann, J. M. Parks, D. J. Frankel, M. 
Pereira da Cunha, and J. F. Vetelino, “A Lateral-Field-Excited 
LiTaO3 High Frequency Bulk Acoustic Wave Sensor” in 
IEEE TUFFC, 2009, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 779–787. 
[4] T. G. Leblois and C. R. Tellier, “Design of new Lateral Field 
Excitation Langasite Resonant Sensors” in Proc. IEEE Int. 
Ultrasonics Symp., 2009, pp. 2672–2675. 
[5] L. Segerlind, Applied Finite Element Analysis. Second 
Edition. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 1984. 
[6] E. 
Skudrzyk, 
The 
Foundation 
of 
Acoustics. 
Basic 
Mathematics and Basic Acoustics. Springer-Verlag, 1971.  
[7] G. Kovacs, M. Anhorn, H. E. Engan, G. Visintini, and C.C.W 
Ruppel, "Improved material constants for LiNbO3 and 
LiTaO3" in IEEE IUS Proceedings, 1990, vol.1, pp. 435-438. 
u1 
u2 
u3 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

