Estimating Emotion for Each Personality
to Prevent School Dropout
Emi Takemoto
Graduate School of Information
Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University, Shiga, Japan
Email: emi0403@de.ritsumei.ac.jp
Yusuke Kajiwara
College of Information
Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University, Shiga, Japan
Email: kajiwara@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp
Hiromitsu Simakawa
College of Information
Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University, Shiga, Japan
Email: simakawa@cs.ritsumei.ac.jp
Abstract—This research estimates emotions of university students
from their pulse waves. Negative emotion of university students
causes school dropout, which is becoming a serious problem in
Japan. It is indispensable for school staffs and counselors to know
when and where students have negative emotion in the campus.
Since pulse wave movement along with emotion changes varies
with personality types, we build a model dependent on personality
type, to estimate student emotion from characteristics of pulse
wave movement. Experimental results show that the model for
each personality type improves the accuracy of emotion estima-
tion for new students. Positive or negative emotion estimated
from pulse wave signals contributes to enhancement of campus
environment by school counselors.
Keywords–emotion; school dropout; pulse wave; personality
I.
INTRODUCTION
University dropout is a serious social problem in Japan.
According to a survey conducted by the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, there are the rates
of student dropout were 0.42% for elementary school, 2.83%
for junior high school, 1.49% for high school and 2.9% for
university [1] [2].
According to Kearney & Silverman, youths are considered
to drop out of school for one or more of the following reasons
(functional conditions):
•
To avoid school-based stimuli that provoke a general
sense of negative affectivity (anxiety and depression)
•
To escape aversive school-based social and/or evalua-
tive situations
•
To pursue attention from signiﬁcant others
•
To pursue tangible reinforcers outside of school
The ﬁrst two functional conditions refer to school dropout be-
havior maintained by negative reinforcement, or the reduction
of unpleasant physical arousal or emotional states triggered
by school-based stimuli [3]. This research focuses on these
functional conditions. Students who drop out of school are
assumed to not be able to deal well with negative emotions
and situations causing them.
M.E.Pritchard and G.S.Wilson reported the combined in-
ﬂuence of emotional health had a signiﬁcant effect on intent
to drop out [4]. Therefore, the university should aware of the
emotional health condition of the students so that students can
maintain a positive mood.
This research estimates when and where universities stu-
dents have negative emotions leading them to school dropout.
The estimation of the time and places causing negative emotion
enables university staff to know what kind of events in campus
activities bring them negative emotion. They can provide the
students with mental care, such as emotional support and
introduction of counseling agency, which prevents the students
from dropping out.
Emotions are estimated through periodical inspection with
questionnaires, behavior observation, and measurement of
physiological responses. Since frequent questionnaires are a
burden to students, they are not suitable to ﬁnely grasp
emotions changing over time. Settlement of equipment, such as
cameras is necessary to observe behaviors. However, it records
the behavior of many students, which violates their privacy.
On the other hand, physiological responses can be obtained
through measurement of biological data using a wearable
device. Biological data correlated with emotion enables us to
estimate emotions online. The combination with positioning
tools, such as GPS and WIFI identiﬁes the place where
negative emotions occur.
A classiﬁer based on machine learning is a promising
means for the estimation of emotion from measured biological
data. However, the transition pattern of biological data for the
occurrence of speciﬁc emotion varies with individuals [5]. If
we want to estimate emotions from physiological responses,
it is necessary to train a classiﬁer with the biological data
brought by emotions of each student in advance for a certain
period of time [6]. In a classiﬁer trained with biological data
of any student, the estimation accuracy would be signiﬁcantly
low, while training of a classiﬁer with biological data of each
student is a big burden for the student. We need to overcome
the problem to estimate emotion from a physiological response
of students.
To solve this problem, this research trains a classiﬁer with
biological data collected from students of identical personality,
because transition patterns of physiological response depend
on personality types [7] [8]. Students of various kinds of
personalities have diversity in patterns of the physiological
response to the occurrence of a speciﬁc emotion. If we train a
classiﬁer using such physiological response, we cannot expect
the classiﬁer to extract the common patterns of physiological
response. In this research, the emotion is estimated using
classiﬁers trained with the physiological response of students
similar in their personality type. Since a classiﬁer is prepared
for each personality type, the emotion of a new student can be
estimated only with the student answering a quick personality
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

test.
In this research, experimental results show classiﬁers for
each personality type improved the accuracy of emotion es-
timation for new users. For each personality type, there was
a difference in estimation accuracy, the pattern of the phys-
iological response, and important variables. Among elements
composing personality, the extroversion and the neuroticism
seem to play a vital effect on the estimation accuracy. Peo-
ple strongly extroverted are likely to have positive emotion,
while those who have high neuroticism are likely to be
sensitive to stimulation. It is inferred that there was a differ-
ence in biological data and variables of importance because
neuroticism certainly affects heart rate and Low-Frequency
(LF) component/High-Frequency (HF) component of heart
rate variablity, while extroversion, openness, and agreeableness
certainly affect the natural log of LF.
A classiﬁer for each personality type would tell the time
and place for which university students have negative emotion
in an on-line manner. For students who have negative emotions,
such as anger and sorrow, it would be possible to provide
support, such as keeping an eye on them, giving them a phone
call, and introducing them to a counseling agency.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
2, we show existing research about determinate emotions. In
Section 3, we show the use case and method of my study.
In Section 4, we show the experimental result. In section 5,
we discuss from experimental result. Finally, we conclude in
Section 6.
II.
EXISTING RESEARCH
Section II describes the advantages and disadvantages of
existing methods to determin emotions. A scale is necessary
to determine emotions. The scale includes psychological scales
to examine subjective emotional experiences, behavior scales
based on external reactions, and biological scales based on
internal responses.
The psychological scale includes the introspective method,
the Likert scale, the rating scale method, the open-ended
question method, the questionnaire method, and so on. Since
these scale methods require students to answer big question-
naires, they have difﬁculties to obtain data of many university
students.
The behavior scale needs permanent acquisition of vari-
ous nonverbal behaviors, such as facial expression, posture,
attitude, gesture, and voice. Although behavior data can be
obtained through a lot of measuring equipment in many places,
it causes privacy violation.
The biological scale uses both of autonomous reaction
by activities of the autonomic nervous system and voluntary
reactions by activities of the central nervous system. The
former includes blood pressure, heart rate, skin electrical
reﬂection, skin temperature, and blood ﬂow rate, while the
latter includes brain waves, electromyograms, and respiration.
The wearable device for determination equipment enables to
obtain those biological data all the time. Emotions can be
estimated in an online manner from them.
However, physiological responses when each emotion oc-
curs often do not match. The reason is that the physiological
response patterns are different among individuals [5]. Leon
has optimized classiﬁers with training using biological data for
each person to eliminate individual differences in physiological
Figure 1. Estimating emotions considering personality
response [6]. Since personalized classiﬁcation method requires
time for the training using individual biological data, new users
cannot use it immediately.
In order to obtain a practical solution to know the timing
when each university student has a negative emotion, we need
a method many users can use easily on the spot. These existing
methods are not suitable for easy classiﬁcation of student
emotions.
III.
EMOTION ESTIMATION WITH PERSONALITY
A. Use Case
This sections describes the method to estimate emotions
in this research. Emotions are estimated from biological data
considering personality. Students take a personality test to
select a classiﬁer according to their test result. The method
estimates emotions from heart rate and its variability using
a wearable pulse wave meter. Various wearable devices have
been developed and operated in the ﬁeld of health care and
sports in recent years [9]. For students wearing a pulse wave
meter, an application on a smartphone estimates negative
emotions. Once it ﬁnds a student who often suffers from
negative emotion, it notiﬁes faculty and counselors of the
information, to provide the mental care for the student. Figure
1 shows an operational diagram of the method.
B. Estimating Personality
In this section, a personality and the method to estimate
personality are described. There are typology theory and
property theory in the ways of grasping a personality. The
typology theory applies a personality to a stereotype set based
on psychological or biological characteristics. The typology
theory is intuitively easy to understand, but the intermediate
type is likely to be ignored in the theory. It is also difﬁcult
for one type to move to another. On the contrary, in the
characteristic theory, the personality is composed of several
characteristics. It expresses personality with multi-dimensions
for quantitative comparison. The characteristic theory has
the disadvantage that it is difﬁcult to grasp the identity of
personality. However, we can analyze personality statistically.
It is also possible to grasp the personality in a typological way,
if we classify subjects from a certain viewpoint.
The characteristic theory is used in this research. The Big
Five test expressing personality with ﬁve factors is considered
to be the most inﬂuential test in the characteristic theory.
The ﬁve factors are neuroticism, extraversion, openness, agree-
ableness, and conscientiousness [10]. Neuroticism responds
sensitively to external stimuli and shows emotional instability
trend. Extroversion indicates a tendency to actively appeal to
the outside world. People with high extroversion tend to have
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

positive emotions. It means openness to experience. It shows
a rich tendency for thought and images. Agreeableness shows
a tendency to synchronize with other people in relationship
with people. Conscientiousness shows a tendency to overcome
things with clear purpose and intention.Conscientiousness is a
dimension related to control of impulses.
Emotion is presumed to be affected by neuroticism related
to anxiety causing emotional instability. It is also likely to be
affected by extraversion leading to positive emotions.
C. Classiﬁers Based on Heart Rate
The students use the wearable device to measure biological
data.We measure the heart rate and the heart rate variability.
This section describes heart rate. The heart rate increases
with anger, fear, and sadness, not with joy, surprise, and
disgust [11]. The activity of the human autonomic nervous
system changes when the emotion changes. The activity of
the autonomic nervous system is measured from the frequency
response of heart rate variability [12]. From the heart rate
variability, the following components can be obtained; Very
Low-Frequency (VLF) component (frequency is 0.0033 to
0.04 Hz), Low-Frequency (LF) component (frequency is 0.04
to 0.15 Hz), High-Frequency (HF) component (frequency is
0.15 to 0.5 Hz), Total Power (TP) component (the sum of
the three frequency components), Standard Deviation (SD) of
pulse record (PR) interval, RMssd (whose the deviation of the
difference between adjacent PR intervals)
The value of HF indicates the enhancement of parasympa-
thetic nervous system, while the value of LF/HF indicates the
sympathetic nerve system. TP indicates the activity degree of
autonomic nervous system. RMssd indicates the tension degree
of the vagus nerve. This research uses a pulse wave meter
attached to the earlobe.
D. Create Personality Model
This section describes how to classify personality. The
estimation system in this research uses TIPI-J invented by
Japanese as a scale of Big Five [13]. Since TIPI-J is a simple
scale that can measure ﬁve personality traits with each of
two items, the burden on students is small. The estimation
system ﬁgures out personality vector on the basis of the
ﬁve personality traits with TIPI-J. After it classiﬁes them, it
calculates the centroid vector of each cluster by the k-means
method [14], to create a personality model. A new student is
classiﬁed into the nearest cluster based on the distance from
the personality vector of the student to the centroid vector of
the cluster. The number of personality clusters is determined
to the most appropriate one, trying from 2 to 6 clusters in the
experiment.
E. Emotion Estimation along Personality Model
Supervised machine learning creates emotional classiﬁers.
The emotional classiﬁer is created for each personality model.
The explanatory variable of the emotional classiﬁer is heart rate
and heart rate variability, while the objective variable speciﬁes
whether the student has negative or positive emotion.
To know the student has negative or positive emotion,
we use the Circumplex Model and the Affect Grid proposed
by Russell [15] [16].The Circumplex Model expresses all
emotions in two dimensions of the pleasant-unpleasant one
and the arousal-sleepiness one.The Affect Grid is an evaluation
method of emotions, based on a Circumplex Model. It is
formed in a square grid composed of 81 squares of 9 × 9.
It is considered that the accuracy to estimate emotion
improves, if the biological data is classiﬁed into groups having
common patterns. The personality is used as the scale for the
classiﬁcation. Section 3.2 shows that personality traits affect
brain functions and body reactions. Some research reports that
there is a difference in the balance of autonomic nervousness
depending on personality [7] [8]. It is expected that common
patterns of biological data can be extracted if students are
classiﬁed according to personality models. The classiﬁer for
each personality model of the user would estimate the emotion
more accurately than one ignoring the difference in personality.
IV.
RECALLING EXPERIMENT
A. Purpose and Method of Experiment
This section describes the experiment conducted in this
research. Experimental results show that the personality model
improves the accuracy of emotion estimation. Our subjects are
20 university students, 10 male and 10 female. Heart rate and
heart rate variation were calculated from pulse wave signals
obtained by a wireless earlobe pulse wave device, Vital Meter
made by TAOS Institute [17].
Three types of emotions obtained through experiments
were positive emotions, negative emotions, and emotion during
relaxation. After the subject recalled one of pleasure events,
anger events, and the others, we estimated their emotion. The
recall time was 2 minutes. We conducted each of three types
of emotion estimation after recalls ﬁve times.
We used the random forest to create classiﬁers. Explanatory
variables are 17 variables in total. They include the average,
the minimum, and the maximum of heart rate, beat count (heart
rate at all measurement time), SDNN, RMssd, and the average
of VLF, LF, HF, LF/HF and TP. It also includes the standard
deviation of heart rate, VLF, LF, HF, LF/HF, and TP.
The objective variables are two variables; one means the
student has positive emotion, while the other means negative
emotion. To obtain the objective variable, the subject’s emotion
was attained with the Affect Grid. In the pleasant-unpleasant
dimension of the Affect Grid, the center was set to 0. We
regarded +1 to +4 as positive emotion, while -4 to 0 as negative
emotion.
To show that the personality model works effectively, the
classiﬁer created from 20 subjects without classiﬁcation by
personality model was compared with the classiﬁer trained for
each personality model.
In the former, data of 20 subjects was divided into twenty
pieces, one for each subject, and the 20-part cross-validation
was carried out. In the latter, a classiﬁer was created for
each personality model resulting from clustering of the ﬁve
personality traits of 20 subjects with the k-means method.
After the data was divided into the number of subjects for
each personality model, the cross validation for the number of
subjects was carried out for each personality model.
B. Estimation Accuracy by Personality Model
We compared the estimation accuracy by the cross-
validation of classiﬁers that do not classify personality models
as well as classiﬁers for each of two to six personality models.
The f-measure, a harmonic mean of the precision and the recall
was used as an evaluation index of the estimation accuracy.
When the personality is not classiﬁed, the F value is 0.501.
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 2. Personality Traits of Each Personality Model
TABLE I. P-VALUE ON EACH PERSONALITY MODEL
Compared
E
O
C
A
N
A:B
0.032
0.345
0.947
0.776
0.861
A:C
0.100
0.018
0.015
0.713
0.154
A:D
0.084
0.209
0.058
0.460
0.199
B:C
0.245
0.879
0.065
0.491
0.079
B:D
0.367
0.998
0.140
0.935
0.448
C:D
0.999
0.793
0.927
0.220
0.097
The best of estimation accuracy is 0.557 when the personality
model is classiﬁed into four.
Figure 2 shows the codebook of each personality model
when the personality model is classiﬁed into four. In the
score of 5 personality traits by TIPI-J, the minimum is 2,
while the maximum is 14. The gray marker shows the average
values of all 20 subjects. Personality model A, B, C, and D
involved 8, 5, 4, and 3 subjects, respectively. From Figure
2, personality model A is sociable, strong in outstanding
curiosity and self-control, because of the high extraversion,
openness, and conscientiousness. Personality model B is intro-
verted, strong in intention and diligence, because of the low
extraversion and high conscientiousness. Personality model
C believes to be sensitive to the stimulus, has a solid idea,
is unique, and accepts himself/herself as he/she is, because
of the high neuroticism and low openness, agreeableness,
and conscientiousness. Personality model D understands the
psychological state of the others, is insensitive to stimulation,
and has high impulsivity, because of high agreeableness, low
neuroticism and conscientiousness.
We applied the Steel-Dwass test, which is a multiple
comparison test [18], assuming that the score of personality
traits of each character model can be described as ”there is no
difference between the average values of both groups”. Table I
shows the obtained p-value as a result of the Steel-Dwass test.
The row of ”A: B” in the column of ”Compared” in Table I
shows the result of comparing personality traits of personality
model A and personality model B. The rejection region of p-
value was set to 0.1. As a result, the personality models A and
B showed the signiﬁcant difference in extroversion, A and C
showed it in openness and conscientiousness, A and D showed
it in extraversion and conscientiousness, B and C showed it
in conscientiousness and neuroticism, C and D showed it in
neuroticism.
Next, Figures 3 to 5 show the comparison of the average
values and dispersion of f-measures in each personality model
when classiﬁed and not classiﬁed with the personality model.
”Non” is the average value of the f-measure of persons
belonging to each personality model when 20-part crossing
veriﬁcation was carried out without considering personality.
”CP” is an abbreviation considering personality, which is the
average of f-measure when cross-validation is carried out only
Figure 3. F-measures of Positive Emotion
Figure 4. F-measures of Measures of Negative Emotion
for persons of each personality model when personality is
considered.
The f-measure of positive emotion in personality model
C decreased when personality was considered, but f-measure
in the other personality model increased. Personality model C
with high neuroticism had the greatest CP of negative emotion
among other personality models, and D of low neuroticism is
the greatest Non-CP of negative emotion. Moreover, person-
ality model A with high extraversion had the greatest CP and
Non-CP of positive emotion. Although dispersion of negative
emotion decreased in all personality models, the dispersion
of positive emotion, the average of dispersion of positive and
negative emotion rose.
C. Emotions for Each Personality Model
Figure 6 shows a graph of biological data for each personal-
ity model. The Steel-Dwass test is applied assuming that there
is no difference between the average values of both groups
regarding biological data of each personality model. If the
rejection area of the p-value is 0.1, a signiﬁcant difference
was observed in the average value and standard deviation of
LF/HF of personality models A and D.
Table II shows the values of the questionnaire after re-
calling. The value is represented by the effect grid. Table II
shows the range of positive emotion and negative emotion on
the pleasant axis and the arousal axis for each personality
model. On the pleasant axis, 1 to 4 corresponds to the positive
emotion, while -4 to 0 to the negative emotion. Both of the
emotions become stronger as the absolute value increases.
Moreover, the range on the arousal axis is -4 to 4 for any
emotion. As shown in Table II, personality model C seems
to have a low arousal level. However, p-value with multiple
comparison tests for the questionnaire after recalling presented
no signiﬁcant difference, if the rejection area is set to 0.1.
Table III shows the top 5 of the variable importance in each
personality model in the random forest. It turned out that the
importance of the explanatory variables is different depending
on each personality model. In the comparison of personality
model A with personality model D, A has at least 2.9, whereas
D is less than 1 for every variable.
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 5. F-measures of Positive and Negative Emotion
Figure 6. Biological Data of Each Personality Model
V.
DISCUSSION
A. Personality and Estimation Accuracy
For each personality model, we investigate the estimation
accuracy of the classiﬁers incorporating the personality models
and the classiﬁer neglecting the personality models. Let us
denote the estimation accuracy of the former with CP, while
that of the latter with Non. The increasing rate of the difference
of CP from Non for personality model A is the largest, 0.082,
compared with other personality models. Personality model
A is the highest in the extraversion. Those who are highly
extroverted are said to feel positive emotions, which seem to
increase the accuracy of positive emotion. Personality model
B has low value both in Non and CP.
The activity of autonomic nerves was mild in personality
model B, because the value of TP indicating the degree of
activity of autonomic nerves was low. Personality model B is
considered to be unlikely to change biological data because of
its low extraversion as well as introverted and calm personality.
In personality model C, CP of positive emotion decreased,
while CP of negative emotion was 0.644, which was the largest
TABLE II. RANGES ON PLEASANT AND AROUSAL AXES
Personality Model A
Personality Model B
Emotion 　
Positive
Negative
Positive
Negative
pleasant axis
2.352
-1.439
1.786
-1.281
arousal axis
0.407
0.227
-0.179
-0.031
Personality Model C
Personality Model D
Emotion 　
Positive
Negative
Positive
Negative
pleasant axis
2.333
-1.167
1.696
-1.591
arousal axis
-0.667
-0.833
0.565
-0.273
TABLE III. TOP 5 VARIABLE IMPORTANCE
Rank
Personality Model A
Personality Model B
1st
LF AVG
5.002
VLF AVG
1.820
2nd
HR AVG
4.282
HF SD
1.594
3rd
HR Min
3.892
RMssd
1.341
4th
LF/HF AVG
2.985
VLF SD
1.330
5th
LF SD
2.949
LF/HF AVG
1.274
Rank
Personality Model C
Personality Model D
1st
HF AVG
2.604
LF SD
0.908
2nd
HF SD
2.310
SDNN
0.713
3rd
LF AVG
2.205
RMssd
0.711
4th
HR Min
1.958
LF/HF AVG
0.650
5th
TP AVG
1.542
LF AVG
0.633
among all personality models. Since it has high TP, autonomic
nervous activities are assumed to be intense in personality
model C. Personality model C is sensitive to stimulation and
feels anxiety because of its high neuroticism, which seems
to affect the estimation accuracy of negative emotion. Since
personality model D is introverted and has a low neuroticism,
it is considered that its emotion is calm and stable. It is thought
that the estimation accuracy of positive emotion was low.
People with high agreeableness are reported to have high-stress
values [19]. The estimation accuracy of negative emotion was
good because of stress accumulation.
As a countermeasure to the personality model with low
estimation accuracy, we can add behavior data, such as GPS
logs and acceleration to explanatory variables. Since changes
in biological data are unlikely to occur in low-accuracy models,
it is considered that the accuracy can be improved with
behavior data.
B. Inﬂuence of Personality and Biological Data
As a result of multiple comparisons of each biological data
for each personality model, a signiﬁcant difference was found
in the average value and standard deviation of LF / HF of
personality model A and personality model D. There was no
signiﬁcant difference in the questionnaire after a recall by each
personality model. However, there was a signiﬁcant difference
in extraversion and conscientiousness in the personality traits
of personality model A and personality model D. From the
above, it is considered that extraversion and conscientiousness
have inﬂuenced the average value and standard deviation of
LF / HF with respect to personality model A and personality
model D. Eysenck states that extroverts have a high level
of restraint of the cerebral cortex caused by the reticular
activating system, while introverts have a high arousal level [8].
Extroverts are insensitive to stimulation. Their cerebral cortex
awakening is late, or the awakening falls quickly even if it gets
awaken. On the other hand, introverts are sensitive to stimuli.
Their cerebral cortex tends to awaken excessively even with a
small stimulus. Therefore, the extrovert type is considered to
have low physiological excitement. Buck, Miller&Caul [20]
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

also showed that an extrovert person has a weak autonomic
nervous system reaction. From the above, it is expected that
the value of LF/HF will be low in personality model A who
is high in the extraversion and insensitive to stimulation. On
the contrary, the value of LF/HF would be high because
personality model D is low in the extraversion and sensitive
to simulation. However, the result was different. Personality
model A with high extraversion had a high LF/HF value, while
personality model D with low extraversion had a low LF/HF
value. Although this research evaluates the extraversion as ﬁve
factors in the Big Five, Eysenck evaluates it in the extrovert
- introvert dimension. Because of it, the difference seems to
have occurred.
The extrovert described by Eysenck has traits, such as
sociability and impulsivity. On the other hand, extraversion
by the Big Five is considered to be cautious with identifying
it as sociability. In the Big Five, shyness is not extraversion.
It considers the shyness corresponds to high anxiety and neu-
roticism in almost all cases [10]. In addition, the impulsivity
of Eysenck’s extrovert can be seen as conscientiousness of the
Big Five. Therefore, although personality model A has high
extraversion, it has high conscientiousness and low impulsivity.
It is presumed to be different from extrovert described by
Eysenck. The expectation that the value of LF/HF will be
high is not adapted because personality model D with low
extraversion is sensitive to stimulation.
Eysenck also states that people with high neuroticism are
more likely to arouse the autonomic nervous system while
people with low neuroticism are less likely to be aroused.
Therefore, it seems that the value of the standard deviation of
LF/HF was low because of the low neuroticism in personality
model D.
Regarding the fact that explanatory variables emphasized
in each personality model shown in Table III are different, it
is presumed that biological data affected by personality are
different. Kobayashi showed that the natural log of LF is
correlated with openness and agreeableness during rest, while
extraversion during calculation [21]. It is considered that the
average value of LF is a variable of high importance for
personality model A with high outgoingness and openness,
while the standard deviation of LF is the variable of the high-
est importance for personality model D with agreeableness.
Besides, Nagamine and Nakamura [22] show that there is a
positive correlation between neuroticism and the degree of
stress. They also state the degree of stress and the heart rate
have a positive correlation. In the personality model C with
a high neuroticism, it coincides with the fact that the average
value and the maximum value of the heart rate are large, and
the minimum value of the heart rate is the variable of the top
importance.
VI.
CONCLUSION
This paper addressed the school dropout problem of uni-
versity students. As a method of estimating negative emotion,
the paper proposed a method to estimate emotions considering
personality.
From the experimental results, it was found that the es-
timation accuracy improves, if the classiﬁer is trained for
each personality model. Personality traits of each personality
model were suggested to be related to biological data and
variable importance. From the above, individual differences
in physiological response differ from each personality type.
As future work, it is necessary to look at the correlation
to see how the personality traits exactly affect biological data.
The incorporation of gender difference could be one way to
improve the accuracy. Linking time and location information
to the estimated emotions, faculties and staffs can prevent
school dropout of students with mental care, such as emotional
support at a good timing.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Num-
ber JP16K16471.
REFERENCES
[1]
MEXT, “Survey results on problems related to student guidance such
as problem behavior of student in 2015 (in japanese),” 2016.
[2]
I. Mizuta, T. Kobayashi, S. Ishitani, N. Azumi, S. Ide, and Y. Taniguchi,
“the research on grasping the actual condition of and supporting the
school refusal and withdrawal of university students (in japanese),”
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, Tech. Rep., 2010.
[3]
C. A. Kearney and W. K. Silberman, “The evolution and reconciliation
of taxonomic strategies for school refusal behavior,” Clinical Psycology:
Science and Practice, vol. 3, 1996, pp. 339–354.
[4]
M. E. Pritchard and G. S. Wilson, “Using emotional and social factors to
predict student success,” Journal of college student development, 2003.
[5]
A. Hinz, R. Seibt, B. Hueber, and G. Schreinicke, “Response speciﬁcity
in psychophysiology: A comparison of different approaches.” Journal
of Psychophysiology, vol. 14, 2000, p. 115122.
[6]
E. Leon, G. Clarke, V. Callaghan, and F. Sepulveda, “A user-
independent real-time emotion recognition system for software agents
in domestic environments,” Engineering applications of artiﬁcial intel-
ligence, vol. 20, 2007, p. 337345.
[7]
A. Crider and R. Lunn, “Electrodermal liability as a personality di-
mension,” Journal of Experimental Research and Personalities,, vol. 5,
1971, pp. 145–150.
[8]
H. J. Eysenck, The biological basis of personality. C.C Thomas, 1967.
[9]
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, WHITE PAPER
Information and Communications in Japan.
Nikkei Printing, 2016.
[10]
N. Daniel, Personality: What Makes You the Way You Are.
Oxford
University, 2009.
[11]
P. Ekman, R. W. Levenson, and W. V. Friesen, “Autonomic nervous
system activity distinguishes among emotions,” Science, vol. 221, 1983,
pp. 1208–1210.
[12]
G.
G.
Berntson,
B.J.Thomas,
D.
L.
Eckberg,
P.Grossman,
P.G.Kaufmann, M.Malik et al., “Heart rate variability: Origins,
methods, and interpretive caveats,” Psychophysiology, vol. 34, 1997,
p. 623648.
[13]
A. Oshio, S. Abe, and P. Cutrone, “Development, reliability, and validity
of the japanese version of ten item personality inventory (tipi-j) (in
japanese),” The Japanese journal of Personality, vol. 21, no. 1, 2012,
pp. 40–52.
[14]
K. Wagstaff, C. Cardie, S.Rogers, and S. Schroedl, “Constrained k-
means clustering with background knowledge,” in Proceedings of the
Eighteenth International Conference on Machine Learning, 2001, pp.
577–584.
[15]
J. A. Russell, A. Weiss, and G. A. Mendelsohn, “Affect grid: A single
item scale of pleasure and arousal,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, vol. 57, 1989, pp. 493–502.
[16]
J. A. R. L. B. Feldman, “Core affect, prototypical emotional episodes,
and other things called emotion: Dissecting the elephant,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 76, 1999, pp. 805–819.
[17]
T.
I.
Inc.,
“Vital
meter.”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.taos.tokyo/products/91.html
[18]
C. E. Douglas and F. A. Michael, “On distribution-free multiple
comparisons in the one-way analysis of variance,” Communications in
Statistics-Theory and Methods, vol. 20, 1991, pp. 127–139.
[19]
H. Fukushima, T. Ohira, and M. Hirosaki, “Fundamental research on
the subject’s relationship between 5 factor traits and salivary cortisol
value at the start of health classroom (in japanese),” Master’s thesis,
Tokai Gakuin University, 2011.
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[20]
R. W. Buck, R. E. Miller, and W. F. Caul, “Sex, personality, and
physiological variables in the com munication of affect via facial
expression,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 30,
1974, pp. 587–596.
[21]
H. Kobayashi, “Psychological determinants for short-term heart rat-
evariabliliry (in japanese),” Report of the Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc
Research(no.19570233) by Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and
Culture, Tech. Rep., 2010.
[22]
M. Nagamine and N. Nakamura, “A study on stress processes for college
students during semester-end examinations (in japanese),” The Japanese
Journal of Psychology, vol. 70, 2000, pp. 455–461.
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-581-4
SENSORDEVICES 2017 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

