Proposition of a Smart Environment Architecture for Ressources Monitoring and 
Rural Activities Management 
 
Thierry Antoine-Santoni 
UMR CNRS 6134 SPE 
University of Corsica 
Corte, France 
e-mail: antoine-santoni_t@univ-
corse.fr 
François-Marie Manicacci 
UMR CNRS 6134 SPE 
University of Corsica 
Corte, France 
e-mail: manicacci_fm@univ-corse.fr 
Bastien Poggi 
UMR CNRS 6134 SPE 
University of Corsica 
Corte, France 
e-mail: poggi_b@univ-corse.fr 
Gualtieri Jean-Sébastien 
SITEC 
Techno Park 
Furiani, France 
e-mail: gualtieri_js@sitec.fr 
Dominique Federici 
UMR CNRS 6134 SPE 
University of Corsica 
Corte, France 
e-mail: federici_d@univ-corse.fr 
Aiello Antoine 
UMS CNRS 3514 Stella Mare 
University of Corsica 
Corte, France 
e-mail: aiello_a@univ-corse.fr 
 
 
Abstract— We can find different examples of declared Smart 
Cities in the world: Barcelona, London, Santander, Padova, 
Paris, Stockholm, etc. In a Smart Planet context, what is the 
place of the rural territories? We develop a scientific program 
called Smart Village - Smart Paese: emergence of Smart 
territories in a small village of 250 people in Corsica island. The 
goal is to include rural areas is the global Smart Planet by the 
development of a robust management system for resources and 
rural activities management. In this paper, we introduce our 
definition of a Smart Village and we propose a global 
architecture with 3 parts: (1) a Wireless Sensors Network 
(WSN) deployment of 20 nodes (with several sensors) according 
to different activities (smart water, smart buildings, smart farm, 
smart agriculture), (2) Data storage and Visualization tools and 
(3) a prediction system. We describe the wireless network 
deployment using Long Range (LoRa) technology, the used 
sensors, and the developed dashboards for the dynamic data 
display. We introduce also the first development ways of the 
smart approach with Machine Learning algorithms called 
Smart Entity Model (SEM) using Smart Village data.  
Keywords- Smart city; Smart village; WSN; Data; LoRa; ML. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The emergence of Smart Cities cannot be considered 
sudden, but as a natural transition brought about by 
technological developments in the service of citizens, new 
environmental constraints and the reduction of planetary 
resources. The Smart Planet vision of [1] is possible by the 
task automation and the acceleration of Information 
Technologies (I.T.) development positioned to ensure the 
realization of revolutionary, real-time, and real-world people-
centric applications and services. Nowadays, this common 
term of Smart City allows (3) us to talk about urban and social 
innovation, citizen participation and all others common 
fundamentals. Smart City appears sometimes as a marketing 
term and it is difficult to discern the reality of these projects. 
 The WSN take an important place in the development of 
Smart Cities. The ever more reducing cost of WSNs is 
allowing to embed them everywhere to monitor and control 
virtually any space and environment and to form a part of the 
Internet of Things (IoT) [2]. In the last 10 years, we have seen 
the development of platforms using WSN in urban space [3] 
to collect data, to manage the resources, interact with the 
citizen and provide a model of sustainable development or e-
citizenship. 
In this context of Smart Planet, it is important to find a place 
for the rural areas. We can perceive in India and Indonesia a 
real development of Smart Village concept; a definition of 
Smart Village could be assigned to Ghandi: a Smart Village 
accounts a bundle of services delivered effectively to the 
residents of the village in an efficient manner. We can find 
the same objective between a Smart Village and a Smart City 
with the citizen in the heart of the development strategy of 
the territory thanks, in particular, to robust I.T. infrastructures 
(communication, storage, security, responsiveness, sensor 
networks, etc.). The creation of digital, participatory and 
inclusive services is a permanent goal to control natural, 
energy, human and economic resources. In this paper, we 
introduce an WSN architecture and Machine Learning tools 
for rural resources and activities management. 
We provide in this paper, a first global overview of Smart 
Village applications. Section III, we present the experimental 
area of Cozzano, a small Corsican village. In Section IV, we 
introduce the complete architecture for our developed 
system, which uses LoRa communication, a data 
visualization tool and a Machine Learning approach for rural 
activities and resources management. In Section V, we 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

present the first results of our machine learning system called 
SEM. 
II. 
THE SMART VILLAGE OVERVIEW APPLICATIONS 
It is difficult to find robust researches on the Smart Village 
concept. However, the European commission introduces two 
important working definitions of rural communities and 
Smart Village[4]:  
• 
Communities in rural areas can include one or 
several human settlements, without any restrictions 
regarding the number of habitants. Rural areas are 
defined as "predominantly rural areas" according to 
the urban-rural typology used by the Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(O.E.C.D.) and Statiscal Office of the European 
Communities (EUROSTAT). 
• 
“Smart Villages are communities in rural areas that 
develop smart solutions to deal with challenges in 
their local context. They build on existing local 
strengths and opportunities to engage in a process of 
sustainable development of their territories. They 
rely on a participatory approach to develop and 
implement their strategies to improve their 
economic, social and environmental conditions, in 
particular by promoting innovation and mobilizing 
solutions offered by digital technologies. Smart 
Villages benefit from cooperation and alliances with 
other communities and actors in rural and urban 
areas. The initiation and the implementation of 
Smart Village strategies may build on existing 
initiatives and can be funded by a variety of public 
and private sources”. 
 
Based on the potential of WSN and the previous definitions, 
we decide to focus on the WSN possible applications using 
smart technologies [5] for rural communities needs. Digital 
agriculture [6], Smart farming or Precision Agriculture (PA) 
[7] aim to optimize agricultural processes in order to give 
growers a more detailed overview of the ongoing situation in 
their cultivation area, and/or coordinate the actions in such 
way that optimizes energy consumption, water use and the 
use of chemicals. 
Recent works have focused on these research activities and 
developed different solutions using WSN [8][9] or a 
combination of IoT- Machine Learning algorithms [10]-[12] 
The development of animal tracking solutions can help to 
manage rural activities. Indeed, since the 1960s the scientists 
have used electronic tags to track animals [13].  
Nowadays, the low cost and the performance of devices 
clearly favor the use of WSN to collect different kinds of data 
(GPS, Temperature, acceleration) to help the breeders to 
adapt their exploitation (animal health, crossing alert) 
[14][15]. 
The need to know the environment conditions is important 
in the development of rural activities and economy: natural 
water quality [16]-[18], air quality [19][20], etc. 
In the previous works and examples, we can observe that 
telemetry is the main axis in the use of WSNs, and the list of 
activities is not exhaustive. However, we can distinguish 
different possibilities offered by the WSNs. We propose in 
the following section a deployment of WSN for telemetry 
using LoRa communication in a small village in Corsica. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL AREA AND SMART VILLAGE 
DEFINITION 
The village of Cozzano is located in the center of the 
Corsica island at 650m, surrounded by a pines forest, chestnut 
trees and oaks, in a green valley with many streams illustrated 
in Figure 1. With 250 people, the municipality tried to lead a 
strategy towards a sustainable development. As a result of 
this last point, the village is organized around four power 
generation systems: a hydroelectric power plant on drinking 
water, a hydroelectric power plant on a river, biomass boiler 
for communal buildings and solar panel on social housing.  
 
 
Figure 1. Village of Cozzano (Corsica island) 
According to the definitions in the previous sections, we 
build the concept of Smart Village around four axes: 
1. Sustainable development: to promote development 
of renewable energies, to manage natural resources, 
to reduce global energy consumption; 
2. Infrastructure and digital services: to develop a 
wireless network and different services around this 
network; 
3. Rural activities: to improve agricultural activities to 
promote precision agriculture and smart farming; 
4. Education and citizenship: to include school and 
citizens in the project, to inform citizens, to develop 
inclusive, participatory and collaborative actions. 
 
To contribute to these objectives in the Smart Village 
context, we propose different steps in Smart Village building: 
1. Build a wireless network infrastructure that has low 
energy consumption to connect different kinds of 
devices; 
2. Deploy of a WSN to collect environmental data such 
smart water, smart building, smart weather, and 
smart rural activities; 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

3. Display data for decision support in the several 
activities, to inform the people, and to include the 
citizens in the Smart Village strategy; 
4. Improve the system with prediction algorithms of 
the observed system evolution; 
5. Create services for the data users. 
 
These 5 axes are presented in the following section. 
IV. 
APPROACH OF SMART VILLAGE ARCHITECTURE 
According to our previous development process, we present 
the developed approach for the Smart Village. In Figure 2, 
we provide a basic representation of the different systems in 
the Smart Village: 
• 
smart water 
• 
smart farm 
• 
smart agriculture 
• 
smart public buildings 
 
 
Figure 2. Basic representation of Smart Village 
To reach these objectives, we build a WSN based on LoRa 
communication. Our architecture is divided in five blocks, as 
illustrated in Figure 3: 
• 
Collect environmental data with a LoRa WSN 
(including people’s survey);  
• 
Store data in an indexed datacenter;  
• 
Display the data with different dashboards 
according to the different activities of Smart Village 
(smart water, smart agriculture, smart building, etc.) 
or citizen categories (children, elderly, mayor and 
municipal council); 
• 
Use the database for the evolution prediction of the 
observed systems; 
• 
Create services for the citizens according to the 
dashboards: air and water quality with real-time 
information, real-time weather and prediction, 
information for the activities school. 
 
Figure 3. Block scheme of Smart Village objectives interactions 
A. LoRa Network infrastructure 
The wireless network is built around a central sink based on 
the church roof using LoRa technologies, as illustrated in 
Figure 4. In this program, we would like to build a 
homogeneous, robust and long-range network with a low 
power consumption technology. LoRa develops an approach 
based on the following two distinct layers: (1) a physical 
layer, based on the radio modulation technique (868 MHz for 
Europe), called CSS (Chirp Spread Spectrum) and (2) a MAC 
layer protocol (LoRaWAN) that provides access to LoRa 
architecture [21]. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. LoRa Antenna for the Smart Village on the church roof (left) 
and second rescue antenna with solar panel (right) 
The technology offers a mix of long range, low power 
consumption and secures data transmission. The choice of 
LoRa is clearly in the philosophy of the Smart Village 
program and allows us to manage the network and devices 
performances. The network deployed is a local private 
network and we manage the global system using a carrier 
grade network server. This choice allows us to study the best 
possible coverage and to adapt the network. To supplement 
the main antenna, a second LoRa Gateway visible in Figure 4 
is deployed on a distant hill about 4 km from the village of 
Cozzano to offer greater network coverage. In our system, we 
collect different kinds of data from a WSN and the collected 
data is stored in a database. The data are stored in a database 
according to the different applications of the Smart Village, as 
illustrated in Table I and Figure 5.  
DataBase
DEVS AM 
Smart Entity
Machine Learning
Optimization via 
Simulation
Data Visualization
Ethnography
WSN- IoT
Services
Education
E-democracy
People
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE I.  
 SENSORS FOR SMART VILLAGE APPLICATIONS 
 
 
 
Figure 5. WSN deployment (water, agriculture, water quality, weather, 
buildings) 
This system is complemented by dedicated tools for smart 
farming with a LoRa GPS tracker. 
B. Tracking system  
One of the rural activities of this Corsican area is free-range 
pigs farming. We developed a GPS tracker called AMBLoRa, 
illustrated in Figure 6. Based on LoRa communication, the 
system will help the farmers to know the position of the 
animals [22] and we apply this on a pigs farming, as showed 
in Figure 7. These trackers are energy consumption optimized 
to have a lifetime battery of one year. This tool aims to limit 
the farmer’s movements and allows him to rethink his farm 
organization with new services, such as the real-time 
monitoring. 
 
Figure 6. Block diagram of the proposed wireless embedded card 
All pigs positions are sent to the gateway and stored in the 
database. These data are used to create real-time dashboard, 
which is presented in the following section. 
 
 
Figure 7. Pig with AMBLoRa GPS Tracker 
C. Discusions on WSN and LoRa gateway deployment 
The development of the LoRa network revealed some 
difficulties. Indeed, power outages are common in a rural area 
and we had data loss because of the unpowered antenna. We 
tried to limit these problems by using a second antenna with 
solar panel (weather dependent). This was enough to increase 
the resilience of a system, but it did not make the system 
100% reliable. 
For the signal range, theoretically, it should cover tens of 
kilometers. However, this does not take into account the 
topography and the vegetation cover which very strongly 
reduces to just a few kilometers. 
Application
Type
Input
Precision
Operating 
temperature
Accuracy
Smart Agriculture
Soil temperature
Negative 
temperature 
coefficient
-30°C to 80°C
0,4°C
Smart Agriculture
Soil humidity
Electric Voltage
Capacitive
+ 3%
Smart Air 
Ozone
Serial Data 
Interface at 1200 
baud
Detection threshold 0,02 ppm
Smart Air 
Fine particle
Electric Voltage
Sensor by laser scattering
-20°C to 50°C
0,0 to 999,9 mg/m3
Smart Building
Door opening
Electric Voltage
Magnetic aperture detector
-20°C to 70°C
Smart Water
pH
Serial Data 
Interface at 1200 
baud
Combined electrode (pH / 
reference) with special glass - 
reference Ag/AgCl, gel 
electrolyte (KCl) -
Measuring range (0-14 
pH)
Smart Water
RedOx
Serial Data 
Interface at 1200 
baud
Combined electrode (RedOx / 
reference), platinium tip / 
reference Ag/AgCl, gel 
electrolyte (KCl)
Resoluion 0,1 MV ; 
accuracy + 2 mV
Smart Water
Dissolved oxygen
Serial Data 
Interface at 1200 
baud
Optical measurement by 
luminescence
-10°C to 60°C
+ 0,1 mg/L - + 0,1 ppm 
+ 1%
Smart Weather
Pyranometer
Electric Voltage
-40°C to 70°C
Spectral range 360nm 
to 11200nm
Smart Weather 
Raingauge
Counter
-20°C to 60°C
Smart Weather 
Wind (force and 
direction)
Counter
Wind speen accuracy 
+ 5% ans wind 
direction + 7%
Smart Weather / 
Smart Building
Relative humidity Numerical
Antiradiation shelter
-40°C to 70°C
+ 2 to 4%
Smart Weather / 
Smart Building
Temperature
Numerical
Antiradiation shelter
-20°C to 60°C
(25°C) : + 0,3°C / (5°C 
to 40°C) : + 0,4°C / (-
40°C to 70°C) : + 0,9°C
Smart Weather / 
Smart Building
Pressure
Electric Voltage
0,15 to 1,15 Bar / Max Value : 
4 Bar / Sensibility : 45 
mV/Kpa
0°C to 85°C
0,2 Vcc
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

D. Visualization system 
To display in real-time the collected data from database, we 
developed an information system with Web interface for the 
visualization. This architecture is built on an indexed 
database. All the data collected are stored and indexed to 
allows a dynamic visualization. 
This architecture is based on Elasticsearch [23], a real-time 
distributed search and analytics engine. It is built on a full-
text search-engine library called Apache Lucene. To 
visualize the data, we use the Kibana tool [23]. Kibana is a 
data visualization software on top of the ElasticSearch 
engine. It provides a number of tools to display information, 
like dashboards, queries, filters and time ranges. Information 
stored in an ElasticSearch cluster can be visualized as 
interactive plots such as pie charts, histograms, text, maps, 
etc. We develop different dashboards according to the 
different activities such as: weather, air quality, smart water, 
smart agriculture, smart building and smart farm. In Figure 8, 
we can see an example of a dashboard built with Kibana, with 
different information for the farmer and a heat map with last 
pigs positions. We can also have the signal quality from the 
LoRa devices using a Received Signal Strenght Indication 
(RSSI). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. First Kibana tracking visualization based on Elasticsearch 
engine  
We have presented the LoRa architecture, the deployment 
of WSN and the dashboards for the real-time visualization of 
the data collected using our architecture. However, to become 
a smart system, our approach needs to predict the behavior of 
the observed system to help in the resources and activities 
management. 
V. 
MACHINE LEARNING SYSTEM CALLED SMART ENTITY 
To reach our objective of a real smart system, we developed 
a model to predict behaviors evolution of observed systems 
using popular Machine Learning (ML) Libraries. The 
prediction must help to manage the village environment and 
to provide decision support for the municipality. Our ML 
system is based on a model called Smart Entity Model 
(SEM). This model must be generic and be able to treat all 
kinds of data collected on the Smart Village. 
The SEM [24] is a generic model based on modeling 
approach using Discrete Event System Specification (DEVS) 
Formalism. DEVS is a modelling and simulation formalism 
proposed by B. P. Zeigler [25] in the 70s. The main DEVS 
objective is to provide an explicit separation between 
modeling description and simulation core. The formalism is 
based on two mains concepts: Atomic Model (AM) and 
Coupled Model (CM). AM describes the system behavior in 
a modular way and CM describes the system structure by 
abstraction levels and model encapsulations. This genericity 
of model description provides a reusable abstract simulator 
independent of the studied systems. The model is defined 
with a fixed number of inputs and outputs ports in order to 
maintain a high level of interoperability.  
As represented in Figure 9, the collected data are stored in 
the database. These data become the SEM AM inputs (XE) 
and they are used as dataset to select the best ML algorithms 
for the prediction of the observed system according to the 
most popular libraries [26]-[29]. The XE dataset is divided in 
two parts: 80% for the training process of ML algorithms and 
20% for the prediction comparison test. SEM defines a ratio 
between the predicted data and the actual data and gives a 
score for each ML algorithm. The best algorithm is chosen to 
build the prediction model. This selection is made every 
thousand new data entries. 
 
 
Figure 9. SEM for the prediction 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure 10 and Figure 11 show the first results of prediction 
according to the collected by the WSN on the Smart Village 
project. We can see in Figure 10, the prediction of air 
temperature by hour. The diagram in Figure 11 shows the 
prediction of air temperature by day. 
 
 
Figure 10. Hourly Prediction outputs on Smart Village Air temperature 
 
Figure 11. Daily Prediction outputs on Smart Village Air temperature 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper introduces the first research and development 
(R&D) steps of a scientific program called Smart Village - 
Smart Paesi, emergence of Smart Territories. We propose a 
definition of a Smart Village and our global architecture 
according to 4 parts: (1) a WSN built around a LoRa 
Gateway, (2) a database, (3) a data displays interface and a 
(4) prediction system to anticipate the evolution of the 
observed systems: water, air, weather, building, agriculture 
and farm. 
We deployed a WSN based on LoRa communication to 
observe different systems in the village (weather, water 
quality, agriculture, air quality, buildings, farm). All the 
collected data are stored in a dynamic database using the 
Elasticsearch engine. The data are also used to supply a 
ML/DL model called Smart Entity Model to predict the 
evolution of observed systems. We also built dashboards to 
display the data according to the different observed 
applications. 
This first step of R&D is quite conclusive for many reasons: 
- 
The network architecture is robust enough to collect 
regularly the data without major communication 
problems and to obtain a resilient network architecture 
to provide a real Quality of Service (QoS) on the Smart 
Village; 
- 
LoRa Technology capacities (coverage, long range, 
low power consumption) allow us to develop different 
applications for the Smart Village; 
- 
The first results of SEM are sufficient to validate the 
first step of our smart approach. 
The future objectives in the project are as follows: 
- 
New deployment of WSN based on LoRaWAN 
communication technology to observe other Smart 
Village 
systems 
(public 
lighting, 
waste) 
and 
improvement of network architecture; 
- 
Integrate and develop several SEM (for all observed 
systems) as a Web service directly connected to the 
database.  
- 
Reduce energy consumption to improve battery 
lifetime of LoRa devices;  
- 
Develop dashboards for all activities;  
- 
Cozzano’s municipality supports this project by 
providing access to its infrastructures, its building for 
researchers and organizing events in the field of 
sustainable development. 
Citizen are involved in the research program and they are 
proactive through different events. During regular meetings, 
field surveys, or interviews realized by the students of the 
University of Corsica, people expose the impacts of the 
project on their living environment, their needs or their 
wishes. We also included the school in a project through a 
school journal for the project information dissemination. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project is financed by an European fund and 
supported by the Regional Council of Corsica during the 
period 2017 - 2020. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Raj and A. C. Raman, Intelligent Cities: Enabling Tools and 
Technology, CRC Press. 2015. 
[2] R. Du, P. Santi, M. Xiao, A. V. Vasilakos, and C. Fischione, 
“The sensable city: A survey on the deployment and 
management for smart city monitoring,” IEEE Commun. Surv. 
Tutor., pp. 1–1, Nov. 2018. 
[3] A. Zanella, N. Bui, A. Castellani, L. Vangelista, and M. Zorzi, 
“Internet of Things for Smart Cities,” IEEE Internet Things J., 
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 22–32, Feb. 2014. 
[4] European Commission, “Consultation on the working 
definition of ‘Smart Villages,’” 2018. 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[5] M. Dener and C. Bostancıoğlu, “Smart Technologies with 
Wireless Sensor Networks,” Procedia - Soc. Behav. Sci., vol. 
195, pp. 1915–1921, Jul. 2015. 
[6] S. Tang, Q. Zhu, X. Zhou, S. Liu, and M. Wu, “A conception 
of digital agriculture,” in IEEE International Geoscience and 
Remote Sensing Symposium, Toronto, Ont., Canada, 2002, vol. 
5, pp. 3026–3028. 
[7] A. Tzounis, N. Katsoulas, T. Bartzanas, and C. Kittas, “Internet 
of Things in agriculture, recent advances and future 
challenges,” Biosyst. Eng., vol. 164, pp. 31–48, Dec. 2017. 
[8] A. Nayyar and V. Puri, “Smart farming: IoT based smart 
sensors agriculture stick for live temperature and moisture 
monitoring using Arduino, cloud computing & solar 
technology,” in Communication and Computing Systems, 
Dronacharya College of Engineering, Gurgaon, India, 2016, 
pp. 673–680. 
[9] F. Ferrández-Pastor, J. García-Chamizo, M. Nieto-Hidalgo, 
and J. Mora-Martínez, “Precision Agriculture Design Method 
Using a Distributed Computing Architecture on Internet of 
Things Context,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 6, p. 1731, May 2018. 
[10] F. Balducci, D. Impedovo, and G. Pirlo, “Machine Learning 
Applications on Agricultural Datasets for Smart Farm 
Enhancement,” Machines, vol. 6, no. 3, p. 38, Sep. 2018. 
[11] T. Truong, A. Dinh, and K. Wahid, “An IoT environmental 
data collection system for fungal detection in crop fields,” in 
2017 IEEE 30th Canadian Conference on Electrical and 
Computer Engineering (CCECE), Windsor, ON, 2017, pp. 1–
4. 
[12] J. Duarte-Carvajalino, D. Alzate, A. Ramirez, J. Santa-
Sepulveda, A. Fajardo-Rojas, and M. Soto-Suárez, “Evaluating 
Late Blight Severity in Potato Crops Using Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicles and Machine Learning Algorithms,” Remote Sens., 
vol. 10, no. 10, p. 1513, Sep. 2018. 
[13] R. Kays, M. C. Crofoot, W. Jetz, and M. Wikelski, “Terrestrial 
animal tracking as an eye on life and planet,” Science, vol. 348, 
no. 6240, pp. 2478–2478, Jun. 2015. 
[14] R. Zviedris, A. Elsts, G. Strazdins, A. Mednis, and L. Selavo, 
“LynxNet: Wild Animal Monitoring Using Sensor Networks,” 
in Real-World Wireless Sensor Networks, vol. 6511, P. J. 
Marron, T. Voigt, P. Corke, and L. Mottola, Eds. Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 170–173. 
[15] V. R. Jain, R. Bagree, A. Kumar, and P. Ranjan, “wildCENSE: 
GPS based animal tracking system,” in 2008 International 
Conference on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and 
Information Processing, Sydney, Australia, 2008, pp. 617–
622. 
[16] B. O’Flynn et al., “Smart Coast: A Wireless Sensor Network 
for Water Quality Monitoring,” in 32nd IEEE Conference on 
Local Computer Networks (LCN 2007), Dublin, Ireland, 2007, 
pp. 815–816. 
[17] Z. Rasin and M. R. Abdullah, “Water Quality Monitoring 
System Using Zigbee Based Wireless Sensor Network,” Int. J. 
Eng., vol. 9, no. 10, p. 6. 
[18] T. Sugapriyaa, S. Rakshaya, K. Ramyadevi, M. Ramya, and P. 
G. Rashmi, “Smart water quality monitoring system for real 
time applications,” in International Journal of Pure and applied 
Mathematics, volume 118, p 1363-1369,2018. 
[19] K. Khedo, R. Perseedoss, and A. Mungur, “A Wireless Sensor 
Network Air Pollution Monitoring System,” Int. J. Wirel. Mob. 
Netw., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 31–45, May 2010. 
[20] W. Yi, K. Lo, T. Mak, K. Leung, Y. Leung, and M. Meng, “A 
Survey of Wireless Sensor Network Based Air Pollution 
Monitoring Systems,” Sensors, vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 31392–
31427, Dec. 2015. 
[21] J. de Carvalho Silva, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, A. M. Alberti, P. 
Solic, and A. L. L. Aquino, “LoRaWAN — A low power WAN 
protocol for Internet of Things: A review and opportunities,” 
in 2017 2nd International Multidisciplinary Conference on 
Computer and Energy Science (SpliTech), 2017, pp. 1–6. 
[22] T. Antoine-Santoni, J.-S. Gualtieri, F.-M. Manicacci, and A. 
Aiello, “AMBLoRa: a Wireless Tracking and Sensor System 
Using Long Range Communication to Monitor Animal 
Behavior,” pp. 35–40, 2018. 
[23] M. Bajer, “Building an IoT Data Hub with Elasticsearch, 
Logstash and Kibana,” in 2017 5th International Conference 
on Future Internet of Things and Cloud Workshops 
(FiCloudW), Prague, 2017, pp. 63–68. 
[24] T. Antoine-Santoni, B. Poggi, E. Vittori, H. V. Hieux, M. 
Delhom, and A. Aiello, “Smart Entity – How to build DEVS 
models from large amount of data and small amount of 
knowledge ?,” in Proceedings of 11th EAI International 
Conference on Simulation Tools and Techniques (SIMUtools 
2019), Chengdu, People’s Republic of China, 2019. 
[25] B. P. Zeigler, G. Kim, and H. Praehofer, Theory of Modeling 
and Simulation 2nd edition, Academic Press. 2000. 
[26] M. Abadi et al., “TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning 
on Heterogeneous Distributed Systems,” Software available 
from tensorflow.org. 
[27] “https://pytorch.org/.” (March 2019) 
[28] “https://keras.io/.” (March 2019) 
[29] F. Pedregosa et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in 
Python,” Mach. Learn. PYTHON, p. 6. 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

