 
 
Abstract—In the modern day society with its modern way of 
life, there is a growing problem with regard to the health of the 
people. One of the major concerns right now is the increasing 
number of overweight and obese people in the world. A way to 
determine whether the person has this problem is by detecting 
Adiponectin. The aim of the work is to make use of magnetic beads 
for future detection of the adiponectin, which is the target analyte 
of the work. This work will discuss the theoretical background of 
the target system as well as results for experiments using the 
prototype of the system implemented using commercially available 
components. The work shows a working prototype for a biosensing 
device that will be developed in the microscale level in the future.  
 
Index Terms—Magnetic Beads, Point of Care Testing (POCT), 
Hall Sensor, Adiponectin, Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay 
(ELISA) 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The need for Point of Care Testing (POCT) has been 
growing for the past couple of years.  It is a tool that may be used 
in diagnostics which plays an important part in the modern day. 
They can be separated into four different categories which 
include 
clinical 
diagnostics, 
veterinary 
diagnostics, 
environmental monitoring and food testing. Clinical diagnostics 
does not only involve detection of disease but also in its 
prevention and health care 
This work will address the growing problem of obesity in the 
world. In order to deal with obesity, we must understand the 
physiology of an obese person. Obesity is defined as a medical 
condition wherein there is an excessive accumulation of body 
fat and has already reached a point where the person’s health 
problem has increased and the life expectancy has decreased 
[1]. Therefore we must understand what is body fat. Body fat or 
fat is referred to as the adipose tissue in histology. It is a loose 
connective tissue that is composed of adipocytes or fat cells. Its 
main role in our body is to store energy in the form of fat. It also 
provides the body with cushion and insulation. It is made of 
several types of hormones, of which, have different effects on 
the body. One of the hormones that have been studied and are 
found to be a promising therapeutic tool in treating obesity and 
other human diseases is the adiponectin. There are a hundred 
ways to detect adiponectin, which from here on will also be 
referred to as the target analyte, but the most commonly used 
way is the enzyme-link immunosorbent assay (ELISA) protocol 
[2]. 
The work aims to develop in the future a portable POCT 
device that would utilize the characteristics of the magnetic 
beads to detect the concentration of the adiponectin protein 
hormone. Magnetic beads are ideal for such kind of bioassay 
application due to the following reasons: (a) cells exhibit few 
magnetic properties, (b) signals from magnetic beads are stable 
with time, (c) results from magnetic detection is independent of 
the color and clarity of the sample, and (d) magnetic labeling 
has functionalities that may be used to improve bioassay 
performance such as magnetic filtration and manipulation [3].  
As a proof of concept for the microscale device, this work 
will present a working prototype developed using commercially 
available components. For the prototype, 2mm steel balls will 
be used in place of the magnetic beads that are 
superparamagnetic. 
Superparamagnetic 
behavior 
is 
an 
important property of magnetic beads used for detection since it 
prevents the beads from clustering at the absence of 
magnetization [4]. The components used to build the prototype 
are also discussed. There are several types of devices that can be 
used in the detection of magnetic field. Of which include 
Building a Prototype for a Magnetic Nanoparticle Bead Based Biosensing Device  
Wen Yaw Chung, Kimberly Jane Uy, Yi Ying Yeh, Ting Ya Yang, Hao Chun Yang, and Hsi Wen Li 
Department of Electronic Engineering  
Chung Yuan Christian University  
Chung-Li, Taiwan, R.O.C.  
eldanny@cycu.edu.tw, kimuy_1984@yahoo.com, polnna25@hotmail.com, tingya0112@gmail.com, 
derry2010@hotmail.com, fea7777777@gmail.com 
 
Figure 2. Magnetic Bead Sensing System [3]. The system make use of 
inductor as a source of polarization. 
 
Figure 1. Capture of sample using sandwich ELISA. Illustration shows 
two ways of detection of sample presence; (left) magnetic bead, (right) 
HRP used in conventional ELISA 
 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs), 
Giant Magnetoresistive (GMR) Sensors, spin valve sensor, 
Tunneling Magnetoresistive (TMR) sensors, and Anistropic 
Magnetoresistive (AMR) sensors. However, such devices are 
not ideal for dense arrays due to the presence of magnetic field 
caused by applied bias conditions [4]. For this work, a 
commercially available hall sensor, WSH 136, was used in the 
system and is characterized in the following article. The said 
device is ideal for such application since it is designed to track 
extremely small change in the magnetic flux density [5].  
The work will give a theoretical background of the concepts 
of which the work is based on. Such discussion will include 
description of adiponectin, the ELISA protocol, the magnetic 
beads, and the sensor system. After which, a detailed discussion 
of the implementation of the circuit model will be given.  This is 
then followed by the discussion of the experimental data and 
results，conclusion and future work. 
II. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
A. Adiponectin 
Adiponectin is a protein hormone that is secreted 
exclusively by the adipose tissue into the bloodstream. It is 
relatively abundant in plasma as compared other hormones. Its 
function includes modulation of a number of metabolic 
processes. These processes include glucose regulation and fatty 
acid catabolism. Study shows that the higher the level of 
adiponectin, the lower is the production of insulin. Our blood 
sugar is also better controlled. The increased number of 
adiponectin will reduce the risk of diabetes and heart disease. 
Furthermore, people with plenty of adiponectin will have a 
better controlled weight. Although the adiponectin is produced 
from body fat, it is found that the plasma level of adiponectin is 
inversely proportional to the body fat. Therefore, as adiponectin 
level is lowered, the weight of the person further increased. 
Some studies have shown that the adiponectin production is 
increased when a person does exercise. 
B. Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) 
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) is a 
protocol dominantly used for medical diagnostics. The work 
will make use of its basic principle for the detection of the target 
analyte, which refers to the substance being to be analyzed by 
the procedure. The protocol will consist of three different 
antibodies. The first antibody will be the capture antibody that 
will be placed on the surface of the micro plate and is 
responsible for capturing the target analyte from the sample. 
The second antibody will attach itself to the target analyte 
captured. The third antibody is the detection antibody which 
will have horseradish peroxidase (HRP) attached to it and will 
bind to the second antibody. Figure 1 illustrates the architecture 
of the said antibodies and analyte. In general ELISA protocol, 
the concentration of the sample will be calculated based on the 
optical density measured from the result of the experiment. 
Optical density can be described as the amount of light absorbed 
by the target sample. HRP is used to increase the detectability of 
the target analyte. The number of detection antibody that will 
remain on the sample will be proportional to the concentration 
of the target analyte. The reaction between the HRP attached on 
the detection antibody and a substrate will change the opacity of 
the sample giving it a much denser color. The optical density of 
the solution is then measured and is presumed to be the 
concentration level of the target analyte in the sample. A low 
value of optical density will mean a higher concentration of the 
target analyte present in the sample. For this work, the ELISA 
protocol will slightly be altered. The detection antibody will be 
attached to magnetic beads instead of HRP. There will no longer 
be a need for a substrate to react with sample. The number of 
magnetic beads left in the sample will determine the level 
magnetic field detected by the sensing system. Figure 1 
illustrates the difference between the typical ELISA protocol 
and the proposed structure with the magnetic beads. This 
process is often referred to as magnetic assays. 
C. Magnetic Beads 
Magnetic beads are made from γ − Fe2O3 or Fe3O4 
nanometer crystals that are dispersed in a polymer matrix [4]. 
Their superparamagnetic behavior is an important property 
when used for biomedical detection. When the beads are coated 
with specific chemical substance they are able to bind to 
specific biological material. They can be used in POCT devices 
that use bioassays for detections and measurements. The super 
paramagnetic characteristics of these beads are ideal for such 
applications since they have little or no intrinsic magnetization. 
This means that there will be no clustering of magnetic beads at 
the absence of magnetic field. 
 
Figure 3 Circuit model of the sensing system. This includes steel balls, 
magnetic sheet and commercially available hall sensor IC. 
 
 
Figure 4. Characteristic curve of the WSH 136 commercial hall sensor IC. 
[5] The figure illustrates the output voltage of the component with regard to 
the sensed magnetic field 
 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
D. Sensing System 
Figure 2 illustrates a sample magnetic beads sensing system 
[3]. The sensing system is composed of a hall sensor and a 
micro-coil. 
The 
system 
is 
implemented 
using 
the 
complementary 
metal 
oxide 
semiconductor 
(CMOS) 
technology. In order for the hall sensor to detect the magnetic 
beads, it needs to have a flux generator to induce magnetic field 
onto the super paramagnetic beads. A micro-coil is, therefore, 
placed on top of the hall sensor to serve such purpose. This, at 
the same time, will serve as a calibration mechanism for the 
system. Since there is a magnetic field source specific for the 
system, the environmental magnetic fields are negligible. The 
hall sensor would then be connected to a source that will 
provide an electrical signal running on a uniform direction. And 
another distinct electrical signal will be measured. An example 
of such electric signal is having a constant current fed through 
your hall sensor. And for the measured electrical signal; the 
voltage across the hall sensor shall be taken. At the presence of 
additional magnetic field which will come from the super 
paramagnetic beads, at constant supply current, the value of the 
measured voltage will change in proportion to the number of 
magnetic particles present in the system. 
III. CIRCUIT MODEL IMPLEMENTATION 
A. Sensing System 
For this work, the magnetic beads are replaced with steel ball 
with a 2mm diameter.  The steel balls are ideal for this work 
since they are unpolarized and get magnetized when placed near 
a magnetic field which is similar to the characteristic of 
magnetic beads. The downside, though, is that they will not 
automatically demagnetize when taken away from a magnetic 
field. Therefore, this work also made use of a demagnetizer 
circuit to demagnetize the steel balls after each use. The system 
was made such that the system would be able to test up to a 
quantity of nine steel balls. A porous plate was made to hold the 
steel balls in place. In place of the micro-coil, a round magnetic 
sheet is placed for polarization of the steel balls. On the bottom 
is the commercially available hall sensor integrated circuit (IC). 
The hall sensor already have amplifier that would preprocess 
the reading from the hall sensor. The illustration of the 
described sensing system is shown in Figure 3. 
B. Characteristic of the Hall Sensor IC 
The work made use of a commercially available hall sensor 
IC made by Winson. The model used in this work is the WSH 
136. Integrated into this component is a hall sensing element, 
linear amplifier, sensitivity controller, and emitter follower 
output stage [5]. The component operates in a voltage range of 
3.0V to 12V. It has a sensitivity of 3.3mV/Gauss. Figure 4 
illustrates the operating curve of the sensor IC at a given range 
of magnetic field.  
C. Circuit Implementation 
The circuit for readout circuit is illustrated in Figure 5. The 
system includes the following components: shift register, digital 
to analog converter (DAC), operation amplifier (OPA), 
microcontroller, and the hall sensor IC. The system consists of 
an adder and a subtractor. These components are used to 
compute the analog signal from the hall sensor. The system 
simultaneously adds and subtracts the output the DAC from hall 
sensor IC. 
 
 
Figure 6. A picture of the whole large scale system implemented on a 
custom made PCB board. 
 
 
Figure 5. Illustration of the readout circuit diagram for the 
implementation of the large scale model. The system also includes a 
microcontroller that would process the data to human understandable 
number. 
 
 
TABLE I. 
LIST OF COMPONENTS USED IN IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 
LARGE SCALE SYSTEM 
 
Component 
Model 
Shift Register 
74LS164 
Digital to Analog Converter (DAC) 
DAC0808 
Operational Amplifier (OPA) 
LMC6484 
Microcontroller 
ATmega8535 
Hall Sensor 
WSH 136 
 
 
 
Figure 7. LCD display output of the whole sensor system. 
 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
Figure 9. Analog output value for the system generated from 0 to 9 
numbers of steel balls placed on the sensor system. 
Their output is then fed into a programmable gain amplifier 
that is designed using OPAs. Since they are of the same 
potential and current we are able to derive equations (1) and (2). 
Although the adder and the subtractor work simultaneously, 
only one path will be used for the measurement of the result. 
This will be done by the microcontroller. 
The system will perform an Auto Zero calibration or AZC 
which is performed when no steel ball is placed on the system. 
This is done to eliminate the magnetization coming from the 
surrounding. This will be done every time the device is turned 
on and is used to account for the offset given by the magnetic 
field from the surrounding. Then when the steel balls are placed, 
the computation of the magnetization measurement will start.  
The output from the adder and the subtractor will be fed into the 
microcontroller wherein the internal analog to digital converter 
(ADC) will be used to convert the analog signal to a digital 
value that could be processed by the microcontroller. The two 
values are then averaged and compared to the values from the 
adder and subtractor through the use of an XOR operation until 
the desired value is reached.  
 
HS － DAC = V－                                              (1) 
HS + DAC = V+                                              (2) 
 
The implemented system is illustrated in Figure 6. And the 
list of commercially available components used in the building 
of this system is listed in table 1.  
D. Data Display 
Figure 7 shows a picture of the LCD display for the reading 
of the system. Table 2 shows the description of each value in the 
LCD display. “AZC” stands for the Auto Zero Calibration 
which is the initial reading value of the system. The initial value 
is the reading when there is no steel ball placed on the system. 
The “initial reading” will account for the magnetic field 
surrounding the system. The magnetic field from the 
surrounding will be the offset value of the system. This value 
will change at different locations. Therefore, auto zero 
calibration will be time each time the device is used. This also 
means that the “initial value” will vary each time the device is 
used. The “corrected value” stands for the value of the reading 
when a certain number of steel balls are placed on the system. 
And “MAG” will stand for the magnitude of the readout. The 
“measured value” will have the same value as that of the 
corrected value. The “variation” will stand for the change in the 
output value between the first reading and the second reading. 
IV. DATA AND RESULTS 
Figure 8 shows the digital output value of the system while 
Figure 9 shows the analog output value of the system.  The 
digital output shows a linearity of 0.98. And the delta in the 
figure represents the difference between the initial value and 
each count of steel balls present in the sensor system ranging 
from 1 to 9. This result also shows a linearity of 0.98. The 
analog output of the system also shows a linearity of 0.98 same 
as that of the digital output. The output voltage range, as shown 
in Figure 8 is ranging from 1.217V to 1.728. This shows a 
system sensitivity of 56.77mV for each steel ball. 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A circuit model was implemented with components having 
the same function as that of their counterparts on the submicron 
technology scale to be implemented. The steel balls were used 
in place of the magnetic beads, the round magnetic sheet were 
used in place of the micro-coil and the hall sensor IC with 
internal preprocessing circuit was used in place of the CMOS 
based hall sensor. The results show that the quantity of steel 
balls present on the sensor will affect the output voltage of the 
system. The result also shows high linearity for the results. From 
this we can conclude that the system is able to give an accurate 
result for sensing the quantity of beads present on the system. 
For the future work, the system shall be implemented on a 
submicron CMOS technology for its intended application.  
From the results shown in this work, the number of magnetic 
beads captured by the sensor using magnetic assay should 
TABLE II. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE DISPLAYED VALUES OF THE LCD 
DISPLAY PANEL. 
 
AZC 
initial  value 
corrected value  
MAG 
measured values 
 variation  
 
0
100
200
300
400
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10bit
(0~1024)
digital
Δ
 
Figure 8. Digital output value for the system generated from 0 to 9 
numbers of steel balls placed on the sensor system. 
 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
reflect the concentration of the target antigen. The sensor will 
use BioMEMS technology for implementation. This will 
provide the sensor to have greater binding capabilities to 
biological materials. And it will also provide a smaller distance 
between sensor and magnetic beads due to its post process 
etching capability, thereby increasing the sensitivity of the 
sensor. The post data processing of the said device would be 
done using an 8051 microcontroller. The data gathered from the 
device would be converted to a value that is understandable by 
the user. The signal quality of the system will be taken into 
consideration. Additional filters will be applied to the system as 
deemed needed to reduce noise levels during the development 
of the micro-scale system. The said device shall not be limited 
to the testing of a specific analyte. The device may be altered to 
the need of the user. This is simply done with the change 
antibodies used for the reactions.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work would like to acknowledge the National Science 
Counsel, Taiwan, R.O.C. for funding this project (NSC 
99-2221-E-033-064) and Hall sensors donated by Winson 
Semiconductor Corp, Taiwan. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Arita, S. Kihara, N. Ouchi, M. Takahashi, K. Maeda, J. 
Miyagawa, K. Hotta, I. Shimomura, T. Nakamura, and K. Miyaoka, 
“Paradoxical decrease of an adipose-specific protein, adiponectin, 
in 
obesity,” 
Biochemical 
and 
Biophysical 
Research 
Communications, 1999. 257(1): pp. 79-83. 
[2] R. S. Yalow and S. A. Berson, “Immunoassay of Endogenous 
Plasma Insulin in Man”, J Clin Invest. 1960 Jul; 39:1157–1175, 
1960. 
[3] O. Florescu, M. Mattmann, and B. Boser, “Fully integrated 
detection 
of 
single 
magnetic 
beads 
in 
complementary 
metal-oxide-semiconductor,” Journal of Applied Physics, 2008.  
[4] F. Colle, “Hallsensor based detection of magnetic particles for 
lab-on-a-chip,” 2007, s.n. 
[5] Winson Semiconductor Corp., “Linear Hall Effect Sensor IC – 
WSH136,” Data sheet. 
[6] T. Aytur, P. R. Beatty, and B. Boser, "An immunoassay platform 
based on CMOS hall sensors," Proc. Solid-State Sensor, Actuator 
and Microsystems Workshop, pp. 126 - 129, 2002. 
[7] H. H. Tsai, C. F. Lin, Y. Z. Juang, I. Wang, and Y. C. Lin, “Multiple 
type biosensors fabricated using the CMOS BioMEMS platform,” 
Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical. 144(2): pp. 407-412. 
[8] Wang, H. and S.A. Hajimiri, “A Frequency-Shift CMOS Magnetic 
Biosensor Arraywith Single-Bead Sensitivity and No External 
Magnet,” California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA. 
[9] P. A. Besse, G. Boero, M. Demierre, V. Pott and R. Popovic, 
“Detection of a single magnetic microbead using a miniaturized 
silicon Hall sensor,” Applied physics letters, 2002. 80(22): pp. 
4199-4201. 
[10] L. Brown, "Beyond the Ivory Tower: Disease detection on a chip," 
Berkeley Science Review, issue 6, pp. 32, Spring 2004. 
[11] T. S. Aytur, T. Ishikawa, and B. E. Boser, “A 2.2-mm CMOS 
Bioassay Chip and Wireless Interface,” 2004: IEEE. 
[12] R. Elliott, “Flux Meter,” Page Created 28 November 2008. Access 
Date 
15 
July 
2011. 
http://sound.westhost.com/clocks/fluxmeter.html. 
[13] Y. J. Chang, C. Y. Hu, L. T. Yin, C. H. Chang, and H. J. Su, 
“Dividable Membrane with Multi-Reaction Wells for Microarray 
Biochips,” J. of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Vol. 106, No.1, pp. 
59-64, 2008. 
[14] S. M. Grundy, H. B. Brewer, Jr, J. I. Cleeman, S. C. Smith, Jr, and 
C. Lenfant., “Definition of Metabolic Syndrome,” Circulation, No. 
109, pp. 433-438, 2004. 
 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-010-9
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

