Development of a Mechanical Sleeve Diagnosis Test 
 
 
André Borges 
School of Technology 
Polytechnic Institute of Cávado and Ave (IPCA) 
Barcelos, Portugal 
e-mail: a8685@alunos.ipca.pt 
Vítor Carvalho 
School of Technology & Algoritmi R&D 
IPCA & Minho University 
Barcelos & Guimarães, Portugal 
e-mail: vcarvalho@ipca.pt
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents the development of a system to 
assist the inspection, repair and calibration of mechanical 
sleeves. This system contemplates a mechanical device and the 
underlying software in which the main data acquisition is 
carried out through a force sensor. The developed system 
implied the development of specific hardware, based on the 
platform Arduino, and dedicated software based on C 
programming language. A user interface to register and store 
the fulfilled tests was developed. The system allowed to 
optimize 
the 
performance 
and 
the 
efficiency 
of 
a 
manufacturing unit, which, until now, was done using a 
manual procedure.  
Keywords-sleeve; nozzle; force sensor; Arduino. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This section presents the state or art, the motivation and 
the background of the project, as well as its purposes and 
the paper structure. 
A. State of Art 
Verhagen et al. (2015) [1] argue that automation of 
engineering processes is increasingly prevalent in multiple 
lifecycle phases such as design, manufacturing and service. 
The automation of physical tasks is a long-standing 
characteristic of enterprises striving to remain competitive. 
For mass production systems in particular, the majority of 
manual labour has been replaced by automated production 
equipment, a trend that is increasingly replicated in series 
production systems. 
Limoncelli (2016) [2] tells that care should be taken 
when a process is automated because the human component 
of the process could be very important for the entire system. 
“When a process is automated the automation encapsulates 
learning thus far, permitting new people to perform the task 
without having to experience that learning.” 
Luz and Kuiawinski (2006) [3] expose that, with the 
industry evolution, relevant events were observed in the 
development of Production Engineering settings and the 
presence of the machines, manufacturing processes and 
production systems increased. Using these concepts, 
expanded methods have been created to the other branches 
of the organization, such as the commercial and services 
branches. 
Zuboff (1994) [4] quoting H. L. Arnold, an industrial 
journalist, wrote with excitement about Ford’s innovations 
that maximize the continuity of the assembly. He 
summarized the main elements of that productivity strategy, 
initially, all unnecessary movements were eliminated from 
the actions of the workers. The task was organized in order 
to require the least amount of will power consumption and 
mental effort. 
From the above, it can be assumed that automating a 
manual process can be very advantageous although it should 
be pondered if this action is beneficial to the company as it 
is to the human element. In the case of this paper, it will be 
clearly demonstrated that the developed system brings 
numberless advantages to both sides because it will reduce 
the error margin and increase the efficiency, resulting in an 
increase of effective working time of the operator.  
B. Motivation and Background 
The motivation associated with this study fits in 
upgrading/automating a mechanical sleeves test procedure of 
a multinational technological company, located in the city of 
Braga, northern Portugal. The sleeves are used by an 
electronic components assembly industrial machine; this 
machine controls the segments in order to pick the 
components and drop them in the right place of a PCB 
(printed circuit board). They have a spring inside with a 
defined pressure, which is responsible for absorbing the 
impact of SMD components (Surface Mounting Devices) 
both in the collection as well as in the placement. The state 
of this spring is critical to ensure the components application 
accuracy as well as to prevent the rejection of the electronic 
components. The spring pressure can only be applied after 
placing a nozzle (Fig. 1). 
The previous method that was used for the detection of 
the spring state was a manual process using a testing 
instrument in which the result of the applied force in the 
spring was shown using a manometer. To observe that, some 
individual weights of 200 g each were used, who exercise 
force exclusively on the spring. The pointer of the 
manometer must be between 15 and 25, resulting in a 
maximum force applied of 2.2 N. That range is 
recommended by the buyer which is also the manufacturer of 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

the industrial machine referenced above. This measurement 
system has no units which gives a non-scientific approval. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Example of a sleeve with the nozzle applied. 
C. Project purposes 
 As the manual diagnostic test is a time consuming 
process and it may not offer the same test conditions to all 
sleeves - this is a consequence of the weights that might be 
dropped at different heights resulting in a change in the force 
exerted in the spring. So, to address these issues, the purpose 
of this project is to develop a device associated with a 
graphical application, allowing direct contact between the 
data acquired with the operator, which results into less 
manual labour on the side of the user. 
This project contemplates two main parts, hardware and 
software. The hardware to be developed will comprise: 
• 
A support structure to backing the tool in the repair 
bench; 
• 
A motor for controlling the force to apply to the 
sleeve to be evaluated; 
• 
A sensor for measuring strength and all electronic 
components required.  
The software to be developed should provide: 
• 
An interface for interaction with the operator to 
control and analysis of the measures; 
• 
Graphical presentation of the force measured; 
• 
Organization and storage of the data acquired. 
D. Paper structure 
This paper is structured in 4 sections. In the second 
section, Technical Description, the problem analysis is 
presented as well as the way it was approached, 
demonstrating how problems were solved and which are the 
reasons that led to the chosen solutions. This section exposes 
the most important points of the development of this project. 
In the third section, Final Tests and Installation, we describe 
the final tests carried out and the method how the installation 
of the device was executed in production. In the fourth 
section, Conclusion and Future Work, we present the 
conclusions of the work carried out, as well as indicate some 
improvement proposals. 
II. 
TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION 
The problem to be solved arises from the need to replace 
the manual performed sleeve spring diagnostic test that, can 
be susceptible to human error, for a new device capable to 
streamline resulting in a more organized process as well as 
the integration of more and new features. 
It was established a strategy of resolution of the problem. 
In the broadest sense of the problem, the following block 
diagram was developed (Fig. 2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Project block diagram. 
As presented in Fig. 2, the data provided by the sensor 
should be treated by the controller and sent to the interface; 
the motor which represents the motion of the sleeve, receives 
orders from the controller that can either be subsequent of 
sensor data or orders from the operator through the interface. 
In order to store the information of each tested segment as 
well to include the date of the tests, there was a need to 
integrate a database in the software application. 
A. System Design 
In a first approach to the project it was necessary and 
important to perform several manual diagnostic tests to 
understand the whole process from scratch. If the test is 
invalid, it is necessary to repair the sleeve by changing the 
spring or, in some cases, by cleaning the inside of the 
sleeve, which is enough to restore the correct functionality 
of the spring. 
Once defined the resolution strategy it was crucial to 
begin the research about the sensor to use knowing that, it 
would be important to measure the force intensity applied in 
Newton (N) [5, 6]. 
After a research of existing sensors in the market that 
could supply this project needs, we considered the force 
sensor reference FSG015WNPB from Honeywell (Fig. 3) 
[6]. This sensor has a plunger area, a total volume of 916,16 
mm3, a measurement range between 0 to 15N, a value of 
0,5% span relativity to linearity and 0,2% of span relativity 
to repeatability, in order to detect the small force 
oscillations of the sleeve during the test.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Force sensor [7]. 
 
 
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
The force sensor chosen is based on a Wheatstone bridge; 
by applying a force on the plunger of the sensor it will cause 
a symmetrical variation, however opposite, in the sensor 
outputs; as various forces represent variations of different 
voltage, it has a fundamental tension force ratio to 
determine the force applied. As a result of the information 
requested from the manufacturer along with this sensor, we 
also acquired an instrumentation amplifier (IA) [8, 9], with 
the reference INA122 from Texas Instruments [10]. 
The controller used was the Arduino UNO platform since 
the company already had one and it also can meet all the 
requirements necessary for the development of this project. 
With this controller it was possible to power up the circuit 
chosen. 
To control the speed and direction of the DC motor, we 
used an Arduino module of the H bridge, as it allows to 
control both directions of the motor rotation. The module 
used is based on the IC L298 from ST, which is a dual H 
bridge [11]. The motor speed can be regulated through 
PWM (Pulse Width Modulation) being able to rotate at 
different speeds allowing faster/slower testing times. 
However, in order to get proper results, once the sleeve 
approaches the sensor, the motor speed should be as slow as 
possible, and in this case the possible slowest speed is 
manifested by the PWM value of 40, on a scale from 0 to 
255. PWM values lower than 40 aren’t enough to keep the 
motor in motion.  
For position switches, we considered some roller 
switches as they are very affordable and of great efficiency.  
Figure 4 presents the sensor output circuit designed [12, 
13]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Circuit designed to read the sensor output. 
Outlined the circuit, it was essential to scale the value of 
RG (Fig. 4) being the gain (G) of the IA, G = 5 + (200k/RG). 
Since the circuit is powered from a 5V source it has to be 
ensured that the output does not exceed the 5V to force 
values up to 2.2 N, as it is the value of the maximum force 
applied to the spring of the sleeve. So, to calculate the gain, 
we defined as maximum value, hypothetically, applied to a 
weight of 308.8 g corresponding to an output of 0.038 V. 
For a maximum voltage of 4.8V, as a precaution, G = 
4.80/0.038 = 124. Then, RG = 200k/(124−5) = 1.6kΩ. 
In order to read the values from the sensor, we developed 
an application with the Arduino interface software (Fig. 5). 
The input considers an analogue port from the Arduino and 
depending on the ratio between the maximum and minimum 
values read there is a direct correspondence to the maximum 
and minimum values of the applied force value, 
respectively. Moreover, it is possible to make the mapping 
of values to get the current value of the force. This is only 
possible because the sensor features a linear behaviour. 
So, verifying the minimum weight and the maximum 
weight that the Arduino can read, a relationship was 
established between the weight applied and the output 
voltage. Knowing the weight being applied, easily, it is then 
converted to Newton, multiplying it by 9.8 m/s2 
(acceleration due to gravity on Earth). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Flowchart of the Arduino interface code. 
Following the flowchart (Fig. 5), the first step is to 
calculate the force in Newton; then if the operator chooses 
to begin the test, the motor will spin to the right, which 
means the sleeve will start to approach the sensor, if not, the 
motor does not spin. 
Up next, if the applied force is higher than 2.2N, the 
motor will reverse its rotation, if not, the motor will keep his 
current configuration whether is stopped or is on the move.  
If the limit switch is activated, it means that the sleeve is 
coming back, so the motor must stop, otherwise, the motor 
keeps the current configuration. 
For security reasons, we implemented an emergency 
switch. This is a way to ensure control of the system, as 
once activated cuts off the system power. This switch 
should only be activated if the sleeve, for some reason, 
 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
mechanical or by software, overload the sensor and reaches 
the switch.  
If there were no security system implemented, certainly 
the mechanical components could be damaged. 
The source code represented by the flowchart is executed 
every 5ms which represents a frequency of 200Hz, 
corresponding 
to 
a 
sensor 
output 
reading 
almost 
continuously, which allows to make nearly live decisions. 
Once the Arduino code was completed, the code was 
implemented in C# programming language [14, 15], with 
the purpose of creating a user friendly interface that shows 
graphically the applied force value to the segment, 
transmitted through the application on Arduino. 
It was imperative to establish a communication between 
the Arduino and the application [16]. With this purpose it 
was necessary to receive and send data through the serial 
port of the computer. 
As this application uses several distinct features such as 
establish a connection by serial port or define a graph on the 
interface, it is essential to use delegate methods it allows 
updating the UI (user interface) thread, for getting or setting 
data.  
To set the chart it was established that the Y-axis will 
represent the values of the force in mN and the X-axis will 
represent time in ms.  
The chosen chart type is a line chart. For better 
perception of the maximum peak, a label is displayed in the 
interface with this information, as well as in any place of the 
chart it is displayed a tooltip with the coordinates. 
Additionally, some other features were implemented in 
the application (Fig. 6), that result from the need to explore 
new concepts and offer different and contemplative 
solutions to the operator, such as the possibility of saving 
the chart to a file in JPG format, creation of a database (DB) 
[17] to store information regarding tests performed, or to 
print data and display it in a HTML page [18]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  User interface. 
B. Hardware Implementation 
It was known beforehand that the device to develop 
should be robust. The idea was to create a system with a 
strap to allow the sleeve to move in the horizontal plane 
(Fig.7). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Motion system [1- position switch; 2- motor speed limit switch; 
3- emergency switch; 4- movable part; 5-mechanical shirt; 6- 
sleeve/segment; 7- force sensor.]  
Observing Fig. 7, the motor is connected to a pulley and, 
through a strap, this is linked to another pulley as well, as 
the movable part that carries the sleeve is attached to the 
belt, this will move horizontally. To give mobility to the 
movable part, this is attached to a bearing system, so when 
the belt moves, the movable part follows this movement. To 
put the sleeve to test in the movable part it was used a 
mechanical shirt that is permanently affixed to the movable 
part, so any sleeve can be tested as long as it is embedded in 
the mechanical shirt. 
The electronic circuit was welded into a board allowing 
that all the components stay inside of the structure, thus 
protected from external disturbances. 
The structure must guarantee that the test conditions are 
the same for all segments to be tested. 
III. 
FINAL TESTS AND INSTALLATION 
Once the software and the hardware were completed, the 
testing phase was undertaken. At first two sleeves were 
tested, one in a good state and another in a bad state, 
previously tested through the manual system. The results 
were very positive because we found large differences in the 
graphs obtained, so then only sleeves in good condition were 
tested for being able to establish parameters that identify the 
state of any sleeve (Fig. 8). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
Figure 8.  Sleeve in good condition. 
On the basis of these tests, it was managed to check that 
if all the graphics of sleeves that show up in conditions of 
being used, approach the symmetry between the range 
650ms and 800ms and the maximum number of force 
applied may not exceed the 2200mN. 
By testing different sleeve states, we also verified distinct 
characteristics for each spring condition. Figures 9 and 10 
are examples of graphs that represent the state of a loose 
spring (Fig. 9) and a stuck spring (Fig. 10). 
 
Figure 9.  Sleeve with a loose spring. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Sleeve with a stuck spring. 
A loose spring does not offer as much resistance as a 
normal one so it takes longer time to achieve the maximum 
force. Moreover, when a stuck spring is tested the opposite is 
verified because the sensor captures the oscillations that a 
spring of this type causes - several peaks may result. 
We performed several tests with segments in which it 
was previously knew the condition of them for validation. 
Afterwards, the device has been put to the test, and were 
carried out tests to about 50 segments, in which their 
condition was unknown. The application was able to 
successfully distinguish the sleeves that were ready to be 
used from sleeves that were in bad condition. Moreover, 
these results were later verified by the manual process and 
the results matched. 
Furthermore, we implemented a functionality that allows 
to calibrate the sensor over time. The calibration procedure is 
accomplished by the same way as the method that is used to 
calculate the force, in other words is based on known 
masses. The relationship between the weight applied and the 
output voltage is recalculated given the new weights. 
This calibration option is available, as seen, in the 
interface application and it is protected by password for 
security reasons. 
The calibration, as previously referred, is performed 
using two weights, both of known masses, one which 
represents the minimum value and the other the maximum 
value. For that, simply it puts the weight on the sensor and 
depending on the value that the Arduino is receiving, a high 
or low value, it is regarded as a new value for the calculation 
of the force. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
This paper presents the development of a mechanical 
sleeve diagnosis system through a force sensor. The defined 
objectives for this project were achieved. Concerning the 
hardware, two weights, both of known masses all the test 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

conditions to the sleeve. Regarding the software, we created 
a user interface for interaction with the operator in order to 
control and analyse the measures as well as represent them 
graphically, a DB was created for organization and storage 
of data. Additionally, it was implemented a sensor 
recalibration option as well as a function to define limits for 
analysis of the measures. 
Based on the presented results and on the feedback from 
the operators, this new device shall allow the optimization of 
the performance and efficiency of the manufacturing unit. 
The developed product will have a great utility for the 
company in the way that it presents clear advantages 
compared with their previous manual method, among others, 
it saves time, enables better decision-making ability on the 
realized test, increasing the overall efficacy. 
Furthermore, 
there 
are 
some 
ideas 
for 
future 
development, namely, to improve the user interface and to 
make the decision process of the sleeve state autonomous. 
V. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Verhagen, W.; Vrught, B.; Schut, J.; Curran, R. (2015). A 
method for identification of automation potential through 
modelling of engineering processes and quantification of 
information waste. Advanced Engineering Informatics 29, 
P.307-321. 
[2] Limoncelli, T. (2016). The “Leftover Principle” requires 
increasingly more highly skilled humans. Communications of 
the ACM, Vol.59, No 9. 
[3] Luz, G.; Kuiawinski, D. (2006). Mecanização, Autonomação 
e Automação – Uma Revisão Conceitual e Crítica. XIII 
SIMPEP Bauru, SP, Brasil. 
[4] Zuboft, S. (1994). Automatizar/ Informatizar: As Duas faces 
da Tecnologia Inteligente. Revista de Administração de 
Empresas. São Paulo, V.34, n.6, p.80-91. 
[5] http://www.farnell.com/datasheets/1728715.pdf, 
<consulted 
in 14-02-2015> 
[6] http://sigma.octopart.com/21314551/instruction_sheet/Honey
well-FSG015WNPB.pdf, <consulted in 16-02-2015> 
[7] http://sensing.honeywell.com/honeywell-force-sensors-fsg-
series-72dpi.jpg, <consulted in 16-02-2015> 
[8] S. Franko, Design with Operational Amplifiers and Analog 
Integrated Circuits, McGraw–Hill. 
[9] Ron Mancini (2002). OP Amps for everyone, Texas 
Instruments. 
[10] http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/ina122.pdf, <consulted in 
14-02-2015> 
[11] http://www.instructables.com/id/Arduino-Modules-L298N-
Dual-H-Bridge-Motor-Controll/?ALLSTEPS, <consulted in 
05-03-2015> 
[12] http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/ina122.pdf, <consulted in 
15-02-2015> 
[13] Louis Nashelsky, Robert L Boylestad, (2013), Dispositivos 
Eletrônicos e Teoria De Circuitos, Prentice Hall. (in 
portuguese). 
[14] C# 3.5, Paulo Marques, Hernâni Pedroso e Ricardo Figueira, 
FCA editora, 2009. (in portuguese). 
[15] Visual C# 2008 How to program (Third edition), P.J. Deitel & 
H.M. Deitel, Prentice Hall, 2009. 
[16] http://www.embarcados.com.br/comunicacao-serial-c-
arduino-parte-1/, <consulted in 12-03-2015>. 
[17] http://www.macoratti.net/08/06/c_shp4.htm, <consulted in 
02-03-2015>. 
[18] https://ivanmeirelles.wordpress.com/2012/11/07/exportar-
uma-datagridview-para-html-em-c/, <consulted in 16-05-
2015>. 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

