 
(a) 
(a) 
(b) 
 
(c) 
Figure 1: CryoProbe to sensor connection before (a) and after (b) 
freezing; Schematic overview of the system (c) 
 
 
 
Controlled Cryogenic Ablation Using Ultrasonic Sensing 
 
Assaf Sharon 
Robots and BioMedical Micro Systems (RBM2S) research 
laboratory, School of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of 
Engineering, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.  
e-mail: assaf.a1@post.tau.ac.il 
Dr. Gabor Kosa 
Robots and BioMedical Micro Systems (RBM2S) research 
laboratory, School of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of 
Engineering, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. 
e-mail: gkosa@post.tau.ac.il
 
 
Abstract—The Cryoablation process is one of the methods for 
treating various tissue abnormities. Cryoablation devices are 
mostly minimally invasive and are used in open loop control, 
monitored by additional imaging devices. In this study, we 
monitor the growth of the ablated area by using a miniature 
ultrasonic transducer that is collocated with the tip of the 
cryogenic device. The 20 MHz ultrasonic sensor is capable of 
measuring the size of the ice sphere that is created in front of 
the needle. In addition to real time monitoring of the ablation 
process, the ultrasonic sensor will be able to determine the 
local thickness of the tissue prior to the treatment (thus 
enabling the setting of the power of the ablation treatment). 
The combined device will shorten the ablation treatment and 
will eliminate the need for additional ablation treatments or 
monitoring devices. The proof of concept was done in water, 
ultrasonic gel and muscle tissue. In the experiments we found 
that, in the frequency domain one can identify at 10-12 MHz 
the increase of the intensity of the returned echo in the ice and 
the decrease of the signal after the ice-tissue boundary. One 
can correlate the increase of the intensity with the growth of 
the ice sphere. 
Keywords – Cryogenic, Ablation, Control, Ultrasound, Piezo, Ice 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Cryosurgery, also referred to as Cryotherapy or 
Cryoablation, is a minimally invasive surgical technique in 
which freezing is used to destroy undesirable tissue. 
Cryoablative techniques have persistently improved over the 
past forty years with the development of successive 
generations of devices including Cryoneedles, Cryoballoons, 
intraoperative ultrasound and vast knowledge of the 
mechanisms by which cells are affected by low temperature 
exposure [1]. We now recognize two mechanisms causing 
cell death following a freezing cycle: direct mechanism 
adjacent to the ablating device of cell rupture due to 
intracellular ice crystal formation and cellular dehydration 
with associated osmotic damage, and indirect mechanism of 
ischemia and necrosis throughout the tissue/tumor peripheral 
zone [2, 3]. To perform a cryosurgical procedure 
successfully, it is important to monitor precisely and evaluate 
accurately the extent of freezing. Failure to do so can lead to 
either insufficient or excessive freezing, and consequently, to 
recurrence of malignancies treated by cryosurgery or to 
destruction of healthy tissues [4]. Most of the Cryoablation 
devices are used in an open loop control. The results of the 
treatment are inspected by additional imaging devices such 
as ultrasound, camera, temperature sensors and other sensors 
according to the relevant application [1]. 
In this study, we intend to add a miniature ultrasonic 
sensor to a cryoablation device in order to determine the 
treatment progress in real time, observing the ice sphere’s 
boundary growth. This capability allows controlling directly 
the ablation process by closed loop control. Such a device, 
will be able to determine much more effectively (faster, more 
accurately and more precisely). The close loop controlled 
cryogenic device will be more efficient and safe than the 
current treatment. In addition to real time monitoring of the 
ablation process, the ultrasonic sensor will be able to 
determine the local thickness of the target area before 
treatment and will enable a more accurate setting of the 
device’s parameters (freezing power and period). The system 
will shorten the ablation treatment and eliminate the need for 
reoccurrence treatments. 
To the best of our knowledge, there is no Cryoablation 
device with collocated sensor that monitors in-situ the 
progress of the target tissue’s freezing. 
 
Ultrasound 
Transducer 
Cryogenic 
Needle 
Ice 
Sphere 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
Figure 2: IceCure's IceSense3™ System (Left) and its CryoProbes with an 
example of Ice Sphere at their tip (Right) 
  
 
 
Figure 3: Vermon ultrasonic sensor -Ø2X5.5 mm 
  
 
Figure 4: Vermon US sensor frequency response with central 
frequency of 18.5 MHz 
The purpose of the present study is to show feasibility of 
detecting the ice sphere growth from within the ice sphere 
during Cryoablative therapy without using additional 
monitoring devices. We assume that by transducing a high 
frequency ultra-sound wave we will be able to determine the 
location of the ice sphere outer boundary due to the 
impedance differences between frozen and unfrozen tissue. 
We expect to be able to distinguish the frozen tissue’s 
returning echo’s (inside the ice sphere) from the unfrozen 
tissue’s returning echo’s (at the outer rim of the ice sphere).  
In section 2 (Method), we will present an overview of the 
entire system with detailed description of its two main 
components; Ablation device and monitoring device, 
following with an explanation of the monitoring method and 
the analysis done. Section 3 (Results) will include a 
summary of the results of different analysis steps and our 
conclusions will be presented in section 4.  
 
II. METHOD 
A. System Overview 
 
The controlled Cryoablation system, that we developed is a 
device for Cryoablation therapy with an ultrasound 
transducer attached to it as shown in Figure 1. In the future 
the ultrasonic sensor will be integrated into the cryogenic 
needle.  
The main components of the system are: 
1. A cryoablation device with a Cryoprobe reaching 
extreme low temperatures (about -170ºC) at its tip. 
Acronymed as CAS. 
2. A forward looking ultrasonic sensor that can measure 
regular and frozen tissue up to 10 mm in depth. 
Acronymed as USS. 
The detailed description of the components is described in 
the following sections. 
B. Ablation Device 
 
We 
used 
the 
Cryo-ablative 
device 
designated 
as 
IceSense3™ system (Figure 2) manufactured by IceCure 
Medical. IceCure Medical developed a minimally invasive 
Cryo-ablation therapy for the Women health market [5].  
 
The IceSense3™ system, provides a minimally invasive, in-
office, definitive treatment which uses low temperatures 
(about -170 C°) to destroy (ablate) the targeted tissue in situ. 
The system uses a closed loop cryogen which reaches a 
Cryoprobe tip at the center of the ablate tissue and cooled to 
sub-zero temperatures, removing heat from the targeted 
tissue by conduction [6] (See Fig 1b and Figure 2). During 
the 
Cryo-ablative procedure, an ice 
spheroid (for 
convenience we regard to it as a sphere) is formed around 
the Cryoprobe tip. The ice sphere size varies in time and can 
reach a diameter of 40 mm and length of around 55 mm 
after 10 minutes. 
C. Monitoring Device 
 
We have used an Ultrasound transducer manufactured by 
Vermon, France as our monitoring (Figure 3). 
 
The transducer is a single element transducer with outer 
dimensions of Ø2X5.5 mm and central frequency of 18.5 
MHz as shown in the frequency response in Figure 4.  
 
This frequency is equivalent to 0.126 mm axial resolution 
[7] in water. The frequency response (Figure 4), has a 
central frequency of 18.5 MHz (at -3dB)  bandwidth 
frequency of 8.7 MHz, low cut frequency 14.2 MHz and 
high cut frequency 22.9 MHz. 
The ultrasound transducer time response in water is noted in 
Figure 5. 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

  
 
Figure 5: USS time response 
 
  
 
  
 
 
Figure 6: Returning US Echo of 5 mm thick frozen meat slice 
  
 
Figure 7: The spectogram at 3 mm (a) and 4 mm (b) radius Ice sphere (In 
Parker Gel). The area of interest of 10-12 MHz is in the black frames. The 
intensity of the echo is depicted by jet colormap. 
 The transducer is controlled by USBox system of Lecoeur 
Electronique Company, transmitting 230 Volts (1 volts 
step), square pulse. The monitoring was done in A-mode, 
transmitting and receiving from the same transducer. The 
returning Echo’s were monitored by Matlab software, 
sampling in 80 MHz in order to observe returning Echo’s of 
up to 40 MHz.  
 
D. Experimental Method 
 
Our main objective, was to recognize the outer contour of 
the ice sphere in real time (during treatment) when our 
monitoring device is located at the center of the freezing 
zone hence allowing us to have both treating and monitoring 
elements in a single device. The transducer was chosen to be 
minimally in size to allow in the future positioning inside the 
ablating element (less than ø3 mm). In this experiment, we 
connected it to the center of the CryoProbe freezing zone 
with additional connector placing the transducer adjacent to 
the CryoProbe outer surface (Figure 1). We have used US 
Parker gel inside a Standard 1000 ml beaker as our tissue 
model (ablated medium) and compared it to water and 
chicken breast tissue. 
Several cryogenic treatment simulations were done. The 
freezing process duration was up to 10 minutes. The ice 
sphere size was measured using an external camera in time 
periods of 30 seconds as a reference to the transducer 
measurements. All returning echoes were received in a time 
to voltage raw data manner and several analyses were done 
in order to observe the ice sphere growth as detailed below. 
 
E. Data Analysis 
 
Looking at the time response of the echo (Figure 6), one 
can observe the large attenuation of the signal in the ice.  
The ice-water boundary, cannot be distinguished from 
direct A-mode inspection of the ice sphere’s outer contour.  
In order to detect the boundary we transferred the signal 
to the frequency domain using Matlab software’s signal 
analysis toolbox. We are using the following steps to 
estimate accurately the ice sphere’s contour’s distance:  
 
1. The sound velocity in ice is estimated by correlating the 
signal response near the exit of the transducer (called 
ringing in the US jargon) in water and ice.  
2. Using the sound velocity, the time response is converted 
into distance and an A-mode US image is derived 
(Figure 6).  
3. The time response is also converted to the frequency 
domain using the short time Fourier transformation. The 
representation of the data is in a spectrogram that 
enables identification of significant features in the image 
(See Figure 7).  
 
4. In order to emphasize the growth of the ice sphere we 
used a binary conversion. This calculation is based on 
the reduction of the spectrogram according to the 
derivative of the intensity in the spectrogram (growing 
intensity black, and vice versa).  
5. We also calculated, the sum of the total intensity at the 
targeted frequency range and found that it is a good 
indicator of the growth of the ice sphere. 
Expected ice-
water 
boundary 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 10: Retrieved signal Total Intensity Vs. different ice sphere sizes – 
10-12 MHz Range (All Experiments in water or Parker Gel) with additional 
combined Linear Trendline (in black). 
 
Figure 8: 10-12 MHz Range at different ice sphere sizes: radius of – 0 mm 
(a), 2 mm (b), 3 mm (c), 4 mm (d) and 5 mm (e) - (In Parker Gel The 
intensity of the echo is depicted by jet colormap 
 
Figure 9: 10-12 MHz Range Binary differences analysis between the base 
line (0 Sec) and different ice sphere sizes: radius of – 1 mm (a), 2 mm (b), 3 
mm (c), 4 mm (d) and 5 mm (e) - (In Parker Gel) 
 
 
 
Figure 11: 10-12 MHz Range Binary differences analysis between the base line 
(0 Sec) and different ice sphere sizes: radius of – 1 mm (a), 2 mm (b), 3 mm 
(c), 4 mm (d) and 5 mm (e) - (In chicken breast) 
III. RESULTS 
 
Using the correlation analysis, we were able to determine 
that the frozen gel used has a sound velocity of 2520 m/s (the  
literature value of ice sound velocity is 3600 m/s and water 
1430 m/s) with this property determine we were able to 
match the returning Echo’s with their correct location. 
The dynamic process of the growing ice sphere is 
characterized by the increase of the intensity from the ice 
layer and the reduction of the intensity of the echo from the 
water or tissue layer beyond the ice sphere. Figure 7 
demonstrates that this process is the most apparent in the 
bandwidth of 10-12 MHz. 
 
Focusing on the bandwidth we identified in Figure 7 we are 
able to show a consistence advancing increase of intensity of 
the echo in time as shown in Figure 8 (red and yellow in the 
jet colormap).  
This dynamic process can be correlated to the growth of the 
ice sphere. The increase in the echo from the ice is more 
emphasized than the decrease in the gel.  
 
To better distinguish the intensity increments, we did 
additional binary analysis (Figure 9).  
Each signal received at different ice sphere size was 
compared to the base signal (prior to the freezing cycle) – 
areas with increased intensity than the base signal are shown 
in black and areas with lower intensity than the base intensity 
are shown in white. The advance of the boundary can be 
detected by the increase of the black area with the growth of 
the ice sphere. This binary intensity contrast is easier to 
detect using computerized models in real time. 
 
Finally, we calculated the total intensity of the returning 
Echo’s of different ice sphere sizes during its growth and 
received an increasing graph for each experiment. We 
compared all experiments in gel and water in a single graph 
and receive a linear trend line with R-squared value of 
0.9656 (Figure 10).  
One can see that the total intensity is a good quantitative 
measure for the increase of the ice sphere. 
The results in the chicken breast tissue show similar 
results to the gel. There were visible increments with time of 
the returning Echo’s at 10-12 MHz frequency range, better 
observed when looking at the binary analysis (Figure 11). 
 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 12: Retrieved signal Total Intensity Vs. different ice sphere sizes 
– 10-12 MHz Range (In chicken breast) 
Figure 1.   
 
 
We also repeated the returning Echo’s total intensity 
calculation of different ice sphere sizes during its growth and 
received an increasing graph similar in values to all other 
experiments (Figure 12). 
Combining all the information gathered from the results, we 
receive a very good indication that measuring the ice ball 
growth from inside the ice ball is possible even in real time.  
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
 
Examining our results, we can clearly distinguish a 
growing intensity of the signal with the ice sphere growth. 
We also noticed, that our finding are similar when using 
ultrasound gel and breast tissue as our ablate model.  
With further experiments (using improved ultrasound 
sensor), we will be able to determine the exact correlation 
between the intensity growth to the ice sphere real size with 
high accuracy and precision.  
This capability will allow us to monitor the Cryoablation 
treatment from within the Cryo-ablative device and in the 
future have a closed loop combined device both treating and 
monitoring in real time. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
B. 
Rubinsky, 
"CRYOSURGERY," 
Annual 
Review 
of 
Biomedical Engineering, vol. 2, p. 157, 2000. 
[2] 
A. A. Gage and J. G. Baust, "Cryosurgery-a review of recent 
advances and current issues," Cryoletters, vol. 23, pp. 69-78, 
2002. 
[3] 
M. Maccini, D. Sehrt, A. Pompeo, F. A. Chicoli, W. R. Molina, 
and F. J. Kim, "Biophysiologic considerations in cryoablation: a 
practical mechanistic molecular review," International braz j 
urol, vol. 37, pp. 693-696, 2011. 
[4] 
J. G. Baust, A. A. Gage, A. T. Robilottto, and J. M. Baust, "The 
pathophysiology of thermoablation: optimizing cryoablation," 
Current Opinion in Urology, vol. 19, pp. 127-132, 2009. 
[5] 
IceCureMedical Website: http://icecure-medical.com/ 
[6] 
J. Baust, A. Gage, T. B. Johansen, and J. Baust, "Mechanisms of 
cryoablation: clinical consequences on malignant tumors," 
Cryobiology, vol. 68, pp. 1-11, 2014. 
[7] 
D. Ensminger and L. J. Bond, Ultrasonics: Fundamentals, 
Technologies, and Applications: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis 
Group, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

