A Smart City-Smart Bay Project - Establishing an
Integrated Water Monitoring System for Decision
Support in Dublin Bay
Fiona Regan, Timothy Sullivan, Ciprian Briciu,
Helen Cooney, Kevin Murphy
Marine and Environmental Sensing Technology Hub (MESTECH)
National Centre for Sensor Research
Dublin City University
Dublin, Ireland
ﬁona.regan@dcu.ie, tim.sullivan@dcu.ie
briciu.ciprian@gmail.com, helen.cooney2@mail.dcu.ie
kevin.murphy@dcu.ie
Dian Zhang, Edel O’Connor,
Noel O’Connor, Alan Smeaton
CLARITY Centre for Sensor Web Technologies
Dublin City University
Dublin, Ireland.
dian.zhang2@mail.dcu.ie, edel.oconnor@dcu.ie
noel.oconnor@dcu.ie, alan.smeaton@dcu.ie
Abstract—Environmental and water quality monitoring is key
to measuring and understanding the chemical and biological
quality of water and for taking reactive remedial action. Over
the coming years, monitoring of water bodies will increase within
Europe, in order to comply with the requirements of the Water
Framework Directive (WFD, Council Directive 2000/60/EC), and
globally owing to pressure from climate change. The estab-
lishment of high quality long-term monitoring programmes is
regarded as essential if the implementation of the WFD is
to be effective. However, the traditional spot/grab sampling
using conventional sampling and laboratory based techniques
can introduce a signiﬁcant ﬁnancial burden, and is unlikely to
provide a reasonable estimate of the true maximum and/or mean
concentration for a particular physico-chemical variable in a
water body with marked temporal variability. When persistent
ﬂuctuations occur, it is likely only to be detected through
continuous measurements, which have the capability of detecting
sporadic peaks of concentration. The aim of this work is to
demonstrate the potential for continuous monitoring data in
decision support as part of a smart city project. The multi-
modal data system shows potential for low-cost sensing in complex
aquatic environments around the city. Continuous monitoring
data from both visual and water quality sensors is collected and
data from grab samples collected support the observations of
trends in water quality.
Keywords - Continuous water monitoring; estuary; marine;
decision support; turbidity; salinity.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The use of in-situ sensors capable of continuously sam-
pling chemical and physical parameters offers the potential
to reduce costs, provide more up-to-date information and a
better representation of long-term trends in the ﬂuctuations
of pollutant concentrations [1] in aquatic environments. The
ideal monitoring system of the near future might consist of
a network of sensors deployed at key locations, capable of
autonomous operation in the ﬁeld for a year or more [2]
[3]. Despite the increasing range and diversity of techniques
currently available, continuous on-line in-situ, measurement
systems remain largely limited by environmental factors, in-
terferences, fouling problems, cost, power requirements, short
life-time and the need for chemical reagents, as well as
frequent calibrations. While the measurement and detection of
environmental pollutants can be successful under laboratory
conditions, continuous monitoring remains a challenge. The
area of wireless sensing, and particularly, the concept of
wireless networked sensors, is fast becoming one of the most
dynamic and important areas of multi-disciplinary research [4]
[5].
A. The requirement for monitoring
Historically, investment in the monitoring of European
water bodies has been low, partly owing to the high costs
associated with sample collection, and subsequent analyses
in the laboratory. However, monitoring of water, globally
and within Europe, will increase over the coming years, in
response to the needs of the Water Framework Directive
(WFD) [6] and the pressures of climate change, which will
lead to resource scarcity and water quality changes. The use
of relatively inexpensive in-situ sensors offers the potential to
reduce costs considerably, making it possible to monitor an
increasingly wider set of parameters in the ﬁeld, as well as
providing more useful, continuous monitoring capabilities to
give an accurate idea of changing environmental and water
quality. As mentioned previously, the accurate measurement
and detection of environmental pollutants is feasible under
laboratory-controlled conditions, but doing so with continuous
in-situ monitors remains the most challenging aspect of envi-
ronmental sensing. One of the advantages of wireless sensor
networks is that they enable remote continuous monitoring of
the environment. Data from monitoring systems can now be
used for a variety of applications in addition to protection of
the environment [7] [8] [9].
B. The ideal system
Although it is evident that some elements of this ideal mon-
itoring system are in place, ongoing research and development
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

is required in several areas relating to both sensor technology
and ﬁeld-testing.
The ideal monitoring system of the near future might
consist of a network of sensors, deployed at key locations,
capable of autonomous operation in the ﬁeld, for perhaps
a year or more. Currently, the building blocks necessary to
achieve the ideal scenario, of the measurement of multiple
water quality parameters, simultaneously, in real-time are
available [10]. However, as a scientiﬁc community, we need to
improve the quality of some of the more sophisticated sensors
for nutrients, while using the simpler devices in cleverer ways
in embedded networks to make this ideal truly achievable.
Data from monitoring stations can be analysed and commu-
nicated by wireless technology, for statistical processing and
interpretation by expert systems, from the ofﬁce. Alerts can
be issued to relevant personnel - through an alarm sent to
their smart phone or by e-mail - when worrying trends for any
constituent of interest or breaches of Environmental Quality
Standards (EQS) are detected through the evaluation of water
quality parameters measured numerous times per day. These
personnel can then intercept serious pollution incidents or lead
the response they deem appropriate.
The aim of this work is to outline the potential for
continuous water quality monitoring in decision support as
part of a Smart Bay element [11] [12] to a broader connected
city project in Dublin. Over the coming years, this SmartBay
project will see the expansion of a multi-modal sensor and
data network in Dublin bay for monitoring water quality and
ﬂooding in particular. The latter will consist of a number of
sensor deployments, including visual sensing systems, mod-
elling and additional available data sources. The data collected
over the course of the SmartBay project can be utilized for
other applications depending on user requirements or emerging
applications, with particular emphasis on water in the city, port
and coastal area.
In this paper, data from two sites in Dublin Bay will be
discussed in terms of event detection and decision support
opportunities. The multi-modal data system shows potential
for low-cost sensing in complex aquatic environments such
as estuaries. Continuous monitoring data from water quality
sensors is evaluated and analysed along with data from grab
samples, with the latter supporting the observations of trends
from the water quality monitoring systems. The scenarios
provided are a snapshot of the potential value of such a
monitoring system in building a SmartBay infrastructure.
This paper introduces continuous monitoring of environ-
mental water parameters using in-situ sensors in the context
of a Smart City-Smart Bay project. In Section II, both of the
monitoring locations used in the study are outlined. Section III
describes the technology employed at the sites, how it is used
and maintained as well as the methods employed to gather and
analyse the environmental samples. The results obtained from
the work are presented and discussed in Section IV. Finally,
the conclusions garnered from this research are detailed.
II.
MONITORING LOCATIONS
A sensor sonde was located at two sites in Dublin Bay
(Fig. 1); Malahide Estuary (lat: 53◦ 27′ 14′′, long:−6◦ 9′)
and Poolbeg marina (lat: 53◦ 20′ 39”, long:−6◦ 13′). Visual
Fig. 1: Map of Dublin Bay area with the location of the working sites indicated
by the red marks on the map.
sensing technology was also deployed at Poolbeg to track
vessel movement in the port area. A sampling regime informed
by the continuous sensor systems was instituted to collect grab
samples. The two estuaries were selected for this study as they
represent the variety of activities in Dublin Bay, with a wide
array of stressors and user groups.
A. Malahide Estuary
As outlined by O’Boyle and Silke [13], the area around the
Malahide deployment is a “typical estuarine body characterised
by an elongated shallow channel demarcated at one end by a
river which is the source of freshwater input and associated
nutrients, and at the opposite end by the sea, which is a
source of tidal seawater inﬂuence”. Under the EU Habitats
and Birds directives [14] [15] the estuary is both a special
area of conservation (SAC) and a special protected area (SPA)
and is divided in two by a viaduct built in 1844 [16]. It is a
lagoon in character due to a sand spit gradually cutting it off
from the sea.
The inner estuary on the left hand side of the bridge is fed
with freshwater from the Broadmeadow river and the outer
estuary is mainly inﬂuenced by the Irish Sea which drains
almost completely at low tides. The inner estuary does not
drain at low tides apart from the extreme inner estuary. As
with all estuaries, the average water movement is towards the
sea, but the Malahide/Broadmeadow is a mixed estuary [17]
as the river ﬂow is less dominant than the tidal ﬂow. The main
pressures affecting the estuarine catchment water quality is the
presence of waste water treatment plants and sewer overﬂows.
B. Poolbeg Marina
Poolbeg Marina, on the lower Liffey Estuary, is a busy port
environment with a diverse ecosystem that includes benthic
communities [18], ﬁsh and shellﬁsh, marine bird populations
and some marine mammals. The site forms a zone of passage
for salmon and sea trout migrating from the sea to spawning
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

areas upriver and for juveniles migrating from the river to the
sea. The area hosts much human activity including heavy port
use, marine transportation and aquaculture. The topography of
the estuary is heavily modiﬁed, being walled for its whole
length and undergoing regular dredging.
The site is located in the upper part of the estuary, where
ship trafﬁc is less intensive and thus easier to monitor. The
water depth in the area is approximately 8 m and the width of
the channel is approximately 260 m. The area acts as a buffer
zone for the freshwater input and the tidal ﬂow. Stratiﬁcation
is present due to denser salt water settling at the bottom with
fresh water at the surface and also to seasonal heating which
causes a differential event, with warm water in the surface
layer isolated from the colder, bottom layer. Overlaid on
these natural effects are changes attributed to anthropogenesis
including input of pollutants (run-off, storm drains, sewage
treatment discharges, industrial discharges, port activity and
recreational boating) and the modiﬁcation of ﬂow (upstream
dam releases). All of these changes effect the chemical and
physical parameters at the site increasing its complexity.
III.
TECHNOLOGY DEPLOYED AT BOTH SITES
As discussed earlier, a multi-parameter sonde from YSI
Hydrodata UK, equipped to measure turbidity (NTU), op-
tical dissolved oxygen (mgL−1), temperature (◦C), conduc-
tivity (mS/cm) and depth (m), along with a telemetry system
(EcoNet), was purchased and deployed. The sonde was placed
at a depth of 2.5 m and data was collected with a sampling
interval of 15 min. The power supply was a 12 VDC external
battery and the data was recorded to an internal logger. The
data was also transmitted via GPRS to a web-based server were
it can be visualized in real-time or downloaded. Deployment
and data collection at Malahide occurred from March until
May 2012, with the Poolbeg site on-line from 1st October
2010 until the present (June 2013).
A. Maintenance Protocols
The operation of the system was checked daily by review-
ing the sensor function, the battery levels and telemetry op-
eration. Site visits were carried out for maintenance purposes
where cleaning, calibration and validation measurements were
performed. A ProPlus hand-held multi-parameter instrument
from YSI UK was used to check temperature, dissolved
oxygen and salinity and a portable turbidity meter Turb R⃝430
IR from VWR Ireland was employed to validate turbidity
measurements. These instruments were laboratory calibrated
prior to site visits, which occurred every two weeks for the cold
season and weekly during spring. This frequency was generally
governed by the biofouling rate of sensors and, occasionally,
by a malfunction of the telemetry system. Copper tape and
mechanical wipers (for the optical sensors such as DO and
turbidity) were used to limit the fouling rate. A protocol for
the operation and maintenance of a continuous water quality
monitor at sites with rapidly changing conditions was adapted
from Wagner et al. [19]. This process is illustrated in Fig. 3.
On arrival at the site, the following steps were performed:
1) readings were recorded from the sonde and compared to the
pre-calibrated meters;
2) if a large different was observed, an insulated bucket was
ﬁlled with ambient water with both the sonde and the calibrated
meter placed inside and allowed to run in parallel while
logging data internally;
3) the sonde and the sensors were cleansed and step 2 was
repeated;
4) the sonde was removed, rinsed thoroughly and it was
checked against the calibration standards and readings were
recorded, in the case of the calibration criteria∗ being breached
a re-calibration was performed.
To account of the variable nature of turbidity it’s sensors
pre-cleaning measurements were made in a bucket of tap water.
∗ calibration criteria: temperature ±0.2◦C; DO ±0.3 mgL−1;
speciﬁc conductance ±3% of the measured value; turbidity
±5% of the measured value.
B. Rainfall Data
Daily rainfall data was collected from the Irish Meteorolog-
ical Service from all the meteorological stations in Dublin area.
Stations (Fig. 2) were selected based on the spatial distribution
around the monitoring locations and the data obtained from all
the stations was averaged to compute a single daily mean.
Fig. 2: The location of rainfall data stations around Dublin from which a daily
mean was established.
C. Grab Samples
Water samples for phosphorus (P), Total Suspended Solids
(TSS) and microbiological analysis were collected in August
and September 2012. Samples were collected in the morning,
before and after the arrival of the ferry at three depths: 0.5, 2.5
and 4.5 m. All the samples were collected in triplicate using a
Wheaton grab sampler, and were transported to the lab under
ice.
D. Microbial analysis of water samples at Poolbeg
Water samples were collected in sterile 500 mL High-
Density Polypropylene (HDPP) bottles. Samples were trans-
ported to the lab under ice within 2 hrs and inoculated within
4 hrs after collection. A Colilert-18 R⃝/Quanti-Tray
2000 R⃝
system (IDEXX Laboratories) was used for the enumeration of
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Coliforms and Escherichia coli and an Enterolert
R⃝ /Quanti-
Tray
2000 R⃝ system (IDEXX Laboratories) was used for
the enumeration of Enterococcus (ENT). The enumeration
protocol was followed in accordance with the manufacturers
instructions. Aliquots of 10 mL from the original water sample
Fig. 3: Data collection, analysis and interpretation; (a) real-time data visualisation in the ﬁeld using smart phones, (b) telemetry system, (c) YSI Pro-Plus
hand-held sensor used for on-site validation, (d, e) YSI 6 series sonde, (f) sensor cleaning and (g) validation procedure.
were diluted 1:10 with sterile de-ionised water into 100
mL bottles. After the addition of Colilert-18 and Enterolert,
samples were inoculated into Quanti-Trays and sealed. For
E. coli and coliform enumeration, samples were incubated at
37.0◦C for 18 to 20 hrs. Following incubation the Quanti-Tray
wells were read for yellow colour indicating the presence of
coliforms and for blue ﬂuorescence indicating the presence
of E. coli. For ENT enumeration samples were incubated at
41.0◦C for 24 to 28 hrs after which blue ﬂuorescent wells
were counted as positive. The number of positive wells was
recorded for both tests and converted to Most Probable Number
(MPN) estimations using tables provided by the manufacturer.
For quality control, replicates of positive controls of E. coli
ATCC 11775 and Enterococcus faecalis ATCC 19433, negative
controls and laboratory reagent blank were analysed for each
sample batch.
E. Phosphorus analysis for Poolbeg samples
For Phosphorus (P) analysis, a protocol based on the
phospho molybdenum blue method was adapted from Murphy
and Riley [20] and Standard Method 4500 P-E [21] was used,
as described below. Samples were collected in 500 mL HDPP
bottles and transported to the lab on ice, where 250 mL of
each samples was ﬁltered through 0.45 µm cellulose nitrate
ﬁlter membranes. Soluble Reactive Phosphorus (SRP) and
Total Soluble Phosphorus (TSP) were determined from the
ﬁltered samples, while Total Phosphorus (TP) was determined
from the raw water samples. Total Particulate Phosphorus
(TPP) was determined as TP − TSP = TPP. For TSP and
TP analysis samples were digested using acidiﬁed potassium
persulfate and autoclaving for 40 min at 121◦C [21]. The
Method Detection Limit (MDL) was 11.0 gL−1 with a useful
analytical range between 36.9 µgL−1 and 1 mgL−1 PO4-P
using a Shimadzu UV-1800 spectrophotometer.
F. Data management and processing
In situ sensors operating in harsh environments like those
experienced at Malahide and Poolbeg are prone to fouling
and drift, leading to data compromise. Before the data can be
used, it has to undergo a set of quality assurance and quality
control procedures to ensure that anomalies and spurious data
values are removed. Wagner et al. [19] provide guidelines and
standard procedures for correcting errors in continuous water
quality data streams and Horsburgh et al. [22] give examples
of raw data containing errors that have to be corrected. In the
initial stage of this process, raw data was reviewed daily and
anomalous data and out of range data were ﬂagged [22].
Data was fully reviewed after each site visit and corrected if
necessary. Out of range values were short-lived (no more than
one sensor value) and were corrected manually by interpolating
adjacent values. Sensor fouling occurs gradually over time
leading to shifts in data after cleaning and re-calibration.
Data correction for fouling drift was applied between two
servicing dates as described by Wagner et al. [19], only when
the combined absolute value for calibration and fouling error
exceeded the following criteria: temperature ±0.2◦C; DO ±0.3
mgL−1; speciﬁc conductance ±3% of the measured value;
turbidity ±5% of the measured value.
Sensor drift is assumed to occur at a constant rate through-
out the correction, with fouling commencing as soon as the
sonde is deployed in the aquatic environment. Zero correction
is applied at the start of the interval, the full correction at the
end of it and between these dates data is linearly interpolated.
Eq. 1 [22] was used in this case for linear drift correction,
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Vc = V + (Vf − Vs)
Tt − T
Tt

(1)
where Vc is the drift corrected value, V
is the original
measured value, Vf is the response of the sensor immediately
before cleaning and validation at the end of the correction
interval; Vs is the response of the sensor after cleaning
and calibration; Tf is the total time interval for which the
correction is applied and T is the time between the end of
deployment and the time when the value is measured.
IV.
RESULTS
This section provides an overview of results garnered from
two estuarine sites in Dublin where continuous monitoring has
been carried out over the past three years. Data from sensors
and other sources, has shown that events can be identiﬁed
and this can trigger the need to sample for more specialist
analysis. This event driven approach to sampling is a much
more reliable approach to water resource management than the
current methods. These long term continuous data sets provide
the basis for the development of a SmartBay dimension to the
Dublin SmartCity project currently underway.
The data collected from the sites provides evidence that:
a) sensor readings (speciﬁcally turbidity and DO) can indicate
the onset of a primary productivity event (algal bloom);
b) temperature and DO readings can provide an early warning
of the latter event;
c) turbidity data can indicate the correct time to sample a water;
d) bacteriological and nutrient analysis can conﬁrm the value
of the turbidity readings as a decision support.
The multi-modal data system shows potential for low-cost
sensing in complex aquatic environments around the city.
A. Malahide Estuary
Average surface temperatures for near shore coastal waters
are inﬂuenced by freshwater run-off, as occurs at Malahide.
These waters trend colder in winter and warmer in summer due
to the effects of incoming freshwater which in winter is colder
and in summer warmer than the corresponding sea tempera-
tures. It can be seen that the temperature of the estuary water
increases on low tide when there is freshwater run-off from
the Broadmeadow River (Fig. 5(a)). Salinity can also have an
effect on the solubility of gases in water (Fig. 5(b)). Salt water
is more dense and becomes saturated with oxygen quicker than
freshwater [21]. It would be expected for dissolved oxygen to
decrease with increasing salinity, however in this situation the
opposite (i.e. High DO at highest salinity) can be observed in
Fig. 5(b). The reason for this is twofold; the temperature is at
its lowest when DO is at its peak and the salinity differences
are so small that this relationship is obscured by the tidal
inﬂuences. The lowest dissolved oxygen concentration over
this weekly period (and consistent with other weekly periods)
occurs at the lowest salinity. This coincides with the highest
temperatures, as previously established above, due to the run
off from the “warmer freshwater”.
It was found that chlorophyll is positively correlated to
the rise and fall of the tides based on salinity (Fig. 5(c)).
Photosynthesising phytoplankton off the coast of Malahide and
other coastal areas move inward toward the land due to tidal
movement [23]. It was observed the maximum chlorophyll
concentration occurs each day on high tide when salt water
and freshwater are mixed . Such daily blooms of chlorophyll
could represent “Spring blooms” that occur during the months
of April and May. This chlorophyll data corresponds well with
the dissolved oxygen data discussed previously. Throughout
the monitoring period turbidity remained relatively constant
(between 0-14 NTU), however, a change was observed on 4th
April 2012 (Fig. 5(d)), where it increased from the background
level to 94.5 NTU. It was discovered that a linked cause of
this increase could be a blue green algae (BGA) event which
corresponded with other water quality parameters, as well as
the onset of stormy, wet weather. The wind blowing seaward
moved masses of water from the inner estuary towards the
outer estuary and led to the ﬂushing of sediments and BGA
from the mudﬂats present in the outer estuary. Real time data
analysis allowed for the veriﬁcation these observations and the
expected marine biological growth.
B. Event monitoring in Poolbeg - a busy estuary
In Poolbeg, on the averaged daily data set regular turbidity
events occurred during the deployment period, which led to
a jump in turbidity. From this study, relationships between
the temporal changes in certain parameters, for instance a
correlation between salinity, turbidity and DO were observed.
The oscillations that are observed were not caused by water
level changes. It was thought that these changes could have
resulted from increased rainfall events which was conﬁrmed by
the rainfall data (Fig. 4). Other events which regularly led to
increased turbidity were linked with ship trafﬁc in Dublin Bay
near the deployment site (Fig. 6). This was observed numerous
times daily as vessels travelled through the port area.
Fig. 4: Rainfall effect on background turbidity levels. Day 1 was during a
relatively dry period while Day 2 was after a rainfall event. Inset (a) shows
the Enterococci levels from the 2 days while inset (b) shows the 24 rainfall data
prior to the sample collection. Discrete samples for microbiological analysis
were collected on both days between 6:45 and 7:15 am.
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 5: Results from the Malahide estuary deployment: (a) salinity and temperature over seven days in Malahide estuary illustrating the effects of the tide and
freshwater run-off, (b) dissolved oxygen and salinity overlaid indicating the daily variation, (c) overlay of dissolved oxygen and chlorophyll for a seven day
period at a sensor depth of 2.5 m, illustrating the relationship between them during a growth period, (d) turbidity and BGA for a four week period showing the
turbidity increase during a bloom event.
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 6: Data Collected on 15th August 2012: a) Concentration of Solid Reactive Phosphorus (SRP), TPP, Total Suspended Phosphorus (TSP), TP (PO4-P),
E. coli, Coliforms and Enterococci before the arrival of the ferry (left group), immediately after the arrival (middle group) and 45 min after the arrival (right
group); b) Turbidity data, TSS data before (left), at (middle) and 45 mins after (right) the arrival of the ferry. Error bars represent SD of n=3 individual
samples collected at the site.
Fig. 4 shows how levels of faecal indicators in the water are
elevated (Inset (a)), in association with rises in the background
turbidity level. Discrete samples for microbiological analysis
were collected on both days between 6:45 am and 7:15 am,
with the level of Enterococci found to be much increased on
the second day. On further investigation, it was discovered that,
in the intervening day there was large rainfall, as illustrated in
Inset (b) of Fig. 4.
A typical ship transit event occurred on the 15th of August
2012, as indicated by the continuous monitoring. Data grab
samples were gathered at these times to identify if these events
could be used to indicate ideal sampling times. In Fig. 6,
the lower plot represents a turbidity increase that is linked
to a vessel arrival. Samples taken before, during and after this
event were analysed for microbial content (E. coli, Coliforms
and Enterococci) and phosphorus (Solid Reactive Phosphorus
(SRP), TPP, Total Suspended Phosphorus (TSP), TP (PO4-P).
A
concentration
gradient
in
the
water
column
for
microbiological data was observed for the samples collected
before the arrival of the ﬁrst ferry, with higher bacteria
densities recorded in the surface water layer (0.5 m), as seen
in Fig. 6a. This was expected as the bottom layer represents a
mixture of the fresh water, from the Liffey river, and the salt
water. The fresh water contains higher levels of biological
faecal indicators accumulated from run-off and diffuse point
pollution
[24].
Bedri
et
al.
[25]
have
used
a
hydro-
environmental model to study the impact of the Waste Water
Treatment Plant (WWTP) discharges of E. coli on the water
quality of Dublin Bay. Results from the model which ac-
counted for wind speeds, tidal cycle, density differences within
the water column and ﬂow velocities showed that E. coli counts
at the working site are not affected by the WWTP discharges.
Another reason for the presence of the concentration gradient is
the increase in osmotic pressure to which bacteria are subjected
in the water column. Rich salt water environments cause the
water to leave the cell and permeate through the cell wall
leaving the bacteria dehydrated, eventually leading to bacterial
death. For the data collected, no signiﬁcant correlation was
observed between the faecal indicators data and the P or TSS
data, with the exception of Enterococci, which was moderately
correlated with TSP (R = 0.429, p < 0.05).
The strongest correlation was found to be between TP and
TSS (R = 0.575, p < 0.05) and TPP and TSS (R = 0.568,
p < 0.054). This suggests that most of the TP enrichment
in the water column is attributed to TPP associated with re-
suspension of river bed material. It was identiﬁed that the
major source of TP is associated with light weight sediments
from the top layer of the river bed (ﬂocculated organic material
with low sheer stress).
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This challenging project is based on the collection of three
years of continuous water quality data, supported by sample
analyses for environmental parameters. The work as presented
here attempts to better understand the value of continuous
monitoring. It is clear from this work that simple continuous
measurements of water quality parameters such as temperature,
DO, turbidity and salinity can provide valuable information
on the activities in estuaries around Dublin. This monitoring,
supported by meteorological data, provides a valuable decision
support tool which can be utilized to establish suitable water
sampling times for the purpose of monitoring compliance,
information about the onset of algal blooms, the frequency of
pollution events and sources of pollution events among others.
Two scenarios are provided to demonstrate the potential of
continuous monitoring, e.g., turbidity data as an indicator of
a signiﬁcant change in a system, identifying ideal times for
sample collection as part of a monitoring programme and the
value of salinity in identifying periods of freshwater input to
the estuary, as an indicator of a potential ﬂooding event. These
data do not conﬁrm events but rather inform a decision maker,
assisting in the environmental management decision process.
The data obtained in real-time can also be valuable in
monitoring the performance of the sensing system, whereby
the data can identify when sensors require maintenance in a
timely manner, so that the integrity of the data and monitoring
system can be maintained.
The SmartBay-SmartCity project in Dublin plans to expand
the sensor network in the coming year to include additional
sites in the Bay. The network will include further visual
sensing technologies, multi-modal data analysis and prediction
tools to provide stakeholders or users with valuable informa-
tion for a variety of applications in areas of tourism, water
quality, security or ﬂood management.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge the funding of this research
through the Beaufort Marine Research Award, carried out
under the Sea Change Strategy and the Strategy for Science
Technology and Innovation (2006-2013), with the support of
the Marine Institute, funded under the Marine Research Sub-
Programme of the National Development Plan 2007-2013.
Also, QUESTOR Research Centre under grant DCU8/10/2013
and Science Foundation Ireland under grant 07/CE/I1147. The
authors also wish to thank the staff at Poolbeg marina and
Malahide marina for permission, assistance and access to the
deployment location and marina facilities.
REFERENCES
[1]
R.
Greenwood,
J.
Webster,
and
F.
Regan,
“Sustainable
Water:
Chemical Science Priorities. Chap 4
Water monitoring”, Royal
Society of Chemistry Report, http://www.rsc.org/images/waterreport
tcm18-108403.pdf[retrieved:August,2013], 2007.
[2]
J. Grath, R. Ward, A. Scheidleder, and P. Quevauviller, “Report on
EU guidance on groundwater monitoring developed under the common
implementation strategy of the water framework directive”, J. Environ.
Monit., 9, 2007, pp. 1162-1175.
[3]
A. Lawlor, F. Regan, J. Torres, B. O’Flynn, and J. Wallace, “DEPLOY:
A long term deployment of a water quality sensor monitoring system”,
Sensor Review, 32, 1, 2012, pp. 29-38.
[4]
C. Albaladejo, et al., “Wireless sensor networks for oceanographic
monitoring: A systematic review”, Sensors, 10, 7, 2010, pp. 6948-6968.
[5]
P. W. Rundel, E. A. Graham, M. F. Allen, J. C. Fisher, and T. C. Harmon,
“Environmental sensor networks in ecological research”, New Phytol.,
182, 3, 2009, pp. 589-607.
[6]
“The
EU
Water
Framework
Directive”,
Directive
2000/60/EC,
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2000:
327:0001:0072:EN:PDF[retrieved:August,2013], 2000.
[7]
S. M. Glenn, T. D. Dickey, B. Parker, and W. Boicourt, “Long-term real-
time coastal ocean observation networks”, Oceanography, 13, 1, 2000,
pp. 24-34.
[8]
T. S. Moore, et al., “Marine chemical technology and sensors for marine
waters: potentials and limits”, Annual Review of Marine Science, 1, 2009,
pp. 91-115.
[9]
T. Voigt, et al., “Sensor networking in aquatic environments-experiences
and new challenges”, 32nd. IEEE Conference on Local Computer Net-
works, 2007, pp. 793-798.
[10]
B. O’Flynn, F. Regan, A. Lawlor, J. Wallace, J. Torres, and C. O’
Mathuna, “ Experiences and recommendations in deploying a real-time,
water quality monitoring system”, Meas. Sci. Technol., 21, 2010, pp.
124004-124008.
[11]
F. Regan, A. Lawlor, and A. McCarthy, “SmartCoast project- Smart-
Water quality monitoring system”, STRIVE Report Series No. 30, EPA,
2009.
[12]
F. Regan, A. Lawlor, B. O’Flynn, and J. Wallace “DEPLOY: Smart
demonstration of online water quality monitoring on the River Lee, Cork,
Ireland”, STRIVE Report Series No. 82, EPA, 2011.
[13]
S. O’Boyle and J. Silke, “A review of phytoplankton ecology in
estuarine and coastal waters around Ireland”, J. Plankton Res., 32, 1,
2010, pp. 99-118.
[14]
“The
Habitats
Directive”,
Council
Directive
92/43/EEC,
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:
31992L0043:EN:html[retrieved:August,2013], 1992.
[15]
“The
Birds
Directive”,
Directive
2009/147/EC
,
http://eur-lex.
europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2010:020:0007:0025:
EN:PDF[retrieved:August,2013], 2009.
[16]
R. Greene, “Around and about Malahide”, Fingal County Libraries, Co.
Dublin, 2009.
[17]
D. W. Connell, “Basic Concepts of Environmental Chemistry”, Lewis
Publishers, CRC Press, 1st Ed., 1997.
[18]
S. Roth and J. G. Wilson, “Functional analysis by trophic guilds of
macrobenthic community structure in Dublin Bay, Ireland”, J. Exp. Mar.
Biol. Ecol., 222, 1-2, 1998, pp. 195-217.
[19]
R. J. Wagner, R. W. Boulger, C. J. Oblinger, Jr., and B. A. Smith
“Guidelines and Standard Procedures for Continuous Water-Quality
Monitors - Station Operation, Record Computation, and Data Reporting”,
U.S. Geological Survey Techniques and Methods, http://pubs.water.usgs.
gov/tm1d3[retrieved:August,2013], 2006.
[20]
J. Murphy and J. P. Riley, “A Single Solution Method for the Deter-
mination of Soluble Phosphate in Sea Water”, J. Mar. Biol. Assoc., 37,
1958, pp. 9-14.
[21]
American Public Health Association, American Water Works Asso-
ciation, and Water Environment Federation, “Standard methods for
the examination of water and wastewater”, American Public Health
Association, Inc., 18th Ed., 1992 .
[22]
J. S. Horsburgh, A. Spackman Jones, D. K. Stevens, D. G. Tarboton, and
N. O. Mesner, “A sensor network for high frequency estimation of water
quality constituent ﬂuxes using surrogates”, Environmental Modelling &
Software, 25, 9, 2010, pp. 1031-1044.
[23]
F. Regan, et al., “A demonstration of wireless sensing for long term
monitoring of water quality”, The 4th IEEE International Workshop on
Practical Issues in Building Sensor Network Applications (SenseApp
2009), 2009, pp. 819-825.
[24]
B. M. Steets and P. A. Holden, “A mechanistic model of runoff-
associated fecal coliform fate and transport through a coastal lagoon”,
Water Research, 37, 3, 2003, pp. 589-608.
[25]
Z. Bedri, M. Bruen, A. Dowley, and B. Masterson, “A Three-
Dimensional Hydro-Environmental Model of Dublin Bay”, Environmen-
tal Modeling & Assesment, 16, 4, 2011, pp. 369-384.
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

