A Real-Time Bridge Pier Scouring Monitoring System Based on Hall-Effect Sensors   
 
Chen-Chia Chen, Ssu-Ying Chen, Wen-Ching Chen, Gang-Neng Sung, Jin-Ju Chue, Chih-Ting Kuo,  
Yi-Jie Hsieh, Chih-Chyau Yang, Chien-Ming Wu, and Chun-Ming Huang 
Applied Research Laboratories, National Chip Implementation Center,  
7F, No. 26, Prosperity Rd. I, Science Park,  
Hsinchu City, Taiwan. 
Email: ccchen@cic.narl.org.tw 
 
Abstract—Scour around bridge pier is the major cause of 
bridge failure such as collapse resulted in loss of life and 
property. Most of available bridge pier scour sensors and 
approaches are very expensive, which is a challenge for mass 
deployment of numerous bridges. Our proposed scour monitor 
system utilized low-cost commercial sensors, hall-effect sensors 
(unit price < $1) that are capable of real-time measuring 
bridge pier scour with resolution of ca. 2.5 cm, and overall cost 
for single sensor node of my proposed work is at least 40% less 
expensive than existing work. After scour event, the typical 
output voltage difference of ~ 10 mV and the signal-to-noise 
ratio of ~ 10 were observed. After simple modified setup, the 
output voltage difference could be reached to ~300 mV. 
Moreover, the master-slave architecture of bridge pier scour 
monitoring system has scalability and flexibility for mass 
deployment. This technique has the potential for further 
widespread implementation in the field. 
Keywords-bridge; piers; scour; senso; hall-effect  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the past few decades, global warming has increased 
dramatically in rainfall intensity, duration, and frequency, 
which resulted in harsh floods in Taiwan. Nevertheless, most 
mountains in Taiwan are very steep with slope gradients, so 
rivers in Taiwan are usually short and steep. When typhoons 
come and bring intensive rainfall, resulted in serious floods, 
even disaster flow [1]. It usually causes tremendous damages 
and loss of life and property. According to 2012 annual 
report by directorate general of highways, MOTC, there are 
~ 9699 bridges of highway in Taiwan area, total length ~ 
502021.8 m. Some of the crossing river bridges face serious 
challenges of bridge foundation scouring problem during 
harsh floods and disaster flow. Bridges lose their piers due to 
excessive pier scour and high flow velocities, which is one of 
the major causes for partial bridge collapse [2]. 
For more than a hundred years, bridge pier scour has 
been extensively studied in the world. Many methodologies 
and instruments have employed to measure and monitor the 
local pier scour depth, such as sonar, radar, ad Time-Domain 
Reflecotometry (TDR), Fiber Bragg Grating (FBG) sensor 
[3]. The sonar and radar sensor provide contactless 
measurement of streambed scouring near bridge pier and 
abutments, and usually used to show the final status of 
streambed after a flood. One of disadvantages of the sonar 
and radar is that they have limit for measuring status of 
streambed in real time as rush water contained sands, even 
rocks during a flood. A method of TDR measures the 
reflections that results from a fast-rising step pulse travelling 
thorough a measurement cable. The depth of soil-water 
interface is determined by counting the round trip travel time 
of the pulse. However, the major drawback of TDR is that 
accuracy of TDR is strongly depended on environment 
temperature and humidity. Moreover, monitoring scour 
depth by FBG is depended on number of FBG elements. 
However, the cost of monitoring of the scour depth by FBG 
technique is higher than that of existing methods [4]. The 
costs of Radar and TDR are expensive due to high-speed 
hardware requirement. For example, a commercial TDR 
(Campbell Scientific Inc., TDR100) was used to real-time 
monitor scour evolution [5], and its price is about $250.  
For FBG, optical devices such as laser, photo detectors and 
the optical fibers are very expensive. In addition, most of the 
existing methods used for scour detection are expensive and 
complicated, which is a major challenge for mass 
deployment to a lot of bridge piers. 
In this study, we develop and verify proposed real-time 
bridge pier scouring monitoring system which has a gateway 
and sensor nodes as master-slave configuration. Each sensor 
node has a hall-effect sensor module; overall cost for single 
sensor node is about ~$100, the cost includes components 
and Printed Circuit Boards (PCB) manufacturing and 
assembly. Our proposed solution is 40% less expensive than 
existing work (TDR). Furthermore, we also developed a 
Bridge Surveillance program for remotely accessing raw 
sensor data. The experimental results show that our proposed 
monitoring system can monitor pier scour process in 
real-time.  
We start with an overview of our proposed architecture 
and experimental setups in related work in Section II. 
Section III presents the results provided from our 
experiments. Finally, we conclude this paper in Section IV. 
II. 
DEVELOPMENT OF REAL-TIME BRIDGE PIER SCOUR 
MONITORING SYSTEM 
Architecture of bridge pier scouring monitoring system 
The architecture of real-time bridge pier scour 
monitoring system is shown in Figure 1. The architecture is 
based on master-slave configuration. A master sends 
commands to slave for controlling sensor node and 
accessing sensor data. The host controller communicates 
with gateway through Power Over Ethernet (POE) and 
Ethernet switch. The host controller sends a command to the 
getaway. When the gateway receives command, the gateway 
converted Ethernet command to RS485 command. After 
converting command, the gateway broadcasts to sensor 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

nodes. Since the command packet contains unique sensor ID, 
only specific sensor node returned sensor data to the host 
controller. We adopt both accelerometer and hall-effect 
sensor modules in our sensor node. In order to reduce 
number of wires in this study, POE is utilized. Simply 
connected 48V battery (3 packs in series for 48V with 
individual 16V lithium iron phosphate battery) to the POE 
adaptor (Cerio, POE-PE03), and used an Ethernet cable to 
connect the POE adaptor to the gateway and sensor node in 
series.  
 
Figure 1: The architecture of real-time bridge pier scouring monitoring 
system 
Gateway and Sensor nodes 
The gateway is comprised of two stacked PCBs – a power 
module and a core module (see Figure 2). The top board is 
the power module, which operates as a DC-DC converter 
for creating 1.2~5V outputs from the 48V input. An 
Ethernet PHY (TI, DP83640) is used to receive and send 
Ethernet data, and also to send signals and power to sensor 
nodes through RS485 interface (ADI, ADM2682E). The 
core module is composed of a Cortex-R4 MCU (TI, 
RM48L952) and a FPGA (Xlilinx, Spartan-6). Ethernet data 
and RS485 data are processed by the Cortex-R4 MCU and 
the FPGA, respectively. The FPGA mainly translates the 
sensor data from serial format to parallel format, between 
the FPGA and the Cortex-R4 MCU have three control 
signals (Int, Rdy, En) and 8-bit data signals. The FPGA 
receives the sensor data in 8-bit as a unit, after the FPGA 
collected 8-bit data, the FPGA will deposit to register, then 
send Int signal = 1 to the Cortex-R4 MCU, notify the 
Cortex-R4 MCU can receive sensor data. After the 
Cortex-R4 MCU receives 8-bit data, the Cortex-R4 MCU 
will set the Rdy signal to send a plus for the FPGA, 
followed by cycle until the FPGA En Signal = 0, on behalf 
of the sensor data has been transferred.  
 
Figure 2: The photos of printed circuit boards of gateway (left) and sensor 
node (right). 
The configuration of sensor node was similar to the 
gateway. The Cortex-R4 MCU is used to access sensor data 
through SPI (Serial Peripheral Interface) interface, and the 
FPGA is used to process RS485 data. The block diagram of 
the FPGA in sensor node is shown in figure 3.  
 
Figure 3:  Block diagram of FPGA in sensor node 
 
The FPGA parses receives commands, executes part of 
commands, and responses to the host. The Cortex-R4 MCU 
takes charge of collecting sensor data. Figure 4 describes 
processing sequence of the FPGA and the Cortex-R4 MCU. 
In Figure 4, the steps in blue are tasks of the FPGA, those in 
purple are memory related tasks, and those in red are tasks 
of the Cortex-R4 MCU.  In the case that the host requests 
sensor data, the FPGA will receive a Read command. The 
FPGA then parses and decodes the command and is aware 
that cooperation with the Cortex-R4 MCU is necessary. The 
FPGA puts this command in memory and notifies the 
Cortex-R4 MCU with an interrupt. The Cortex-R4 MCU 
reads command from memory via I2C, collects sensor data 
and stores them in memory. After collection is done, the 
Cortex-R4 MCU notifies the FPGA with a General-Purpose 
Input/Output (GPIO) signal. Then the FPGA reads data from 
memory and generates response to the host. 
 
Figure 4:  Processing sequence of FPGA and MCU 
Accelerometer and hall-effect sensor modules 
 The core module of the sensor node which is connected 
to an accelerometer (ADI, ADXL345) and a hall-effect 
sensor (Allegromicro, A1301) which is used in this study are 
widely available online. But in this study, we only focus on 
the monitoring scour event by using the hall-effect sensors. 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The output voltage of the hall-effect sensor is returned to an 
ADC (TI, ADS 1258) to digitize its analog signals, as shown 
in Figure 5. Digitizing output voltage of the hell-effect 
sensor sends back to the Cortex-R4 MCU via the SPI 
interface.   
 
Figure 5: Top-view and bottom-view photos of the hall-effect sensor 
 
Setup of the experimental tests 
A Neodymium magnet with a diameter of 8 mm and 
thickness of 3 mm is fixed on thin metal strip with 
thickness of 0.3 mm, as shown in Figure 6. The hall-effect 
sensor and Neodymium magnet are aligned well, and are 
separated by a distance of 10 mm. Both types of sensor 
modules are installed alone the pier model, as shown in 
Figure 7. 
module. 
 
Figure 6: The drawing of house for accelerometer and hall-effect sensor 
module. 
 
 
Figure 7: The photos of setup of real-time bridge pier scouring 
monitoring system. 
 
The monitoring bridge scour erosion detection is carried 
out in a recirculating laboratory flume (length = 36m, width 
= 1 m, depth = 1.1 m) at Hydrotech Research Institute of 
National Taiwan University, Taiwan [6]. The layout of the 
flume and experimental setup are shown in Figure 8. A false 
test bed has a sediment recess (length = 2.8 m, width = 1 m, 
depth = 0.3 m) which is filled by nearly uniform sediment. A 
15-cm-diameter hollow cylindrical pier made of plexiglass is 
located at the middle of the recess. An inlet valve and a 
tailgate are used to regulate depths of flow and flow speed. 
Inlet valve
Flow 
regulator
pier
Tailgate
Sediment in recess
Sediment 
corrector
Head tank
flow
Figure 8: Partial layout of recirculating laboratory flume. 
 
Gateway Initialization 
The procedure including gateway initialization and 
sensor data access are shown in Figure 9. A Bridge 
Surveillance program is ran in the host controller, and it 
sends command (Request Packet) to specific gateway for 
making TCP connection through Ethernet. When the 
gateway receives ACK from the host controller and returned 
SYN/ACK, the TCP connection is made successes. The host 
controller sends a command to disconnect an active 
connection when the busy gateway doses not return 
SYN/ACK. After making TCP connection, the gateway 
firstly initializes GPIO of the FPGA. Secondly, it converts 
Request Packet to serial data, and then it broadcasts serial 
data to sensor nodes. Until FPGA signal = 1, the FPGA 
receives sensor data from sensor node, and then the gateway 
sends the Response Packet to the host controller.  
Host
Converted Request 
Packet to serial data
Sends serial data
Receive Sensor data 
from FPGA
GPIO Initialization
Yes
NO
Request 
Packet
Gateway received 
Request Packet
Gateway sends 
Response Packet
Response 
Packet
Gateway
FPGA 
Int signal = 1
Sensor Node
 
Figure 9: The flow chart of Gateway initialization 
 
Figure 10 shows the Bridge Surveillance program with 
friendly graphical user interface, which automatically 
collects data from accelerometer and hall-effect sensor 
modules.  
 
Figure 10: A Bridge Surveillance program with friendly graphical user 
interface (simulation data). 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The host controller sends command every 20 ms, and the 
host controller will receive the Response Packet. The 
proposed software extracts the sensor data from payload of 
the Response Packet and then it displays them in real-time 
on charts (left: accelerometer, right: hall-effect sensor) of 
GUI as shown in Figure 10. Therefore, remote users can 
access raw data of each sensor nodes by WiFi 
communication, and they can analyze them in-situ. If pier 
scour status reaches critical condition of bridge collapse, the 
next version of the Bridge Surveillance program will alarm 
people away from the bridge. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
A simple method for calibrating the measuring gap 
between the hall-effect sensor and the magnet will be shown. 
A permanent magnet is moved away from the hall-effect 
sensor, and the dependence between corresponding output 
voltage of the hall-effect sensor and the distance between the 
magnet and the hall-effect sensor is shown in Figure 11. The 
output voltage of the hall-effect sensor as a function of the 
distance is nonlinear, but can be expressed by the following 
equation, 
 
y = 7.513 − 1.055x
+ 0.079𝑥2 − 0.002𝑥3    (1) 
 
where x is the distance between the magnet and the 
hall-effect sensor output voltage in millimeter and y is the 
corresponding output voltage of hall-effect sensor distance in 
volt. We can use look-up table or transfer function to quickly 
find out the gap between the magnet and the hall-effect 
sensor. Besides, performance of a hall-effect sensor was 
guaranteed over an extended temperature range from its 
datasheets. We did not make temperature calibration for the 
hall-effect sensor prior to starting experiments.  
 
Figure 11: The data and fitting curve of the output voltage of the hall-effect 
sensor versus distance between hall-effect sensor and magnet. 
 
When the maximum number (1024) of sensor data is 
reached, the host controller creates a new file to a disk. In 
order to save disk space, a gzip utility is used for 
compression of the sensor data. After uncompressed file, the 
sensor data were shown in Figure 12, each line represents a 
data and time stamp, sensor ID, output voltage of a 
hall-effect sensor and ends with a newline character.  
 
Figure 12: Hall-effect sensor record file. 
 
Figure 13 shows the evolution of signals of the hall-effect 
sensors during the monitoring scour experiment. A cylinder 
pier model is used for these tests. Some of the hall-effect 
sensor modules (sensor module 4-10) are completely 
submerged under sand; the others (sensor module 1-3) are 
left in the air.  
 
Figure 13: Real-time monitor output voltages of all of hall-effect sensor 
modules during scour experiment. Plots from to bottom were corresponded 
from hall-effect module 1 to 10. 
 
At ca. 10000 s, the inlet valve is ON. At 11733s, water 
flow starts striking the thin metal strips of the hall-effect 
sensor module 2 and 3, and their output voltage abruptly 
grows up due to bending of the thin metal strips caused by 
the water flow. It is worth knowing that quiver of voltage of 
the hall-effect sensors were strongly depended on the rate of 
flow water (data was not shown in here). The output voltages 
of the hall-effect sensor module 4, 5, and 6 are suddenly 
dropped down at 11787, 11834, and 11868, respectively. The 
out voltage of the hell-effect sensor drops so quickly 
meaning that the sand around the sensor node is totally 
removed by scour process. However, the rate of change of 
the output voltage of the hall-effect sensor module 7 and 8 
are slower than that of module 4, 5, and 6. It reflects that the 
scour processes are slow and sand around the hall-effect 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

sensor module is just partially removed during scour process. 
The output voltages of the hall-sensor module 9 and 10 
almost have no clear drop, so the sand still covers them well. 
Moreover, the hall-sensor module 1 and 4 are broken due the 
leaking water from imperfect silicon package sites. Figure 14 
shows the pier model before, under, after scour experiment. 
 
Figure 14: Photos of pier model (a) before, (b) under, and (c) after scour 
experiment. 
 
In order to sense the scour event more sensitivity by the 
hall-effect sensor, we try to amplify the change of output 
voltage of the hall-sensor module after scour event, as shown 
in Figure 15.. 
 
Figure 15: Real-time monitor output voltages of the hall-effect sensor 
modules with and without amplified signals during scour experiment. 
 
 We know that the output voltage of the hell-effect sensor 
strongly depends on the distance of the magnet and the 
hall-effect sensor. Therefore, we make the distance between 
the magnet and the hall-effect sensor get closer during install 
sensor node. The change of voltage of the hall-effect sensor 
is enhanced ca. thirty fold that of before original setup, as 
shown in Figure 15.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
  Comparison of existing system for monitoring bridge 
scour is shown in Table I. In this study, we have proposed 
the architecture of real-time bridge pier scouring monitoring 
system featuring hall-effect sensors. Our proposed real-time 
monitoring system offers the advantage of low-cost and 
easy mass deployment. The overall cost for single sensor 
node of our proposed work is at least 40% less expensive 
than existing solutions (TDR).  
 
 
TABLE I. COMPARISON OF EXISTING SYSTEM FOR MONITORING BRIDGE 
SCOUR 
 
TDR 
Radar 
FBG 
This 
work 
Cost ($) 
>250 
>3500 
240a 
~100 
Resolution (cm) 
2.5 
10 
10 
2.5 
Temperature 
effect  
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
NO 
work environment 
Water; 
Sand 
Air 
Water; 
Sand 
Water; 
Sand 
Real-time 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
a. 
This price is only for sensor. 
 
Our bridge pier scour monitoring system with a solution 
of 2.5 cm is demonstrated. Furthermore, we also have 
developed the Bridge Surveillance program with friendly 
GUI, which automatically collects data of each sensor node. 
Therefore, it is practical to use our proposed real-time scour 
monitoring system for diagnosis bridge pier scour events. 
Next step, we will further widespread implementation in the 
field. 
 
REFERENCE 
[1] J. C. Chen, C. D. Jan, and W. S. Huang, "Characteristics of 
Rainfall Triggering of Debris Flows in the Chenyulan 
Watershed, Taiwan," Natural Hazards and Earth System 
Sciences, vol. 13, 2013, pp. 1015-1023. 
[2] H. Wang, S. C. Hsieh, C. Lin, and C. Y. Wang, "Forensic 
Diagnosis on Flood-Induced Bridge Failure. I: Determination 
of the Possible Causes of Failure," Journal of Performance of 
Constructed Facilities, vol. 28, Feb. 2014, pp. 76-84. 
[3] L. J. Prendergast, "A Review of Bridge Scour Monitoring 
Techniques," Journal of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical 
Engineering vol. 6, 2014, pp. 138-149. 
[4] J. Y. Lu, J. H. Hong, C. C. Su, C. Y. Wang, and J. S. Lai, 
"Field Measurements and Simulation of Bridge Scour Depth 
Variations 
During 
Floods," 
Journal 
of 
Hydraulic 
Engineering-Asce, vol. 134, Jun. 2008, pp. 810-821. 
[5] 
  X. B. Yu, and X. Yu, “Laboratory Evaluation of Time-Domain 
Reflectometry for Bridge Scour Measurement: Comparison 
with the Ultrasonic Method,” Advances in Civil Engineering, 
vol. 2010, 2010, pp. 1-12. 
[6] Y.-B. Lin, J.-S. Lai, K.-C. Chang, W.-Y. Chang, F.-Z. Lee, 
and Y.-C. Tan, "Using MEMS Sensor in  the Bridge Scour 
Monitoring System," Journal of the Chinese Institute of 
Engineers, vol. 33, Jan, 2010, pp. 25-35. 
 
 
 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

