Integrated Sensor System for Signal Conditioning, Digitization and Interfacing for
Terahertz Bolometric Camera
Tomo Markočič and Janez Trontelj 
University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Ljubljana, Slovenia
tomo.markocic@student.uni-lj.si; janez.trontelj1@guest.arnes.si
Abstract—This work is about designing an integrated system to
capture, partially process and digitalize data from a terahertz
bolometric antenna array. Different techniques for achieving
the required operation are presented, including a low noise
amplifier with a custom lateral bipolar p-n-p structure as input
stage and other strategies to reject noise, and integration of
analogue signal processing into Analogue-to-Digital Converter
(ADC). The results of the bipolar structure characterization
are presented in great detail, demonstrating the feasibility of
using them in an amplifier.
Keywords-lateral bipolar transistor; low-noise amplifier;
terahertz bolometric camera; custom CMOS structure.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The one-dimensional terahertz camera uses a pulsed 50%
duty cycle source of electromagnetic waves with frequency
between 0.08 and 1 THz and in-house designed and
manufactured
bolometers,
precisely
designed
resistors
bonded to THz micro antennas, that are sensitive to these
frequencies [1][2]. The camera is designed for industrial
applications where high image rate is required. Typically,
objects are flying past the camera at speeds up to 20 m/s and
need to be imaged with precision in the range of millimetres,
requiring sample rates in the range of 20 kS/s [3].
Due to the nature of bolometers, sensor value acquisition
must be synchronised with the terahertz source duty cycle to
correctly detect peak-to-peak values (between source being
on and off). The effective pixel value is the difference
between these two acquired values.
The currently used system uses an Application-Specific
Integrated Circuit (ASIC) with custom designed Low-Noise
Amplifiers
(LNA),
Successive
Approximation
Register
(SAR)
ADCs
for
early
digitalization
and
Field-
Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) unit for processing and
interfacing. Early digitalization is a trend in the sensor
industry but, with the ever-increasing number of pixels, the
data rates and processing power requirements are becoming
too high and too expensive. It currently takes 8 16-bit ADC
conversions per one pulse of terahertz source, which are then
averaged and subtracted to get one sample value for one
pixel. With several hundred sensors at 20 kS/s, it becomes a
costly challenge for the FPGA interface.
Designing a single chip sensor interface as for regular
complementary
metal–oxide–semiconductor
(CMOS)
camera sensors is not feasible; pixels are a couple of
millimetres apart, stretched over wide areas and we can only
interface a few pixels with one chip. Therefore, distributed
processing is required, to minimise the amount of data that
goes to the interface unit.
Section 2 of this work describes the proposed updates of
the system; Section 3 demonstrates some preliminary results
of system simulations and test structures measurements and
Section 4 summarizes the findings.
II.
UPDATED SYSTEM DETAILS
The novel proposed system joins an improved LNA, a
circuit for analogue processing of the amplified signal and an
integrated capacitive SAR ADC on a single ASIC. The
camera would be composed of several ASICs which would
be interfaced through a simplified central system with a
microprocessor or FPGA (Fig. 1).
The LNA is improved by introducing a bipolar input
stage, as it is not a victim to 1/f shot noise and helps in
reducing the white noise level. Unlike for CMOS transistors,
noise is not dependent on the bipolar transistor size.
Therefore, the new LNA is expected to utilize a fraction of
the silicon area used by the existing LNA. Designing a
bipolar stage is, however, a challenge of its own as a regular
bipolar transistor cannot be fabricated in the preferred 0.35
µm CMOS technology due to layer availability, or has the
collector permanently connected to the substrate, making it
useless. Fortunately, there is an option to create a lateral p-n-
p structure which has two collectors, one (horizontal) still
permanently connected to substrate and the other (lateral)
available for active load connection (Fig. 2). Initial Spice
simulation model parameters for the structure have been
borrowed from a similar CMOS technology of a different
Figure 1.
Proposed system
Figure 2.
Lateral p-n-p structure
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 3.
Layout diagram for lateral p-n-p structure
semiconductor foundry and will be later updated to better
match the results of the test structures (Fig. 3) to be then
used in simulations of LNA.
The analogue signal processing circuit is partially
integrated into ADC and allows it to directly digitize peak-
to-peak values of the amplified signal from the bolometers.
A
SAR
ADC
usually
samples
signal
and
reference
simultaneously in its capacitors, while here it is set to sample
the bottom peak as reference in the first half of the period
and the top peak as signal in the second half. The rest of the
processing circuit is a configurable low-pass filter, used to
minimise noise with lowest impact on signal, so that we can
avoid oversampling and possibly lower requirements for the
number of bits.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Testing of lateral p-n-p test structures showed promising
results compared to the existing Spice model (Fig. 4). We
tried two slightly different layouts of which one (Q1) appears
to be more stable over VBC voltage with beta factor around
half of expected value, while the second (Q2) shows much
better beta factors at higher currents, but varies a lot with
VBC. In an amplifier, a number of transistors would be
connected in parallel, allowing utilisation of higher beta
factors at lower currents through single transistors. The grey
area in Fig. 4 marks the planned single-transistor collector
current – it would be a compromise between total collector
current, silicon area and highest beta. The samples still
require more detailed characterisation, but designing a third
layout that is between these two seems as a reasonable idea
to get a better compromise.
Figure 4.
Measurement results for beta of lateral transistor
Figure 5.
Noise comparison of systems with digital and analogue signal
processing, and with no filtering
Noise results are incomplete at this point, but we are
expecting white noise with level inversely proportional to the
collector current.
Simulink simulations of analogue processing show noise
levels comparable to digital with oversampling. The correct
settings of analogue low-pass filter are required. By varying
the filter edge frequency, we could either let more noise pass
through, lower the signal, or even introduce pixel retention
noise. When the filter is set correctly, the noise rejection in
our proposed system is very similar to the digital system,
when we compare them to a system with no filtering, as seen
in Fig. 5.
Our findings suggest that we will need to trim these
filters to adapt them to the desired sample rate and possibly
compensate for the process spread of integrated components
(resistors, capacitors).
IV.
CONCLUSION
With this work, we have demonstrated that the novel
system with analogue processing is feasible and would
significantly reduce hardware cost of the terahertz camera.
This is done by more means: integrating ADCs on chip,
reducing the amount of digital data, optimizing data
connections to the interface and replacing powerful FPGA
with a simpler interface.
At the same time, we have shown that the performance of
the system will not be compromised but rather improved
with better noise characteristics of the new LNA.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Sešek, I. Kašalynas, A. Žemva, and J. Trontelj, “Antenna-
Coupled Ti-Microbolometers for High-Sensitivity Terahertz
Imaging,” Sens. Actuators Phys., Vol. 268, pp. 133–140, Dec.
2017.
[2]
I. Kašalynas et al. , “Performance of the Antenna Coupled
Microbolometers
Characterized
by
the
Quasi-Optical
Measurements
at
Frequencies
0.1–1.0
THz,”
38th
International
Conference
on
Infrared,
Millimeter,
and
Terahertz Waves (IRMMW-THz), 2013, pp. 1–2.
[3]
S. Boppel, A. Lisauskas, A. Max, V. Krozer, and H. G.
Roskos, “CMOS Detector Arrays in a Virtual 10-kilopixel
Camera for Coherent Terahertz Real-Time Imaging,” Opt.
Lett., 37, February 4, 2012, pp. 536–538.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

