A Smart Grid Testbed using Wireless Sensor Networks in a Building 
 
Kwang-Soo Kim      Hyunhak Kim      Tae-Wook Heo      Yoonmee Doh      Jong-Arm Jun 
RFID/USN Research Department 
Electronics & Telecommunications Research Institute  
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: {enoch, hh.kim, htw398, ydoh, jajun}@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes the implementation and results 
of a field demonstration that monitors the usage and the 
generation of electricity in a two-story building. The field 
demonstration took place in Jeju to increase energy efficiency 
and to evaluate the stability of the developed system including 
smart meters, a wind power generator, a photovoltaic power 
generator, a rechargeable battery, electric vehicle chargers, 
light controllers, and a smart outlet. The light controllers 
exchange data through a power line communication; the other 
devices exchange those through a wireless sensor network 
based on ZigBee. A centralized monitoring server has operated 
to collect periodically all data such as the amount of the 
electricity consumption and generation and to control the 
amount of electricity consumption and charge. This testbed 
provides valuable insights about design decisions of a smart 
grid using wireless sensor networks. 
Keywords-wireless sensor networks; smart grid; testbed; 
home area; energy efficiency 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The 
rapid 
industrialization 
and 
indiscriminate 
development in a lot of countries have increased greenhouse 
gas emissions, caused environmental degradation, and 
depleted natural resources. To overcome these problems, 
many counties have sought to develop technologies to reduce 
the use of natural resources as well as the greenhouse gas 
emissions. A smart grid is considered one of innovative 
technologies that reduce the greenhouse gas emissions by 
increasing energy efficiency [1][2][3].  
A smart grid refers to a next generation electric power 
network that combines information technologies and power 
technologies. The smart grid includes all functions of a 
utility such as power generation, electricity distribution, 
electricity transmission, and energy trading. Some of these 
functionalities related to utilities are already implemented 
through some automation systems such as SCADA 
(Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition) and DAS 
(Distribution Automation Systems) [4]. Recently, the smart 
grid is extending to include customers. Therefore, it becomes 
a system that enables two-way communications between 
consumers and suppliers [5]. Through the communications, 
the energy consumption of a consumer is transmitted to an 
electric power company and the company sends control 
messages to reduce the energy consumption to the consumer. 
The energy consumption is measured by a smart meter on 
the consumer side and the energy control is executed by 
smart appliances. In addition to the devices, the smart grid 
includes distributed energy such as renewable energies. 
There are several competing technologies for capturing 
and transmitting the electricity usages of consumers in the 
smart grid, such as wired technology, power line 
communication (PLC) technology, and wireless sensor 
network (WSN) technology [6]. Although each technology 
has its own advantages, the WSN technology is very 
promising candidate among these technologies for several 
reasons. The WSN technology represents an emerging set of 
technologies that will have profound effects across a range of 
industrial, scientific, and energy management applications 
[7]-[15]. The WSN can reduce wiring cost and time for the 
smart grid deployment. Also, the WSN technology can 
reduce labor costs by simplifying installation. Moreover, it is 
one of key solution for facilities that frequently reconfigure 
spaces and places where a wire communication is difficult to 
apply. Meanwhile, in the residential area, the WSN is 
regarded as a part of the home network system. Accordingly, 
various service concepts which integrate the smart grid with 
home networks can be derived [6][7][8]. By introducing 
WSN technologies which assure network flexibility and 
mobility, it is easier to provide value added services like 
electricity equipment control. 
The ZigBee technology is one of the most popular 
wireless standards to implement the monitoring and 
controlling of the energy consumption for the smart grid. The 
ZigBee Alliance published the smart energy profile for 
interoperable products that monitor, control and automate the 
delivery and use of energy. The profile includes several 
specifications related to the advanced metering, the demand 
response and load control, pricing, and text message [16]. 
We implemented several devices based on the ZigBee 
standards and some of them were certified by the ZigBee 
Alliance. They were installed at a testbed in Jeju Island, 
South Korea. Our system focuses on measuring, monitoring, 
and controlling the energy consumption on the customer side. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The 
motivation is discussed in Section II. The detailed design of 
the testbed is described in Section III. Finally, Section IV 
provides the conclusion and the future work.  
II. 
MOTIVATION 
In this section, we discuss the motivation of this study. In 
South Korea the demand of electricity is growing faster 
every year. If the peak electricity demand grows higher than 
371
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

the power generation, then the power network is broken 
down. Figure 1 shows the increasing trend of the power 
production and the consumption in South Korea from 2005 
to 2009.  We can clearly see in Figure 1 that the electricity 
consumption is growing every year. To supply the energy for 
consumers without outage, the utility company, KEPCO 
(Korea Electric Power Corporation), can do two activities: 
constructing a new power plant and reducing energy 
consumption. The construction of a new plant may not be 
reasonable in a certain aspect. It requires a lot of costs and 
time to construct a new power plant. Also, the new plant 
might operate and generate the electricity only when the 
energy consumption approaches peak load. This situation is 
ineffective for utilities. Therefore, many utilities have sought 
to decrease the energy consumption, in other words, they 
want to balance the power generation and the power 
consumption by controlling the energy consumption.  
 
 
Figure 1. Trend of energy production and consumption in Korea (Source: 
KEPCO’s Statistics, May 2010) 
III. 
SMART GRID TESTBED DESIGN 
The building in which the system was installed is a two-
story building and the area of each story is about 30m  20m. 
The system consists of five main components: (i) application, 
(ii) server, (iii) gateway, (iv) electric devices, and (v) 
information networks connecting all devices.  They are 
shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. System configuration 
A. Application 
The main function of the application is to display all 
measurements according to the requirements of users. Two 
examples are shown in Figure 3.  Figure 3-(a) indicates the 
main dashboard that displays and compares the electricity 
usages of today and yesterday. If the electricity gauge is 
displayed in red, then the user had better control the 
electricity usages because the electricity usage is over a 
threshold. Figure 3-(b) displays the electricity usages 
according to the specific period. The electricity usage has 
been measured and transmitted on every 15 minutes by the 
smart meters and the smart outlet. The graph based on hour 
will be changed according to the search condition such as 
day, month, or year. 
 
   
(a) Main dashboard 
 
 
 
(b) Power usage 
Figure 3. Power usage information 
 
 
Figure 4. SEMS’s user interface 
372
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

B. Server 
The server is divided into SEMS (Smart Energy 
Management Server) and FEP (Front End Processor). The 
functionalities of SEMS and FEP are similar; however, their 
coverage is different. SEMS is installed a relatively narrow 
area such as a home, a building, a university campus, a 
factory, an apartment, etc; on the other hand, FEP covers a 
wide area such as a city by connecting to a lot of SEMSs. 
Therefore, SEMS gathers and manages the electricity usage 
at the fine-grained level, in other words, it captures directly 
the electricity usage of each electricity device. FEP 
summarizes the values gathered by SEMSs. Figure 4 
displays the user interface of SEMS. The electricity usages 
of lighting, EV (Electric Vehicle) chargers, a battery, and 
renewable power generators are displayed separately. SEMS 
sends a query at 15-minute intervals to gather the electricity 
usage to all electric devices and sends the gathered data to 
FEP. In addition, SEMS sends a control message (e.g., turn a 
device on/off, charge/discharge the battery) to the smart 
outlet, the battery, and the light controller. The control 
message is generated by a demand response program in 
SEMS according to predefined rules. For example, if the 
electricity usage exceeds a threshold, the demand response 
program sends a turn-off message to the outside lighting 
devices. If the usage exceeds the threshold again, then it 
sends another message to those near to windows.  
C. Gateway 
The gateway becomes a bridge between the wireless 
sensor network and SEMS through an IP-based network. The 
gateway provides the gateway device interface and the smart 
energy profile 1.0 announced by ZigBee Alliance [16][17] as 
well as provides the functions that connect and manage all 
electric devices within HAN (Home Area Network). The 
gateway 
includes 
PANC 
(Personal 
Area 
Network 
Coordinator) starting the network formation and routing 
messages between the gateway and each electric device. The 
gateway is implemented on Linux 2.6 in the C programming 
language, and uses PHP (Personal Hypertext Preprocessor) 
for the web application to exchange data with SEMS. The 
gateway and SEMS exchange XML messages following 
REST (Representational State Transfer) specification [17]. 
Figure 5 shows the gateway hardware and the main window.  
 
 
Figure 5. Gateway 
D. Electric Devices 
The electric devices consist of five smart meters, two 
wind power generators, a photovoltaic power generator, a 
rechargeable battery, two electric vehicle chargers, two light 
controllers, and a smart outlet. The light controllers exchange 
their data and control messages through PLC and the other 
devices exchange those through a wireless sensor network. 
The smart meters measure the electricity usage of the first 
and second floor, the two electric vehicle chargers, and the 
smart outlet as well as the electricity generation of two wind 
generators and one photovoltaic generator. The wind and the 
photovoltaic generator produce 0.8KWh and 6 KWh of 
energy, respectively. The measurements of the meters are 
transmitted to the gateway. The meters send LP_Data (Load 
Profile Data) including forward active power, backward 
active power, reactive power, etc. The forward power 
indicates that it is supplied for a customer by a utility; the 
backward power indicates that it is supplied for the utility by 
the customer. The outlet measures the electricity usage of an 
appliance (e.g., TV, air conditioner, refrigerator, etc.) which 
connects to it and transmits the measurement to the gateway. 
The rechargeable battery is a storage device which repeats 
charging and discharging according to the predefined 
conditions. It can store the power generated by the wind and 
the photovoltaic generator and dispatch power to supply 
electricity for streetlights over a night. Its current state and 
the charge level are transmitted to the gateway. Depending 
on a battery type and capacity, the high speed and the low 
speed EV charger can take about 3 hours and 12 hours to 
fully recharge a battery. The light controller measures the 
electricity usage of the first and the second floor, and 
transmits them to the PLC gateway. 
 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON RESULTS OF COMMUNICATION SCHEMES 
Competitiveness 
Items 
ZigBee 
Narrowband 
PLC 
Z-Wave 
Communication 
Range 
1~75m+ 
Max 1Km(bet. 
PLC modems) 
30~500m 
Data Transfer 
Speed 
40K~250Kbps 
1Kbps~20Kbps 
10-40Kbps 
Communication 
Stability 
Partly Limited 
Very Limited 
Limited 
Interoperability 
with HAN Devices 
Very High 
Low 
Medium 
Standardization 
Support 
Global 
Standard 
De facto 
Standard 
Local Standard 
Security 
Very Good 
Good 
Good 
Scalability(Number 
of Device Adders) 
255+ 
20-255 
232 
Convenience in 
Deployment 
Non-line-of-
sight feature is 
suitable for 
various 
environment 
needs to deploy 
repeaters and 
modems on the 
wire 
Non-line-of-
sight feature is 
suitable for 
various 
environments 
Battery 
Support(One AAA 
battery with 
network activation 
on a minute basis) 
Weeks 
No capability 
of battery 
support 
Weeks ~ 
Months 
Mobility 
High 
Low 
Medium 
 
E. Information Networks 
In a smart grid, two-way communication allows the data 
exchange between the customer side and the supply side.  
373
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

There are several technologies that can be used in the smart 
grid [6]. We compare the technologies in terms of 
communication range, data transfer speed, interoperability 
with HAN devices, standardization support, etc. The result is 
shown in Table I. 
We select PLC and the ZigBee technology. As PLC uses 
the existing power line infrastructure, it is used to capture 
and to control the electricity usage of lighting devices in our 
testbed. On the other hand, newly installed devices are 
developed based on ZigBee because it is one of the most 
popular wireless standards to implement the monitoring and 
controlling the energy consumption for the smart grid 
through the smart energy profile. Therefore, our wireless 
sensor network system is developed based on ZigBee 
specification and IEEE 802.15.4. The sensor network 
installed on each floor consists of one gateway and several 
nodes corresponding to the electric devices respectively. In 
this building environment, the devices can exchange 
messages via one-hop communication with star topology 
because every device is within the radio range of the gateway. 
After PANC included in the gateway starts the network 
formation, a node willing to associate with the network starts 
the association procedure by requesting for a beacon with 
channel scanning. A joined node permits the association by 
beaconing with setting permit-joining flag on.  Once a node 
has associated the network, it maintains three data tables: 
routing table, neighbor list table and link cost table. The 
maintaining of those tables allows the further expanding of 
the network up to the mesh topology, and the size of each 
table is resizable according to the network size. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper describes a smart grid testbed using a wireless 
sensor network within a small building. To monitor and 
control the usage and the generation of the electricity in the 
building, we installed two monitoring servers and several 
electric devices including five smart meters, two wind power 
generators, a photovoltaic power generator, a battery, two 
electric vehicle chargers, two light controllers, and a smart 
outlet. The light controllers exchange their data and control 
messages through PLC and the other devices exchange those 
through a wireless sensor network. By visualizing the 
electricity usage and running a demand response program 
based on the electricity usage, the energy consumption could 
be saved. Also, the building owner could reduce the amount 
due on the electricity bill because most of the consumed 
energy has been supplied by the renewable power generators. 
In the future, we will execute a demand response 
program combining with a real-time pricing policy. In 
addition, we will perform the economic analysis on the smart 
grid testbed to apply the devices to other households and 
buildings. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by Development of Self-Powered 
Smart Sensor Node Platform for Smart and Green Building 
[10035570] funded by the Ministry of Knowledge and 
Economy, Republic of Korea. The authors would like to 
thank KEPCO-KDN members for working together. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] The National Energy Technology Laboratory, “A Vision for 
the Smart Grid,” 2009. 
[2] SBI, “Smart Grid Technologies, Markets, Components and 
Trends Worldwide,” 2009. 
[3] ROA Group Korea Consultants, “Introduction to Smart Grid: 
Latest Developments in the U.S., Europe and South Korea,” 
Jul.  2009. 
[4] M. J. Jang, B. N. Ha, and S. W. Lee, “The Study on the 
Design of the Smart Grid Test-Bed in KEPCO,” Selected 
Topics in Power Systems and Remote Sensing, Proc. 10th 
WSEAS/IASME Intervational Conference on Electric Power 
Systems, High Voltages, Electric Machines,  2010, pp.348-
350. 
[5] Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, “Pacific Northwest 
GridWiseTM Testbed Demonstration Projects,” Oct. 2007. 
[6] S. J. Kim, J. H. Seo, J. A. Jun, and C. S. Pyo, “Advanced 
Metering Infrastructrue (AMI) Service for Efficient Energy 
Management,” Proc. 19th European Regional International 
Telecommunications Society Conference, Oct. 2008. 
[7] S. J. Kim, “Smart energy management for buildings with 
wireless sensor technology,” Proc. 20th European Regional 
International Telecommunications Society Conference, Oct. 
2009. 
[8] K. Kim and J. A. Jun, “Smart Energy Server using Wireless 
Sensor Networks,” Proc. International Symposium on Remote 
Sensing, Oct. 2009. 
[9] I. F. Akyildiz, D. Pompili, and T. Melodia, “Underwater 
acoustic sensor networks: research challenges,” Ad Hoc 
Networks, Vol. 3, 2005, pp. 259-279. 
[10] W. Chen, L. Chen, Z. Chen, and S. Tu, “WITS: A Wireless 
Sensor Network for Intelligent Transportation System,” Proc. 
the First International Multi-Symposiums on Computer and 
Computational Sciences, Vol. 2, Apr. 2006, pp. 635-641. 
[11] J. A. Gutierrez, D. B. Durocher, and B. Lu, “Applying 
Wireless Sensor Networks in Industrial Plant Energy 
Evaluation and Planning System,” Proc. IEEE IAS Pulp and 
Paper Conference, Jun. 2006, pp.1-7. 
[12] J. K. Hart and K. Martinez, “Environmental Sensor Networks: 
A revolution in the earth system science?,” Earth-Science 
Reviews, vol. 78, 2006, pp.177-191. 
[13] P. Jiang, H. Ren, L. Zhang, Z. Wang, and Z. Xue, “Reliable 
Application of Wireless Sensor Networks in Industrial 
Process Control,” Proc. the 6th World Congress on Intelligent 
Control and Automation (WCICA), Vol. 1, Jun. 2006, pp. 99–
103. 
[14] K. Kim, J. Jun, S. Kim, and B.Y. Sung, ”Medical Asset 
Tracking Application with Wireless Sensor Networks,” Proc. 
International Conference on Sensor Technologies and 
Applications (SENSORCOMM), Aug. 2008, pp. 531-536. 
[15] J. A. Stankovic, “When Sensor and Actuator Networks Cover 
the World,” ETRI Journal, Oct. 2008, pp. 627-633. 
[16] ZigBee Alliance, “Smart Energy Profile Specification,” 
(075356r15ZB), Dec. 2008. 
[17] ZigBee Alliance, “ZigBee Gateway Device Specification,” 
(075468r30ZB), Jul. 2010. 
 
374
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

