Self-Assembled Plasmonic Sensor Platforms: a Promising Approach for Monitoring 
Enzymatic Degradation of Thin Gelatin Layers 
 
 
Markus Weiler and Stefan B. Quint 
Department of Biosystems and New Materials,  
Max Planck Institute of Intelligent Systems  
Stuttgart, Germany 
Supratim Basak and Claudia Pacholski  
Institute of Chemistry, University of Potsdam 
Potsdam, Germany 
e-mail: cpachols@uni-potsdam.de
 
 
Abstract - Plasmonic sensors based on periodic hole arrays in 
metallic films are investigated for monitoring enzymatic 
degradation of extracellular matrix. Sensors are fabricated 
using a bottom-up strategy in which soft colloidal lithography 
is combined with chemical gold film deposition. The resulting 
plasmonic sensors show extraordinary transmission of light 
supported by surface plasmon polaritons. These are highly 
sensitive to refractive index changes in close proximity to the 
sensor surface and are utilized for the quantitative detection of 
extracellular matrix degradation.  
Keywords - Optical sensor; bottom-up; enzymes; surface plasmon 
resonance; real-time monitoring. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Qualitative and quantitative detection of biomolecular 
interactions, such as DNA hybridization, antigen/antibody 
recognition, as well as enzymatic reactions is nowadays 
routinely achieved by optical biosensors (overview in [1]). 
These sensor platforms are composed of a recognition layer 
providing specificity for the target analyte and a transducer 
converting the recognition events into a measurable optical 
signal.  
A prominent transduction method exploited in these 
sensors is Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) – a resonant 
oscillation of conduction band electrons occurring at a 
dielectric/metal interface (reviewed in [2]). The resonance 
wavelength of SPR depends on the refractive index of the 
environment in proximity to the metal surface. SPR can be 
subdivided in Propagating Surface Plasmon Resonance 
(PSPR) and Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance (LSPR). 
The latter, LSPR, occurs in metallic nanostructures – 
especially nanoparticles - and can be directly excited by 
light. A vital difference between LSPR and PSPR is the field 
decay length of the SPR. Whereas LSPR in gold 
nanoparticles can detect refractive index changes only 
several nanometers (maximal 10 nm – 20 nm) above the gold 
surface, PSPR are sensitive to refractive index changes 
several 100 nm above the gold film. However, PSPR cannot 
be directly excited. In order to match the momentum of 
incoming light to that of the plasmon, commercial available 
SPR 
biosensors 
employ 
the 
so-called 
Kretschmann 
configuration in which a thin gold film on a prism is used. 
Another way to generate SPPs is to introduce a period 
structure (grating) into the gold film. It has been reported 
that periodic hole arrays in metallic films show an 
extraordinary transmission of light (EOT), meaning that 
more light is transmitted through the sub-wavelength holes 
than expected from Bethe’s law. EOT has been traced back 
to the excitation of PSPR by the grating [3].  
Sensors based on nanohole arrays could offer several 
advantages in comparison to SPR sensor based on thin metal 
films on prisms, such as more convenient experimental 
geometries, 
higher 
spatial 
resolution 
and 
greater 
reproducibility [4]. For example, the presented plasmonic 
sensor can be operated in transmission mode and therefore 
could 
be 
incorporated 
in 
multi-well 
plates. 
Thus, 
multiplexing in combination with the advantages of PSPR 
sensors could be exploited for detecting target analytes, 
determining equilibrium binding constants or enzymatic 
activities. Due to these tremendous advantages over 
commercial PSPR sensors, optical sensors based on this 
technology have already been used for the detection of 
biomolecular interactions in a proof-of-concept study [5]. 
However, the full potential of these sensor platforms has not 
been tapped. 
Two challenges can be identified for this. On the one 
hand plasmonic sensors based on hole arrays in metallic 
films have a lower sensitivity than thin gold films 
investigated in Kretschman configuration. In order to 
increase the sensitivity of the hole array sensors, different 
approaches have been suggested including the deposition of 
fluorescent material [6] or metallic nanoparticles in the holes 
[7] of the perforated metal film. On the other hand - on the 
background of the numerous promising applications - it 
seems evident that simple, fast and inexpensive techniques to 
fabricate hole arrays are needed to make them accessible to 
the many research groups who could benefit from such 
devices. However, periodic arrays of nanoholes in opaque 
metal films are commonly fabricated by focused ion beam 
milling or electron beam lithography. These techniques are 
expensive and provide only small nanostructured areas at 
low throughput. An alternative approach is photolithographic 
fabrication but it suffers from the complicated production of 
a master and/or the requirement to work in a clean-room.  
Only a few attempts have been made to use simpler 
approaches, like colloidal nanolithography, to fabricate hole 
arrays in metallic films. However, even in these approaches 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

expensive equipment, such as reactive ion etching machines 
were used. Recently, our group reported a novel strategy to 
produce sub-wavelength hole arrays in metallic films, which 
is solely based on simple chemical techniques [7]. The 
procedure, which is based on soft colloidal nanolithography 
and electroless plating, has great advantages over standard 
fabrication procedures as it allows high throughput, can be 
easily applied to areas of square centimeters, and requires 
only standard lab equipment. Furthermore, this method 
might enable the deposition of periodic hole arrays in 
metallic films in multiwell plates. 
The sensors fabricated by utilizing this ‘pure’ bottom-up 
approach showed comparable sensitivity to refractive index 
changes as nanohole arrays in metal films prepared by more 
sophisticated and expensive methods. Furthermore, the 
adsorption of bovine serum albumin to the sensor surface 
and protein A/IgG interactions could be monitored in real-
time using these self-assembled plasmonic sensors. Highly 
sensitive detection of biomolecular interactions has also been 
reported for nanohole arrays in metallic films produced by 
electron beam lithography [5]. 
However, sensors based on periodic hole arrays in 
metallic films have not been investigated for determining 
enzymatic activity – to the best of our knowledge. This fact 
is quite surprising as biosensors for detecting enzymatic 
activity were and still are in the focus of biosensor research 
[8]–[10]. The high interest in this topic is based on the 
crucial role that certain enzymes (proteases) play in 
physiological processes, e.g., matrix metalloproteases in 
cancer development – degradation of extracellular matrix 
(ECM) [11]–[13]. Consequently, detection of enzymatic 
activity using biosensors which exploit surface plasmon 
resonance as transduction method has already been reported. 
Here, either thin gold films deposited on prisms 
(Kretschmann configuration) [14] or gold nanoparticles on 
solid substrates were utilized [15].  
In this contribution, we report on the bottom-up 
fabrication of an optical sensor composed of a periodic hole 
array in a metallic film, which allows for monitoring 
enzymatic activity in real-time. The paper is structured in the 
following way: In Section I an introduction to the topic is 
given. Afterwards, experimental details on the preparation 
and characterization of the presented plasmonic sensor 
platforms are described in Section II. Obtained scientific 
results on the fabrication and optical behavior of the 
plasmonic sensors, as well as their sensing performance are 
presented and discussed in Section III. Finally, the content of 
the paper is summarized in Section IV (conclusions). 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL SECTION 
A. Materials & Methods 
All chemicals were used as received without any further 
purification except of N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM), 
which 
was 
purchased 
together 
with 
(3-amino-
propyl)triethoxysilane (APTES) from Acros Organics. 
NIPAM was recrystallized from hexane before synthesizing 
microgels. Tetrachloroauric(III) acid trihydrate, hydroxyl-
amine hydrochloride, and sodium citrate were obtained from 
Sigma Aldrich. Ethanol, N,N’-methylene(bisacrylamide) 
(BIS), hydrochloric acid (fuming), sulfuric acid (96%), 
calcium chloride dihydrate, glycerol, N-2-HydroxyEthyl 
Piperazine-N'-2-Ethane Sulphonic acid (HEPES) and glass 
cover slips (20  20 mm or 24  24 mm) were received 
from Carl Roth. Nitric acid (65%) and hydrogen peroxide 
(30%) were supplied by Merck. Potassium peroxodisulfate 
(KPS) was obtained from Fluka. Methanol was purchased 
from BASF. Collagenase, Type III from Clostridium 
histolyticum was purchased from Merck. Water was 
deionized to a resistance of at least 18.2 MΩ using an Ultra-
Pure Water System (TKA, Germany).  
Transmission spectra were recorded with a Cary 5000 
UV-VIS-NIR spectrometer (Varian, USA) at normal 
incidence using unpolarized light. 
Scanning electron micrographs were taken with a Zeiss 
Ultra 55 "Gemini" scanning electron microscope. 
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was carried out with a 
device from Asylum research (MFP-3D-BIO). Commercially 
available silicon cantilever (Olympus, spring constant 0.02 
N /m, resonance frequency 11 kHz) were used for the 
measurements. 
B. Sensor fabrication 
Plasmonic sensors were prepared according to Quint and 
Pacholski [7]. In this fabrication method, poly-N-
isopropylacrylamide (polyNIPAM) beads were employed for 
colloidal lithography, previously synthesized by aqueous 
dispersion copolymerization of NIPAM with BIS in the 
presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate as described elsewhere 
[16]. Prior to use, the bead dispersion was purified by 
centrifugation and filtration. 
Microscope cover slips were utilized as substrates. To 
clean them and provide a hydrophilic surface, the glass cover 
slips were immersed in piranha solution (concentrated 
sulfuric acid : hydrogen peroxide 3 : 1, v : v) for 1.5 h 
followed by thorough rinsing with ultra-pure water. The 
cleaned cover slips were stored in deionized water from 1 to 
24 h and were blown dry with nitrogen just before the 
deposition of polyNIPAM beads.  
Deposition of polyNIPAM bead arrays onto glass 
substrates was achieved by spin coating. Spin coating was 
carried out using a Laurell WS-400A-6NPP Lite spin coater 
(Laurell Technologies Corporation, North Wales). Cleaned 
glass substrates were mounted in the spin coater and a 40 µl 
droplet of diluted polyNIPAM bead dispersion was placed in 
the center of the substrate. Subsequently, 5 µl of ethanol 
were added to facilitate self-assembly of polyNIPAM beads 
in hexagonal patterns and to obtain a complete substrate 
wetting. Subsequently, the sample was rotated for 6 min at 
500 rpm followed by 1 min at 6000 rpm using an 
acceleration of 100 rpm/s in both cases. This procedure 
yielded high ordered arrays of polyNIPAM beads on the 
glass substrate surface. 
In order to allow a binding of gold colloids to the 
substrate, the glass surface was functionalized with amino 
groups. To do this, previously spin coated samples were 
encased in a standard exsiccator together with a small dish 
containing 40 µl of APTES. The exsiccator was then 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

evacuated until a pressure of 0.3 mbar was reached. The 
samples were kept under these conditions for 1 h to allow a 
dense silanization of the glass surface. Afterwards the 
samples were incubated for 1 h in a drying oven at 80 °C. 
Subsequently, the sensor surface was wetted with a ~ 12 nM 
colloidal gold solution [17] and incubated at 40 °C for 30 
min to allow gold nanoparticle binding to the free amino 
groups. Afterwards the samples were rinsed with ultra-pure 
water.  
In the next step, a gold film was formed by electroless 
deposition. For this purpose, the samples were immersed in 
an aqueous solution of 0.4mM hydroxylamine hydrochloride 
and 0.5% HAuCl4∙3H2O [18]. The solution was agitated on a 
vibrating table to ensure the formation of a homogenous gold 
film. After 1 h the samples were rinsed with water and blown 
dry under a nitrogen stream. Finally, the colloidal mask was 
removed by flame annealing in a propane/butane flame 
which leads to pyrolysis of the polyNIPAM beads. In an 
alternative approach, the colloidal mask was removed by 
ultrasonication after the deposition of gold colloids. 
C. Sensor performance 
1) Deposition of gelatin layer 
Spin-coating was employed for obtaining thin films of 
gelatin. Here, 100 µL of a warm solution of gelatin in ultra-
pure water (50 °C) was dropped on a 20  20 mm glass 
substrate, which was rotated at 6000 rpm at this moment and 
for a further minute after applying the gelatin solution. 
Thereby, complete drying of the gelatin layer was ensured. 
In order to control the thickness of the deposited gelatin 
layer, different concentrations of gelatin in solution were 
investigated. Moreover, glutardialdehyde was added to the 
gelatin solution prior to spin-coating in order to cross-link 
the gelatin. For example, warm gelatin solution (2.5 wt% 
gelatin) was mixed with 0.5 wt% glutardialdehyde (final 
concentration) and then immediately spin-coated onto 
cleaned glass substrates. 
2) Monitoring enzymatic reactions 
Gelatin coated sensors were mounted in a custom-made 
flow cell and exposed to buffer solution (50mM HEPES, 10 
mM CaCl2, 5% glycerol, pH 7.4). After establishing a 
constant baseline, the buffer solution was replaced by a 
solution of collagenase in buffer. Different concentrations of 
collagenase were tested. Transmission spectra were recorded 
every 30 s and the position of the transmission minimum in 
each spectrum was determined by a fitting routine. Briefly, 
to extract the positions of the transmission minimum, we 
have used a Matlab script which first determined the absolute 
minimum. This minimum was taken as starting point. Then, 
we chose 40 data points, which surrounded this minimum, 
and fitted these points with the polyfit Matlab function with a 
degree of n = 2 (f(x) = ax² + bx + c ). 
III. 
RESULTS & DISCUSSION 
A. Sensor fabrication and characterizaion 
Three major steps are involved in the presented 
fabrication method for periodic hole arrays in metallic films 
(Figure 1). In the first step, a lithographic mask is prepared 
on a glass cover slip. In contrast to previous colloidal 
lithographic approaches, polyNIPAM beads are used for the 
mask production. This allows for directly creating loosely 
packed, hexagonally ordered arrays of microspheres as 
polyNIPAM undergoes a reversible phase transition from a 
swollen to shrunken state upon drying. This property is very 
advantageous as it supersedes any further treatment of the 
mask, which is necessary in conventional colloidal 
nanolithography approaches. The obtained two dimensional 
hexagonal array can be readily used as a lithographic mask 
for the fabrication of hole arrays. 
In the following step, a homogenous gold film is 
deposited by electroless plating. The reaction requires Au(0) 
as nucleation seeds for the chemical reduction of dissolved 
Au(III) [18]. Thus, the glass surface is functionalized with 
3-(aminotriethoxy)silane and subsequently decorated with 
gold colloids, which serve as seeds for the growth of a 
homogenous gold-layer by electroless plating. Removal of 
the colloidal mask was achieved by thermal treatment or 
ultrasonication. This fabrication process has already been 
published [7]. 
 
Figure 1.  
Major steps involved in the fabrication of sub-wavelength 
holes in gold films. 
In Figure 2, a representative scanning electron 
microscopy (SEM) image of a periodic hole arrays in a gold 
film, prepared by the previously presented method, is 
displayed. On the first glance a quasi-hexagonal order of the 
holes can be noticed. To provide a quantitative measure for 
the lattice constant of the hole array, we have calculated the 
radial distribution function by analyzing several SEM images 
[19].  
 
Figure 2.  
Representative SEM image of a prepared periodic hole array 
in a metallic film. 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

For this purpose, we have read out the positions of the 
holes in Cartesian coordinates with the help of the software 
ImageJ. In a second step, the pairwise distance rij of all 
colloids and then the radial distribution density g (r) was 
calculated as follows: 
g(r)=
1
2π r Δ rρ∑
i=1
N
∑
j>i
N
χ(r ij−r)
 
(1) 
where N is the total number of colloids in the image,  
the density per µm2, Δr is the step size and r the considered 
colloid distance. χ is defined as: 
χ(r ij−r)={
1, if ∣r ij−r∣≤Δr
0, if ∣r ij−r∣>Δr}
 
(2) 
The function g (r) thus describes the mean number of 
colloids in the distance r + Δr, which is found from any 
colloid. The first maximum in the radial distribution function 
corresponds to the lattice constant, which was determined to 
be (470 ± 100) nm in the shown SEM image. 
A transmission spectrum of this hole array in a gold film 
is presented in Figure 3. The spectrum is characterized by 
two transmission maxima, which can be assigned to the (1,0) 
gold,glass resonance at ~1200 nm and to the (1,0) gold,air 
resonance at ~800 nm using the following equation [20]: 
λSPP=
a0
√
4
3 (n
2+nm+m
2)√
εmεd
εm+εd
 
(3) 
Where SPP is the resonance wavelength, a0 is the lattice 
constant, n as well as m are integer numbers, and m and d 
are the dielectric constants of the metal and the dielectric 
medium, respectively. 
The horizontal line in the spectrum indicates the open 
area fraction of the particular hole array, determined by the 
software ImageJ. As the open area fraction is lower than the 
transmission of the (1,0) Au,glass resonance of the hole 
arrays, extraordinary transmission of light is observed.  
We have determined the sensitivity of the fabricated hole 
arrays by immersion of the sensors in solutions with different 
refractive indices. The position of the transmission minimum 
in the spectrum was evaluated, which can be found at ~ 600 
nm in air and is particularly sensitive. The position of this 
minimum shifted linearly to longer wavelengths with 
increasing refractive indices of the immersion medium. It 
shows a sensitivity of 540nm / RIU and is in the same 
sensitivity range as published for hole arrays fabricated by 
conventional lithography. Hence, the presented method for 
preparing periodic hole arrays in metallic films is highly 
attractive for mass production, as it is simpler as well as 
more cost- and time-efficient in comparison to approaches 
using electron beam lithography or focused ion beam 
milling. Moreover, the presented bottom-up strategy is 
capable to nanostructure large areas in the range of cm2. 
 
Figure 3.  
Transmission spectrum of a fabricated optical sensor. 
B. Deposition of ECM layer 
In order to obtain thin films of gelatin (= ECM), we 
applied spin-coating. The thickness of gelatin films can be 
adjusted by varying the gelatin concentration of the gel. As 
it can be seen from Figure 4, film thickness is an 
exponential function of the gelatin concentration, when 
temperature, spinning speed, and suspension volume are 
kept constant. 
To determine the gelatin film thickness we scratched a 
groove into the film and measured the step height using a 
white light interferometer. Each data point in Figure 4 
coressponds to 6 measured thickness values.  
 
Figure 4.  
Gelatin films on sensor surface. a) gelatin film thickness in 
dependence of the gelatin concentration in the soultion used for spin-
coating. b) Gelatin film thickness in air and in water determined using 
atomic force microscopy (AFM). 
Gelatin is a network of collagen filaments comprising 
hydrophilic protein chains. Therefore, gelatin is a highly 
absorbent polymer matrix, which swells upon immersion in 
water. The swelling of gelatin depends on the crosslinking 
density of the gel. Not crosslinked gelatin films can increase 
roughly tenfold in film weight due to water uptake when 
 
 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

stored in a buffer solution. The swelling ratio is important 
for us because of two reasons. First of all, we would like to 
tune the thickness of the film in such a way that it matches 
the penetration depths of the surface plasmons of our sensor. 
The surface plasmons are only sensitive to changes in the 
refractive index which are within their penetration depth, 
which is roughly 100 nm at the resonance minimum we 
consider for following refractive index changes. If we know 
the swelling ratio, we can easily estimate the thickness of 
the film in water after measuring the thickness in air. A 
measurement in air is much easier to perform than in water, 
but can give us only relevant information when we know the 
swelling ratio. Second, the swelling ratio will also have an 
effect on the refractive index of the film. The more water 
the film takes up the more the refractive index will be 
shifted towards that of water. Also, this has an effect on the 
sensitivity of our sensor.  
A way to affect the swelling ratio of gelatin films is cross 
linking by GluTardiAldehyde (GTA). Therefore, we 
measured the Swelling Ratio (SR) for different contents of 
GTA, which were added prior to spin-coating. We used 
AFM to measure the height profiles of gelatin films in air 
and in water, and to determine the swelling ratio of thin 
gelatin films, which is simply the thickness in water divided 
by the thickness in air. Figure 4 b) shows two typical height 
profiles for a gelatin film in air and water. A SR of ~2 was 
determined by using this method in accordance with 
published values [21].  
C. Monitoring ECM degradation 
For the degradation experiments the sensor surface was 
coated with a gelatin layer, which has a thickness of (57 ± 
8) nm in the dry state (determined by white light 
interferometry). Figure 5 shows transmission spectra of a 
sensor, before and after coating the sensor surface with 
gelatin, recorded in air.  
 
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
850
5
10
15
 with gelatin in air
 without gelatin in air
 
transmission (%)
wavelength (nm)
  
Figure 5.  
Transmission spectra of a sensor before and after coating with 
gelatin. 
The spectrum of the bare sensor is characterized by a 
transmission maximum at ~760 nm which can be assigned to 
the (1,0) gold,air resonance. After coating the sensor with 
gelatin this maximum shifts to longer wavelengths due to the 
increase of the refractive index at the sensor surface. In this 
case, the maximum is close to the wavelength region in 
which water absorption interferes with measuring reliable 
spectra for determining the sensor response to refractive 
index changes. Therefore, we have chosen to monitor the 
position of the transmission minimum located at ~800 nm 
after coating the sensor with gelatin. 
To carry out the degradation experiments the sensor was 
mounted in a custom-made flow cell and rinsed with HEPES 
buffer at 37 °C. Transmission spectra of the sensor were 
recorded throughout the whole degradation experiment every 
30 s. In Figure 6, the position of the transmission minimum 
on the wavelength scale is plotted versus time. First, a stable 
baseline in buffer was established for each sensor. Then, at 0 
min, a solution composed of collagenase in HEPES buffer 
was added. An enzyme concentration of 1 units/mL led to a 
quasi-linear decrease in the peak position until after about 
180 min the signal remains almost unchanged. In this case, 
the same results were obtained under flow and static 
conditions (red circles and black squares, respectively).  
 
Figure 6.  
Real-time monitoring of enzymatic activity. At 0 min the 
enzyme was added to the buffer solution. 
If the concentration of the enzyme in the solution was lower 
(0.25 units/mL) the degradation reaction was much slower – 
as expected. A negative control experiment was carried out 
by injecting only HEPES buffer at 0 min into the flow cell. 
In this case, no degradation of the gelatin layer could be 
detected by monitoring the transmission minimum position 
(open blue triangles). Hence, a first proof-of-concept for 
utilizing periodic hole arrays in metallic films was 
demonstrated. 
The 
enzymatic 
activity 
was 
reliably 
determined, but the sensitivity of the sensor should be 
improved for being capable of detecting smaller amounts of 
enzymes. For this purpose, it is planned to replace the 
gelatin layer with a more sophisticated layer mimicking 
ECM. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In summary, periodic hole arrays in metallic films were 
prepared using a bottom-up strategy and successfully tested 
 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

as optical sensors for monitoring enzymatic degradation of 
gelatin layers in real-time.  
Fabrication of sensor platforms was achieved by 
combining soft colloidal lithography with subsequent 
chemical deposition of a gold film. The resulting periodic 
hole array in a gold film showed extraordinary transmission 
of light facilitated by the excitation of surface plasmon 
resonance by the grating and leading to distinct transmission 
maxima and minima in their optical spectrum. Surface 
plasmon resonance is confined to the sensor surface and 
probes only refractive index changes occurring with a 
maximum distance of approximately 100-200 nm from the 
gold film (for the reported sensor). These characteristics of 
the prepared sensors were successfully exploited for 
detecting enzymatic activity by following the position of a 
transmission minimum on the wavelength scale in the 
optical spectrum. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project was funded by the VolkswagenStiftung, the 
Heidelberg Academy of Sciences and Humanities, and the 
Max Planck Society. In addition, C. Pacholski is grateful for 
funding by the DFG (Heisenberg fellowship / project 
number: 286735196). 
REFERENCES 
[1] X. Fan et al., “Sensitive optical biosensors for unlabeled 
targets: A review,” Anal. Chim. Acta, vol. 620, no. 1–2, pp. 
8–26, Jul. 2008. 
[2] J. Homola, S. S. Yee, and G. Gauglitz, “Surface plasmon 
resonance sensors: review,” Sens. Actuators B Chem., vol. 54, 
no. 1–2, pp. 3–15, Jan. 1999. 
[3] T. W. Ebbesen, H. J. Lezec, H. F. Ghaemi, T. Thio, and P. A. 
Wolff, “Extraordinary optical transmission through sub-
wavelength hole arrays,” Nature, vol. 391, no. 6668, pp. 667–
669, Feb. 1998. 
[4] A. De Leebeeck et al., “On-Chip Surface-Based Detection 
with Nanohole Arrays,” Anal. Chem., vol. 79, no. 11, pp. 
4094–4100, Jun. 2007. 
[5] A. G. Brolo, R. Gordon, B. Leathem, and K. L. Kavanagh, 
“Surface Plasmon Sensor Based on the Enhanced Light 
Transmission through Arrays of Nanoholes in Gold Films,” 
Langmuir, vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 4813–4815, Jun. 2004. 
[6] S. Wu, P. Guo, W. Huang, S. Xiao, and Y. Zhu, “Dielectric 
Thickness Detection Sensor Based on Metallic Nanohole 
Arrays,” J. Phys. Chem. C, vol. 115, no. 31, pp. 15205–
15209, Aug. 2011. 
[7] S. B. Quint and C. Pacholski, “A chemical route to sub-
wavelength hole arrays in metallic films,” J. Mater. Chem., 
vol. 19, no. 33, pp. 5906–5908, 2009. 
[8] Y. Zhou, S. Jiang, S. Krause, and J.-N. Chazalviel, 
“Biosensor Arrays Based on the Degradation of Thin 
Polymer Films Interrogated by Scanning Photoinduced 
Impedance Microscopy,” Anal. Chem., vol. 79, no. 23, pp. 
8974–8978, Dec. 2007. 
[9] C. Sumner, A. Sabot, K. Turner, and S. Krause, “A 
Transducer Based on Enzyme-Induced Degradation of Thin 
Polymer Films Monitored by Surface Plasmon Resonance,” 
Anal. Chem., vol. 72, no. 21, pp. 5225–5232, Nov. 2000. 
[10] B. Schyrr, S. Boder-Pasche, R. Ischer, R. Smajda, and G. 
Voirin, “Fiber-optic protease sensor based on the degradation 
of thin gelatin films,” Sens. Bio-Sens. Res., vol. 3, pp. 65–73, 
Mar. 2015. 
[11] L. A. Liotta et al., “Metastatic potential correlates with 
enzymatic degradation of basement membrane collagen,” 
Nature, vol. 284, no. 5751, pp. 67–68, Mar. 1980. 
[12] M. A. Moses et al., “Increased incidence of matrix 
metalloproteinases in urine of cancer patients,” Cancer Res., 
vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 1395–1399, Apr. 1998. 
[13] R. A. Cairns, R. Khokha, and R. P. Hill, “Molecular 
mechanisms of tumor invasion and metastasis: an integrated 
view,” Curr. Mol. Med., vol. 3, no. 7, pp. 659–671, Nov. 
2003. 
[14] A. Shoji, M. Kabeya, and M. Sugawara, “Real-time 
monitoring of matrix metalloproteinase-9 collagenolytic 
activity with a surface plasmon resonance biosensor,” Anal. 
Biochem., vol. 419, no. 1, pp. 53–60, Dec. 2011. 
[15] S.-H. 
Jung 
et 
al., 
“Rapid 
analysis 
of 
matrix 
metalloproteinase-3 activity by gelatin arrays using a spectral 
surface plasmon resonance biosensor,” The Analyst, vol. 135, 
no. 5, p. 1050, 2010. 
[16] R. H. Pelton and P. Chibante, “Preparation of aqueous latices 
with N-isopropylacrylamide,” Colloids Surf., vol. 20, no. 3, 
pp. 247–256, Oct. 1986. 
[17] J. Turkevich, P. C. Stevenson, and J. Hillier, “A study of the 
nucleation and growth processes in the synthesis of colloidal 
gold,” Discuss. Faraday Soc., vol. 11, no. 0, pp. 55–75, 1951. 
[18] K. R. Brown and M. J. Natan, “Hydroxylamine Seeding of 
Colloidal Au Nanoparticles in Solution and on Surfaces,” 
Langmuir, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 726–728, Feb. 1998. 
[19] S. B. Quint and C. Pacholski, “Getting real: influence of 
structural disorder on the performance of plasmonic hole 
array sensors fabricated by a bottom-up approach,” J. Mater. 
Chem. C, vol. 2, no. 36, pp. 7632–7638, 2014. 
[20] T. Thio, H. F. Ghaemi, H. J. Lezec, P. A. Wolff, and T. W. 
Ebbesen, “Surface-plasmon-enhanced transmission through 
hole arrays in Cr films,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, vol. 16, no. 10, p. 
1743, Oct. 1999. 
[21] C. M. Ofner and H. Schott, “Swelling studies of gelatin. I: 
Gelatin without additives,” J. Pharm. Sci., vol. 75, no. 8, pp. 
790–796, Aug. 1986. 
 
 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

