Smart Parking System using Wireless Sensor
Networks
Joseph Jeﬀrey, Roshan Gajanan Patil, Skanda Kumar Kaipu Narahari, Yogish
Didagi, Jyotsna Bapat, Debabrata Das
International Institute of Information Technology, Bangalore
Abstract—Reliable communication is imperative
for realising a vision of “Ambient Intelligence”
where diﬀerent devices gather and process informa-
tion from diﬀerent sources to exert control over the
physical environment. Wireless Sensor Networks
(WSN) have been employed to fulﬁl the necessity
of reliable energy eﬃcient communication between
these devices. These networks consist of individual
motes that are able to sense and control the en-
vironment with the help of sensors and actuators.
In this paper, we describe the implementation of
an energy and cost eﬃcient smart parking system
for multi-ﬂoor parking facility using WSN. The
system monitors the availability of free parking
slots and guides the vehicle to the nearest free
slot. Additional information such as the amount of
time the vehicle has been parked is also monitored
for billing purposes along with the status of each
mote. Cost is minimized by keeping the number
of sensors lower without sacriﬁcing the reliability.
Energy consumption of each mote is kept in check
by allowing the systems to sleep periodically and
by reducing their communication range.
Index Terms—smart environment; energy ef-
ﬁciency; wireless sensor networks; sensor mote;
light-dependent sensors.
I. Introduction
In recent years, there has been tremendous
amount of research in the ﬁeld of wireless sensor
networks. These networks are typically ad-hoc
in nature consisting of large number of sensing
motes communicating with a Central Supervisory
Station (CSS). The sensor mote is a battery
operated device with limited computation and
communication capabilities. The mote can be in-
terfaced with several types of sensors to measure
diﬀerent environmental parameters. The wireless
sensor networks have varied advantages like ﬂex-
ibility, inherent intelligence, low cost, rapid de-
ployment and more sensing point, especially in
area that cannot be wired. It is because of these
advantages that they found their way in diverse
application domains such as facility management,
health care, environment monitoring, intelligent
buildings, disaster relief applications etc. In this
work, we have developed a smart parking manage-
ment system that can track available parking slots
economically and reliably and in turn contribute
considerably to fuel and time conservation. An
emerging trend in wireless sensor networks is its
use in parking facility management. Typical car
parking management systems monitor the num-
ber of cars passing the entry and exit points for
estimating the free slots available. This result is
then displayed at strategic locations for assisting
the user.
A number of WSN systems have been devel-
oped to address the car facility management. In
[1], the system is developed using the DSYS25z
[2], mote with magnetic sensors. The system de-
scribed in [1] concentrates on issues such as con-
nectivity, sensing and network performance. In
[3], [4] and [5], a WSN based car parking system
are proposed, where each of these papers explore
the possibility of using diﬀerent kinds of sensors.
They also propose diﬀerent routing mechanisms
for transferring the data from the source to the
sink. Most of the existing systems have discussed
a scheme in which the data collected from the
multiple sensor motes is analysed by a central
station and is displayed at strategic points to
assist the user.
In this paper, we propose and implement a
car parking management system using wireless
sensor networks such that overall eﬃciency and
ﬂexibility of the facility management system is
improved. The system is highly cost-eﬀective as
each mote is equipped with only one passive
306
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

ambient light sensor, to detect the presence or
absence of a car. Apart from detecting the car the
sensor mote also provides additional information
like the amount of time the car has been parked
and also its health status. The system designed
is also energy eﬃcient, since the radio module at
the mote is allowed to “sleep” at regular intervals.
In addition the power consumed by the radio
module is reduced by the use of repeaters. The
proposed system is completely automated and
does not require the presence of a human at the
entry or exit point. The system not only displays
the availability status at strategic locations but
also sends the information such as slot allotted,
time parked, billing information and directional
details to the user’s mobile phone via SMS (Short
Message Service). By introducing the SMS fea-
ture we are basically targeting everyone as the
number of mobile subscribers in the world are
very high, which is expected to increase further
tremendously. Furthermore, including the SMS
feature helps us avoid the usage of paper or plastic
cards that are currently used for the purpose of
parking/billing.
This paper is organized as follows: Section
II decribes the system architecture and its op-
eration. Section III discusses about the imple-
mentation details of the system. Section IV de-
scribes the experimental setup. Sections V and
VI present the future work and conclusion.
II. System Architecture
The block diagram of the system is shown in
Figure 1 and the CSS comprises of components as
shown in Figure 2. The operation of the system
is as follows:
• A user enters the parking facility. At the
entrance, there will be a keypad and a display
as shown is Figure 9. The driver enters his
mobile phone number using the keypad.
• On successful entry of the phone number, ID
of the nearest empty parking slot, time of
entry and route direction information will be
displayed on the monitor. The same infor-
mation will also be sent to the user’s mobile
phone via SMS.
• In order to incorporate the SMS feature, a
GSM modem is connected to the CSS. A java
based SMS gateway at the CSS provides the
Figure 1.
System Architecture
Figure 2.
Central Supervisory Station Components
essential functionality using AT commands
to the send the SMS.
• When the driver parks the car in the des-
ignated slot, a timer is started in the mote
present in that slot. The mote will inform
the CSS that the slot has been currently
occupied.
• The CSS will update the database of the
motes with the occupancy information along
with the corresponding user mobile phone
number. This is done to uniquely identify the
parking slot with the vehicle.
• When the driver leaves the parking slot area,
immediately the timer in that slot’s mote
stops. The timer data is communicated to the
CSS.
• The CSS consults its database, extracts the
mobile phone number ﬁeld corresponding to
the mote ID it received, and sends an SMS to
the user. The SMS will contain information
of how long the vehicle was parked and the
307
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

billing amount.
• By the time the driver reaches the exit of the
parking facility, he/she would have received
the SMS containing the billing information.
Each parking slot will be equipped with an
MIB510 Iris sensor [6] mote running TinyOS
[7] operating system and MDA100 ambient light
sensor to detect the presence/absence of a vehicle.
The mote keeps track of how long the vehicle has
been parked and sends this timing information
to a repeater, which in turn sends it to the
CSS. The IEEE 802.15.4 (Zigbee Protocol) [8] is
the protocol used for communication between the
motes. The CSS calculates the billing information
based on the data received from the sensor motes.
The mote also sends the availability status to
the CSS which is displayed on a suitable GUI as
shown in Figure 10. The CSS monitors the status
of mote health.
To overcome the energy problems encountered
in multi-hop routing strategy, in the proposed
system, the motes forward their data to a repeater
mote placed at a convenient distance from both
the CSS as well as the individual motes in the
parking area. The repeater simply retransmits the
data it receives from the motes to the CSS. The
repeater is powered from the AC mains.
III. Implementation Details
The entire working ﬂow of the system at CSS
and the sensor mote are shown in Figure 5 and
Figure 6, respectively.
A. Parking bay occupancy detection and Data
packet creation
The method employs measurement of the
amount of ambient light captured by the light sen-
sor to detect the presence/absence of the vehicle
over the parking slot. The sensor mote is placed
at the center of the parking slot few inches below
the ground level with a suitable physical casing to
ensure only light incident in normal direction is
used for evaluation purpose. The principle behind
detection is that, when a vehicle occupies a slot,
there is a signiﬁcant dip in the light intensity.
By comparing this light intensity with a suitable
threshold a decision on the occupancy status is
taken. The threshold set is adaptive in nature
based on the present lighting conditions.
Each sensor mote creates a data packet of 14
bytes with the following ﬁelds; mote id, timing
information and slot availability status. Each ﬁeld
occupies two bytes. The packet header is as shown
in Figure 3:
Figure 3.
Occupancy Status Packet Header
This packet generated by the mote is transmit-
ted to the CSS. At the CSS, a java based packet
sniﬀer program is used to detect the packets sent
to the CSS. This java program has been modiﬁed
to not only detect the packets but also parse the
packet to obtain just the last 6 bytes of data from
the packet. These last 6 bytes having the Mote
ID, the slot status and the timing information is
then stored at the CSS.
B. Dead or Alive (DoA) signalling
The mote periodically transmits DoA signal
to the CSS, which enables the CSS to keep
track of the health of the motes. The sensor
mote sends the DoA signal typically every ﬁve
seconds. The DoA signal is nothing but a data
packet containing only mote id as the payload.
The CSS maintains a table with all the mote
IDs as its entries. Whenever a DoA signal is
received, a count corresponding to that mote is
incremented. Then, a decision as to whether a
mote is dead/alive is taken after averaging over
three consecutive readings from all the motes for
experimental purpose. The number of consecutive
readings can be increased to obtain a higher
probablity of assurance, whether a mote is dead or
alive, but at the cost of increase in decision taking
time. The packet header here is of 10 bytes and
is shown in Figure 4:
Figure 4.
DOA Packet Header
308
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure 5.
Flow Diagram at CSS
C. Data Packet Transmission Optimization
Radio Transmission consumes a lot of battery
power. In order to reduce the battery drain due to
repeated transmissions of data packet, the data
packet indicating the slot status is transmitted
only when there is a state transition. The state
transition happens when the vehicle arrives at
or leaves the parking bay. Activating the radio
module to communicate information only during
these transitions reduces the power consumption
to a great extent.
However, to further reduce the power consump-
tion by the mote, it can be put to sleep state.
Since the DoA signal is sent every 5 seconds by
the motes, according to the calculation it takes
approximately 40 microseconds to transmit the 10
bytes long DoA signal at speed of 250Kbps. After
the DoA packet is sent, the mote’s transceiver
module is put to sleep state. The mote is then
awakened after every 5th second or if there is a
state transition.
It has been found that the radio module of the
mote in active state draws 12mA. On the other
hand, during the sleep state, it draws only 1µA.
This shows that by putting the mote to sleep state
considerable power savings can be achieved.
D. Adaptive Thresholding
The lighting conditions do not remain constant
at all times. In order to adapt to the ever chang-
ing lighting conditions, an adaptive thresholding
algorithm has been implemented. The present
lighting conditions are monitored and readings
are captured periodically for a ﬁxed interval of
time. These values are averaged out and after
comparing it with the previous threshold, the
new threshold is set. Hence the system is made
intelligent to adapt itself automatically to varying
light conditions.
Figure 6.
Flow Diagram at Sensor Mote
IV. Experimental setup
The project uses Crossbow IRIS – XM210 mote
with MDA100CB sensor board. The MDA100CB
sensor board is equipped with a CdSe photocell
which acts as a light sensor. When there is light,
the nominal circuit output is near VCC or full-
scale, and when it is dark the nominal output is
near GND or zero. This is used in the decision
making process. Each mote runs on two AA bat-
teries. The CSS mote is connected to the pc via
USB cable for monitoring and display purposes.
Figure 10 shows the display running at the CSS.
The adaptive threshold for the sensor mote was
tested at an indoor parking facility at a mall. The
communication range of the radio module was
tested in the outdoor parking lot. The health sta-
tus of the batteries in the motes is also monitored
for maintenance purposes. According to therot-
ical calculations, the battery life is estimated
to be 1.58 years without considering the power
consumed by the processor in idle state. The
deployment of the sensor mote for the experiment
is as shown in Figure 7 and Figure 8 shows a closer
view of the same. In order to avoid the mote being
over run by a car, the mote could be placed few
309
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

inches below the ground surface during the actual
deployment at the parking bay.
Attribute
IRIS - XM120
Program Flash Memory
128K bytes
Serial Flash
512K bytes
RAM
8K bytes
Serial Communication
UART
Analog to Digital Convertor
10 bit ADC, 8 Channel, 0-3V input
Current Drawn (Processor)
8mA (Active), 8uA (Sleep)
Frequency Band
2405 MHz – 2480 MHz
Transmit Data Rate
250 kbps
Outdoor Range
>300m
Indoor Range
>50m
Current Drawn (Radio module)
16mA (Rx mode), 10mA (Tx mode)
Battery
2 AA batteries
Table I
Hardware Specifications
Device
Software/Operating System
IRIS - XM120
TinyOS 2.1.1
Base Station - PC with Intel processor
Ubuntu 10.04
Listen tool, GUI using JDK 1.6
SMS gateway using JDK 1.6
Socket Programming using JDK 1.6
MySQL Database
Table II
Software Specifications
Figure 7.
Deployment
Figure 8.
Deployment Under Car
V. Future Work
In the future work, we plan to use additional
sensors which will allow usage of the system in
Figure 9.
End User UI
Figure 10.
Central Supervisory Station UI
outdoors environment, albeit at increased cost.
An active sensor may be added to validate the
light sensor information. Cost may be further
reduced by using a low cost processor mote such
as custom built mote using the 8051 micro-
controller. The system can be further extended
to include the IMS network by providing infor-
mation on SIP enabled devices. Another possible
extension would be to provide location based
services via mobile apps.
VI. Conclusion
The project successfully demonstrated the pos-
sibility of using WSN for multi ﬂoor parking
310
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

facility. The system developed is fully automated,
highly energy eﬃcient and cost eﬀective as only
one sensor is utilized. The utilization of only one
light sensor with the adaptive threshold algorithm
was reliable in detecting the presence/absence of
the car. As the application does not demand any
complex routing mechanisms, our system imple-
ments the broadcast technique to communicate to
the CSS. This is both simple in implementation
and power eﬃcient as opposed to unicast trans-
mission which has a higher power proﬁle due to
the additional overhead to the packets. Finally,
the system also proposed a novel approach of
associating the slot, timing, direction and billing
information with the users mobile number via
SMS.
References
[1] J. Benson, “Car-Park Management using Wireless Sensor
Networks,” tech. rep., University College Cork (UCC),
Cork, Ireland, November 2006.
[2] Andre Barroso, Jonathan Benson, Tina Murphy, Utz
Roedig, Cormac Sreenan, John Barton, Stephen Bellis,
Brendan Flynn, and Kieran Delaney, “The DSYS25 Sen-
sor Platform,” tech. rep., University College, Cork, Ireland
and National Microelectronic Research Center, Cork, Ire-
land, 2004.
[3] Vanessa W.S Tang, Yuan Zheng, and Jiannong Cao,
“An Intelligent Car Park Management System based on
Wireless Sensor Networks,” tech. rep., Internet and Mobile
Computing Lab, Department of Computing, The Hong
Kong Polytechnic University, P.R.China, August 2006.
[4] Seong-eun Yoo, Poh Kit Chong, Taehong Kim, Jonggu
Kang, and Daeyoung Kim, “PGS: Parking Guidance Sys-
tem based on Wireless Sensor Network,” tech. rep., Infor-
mation and Communications University Daejeon, Korea,
May 2008.
[5] B. Yan Zhong, S. Li Min, Z. Hong Song, Y. Ting Xin,
and L. Zheng Jun, “A Parking Management System Based
on Wireless Sensor Network,” tech. rep., Institute of Soft-
ware, Graduate School of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, November 2006.
[6] Sangwon Lee, Dukhee Yoona, and Amitabha Ghosh, “In-
telligent Parking Lot Application Using Wireless Sensor
Networks,” tech. rep., Autonomous Networks Research
Group, Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical Engineering,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, May 2008.
[7] Itziar Marin, Eduardo Arceredillo, Aitzol Zuloaga, and
Jagoba Arias, “Wireless Sensor Networks: A Survey
on Ultra-Low Power-Aware Design,” tech. rep., World
Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology, August
2005.
[8] ZigBee/IEEE 802.15.4 Summary, “Sinem Coleri Ergen,”
tech. rep., EECS Berkely, September 2004.
[9] David Gay and Philp Levis, The nesC Language: A Holis-
tic Approach to Network Embedded System.
[10] David Gay and Philp Levis, Software Design Patterns for
TinyOS.
[11] David Gay and Philp Levis, nesC 1.1 Language Reference
Manual.
[12] Wikipedia The Free Encyclopedia, “Tiny OS Documen-
tation Wiki.” http://docs.tinyos.net/, August 2011. Ac-
cessed: 25/6/2012.
[13] “Tiny OS 2.0.2 Documentation.” http://www.tinyos.net/
tinyos-2.x/doc/, July 2007. Accessed: 25/6/2012.
[14] “Data
Sheet
for
Memsic
IRIS
Motes.”
http:
//www.memsic.com/products/wireless-sensor-networks/
wireless-modules.html. Accessed: 28/7/2012.
311
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

