Quality of Service and Energy Efficient Evaluation of 
Hierarchical and Flat Routing Protocols 
for Wireless Sensor Networks 
Abdelbari Ben Yagouta, Bechir Ben Gouissem 
Communication System Laboratory Sys'Com 
National Engineering School of Tunis 
University Tunis El Manar 
Tunis, Tunisia 
Emails: {abdelbari.benyagouta@gmail.com, bechir.gouissem@enit.rnu.tn} 
 
 
Abstract—Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) is a network with 
limited power sensing devices with a communications 
infrastructure for monitoring physical or environmental 
conditions, such as temperature, sound, pressure, etc. Among 
the concerns of these networks is prolonging the lifetime by 
saving nodes energy. There are several protocols specially 
designed for WSNs based on energy consumption and network 
lifetime. However, many WSNs applications require QoS 
(Quality of Service) criteria, such as latency and throughput. 
In this paper, we will compare three routing protocols for 
wireless network sensors LEACH (Low Energy Adaptive 
Clustering Hierarchy), AODV (Ad hoc on demand Distance 
Vector) and LABILE (Link Quality-Based Lexical Routing) 
using Castalia simulator in terms of energy consumption, 
number of nodes alive and stability period, throughput and 
latency time of packets received by the base station under 
various conditions. The results prove that LEACH had the 
longest network stability period, consumes the least energy and 
had the least latency time, while the LABILE and AODV 
protocols have the highest throughput. 
Keywords-WSNs; Quality of Service; LEACH; AODV; LABILE. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
WSNs are a special case of Ad hoc networks [1], widely 
used in various applications such as, environmental 
monitoring, military surveillances, intelligent transportation, 
healthcare, etc. A WSN is a collection of large numbers of 
sensor nodes deployed in a geographical area to be 
controlled. Each sensor is limited in terms of processing 
power, wireless bandwidth, battery and storage capacity. In 
most WSNs applications, it is difficult even impossible to 
change or recharge power resources, which makes the energy 
consumption a major constraint of WSNs lifetime [2]. Since 
wireless communication requires significantly more power 
than processing tasks, energy conservation is crucial while 
designing network protocols for WSNs. Clustering approach 
is one of the best ways for reducing energy consumption of 
nodes. In these sensor nodes, rather than sending 
individually, first, the sensor nodes group themselves into 
clusters, and then an elected cluster head (CH) sends the 
aggregated data from all to the sink. Other than the power 
consumption criterion, real-time applications such as, 
military applications require QoS criteria like latency. 
In typical WSNs applications, throughput is not 
significant as other parameters, because a sensor node sends 
small packets. But, the use of acoustic and imaging sensors 
requires significant throughput, as data must be streamed 
through the network. Thus, certain WSNs applications 
require maximizing throughput. In that context, distance-
vector routing protocols based on calculating of direction and 
distance to any link in a network and multi-hop approach can 
ensure a great throughput. 
In this work, we have compared three WSNs routing 
protocols; AODV and LABILE based on distance-vector and 
LEACH based on clustering approach. The source codes of 
these three routing protocols are developed for Omnet++/ 
Castalia simulator by GERCOM (research Group on 
Computer Network and Multimedia Communication) [3]. 
The comparison results show that, LEACH had the longest 
stability period, consumes least energy, and had the least 
latency time, while LABILE and AODV protocols have the 
highest throughput. The rest of the paper is organized as 
follows. In Section II, we review the related work in this 
field. Section III will provide an overview of the three 
routing protocols AODV, LABILE and LEACH. Section IV 
describes the common simulation settings used in different 
scenarios. Section V discusses the results and analysis; 
finally, we conclude the paper in Section VI. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Various comparative studies have been made between 
hierarchical and flat routing protocols for WSNs based on 
the energy saving criteria and network lifetime such as in [4]. 
In those studies, AODV, LEACH and LEACH-E routing 
protocols are compared for energy efficiency and network 
lifetime. The simulation results show that, under different 
simulation time, LEACH and LEACH-E protocols consume 
less energy than AODV. Indeed AODV has the least 
network lifetime. However, many WSNs applications have 
latency and throughput constraints like real-time application. 
The particularity of this work is to compare hierarchical 
(LEACH) and flat routing protocols (AODV and LABILE) 
in terms of latency, throughput and energy consumption 
under different scenarios to determinate which type of 
routing protocols is more suitable for QoS constraints. 
III. 
ROUTING PROTOCOLS FOR WSNS : AN OVERVIEW 
WSNs routing protocols are classified according to their 
architecture or their operating principles into flat, location-
based and hierarchical/cluster categories [5]. Flat routing 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

protocols represent an appropriate solution for several 
applications, 
such 
as 
smart-homes, 
healthcare 
and 
environmental monitoring. Many applications employed in 
these scenarios have low tolerance for packet delay and loss. 
On the other hand, routing protocols based on clustering are 
an alternative to improve QoS and energy consumption for 
many applications [6], such as multimedia traffic [7]. The 
energy saving, throughput and packets transmission delay 
represent a great worry for WSNs, and a real compromise 
between flat and hierarchical routing protocols; so, for these 
reasons we have chosen to compare AODV and LABILE 
and LEACH. 
A. AODV Routing Protocol 
AODV protocol [8] was originally proposed in RFC 
3965. In AODV, on-demand routes can be discovered, which 
decrease the overhead, by using pairs of Route Request 
(RREQ) and Route Reply (RREP) messages. However, the 
route selection process is only based on the minimal number 
of hops, which is not suitable for ensuring energy-efficiency 
and reliable data transmission. The deficiency of energy-
efficiency mechanism results in energy holes and an uneven 
distribution of scarce network resources. Moreover, AODV 
only stores one possible route for a given destination node. 
This means that if a single route fails or is unavailable, a new 
route must be discovered, which requires more time and 
increases the delay or failure rate of data delivery. 
B. LABILE Routing Protocol 
LABILE [9] proposes a routing algorithm based on 
lexical structures and link quality evaluation. Using LQI, i.e., 
a metric provided by the physical layer of IEEE 802.15.4 
standard, LABILE is able to evaluate the link quality. The 
LABILE proposal evaluates end-to-end link quality by 
classifying the possible values of LQI, determines a 
threshold value for link classification, where the lowest 
values of LQI (below the threshold) are considered bad, and 
represents links that are more susceptible to packet loss. 
During the route discovery process, all the bad links are 
counted, recorded and reported with the aid of an additional 
field in RREQ and RREP messages. The purpose of 
LABILE is to select routes with good link qualities. 
However, this behaviour implies that these routes have an 
exhaustive use, and lead to the premature death of these 
nodes. This is due to a lack of mechanisms for determining 
when there is a need to use alternative routes. 
C. LEACH Routing Protocol 
LEACH [10], is the first hierarchical cluster based 
routing protocol for WSNs, developed by W. R. Heinzelman 
et al. from MIT. It is based on the concept of rounds where 
each round consists of two phases: first, clusters set up phase 
and second a steady state phase.  
1) Cluster set-up phase: In this phase, each node 
decides whether or not to become a CH for the current 
round r. This decision is made by the node n choosing a 
number between 0 and 1 randomly. If the number is less 
than a threshold T(n), the node becomes a CH for the 
current round [10]. 
2) Steady set-up phase: In the steady working stage, 
each member node of the cluster sends data to the 
corresponding CH during the allocated communication slot. 
After receiving all the data, the CH aggregates it and sends 
to the sink. In order to minimize the power consumption, the 
steady phase duration is kept far greater than the cluster 
constructing phase duration.. 
IV. 
SIMULATION SCENARIOS 
In this work, we want to make a comparison between 
hierarchical and flat WSNs routing protocols in terms of 
energy consumption, packet latency and throughput. In order 
to achieve convincing results, we will simulate the chosen 
protocols several times in various scenarios. For simulation, 
we will use the OMNET++/Castalia simulator [11]. By using 
the ”Throughput Test” application implemented in Castalia 
simulator, we suppose that all nodes have data to sending, 
have an initial energy of 10 joules and randomly placed in a 
100 m x 100 m area. 
Table I depicts the common simulation settings for all 
scenarios, with the last three parameters that contain (*) are 
specific to LEACH protocol. 
TABLE I.  
GLOBAL SIMULATION PARAMETERS. 
Parameters 
Values 
Routing protocols. 
AODV, LABILE, LEACH. 
Node deployment (topology) 
Random 
Number 
of 
Simulation 
Repetition  
20 
Sink Position (x, y, z)  
(50 m, 120 m, 0 m) 
Collision Model  
Simple collision 
Area  
100 m x 100 m 
Initial energy/node  
10 Joules 
Sink Initial Energy  
100 Joules 
TX output power 
-5 dBm 
Packet rate  
1 packet/s 
Node Buffer size  
1000 bytes 
Application name  
Throughput Test 
Path loss exponent  
2.0 (Free Space) 
Radio parameter file  
CC2420.txt 
Round length *  
20s (Duration between two rounds) 
Slot length *  
0.2ms (TDMA slot dedicated to each 
node) 
Routing percentage *  
0.05 (Percentage of Cluster Head 5%) 
V. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
In this section, we will present results under different 
simulation scenarios by varying simulation time, node 
density and packet size. These results are analysed to 
demonstrate the performance of these protocols in terms of 
latency time, throughput and energy consumption. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

A. Energy consumption and network lifetime 
In this section, we have evaluated energy consumption 
and network lifetime for different scenarios described below. 
1) Time variation scenario:In this scenario, we have 
simulated the protocols for different simulation times and 
analysed their performance in terms of energy consumption, 
network lifetime and network stability period. The 
parameters of this scenario are illustrated in Table II.  
TABLE II.  
TIME VARIATION SCENARIO PARAMETERS. 
Parameters 
Values 
Simulation time (s) 
[20, 40, 60..600] 
Number of nodes  
100 
Packet size ( byte)  
100 
Figure 1 shows the variation of total consumed energy 
according to the simulation time. The graph depicts that 
LEACH consumes the least, while AODV and LABILE 
have the highest total energy consumption. It also shows that 
the nodes that use AODV and LABILE consumes all of their 
energy at time 150 s, while for LEACH it remains until time 
470 s. 
 
Figure 1.  Total Consumed Energy vs Time. 
From Figure 2, it is quite clear that by using LEACH the 
first node dies at time 435 s (stability period = 435 s) and the 
last at time 470 s. Nevertheless, with AODV and LABILE 
all nodes are dead between 145 s and 150 s (stability period 
= 145 s). Therefore, we can conclude that the nodes using 
LEACH consume less energy and subsequently the network 
has a long stability period. However, nodes using AODV and 
LABILE consume more energy and the network has a brief 
stability period relative to LEACH. 
 
Figure 2.  Network lifetime and Stability period. 
So, due to the multi-hop routing technique used by flat 
routing 
protocols, 
energy 
consumption 
increases 
proportionally to the number of hops to reach the sink. 
Therefore, the nodes energy dissipates very quickly and the 
network stability period becomes short.  
However with the hierarchical routing protocol that uses 
data aggregation; only the CHs nodes (only 5% of nodes) 
transmit data to the sink. Therefore, it retains the total energy 
of the network and increases the stability period. 
2) Nodes density variation scenario: In this scenario, we 
have simulated the protocols for different numbers of nodes 
(100, 200, 300 and 400) and analysed their performance in 
terms of energy consumption. The parameters of this 
scenario are illustrated in Table III. 
TABLE III.  
NODES DENSITY VARIATION SCENARIO PARAMETERS. 
Parameters 
Values 
Simulation time (s) 
20 
Number of nodes  
100, 200, 300, 400 
Packet size ( byte)  
100 
Figure 3 shows the variation of total consumed energy 
according to the number of nodes. The graph depicts that by 
increasing 
the 
number of 
nodes deployed, 
energy 
consumption also increases for the three routing protocols, 
but AODV and LABILE consume more energy than 
LEACH. With flat routing protocols, based on multi-hop 
routing, if we increase the density of nodes deployed, there 
will be as many of the nodes involved in the data 
transmission to the sink, so the energy consumption 
increases proportionally. 
However, with hierarchical routing protocol, if we 
increase the node density the energy consumption increases 
obviously well, but with a lower slope than AODV and 
LABILE. These results are explained by the made where the 
number of nodes increases only the number of CHs increases 
(which are responsible for the data transmission to the sink). 
 
Figure 3.  Total Consumed Energy vs Number of nodes. 
3) Packet size variation scenario: In this scenario, we 
have simulated the protocols for different packet size (100, 
200, 400, 600 and 800 bytes) and analysed their 
performance in terms of energy consumption. The 
parameters of this scenario are illustrated in Table IV. 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE IV.  
NODES DENSITY VARIATION SCENARIO PARAMETERS. 
Parameters 
Values 
Simulation time (s) 
20 
Number of nodes  
100 
Packet size ( byte)  
100, 200, 400, 600, 800 
Figure 4 shows the variation of total consumed energy 
according to the different packet size. The graph depicts that 
by increasing packet size energy consumption also increases 
for the three protocols but AODV and LABILE consume 
more energy than LEACH. For AODV and LABILE, by 
using multi-hop routing technique, by increasing packet size, 
nodes consume more energy to forward the packets from 
node to other until arriving to the sink. LABILE consumes 
less energy than AODV because it uses roads based on good 
link qualities selection technique. For LEACH, with the use 
of data aggregation, the CH eliminates data redundancy, 
which reduces the size of the transmitted packets to the sink. 
Therefore, the energy consumption increases proportionally 
with packet size, until it reaches the maximum data buffer 
size. 
 
Figure 4.  Total Consumed Energy vs Packet size. 
B. Throughput 
In this section, we have evaluated throughput (Total Data 
received by sink) for different scenarios described below. 
1) Time variation scenario:In this scenario, we have 
simulated the protocols for different simulation times and 
analysed their performance in terms of total data received by 
the sink. The parameters of this scenario are illustrated in 
Table V.  
TABLE V.  
TIME VARIATION SCENARIO PARAMETERS. 
Parameters 
Values 
Simulation time (s) 
[20, 40, 60..600] 
Number of nodes  
100 
Packet size ( byte)  
100 
Figure 5 shows the variation of total data received by the 
sink according to the simulation time variation. The graph 
depicts that by increasing the simulation time AODV and 
LABILE transmit more data to the sink than LEACH until it 
consumes all of her energy.  
For these simulation results, we will compare the 
protocols, only during their stability period. LEACH has a 
low rate compared to other protocols because only CH sends 
data to the sink (5% of the total number of nodes). LABILE 
has a less rate than AODV because it sends the data only 
through the good quality links, so less traffic in the network 
and fewer packets transmitted to the sink. 
 
Figure 5.  Total data received by the sink vs Time. 
2) Nodes density variation scenario: In this scenario, we 
have simulated the protocols for different numbers of nodes 
(100, 200, 300 and 400) and analysed their performance in 
terms of throughput. The parameters of this scenario are 
illustrated in Table VI. 
TABLE VI.  
NODES DENSITY VARIATION SCENARIO PARAMETERS. 
Parameters 
Values 
Simulation time (s) 
20 
Number of nodes  
100, 200, 300, 400 
Packet size ( byte)  
100 
Figure 6 shows the variation of total data received by 
sink according to the number of deployed nodes. The graph 
depicts that by increasing the number of deployed nodes 
AODV and LEACH are able to transmit more data to the 
base station unlike LABILE that transmits less. In this 
scenario, LABILE possesses a lower throughput than AODV 
and even as LEACH, because if we increase the number of 
nodes, the route selection algorithm takes a long time in the 
processing and in links quality selection phase. Therefore, 
fewer packets transmitted to the sink. LEACH throughput 
increases proportionately by increasing the numbers of nodes 
because the number of CH increases. 
 
Figure 6.  Total data received by the sink vs Number of nodes. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

3) Packet size variation scenario: In this scenario, we 
have simulated the protocols for different packet size (100, 
200, 400, 600 and 800 bytes) and analysed their 
performance in terms of total data received by the sink. The 
parameters of this scenario are illustrated in Table VII. 
TABLE VII.  
PACKET SIZE VARIATION SCENARIO PARAMETERS. 
Parameters 
Values 
Simulation time (s) 
20 
Number of nodes  
100 
Packet size ( byte)  
100, 200, 400, 600, 800 
Figure 7 shows the variation of total data received by the 
sink according to the packet size. The graph depicts that by 
increasing the packets size, AODV and LABILE transmit 
data to the base station more than LEACH. AODV and 
LABILE provide better throughput for a packet size of 400 
bytes. If the packet size exceeds 400 bytes, the buffer 
becomes overloaded and throughput decreases. For LEACH, 
throughput increases proportionately with the packet size 
until the size of 600 bytes because the CHs remove data 
redundancy in the packets. If the packet size exceeds 600 
bytes, the buffer saturates.  
 
Figure 7.  Total data received by the sink vs Packet size. 
C. Throughput 
In this section, we have evaluated packets latency time 
for different scenarios described below. 
1) Time variation scenario:In this scenario, we have 
simulated the protocols for different simulation times and 
analysed their performance in terms of packets latency time. 
The parameters of this scenario are illustrated in Table VIII.  
TABLE VIII.  TIME VARIATION SCENARIO PARAMETERS. 
Parameters 
Values 
Simulation time (s) 
20, 40, 60, 80, 100 
Number of nodes  
100 
Packet size ( byte)  
100 
Figure 8 shows the variation of latency intervals of 
received packets according to the simulation time. The graph 
depicts that by increasing the simulation time LEACH sent 
90% of data in the range of (0-20 ms) while AODV sent the 
majority of data with time greater than 200 ms and LABILE 
with uniform distribution between 0 and 200ms. Conversely, 
LEACH sends 90% of the data with a latency less than 20 
ms, because the nodes send their data to the CH and the CH 
forward this data directly to the sink. AODV and LABILE 
send their packets with a larger latency because the packets 
are moving from node to node until they reach the sink.  
 
Figure 8.  Packets latency time vs Time. 
2) Nodes density variation scenario: In this scenario, we 
have simulated the protocols for different numbers of nodes 
and analysed their performance in terms of packets latency. 
The parameters of this scenario are illustrated in Table IX. 
TABLE IX.  
NODES DENSITY VARIATION SCENARIO PARAMETERS. 
Parameters 
Values 
Simulation time (s) 
20 
Number of nodes  
100,  200,  300,  400 
Packet size ( byte)  
100 
Figure 9 shows the variation of latency intervals of 
received packets according to the number of deployed nodes. 
 
Figure 9.  Packets latency time vs Number of nodes. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The graph depicts that by increasing the number of 
deployed nodes LEACH sent 90% of data in the range of (0-
20 ms) while AODV sent 50% of data with time greater than 
200 ms and LABILE with uniform distribution between 0 
and 200 ms. For LEACH, if we increase the number of 
nodes, 90% of the packets always arrive at the sink with a 
latency less than 20 ms. 
For flat routing protocols, if the number of nodes 
increases, the number of packets hops increases and the 
delay accumulates. With LABILE packets have less delay 
than AODV, due the mechanism of good links selection, 
which reduces the number of hops to the sink. 
3) Packet size variation scenario: In this scenario, we 
have simulated the protocols for different packet size (100, 
200, 400, 600 and 800 bytes) and analysed their 
performance in terms of packets latency time. The 
parameters of this scenario are illustrated in Table X. 
TABLE X.  
PACKET SIZE VARIATION SCENARIO PARAMETERS. 
Parameters 
Values 
Simulation time (s) 
20 
Number of nodes  
100 
Packet size ( byte)  
100, 200, 400, 600, 800 
Figure 10 shows the variation of latency intervals of 
received packets according to the packet size. The graph 
depicts that by increasing the packet size, LEACH sent the 
majority of data in the range of (0-20 ms) while AODV sent 
80% of data with time greater than 200 ms and LABILE sent 
50% of data with uniform distribution between 0 and 200 
ms. For flat routing protocols, if the packets size increases, 
the processing time and the packet forwarding delay 
increases and subsequently the packets arrives at the sink 
with over delay. For LEACH, if the packet size exceeds 600 
bytes, the CHs take longer for data fusion and elimination of 
redundancy. By result, only 50% of data arrives with a 
latency of less than 20 ms.  
 
Figure 10.  Packets latency time vs Packet size. 
General Synthesis: For LEACH, with a 100 bytes packet 
size, 90% of the packets always arrive at the sink with a 
latency less than 20 ms, even with a density of 400 nodes / 
100 m x 100 m. Even with a packet size of 400 bytes 75% of 
data arrives to the sink with a latency time less than 20 ms. 
So, we can conclude that LEACH protocol has the least 
delay to send data due to the data aggregation technique. 
Nevertheless, the LABILE and AODV protocols have the 
highest delay to send packets due the using of the multi-hop 
routing technique.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In WSNs, a significant consideration has been given to 
the prolongation of node lifetime. Efficient utilization of 
energy is crucial for enhancing the node lifetime. Although 
wireless network sensors routing protocols like ad hoc on 
demand distance vector can be used, they usually do not 
focus on energy conservation, network lifetime prolongation 
of sensor nodes and delay to send data. 
In this paper, we have evaluated three routing protocols 
for WSNs namely AODV, LABILE and LEACH using 
Castalia Simulator for energy consumption, network 
lifetime, throughput and latency time with reference to 
simulation time, number of deployed nodes and size of 
transmitted packets. Simulation results show that, under 
different conditions, LEACH protocol has least energy 
consumption and highest network lifetime compared to the 
LABILE and AODV protocols. The AODV and LABILE 
protocols have the least network lifetime because of high-
energy consumption per node. This makes AODV and 
LABILE unsuitable for WSNs, where lifetime is a primary 
metric for evaluating the performance and LEACH protocol 
has become better for network lifetime. 
Under different simulation conditions, the results show 
that LEACH protocol has the least throughput because of the 
use of data aggregation technique. Nevertheless, the 
LABILE and AODV protocols have the highest throughput 
and that from the multi-hop technique used by both routing 
protocols. This makes LEACH unsuitable for WSNs 
applications, where throughput is a primary metric for 
evaluating the performance likewise, AODV and LABILE 
become better for this type of applications. Under different 
scenarios, the results show that LEACH protocol has the 
least delay to send data due to the data fusion technique. 
Nevertheless, the LABILE and AODV protocols have the 
highest delay to send packets due to the using of multi-hop 
technique. This makes AODV and LABILE unsuitable for 
real-time WSNs applications, where latency time is a 
primary metric for evaluating the performance and LEACH 
become better for this type of applications.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the anonymous 
reviewers for their helpful comments. They would also like 
to thank the Editors for their generous comments and support 
during the review process.  
REFERENCES 
[1] C. M. Cordeiro, D. and P. Agrawal, ”Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks: 
Theory and Applications, World Scientific Publication 2006”, ISBN 
981-256-681-3, ISBN 981-256-682-1. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[2] M. Zhang and S. Wang, ”An Energy Efficient Dynamic Clustering 
Protocol based on Weight in Wireless Sensor Networks, Journal of 
Networks”, vol. 6, no. 7, 2011, pp. 1057-1064. 
[3] Sensor Network Routing Protocols, LEACH Clustering Protocol v0.2, 
AODV, 
and 
LABILE 
Codes 
Source, 
Available 
Online: 
www.gercom.ufpa.br/index.php?option=com_osdownloads&view=do
wnloads&Itemid=346 (accessed on 9 June 2016). 
[4] Jyoti Kashniyal and H. L. Mandoria, ”Energy Efficiency Analysis 
between AODV, LEACH and LEACH-E using Castalia, International 
Journal of P2P Network Trends and Technology (IJPTT)”, vol. 3, 
issue. 4, May 2013, pp. 240-244, ISSN:2249-2615. 
[5] S. Ehsan and B. Hamdaoui, ”A survey on energy-efficient routing 
techniques with QoS assurances for wireless multimedia sensor 
networks”, IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2012, pp. 265-278. 
[6] M. Becker, A. Gupta, M. Marot, and H. Singh, ”Improving Clustering 
Techniques in Wireless Sensor Networks Using Thinning Process. In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Performance 
Evaluation of Computer and Communication Systems: Milestones 
and Future Challenges”, Lisbon, Portugal, December 2011, pp. 203-
214. 
[7] A. Hnini, A. Ezzati ; A. Hajami, ”LEACH protocol for multimedia 
traffic with a variable-size packet. In Proceedings of Multimedia 
Computing and Systems (ICMCS), 2014 International Conference”, 
Marrakech, Marocco, 14-16 April 2014, pp. 906-909. 
[8] C. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer, and S. Das, ”Ad hoc on Demand 
Distance Vector (AODV) Routing (RFC3561)”, Available online: 
http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3561.txt(accessed on 30 March 2016). 
[9] M. Butt, et al. ”Labile: Link Quality-Based Lexical Routing Metric 
for Reactive Routing Protocols in IEEE 802.15.4 Networks. In 
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Future 
Information Technology (FutureTech)”, Busan, Korea, 2123 May 
2010, pp. 16. 
[10] W. R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, 
”Energyefficient communication protocol for wireless microsensor 
networks, in Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS-3300)”, January 2000, p. 
223. 
[11] Castalia, ”Wireless Sensor Networks Simulator”, Available Online: 
https://castalia.forge.nicta.com.au/index.php/en/ (accessed on 5 April 
2016). 
 
 
 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

