Design and Characterization of the Seashell Effect Pretouch Sensor Integrated Into
Robot Grippers
Liang-Ting Jiang
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, USA
email: jianglt@uw.edu
Joshua R. Smith
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, USA
email: jrs@cs.uw.edu
Abstract—The paper presents a short range proximity pre-
touch sensor device based on the seashell effect inspired by
the phenomenon of “hearing the sea” when a seashell is held
to the ear. The acoustic theory, design consideration, and the
quantitative characterizations of the sensor under different am-
bient sound conditions are studied. The sensor has a number of
practical beneﬁts compared to conventional sonar-based time of
ﬂight sensors: (1) easy sensor integration — the sound stimulus
source and the detector do not need to be co-located; (2)
short-time measurements are not required; (3) no multi-path
effects. The sensors are designed and integrated into a robot’s
gripper, which provides a new source of information for robotic
manipulation that complements long range depth sensors and
contact-based tactile sensors. Continuous object contour tracking
using differential measurements with pairs of the new sensors
(one in each robot’s ﬁngertip) is demonstrated on objects with
different material properties.
Keywords–pretouch; sensor; acoustic; proximity; non-contact
I.
INTRODUCTION
“Pretouch” sensors are non-contact sensors with properties
intermediate between long range non-contact sensors (RGB
cameras, depth cameras, and laser rangeﬁnders) and contact-
based tactile sensors. Previous pretouch sensors based on
electric ﬁeld [1][2][3] and optics [4] have been used in
several robot grasping applications, such as robot hand pre-
shaping, gripper servoing, co-manipulation, and, mid-range
object imaging. One issue of these sensors is their restricted
compatibility for different material properties. Electric ﬁeld
pretouch only works well on materials with high conductivity
or dielectric constant, and optical methods (including optical
pretouch as well as RGB cameras and depth sensors) are not
suited to highly reﬂective, transparent, or absorbing (black)
materials.
The “seashell effect pretouch” sensor [5] we previously
proposed relies on mechanical (acoustic) properties rather
than electrical or optical properties, and, therefore, is com-
patible with a set of materials that is orthogonal to those
can be sensed by electrical / RF or optical techniques. The
effectiveness of seashell effect pretouch was demonstrated
with two simple robot grasping applications: (1) pretouch-
assisted grasp planning, in which the pretouch sensor is used to
exhaustively augment the point cloud of the object provided
by a depth sensor operating in sub-optimal conditions, such
as with transparent materials or occluded objects; (2) reactive
grasping: the detection of extremely compliant objects which
can not be sensed by traditional tactile sensors. Recently,
(a)
Seashell Effect
Pretouch Sensors
PR2 Robot
Reference
Channel
Cavity
+ Mic
Microcontroller
Microphone
Amplifier
SPI Connector
(b)
Fig. 1.
(a) The seashell effect pretouch sensors installed on the Willow
Garage PR2 robot grippers. (b) The sensor system consists of a PCB, a
microcontroller, electronic components, a microphone, and an acoustic cavity
integrated into the PR2 robot’s ﬁngertip.
we also proposed a uniﬁed probabilistic framework to enable
automatic exploration with the pretouch sensor to reduce object
shape uncertainty before robotic grasping [6].
In this paper, we further discuss in more detail the acoustic
theory, design consideration, and the quantitative character-
izations of the sensor. We also characterizes the effect of
ambient noise power and spectral contents on the sensor
performance, and propose an adaptive stimulus generation by
deliberately generating white noise, band limited to match the
sensor’s frequency response. It detects current ambient sound
conditions and provides additional band-limited white noise to
maintain consistent SNR ratio, and thus guarantee minimum
sensor performance, even at low ambient sound levels. We
also introduce an embedded sensor system integrated into the
PR2 robot’s gripper, which eliminates the external power and
data cables necessary in prior implementations. This improved
implementation has also made it practical to integrate multiple
seashell effect sensors in a single robot (one in each ﬁnger).
The paper is organized as follows: in Section II, we ﬁrst
review the related work. The acoustic theory is discussed in
Section III. The sensor design and considerations are discussed
in detail in Section IV, and then the proposed sensor systems
is characterized in Section V. In Section VI, we show an
example application of the proposed sensor in robotics. Finally,
in Section VII, we conclude and discuss the future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
The idea of acoustic resonant shift is widely used in highly
sensitive mass sensors for chemical and biological environment
[7]. A typical acoustic mass sensor uses the fact that the
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

resonant frequency of an acoustic-wave resonator changes in
response to the mass load applied on the resonator’s surface.
For example, Zhang et al. [8][9] devised a micromachined ﬁlm
bulk acoustic resonator mass sensor built on a micromachined
silicon-nitride diaphragm with a piezoelectric thin ﬁlm and Al
electrodes that can operate in vapor and liquid. Its resonant
frequency drops linearly with added mass on the surface. The
shift of the acoustic resonant frequency is measured from the
longitudinal standing wave existing between two faces of the
electrodes sandwiching a piezoelectric ﬁlm, and the mass load
and be inferred from the frequency shift.
In the design of our seashell effect pretouch sensor, we
design an acoustic system (a closed-open ended cylindrical
pipe in our case), in which its resonant frequency is shifted
by the reactive radiation impedance (small vibrating air mass)
change at the open termination of the pipe caused by the
obstacle.
III.
ACOUSTIC THEORY
The seashell effect is the phenomenon of “hearing the
sea” that is observed when a seashell is held to the ear. The
sound is the ambient noise ampliﬁed (attenuated) with the
seashell cavity’s acoustic frequency response. Inspired by the
fact that the sound of the sea changes as the distance from
the seashell to the head varies, a pretouch sensor is essentially
an acoustic cavity (an closed-open pipe in our case) attached
to a microphone that detects the change in ambient sound
spectrum that occurs when the pipe approaches an object.
When an object approaches the pipe opening, the sound ﬁeld
between the surface of the object and the pipe opening causes
a change in the effective (acoustic) length of the pipe. Perhaps
counterintuitively, the effective length of the pipe increases as
the sensed object approaches; thus the resonant frequency of
the pipe decreases as an object approaches. The similar effects
were also studied for the woodwind musical intruments which
have keys (buttons) hanging above the tone holes [10]. The
key acoustic theory is summarized in this section.
A. End Correction of Cylindrical Pipes
The shift of the resonant frequency caused by the object
can be best explained by using the terminologies of acoustic
impedance and end correction. The acoustic impedance is
deﬁned as: Z = P
U , where P and U are the amplitude of the
sound pressure and volume velocity, respectively. For an ideal
closed-open pipe, the closed end is a rigid termination with
inﬁnity acoustic impedance (Zc = ∞). At the open end, the
sound wave is small compared to the atmospheric pressure, so
the open end acts as a release termination at which the pressure
vanishes (p = 0) with zero acoustic impedance (Zo = 0),
which gives total reﬂection in anti-phase. However, the open
end is in fact terminated by a radiation impedance. The effect
of radiation can be approximated by considering the wave in
the pipe accelerating the ﬁnal layer of the air back and forth
as a small mass. The radiation impedance (Zr) seen by this
ﬁnal layer has a general form of:
Zr = Z0
S (R + jX)
(1)
where Z0 is the characteristic impedance (Z0 = 415 Ns/m3
for air at 20 ◦C); S = πa2 is the area of the pipe (m2),
where a is the pipe radius; R and X are functions of the
wave number k, the pipe radius a, and most importantly,
the geometric conﬁguration in the environment around the
opening. R and X represent the similar ratios of the real
part of the impedance (acoustic resistance) and the imaginary
part of the impedance (acoustic reactance) to the characterisric
impedance, respectively. The imaginary part corresponds to
the impedance of a mass of a volume of the medium of
the size S∆L, and shifts the position where reﬂection in
antiphase occurs to a virtual plane outside the tube by ∆L,
which is usually called end correction. The end correction
∆L= 0.8488a for a cylinder pipe with inﬁnite ﬂange can be
solve analytically using Rayleigh integral for the Helmholtz
equation [11], and serves as the upper bound for cylindrical
pipes, while ∆L= 0.6133a for cylindrical unﬂange pipe [12]
was solved under plane wave assumption (for frequency lower
than the ﬁrst cut-off frequency of the pipe), which serves
as the lower bound. End correction for other complicated
geometric conﬁgurations are usually found by numerical and
experimental methods [13].
In our application, we are most interested in knowing the
effects of obstacles presenting near the opening, speciﬁcally,
the distance of the object to the opening. The presented object
further restricts the space for sound wave propagation and
causes more end correction in addition to ∆L. Dalmont et.
al. [14] presented an emperical formula of this additioanl end
correction term ∆Lobj for this situation:
∆Lobj =
a
3.5(h/a)0.8(h/a + 3w/a)−0.4 + 30(h/d)2.6
(2)
where a is the radius of the pipe; h is the distance between the
obstable and the pipe opening; w is the thickness of the pipe
wall; d is the width of the object. Considering this additional
end correction, the effective length of the pipe becomes:
Leff = L + ∆L + ∆Lobj
(3)
B. Resonance Frequency
The fundamental resonance frequency of the standing wave
in a closed-open pipe f0 can be found by
f0 =
c
4Leff
(4)
where c is the speed of sound. The effective pipe lenght
is altered when an object is presented near the opening.
Therefore, by measuring the resonance frequency of the pipe,
we can inversely infer effective length of the pipe, and then
further infer the distance of the object h from experimental
data.
IV.
SENSOR DESIGN
The main sensor hardware consists of a brass open-ended
pipe, and a microphone attached to one side of the pipe
to form the closed end. The microphone collects the sound
pressure at the closed end ﬁltered by the acoustic cavity
(i.e., the closed-open pipe). The pipe’s fundamental resonant
frequency is found by looking for the ﬁrst maxima in the
frequency spectrum. To avoid being confounded by features
in the raw (unﬁltered) ambient audio itself (including loud
ambient sounds), a reference microphone is used to collect
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

environmental sounds not ﬁltered by the pipe; this background
spectrum is subtracted from the actual pretouch sensor chan-
nel. This noise cancellation approach substantially improves
sensing accuracy. Figure 4 shows the system architecture of
our seashell effect pretouch sensor.
A. Acoustic Design
Equations (2), (3), and (4) were employed throughout the
acoustic design process. Although the end correction term is
based on approximattion and not an exact solution, they serve
as useful guiding references. The sensor acoustic character-
istics are mainly determined by two geometric parameters:
the pipe length L and the pipe radius a. Some considerarions
should be taken when designing the two parameters:
(a) As a rule of thumb, we want the plane wave assumption
to hold in order to have predictable acoustic behavior. It
requires the resonance frequencies in the working range of
the sensor to be lower than the ﬁrst cut-off frequency in the
circular pipe (ka<1.8412), so that only the fundamental mode
will propagate.
(b) From (2), the end correction caused by the object
(∆Lobj) is roughly inversely proportional to the ratio h/a. It
means using a larger pipe radius a could increase the amount
of end correction changes at different object distances, and
thus obtain better frequency resolution in the vertical sensing
direction given a ﬁxed pipe length L. Figure 2 shows the
end correction values and the estimated resonance frequencies
based on (2) and (4). From Fig. 2(a), we can see the frequency
drops more at the close range when using larger radius (a=5
mm) compared to when using a small pipe (a=1 mm). This
is due to the larger changes of the varying end correction
term ∆Lobj caused by the object when using a larger radius.
However, using a larger radius means the sensor will lose
lateral sensing resolution physically, and become harder to
integrating into the robot’s gripper. Therefore, there is a trade-
off when selecting the pipe radius.
(c) In the case of a ﬁxed pipe radius a (ﬁxed end correction
∆L and ∆Lobj), using a shorter pipe length L can result in
more frequency shift according to (4). Figure 3 shows the
shortest pipe (L=2.5mm) has the best dynamic range of the
resonance frequency shift. The end correction changes is ﬁxed
because it is independent of L. Therefore, the shorter the pipe
length L is, the more frequency shifts at the close distances.
However, an open cavity is considered as a lumped-element
(a mass) as a whole when the length is short compared to the
wavelength (kLeff<< 1) [15], which has a different resonance
behavior.
According to the above design considerations and exper-
iments, a pipe length L=5 mm and radius a=2.5 mm was
selected for our system, which has a compact size to be
embedded on the PR2 gripper ﬁngertip.
B. Hardware Design
A customized Printed Circuit Board (PCB) and ﬁngertip
structure was designed to hold all the electronic and mechan-
ical components, including the microphone and the pipe. The
cavity used in our system is a 2.5 mm radius / 5 mm length
cylindrical pipe attached to a 2.5 mm radius / 3 mm length
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6 x 10
4
Object Distance (mm)
Resonace Frequency (Hz)
Fixed pipe length L = 5 mm
 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Object Distance (mm)
End Correction (mm)
 
 
a=1.0mm
a=2.5mm
a=5.0mm
(a=1.0mm) ∆L
(a=1.0mm) ∆Lobj
(a=2.5mm) ∆L
(a=2.5mm) ∆Lobj
(a=5.0mm) ∆L
(a=5.0mm) ∆Lobj
Fig. 2.
(Upper:) resonance frequencies of the pipe at different distances with
ﬁxed length (L=5 mm) and various radius size. (Lower:) end correction of
the pipe at different distances with ﬁxed length and various radius size.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0.5
1
1.5
2 x 10
4
Object Distance (mm)
Resonace Frequency (Hz)
Fixed pipe radius a = 2.5 mm
 
 
L=2.5 mm
L=5 mm
L=10.0 mm
Fig. 3.
The computed resonance frequencies of the pipe at different distances
with ﬁxed radius size (a=2.5mm) and various pipe length L.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

+
-
Welch
Spectrum
Estimation
Sound Wave
Reference Mic
Cavity
Mic
Subtracted 
Spectrum
Spectral
Peak Finding
Sensor Output:
Estimated
Resonance
Frequency
Audio Signal
Fig. 4.
The system architecture and the signal ﬂow of the seashell effect
pretouch sensor system.
microphone, which is compact enough to be embedded in
the PR2 gripper’s ﬁngertip. Figure 1(b) shows the PCB and
ﬁngertip ﬁxture with all the components attached, and Fig. 1(a)
shows the completed pretouch sensing ﬁngertip installed on the
Willow Garage PR2’s gripper. In the current implementation,
there are two ﬁngers on one of the grippers as the actual
sensing channels, and a reference channel. The microphone
for the sensing channel is attached with an acoustic cavity to
amplify (attenuate) the ambient sound. The microphone for
the reference channel is used to collect the ambient sound for
spectrum subtraction. The only difference between the design
is that the microphone on the reference channel is not attched
to the pipe (acoustic cavity), so it simply collects the ambient
(unﬁltered) sound. Unlike the previous sensor [5], the new
sensor described in this paper is completely integrated into the
Willow Garage PR2 robot; all external cables and electronics
have been eliminated. The embedded sensor design eliminates
the constraints on robot arm motion caused by the external
wires and electronics, and thus broadens the applicability of
the sensors. The design presented here could also be adpated
to integrate the sensor into other platforms.
The sound signal path implementation is decribed here.
The pipe cavity ﬁlters the ambient noise, and the sound
signal collected by an electret microphone (Panasonic WM61-
A) is ampliﬁed by 40 dB through a low-noise microphone
ampliﬁer (Maxim MAX9814), and is sampled by the 8-bit
Analog-To-Digital Convertor (ADC) on a 8-bit microcontroller
(Atmel ATMega168). The sampled data is then transmitted
from the microcontroller to the 8-bit soft soft processor (Xilinx
PicoBlaze) residing in the FPGA inside the PR2’s gripper via
the Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) communication protocol.
Finally the sampled sound data is accessible from the FPGA to
Robot Operating System (ROS) in the PR2 robot through the
EtherCAT interface. The sampling rate for this whole signal
path is 35,700 Hz for each channel. Currently, the sampling
rate is limited by the SPI implementation on our circuit board;
with more careful SPI design, the sampling rate could be
increased up to the limit imposed by the microcontroller’s
ADC.
C. Signal Processing
The power spectral density of the sound signal from both
channels are estimated using Welch spectrum estimation (Ns =
1024; overlap ratio = 70%; Hanning data taper). The spectrum
of the reference channel is subtracted from the spectrum
of the sensor signal before peak ﬁnding, which avoids the
effect of loud sounds, outside of the sensor’s frequency range,
misleading the peak tracking. The peak ﬁnding and estimation
Fig. 5.
The box-and-whisker plot of 1000 estimated resonance frequencies at
each distance. It represents the sensor characteristics of the sensor with length
L=5 mm and radius a=2.5 mm integrated on the robot ﬁngertip.
algorithm we used here is the same as described in [5].
V.
CHARACTERIZATION
In this section, we perform a set of experiments to char-
acterize the sensor, including the resonance frequency shift at
different object distance and effects of the object materials and
ambient noise (the power density and spectral content).
A. Resonance Frequency Shift
The resonance frequency changes with object distance is
evaluated by collecting 1000 sensor readings (ﬁltered spectral
peak frequency) at various distance from 1 mm to 10 mm. A
box-and-whisker plot presents the performance of the sensor
(Fig. 5). The resonance frequency drops at close distance
starting from 6 mm. Based on experimental data, we select the
a threshold at 9500 Hz (the lower quartile at 3 mm), such that
the upper quartile at 3 mm is smaller than the lower quartile
at 6 mm, so the sensor can be used as a binary sensor.
B. Material Sensitivity
The seashell effect pretouch sensor does not depend on
optical or electrical material properties. Instead, it depends on
mechanical / acoustic properties. This characteristic makes it
a good complement to long range optical depth sensors. For
example, seashell effect pretouch can sense highly transparent,
reﬂective, or light-absorbing materials, which are difﬁcult for
optical sensors. In this section, we compare the sensor output
for several different materials at the same distance. 1000
readings are measured for each object at a distance of 2 mm
from the object’s surface. The collected data is plotted in Fig.
6. The results show that the readings from materials with more
porosity, such as cloth and foam, are more noisy than others.
We hypothesize that these materials may acts as absorption or
transparent materials depending on their thickness.
C. Effect of Ambient Sound
It is natural to wonder whether seashell effect pretouch
could be improved by actively generating sound. Although
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Cloth
Foam
Glass 
Cup
Iron
Plate
Paper 
Box
PVC 
Plastic
Tissue
Paper
Fig. 6.
The box plot of the sensor readouts to different materials. 1000
readouts are measured for each object at 2mm distance.
the passive scheme has the advantage of easy integration, it
is desirable to understand how much improvement could be
achieved if extra sound is actively generated. In this section, we
systematically investigate the effects of deliberately generated
sound; we will examine sensor performance as a function
of the sound’s spectral contents and power density. Finally,
we describe an adaptive active sound generation scheme that
maintains consistent sensor performace regardless of ambient
sound conditions.
The ﬁrst factor we investigate is the spectral contents of
the sound. Two waveforms with different spectral contents
are experimented and compared. The ﬁrst waveform, white
noise, has an uniform power spectral density distribution over
its frequency band from 0 to 22,050 Hz. Considering the
fact that the sensor’s resonance frequency is always within
a certain range, it is intuitive to hypothesize that providing
bandlimited white noise might be sufﬁcient, or even more
efﬁcient. Therefore, the second waveform has the uniform
spectral density limited within 6,000 - 12,000 Hz (the relevant
range, as determined in our previous experiments). The lower
and upper bounds were determined by experimental data: the
sensor readout is conﬁned to this frequency band for objects
in its working range (0 - 10 mm). The waveform is generated
by processing the white noise waveform with a bandpass
ﬁlter. Figure 7 shows the spectral density of the two different
waveforms used in this experiment. (For example, 1.5 dB/Hz)
The second factor investigated is the power level of the
added sound. During the experiment, we measure the average
power density of the sound for 30 seconds without a stimulus,
and again for 30s with the stimulus. (The average is computed
ﬁrst over time, and then over all discrete frequency bins.)
The difference is computed to ﬁnd the power increase due
to the stimulus. The difference value in units of dB/Hz is the
average power density level increased due to the generated
sound stimulus. When the waveform is played, the amplitude is
adjusted such that the total power received by the microphone
is at the target level. Three sound levels are tested: without
external stimulus sound, 0.5 dB/Hz stimulus, and 1.5 dB/Hz
stimulus. The microphone selected for the sensor system has
ﬂat frequency response from a very low frequency (20 Hz)
to its highest frequency (20,000 Hz), and the microphone
ampliﬁer has ﬂat frequency response over 400 - 20,000 Hz
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
−120
−110
−100
−90
−80
−70
−60
−50
−40
Frequency (kHz)
Power/frequency (dB/Hz)
 
 
White Noise
Band−Limited White Noise
Fig. 7.
The spectrum of the two waveforms used for external sound
characterization. The bandlimited white noise is the white noise processed
by a bandpass ﬁlter that attenuates below 6000 Hz and above 12000 Hz.
according to the manufacturer’s datasheet. Our seashell effect
pretouch sensor works in the range of 6,000 - 12,000 Hz,
so the effects of the system response of the microphone and
ampliﬁer can be considered uniform for both waveforms in
this experiment.
Two indicators are deﬁned to characterize the sensor per-
formance: The CNR is deﬁned as:
CNR := fn − f1
σ(fi)
, i = 1..n
(5)
where i is the object distance in millimeter, n is the farthest
distance, f are the measured resonance frequencies, and σ
is the standard deviation. This is the frequency difference
between the farthest (10mm) and closest (1mm) distance
devided by the average of the standard deviation at each
distance. It measures the ability of the sensor to distinguish
between the farthest and closest distance, subject to sensor
variability The second indicator Signal-To-Noise Ratio (SNR)
is a measurement of how prominently the peak frequency
stands out in the subtracted power spectral density compared
with the noise level of the environment. It is deﬁned as:
SNR := pmax − p
(6)
where p is the power density (dB/Hz) of the spectrum. The
higher the SNR is, the more likely the peak (resonance)
frequency can be detected precisely in the spectrum. The ﬁrst
measure is useful for characterizing ground truth performance
of the sensor. The second measure will be used autonomously
to choose the energy of the stimulus. It is necessary for its
autonomous use that this measure does not require knowledge
of the ground truth.
Using the combination of two different waveforms and
three different sound levels, ﬁve experimental trials were per-
formed: no stimulus, 0.5 dB/Hz broadband stimulus, 0.5 dB/Hz
bandimited stimulus, 1.5 dB/Hz broadband stimulus, and 1.5
dB/Hz bandimited stimulus. For each trial, 1000 readouts were
measured at each distance from 1 to 10 mm (in increments of
1 mm). Figure 8 shows the power spectral densities and the
computed SNR for the ﬁve trials. Whithout providing extra
sound stimulus, the peak power is weak compared with the
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
Frequency (Hz)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Spectral Density (dB/Hz)
Subtracted Spectrum
No Stimulus (SNR=1.4)
0.5 dB/Hz Broadband Stimulus (SNR=7.17)
0.5 dB/Hz Bandlimited Stimulus (SNR=9.8)
1.5 dB/Hz Broadband Stimulus (SNR=8.37)
1.5 dB/Hz Bandlimited Stimulus (SNR=12.56)
Fig. 8.
The subtracted spectrum (spectrum of sensing channel - spectrum of
reference channel) at 10mm distance when extra noise is played with different
waveforms and different power.
environment sound, so any other noise bursting in the ambient
sound can mislead the peak frequency estimation. By providing
extra sound, the peak power at around 10,700 Hz is more
prominent, so any other smaller peak appearing in the spectrum
will not affect the peak frequency estimate. For the same
stimulus power constraint, all the power in the bandlmited
white noise stimulus falls in the sensor’s working range (6,000
- 12,000 Hz), while the broadband stimulus essentially wastes
some power (that outside the sensor’s working region). Thus
for the same allowed stimulus power, the bandlimited stimulus
increases the sensor SNR more. Thus, the bandlimited white
noise is more efﬁcient, since we want to provide the smallest
noise possible, both to avoid annoying nearby people who
might hear the stimulus, and to prevent the robot / sensor
system from expending unncessary electrical power.
The sensor readouts at each distance from 0 to 10 mm
for each of the ﬁve cases; the CNR is computed for each
case. From Fig. 9, it is clear to see without providing external
stimulus noise in a quiet environment, the sensor readings
are spread out, with no prominent peaks. When bandlimited
white noise is provided at the average power density of 1.5
dB/Hz, the CNR is improved from 0.9 to 10.88 compared to
the case without extra noise. (Note that in our prior work [5],
noise sources in the robot such as fans appear enabled better
performance than the no stimulus case presented here; this data
was taken in a quiet room far from the robot.)
Table I shows the performance indices for all the experi-
ment sets. From these results, we can conclude the following:
(1) appropriate ambient noise spectrum and level is essential
for good sensor performance. (2) the bandlimited white noise
is more efﬁcient to imporve the SNR and CNR compared with
the white noise at the same power level. (3) CNR is hightly
correlated with SNR, which matches the intuition that the more
prominent peak will facilitate the peak estimation, and thus the
sensor measurement is more accurate. Based on these ﬁndings,
we propose to implment an adaptive stimulus noise generation
Fig. 9.
The sensor model created by collecting 1000 sensor readouts at each
distance from 0 to 10 mm for the two cases: (a) In a quiet room without
actively providing extra noise. (b) the extra bandlimited white noise provided
at 1.5 dB/Hz average spectral power density.
TABLE I.
EFFECT OF THE EXTRA NOISE SPECTRUM ON SENSOR
PERFORMANCE
Waveform
Stimulus Noise Average
Power Density (dB/Hz)
CNR
SNR
No Extra Noise
0
0.90
1.40
White Noise
0.5
6.57
7.17
Bandlimited White Noise
0.5
9,37
9.80
White Noise
1.5
8.45
8.37
Bandlimited White Noise
1.5
10.88
12.56
scheme described in the following section.
D. Adaptive Stimulus Generation
The goal of the adaptive stimulus sound generation scheme
is to maintain a consistent and quantiﬁable sensor performace
regardless of ambient noise conditions. Based on the ﬁndings
from the experiments, bandlimited white noise is selected as
the sound waveform of the stimulus sound. We can hypothisize
that if the SNR in the sound signal spectrum is kept at
a ﬁxed value, the actual sensor measurement performance
indicator SNR will also be maintained at a stable level. Since
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

CNR can only be computed with knowledge of the ground
truth sensing situation, it is not the appropriate quantity to
control the adaptive stimulus generation. In this particular
implementation, a SNR target of 10 was selected, as suggested
by the experimental data. A ﬁrst order closed-loop feedback
control is used to monitor the current SNR in the spectrum
from the sensor and adjust the bandlimited white noise level
with a ﬁxde gain. The goal is to keep the SNR to the targeted
value, so that consistent sensor performace can be achieved.
To assess the effectiveness of this approach, the standard
deviation of the sensor readouts is computed from the readouts
in 60 seconds for both the cases with and without the adaptive
stimulus noise generation while the robot’s ego noise presents.
The standard deviation decreases from 183.59 to 53.56 Hz
when the adaptive stimulus is applied. (The discrete frequency
bin size is 69.72 Hz). A demonstration of the effectiveness of
this scheme can be seen in the video attachment (address in
the next section), in which the realtime sensor readouts and
the change of stimulus volume are visualized.
VI.
APPLICATION IN ROBOTICS: OBJECT
CONTOUR TRACKING
The embedded sensor design eliminates the robot arm’s
motion constraints caused by the external cables and electron-
ics, and thus broadens the sensor’s applicability. It also makes
it feasible to put one sensor in each of the PR2 robot’s ﬁngers.
This enables differential distance measurements, and thus
allows the robot to orientate its ﬁngertup towards the surface
of the object. Using this capability, we present an object
contour tracking as an application example to demonstrate the
capabilities of the sensor. Two sensors are installed on the same
robotic gripper, and the difference between the two sensor
readings are used to compute the orientation of the ﬁngertip
with respect to the object. Three objects with different material
properties are tested: mug (non-conductive material), glass cup
(transparent material), and a stainless pot (highly reﬂective
material). The objects are those the previous electric-ﬁeld and
optical pretouch sensors have trouble to sense. These examples
demonstrate the PR2 collecting local geometric information
enabled by the pretouch sensors, and allows the robot gripper
to successfully follow the contour of the objects even if they
are transparent or highly reﬂective.
VII.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
A. Conclusions
This paper demonstrated a novel acoustic pretouch sensor
inspired by the well-known seashell effect. As far as we know,
this effect has not previously been used to build proximity
sensors. We characterize the frequency shift of the sensor at
different object distance, and the effect of ambient noise on
the sensor performance, including the noise level and spectral
content. A stimulus consisting of band-limited white noise with
frequency content in the sensor’s working frequency range
is most effective, compared with a broadband stimulus, or
random ambient sound. An automatic adaptive stimulus noise
compensation scheme, which detects the current ambient sound
condition and provides additional band-limited whitnoise, was
proposed to maintain a consistent SNR in the spectrum, and
thus achieve the good performance of the sensor invariant to
the ambient sound.
The fully-integrated sensor into the robot grippers makes it
feasible to put one sensor in each of the PR2 robots ﬁngers for
differential distance measurement, and thus enables the object
contour tracking application. Compared to to conventional
sonar based on time of ﬂight measurements, the technique we
presented based on incoherent peak following has a number of
practical beneﬁts: (1) The sound stimulus source can be located
anywhere—it does not have to be close to the sound receiver,
which is an advantage for sensor integration into devices; (2)
careful/short-interval time measurements are not required, and
(3) our scheme should not be affected by multi-path effects
commonly seen when using time of ﬂight sonar methods.
B. Future Work
More applications using the proposed sensor systems are
working in progress. For example, the sensor can be integrated
with the existing microphones in a mobile phone as a proximity
sensor to trigger the lock of the touch screen when the objects
(human ears) are close to the microphone to prevent touching
the screen by mistake while speaking (current mobile phones
use an dedicated light sensor for that purpose).
REFERENCES
[1] J. R. Smith, E. Garcia, R. Wistort, and G. Krishnamoorthy, “Electric
ﬁeld imaging pretouch for robotic graspers,” in IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2007, pp. 676–683.
[2] R. Wistort and J. R. Smith, “Electric ﬁeld servoing for robotic manipu-
lation,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems, 2008, pp. 494–499.
[3] B. Mayton, L. LeGrand, and J. R. Smith, “An electric ﬁeld pretouch
system for grasping and co-manipulation,” in IEEE International Con-
ference on Robotics and Automation, 2010, pp. 831–838.
[4] K. Hsiao, P. Nangeroni, M. Huber, A. Saxena, and A. Y. Ng, “Reactive
grasping using optical proximity sensors,” in IEEE International Confer-
ence on Robotics and Automation, 2009, pp. 2098–2105.
[5] L.-T. Jiang and J. R. Smith, “Seashell effect pretouch sensing for
robotic grasping,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, 2012, pp. 2851–2858.
[6] L.-T. Jiang and J. R. Smith, “A uniﬁed framework for grasping and shape
acquisition via pretouch sensing,” in IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, 2013.
[7] L. Arapan, E. Anderas, I. Katardjiev, and V. Yantchev, “Sensitivity
features of thin ﬁlm plate acoustic wave resonators,” IEEE Sensors
Journal, 2011, vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 3330–3331.
[8] H. Zhang and E. Kim, “Micromachined acoustic resonant mass sensor,”
Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 2005, vol. 14, no. 4, pp.
699–706.
[9] H. Zhang, M. Marma, S.Bahl, E. Kim, and C. McKenna, “Sequence
specic label-free dna sensing using ﬁlm-bulk-acoustic-resonators,” IEEE
Sensors Journal, 2007, vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 1587–1588.
[10] J. W. Coltman, “Differentiating sonar reﬂections from corners and planes
by employing an intelligent sensor,” Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 1978, vol. 65, pp. 499–506.
[11] L. V. King, “On the electrical and acoustic conductivities of cylindrical
tubes bounded by inﬁnite ﬂanges,” Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 1936, vol. 21, pp. 128–144.
[12] H. Levine and J. Schwinger, “On the radiation of sound from an
unﬂanged circular pipe,” Physical Review, 1948, vol. 73, pp. 383–406.
[13] A. R. D. Silva, P. H. Mareze, and A. Lenzi, “Approximate expressions
for the reﬂection coefﬁcient of ducts terminated by circular ﬂanges,”
Journal of Brazil Society of Mechenical Science and Engineering, 2012,
vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 219–224.
[14] J.-P. Dalmont, C. Nederveen, and N. Joly, “Radiation impedance of
tubes with different ﬂanges: Numerical and experimental investigations,”
Journal of Sound and Vibration, 2001, vol. 244, no. 3, pp. 505–534.
[15] D. T. Blackstock, Fundamentals of Physical Acoustics, 1st ed., Wiley-
Interscience, 2000.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

