Field Study of Ice Detection on Structures Using Passive Thermal Infrared Imaging  
 
Muhammad S. Virk 
 
Arctic Technology Research Team 
Institute of Industrial Technology, University of Tromsø, Norway 
Email: muhammad.s.virk@uit.no 
 
 
Abstract--Different techniques have been used by researchers 
to detect ice accretion on structures, but most of these 
techniques detect ice on a particular (point) location and 
detecting the ice on large surface areas is still a problem. This 
paper describes a passive thermal infrared-based ice detection 
technique for large surface areas. A field study has been 
carried out to detect ice accretion on various large structures 
such as roads, bridges, communication towers and fishing 
vessels. Results from this preliminary field study show that 
passive thermal infrared-based non-intrusive ice detection 
method can be a promising way to detect ice on large surface 
areas, where typical point based icing sensors do not work 
effectively. 
 
Keywords- Atmospheric ice detection; Structure; Passive thermal 
infrared; Temperature distribution. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
One of the difficulties of atmospheric ice detection on 
structures is how to accurately detect and analyze the 
intensity of accreted ice on a surface. Most ice detectors are 
point devices and measure required icing parameters only at 
one particular location, while the interest of operators is 
often to detect ice accretion over a large surface area. At the 
same time, ice detector technology must not interfere with 
the ice accretion process, so that the measurements are 
accurate, nor should it be affected by the icing event itself, 
which is one of the problems with the present point based 
ice detection methods. Generally four ice detection 
technologies; imaging, remote, conformal and probe are 
used for annunciating the presence of ice, automatically 
triggering ice protection technologies and indicating 
whether ice has been removed or not [1]. A system based on 
the processing of thermal images acquired in the infrared 
spectra can be a possible way to monitor the ice accretion in 
a non-intrusive manner, while covering all these areas of 
interest. 
 
The infrared spectrum lies below the visible band. 
Infrared (IR) imaging can be divided into two main 
categories: active imaging and passive imaging. Active 
imaging techniques use artificial IR lighting source to 
illuminate the target image where icing might be present, 
then an infrared sensor collects the reflecting signal. A 
plethora of successive images over a number of sub-bands 
are collected, which are then processed to determine 
whether or not ice is present. One example on the active 
method is the “Ice Camera” which has been developed by 
MacDonald, Dettwiler and Associates Ltd. (MDA). The 
“Ice Camera” system utilizes a multi-spectral infrared 
camera that detects both ice and water. It  employs a 
reflectance spectroscopy technique to detect ice of 0.5 mm 
thickness or above [2]. 
 
Passive thermal infrared image captures the naturally 
radiated infrared from the target to construct an image. In 
this technique, a thermal image is constructed using a Focal 
Plan Array (FPA) sensor that captures the radiated IR 
energy from the object. The FPA is designed to sense a 
certain band of IR radiation depending on the application for 
which the thermal image camera will be used. Every object 
in the world emits thermal radiations, which are mainly the 
function of object temperature and surface emissivity. When 
the object’s temperature increases, the radiation also 
increases. Thermal imaging devices capture these thermal 
radiations and allow one to study variations in surface 
temperature. During ice accretion process, the region where 
ice accretion occurs becomes warmer than the surrounding 
surface due to release of latent heat of fusion while water 
freezes. In case of an area already covered with ice, the iced 
surface will have low temperature as compared to the un-
iced surface area. By measuring the intensity of thermal 
radiation from the surface material and emissivity, it then 
become possible to infer the surface temperature in icing 
conditions. For thermography analysis emissivity of the 
object, reflected apparent temperature, distance between 
radiated object and thermal camera, relative humidity and 
atmospheric temperature are the important parameters that 
need to be taken into consideration for reliable results [3]. 
Very little work has been reported to detect the ice on 
surface using thermal infrared techniques, as most work in 
this regard has been done using the active infrared approach. 
Adam et al.[4] used the passive thermal infrared technique 
to investigate the atmospheric ice accretion on helicopter 
rotor blade, where a prototype detector system was built 
consisting of a single point infrared pyrometer. The 
characteristic chord wise temperature distribution was 
observed during the icing event. Virk & Ghani [5] 
conducted a lab based experimental study to detect ice on 
wind turbine blades using a passive thermal infrared 
approach. 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The paper describes the preliminary field study to 
analyze the non-intrusive passive thermal IR based approach 
for detection of ice on large structures in cold regions. The 
remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
covers the field measurement setup used for this study. 
Section III describes the results & discussion of the field 
measurement study. The acknowledgement and conclusions 
close the article. 
II. 
FIELD EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
The field study was carried out in the northern part of 
Norway 
during 
winter 
2013/2014, 
using 
simple 
experimental setup consisting of a very long wave (17 µm) 
thermal infrared camera (FLIR A615), data logger, image 
processing software (IRControl) and a laptop computer. 
Analyses were carried out for different structures (bridge, 
communication towers, roads and fishing vessels). The 
thermal infrared images were processed to measure the 
surface thermal signature and these surface temperature 
distributions helped in identifying the ice distribution along 
surfaces of these large structures. Figure 1 shows a 
schematic overview of the experimental setup used for this 
field study.  
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic overview of field experimentation setup 
In this setup, the  IR camera measures infrared 
radiation in a specific spectral range. The radiation 
originating from structural surface is directly related to its 
temperature and makes it possible to calculate the 
temperature distribution on structural surfaces based on the 
radiation measured. This information was reproduced as an 
image. The radiation measured from IR camera is not only a 
function of temperature, but also the emissivity of the 
measured object. Emissivity is often not uniform across the 
entire surface of the object. IRControl software used in this 
study has the capability to measure emissivity. A locally 
generated emissivity map is calculated and recorded. Other 
factors effecting the IR radiation like reflected ambient 
radiation, object distance, relative humidity and the 
atmospheric damping has also been compensated within 
IRControl software used in this study for IR image 
processing.  
 
III. 
RESULTS & DISCUSSION 
A. Road Bridge  
In recent years, the relevance of ice accretion for wind-
induced vibration of structural bridges has been recognize as 
a safety hazard. Two main topics of concern in this regards 
are, 1) icing on road surface of bridge, 2) icing on bridge 
structural components mainly on cables. As an overall, ice 
accretion on bridge effects both static and dynamic 
stabilities due to added mass effects of accreted ice and 
changes in wind induced aerodynamic effects. In addition, 
ice chunks falling from bridge members/cables can also 
cause traffic accidents, direct damages to passing vehicles 
and generally place human safety at risk [6]. 
 
A field study has been carried out to detect the ice 
accretion on a hanging bridge structure by using passive 
thermal IR approach. Figure 2 shows the results of surface 
temperature distribution along each selected location of the 
bridge.  
 
 
LOI14
Mountain 
Side Railing
Right Cable Bottom
Right Cable Top
eft cable bottom
Left Cable Top
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Surface temperature distribution along different sections of 
iced bridge 
 
Surface temperature distribution at seven different 
locations was analyzed and compared with the visual 
observations of iced areas. Results showed a significant 
variation in surface temperature distribution along these 
selected locations. The lowest surface temperature was found 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

along the top end of the bridge, where ice was accreted. 
More ice was found on windward (right) side of the bride. 
Ice detection by IR thermal images was also found in 
agreement with the visual observations. A systematic 
application of this approach can help to routinely monitor the 
ice accretion along bridge and avoid any possible incidents 
effecting the safety of the bridge structure and pedestrians. 
B. Road Surface 
In regions with subzero temperatures, severe road 
conditions are common, therefore a good knowledge of the 
road conditions is important for performing effective and 
environmental friendly safe road maintenance. Water 
freezes to ice causing a drastic decrease of road surface 
friction, which can lead to an increase in the possibility of 
traffic accidents [7]. The importance of finding the point at 
which a wet road surface will freeze implies that a correct 
monitoring of road surface is necessary. The limitations of 
existing technology is not the ability to get qualitative data 
at single point, but to get data that represents the actual road 
conditions over a large surface area. It is difficult to 
accurately estimate the road condition from a single point 
freezing point sensor, therefore additional efforts are 
required to better detect the presence of ice and differentiate 
between different types of accumulated ice on the road. 
There is a good potential in non-intrusive infrared (IR) 
based technology for monitoring the road weather 
conditions in cold and icing conditions. This technique can 
give detailed information about the top surface temperature 
of the road, which is crucial for finding possible icing 
locations.  
 
 
LOI0
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Surface temperature distribution along iced road surface. 
Figure 3 shows the results of surface temperature 
distribution along an iced road surface in northern Norway, 
where it can be seen that the iced surface areas are marked 
in blue color and have lowest temperature as compared to 
un-iced surfaces. Such information about distribution of 
surface temperature also helps to identify among different 
types of ice, which eventually can help to improve the road 
safety. The results shown in Figure 3 represent the case, 
where ice has already accumulated on the road surface, 
therefore the iced surface area has the lowest temperature. 
However, while ice accumulation is in process and super 
cooled water droplets are hitting the road surface, in that 
case, latent heat will releases while the droplets freeze and 
the iced surface area will show the highest temperature. 
With the help of point based ice detection method, it is not 
easy to get such detailed information about road surface 
condition in icing condition.  
C. Shipping Vessels 
Icing can be a safety hazard for offshore shipping 
vessels as weight of accreted ice can possibly effect both its 
safety and stability, therefore actions necessary to improve 
safety must be considered [1]. Thermal imaging technique 
of ice detection may be useful for application in marine 
environment also, especially where incipient icing could 
cause slipping hazards on deck, stairs and other work areas. 
Figure 4 shows some results of temperature distribution 
along different sections of a fishing vessel.  
 
 
Location 2
Location 4
Location 3
Location 1
Sea Surface
 
 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Eval. °C
-6.5
-3.9
-1.3
1.2
3.8
6.3
8.9
11.4
Location 3
Location 1
Location 2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Thermal image of fishing vessels and temperature distribution 
along selected locations. 
It can be seen in Figure 4 that the distribution of 
temperature is not constant along the selected locations and 
iced locations have significantly low temperature compared 
to un-iced surfaces. Such information of temperature 
distribution is vital to identify the iced surfaces and initiate 
the de-icing operation accordingly. With the help of passive 
thermal IR approach, it is possible to monitor the ice 
accretion along various sections of ships, where ordinary 
point based icing sensor does not work. A coupled 
continuous monitoring of significant locations along ships 
can help to optimize the operation of the anti/deicing 
systems, which can also help to save the required energy for 
anti/deicing systems.   
 
D. Communication Towers 
Atmospheric icing is a design constraint for the 
communication towers in cold regions, as these are typically 
elevated and exposed. Ice buildup on communication towers 
can cause signal interference, structural fatigue from 
dynamic loading, guy wire stretch, ice chuck fall and 
complete tower failure [8]. Due to complex structural 
integration and installation at remote locations, ice detection 
and mitigation on communication towers is difficult, but 
non-intrusive passive thermal IR approach can be a good 
way to detect the ice on communication tower and initiate 
the ice mitigation accordingly. Figure 5 shows the thermal 
IR image of communication tower and respective 
distribution of ice along the specified locations.  
 
 
Bottom
Top
Center Line
Right
Left 
 
 
Figure 5. Thermal image of communication antenna and temperature 
distribution along selected locations. 
In this field study, five different locations were 
selected along a radio communication tower, where based 
upon thermal radiation and surface emissivity temperature 
distribution was analyzed to get a perspective about 
accumulated ice. Results showed different temperature 
distribution profiles along each location, which indicated 
that ice is not symmetrically distributed along these 
locations and maximum ice was observed near the top and 
right locations of the communication antenna. Such 
information about distribution of ice along antenna surface 
can help to optimize the design of communication antenna 
and design the ice mitigation approach accordingly. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This preliminary research work was focused on to use 
of non-intrusive passive thermal infrared based intelligent 
sensor technology to analyze the ice distribution along 
surfaces of different structures in cold regions. Preliminary 
analysis showed a potential in this technique to better 
predict the ice distribution along different structures. This 
technique has an advantage over the available techniques for 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

detection of ice at single point, as with this technique we 
can successfully predicted the dynamic icing conditions 
over large surface areas, but it is necessary to further 
evaluate this methodology by a comprehensive study to 
build a large dataset from different scenarios before its final 
implementation. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The work reported in this research paper is funded by the 
WindCoE (Nordic Wind Energy Centre) project funded 
within Interreg IVA Botnia-Atlantica, as part of European 
Territorial Cooperation (ETC). 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]. C. Ryerson, ''Ice protection of offshore platforms'', Cold 
Regions Science and Technology, 2011,  p. 97-110. 
[2]. D. Gregoris, S. Yu and F. Teti, ''Multispectral imaging of ice'', 
IEEE CCECE Conference, 2004, Niagara, Ontario, Canada, p. 
2051-2056. 
[3]. M. S. Virk, ''Application of Passive Thermal Infrared Imaging 
to Study Ice and Snow Accretion on Automobiles in Cold 
Regions'', Advanced Materials Research, 2013, vol. 739: p. 
481-485. 
[4]. A. 
Dershowitz 
and 
R. 
J. 
Hansman, 
''Experimental 
investigation of passive infrared ice detection for helicoptr 
applications'', AIAA-91-0667,1991, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, USA: Reno, NV. 
[5]. R. Ghani and M. S. Virk, ''Experimental Study of 
Atmospheric Ice Detection on Wind Turbine Blade Using 
Thermal Infrared Technique'', Wind Engineering : The 
International Journal of Wind Power, 2013, vol. 37, issue. 1, 
p. 71-78. 
[6]. K. Kleissl and C. T. Georgakis, ''Bridge ice accretion and de- 
and anti-icing systems: A review'', 7th Internation Cable 
Supported Bridge Operators Conference, 2010, p. 161-167. 
[7]. P. Jonsson, ''Intelligent networked sensor for increased road 
safety'', in Department of information technology and media, 
2011, Mid Sweden University: Ostersund, Sweden, p. 41. 
[8]. N. D. Mulherin, ''Atmospheric Icing and Tower Collapse in 
the 
United 
States'', 
7th 
International 
Workshop 
on 
Atmospheric Icing of Structures, 1996, Chicoutimi, Quebec, 
Canada: IWAIS. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

