 
 
A Real-Time Bridge Scouring Monitoring System Based on Accelerometer Sensors 
 
Chih-Chyau Yang, Yi-Jie Hsieh, Ssu-Ying Chen, Wen-Ching Chen, Chih-Ting Kuo, Chen-Chia Chen, 
Chien-Ming Wu, and Chun-Ming Huang 
Applied Research Laboratories, National Chip Implementation Center,  
Hsinchu City, Taiwan. 
Email: ccyang@cic.narl.org.tw 
 
 
Abstract—With the fast global climate change, many 
bridge structures are facing the nature disasters such as 
earthquakes and floods. The damage of bridges can cause the 
severe cost of human life and property. The heavy rain that comes 
with typhoon occurs in July and August in Taiwan causes the 
bridge scour and makes the damage or collapse for bridges. 
Since scour is one of the major causes for bridge failure, how 
to monitor the bridge scour becomes an important task in Taiwan. 
This paper presents a real-time bridge scour monitoring system 
based on accelerometer sensors.  The presented sensor network 
consists of a gateway node and under-water sensor nodes with the 
wired 
RS-485 
communication 
protocol. 
The 
proposed 
master-slave architecture of the bridge scour monitoring 
system owns the scalability and flexibility for mass 
deployment. This technique has the potential for further 
widespread implementation in the field. The experimental 
results show our sensor system can detect the bridge scour effectively 
with our proposed scour detection algorithm in real time.  
 
Keywords-bridge; bridge scour; sensor network; accelerometer  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Bridges are the important pivots of traffic and the damage of 
bridges can cause the severe cost of human life and property. 
With the fast global climate change, many bridge structures 
are facing the nature disasters such as earthquakes and 
floods. These nature disasters cause lots of bridge collapse 
or destruction and thus endanger our daily life.  
In Taiwan, many bridges have exceeded their 50-year life span, 
while many highway bridges are more than 20 years-old [1]. The 
strength of these old bridges is no longer affordable to the severe 
nature disasters. In other words, the bridges in Taiwan are likely 
to suffer from the damage. Scour is one of the major causes 
for bridge failure [2]. The heavy rains brought by the 
typhoon in July and August in Taiwan can cause the bridge 
scour and makes the damage or collapse for bridges. Thus, 
how to monitor the bridge health and real-time diagnose the 
bridge structure becomes an important task in Taiwan.  
Bridge scour has been extensively studied in the world 
for more than a hundred years. Many methodologies and 
instruments have been employed to measure and monitor 
the local pier scour depth, such as bricks, sonar, radar 
sensor, Time-Domain Reflectometry (TDR), Fiber Bragg 
Grating (FBG) sensor and accelerometer sensor. The bricks 
sensors [3][4] are buried in the certain location of the sand 
before the rain season. After the floods, the bricks are 
digged out and the number of the remained bricks is 
calculated. Thus, the bridge scour depth can be obtained. 
This method can only be used only one-time and the scour 
detection cannot be real-time detected. The sonar and radar 
sensors [4] provide contactless measurement of streambed 
scouring near bridge pier and abutments, and usually used 
to show the final status of streambed after a flood. One of 
disadvantages of the sonar and radar is that they have limit 
for measuring status of streambed in real time as rush 
water contained sands, even rocks during a flood. The TDR 
[5][6][7] measures the reflections that results from a 
fast-rising step pulse travelling through a measurement 
cable. The depth of soil-water interface is determined by 
counting the round trip travel time of the pulse. However, 
the major drawback of TDR is that accuracy of TDR is 
strongly dependent on the environment temperature and 
humidity. Monitoring the scour depth by the FBG [5] is 
dependent on number of FBG elements. However, the cost 
of monitoring of the scour depth by FBG technique is 
higher than that of existing methods [5]. The costs of Radar 
and TDR are expensive due to high-speed hardware 
requirement. For example, a commercial TDR (Campbell 
Scientific Inc., TDR100) was used to real-time monitor 
scour evolution, and its price is high.  For FBG, optical 
devices such as laser, photo detectors and the optical fibers 
are very expensive. In addition, most of the existing 
methods used for scour detection are expensive and 
complicated, which is a major challenge for mass 
deployment to a lot of bridge piers. The frequency 
response with Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) and the time 
domain response with the root mean square (RMS) values 
of the accelerometer [8][9] are used to detect the scour. 
Since the accelerometer [8] does not sense the vibration 
data by the flow directly, the result of scour depth may be 
inaccurate due to the unpredictable interferences in the 
complicated under-water environment. Besides, in order to 
obtain the frequency response result [9], it may consume 
the large computations to get the bridge scour. 
This paper presents a sensor network with accelerometer 
sensors to real-time detect the bridge scour with our 
proposed simple scour detectioion algorithm. The presented 
sensor network consists of a gateway node and under-water 
sensor nodes with the wired RS-485 communication protocol. 
The proposed master-slave architecture of the bridge scour 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
monitoring system owns the scalability and flexibility for 
mass deployment. This technique has the potential for 
further widespread implementation in the field. The 
experimental results show our sensor system can detect the bridge 
scour effectively with our proposed scour detection algorithm in 
real time. 
In Section II, the operation and the proposed algorithm 
of scour bridge detection are introduced. In Section III, the 
overview of our proposed architecture is presented. In 
Section IV, the experimental setups and the experimental 
results are illustrated. Finally, we conclude this paper in 
Section V. 
 
II. THE OPERATION AND PROPOSED ALGORITHM OF 
BRIDGE SCOUR DETECTION 
In this paper, the accelerometer sensor system is 
presented to real-time detect the bridge scour. The 
accelerometers are buried into the sand of riverbed in 
advance. During the season of typhoon, the heavy rain that 
comes with typhoon causes the river full of water. The 
sand of the riverbed is scoured and it causes the 
accelerometers exposed. The accelerometers are scoured 
and thus vibrated due to the river water flow. The 
accelerometer owns the characteristics of low-cost, high 
sensitivity, small form factor, and low power compared 
with those in other instruments. With the accelerometers, 
the vibration can be detected easily no matter the river 
water is clean or mixed with sand.  With the 
accelerometers, it is easy to setup in the field without the 
direction alignment.  
 
 
Before setup
Buried in the 
sand
River water
Sand
Node 7 position is 
scoured
Continued to 
scour
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Under-
water 
node
River water
River water
Sand
Sand
 
Figure 1. The operation of under-water sensor node to detect the bridge 
scour  
 
The main purpose of the under-water sensors is to 
monitor the scouring condition of the bridge pier and 
riverbed. Figure 1 shows the concept of the scour detection 
with accelerometer sensors. The under-water sensors are 
arranged equidistance and vertically fixed on the steel shelf. 
The under-water sensors are then buried deeply in the 
riverbed close to the bridge pier. In the normal condition, 
the sand of the riverbed can fully cover the under-sensor, 
and the sensor nodes are in a steady state condition. When 
the water of the river becomes rapid due to the storm or 
heavy rain, it washes away part of the riverbed and the 
sensors originally buried in the sand becomes exposed and 
vibrated due to the scouring. The deeper the riverbed gets 
scoured, the more sensors are exposed. The vibration data 
of each sensor will be real-time sent to the data logger 
through the Ethernet and the host program help to identify 
the scouring degree. To keep track of the scouring 
condition of the riverbed in long terms, it can provide 
reference information of the stability of the bridge pier, 
and achieve the purpose of disaster prevention. 
 
TABLE I. THE ALGORITHM FOR BRIDGE SCOUR DETECTION 
LOOP 
Scour Detection Loop 
1 
LOOP 
2 
FOR t=0 TO (N-1) 
3 
    Node(Ax, Ay, Az) = GetAccInfo(); 
4 
(μx, μy, μz) = GetMean (Ax, Ay, Az); 
5 
Δμx =∣μx-μx0∣; Δμy =∣μy-μy0∣; Δμz =∣μz-μz0∣; 
6 
IF( (Δμx >μThD) OR (Δμx >μThD ) OR (Δμx >μThD) ) 
7 
Node_Scoured =ON; 
8 
ELSE 
9 
Node_Scoured =OFF; 
10 
IF (i >= Alarm_ThD) THEN 
11 
     AlarmTrigger(); 
12 
GOTO LOOP; 
 
Table 1 illustrates our proposed algorithm to detect the 
bridge scour with accelerometers. The algorithm consists of 
scour detection loop for each sensor node. Each 
accelerometer executes the scour detection loop. In this 
detection loop, the host program acquires the N-point 
accelerometer value. These N-point values are averaged and 
then subtracted by the initial accelerometer value to obtain 
the absolute difference value. If the absolute difference 
value 
between 
current 
accelerometer 
and 
initial 
accelerometer exceeds the threshold value, then the sensor 
node is labeled as the scoured status. Otherwise, the sensor 
node is labeled as the status of non-scoured. If the position 
of the scoured sensor node exceeds the position of alarm 
threshold, the alarm is triggered. Note that the threshold 
value and the position of alarm threshold are obtained from 
the experiment in the lab. Figure 2 illustrates the flow chart 
of the proposed algorithm for bridge scour detection loop. 
Note that the threshold value for the absolute difference of 
accelerometer values is obtained from the experiments in 
the laboratory.  
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
Start
Acquire the N-point under-
water vibration value and 
calculate the mean.
Calculate the absolute 
difference(ABS)of N-point 
vibration mean and initial 
vibration mean
  Absolute 
difference of mean 
> Threshold value
Label the sensor 
node as Non-
scoured status
No
Label the sensor 
node as Scoured 
status
Sensor node is in 
dangerous position
Alarm 
Yes
No
Yes
 
 
Figure 2. The flow chart to detect the bridge scour with accelerometers 
III. DEVELOPMENT OF REAL-TIME BRIDGE PIER SCOUR 
MONITORING SYSTEM 
Architecture of bridge scouring monitoring system 
The architecture of real-time bridge scour monitoring 
system shown in Figure 3 is based on master-slave 
configuration. A master sends commands to slave for 
controlling sensor nodes and accessing sensor data. The data 
logger communicates with gateway through Power over 
Ethernet (POE) switch. The data logger sends a command to 
the gateway. When the gateway receives command, the 
gateway converted Ethernet command to RS485 command. 
After converting command, the gateway broadcasts it to all 
the sensor nodes. Since the command packet contains 
unique sensor ID, only the specific sensor node returns the 
sensor data to the data logger. We adopt the accelerometer 
sensor module in our sensor node. The POE switch is 
connected with 48V battery (3 packs in series for 48V with 
individual 16V lithium iron phosphate battery). 
Gateway and Sensor nodes 
The gateway noe is comprised of two stacked PCBs – a 
power module and a core module (see Figure 4). The top 
board is the power module, which operates as a DC-DC 
converter for generating 1.2~5V outputs from the 48V input. 
An Ethernet PHY (TI, DP83640) is used to send/receive 
Ethernet data from POE switch, and send/receive the signals 
and power to sensor nodes through RS485 interface (ADI, 
ADM2682E). The core module is composed of a Cortex-R4 
Mico Controller Unit (MCU, TI, RM48L952) and a FPGA 
(Xlilinx, Spartan-6). Ethernet data and RS485 data are 
processed by the Cortex-R4 MCU and the FPGA, 
respectively. The FPGA mainly is used to translate the 
sensor data from serial format to parallel format. Three 
signals (Int, Rdy, En) are used to control the operation 
between the FPGA and the Cortex-R4 MCU. The FPGA 
receives the sensor data in 8-bit as a unit. After the FPGA 
collects 8-bit data, the FPGA deposits to register, then send 
Int signal to the Cortex-R4 MCU, and then notifies the 
Cortex-R4 MCU to receive sensor data. After the Cortex-R4 
MCU receives 8-bit data, the Cortex-R4 MCU sets the Rdy 
signal to send it to the FPGA. The FPGA En Signal is set to 
“0” to indicate that the sensor data has been transferred 
completely.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. The architecture of real-time bridge scouring monitoring 
system 
 
 
 
Figure 4. The pictures of printed circuit boards of gateway (left) and sensor 
node (right). 
 
The configuration of sensor node is similar to that in the 
gateway node. The Cortex-R4 MCU is used to access sensor 
data through Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) interface and 
the Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) is used to 
process RS485 data. The block diagram of the FPGA in 
sensor node is shown in Figure 5.  
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
POE  
Switch
Data 
Logger
FPGA
RS485
Command 
Processing Unit
Cortex R4
Accelerameter
Memory
Sensor Node
SPI
I2C
Int/Rdy
 
Figure 5. Block diagram of FPGA in sensor node 
 
 
Figure 6. Processing sequence of FPGA and MCU 
 
The FPGA parses receives commands, executes part of 
commands, and responses to the data logger. The Cortex-R4 
MCU takes charge of collecting sensor data. Figure 6 
describes processing sequence of the FPGA and the 
Cortex-R4 MCU. In Figure 6, the steps with blue color are 
tasks of the FPGA, those steps with purple color are 
memory related tasks, and those with red color are the tasks 
of the Cortex-R4 MCU. In the case that the data logger 
requests sensor data, the FPGA will receive a Read 
command. The FPGA then parses and decodes the 
command and is aware that cooperation with the Cortex-R4 
MCU is necessary. The FPGA puts this command in 
memory and notifies the Cortex-R4 MCU with an interrupt. 
The Cortex-R4 MCU reads command from memory via I2C 
interface, and then collects sensor data and stores them in 
memory. After the data collection is done, the Cortex-R4 
MCU notifies the FPGA by a General-Purpose Input/output 
(GPIO) signal. Then, the FPGA reads data from memory 
and generates response to the data logger.  
 
Accelerometer sensor module 
 The core module of the sensor node which is connected 
to an accelerometer (ADI, ADXL345) module which is used 
in this study is widely available online. Figure 7 shows the 
top-view and bottom-view pictures of the accelerometer 
module. The accelerometer is read by Cortex-R4 MCU via 
the SPI interface. The sensor data is then sent back to data 
logger.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Top and bottom-view pictures of the accelerometer module 
 
IV. THE EXPERIEMENTAL SETUP AND RESULTS 
The accelerometer module is fixed on thin metal strip 
with thickness of 0.3 mm, as shown in Figure 8. The 
accelerometer module is filled with silicon to be water-proof. 
Figure 9 shows the picture of setup of real-time bridge 
scouring monitoring system. The accelerometer sensor 
module is installed alone the pier model. The 48V battery, 
control circuits of gateway and sensors nodes and cables are 
setup near the laboratory flume.  
 
 
 
Figure 8. The drawing of house for accelerometer module 
 
The monitoring bridge scour erosion detection is carried 
out in a recirculating laboratory flume (length = 36m, width 
= 1 m, depth = 1.1 m) at Hydrotech Research Institute of 
National Taiwan University, Taiwan [10]. The layout of the 
flume and experimental setup are shown in Figure 10. A 
false test bed has a sediment recess (length = 2.8 m, width = 
1 m, depth = 0.3 m) which is filled by nearly uniform 
sediment. A 15-cm-diameter hollow cylindrical pier made of 
plexiglas is located at the middle of the recess. An inlet valve 
and a tailgate are used to regulate depths of flow and flow 
speed. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
Figure 9. The photos of setup of real-time bridge pier scouring 
monitoring system. 
Inlet valve
Flow 
regulator
pier
Tailgate
Sediment in recess
Sediment 
corrector
Head tank
flow
 
 
Figure 10. Partial layout of recirculating laboratory flume 
Figure 11 shows the experimental results. The left figure 
shows the time-domain vibration raw data while the right 
figure shows the absolute difference vibration data. 
First, we discuss the time-domain vibration data 
obtained in the scouring experiment. At first, the sensors of 
G4, G5, G6, G7, G8, G9 and G10 are buried in the sand. At 
the time of Ti, the Gk sensor starts to be scoured by water 
and exposed from the sand; Ti refers to the times {T1, T2, 
T3, T4, T5} and Gk refers to the sensor nodes {G4, G5, G6, 
G7, G8}, respectively. The accelerometer data of G7 and 
G8 starts to change little from T4 and T5 respectively. We 
find the the G7 and G8 are scoured and exposed from the 
sand; however it’s not easy to obtain the correct scouring 
information from the vibration raw data in the time domain. 
For the sensor of G9 and G10, they are buried in the sand in 
this experiment, so that we cannot observe the change of the 
vibration data for these two accelerometers. 
 
T1
T1
T2
T2
T3
T3
T4
T4
T5
T5
 
 
 
Figure 11. The experimental results of time-domain vibration raw data and absolute difference vibration data 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
The right figure of Figure 11 shows the absolute 
difference vibration data. We utilize our proposed algorithm 
in Table I to detect the bridge scour. The threshold absolute 
difference of vibration data is set to 0.01 according to the 
experiment results. At the time of Ti, the Gk sensor starts to 
be scoured by the water and starts to be exposed from the 
sand. The value of absolute difference vibration data for Gk 
sensor node starts to be larger than the threshold value from 
Ti. ; Ti refers to the times {T1, T2, T3, T4, T5} and Gk 
refers to the sensor nodes {G4, G5, G6, G7, G8}, 
respectively. By using the proposed algorithm shown at 
Table 1 and the proposed flow chart shown in Figure 2, the 
bridge scour detection can be easily realized. This sensor 
system and proposed algorithm will be utilized for the mass 
production deployment in the field in the near future. 
V. CONCLUSIONS 
  Bridges are the important pivots of traffic, and the damage 
of bridges can cause the severe cost of human life and property. 
The heavy rain that comes with typhoon occurs in July and 
August in Taiwan often causes the bridge scour and makes 
the damage or collapse for bridges. Since scour is one of the 
major causes for bridge failure, how to monitor the bridge 
scour becomes an important task in Taiwan. This paper presents a 
real-time bridge scour monitoring system based on accelerometer 
sensors. The proposed sensor network consists of a gateway node 
and under-water sensor nodes with the wired RS-485 
communication protocol. With the proposed scour detection 
algorithm, the system can detect the bridge scour effectively in 
real time.  The proposed master-slave architecture of bridge 
pier scour monitoring system has scalability and flexibility 
for mass deployment. This technique has the potential for 
future widespread implementation in the field.  
 
 
 
REFERENCE 
[1]  T. Y. Liu, W.L. Chiang, C.W. Chen, W.K. Hsu, L.C. Lu and 
T. J. Chu, “Identification and Monitoring of bridge health 
from ambient vibration data,” Journal of Vibration and 
Control, , Nov. 2010, pp. 1-15. 
[2] J.A. Puleo and J. T. Hayden, “A Near Real-time Scour 
Monitoring System at Indian River Inlet, Delaware, USA,” 
IEEE Bilox-Marine Technology for Our Future: Global and 
Local Challenges , Oct. 2009, pp. 1-10. 
[3] J. Lu, J. Hong, C. Su, C. Wang, and J. Lai, “Field 
Measurements and Simulation of Bridge Scour Depth 
Variations during Floods,” Journal of Hydraulic Engineering, 
2008, pp. 810–821. 
[4] H. C. Yang and C. C. Su, “Real-time River Bed Scour 
Monitoring 
and 
Synchronous 
Maximum 
Depth 
Data 
Collected During Typhoon Soulik,” Hydrological Processes, 
vol. 29, 2015, pp. 1056-1063. 
[5] L. J. Prendergast, “A review of bridge scour monitoring 
techniques,” Journal of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical 
Engineering, 2014, pp. 138-149. 
[6] H. Wang, S. C. Hsieh, C. Lin, and C. Y. Wang,“Forensic 
Diagnosis 
on 
Flood-Induced 
Bridge 
Failure. 
I: 
Determination of the Possible Causes of Failure,” Journal of 
Performance of Constructed Facilities, vol. 28, 2014, pp. 
76-78. 
[7]  J. Tao, X. Yu, and X. B. Yu, “Real-time TDR Field Bridge 
Scour Monitoring System,” Structures Congress, 2013, pp. 
2996-3009. 
[8]  J. L. Briaud, S. Hurlebaus, K. Chang, C. Yao, H. Sharma, O. 
Yu, et al., “Realtime Monitoring of bridge scour using 
remote monitoring technology,”  FHWA/TX-11/0-6060-1, 
Texas Transportation Institute,  Austin, USA, 2011.  
[9] 
M. 
Fisher, 
S. 
Atamturktur, 
A. 
Khan, 
“A 
Novel 
Vibration-based Monitoring Technique for Bridge Pier and 
Abutment Scour,” Structure Health Monitoring, vol. 12, 
2013, pp. 114-125. 
[10]  Y. B. Lin, J.-S. Lai, K. C. Chang, W.-Y. Chang, F.-Z. Lee, 
and Y.-C. Tan, "Using MEMS Sensor in  the Bridge Scour 
Monitoring System," Journal of the Chinese Institute of 
Engineers, vol. 33, Jan, 2010, pp. 25-35. 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-425-1
SENSORCOMM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

