Silicon Photonics for Mid-Infrared Sensing 
 
 
D. J. Rowe, Y. Qi, V. Mittal, A. Osman, Z. Qu,  
Y. Wu, M. Banakar, J. Soler Penades, J. S. Wilkinson,  
M. Nedeljkovic, G. Z. Mashanovich 
Optoelectronics Research Centre 
University of Southampton 
Southampton, UK 
e-mail: g.mashanovich@soton.ac.uk 
A. Sánchez-Postigo, J. G. Wangüemert-Pérez,  
A. Ortega-Moñux, R. Halir, Í. Molina-Fernández 
Dpto. Ingeniería de Comunicaciones 
Universidad de Málaga 
Malaga, Spain 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we review our recent work on Si and 
Ge material platforms suitable for mid-infrared sensing. We 
investigate 
Silicon-on-Insulator, 
Germanium-on-Silicon, 
suspended Si and suspended Ge. Design, fabrication and 
characterisation results for various passive devices are 
discussed. We also show preliminary results on integration of 
microfluidic channels with the Silicon-on-Insulator platform. 
Keywords-silicon; germanium; mid-infrared;waveguides. 
I.  
 INTRODUCTION 
The mid-infrared (MIR) wavelength region contains 
strong absorption bands of many molecules and substances 
and is therefore of great interest for various sensing 
applications [1]. Silicon and germanium are suitable material 
platforms for the MIR as they are transparent in this 
wavelength range and are readily available with well 
established fabrication techniques mostly employed for the 
realisation of near-IR photonic devices [2].  
As the MIR wavelength range is very broad (2-15 µm) 
and different applications can target different wavelengths 
within the MIR, development of non-standard material 
platforms may be needed. SOI is the most popular platform 
in the NIR and is low loss up to ~3.8 µm [3]. To utilise the 
full transparency of Si, buried oxide layer can be removed 
resulting in a suspended Si structure. In this paper we report 
our approach based on subwavelength gratings [4][5]. 
Several research groups have reported Ge-on-Si and SiGe 
waveguides with operation up to 8.5 µm [6-8]. However, 
such waveguides have limited evanescent field which may 
result in low sensitivity of transducers based on these 
platforms. Suspended Ge is an alternative platform for 
sensing [9] and here we discuss our preliminary result on this 
platform. Finally, we show integration of microfluidic 
PDMS channels and SOI waveguides and measurement of 
aqueous solutions of IPA.  
The paper is organised as following. A review of several 
MIR platforms is given in Section II. Section III describes 
suspended Si and suspended Ge platforms. Integration of 
MIR photonic circuits with microfluidic channels is given in 
Section IV. Finally, Section V contains conclusions.  
II.  
STANDARD PLATFORMS 
The SOI platform has been extensively used for NIR 
devices, photonic integrated circuits and systems [10]. It is 
therefore a preferred platform in silicon photonics and we 
have conducted an extensive investigation into its suitability 
for the MIR. We have shown that this platform can be used 
up to ~4 µm due to large SiO2 material loss beyond ~ 3.6 µm 
[3]. A number of MIR devices have been realised in this 
platform, for example waveguides with loss of ~1 dB/cm, 
spectrometers [2], modulators [9], detectors [11][12], 
integrated sources [13] etc. This platform can also be used 
for sensing as shown for example in [14] and in Section IV 
of this paper. To increase refractive index contrast and also 
transparency range, pedestal Si and suspended Si can be used 
as shown in Section II.  
The main appeal of Ge as a MIR material is its superior 
spectral transparency compared to Si that spans from 2 to 15 
µm. Ge also has other interesting characteristics such as 
larger 
carrier 
mobility, 
thermo-optic 
and 
non-linear 
coefficients compared to Si. The most popular approach for 
fabrication of Ge-based MIR platform has been CVD growth 
of Ge on Si wafers. Various Ge thicknesses have been used 
with reported losses typically around 2 dB/cm and with best 
results as low as 0.6 dB/cm [15].  
Ge-rich SiGe waveguides have also been demonstrated 
and sub dB/cm losses shown [8]. The main advantage of this 
approach is the possibility to have a gradual change of Ge 
concentration in the SiGe alloy thus reducing defect 
concentration that can affect the GOS platform losses.  
Although these platforms should have low losses up to 11 
or 12 µm, larger values have been observed beyond 8.5-9 µm 
[6-8] and therefore further investigation is needed. These 
platforms have another drawback: to enable low propagation 
losses thicker Ge and SiGe top layers are required resulting 
in high optical mode confinement in the core and low 
evanescent field as shown in Figure 1 for a GOS waveguide. 
This results in low interaction of the optical mode with an 
analyte and thus lower sensitivity. Suspended Ge can offer 
solution to this problem as discussed in the next section.  
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 1.    GOS waveguide: optical mode is well confined in the 
waveguide resulting in low evanescent field. 
III.  
SUSPENDED PLATFORMS 
A.   Suspended Si 
Si is transparent up to 8 µm and to realise Si-based 
photonics circuits that operate to a wavelength as long as 8 
µm there are two solutions: a) Si is bonded to a substrate that 
has the same or larger transparency range and b) the buried 
oxide (BOX) in SOI is removed and suspended Si formed. 
Here, we discuss b).  
The most obvious solution is to form a rib waveguide and 
holes on both sides of the rib that can be used for wet 
selective etching of the BOX layer. This requires two dry 
etch steps to form the rib and holes and also careful 
positioning of the holes such not to cause scattering of the 
optical mode. It can also result in bending of the slab region 
for larger structures, such as Multi-Mode Interference (MMI) 
splitters 
or 
Mach-Zehnder 
Interferometers 
(MZIs), 
depending on the thickness of the slab region.  
A better solution is to place the holes in close proximity 
to the core, to increase the mode-analyte interaction, to 
improve mechanical stability and to simplify the fabrication 
process. We have developed such an approach based on 
subwavelength gratings as shown in Figure 2. The 
subwavelength gratings act as lateral claddings and access 
points for HF removal of the BOX.  
 
lSi lgap
wg
clad
x
y
z
Si
Wwg
tSi
tBOX
Wclad
Si
Wwg
⇤
lgap lSi
nSi
nAir
Wclad
Wclad
x
z
 
Figure 2.    Suspended Si waveguide with subwavelength grating cladding. 
There are several contradictory requirements when 
designing such structures. To reduce scattering caused by the 
sidewall roughness the waveguide core Wwg should be wide. 
This can result in multimode propagation and/or downward 
bending of the waveguide. The cladding width Wclad should 
be relatively large to reduce the leakage loss but on the other 
hand small to reduce downward bending. Subwavelength 
holes should be large enough to enable liquid HF penetration 
and subsequent BOX removal, however also small enough 
not to reduce Si side supports that are important to 
mechanical stability of the structure. If these Si supports are 
too wide they can increase mode leakage to the slab region. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.    Part of a supsended grating coupler for suspended Si photonic 
circuits operating at a wavelength of 7.7 µm [16].  
It is clear from the previous paragraph that extensive 
simulations are required to optimise dimensions of various 
photonic devices based on the subwavelength grating design. 
We have conducted such an optimisation and fabricated 
devices operating at 3.8 [5] and 7.7 µm [16], achieving 
propagation losses of 0.8 dB/cm and 3.1 dB/cm, 
respectively, low bending losses, low insertion losses for 
MMIs, MZIs, and good coupling efficiency for surface 
grating couplers (Figure 3). It should be pointed out that Si 
material loss at 7.7 µm is 2.1 dB/cm, and leakage loss for this 
particular waveguide is 0.1 dB/cm, meaning that the ‘actual’ 
waveguide loss is 0.9 dB/cm which is very similar to the 3.8 
µm result of 0.8 dB/cm [5]. This demonstrates a robust 
fabrication method.  
B.   Suspended Ge 
To suspend Ge, the same two approaches can be 
implemented: rib waveguide configuration (Figure 4) or 
subwavelength grating approach discussed in the previous 
section (Figure 2). We have applied the former, and we are 
currently working on the latter.  
In terms of the substrate, Si or SOI can be used. In our 
approach, we have used the SOI substrate because it results 
in a well defined air channel under the Ge rib waveguide 
(Figure 4).  
 
 
 
Figure 4.    Suspended Ge waveguide on thin SOI platform. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The waveguides were fabricated using 6” Ge-on-SOI 
wafers with a 1 µm Ge layer grown by RPCVD on 50 nm 
SOI. The BOX thickness was 3 µm. Rib waveguides were 
designed for single mode propagation at λ = 7.7 µm. The 
dimensions were: height (H) = 1 µm, width (W) = 3.5 µm 
and etch depth (D) = 300 nm. The initial SOI substrate 
consisted of a 250 nm thick layer of Si on a 3 µm thick layer 
of SiO2. It was thinned to 50nm Si using oxidation. The 
waveguides were patterned using e-beam lithography. They 
were then defined by dry etching using ICP. A second e-
beam lithography step followed in order to define the holes, 
which were etched down to the BOX. The sample then 
underwent two wet etch steps. First, the sample was 
immersed in 1:7 HF, which removed the BOX. Then it was 
immersed in a 25% aqueous solution of Tetramethyl-
ammonium Hydroxide (TMAH) at room temperature, which 
resulted in a removal of the 50 nm thick Si layer.  
 
The waveguides were measured using the effective cut-
back method. Waveguides of different lengths were 
fabricated for the propagation loss measurement. The 
measured value was 2.65 dB/cm at λ = 7.7 µm. Our future 
work will address waveguides for longer wavelengths and 
development of other passive devices in this platform and its 
implementation for sensing. 
IV.  
INTEGRATION WITH MICROFLUIDIC CHANNELS 
Strip waveguides were fully etched in 500 nm silicon on 
3 µm silica with a silica cladding. The mode profile was 
optimised using Lumerical for maximum sample interaction 
and to prevent cross-talk. Spirals were used to reduce 
footprint while providing a range of interaction lengths, 
where the sample-waveguide interaction length was 
determined by a window in the silica cladding. Gratings 
were optimised for operation at λ = 3.8 µm. 
PDMS microfluidic channels were prepared using 
Sylgard 184 and a 3D printed resin mould. The channel had 
3000 x 100 µm cross-section and 30 mm length. The channel 
was made excessively wide for simple manual alignment 
with the sensing windows, although we subsequently 
designed a mount to aid alignment and reduce channel width. 
An O2 plasma was used for surface modification to 
covalently bond the PDMS and SiO2 cladding. 
DI water and IPA solutions were prepared at volume 
fractions of 20, 40, 60, 80 and 100% and delivered using a 
syringe pump.  A tunable QCL source and detector were 
coupled to waveguide gratings using fluoride mid-infrared 
fibres. A lock-in amplifier and chopper were used to reduce 
noise. A LabVIEW program was used to synchronise the 
laser wavelength sweep with data collection. 
The normalised power spectra of water-IPA solutions 
relative to water are shown in Figure 5, showing the 
expected IPA absorption at λ = 3.76 µm. All measurements 
were performed using a 100 µm interaction length. By using 
longer interaction lengths smaller concentrations of aqueous 
solutions of IPA (~1%) can be achieved.  
 
 
Figure 5.    Transmittance of water-IPA solutions relative to water, showing 
the expected IPA absorption at λ = 3.76 µm. 
V.  
CONCLUSIONS 
Low loss waveguides and other photonic devices have 
been realised in SOI, GOS, suspended Si and suspended Ge 
platforms. Which platform will be used depends on the 
application in question and appropriate wavelength range. 
Work is underway to integrate these platforms with 
microfluidic channels for detection of various substances that 
have strong absorption bands in the MIR.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the EPSRC in the UK 
through the following projects: National Hub in High Value 
Photonic 
Manufacturing 
(EP/N00762X/1), 
Electronic-
Photonic 
Convergence 
(EP/N013247/1), 
MIGRATION 
(EP/L01162X/1), and CORNERSTONE (EP/L021129/1), 
and 
by 
the 
Royal 
Academy 
of 
Engineering 
(RF201617/16/33). 
REFERENCES 
[1]   R. Soref, “Mid-infrared photonics in silicon and germanium,” 
Nature Photonics, vol. 4, pp. 495-497, 2010.  
[2]   G. Z. Mashanovich et al., “Silicon photonic waveguides and 
devices for near- and mid-IR applications,” IEEE Journal of 
Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 21, pp. 1-12, 
2015. 
[3]   M. Nedeljkovic et al., “Silicon photonic devices and 
platforms for the mid-infrared” Optical Materials Express, 
vol. 3, pp. 1205–1214, 2013.  
[4]   J. Soler Penades et al., “Suspended SOI waveguide with sub-
wavelength grating cladding for mid-infrared,” Optics Letters, 
vol. 39, pp. 5661-5664, 2014. 
[5]   J. Soler Penades et al., “Suspended silicon mid-infrared 
waveguide devices with subwavelength grating metamaterial 
cladding,” Optics Express, vol. 24, pp. 22908-22916, 2016. 
[6]   M. Brun et al., “Low loss SiGe graded index waveguides for 
mid-IR applications,” Optics Express, vol. 22, pp. 508, 2014. 
[7]   M. Nedeljkovic et al., “Germanium-on-silicon waveguides 
operating at mid-infrared wavelengths up to 8.5 µm,” Optics 
Express, vol. 25, pp. 27431-27441, 2017. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[8]   J. M. Ramirez et al., “Graded SiGe waveguides with 
broadband low-loss propagation in the mid infrared,” Optics 
Express, vol. 26, pp. 870-877, 2018. 
[9]   G. Z. Mashanovich et al., “Group IV mid-infrared photonics,” 
Optical Materials Express (in press) 
[10]   D. Thomson et al., “Roadmap on silicon photonics,” Journal 
of Optics, vol. 18, 073003, 2016.  
[11]   J. J. Ackert, et al., “High-speed detection above the 
telecommunication 
windows 
with 
monolithic 
silicon 
photodiodes,” Nature Photonics, vol. 9, pp. 393-396, 2015. 
[12]   M. Muneeb et al., “III-V-on-silicon integrated micro-
spectrometer for the 3 µm wavelength range,” Optics Express, 
vol. 24, pp. 9465-9472, 2016. 
[13]   A. Spott et al., “Quantum cascade laser on silicon,” Optica, 
vol. 3, p. 545, 2016. 
[14]   P. Tai Lin at al., “Label-free glucose sensing using chip-scale 
mid-infrared integrated photonics,” Advanced Materials, vol. 
4, pp. 1755–175, 2016. 
[15]   M. Nedeljkovic et al., “Surface-grating-coupled low-loss Ge-
on-Si rib waveguides and multimode interferometers,” IEEE 
Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 27, pp. 1040-1043, 2015. 
[16]   J. Soler Penadés et al., “Suspended silicon waveguides for 
long-wave infrared wavelengths,” Optics Letters, vol. 43, pp. 
795-798, 2018. 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-660-6
SENSORDEVICES 2018 : The Ninth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

