A Battery-Less NFC Sensor Transponder for Museum Artefact Monitoring 
A Review of NFC Sensor Technology and a Proposed Solution  
Dinesh R. Gawade1, John Buckley1, Nadeem Rather1, Steffen Ziemann2, Alex Zabeo3, John Barton1, Daniela 
Iacopino1, Katharina Schuhmann2, Manfred Anders2, Micheal Burke1, Aidan Quinn1, Brendan O'Flynn1  
1Tyndall National Institute, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland, 
2ZFB Zentrum für Bucherhaltung GmbH, Bücherstraße 1, 04347 Leipzig, Germany, 
3Ca 'Foscari University of Venice, Dorsoduro 3246, 30123, Venice, Italy 
E-mail: 1dinesh.gawade@tyndall.ie, 2ziemann@zfb.com, 3alex.zabeo@unive.it 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a novel, low-cost, battery-
less Near-Field Communication (NFC) sensor transponder for 
museum artefact monitoring of Cultural Heritage objects. The 
proposed solution combines a unique combination of 
packaging materials and NFC technology to enable a low-cost 
preventive conservation solution that is practical to implement, 
something that is not possible at present. Cultural Heritage 
objects and artefacts are valuable objects housed by museums 
and are often stored in uncontrolled climatic conditions, which 
may lead to degradation of these objects. Preventive 
conservation is a new strategy that aims to avoid future 
degradation of these types of valuable objects. Recently, NFC 
sensor transponders have shown an increased use in food and 
pharmaceutical cold supply chains for monitoring, but these 
commercial solutions are expensive to implement and cannot 
be easily adapted for museum artefact monitoring. In this 
work, we present a battery-less, long shelf life, low-cost sensor 
transponder for monitoring the temperature and humidity 
conditions inside cardboard artefact storage boxes. In 
developing the proposed solution, the state of the art NFC 
sensor technology is first reviewed in detail, and a battery-less 
NFC sensor transponder is proposed with a cost of less than €5 
in quantities of 10k. In addition to this, early-stage prototype 
results are also presented.  
Keywords- Artefacts; Battery-less; Cultural Heritage; Energy 
Harvesting; High-Frequency RFID; Internet of Things; 
Museum; NFC; Preventive conservation; Sensor Technology. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Degradation of movable tangible Cultural Heritage (CH) 
objects can significantly increase by unfavorable and 
unstable climatic conditions, environmental pollutants, 
pollutants emitted from artefacts and their packaging 
materials. 
An 
effective 
and 
affordable 
Preventive 
Conservation (PC) strategy is highly necessary to minimize 
the ageing and degradation of such artefacts. In small and 
medium-sized museums, only a very small percentage of all 
museum objects are on display; the vast majority are in 
storage. The stored artefacts are often exposed to daily and 
seasonal temperature and humidity fluctuation. Currently 
used Passive Sampling Devices (PSDs) and monitoring 
systems are expensive and cumbersome to calibrate and also 
fail to deliver the correct sensing in a timely manner [1]. 
One critical disadvantage of monitoring the storage 
conditions by PSDs is the necessity of opening the box for 
analysis. 
 
Figure 1.  Depiction of proposed NFC temperature/humidity sensor 
solution. (a) Cardboard artefact storage box with proposed NFC sensor 
attached, (b) NFC sensor scan using a Smartphone, (c) Depiction of NFC 
sensor-to-cloud data flow.   
This can lead to a loss of the desired microclimate, and 
reading the sampled results would be time-consuming. The 
values obtained by PSDs further do not represent the current 
Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) concentrations inside 
the box but show an accumulation during the measurement 
time, which can not be related to a current concentration at a 
specific moment. For making rapid decisions, such as 
whether an absorbent must be replaced or if any further 
adjustment is required, these values have to be as reliable as 
possible. 
The APACHE (Active & intelligent Packaging materials 
and display cases as a tool for preventive conservation of 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Cultural Heritage) project is a Horizon 2020 project focused 
on the reduction of costs for maintaining and controlling 
constant climate conditions for CH artefacts. This project 
also focuses on ‘long-term storage’ as a tool of preventive 
conservation for a wide range of tangible CH artefacts [2]. 
The proposed solution is shown in Figure 1. The cardboard 
box contains the cultural artefact, along with a smart NFC 
temperature and humidity sensing label as shown in Figure 
1(a). The transponder will be read using an NFC Type 5 
(NFC-V) enabled smartphone and the data will be uploaded 
to the cloud for storage and analysis, as shown in Figure 
1(b) and 1(c). 
A key motivation for this work stems from the fact that 
the diversity of the objects themselves, as well as their 
degradation mechanisms, are quite large and mainly 
influenced by Temperature (T) and Relative Humidity (RH). 
For these reasons, specific strategies for their preventive 
conservation during storage in appropriate containers have 
to be established. Each material, like cellulose-based paper 
or wood objects, photographs, leather, or contemporary art 
out of plastics, require a different specific climate for 
optimized long-term storage conditions [3]. In collections 
with different materials, all these specific requirements 
cannot be met, even if air conditioning and climate control 
are available for the room. However, as the latter is not 
affordable by the majority of small and medium-sized 
museums, the APACHE project aims to create specific 
optimized climate conditions in each storage item. This 
strategy allows collectors to build up a climate control 
system for their collection step by step in accordance with 
their financial resources. 
Furthermore, within this project, the developed storage 
boxes and containers shall enhance the buffering of 
temperature and humidity fluctuations and therefore reduce 
their accelerating effect on the material degradation process. 
Already small temperature fluctuations can cause significant 
changes in relative humidity conditions, which, in turn, can 
cause mechanical stress in art objects by elongation and 
shrinkage processes. For example, if an art object is packed 
under standard climate conditions (23°C, 50% RH) and the 
temperature decreases by about 10 degrees during transport 
or day/night change, which is not unusual, the relative 
humidity in an airtight enclosure would increase to 90% [4]  
[5]. At colder temperatures, condensation on the artefact 
surface could lead to mould growth, and hence, catastrophic 
damage. Moreover, air pollutants and VOCs like plasticizers 
or organic acids lead to further destruction, especially of 
cellulose-based materials [6][7]. As a consequence, a 
remarkable effort is made in the development and 
application of novel temperature regulating, humidity, and 
pollutants absorbing materials to exclude damaging impacts 
as far as possible [8]. For the definition of thresholds, which 
allow expressing if humidity or VOC concentrations are in a 
critical range, materials modeling simulations, and the 
development of damage functions as a decision-making tool 
are included. In the end, a possible acquirement of sensed 
temperature and RH data will ensure the preservation of 
microclimates found in archive boxes. In this method, the 
archive boxes can remain closed permanently. 
Wireless Sensor Technologies (WST) such as Near-field 
communication (NFC) technology are essential to monitor 
the inside microclimatic conditions of a closed archive box. 
NFC is a short-range wireless communication technology 
that has evolved from existing contactless identification 
technologies [9]. Additional NFC standards ensure the 
interoperability of NFC-enabled devices and enable 
communication between them. The NFC standard defines 
the data rate (26.48 to 424 kbit/s), data frame formats such 
as NFC Data Exchange Format (NDEF),  modulation, 
initialization, and collision control during initialization [10]. 
NFC uses magnetic coupling between two loop antennas 
located within each other's proximity or vicinity. It follows 
the ISO/IEC 18092 communication mode and ISO/IEC 
18000-3 mode 1 protocol and operates at 13.56 MHz 
Industrial, Scientific, and Medical (ISM) band [11][12]. 
NFC has shown increased growth in the past few years due 
to the incorporation of NFC readers into smartphones and 
increasing significance of the Internet of Things (IoT). NFC 
technology not only enables consumers to perform 
payments, access stored data, and connect electronic 
devices, but also helps to sense various parameters. The 
decisive advantage of NFC against PSDs is that the data can 
be remotely read and analyzed without direct physical 
contact or the need to open the storage box. The resources 
and costs required to use, maintain, and read the sensors are 
thus 
significantly 
reduced 
compared 
to 
traditional 
monitoring systems. STMicroelectronics have recently 
introduced NFC sensor integrated circuits that are suitable 
for this application [11]. With this interdisciplinary 
approach, APACHE will lead to an active and intelligent 
solution for storage and archive boxes, where NFC sensing 
acts as an intelligent tool to replace currently used PSDs. An 
NFC sensor transponder represents a fast, convenient, 
sustainable, and precise alternative to check actual 
concentrations, temperatures, and humidity in archive 
boxes. An atomized sensing would give further information 
about the inside conditions during e.g. heating periods or an 
institution´s closure times, which can be very useful for 
management decisions. 
In this paper, the technical requirements of this 
application are first defined in Section II. A detailed review 
of the literature is described in Section III to survey the 
existence of prior work (both academic and commercial 
works) in the area of NFC sensor technology. Section IV 
describes the proposed solution architecture where a low-
cost, battery-less NFC temperature and humidity sensor 
transponder is outlined for a museum artefact monitoring 
application. Early prototype results are described in Section 
V. 
II. 
TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS 
Early detection of temperature and humidity fluctuations 
is of crucial importance to successful PC in museums. The 
technical requirements of every component related to this 
are described in the following subsections.   
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

A. Storage Box 
Corrugated board material represents an environmentally 
friendly, recyclable, and inexpensive material, which 
exhibits tremendous stability, needed for stackable boxes 
and the storage of heavier artefacts. Corrugated board in 
aging resistant archive quality (following DIN ISO 16245) 
furthermore provides the opportunity to enable an alkaline 
reserve, which acts primarily as an absorbent for acidic 
emissions, arisen from paper degradation [13]. The 
production of archive boxes out of corrugated board allows 
the design of individually sized boxes, which provides the 
significant advantages of a space-saving storage solution 
combined with the best possible protection of the objects by 
a reduced volume of "packed air." To detect microclimate 
fluctuations, the sensor transponder needs to be located at 
the inner surface of the box, such as in the fore-edge area of 
a storage box: The surface of potentially degrading material 
should be maximal at this point, which gives the most 
representative critical Temperature and Relative Humidity 
values.  
B. NFC Radio and sensor   
The implementation of sensors transponder into storage 
boxes requires the development of low cost, (typically less 
than €5 per piece), and high durability and stability of 
typically greater than 5 years. The sensor transponder 
should be able to sense and transmit the surrounding 
temperature and humidity of packed artefacts with metadata 
such as storage boxes unique ID, artefacts type and location 
using NFC technology. Thus, to transmit this small payload 
rapidly, a low bit rate is expected, typically less than 
25kbit/s. As this application does not encounter a sudden 
fluctuation in temperature and humidity, no data logging is 
required. The sensor transponder must be battery-less and 
capable of harvesting up to 10mW power from a reader 
(NFC Enabled smartphone) magnetic field. 
Furthermore, harvested power will be utilized to power 
up the sensor and microcontroller. The sensor transponder 
should be able to communicate, without any collision with 
adjacent sensor transponders. The NFC radio should have at 
least 4 Kbit memory and should support dual access (RF 
and I2C). A communication distance of typically 4 cm is 
also required. The size of the sensor transponder must 
comply with ISO/IEC 7810, ID-1 card size standard (85.60 
mm×53.90 mm). It should be assembled on a flexible PCB 
substrate and must be flat with a self-adhesive layer, hence, 
making it easy to be attached inside and on the front of 
storage boxes. The NFC sensor transponder must be 
compliant to NFC-V specification and should also comply 
with the ISO/IEC 15693 air interface. Therefore, it operates 
in the vicinity of the reader and provides the desired data 
rate, communication distance, and interoperability with 
NFC-V enabled smartphone. Transponders based on the 
ISO/IEC 14443 air interface have a shorter read range 
(typically, 3 cm) and thus unsuitable for this application.  
The implementation of sensor transponders into storage 
boxes requires low cost, high durability, long shelf-life, and 
high sensitive temperature and humidity sensors. The 
readable temperature range should be -10°C to 60°C with a 
sensitivity of 0.5°C. The readable humidity range should be 
0 to 100% RH with a sensitivity of 0.5 %.  
C. Smartphone Application  
In order to allow small to medium collections with low 
available resources and still have a chance to monitor the 
status of their artefacts, a widely available cheap solution 
resides in the use of NFC readers embedded in everyday 
smartphones. Raw data received from sensors should be 
managed by a specific smartphone app compatible with 
different smartphone brands and operative systems. Data 
should initially be stored in the smartphone’s internal 
memory and displayed to the user for an immediate 
consultation. This allows performing of readings in 
conditions where reduced or absent external connections are 
available in the artefacts storing facility. Once the 
smartphone 
comes 
back 
to 
sufficient 
connectivity 
conditions, the internally stored data is automatically sent to 
the cloud server for storage and further processing. The 
smartphone app should be able to tag each reading properly 
with the timestamp and distinctive details about the 
analyzed artefact. The app should also be able to receive 
information from the cloud about status and previous 
readings related to artefacts to allow a fast check from the 
operator. 
D. Cloud Processing  
The remote server, receiving data gathered through the 
smartphone app, might be located inside an intranet (local 
cloud) or on the Internet (cloud). In both cases, the same 
infrastructure is needed, which should be composed of a 
web server, an application server, and database storage. The 
web server waits for incoming data through a specially 
designed API software interface. The smartphone app 
establishes a secure connection with the server through the 
API and then utilizes the channel to funnel the gathered raw 
data to the server. On reception, the webserver passes 
information to the application server, which immediately 
stores the raw data in the database and successively 
processes it to generate all requested information for 
decision support. Finally, the processed information is 
correctly displayed to users through dynamic charts and 
tables, while alarm messages are broadcasted as soon as 
danger thresholds are reached for any of the assessed 
artefacts. 
III. 
TECHNOLOGY REVIEW 
A thorough review of the literature is described in the 
following subsections to survey the existence of academic 
and commercial prior work in the area of NFC and Radio 
Frequency Identification (RFID) sensor technology.    
A. Literature Review of NFC sensor Technology 
In 2013, an early review of NFC technology, related 
academic studies, white papers, and innovative issues was 
reported in [14]. In [15], a detailed survey on NFC sensor 
transponders for IoT, cold supply chain and wearable 
applications is presented. This paper also presents a brief 
summary of NFC sensor integrated circuits and their main 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

specifications. Later in [16], a review of recent progress in 
NFC sensor technology has been reported. In this paper, 
NFC sensor transponder antenna design, manufacturing 
techniques and development of new material along with 
their application in wearable devices and food safety has 
been discussed. Likewise in [17], RFID sensing techniques, 
innovative application, fabrication techniques, commercial 
solutions and technical challenges have been reported.  
In [18], an NFC sensor transponder design and a six-
month pilot result for long term preventive care of fine art 
objects have been reported. The developed transponder 
evaluates inside and outside temperature and humidity 
buffering 
performance 
of 
microclimatic 
enclosure 
constructed to protect a late 16th Century panel painting. It 
is based on the ISO/IEC 15693 standard and compliant NFC 
forum NFC-V specification. This study explicitly explains 
the critical role of object-specific sensor transponders in 
improving long term preventive care of fine art objects. In 
[19], the authors presented the design and implementation of 
RFID and sensor web-based cultural relics management 
system. In this, RFID has been used for cultural relic 
identification and life cycle management during storage and 
circulation. Video and sensing parameters such as 
temperature, humidity, vibration, and displacement are 
transmitted using both wired and wireless communications. 
For preventing theft, a camera is deployed in collaboration 
with RFID and a vibration sensor. This system has been 
installed in a museum in Yongding District, Fujian 
Province, China. Furthermore, in [20], an RFID based 
museum environmental monitoring system is reported. 
Here, a flexible RFID platform is presented, which enables 
operation specific direct plugging of sensors into monitoring 
station. The pilot trials of this system under various 
environmental conditions has taken place in the Hong Kong 
film archive and Hong Kong Museum of history and was 
finally installed in the Hong Kong Science museum in 2015.  
Several papers report the design and performance of 
NFC/RFID sensor transponders, specifically for cold supply 
chain 
(food, 
pharmaceutical, 
beverage 
etc.) 
and 
environmental parameters monitoring. In [21], a flexible 
RFID sensor transponder for temperature monitoring is 
reported. The proposed transponder is based on the ISO/IEC 
15693 standard and is compliant to NFC-V specification. 
The transponder prototype was realized by hybrid 
technology combining a printed antenna, surface mount 
RFID integrated circuit and flexible battery assembled with 
the help of Ag-based conductive epoxy adhesive. The size 
(85.60 mm×53.90 mm) of the designed transponder 
complies with ISO/IEC 7810, ID-1 card size standard. 
Smartphone and Web applications have similarly been 
developed for reading sensor data. Escopedo et al, [22] 
present a flexible NFC sensor transponder for Oxygen, 
Carbon Dioxide, Ammonia, and Relative Humidity 
monitoring. It is based on the ISO/IEC 15693 standard and 
compliant NFC forum NFC-V specification and includes a 
smartphone application. Likewise, in [23], an RFID based 
critical temperature indicator for the food supply chain has 
been reported. In [24], a low cost, passive NFC sensor 
transponder for pH monitoring based on a colorimetric 
sensor and smartphone application has been developed. In 
[25], Eldebiky et al, implemented an environmental 
monitoring system with the help of Hybrid System-in-Foil 
(HySiF) components, such as microcontroller, on-chip 
temperature, on-foil humidity sensors and NFC radio. In 
[26], an RFID patch for food spoiling monitoring with the 
help of a temperature sensor has been reported. 
Recently, battery-less NFC sensor transponders and their 
various applications have been reported in the literature. In 
[27][28], battery-less sensor transponders for volumetric 
water content (soil moisture), temperature and relative 
humidity monitoring has been presented. Also, this work 
has shown that the magnetic field generated by NFC 
enabled smartphones is enough to supply energy for the 
transponder. Further, in [29], a battery-less chronic wound 
monitoring system has been presented. In order to monitor 
the chronic wound, the proposed solution acquires 
temperature and pH information of the wound, and 
consumes 5 mW of power. In [30], a battery-less NFC 
transponder for classifying fruit ripeness grade based on 
color measurement has been presented. Likewise, in [31], a 
battery-less diaper has been reported where diaper moisture 
is detected by capacitance variation. 
B. Commercial solutions based  on 13.56 MHZ NFC/ HF 
RFID  
Table I shows NFC and High-Frequency (HF) RFID-
based 
commercial 
sensor 
transponders. 
Various 
organizations have developed and marketed such a solution, 
particularly for cold supply chain or temperature-sensitive 
product monitoring. Gosense Wireless Ltd, UK developed 
and demonstrated TH-Stat ID for fine art preventive care 
[18][32]. Reviewed commercial solutions have a limited 
shelf life of a maximum of 3 years [33][34] and only a few 
of them are battery-less [32][35]. However, all these 
solutions are quite costly and, therefore, cannot be easily 
adapted for low cost museum artefacts monitoring.  
TABLE I.  NFC / HF RFID BASED SOLUTION    
Manufacturer 
Cost 
€ 
Life 
(Years) 
Passive 
Sensor 
Ref. 
Monarch 
Instrument, USA 
71 
3 
No 
T, RH 
[33] 
Microsensys, 
Germany 
48 
3 
No 
T, RH 
[35] 
24 
NA 
Yes 
RH 
[34] 
GoSense, UK 
23 
NA 
Yes 
T,  RH 
[32] 
UID, USA 
18 
1 
No 
T 
[36] 
Intellilog, Germany 
17 
1 
No 
T 
[37] 
Avery Dennison, 
USA 
15 
1 
No 
T 
[38] 
Identiv, USA 
8 
1 
No 
T 
[39] 
This work 
5 
5 
Yes 
T, RH 
[2] 
TABLE II.  UHF RFID BASED SOLUTION  
Manufacturer 
Cost 
€ 
Life 
(Years) 
Passive 
Sensor 
Ref. 
Powercast, USA 
73 
NA 
Yes 
T,  RH 
[40] 
73 
NA 
No 
T, RH 
[41] 
Datalogic, USA 
22 
5 
No 
T 
[42] 
Farsens, Spain 
17 
1  
No 
T 
[43] 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

C. Commercial solutions based  on 860-960MHZ UHF 
RFID  
Table II shows the Ultra High-Frequency (UHF) RFID 
based commercial sensor transponders, developed mainly 
for cold supply chain monitoring. The UHF RFID 
transponders can provide read range less than 10m [41] 
[40], but the cost of the UHF reader is too high [44]. Thus, 
UHF RFID is not suitable for low-cost museum artefacts 
monitoring.  
IV. 
PROPOSED SYSTEM-LEVEL SOLUTION 
The proposed system-level architecture of NFC 
temperature and humidity sensor transponder is described in 
the following subsections. 
A. Near field Communication and Hardware  
The proposed solution block diagram and system 
architecture are shown in Figure 2.  The NFC radio Analog 
Front End (AFE) consists of an RF interface and the energy 
harvesting circuitry, which will connect to the loop antenna. 
The energy harvester will harvest energy from the magnetic 
field (H-field) of an NFC-V enabled smartphone with the 
help of an internal rectifier and capacitor. The harvested 
voltage will further be regulated using a low dropout 
regulator and will be used to power up an ultra-low-power 
Microcontroller Unit (MCU), as well as a temperature and 
humidity sensor. The NFC radio ASK demodulator will 
demodulate the messages from the reader and responds to 
the reader with the help of load modulation. The load 
modulation is achieved by varying the impedance of the 
loop antenna [45]. When the magnetic field strength from 
the reader is sufficient, the harvested energy will be 
available to power up the MCU, NFC radio, temperature, 
and humidity sensor. The NFC radio, temperature and 
humidity sensor will be interfaced with MCU using the 
Inter-Integrated Circuit (I2C) Protocol. Having powered up, 
the NFC radio sends RF events signal to the MCU. The 
sensor will start sensing temperature and humidity and its 
raw value will transmit to the MCU through the I2C. The 
MCU will determine temperature, relative humidity and 
generate an NDEF message. The generated message will 
contain payload such as sensed data, artefacts type, box UID 
and their location. The MCU will write the NDEF message 
in the user memory area of the NFC radio [46] [11], and the 
NFC-V Smartphone will read this memory with the help of 
a dedicated read message command. In this way, the 
smartphone will read the data from the NFC sensor 
transponder at a 26kbit/s bit rate. The hardware will be 
implanted on a flexible PCB substrate, such as polyimide 
(130µm thickness) with a self-adhesive layer. The size of 
proposed sensor transponder will be 85.60 mm×53.90 mm. 
The system architecture of the proposed transponder is 
shown in Figure 2b. After analysing technical information 
and several experiments with different NFC sensor 
evaluation boards, the ST25DV04K NFC radio from 
STMicroelectronics was chosen [11]. This radio is capable 
of harvesting up to 10mW power from NFC-V enabled 
smartphone magnetic fields. 
 
 
Figure 2.  (a) Block diagram, (b) System architecture of the proposed NFC 
temperature/humidity sensor. 
The unit cost of ST25DV04K is €0.43 and aggregated 
cost of other selected tag electronics such as MCU (€1.05), 
voltage regulator (€0.26) and passive components (€1) are 
€2.31 per device for 10k quantity. Also, the 2-layer flexible 
PCB manufacturing and components assembly cost will be 
less than €0.90 per device for the same quantity.     
B. Smartphone Application  
The smartphone application will rely on specific 
libraries for NFC data gathering as well as for storage and 
communication of retrieved information for both the 
Android and iOS smartphone operative systems. Data will 
check for consistency to avoid false or incomplete readings; 
right after this check, a timestamp will be attached to the 
retrieved data. Information about the ID of the artefact and 
all specific readings will come from the NFC sensor 
transponder. 
The 
smartphone 
application 
starts 
up 
automatically when approaching a suitable NFC sensor 
transponder, and autonomously performs the first reading 
and displays the raw contents of the reading. The app user 
can decide through a setting whether to automatically 
upload each reading instead of having to send out the 
currently displayed reading manually. Once the app is 
activated, the user will decide to perform (and upload) 
several successive readings by clicking the corresponding 
user interface button. 
C. Cloud Processing  
Data uploaded by the smartphone app to the cloud Linux 
web server will immediately be stored in a relational 
MySQL database, which will regularly be backed up. The 
connection and data transfer occurs thanks to a specific 
RESTful web API implementing all required rules for a 
proper service endpoint [47]. The gathered information is 
elaborated by the server immediately after being stored, and 
results obtained by the application of the mathematical 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

models embedded in the application server will also store 
and back up in the same database as the readings. User 
interface dashboard, dynamic charts and tables will also 
update live with the new upcoming readings, and a routine, 
which checks whether the alert thresholds are met is run and 
automatically 
sends 
alert 
signals 
(emails, 
phone 
notifications, etc.) to the registered users. The server role 
will be completely transparent to the source of information 
as the smartphone app hides the lack of direct connection 
with the NFC sensors. Thanks to timestamps related to each 
reading coming from sensors with different sampling 
frequencies, the application server will be able to integrate 
heterogeneous information in a single coherent interface and 
decision support framework.  
V. 
EARLY STAGE RESULT AND DISCUSSION  
The early evaluation kit based working prototype shown 
in Figure 3. This working prototype is a proof of concept, 
and experimental results show that the harvested power 
from NFC-V enabled the smartphone's magnetic field is 
enough to run the transponder without a battery. A graph of 
power consumption for the device is shown in Figure 4. In 
order to measure temperature and relative humidity, the 
prototype transponder requires a peak power of 2.37 mW.  
 
Figure 3.  Early NFC sensor transponder prototype (Evaluation kit based) 
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
1.8003
1.8004
1.8005
1.8006
 Voltage
 Current
Time (s)
Voltage (V)
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
 Current (mA)
 
Figure 4.  Prototype NFC sensor transponder power consumption graph  
Also, the experimental communication distance obtained 
for the prototype transponder is up to 28 mm with a 
Vodafone X9 smartphone and up to 37 mm with the iPhone 
XR. The battery-less NFC sensor transponder signifies a 
sustainable and specific alternative to measure actual 
concentrations, microclimatic parameters inside closed 
artefacts storage boxes. These solutions could be beneficial, 
especially for small and middle-size museums, which 
cannot afford air conditioning systems and those in 
countries that have very humid climates. To exclude mould 
growth on paper, for example, the maintaining of adjusted 
relative humidity values is crucial and can be monitored in 
this way. Also, the deterioration of plastic composed 
artefacts emitted VOC´s during this process could lead to 
health detriment if accumulated and even affect surrounding 
paper-based objects which are prevented if those VOC´s are 
chemically immobilized at the source. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has presented the architecture and early 
prototype (Evaluation kit based) result of a novel battery-
less, low-cost, and long shelf-life NFC sensor transponder 
for museum artefact monitoring. The proposed transponder 
total cost is less than €5 per device for 10k quantities. The 
prototype transponder consumes 2.37 mW peak power to 
read temperature and relative humidity along with metadata. 
The experimental read range obtained for the prototype 
transponder is up to 28 mm with a Vodafone X9 smartphone 
and up to 37 mm with the iPhone XR. In order to improve 
communication range, future work will focus on the 
development of low power embedded hardware, loop 
antenna and optimization of the firmware. In the next phase, 
a smartphone application and cloud platform will be 
developed, and system-level testing and calibration will be 
performed. A new low-cost temperature and humidity 
sensor will be developed using Laser Induced Graphene 
(LIG) 
electrodes 
to 
overcome 
conventional 
sensor 
limitations such as accuracy, size, power consumption, 
shelf-life and cost. In another development, chemical 
modification of the above electrodes will be performed 
targeting the electrochemical detection of VOCs. New 
artefacts storage boxes using RF friendly material will also 
be developed during the project. The first hardware 
prototype will be available in Q1 2020. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
We would like to acknowledge funding support from the 
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 
program for APACHE project under the grant agreement 
number 814496. We also acknowledge support from 
Science Foundation Ireland under grant 13/RC/2077 
(CONNECT) as well as the support of Andrew Wallace and 
the team from National Instruments for their continued 
support with the AWR toolset.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. M. Grzywacz, Monitoring for gaseous pollutants in 
museum environments. Getty Publications, 2006. 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[2] 
APACHE, "APACHE Project Objective " 2019, Available: 
http://www.apacheproject.eu/objectives/, 
Accessed 
on: 
2019.09.15. 
[3] 
A. Schieweck and T. Salthammer, "Pollutants in museums, 
libraries and archives, Room air – building materials – 
exhibits," Aufl. Wolfram Schmidt, Braunschweig, 2014. 
[4] 
T. Padfield, "Fundamental microclimate concepts," 2009, 
Available: 
https://www.conservationphysics.org/intro/fundamentals.ht
ml, Accessed on: 2019.09.20. 
[5] 
M. K. Kumaran, Air and Moisture Transfer Through New 
and Retrofitted Insulated Envelope Parts. International 
Energy Agency IEA Annex 24, 1996. 
[6] 
A.-L. Dupont and J. Tétreault, "Cellulose degradation in an 
acetic acid environment," Studies in conservation, vol. 45, 
no. 3, pp. 201-210, 2000. 
[7] 
K. Curran et al., "Cross-infection effect of polymers of 
historic and heritage significance on the degradation of a 
cellulose reference test material," Polymer degradation and 
stability, vol. 107, pp. 294-306, 2014. 
[8] 
K. Ziani, I. Fernández-Pan, M. Royo, and J. I. Maté, 
"Antifungal activity of films and solutions based on 
chitosan against typical seed fungi," Food Hydrocolloids, 
vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 2309-2314, 2009. 
[9] 
R. Minihold, "Near field communication (nfc) technology 
and measurements," White Paper, vol. 6, 2011. 
[10] 
ECMA-340 Near Field Communication - Interface and 
Protocol (NFCIP-1), 2013. 
[11] 
STMicroelectronics, "ST25DV04K- Datasheet," 2018, 
Available: 
https://www.st.com/resource/en/datasheet/st25dv04k.pdf, 
Accessed on: 2019.09.15. 
[12] 
NFC_Forum, "New NFC Forum Technical Specifications 
Broaden Tag Support and Enhance Interoperability," in 
New and Candidate Specifications Bring Additional 
Flexibility and Range of Communications to NFC 
Interactions, ed, 2015. 
[13] 
M. A. Hubbe et al., "Deacidification of acidic books and 
paper by means of non-aqueous dispersions of alkaline 
particles: A review focusing on completeness of the 
reaction," BioResources, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 4410-4477, 
2017. 
[14] 
V. Coskun, B. Ozdenizci, and K. Ok, "A survey on near 
field communication (NFC) technology," Wireless personal 
communications, vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 2259-2294, 2013. 
[15] 
A. Lazaro, R. Villarino, and D. Girbau, "A survey of NFC 
sensors based on energy harvesting for IoT applications," 
Sensors, vol. 18, no. 11, p. 3746, 2018. 
[16] 
Z. Cao et al., "Near-Field Communication Sensors," 
Sensors, vol. 19, no. 18, p. 3947, 2019. 
[17] 
L. Cui, Z. Zhang, N. Gao, Z. Meng, and Z. Li, "Radio 
Frequency Identification and Sensing Techniques and Their 
Applications—A Review of the State-of-the-Art," Sensors, 
vol. 19, no. 18, p. 4012, 2019. 
[18] 
M. D. Steinberg, C. S. Kimbriel, and L. S. d'Hont, 
"Autonomous near-field communication (NFC) sensors for 
long-term preventive care of fine art objects," Sensors and 
Actuators A: Physical, vol. 285, pp. 456-467, 2019. 
[19] 
C. Xiao, N. Chen, D. Li, Y. Lv, and J. Gong, "SCRMS: An 
RFID and sensor web-enabled smart cultural relics 
management system," Sensors, vol. 17, no. 1, p. 60, 2017. 
[20] 
J. Tse, "Development of a new environmental monitoring 
system for museums and galleries using RFID-enabled 
technology," Studies in Conservation, vol. 61, no. sup2, pp. 
334-336, 2016. 
[21] 
K. Sima et al., "Flexible smart tag for cold chain 
temperature monitoring," in 2017 40th International Spring 
Seminar on Electronics Technology (ISSE), 2017, pp. 1-5. 
[22] 
P. Escobedo et al., "Flexible passive near 
field 
communication tag for multigas sensing," Analytical 
chemistry, vol. 89, no. 3, pp. 1697-1703, 2017. 
[23] 
G. S. Lorite et al., "Novel, smart and RFID assisted critical 
temperature indicator for supply chain monitoring," Journal 
of Food Engineering, vol. 193, pp. 20-28, 2017. 
[24] 
M. Boada, A. Lazaro, R. Villarino, and D. Girbau, "Battery-
less NFC sensor for PH monitoring," IEEE Access, 2019. 
[25] 
A. Eldebiky, M. Elsobky, H. Richter, and J. N. Burghartz, 
"Humidity and temperature sensor system demonstrator 
with NFC tag for HySiF applications," Advances in Radio 
Science, vol. 16, no. D., pp. 109-116, 2018. 
[26] 
M. Yuan, R. Ghannam, P. Karadimas, and H. Heidari, 
"Flexible RFID Patch for Food Spoilage Monitoring," in 
2018 IEEE Asia Pacific Conference on Postgraduate 
Research in Microelectronics and Electronics (PrimeAsia), 
2018, pp. 68-71. 
[27] 
M. Boada, A. Lazaro, R. Villarino, and D. Girbau, "Battery-
less soil moisture measurement system based on a NFC 
device with energy harvesting capability," IEEE Sensors 
Journal, vol. 18, no. 13, pp. 5541-5549, 2018. 
[28] 
M. Boada, A. Lazaro, R. Villarino, E. Gil, and D. Girbau, 
"Near-field soil moisture sensor with energy harvesting 
capability," in 2018 48th European Microwave Conference 
(EuMC), 2018, pp. 235-238. 
[29] 
H.-W. Cho, J. H. Yoon, S.-S. Yoo, B. G. Choi, and H.-J. 
Yoo, "A Batteryless Chronic Wound Monitoring System 
with NFC," in 2019 IEEE Eurasia Conference on 
Biomedical Engineering, Healthcare and Sustainability 
(ECBIOS), 2019, pp. 31-34. 
[30] 
A. Lazaro, M. Boada, R. Villarino, and D. Girbau, "Color 
Measurement and Analysis of Fruit with a Battery-Less 
NFC Sensor," Sensors, vol. 19, no. 7, p. 1741, 2019. 
[31] 
A. Lazaro, M. Boada, R. Villarino, and D. Girbau, "Battery-
less Smart Diaper based on NFC Technology," IEEE 
Sensors Journal, 2019. 
[32] 
Gosense, "Gosense wireless ltd Product Index- NFC and 
RFID Mobile Sensors ", Available: http://www.gosense-
wireless.com/GoSense%20TH-StatID%20DS%20Rev1.pdf, 
Accessed on: 2019.09.17. 
[33] 
Monarch_Instrument, 
"Track-It 
RFID 
Temp 
or 
Temp/Humidity 
Data 
Logger," 
Available: 
https://monarchinstrument.com/products/track-it-rfid-temp-
temp-humidity-data-logger?variant=30756070984, 
Accessed on: 2019.09.18. 
[34] 
Microsensys, "product datasheet- TELID 232.nfc ", 
Available: 
https://www.microsensys.de/fileadmin/user_upload/pdf-
dateien/datasheets/TELID232nfc-01.pdf, 
Accessed 
on: 
2019.09.15. 
[35] 
Microsensys, "TELID 332-th product datasheet," Available: 
https://www.microsensys.de/fileadmin/user_upload/pdf-
dateien/ds_sensor-transpond/TELID332-05.pdf, 
Accessed 
on: 2019.09.15. 
[36] 
Unified_Information_Devices, "Tempevent Temperature 
Data 
Logger," 
Available: 
https://www.uidevices.com/product/tempevent-
temperature-data-logger/, Accessed on: September 2019. 
[37] 
Intellilog, "End-to-End Cold Chain Monitoring," Available: 
https://intellilog.io/, Accessed on: 2019.09.18. 
[38] 
Avery_Dennison, "TT Sensor Plus Product Datasheet ", 
Available: 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

https://label.averydennison.com/content/dam/averydennison
/lpm-responsive/europe/english/documents/data-
sheet/product/intelligent-labels/time-and-temp-tracking/ds-
eu-tt-sensor-plus-en.pdf, Accessed on: 2019.09.15. 
[39] 
Identiv, "uTrust Sense Temperature Tracker," Available: 
https://www.identiv.com/products/rfid-nfc-inlays/sensors/, 
Accessed on: 2019.09.17. 
[40] 
Powercast, "PCT200 Powercast High-Function RFID 
Sensor 
Datalogger- 
Datasheet 
", 
Available: 
http://www.powercastco.com/wp-
content/uploads/2017/06/PCT200-Datasheet-Rev-1.pdf, 
Accessed on: 2019.09.20. 
[41] 
Powercast, "PCT100 Powercast High-Function RFID 
Sensor Tag," Available: https://www.powercastco.com/wp-
content/uploads/2019/02/PCT100-Datasheet-Rev-4.pdf, 
Accessed on: 2019.09.20. 
[42] 
Datalogic, 
"DLR-TL001", 
Available: 
https://www.datalogic.com/eng/transportation-logistics/rfid-
systems/dlr-tl001-pd-706.html, Accessed on: 2019.09.16. 
[43] 
Farsens, "Logos-T battery assisted passive temperature 
sensor," 
Available: 
http://www.farsens.com/en/products/logos-t/, Accessed on: 
2019.09.16. 
[44] 
Zebra-logiscenter, "Zebra RFD8500 RFID READERS," 
Available: https://www.logiscenter.ie/rfd8500-5000100-eu-
zebra-rfd8500-rfid-readers, Accessed on: 2019.09.19. 
[45] 
K. Finkenzeller, RFID handbook: fundamentals and 
applications in contactless smart cards, radio frequency 
identification and near-field communication. John Wiley & 
Sons, 2010. 
[46] 
STMicroelectronics, "TN1216 Technical note ST25 NFC 
guide," 
2016, 
Available: 
https://www.stmicroelectronics.com.cn/content/ccc/resourc
e/technical/document/technical_note/f9/a8/5a/0f/61/bf/42/2
9/DM00190233.pdf/files/DM00190233.pdf/jcr:content/tran
slations/en.DM00190233.pdf, Accessed on: 2019.09.15. 
[47] 
E. W. Cesare Pautasso, "RESTful Web Services: Principles, 
Patterns, Emerging Technologies," WWW '10 Proceedings 
of the 19th international conference on World wide web 
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA pp. 1359-1360 April 26 - 30, 
2010. 
 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-744-3
SENSORCOMM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

