1 
 
Integration of RFID and Wireless Sensor Networks into a Supply Chain 
Management System 
 
Laurent Gomez,  
SAP Research France  
Mougins, France 
laurent.gomez@sap.com 
 
Maryline Laurent, Ethmane El Moustaine 
CNRS Samovar UMR 5157,  
Institut Telecom, Telecom SudParis 
Paris, France 
Maryline.Laurent@it-sudparis.eu, 
Ethmane.ElMoustaine@it-sudparis.eu 
 
 
Abstract— Wireless Sensor Networks together with Radio 
Frequency Identification are promising technologies for 
supply chain management systems. They both provide 
supply chain players with goods tracking and monitoring 
functions along the chain. Whereas RFIDs are rather 
focusing on identification of goods (e.g., identification, 
classification), WSNs are meant to monitor and control the 
supply chain environment. Nevertheless, despite the interest 
for the supply chain management systems, their integration 
is often deterred due to the lack of interoperability. In this 
paper, we propose a software framework which makes 
easier the integration of both RFIDs and WSNs into supply 
chain management systems.  
Keywords - RFID; Wireless Sensor Network; Supply 
Chain Management 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A. Context 
Both WSN (Wireless Sensor Networks) and RFID 
(Radio Frequency IDentification) are very promising 
technologies for supply chain management as they 
introduce automation of product tracking and monitoring, 
and as such, they reduce the cost of the whole supply chain 
[19]. Today, there are only few attempts, mostly from 
industrial initiatives, that aim at integrating WSN and 
passive RFID tags [7, 8, 11].  
Similarly, in the scope of the RESCUEIT project [14], 
we address the integration of RFIDs and WSNs into 
supply chain management systems. Together with major 
industrials such as K+N [15], Group Casino [16], REWE 
[17], Dr Oetker [18], we identify a clear need of secure 
and efficient tracking of goods along the supply. 
Supported by the integration of WSNs and RFIDs either 
within packaging or at pallet level, good tracking 
empowers supply chain players with tools for risk 
assessment along the supply chain, but also with 
mechanisms for identification of responsibility in case of 
incident. 
 
B. Motivation 
The benefit of such integration for supply chain 
management could be significant as data collected from 
RFID and sensors are complementary and could serve for 
enriching the range of supported services like monitoring 
and real time traceability. Whereas RFID is rather focusing 
on 
identification 
of 
goods 
(e.g., 
identification, 
classification), WSNs are meant to monitor and control the 
supply chain environment. To some extent, RFID are not 
restricted to unique identification of goods along the 
supply chain, but can be associated to information related 
to the classification, and dangerousness of goods. Based 
on those classifications, and with regards to the regulations 
(e.g., safety [20], quality), the handling, storage, and 
transport constraints are identified. In this context, WSNs 
are 
meant 
to 
enforce 
those 
constraints 
(e.g., 
incompatibilities with other products, flash points). Based 
on the sensed supply chain context at runtime, sensors tend 
to evaluate mismatches between the constraints defined by 
regulations and the current context. Any mismatch is 
therefore reported to the supply chain management system 
as a risk of incident. 
As depicted in Figure 1., we propose a distribution of 
sensors into the supply chain, as foreseen in RESCUEIT 
[14]. Figure 1. shows an integration of RFID and sensor 
nodes only at pallet level. This assumption has been 
validated with end users of the project, like K+N [15]and 
the Casino Group [16]. In this case, we are addressing only 
low valuable products (e.g., household, gardening 
products), which explain the fact that neither goods nor 
packages 
are 
equipped 
with 
RFID 
or 
sensors. 
Nevertheless, goods and packages are still identified with 
barcode. In addition, depending on the value of the 
product, RFID and sensor can be integrated either at 
package or even product level. 
 
393
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

2 
 
 
Figure 1.   RFID and WSN integration 
 
C. Problem statement 
Even though the integration of RFID and WSNs 
appears to be promising for supply chain management 
systems, it can be deterred due to a lack of interoperability. 
First they are considered as disjoint networks. The 
EPCglobal network is designed for supporting RFID only; 
there is no standard targeting the integration of RFID and 
WSN into one network. Second, from a technological 
point of view, RFID are rather supporting single-hop 
communication between tag and reader, while WSNs 
supports a larger variety of communication (e.g., single to 
multi-hop communications). Third, they have different 
objectives. RFID are used for products identification and 
traceability. They rely on the information stored within the 
EPCGlobal infrastructure [10]. This information is related 
to the characterization of tagged assets. On the opposite, 
sensors have the objective to control and monitor the 
physical environment of assets, but not specifically 
associated to assets. Moreover they are able to self-store 
the 
useful 
information 
and regularly report 
that 
information to some supervision platform.  
Due to different technological capabilities  
and 
uses and different objectives, a direct communication 
between RFID and sensor nodes is barely conceivable.  
That is why, we propose a software architecture that 
supports both RFID, especially very low-cost RFID 
systems, and WSN with the objectives to control, 
supervise and monitor both the environment of assets and 
the assets themselves. 
 
D. Overall Approach 
Our technical approach aims at integrating both WSN 
and RFID at the software layer. For that purpose, we 
propose to use EPCIS (Electronic Product Code 
Information Services) for RFIDs management and a 
mediation layer for the WSNs management. EPCIS is 
usually in charge of giving the list of all the features 
associated to an RFID product. In order to ease the 
interaction of RFID and sensor nodes, we use a mediation 
layer, Middleware for Device Integration (MDI), a SAP 
Research prototype. It serves for the activation of adequate 
monitoring and controlling mechanisms on the sensors, 
and to implement interactions with RFID.  
 
As described previously, RFID and sensor are meant to 
be associated to a single product, package or pallet. In that 
context, RFIDs have two major roles: (i) identifying 
automatically goods along the supply chain - as made 
possible by the EPCglobal standard [10] for RFID but not 
with sensors - and including their classification, (ii) and 
tracing RFID for keeping sensors informed of the activity 
along the supply chain (e.g., storage, transport). As such, 
RFID are used for their fundamental identification and 
traceability functions, but also through EPCIS data basis to 
automatically raise the awareness of sensors about some 
(transport, 
storage) 
constraints 
(e.g., 
humidity, 
temperature) for the tagged good, with respect to the 
effective regulations. In addition, the traceability function 
enabled by RFID makes it possible to dynamically inform 
the sensor of any change of activity in the supply chain 
(e.g., transport, storage), so sensors can automatically 
adapt its constraints. Together with classification of goods, 
and update on supply chain activities, sensor nodes can 
therefore 
adapt 
their 
monitoring 
and 
controlling 
mechanisms according to regulations.    
In this context, both EPCIS and MDI are considered as 
agents, each having interactions with RFID tags and 
sensors. As such, this architecture is of great help to make 
RFID and sensors systems interact through the MDI which 
handles data from RFIDs and sensors. Note that this 
approach is very attractive as no new integrated nodes are 
needed since the whole collaboration process between 
RFID and sensors is done at the software layer. 
E. Outline 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
We present the related work in section II. We describe our 
approach in section III, together with a architecture for the 
integration of RFIDs and WSNs into supply chain 
management systems. Finally, we conclude in section IV, 
with an outlook on our ongoing activities. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
To the best of our knowledge, integration of RFID and 
WSN did not attract the interest of the research 
community. RFID and sensor networks are both under 
development but with no interactions in between. Sensors 
are generally an open system contrary to RFID passive 
tags that are generally considered as a closed system where 
modification of their behavior is barely possible. 
Moreover, 
whereas 
sensors 
support 
multi-hop 
communications, current RFID systems are affording only 
single-hop communications, so no communication among 
tags is possible. Many issues are to be solved before 
integrating RFID technology with sensor networks. These 
394
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

3 
 
issues include protocol design, energy consumption, 
security and privacy [13]. 
Moreover, the RFID technology benefits from the 
standard framework EPCglobal Network [10] that defines 
a network architecture for managing the RFID product 
information. This framework serves for trading partners to 
share product data. It is based on several key network 
elements including: EPCIS (EPC Information Services) 
and ONS (Object Naming Service). EPCIS hosts and 
facilitates access to serialized product information 
generated by EPC-tagged products. ONS is a centralized 
authoritative directory that routes information requests 
about particular EPCs likely to the well known Domain 
Name System (DNS).  
The integration of RFID technology and wireless 
sensor networks provides promising perspectives as both 
of them can be used for tightly coupling the physical and 
virtual worlds.  
Few research works are targeting integration of RFID 
passive tags and sensors. We distinguish two types of 
integration: hardware and software. On the hardware side, 
several commercial solutions are provided, which integrate 
RFID and WSNs in a single device (see Section II.A). On 
the other side, and similar to our approach, existing 
research works address the integration of RFID and WSNs 
at the software level (Section II.B). 
A. Hardware integration 
Integrating sensors into an RFID tag is used only for 
sensing few parameters. These sensor tags can be passive, 
semi-passive or active depending on the monitored 
phenomena. Generally, they only support single-hop 
communications. 
The sensor passive tags draw power from the reader to 
perform operations. They are activated only when sensing 
data are required. They can be used to sense photo 
detection [4], acceleration [5], temperature [4, 6], etc.  
The semi-passive sensor tags contain an on-board 
battery that is exclusively utilized for computation (and 
not for communication). They can perform measurements 
independently of the reader, but the energy supplied by the 
reader is always necessary for communication. 
SensTAG [7] is a highly configurable semi-passive 
sensor tag. It operates at 13.6 MHz, and can be used to 
monitor a variety of sensor options, like temperature, 
humidity, strain, shock and light, etc. 
The sensor active tags contain a battery from which 
they draw power for computation, sensing functions, and 
for communication to readers. They may be compliant 
with RFID standards, or they can use protocols based on 
wireless protocols such as ZigBee or WLAN. 
Evigia [8], Savi [11] and Crossbow [12] develop many 
active sensor tags that integrate many embedded sensors 
like temperature, humidity, light sensor, etc. 
Several companies ([11] [12]) also provide active 
RFID 
tags 
embedded 
with 
sensors 
nodes 
(e.g., 
temperature, light, presence detection). In the best case, 
those 
devices 
are 
equipped 
with 
GSM/GPRS 
communication capabilities which make them totally 
independent from supply chain player’s IT infrastructure. 
B. Software integration 
In [3], the authors propose a new architecture made of 
RFID tags and sensors. It consists in adapting the 
Application Level Event middleware (ALE) within the 
EPCglobal Network so that the filtering originally done 
over tag data is extended to sensor data. The main idea of 
this architecture is to distinguish data and control 
mechanisms in both RFID and WSN by introducing a 
reader management component that provides a uniform 
interface. This component is able to include WSN by 
adopting a Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) and the Simple 
Network Management Protocol (SNMP). As such, the 
WSN data are delivered to upper layers exactly like for 
RFID data, because the reader management component is 
able to handle data coming from RFID and WSN. 
C. Conclusion 
Regarding hardware integration within a single device, 
the exposed approaches often lack of integration with 
business applications. Those hardware solutions still 
require specific development for their integration into 
supply chain management specific. 
Our solution belongs to this category, this type of 
integration offers advantages, as no new integrated nodes 
are needed. Moreover this solution provides a common 
infrastructure to link RFID system and WSN together. 
So far, there are no standards proposing the integration 
of separate RFID and WSN into one network. To the best 
of our knowledge, our approach is the first combining 
sensors and RFID passive tags for specific needs for 
securing supply chains. 
III. 
OUR APPROACH 
As introduced in Section I.D, our approach aims at 
integrating RFIDs and WSNs through the establishment of 
a communication channel between EPCIS, for RFIDs, and 
a mediation layer, the Middleware for Device Integration 
(MDI), for WSNs.  
For that purpose, we use the MDI as an interface 
between RFIDs and WSNs. The main idea of our approach 
is to integrate RFID and sensors at the software layers. To 
do this, we make interacting two software elements: the 
EPCIS (designed for RFID as part of the RFID standards) 
and the MDI middleware (originally designed by 
industrials specifically for WSN). These elements support 
authentication of the tagged products and activation of the 
monitoring mechanisms within the sensors. 
The integration at the software layer is necessary 
within this solution because we use very low-cost passive 
RFID tags with existing standards like EPC [10] to 
authenticate the products whereas we use WSN to monitor 
products along the supply chain. 
A. Architecture 
As depicted in Figure 2., our architecture is organized 
in three main components: (i) a palett equipped with an 
395
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

4 
 
RFID and a sensor node, (ii) an EPCIS component, and 
(iii) the MDI.  
 
1) Description of EPCIS 
The EPCIS module is a special web service interacting 
with the whole RFID system (reader, tags, and database) 
and serving as an RFID system interface by the rest of our 
platform. That is, it gives access to serialized product 
information generated by EPC-tagged products and 
available in the backend database. In other words, the 
EPCIS module is like a gateway between any requester of 
tag information and the database containing that 
information. EPCIS is able to handle large volumes of tag 
data coming from numerous RFID readers. 
2) Middleware for Device Integration. 
As mediation layer between EPCIS and sensor nodes, 
we use a mediation layer called the Middleware for Device 
Integration (MDI). MDI is a mediation layer developed by 
SAP Research [21] for the integration of smart items (e.g., 
WSNs, RFID) into business applications. Based on an 
OSGi Service Platform [22], MDI is an agent-based 
middleware 
which 
enables 
both 
monitoring 
and 
controlling of smart items. In Figure 2., the MDI hosts 
three agents: the sensor interface, the update, and the 
alerting 
service. 
The 
sensor 
interface 
enables 
communication with nodes, and the alerting service 
triggers alerts to users. 
In addition the updater agent is in charge of the update 
of monitoring and controlling constraints on the sensor 
nodes. Depending on the classification and activity update 
from RFID, this agent updates on the nodes the constraints 
to be evaluated. For example, an alert whenever 
temperature reaches a given threshold can be activated. 
The same alert can be further on deactivated, in case of 
activity changes along the supply chain. For example, 
pallet fall alerting must be evaluated during storage in 
warehouse, but deactivated whenever the pallet is 
manipulated. 
In Figure 3., we identify the following relationships: 
constraints, based on regulation, depend on asset’s 
classification and activity along the supply chain 
execution. In addition, risk is depending on mismatch 
between constraints on goods and their context in the 
supply chain. If a constraint on temperature is defined, the 
probability on incident occurrence is depending on a 
mismatch with the context of the asset. 
To that purpose, our updater agent enablement service 
is in charge of maintaining a monitoring database, based 
on the nature of the products, and the status of the supply 
chain process. Accordingly constraints to be evaluated are 
pushed to sensor nodes. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Architecture 
 
Figure 3.  Risk Assessment 
B. Interactions between RFID/Sensor Systems  
The sensor node on the pallet is capable of in node 
processing, and is able to measure different contextual 
information (e.g., temperature, humidity). On the other 
hand, RFID is passive. As explained in Section III, the 
EPCIS service stores in its database all the information 
relative to the RFID tagged pallets: i.e. the SSCC [25] 
information (e.g. identifier of the pallet along the supply 
chain), CLP classification of goods (Classification, 
Labeling and Packaging of substances and mixtures) [24]). 
Also, the RFID identification is mapped manually to the 
identifier of the sensor attached to the pallet during the 
initialization phase of the EPCIS database. Table 1 gives 
the adopted EPCIS data model. 
 
RFID Id 
SSCC 
CLP 
Sensor Id 
TABLE I.  
EPCIS DATA MODEL 
Upon reading a tagged pallet, an RFID reader must 
send the RFID Id to the EPCIS service. EPCIS is then in 
charge of informing the MDI that the sensor identified by 
sensorId monitors a good classified according to the CLP 
norm. Based on that classification, the service enablement 
within the MDI extracts a set of constraint to be enforced 
on the sensor Id node. Those constraints are described in 
the constraint database, as shown in Table 1. Finally 
constraints are pushed to the sensor nodes via the MDI. 
For example, for a chemical and anytime along the 
supply chain, a flash point of 13 Celsius degrees is defined 
396
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

5 
 
by safety regulation. In addition, and only during storage, 
a constraint on acceleration of the pallet is activated, in 
order to prevent any pallet fall. 
 
Classification 
Status 
Set of constraints 
TABLE II.  
SERVICE ENABLEMENT DATA MODEL 
Also upon detecting a status change along the supply 
chain, the RFID system registers that information to its 
own database and forwards the new status with the RFID 
Id to the MDI. Status change is then pushed to the sensor 
nodes.  
C. Implementation 
Our architecture has the advantage of leveraging 
standardized 
XML 
messaging 
frameworks 
for 
communications between EPCIS and MDI. 
 
1) RFID and EPCIS 
EPCglobal/ISO 18000-6C [10] is the RFID standard 
for supply chain. It defines a standard interface to enable 
EPC-related data; it does not specify how the service 
operations or database should be implemented. RFID tag 
communicates with the reader using the EPC Generation 
2 protocol. The reader communicates with the EPCIS 
using the Reader Protocol. EPCIS has specific interfaces 
like EPCIS ALE (Application Level Event) interface, 
EPCIS Query interface. 
EPCIS database stores all the product information like 
the traceability information, etc. In our solution, EPCIS 
works and exchanges information with MDI through a 
common interface thanks to web service. 
 
2) EPCIS and MDI 
When the EPCIS/Database authenticates the products, 
it informs the MDI about the nature of the pallet content, 
but also other tag data (e.g., sensor ID associated to the 
same pallet than the tag ID) and the product location (e.g., 
truck, warehouse, latitude, longitude). Then the MDI is 
enabled to activate adequate monitoring mechanisms on 
the sensors. This way, the logistician is able to monitor 
products along the supply chain. The MDI is able to 
handle large constraints coming from different EPCISs. 
Our approach consists in distinguishing the data and 
control mechanisms in both RFID and WSN in two 
different software layers. The proposed architecture has 
the advantage of leveraging standardized Web Service 
messaging frameworks [23] for communications between 
EPCIS and MDI. 
The monitoring and controlling updater exposes a web 
service method for the update of a good, based on its 
classification and its status in the supply chain. The web 
service method signature is defined as follows 
ErrorCode updateSensor(Integer SensorId, String 
GoodClassification, String Activity); 
 
3) Middleware for Device Integration and Sensors 
As depicted in Figure 2., three agents are running into 
the MDI. The updater agent is in charge of the update of 
constraints to be evaluated on nodes. An additional 
alerting agent is dedicated to the collection of alerts form 
the nodes, and the forwarding of alerts to end users. 
Finally a dedicated agent enables the communication 
between sensors and the two former agents. With respect 
to the targeted sensor node, a dedicated agent has to be 
implemented. In our case, we are focusing on crossbow 
[12] sensor node, which requires a dedicated agent. This 
agent has to be able to: (i) acquire information (e.g., alert, 
raw sensor data) from sensor nodes, and (ii) to push 
information (e.g., commands, constraints) to nodes.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
As a conclusion, this paper proposed a framework for 
integrating RFID and sensor within the supply chain 
management systems. With this approach, we firstly aim at 
demonstrating the benefit of integrating RFID and WSNs.  
RFID are in 
charge of 
identifying 
good, 
their 
classification, and the status within the supply chain 
process. 
WNSs, 
embedded 
with 
monitoring 
and 
controlling capabilities, are meant to mismatch between 
regulation on goods, depending on their classification and 
on the status in the supply chain process.  Therefore, 
WSNs depends on RFID information in order to run 
adequate alerting service on nodes. 
We are planning an evaluation of our approach through 
a prototype in the scope of the RESCUEIT project. In 
addition, we are currently working of the design of 
security mechanisms for mutual authentication between 
RFID and tags reader, risk assessment delegations to 
nodes, and secure and efficient tracking of goods along the 
supply chain. Our goal is to address security requirement 
regarding the integration of RFID and WSNs for supply 
chain management systems. 
V. 
DISCLAIMER 
The research was partially funded by the German Federal 
Ministry 
of 
Education 
and 
Research 
under 
the 
promotional reference 01ISO7009 and by the French 
Ministry of Research within the RESCUE-IT project [14]. 
The authors take the responsibility for the content. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Eason, and B. Noble, and I. N. Sneddon, “On certain 
integrals of Lipschitz-Hankel type involving products of 
Bessel functions,” Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London, vol. 
A247, pp. 529–551, April 1955.  
[2] H. Liu, and M. Bolic, and A. Nayak, and I. Stojmenovic, 
“Integration of RFID and Wireless Sensor Networks,” 
SenseID 2007 Workshop at ACM SenSys, Sydney, 
Australia, 6-9 Nov. 2007. 
[3] J. Sung, and T. Sanchez Lopez, and D. Kim “The EPC 
Sensor 
Network 
for 
RFID 
and 
WSN Integration 
Infrastructure,”  PERCOMW '07, Washington, DC, USA. 
[4] N. Cho, and S. Song, and S. Kim, and S. Kim, and H. Yoo 
“A 5.1-uW UHF RFID Tag Chip Integrated with Sensors 
for Wireless Environmental Monitoring” ESSCIRC, 
Grenoble, France, Sept. 2005. 
397
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

6 
 
[5] M. Philipose, and J. R. Smith, and B. Jiang, and A. 
Mamishev, and A. Mamishev, and A. Mamishev, “Battery-
free Wireless Identification and Sensing,” IEEE Pervasive 
Comput., vol. 4, no. 1, Jan.–Mar. 2005, pp. 37–45. 
[6] H. Kitayoshi and K. Sawaya, “Long Range Passive RFID-
tag for Sensor Networks,” Proc. 62nd IEEE Vehic. Tech. 
Conf., 2005. 
[7] SensTag 
HF 
Passive 
RFID 
Sensing 
Products, 
http://www.phaseivengr.com/p4main/Technology/SensTA
GWirelessRFIDSensors.aspx, April 2011 
[8] Evigia, 
Container 
security 
Tag, 
http://www.evigia.com/products/hardware/tag/, April 2011 
[9] Bill Glover (2006-02-03), "RFID Essentials", O'Reilly 
Media, Inc, USA. 
[10] GS1/EPCglobal Network, http://www.gs1.org/epcglobal, 
April 2011 
[11] Savi, 
Transportation 
Logistics 
and 
RFID, 
http://www.savi.com/products/rfid/rfid-tags.php, 
April 
2011 
[12] Crossbow, Logistics products, http://www.xbow.com/asset-
tracking/products/index.html, April 2011 
[13] K.C. Ko, and Z.H. Mir, and Y.B. Ko, “An Energy 
Conservation Method for Ubiquitous Sensor Networks 
Integrated with RFID Readers,” submitted to WWIC 2007. 
[14] L. Gomez, M. Khalfaoui, and E. El-Khoury, and C. Ulmer, 
and J-P Deutsch, and O. Chettouh, and O. Gaci, and H. 
Mathieu, and E. El Moustaine, and M. Laurent, H. 
Schneider, 
C. 
Daras, 
A. 
Schaad, 
« RESCUEIT : 
sécuRisation dE la Chaîne logiStique orientée serviCe 
depUis 
le 
mondE 
des 
objets 
jusqu’à 
l’univers 
InformaTique », 
Workshop 
Interdisciplinaire 
sur 
la 
Securite Globale, WISG 2011, Troyes 
[15] Kuehne + Nagel, http://www.kn-portal.com/, April 2011 
[16] Group Casino, http://www.groupe-casino.com/, April 2011 
[17] REWE, http://www.rewe.de/, April 2011 
[18] Dr Oetker, http://www.oetker.com, April 2011 
[19] A. Dada and F. Thiesse “Sensor applications in the supply 
chain: the example of quality-based issuing of perishables”, 
IOT'08: Proceedings of the 1st international conference on 
The internet of things. pp. 140-154. 
[20] REACH, Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and 
Restriction 
of 
Chemical 
substances,  
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/chemicals/reach/reach_intr
o.htm, April 2011 
[21] SAP 
Research, 
http://www.sap.com/about/company/research/index.epx, 
April 2011 
[22] OSGi Alliance, http://www.osgi.org, April 2011 
[23] Web Service, http://www.w3.org/2002/ws/, January 2002 
[24] Classification, labelling and packaging of substances and 
mixtures 
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/sectors/chemicals/classificati
on/index_en.htm, April 2011 
[25] GS1, 
“GS1 
Identification 
Key 
Series”, 
http://www.gs1.org/sites/default/files/docs/idkeys/GS1_SS
CC_Executive_Summary.pdf, April 2011 
 
398
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

