The Novel Microhotplate: A Design Featuring Ultra High Temperature, Ultra Low 
Thermal Stress, Low Power Consumption and Small Response Time 
 
      Hasan       , and Mona Zaghloul  
Electrical and Computer Engineering  
The George Washington University 
Washington DC, USA 
hgoktas.gwu@gmail.com, mona.zaghloul@gmail.com
 
Abstract— Microhotplate (MHP) has multiple applications, 
such as micro-heating elements, catalytic gas sensors, resistive 
gas sensing, infra-red source, non-dispersive infrared detector 
(NDIR) gas sensing, Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) 
spectroscopy, temperature sensing, flow sensing, pressure 
sensing, 
smart 
sensing 
and 
lab-on-chip. 
Low 
power 
consumption, high temperature, high thermal stability (low 
thermal stresses), uniform temperature distribution and fast 
thermal response are the most desirable features of the MHP 
design.  This paper describes the design of the MHP that has 
ultra-high temperature (2000K), ultra-low thermal stress 
(90MPa), low power consumption (30mW) and small response 
time (9.13ms). All the results matched with Coventor 
simulation results. 
Keywords- Microhotplate; ultra high temperature; ultra-low 
thermal stress; low power consumption; small thermal response 
time. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
One of the popular usages for the MHPs is gas sensors. 
Fig. 1 shows the standard MHP gas sensor with the plate 
structure, a Polysilicon layer, between       
 
 
Figure 1. Microhotplate (MHP) 
 
MHP is widely used for the catalytic and resistive gas 
sensing. According to Korotcenkov [1], high temperature 
would be desirable for selective gas sensors. It would reduce 
considerably the influence of air humidity and increase the 
sensitivity. Some 
metal 
oxide layers require high 
temperature for high sensitive gas sensors. For Ga2O3 
sensor the operation temperature is 600-900 Celsius and it 
senses the O2 and CO gases. Oxygen sensors using SrTiO3 
(Strontium titanate) operates at 1000 Celsius. According to 
[2], selectivity can be improved by operating the sensor in a 
temperature-modulated mode. High temperature MHP 
would allow a wide range of different gas sensing.  
Nanomaterial processing is another one of the most 
important applications for high temperature MHP. It is 
especially important for CNT growth [3], thin film growth 
and characterization [4]. It requires high temperature 
operation with reconfigurable and controllable heating, and 
uniform surface deflection. All these features are well 
established in this paper. 
Section-II concentrates on the causes of the thermal 
stresses 
and 
their 
possible 
solutions. 
Section-III 
demonstrates the effect of the spring structure and 
modulated AC signal on the low power consumption. 
Section-IV shows how to achieve the faster response time 
while keeping the uniform temperature distribution with 
uniform deflection. Section-V shows the novel MHP’s 
performance by comparing it with the ones in the literature        
II. 
LOW THERMAL STRESS MHP DESIGN 
There are two causes of high thermal stress. The first is 
due to having different thermal expansion constant materials 
in the composite structure. The second is having a structure, 
which cannot expand when heated. Solutions in the 
literature are concentrated to solve the first cause by using 
either the same thermal expansion constant materials or the 
compatible materials in the composite structure. This solves 
the problem partially; however, fails at a high temperature 
around 700 Celsius. In this work, an analytical approach is 
first applied to the first cause to find the optimum 
dimensions solution (if any); and then, the novel structure is 
realized and applied to the second cause to get the optimum 
MHP for high temperature applications.   
A. Thermal Stress Analysis  
The equation for the composite structure having a 
different thermal expansion constant is given in [5] as 
shown below in (1) 
          -               
      -       
       -          
     -      
      -      ( 1 )  
where 
       ∑
        -   -  
 
   
 ,      
 
 ∑
       
 -  - 
  
 
   
 
          
 
 ∑
       
 -  - 
  
 
   
 ,    ∑ ∫
             
  
  -  
 
 
 
208
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

    ∑ ∫                
  
    
 
 
 
 
The number of layers in a composite structure are 
represented in Fig. 2 and is denoted by i, where   -  -  h  
represents the thickness of i-th beam,    represents the lower 
surface of i-th beam,    is elastic modulus,    is thermal 
expansion constant for i-th beam, and        is the stress 
value for i-th beam at thickness y and w represents the 
width. 
 
Figure 2. Cross section of the Composite structure 
 
Conventional MHP structure is a composite structure. 
Fig. 3 shows the maximum thermal stress versus the 
temperature 
for 
the 
3 
layer 
composite 
structure 
(SiO2+Poly+SiO2). The stress value is around 240 MPa 
when the temperature reaches to 600 Kelvin. For the CMOS 
technology materials the maximum stress is around 100 
MPa. Thus, at 600 Kelvin the CMOS MHP would be brittle 
with a conventional structure as shown in Fig. 1. 
 
Figure 3. Stress versus Temperature for 3-layer MHP 
 
Fig. 4a shows how the analytical results match with the 
Coventor simulation results for thermal stress in the middle 
of the polysilicon layer proving that the change in the width 
cannot solve the thermal stress problem. Fig. 4b shows that 
large thermal stress occurs in the center of the layer despite 
thermal stress decreasing on the sides proving changes in 
width cannot solve the thermal stress problem. 
 
Figure 4. a) Effect of width on Thermal stress, b) cross-section view of the 2 
layer composite structure 
 
Fig. 5 shows a nice match between the calculation results 
and the Coventor simulation results for the thermal stress on 
the interface layer between SiO2 and Poly layer. In this 
result, layer 2 in Fig. 2a was used. In general, it applies to 
any number of layers in the interface. At first glance, it looks 
like the change in the thickness of one material in the 
composite structure can decrease the thermal stress. 
 
Figure 5. Effect of thickness on Thermal stress 
 
Fig. 6 shows the distribution of the thermal stress 
throughout the thickness of several layers. Thermal stress is 
shown for the poly layer in Fig. 6a and for the SiO2 layer in 
Fig. 6c. Fig. 6b shows the    ’s results. The match between 
the (1) and Coventor simulation results can be seen from 
Fig. 6. The graph in Fig. 6b shows the thermal stress versus 
thickness for SiO2 layer (y=0um to y=1.5um) and for the 
poly layer (y=1.5um to y=2um). It is proved by this example 
that changing the geometry (looking for the optimum 
dimensions) of the composite structure having a different 
thermal expansion constant is not a solution for low thermal 
stress. That is why a single layer structure or the composite 
structure having the same thermal expansion constant 
209
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

materials would be a better option to decrease the thermal 
stress; however, it requires further optimzations as discussed 
in the next section.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. a)Thermal stresses versus thickness of SiO2, b)Thermal stress 
versus thickness from  (1),  c)Thermal stress versus thickness of Poly layer 
B. Designing a structure that can expand 
From the above discussion, a second cause for thermal 
stress is the restriction of expansion in the original MHP 
design shown in Fig. 1. A single layer and the composite 
structure with the same thermal expansion constant are 
described here. Spring structure allows the MHP to expand 
freely, and decreases the stress values, as shown in Fig. 7. 
Stress on the electrode bridge is around 370 MPa in Fig. 7a; 
however, it is around 230 MPa in Fig. 7b. Further design 
optimizations on the spring structure can be accomplished by 
varying the width, length, or thickness. If the width 
increases, then stress decreases according to equation 
             
     
          and it increases the safety factor. In 
our design the maximum stress at 2000 Kelvin is less than 90 
MPa as shown in Fig. 8. Fig. 11 shows the temperature effect 
on the thermal stress. The thermal stress increases while the 
thickness increases due to the increase in volume and 
thermal expansion. The safety factor is realized around 1.5. 
 
 
Figure 7. Spring design for low thermal stress 
 
 
Figure 8. Maximum Thermal Stresses at 2020K 
III. 
LOW POWER CONSUMPTION MHP 
The spring structure decreases the heat flux to the 
substrate and keeps most of the heat on the MHP as shown 
in Fig. 9. Rₒ is the resistance of the heater plate, R1 is for the 
heater bridge and R2 is for the connection between the 
substrate and the heater br dge. Tₒ  s the center temperature 
on the plate, T1 is at the connection of the bridge and plate, 
T2 is at the connection of the heater and substrate and T3 is 
the substrate temperature. The temperature at each node can 
be found via thermal conduction and heat generation 
equations as shown below. 
      
    
  , where   =
   
 ,    
 =   
  ,  = 
 
     (2) 
 
                 , where               (3) 
 
where    is the heat generation per volume, V is the 
volume, R is the resistance,     is the current flow,   is the 
210
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

density, L is the length, A is the area,    is the heat flux, k is 
the thermal conduction constant and     is the resistance for 
a unit surface area. 
 
 
Figure 9. a) Electrical equivalent circuit of MHP, b) Temperature 
Distribution on MHP at 0.4Volt, c) Thermal Conduction equivalent circuit 
of MHP 
 
Coventor simulation results matched with (2) and (3). 
Equation-2 is used in the section between Tₒ and T2. 
Equation-3 is used in the section between T2 and T3 as 
shown in Fig. 9c. This procedure allows us to find the 
optimum design in terms having low power consumption, 
high 
uniform 
temperature 
distribution 
and 
uniform 
deflection on the surface. The design in this paper has 
37mW power consumption with a 0.46 Volt voltage at 2000 
Kelvin. 
 
Using AC voltage (frequency modulated signal) rather 
than DC voltage decreases the power consumption further 
for low-voltage design. Ta in Fig. 10 is the time period 
when the voltage is high; Tb is the time period when there is 
no voltage applied to the MHP. Tb depends on the cooling 
time of the system. In this way the system can be kept at 
2000K with much more less power consumption.  
 
 
Figure 10. DC voltage versus modulated square wave 
 
 
Fig. 11 shows an example for thickness effect on power 
consumption. A decrease in thickness also results in a 
decrease in power consumption because the resistance 
increases and drops the current flow.  
 
Figure 11. Power Consumption and Thermal stress versus thickness at 
2000K 
 
IV. 
SOLUTION TO FAST RESPONSE TIME WITH UNIFORM 
TEMPERATURE DISTRIBUTION AND DEFLECTION 
The response time can be decreased by increasing the 
current because heat is proportional to the rate of current 
flowing through the heater. If the voltage increases more 
than the required value to reach the target temperature, then 
the heating rate will increase. This results in high 
temperature in a short time due to an increase in the current 
density. Fig. 12 shows how the voltage affects the 
temperature increase in a shorter time period. By combining 
the frequency modulated square wave solution from Fig. 10 
with the high voltage solution from Fig. 12, we can get a 
reconfigurable heating rate on MHP. This feature is very 
important especially for high quality CNT growth. Having a 
single layer structure not only enables the uniform 
temperature distribution on the MHP as shown in Fig. 8b, 
but also enables a very small response time as 9.1ms to reach 
2000K with 0.46V. 
 
Figure 12. Transient Responses Temperature from Coventor simulation 
results when different voltages applied to the MHP 
 
 
 
 
211
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

V. 
CONCLUSON 
Previous results in the literature to the best of our 
knowledge show the smallest thermal stress is 210MPa at 
650 Celsius in [6], the highest temperature is up to 1000 
Celsius in [7], the lowest power consumption is 16mW at 
550 Celsius in [8], and the smallest response time is 5ms for 
400 Celsius in [9] and 10ms for 550 Celsius in [8]. We 
succeeded to design the MHP with less than 90MPa stress at 
2000 Kelvin with 9.13ms response time, 37mW power 
consumption and 0.7um uniform deflection. Detailed results 
can be seen from Fig. 13. The MHP structure shown in this 
paper is currently being fabricated for measurements. MHP 
will be tested to sense the gases that require high 
temperature. The temperature modulated mode will also be 
tested by using the advantage of a wide range of 
temperature (0-2000K) capability to sense the different 
gases 
 
 
Figure 13.  Power Consumption and Thermal stress versus temperature 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Korotcenkov, “Metal Oxide for solid-state gas sensors: 
What determines our choice?” Material science and Engineering B 
139 (2007)  
[2] A. Vergara, E. Llobet, J. Brezmes, P. Ivanov, C. Cané, I. 
Gràcia, X. Vilanova, and X. Corre g, “Quantitative gas mixture 
analysis using temperature-modulated micro-hot plate gas sensors: 
Selection and validation of the optimal modulating frequencies,” 
Sensors and Actuators B 123(2007) 1002-1016 
[3] M. S. Haque, K. B. K. Teo, N. L. Rupensinghe, S. Z. Ali, I. 
Haneef, S. I. Maeng, J. Park, F. Udrea, and W. I. M lne, “On-chip 
depos ton of carb on nanotubes us ng CMOS m crohotplates,” 
Nanotechnology 19 (2008) 025607 
[4] J. L. Hertz, D. L. Lahr, and S. Seman ck “Comb nator al 
Character zat on of Chem res st ve F lms Us ng M crohotplates,” 
IEEE Sensors Journal, Vol. 12, No 5, May 2012 
[5] N. Noda, R. B. Hetnarski and Y. Tanigawa, Thermal Stresses, 
Second Edition, Tylor & Francis, 2003, pp. 39-54 
[6] J Puigcorb´e, D Vogel, B Michel, A Vil`a, I Gr`acia, C Can´e 
and J R Morante, “Thermal and mechanical analysis of 
m cromach ned gas sensors,” J. Micromech. Microeng. 13 (2003) 
548–556 
[7] L. Mele, F. Santagata, E. Iervolino, M. Mihailovic, T. Rossi, 
A.T. Tran, H. Schellevis, J.F.reemer and P.M. Sarro, “Sputtered 
Molybdenum as conductive material for high-temperature 
m crohotplates,” Transducers’  , Be j ng, Ch na, June 5-9, 2011 
[8] P.K. Guha, S.Z. Ali, C.C.C. Lee, F. Udrea, W.I. Milne, T. 
Iwaki, J.A. Covington and J.W. Gardner, “Novel design and 
characterization of SOI CMOS micro-hotplates for high 
temperature gas sensors,” Sensors and Actuators B 127 (2007) 
260–266  
[9] Lei Xu, Tie Li, Xiuli Gao, and Yuelin Wang, Senior Member, 
IEEE, “Development of a Reliable Micro-Hotplate With Low 
Power Consumption,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 11, no. 4, April 
2011 
 
 
 
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

