Smart Services Through Smart Item Agent 
 
Jiří Tengler, Juraj Fabuš, Peter Kolarovszki, Viktória Fabušová 
The Faculty of Operation and Economics of Transport and Communications  
University of Žilina 
Žilina, Slovak republic 
e-mail: {jiri.tengler,juraj.fabus,peter.kolarovszki,viktoria.fabusova}@fpedas.uniza.sk 
 
 
Abstract—This work deals with the realization of smart item 
agent, which is equipped with motion, vibration, acceleration, 
temperature, humidity sensors and a tracking module through 
GPS (Global Position System). The main reason for choosing 
this solution was to reduce crash delivery problems and 
increase the quality of services. These two problems are very 
interesting for postal or logistics providers. Item agent collects 
data during transport in the logistics process of the selected 
organization. The output is a summary of the data used to 
monitor the quality and identification of the different services 
that are provided to the selected type of items. The 
configuration is an intelligent agent addressed as follows: The 
heart of the agent is a programmable integrated circuit, which 
takes care of collecting and storing information from the 
sensors mentioned above. Part of the agent may also be a GSM 
(Global System for Mobile Communications) module, which 
allows us to track the shipment in real time, but at the cost of 
lower battery life cycle agent. The collected data will be used to 
improve the organization of its services and the ability to 
identify the failure of the service at a specific point in the 
logistics chain through smart sensor package. The results of 
our research are represented by the solution (smart agent) and 
also the methodology for diagnosing the quality of services in 
conjunction with postal or logistics operator needs. 
Keywords-postal sector; postal package; MCU; smart 
sensors; IoT. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
Quality in the field of postal services could be defined as 
a file of used properties of service taking into account the 
fact that the service would be performed according to 
standards and requests of customers. That is one reason why 
postal operators perform quality monitoring of their services 
[1][2].  
 
Quality monitoring in postal services in terms of letter 
mails is indeed nothing special for most of postal operators 
nowadays. The entire process of quality monitoring deals 
with move tracking of selected tested postal mails at the 
same time in recording of their respective time stamps at the 
time of passing through particular transfer points. This 
process can be performed either by the use of barcodes 
technology, or more frequently, by the use of RFID 
technology (Radio-Frequency Identification). However, this 
process is performed at a large scale for postal letter mails 
only due to adherence of various national as well as 
international standards. Thus, these measurements give only 
information including the time and place of passage of 
postal correspondence. This information is sufficient for the 
service "delivery of correspondence" [3][4]. 
 
Besides postal letter mails that have continuous gradual 
decrease of volumes, there is also another group of postal 
products that, unlike letter mails, have managed to achieve 
growing tendencies – postal parcels. With its nature, this 
service in question allows to transport various commodities 
and goods of various sizes, etc. The question is what kind of 
other quality parameter could be considered for this service, 
except for those already assessed for postal letter mails. The 
subject of postal letter mails service is a delivery of content 
(mostly papers) to addressee of respective postal mail.  
Once the content of a letter is readable, a quality fact can be 
taken into account. In case of postal parcels service, it is a 
little bit different. The subject of postal parcels service is 
transport of respective product, meaning also non-paper 
form. If a content of a mail is article with respective 
function, grade and quality, let us assume that these 
properties should not distinguish between dispatching and 
delivery to final addressee. Based on a real-life experience, 
it is not always the case. Extensive analysis revealed 
potential causes of damage or loss of postal parcels [5][6]. 
There are several reasons for potential damage of postal 
parcels: 
a. 
Inadequate packed mail (improper cover, filling, in 
the case of multipart goods to their poor 
attachment), 
b. Inadequate placing of mail into transport or 
manipulation unit (in a real case, this means bad 
storing of postal parcels in postal crates, truck or 
even into a mailing rate), 
c. 
Inadequate manipulation of mail (loading and 
unloading of the mailing, moving postal parcel 
through sorting system ), 
d. Inadequate selection of transport route (poor choice 
of transport communication in poor condition etc.), 
e. 
and more [7][8]. 
 
These activities could eventually impose impairment of 
content, reduction of mail, reduction of functionality, grade 
or quality of content. The detection of the exact point of any 
inaccuracy occurrence is very complex, as these are detected 
just after their final delivery to addressee.  Even though we 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

could detect, in which phase of transport process the 
inadequacy in question had been made, it is not obvious 
which activities had preceded to it. As it has already been 
said, the postal service package is used for transporting 
various goods. From this, we can conclude that each specific 
item should be packaged specifically for the transport path 
and specifically transported. For example, glass must be 
transported so as not to be broken or foods, flowers, etc. 
should be transported in such a package, to prevent 
overheating and super cooling due to the weather and 
similar cases. It would be advantageous to have a tool that 
could record negative influence on the content of 
transported parcels. That is why this research was started, 
which subsequently was referred to as Smart agent.  
 
Therefore, a question could be raised if it is suitable to 
perform quality monitoring also for postal parcels,  allowing 
by its own nature a capture of more relevant data than just 
points and time of pass-over of postal mail through postal 
transport network [9][10]. 
 
In the second section, we briefly discuss about the current 
state of usage of smart sensors in the postal sector and we 
have provided a reason for the realization of the solution. In 
the third section, we specify the requirements and present 
the logical design of smart agent. The fourth section is 
devoted to describing the parcel shipping process for the 
selected postal operator. An inseparable part of this section 
is a design methodology for measuring of this operator. In 
the fifth section, we describe the measurement process itself 
through smart agent. The sixth section is devoted to the 
interpretation of the measurement results. In the final 
section, we highlight the value of the whole issue and 
suggest other possible steps. 
II. ANALYSIS OF CURRENT SITUTATION 
 
There is currently a large number of technical solutions 
that enable logging and also forward data captured via smart 
sensors. These solutions are then useful in many areas of 
human life [11]. 
 
In our paper, we are primarily interested in the area of the 
postal sector. These solutions are of course applicable where 
it is relevant or necessary to collect this data. There is a 
small number of postal operators using smart sensors in 
their activities. A large group of the above-mentioned postal 
operators uses smart sensors for mapping or monitoring of 
their processes. A further group of postal operators uses 
smart 
sensors 
as 
an 
additional 
service 
for 
their 
transportation services. These are mainly packages or even 
transport units. The reason for developing our own solution 
lies in poorly scalable and modifiable commercial solution 
for our particular area of interest. Another reason was the 
involvement of students in problem solving of selected 
postal operator with whom we have cooperated in the 
development of the device. 
III. CONCEPT OF SMART AGENT 
 
The current development of information-communication 
technologies allows to apply an electronics of minimal 
dimensions even into the field where we could hardly 
imagine to be applied in past. As a proof, let us use the 
application of RFID technology into almost all the fields of 
human activity. We can say that the whole concept of its 
essence is increasingly approaching the issue of Internet of 
Things (IoT), or a subset of it called internet processes 
(IoPro – Internet of Processes). In essence, this philosophy 
deals with the interaction of the reporting entity with 
different influences captured through intelligent sensors. So, 
not only it allows tracking the subject and the influences 
acting on it, but it does to some extent capture and portray 
the processes associated with it. 
 
The result of our attempts has been a realization of a 
small electronic equipment that would be put into the postal 
parcel, whereby the measurement would be performed 
likewise at postal letter mails by use of testing parcel. 
Indeed, fields of application can be eventually much wider, 
either for postal operator or final user of respective postal 
service. Despite the great potential of this device, it is 
planned to be used only on repeated testing of specific parts 
of postal transportation network of postal operators. This 
situation affects the price for the components of the device. 
The purchase price ranges from 16 to 35 Euros, using 
components with online and offline versions.  
 
The foundation of our equipment is energy-efficient 
integrated circuits, which are connected with intelligent 
sensors. Connected storage media were used for data storage 
and battery power with sufficient capacity were considered 
[12]. 
 
 
The basic components of the smart agent: 
 
The energy control unit MCU (microcontroller or 
Micro Control Unit), 
 
Intelligent 
sensors 
(humidity, 
gyroscope, 
acceleration, temperature) 
 
External storage memory, 
 
Battery power. 
 
Additional components: 
 
GSM 
module 
(Global 
System 
for 
Mobile 
Communications), 
 
GPS module (Global Positioning System), 
 
Intelligent sensors (falls, stresses). 
 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 1. Concept of Smart agent. 
Figure 1 represents two proposals for a smart agent. The 
difference is access to recorded information. The online 
version of the smart agent is accessing data in real time. The 
off-line version of the smart agent has access to the data 
after completion of the transport process. 
IV. 
MEASUREMENT METODOLOGY 
 
The main impetus for the implementation of smart tools 
agent was needed to identify the factors that may affect the 
postal parcel dispatch time after transport. After the 
implementation of a smart agent and related laboratory 
performance tests, realistic tests were performed. Our 
measurements were carried out at an unnamed postal 
operator. For the purposes of this article, we will refer to it as 
a general postal operator. 
 
Now, we proceed to the preparation process and 
implementation of measurement. As already mentioned, the 
subject of our measurement was to capture the negative 
influences that can affect the content of postal parcels. We 
chose a trio of sensors. For this measurement, we activated 
the following sensors: 
 
Temperature (° C - Celsius), 
 
Humidity (% RH - Relative Humidity), 
 
Accelerometer and gyroscope (m.s-2). 
 
Through these sensors, we were able to determine the 
degree of humidity, temperature, acceleration in each vectors 
direction of postal parcel and of course location of the 
package through the gyroscope. Beside general acceleration, 
we also considered acceleration toward Earth´s surface. All 
these data were recorded on a storage medium (external 
memory) connected to the smart agent. Other data that were 
used for efficient analysis data were obtained from the postal 
operator. We used information on the arrival and departure 
times of the postal rate for loading and unloading, and of 
course, the approximate time of manual and mechanized 
handling parcels. Basic statistical methods [13] were used for 
processing and analysis of these values.  
A. The principle of treatment of postal parcels 
Phase 1. Within first phase, we obtained the pre-sorted 
parcels coming from processing node. In next step, the 
parcels 
were 
sorted 
at 
central 
processing 
center.  
Consequently, these consignments were transported at the 
appropriate time to a central processing center, where the 
scope of the processing node belongs. Phase 2. Here, the 
shipments are automatically processed and routed through 
sorting lines (see Figure 2). According to the site directed 
(resp. Sites) shipments, either transferred to other central 
processing centers (see Figure 2) or subsequently through 
non-mechanized 
(pedestrian) 
or 
mechanized 
centers 
delivered to the addressee (see the Phase 3 Figure 2). The 
same procedure is repeated in other central processing 
centers. 
Central processing 
center (mechanized 
sorting) no.1
Processing node
Posting a contact point 
for customers 
(hand-sorting)
Customer sender
Post
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 3
Customer recipient
Post
postman
Central processing 
center (mechanized 
sorting) no.1
Central processing 
center (mechanized 
sorting) no.2,3,4,5
Post
Central processing 
center (mechanized 
sorting) no.1,2,3,4,5
 
Figure 2. Principle of treatment of postal parcels. 
B. Preparation of measurement 
 
For our testing, we used standard cardboard packaging 
sizes 350x250x120mm. The weight of this packaging was 
184 g. Our smart agent weighted 258 grams including 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

batteries. Together, the smart agent with the envelope and 
the inner lining weighted 556 grams. 
V. MEASUREMENT 
 
In our measurements, we tested the consignment coming 
from the postal transportation network of postal operator. In 
our measurements we used just part of postal transport 
network described in Figure 2. This particular consignment 
is characterized in the context of Figure 2, the first phase. 
So, we filed a smart agent in the aforementioned packaging 
to transport node. From there, the shipment was transported 
to a central processing center and went through the whole 
process of sort order. Based on the agreement with the 
workers of sorting facility, the package was removed with a 
smart agent at the end of the sorting process and the 
following day handed over to our team. The entire schedule 
is more evident in Figure 3. 
TIME LINE
16:05
18:20
19:30
20:05
Sending smart agent on 
processing node
Beginning pre processing of 
postal parcels
Commencement of loading 
postal package to the postal 
course
The carriage of postal parcels 
to the central processing 
center no.1
20:25
20:50
Commencement of unloading 
postal parcels in the central 
processing center
20. 2. 2016
Commencement the sorting 
process.
22:20
Termination of management, 
execution of loading into 
other central processing 
centers
22:00
Pickup smart agent after 
sorting
 
Figure 3. Time line of measurement. 
The entire schedule is more evident in Figure 3. There 
was only one group of data which had a higher value. And 
this value is 7.345 ms2 and the directional vector 'Z' at 
position 1, see in Figure 4. 
VI. 
MEASUREMENT RESULT 
 
Through this measurement, we were able to obtain 
339,303 groups of values. Each group contained five values. 
Now, we can move on to concrete results. 
A. Position of the postal parcel 
 
The whole measurement took less than six hours. During 
this period the consignment of several position changes. 
From the data analysis it is quite difficult to ascertain the 
exact number of these changes, because in many cases 
postal parcel remained on one edge. If we exclude these 
values, the number of position changes would equal 14th. 
The following Table 1 and Figure 4 represent the time 
duration in the different positions within the measurement. 
 
z
x
y
1. Position
2. Position
3. Position
4. Position
5. Position
6. Position
 
Figure 4. Position of postal parcel. 
TABLE I. %TIME SPENT IN EACH POSITION 
Position 1 
Position 2 
Position 3 
71,12% 
0,62% 
3,62% 
Position 4 
Position 5 
Position 6 
12,24% 
3,67% 
8,74% 
 
 
We find it very difficult to establish clear position of 
mailings. The reason for this is again the case that a 
considerable number of values are already on the edge; see 
Table I that represent % time which smart agent spent in 
each position. As expected, the largest shipment time was 
spent in position 1. The reason is simple, because at this 
postal operator, there is a regulation that says that all the 
postal parcel must be addressed side up. This regulation is 
intended to eliminate the time required for changing the 
position of postal parcel before entering the sorting device. 
This fact is important for the correct load the address side of 
the postal parcel by barcode reader on the sorting line. In 
general, this regulation sets specific parameters for postal 
parcels. In this regulation postal parcel need to be set with 
the address side facing up.  
 
As we can see in Table I, over 28% of time spent by the 
smart agent was in other position at the transport process. In 
the largest extent, this consignment was incorrectly 
positioned on processing node. 
B. Acceleration of postal parcel 
 
In the laboratory testing we received information from 
smart agent based on acceleration. We used the same smart 
agent parcel for real and also laboratory conditions. From 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

the large amounts of data, it was found that most of the data 
acceleration ranges from range from (0,22; 5,936) m.s-2 in 
all three directional vectors. 
 
There was only one group of data which had a higher 
value. And this value is 7.345 m.s-2 and the directional 
vector 'Z' at position 1; see Figure 4. In terms of time data 
provided to us by postal operator, it could be just about 
downhill shipments sorting line. In the phase postal parcels 
moved from sorting line to belt conveyor and fell down 
through the slip. This value corresponds to the base data 
during laboratory testing. This value corresponds to a fall 
from a height to 80 cm, which can be described as 
acceptable value. That postal operator gives one specific 
information regarding the nature of the postal parcel and 
said, "Cover postal parcel must be modified so that the 
content of postal parcels withstands a fall from a height of 
120 cm". 
C. Temperature and humidity 
 
The sudden change in temperature or excessive humidity 
can to some extent negatively affect the contents of the 
consignment. It was the reason why we used these two 
sensors (temperature and accelerometer sensor). On the 
temperature, we were interested primarily in a sudden 
change in temperature. We have assumed a large change in 
temperature between output and input into organizational 
units of transport. Unfortunately, this effect appeared. There 
were several reasons. The first of them was the precision 
packing of our postal parcel and the other too little variance 
in temperature. Summary of temperatures is given in Table 
II. 
 
TABLE II. SUMMARY OF TEMPERATURE 
Temp-min 
Temp-max 
Temp-avg 
6,50 
11,00 
8,37 
 
TABLE III. SUMMARY OF HUMIDITY 
HR-min 
HR-max 
HR-avg 
48% 
74% 
66% 
 
 
Unfortunately, the same problem also affected moisture 
data. Each measurement depends on the forecast condition.   
Summary of humidity is given in Table III. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
The current results of the smart agent are foundations for 
its own improvement. Through this measurement, we 
gained a large amount of data; but, without precise 
identification of the specific area where data originated. In 
the results, we relied on data obtained from the postal 
operator, which ultimately appeared to be too inaccurate. 
Therefore, we want to equip our smart agent with additional 
sensors that will help us to eliminate the negative aspects of 
data processing. One of them is the GPS module and the 
second is an electronic compass. We currently have in 
development an on-line version of the smart agent, i.e., a 
version that will allow batch sending this data via services 
of mobile networks. 
 
Despite all the difficulties, we believe that the concept of 
smart agent represents a further step not only to eliminate 
bottlenecks shipping process but also to connect IoT with 
reality. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This article was created to support project named as: 
IV -Institutional research - 9/KS/2016 - Intelligent package 
as a tool for research on physical influences on parcels at 
selected postal operators. 
E!7592 AUTOEPCIS - RFID Technology in Logistic 
Networks of Automotive Industry 
 
 
Centre of Excellence for Systems and Services of Intelligent 
Transport II ITMS 26220120050 supported by the Research 
& Development Operational Programme funded by the 
ERDF 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] F. Beneš, L. Kubáč, P. Staša, and V. Kebo, “RFID and Augmented 
Reality,” proceedings of the 14th International Carpathian Control 
Conference (ICCC): Rytro, Hotel Perła Południa, Poland, 2013, pp. 
186-191.  
[2] V. Hunt, A. Puglia, and M. Puglia, “RFID: A Guide to Radio 
Frequency Identification.” New Jersey (USA), John Wiley & Sons, 
2007, pp. 28-176.  
[3] M. Kendra, J. Lalinská, and J. Čamaj, “Optimalization of transport 
and logistics processes by simulation,” in ISTEC; Proceedings of the 
3rd International Science, Technology and Engineering Conference, 
Dubai, United Arab Emirates (UAE), Dec. 2010, pp. 886-892. 
[4] V. Klapita and J. Mašek, “Processes solution in the warehouse by the 
queuing theory application,” in Horizons of Railway Transport: 
scientific papers, vol. 3, no. 1, 2010, pp. 64-66. 
[5] P. Kolář, “Container shipping market dimensions and customer 
orientation in the Czech Republic,” Central European Business 
Review, 2013, pp. 115-127. 
[6] P. Kolář and J. P. Rodrigue, “Improving the Bottlenecks: The Czech 
Republic as a Central European Intermodal Transport and Logistics 
Platform,” in IAME Conference 2014. Norfolk: Maritime Institute, 
Old Dominion University, 
[7] R. Madleňák, L. Madleňáková, and J. Štefunko, “The variant 
approach to the optimization of the postal transportation network in 
the conditions of the Slovak Republic,” in: Transport and 
Telecommunication, Vol. 16 (3), 2015, pp. 237-245.  
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[8] M. Maslarić, A. Groznik, and N. Brnjac, “Distribution Channel 
Reengineering: A Case Study.” PrometTraffic&Transportation, 2012, 
pp. 35-43. 
[9] F. Thornton and Ch. Lanthem, “RFID Security. Rockland (MA, 
USA),: Syngres Publishing,” 2006,  pp. 229. 
[10] J. Vaculík and J. Tengler, “Potential of new technologies in logistics 
services,” in CLC 2012 - Carpathian logistics congress: Jesenik, 
Czech Republic, 2012. 
[11] J. Tengler and Z. Kolarovská, ”The sensor logistics,” in Company 
diagnostics, controlling and logistics 2016, Zuberec, University of 
Žilina, Slovak republic, 2016, pp. 300-305. 
[12] L. Vojtěch and M. Neruda, “Application of Shielding Textiles for 
Increasing Safety Airborne Systems - Limitation of GSM 
Interference,” in The Ninth International Conference on Networks 
(ICN 2010). Los Alamitos: IEEE Computer Society, 2010, pp. 157-
161. 
[13] H. Bakytová, M. Urgot, O. Konštelová, “Základy štatistiky.” 
Bratislava (Slovak republic), publishing: Alfa, 1975, pp. 92-111. 
 
 
 
 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-490-9
SENSORCOMM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

