Tiered Wireless Sensor Network Architecture for Military Surveillance Applications
Louise Lamont, Myl`ene Toulgoat, Mathieu D´eziel
Communications Research Centre
Ottawa, Canada
Email:{louise.lamont, mylene.toulgoat, mathieu.deziel}@crc.gc.ca
Glenn Patterson
Newtrax Technologies Inc.
Montreal, Canada
email: gpatterson@newtrax.com
Abstract—This paper presents a novel tiered sensor net-
working architecture that employs advanced Wireless Sensor
Network (WSN) technologies for military operations. This
architecture results in an agile surveillance system with a focus
on improved operational ﬂexibility and usability. Performance
measurements using an in-house simulator are provided using
two different scenarios to demonstrate the system’s great agility
and expandability, operating from possibly a small-scaled single
cluster to a network of many chained hop-to-hop connections
offering a large coverage area.
Keywords: Tiered Network Architecture; Scalability; deploy-
ments; ﬁeld trial.
I. INTRODUCTION
The military areas of operation are becoming less contigu-
ous, creating broad surveillance areas that are increasingly
more difﬁcult to monitor. The security and force protection
of observation posts, for instance, face particular challenges
especially when relocation may not be an option due to the
requirements of the mission. In addition, the more urban
deployment locations of modern military operations include
buildings and other man-made structures that block lines of
sight creating challenges for reconnaissance systems.
To meet the needs of contemporary deployments, the mili-
tary requires a sensor system that can detect, classify, and lo-
calize hostile forces 24 hours a day in all weather conditions.
This system must enhance the surveillance of both critical
terrain and nomadic installations to support the monitoring
of cease-ﬁre lines, demilitarized zones, encampments, and
other high-value assets. As such, the sensor system should
be able to reduce the operators’ workload while providing
greater persistence, thereby freeing up troops for other tasks.
Conventional platform-based military sensor surveillance
systems are usually large and expensive, requiring substan-
tial manpower to operate and monitor [1]-[4]. These wireless
systems have the ability to sense phenomena from their
surrounding environment and communicate the gathered data
to a base unit or gateway where the information is sent via
long-haul communication to a command and control unit.
The deployment requires that the sensors be placed strategi-
cally at a certain distance to the gateway to ensure that the
The work described herein was funded by Defence Research and Devel-
opment Canada (DRDC.)
sensor nodes are in line-of-sight (LOS) to the gateway or the
base station. This deployment conﬁguration results in limited
coverage and single point of failures when deployed in
complex terrain. Sharing detections and validation of events
between sensor nodes is non-existent, which can result in
high-levels of false alarms. The application of these systems
is limited to predeﬁned and ﬁxed monitoring tasks. For fast
and effective deployment, the usability of such systems is
very constrained.
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) have gained popu-
larity particularly with the proliferation in Micro Electro-
Mechanical Systems (MEMS) which have made possible
the use of large networks of small wireless sensors that are
inexpensive compared to the traditional sensors. Through
distributed coordination, WSN are envisioned to enhance
situational awareness and improve the effectiveness of mil-
itary operations. This new generation of WSNs consists of
collaborative sensing nodes that are equipped with many
transducers, a processor, memory, batteries, and a radio
that supports the formation of an ad hoc network for
extended communication coverage [5]-[7]. Sensor nodes
communicate in a multi-hop fashion to reach a gateway. This
type of architecture can be referred to as a planar wireless
sensor network. The gateway provides wireless long-haul
connectivity between the sensor nodes and the backend
command and control station. The gateway bridges the
sensed data and alarms to a remote user using beyond line-
of-sight (BLOS) communication. The advantages of having
the sensor nodes communicate in an ad hoc fashion are
that the network is more robust, link redundancy increases
system reliability, and sensor nodes can be deployed more
rapidly. Additionally, the sensor nodes can perform cross-
cueing to validate events before sending the information to
the gateway, hence reducing the number of false alarms. The
drawback of transmitting the sensory data in a multi-hop
fashion is that the throughput per node falls asymptotically
with the number of nodes N as O
p
(1/N). Hence, when
large areas need to be monitored, the number of sensor nodes
as well as the number of hops to reach the gateway increases
resulting in a decreased communication throughput and an
increased delay.
A tiered networking architecture can be used to facilitate
scalability and address this problem. A number of gateways
288
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

can be deployed and the sensor nodes can associate with the
closest gateway to form clusters [8-10]. The gateways form
the second level of the hierarchy and also form an ad hoc
network. When using clustering techniques, one can reduce
the number of hops required to reach the gateways and
decrease the bottleneck around the gateway. Based on this
motivation, we designed and implemented a tiered embedded
WSN that exhibits a hierarchical networking architecture
that we called Self-healing Autonomous Sensor Network
(SASNet).
The SASNet system tackles the fundamental requirements
of deployment effectiveness, usability, scalability, reliability,
robustness and offers an agile surveillance system with a
focus on improved operational ﬂexibility and usability for
military applications. SASNet aims at providing a holistic
solution that facilitates rapid network deployment and con-
cept of operations.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 gives an overview of the SASNet network ar-
chitecture. Section 3 covers the deployment effectiveness
and usability. In section 4, the performance of the tiered
network is discussed as well the limitations of the network
architecture. Section 5 provides the conclusion.
II. SASNET ARCHITECTURE
SASNet is a tiered embedded wireless sensor network that
exhibits a hierarchical networking architecture, containing:
low cost disposable sensors, the sensor nodes, for extended
monitoring coverage; resource-rich specialized nodes, the
fusion nodes, for aggregation, database and application
processing; and a management node for the command and
control by a remote operator.
A. SASNet Hardware
The sensor nodes form the level 1 tier of the network. A
sensor node is composed of a transducer board for sensing,
an ultrasound board for localization, and a Newtrax WN-
200 board [11] for communication as shown in Figure
1. The sensor nodes communicate with each other on a
non-IP network in non-standard frequency bands anywhere
between 300MHz and 1, 100MHz. They use also this band to
communicate with the fusion node belonging to their cluster.
The communication board supports data rates in the order
of kbps.
The fusion nodes form the level 2 tier of the network. The
fusion node hardware is shown in Figure 2. The fusion node
consists of a TS7800 ARM embedded computer, a BU-353
GPS receiver, and three radios:
• The ﬁrst radio operates within the tier-1 network to
communicate with the sensor nodes in the lower UHF
band.
• The second radio is a more capable radio (in term of
data rate) using IEEE 802.11b. It is used to communi-
cate using IP with other fusion nodes at the level 2 tier
Figure 1.
Sensor Node casing.
Figure 2.
Fusion Node Hardware.
network in the higher UHF band at a maximum rate of
11Mbps.
• The third radio is a WiMax link between the fusion
nodes and the management node. It supports data rates
in the order of tens of Mbps.
The TS7800 ARM holds the database software, the fusion
node application software, and the level 2 tier routing
software. The database is contained in the ﬂash memory.
The management node is at the level 3 tier of the network.
The management node hardware consists of a laptop com-
puter and a WiMax radio operating in the 5.8GHz band. The
laptop holds the Graphical User Interface (GUI) software.
B. SASNet Networking Archirecture
The SASNet hierarchical networking architecture is de-
picted in Figure 3. The sensor nodes lie at the ﬁrst level
(tier-1) of the hierarchy, where they perform basic operations
and provide extended monitoring coverage. Sensor nodes
are equipped with on board transducers such as acoustic,
seismic, passive infra-red (PIR), magnetic and piezo-electric.
They can detect the event of interest, validate the detection
by performing cross-cueing, and facilitate classiﬁcation.
Each sensor node in the network acts as a router, forwarding
data packets for its neighbor nodes. They form an ad hoc
network on the ﬂy and support a single radio interface for
289
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Figure 3.
SASNet Operational Architecture Overview.
bi-directional communication between the sensor nodes and
the fusion node.
At the second level (tier-2) of the hierarchy, the fu-
sion nodes provide a more comprehensive function such
as database synchronization, cluster formation, application
logic formation, and commanding. The fusion nodes re-
ceive information requests from users, keep track of com-
mand/response queries, task the sensor nodes, aggregate
information, and store history of events that have occurred
in the area covered by the fusion node. The fusion nodes
can also act as actuators in the network, for example, to
trigger an onboard or nearby camera to obtain near real time
imagery. Unlike the typical WSN, fusion nodes at the second
level of the hierarchy also form an ad hoc network enabling
extended coverage for larger deployment support. They are
equipped with multiple radio interfaces for communication
with the sensor nodes and other fusion nodes and for long-
range data communications to reach the BLOS management
node. The sensor nodes and fusion nodes form clusters that
interconnect through capable fusion nodes to construct an
unattended ground sensor system.
The management node (MN) at the third level provides
the global view of the system for application, for operational
control, and for system management. The fusion node uses
a long-haul communication link to communicate with the
management node. Authorized users can ﬂexibly access
the system from the fusion nodes at level 2 or from the
management node at level 3. Using a handheld device, a
laptop or a station PC, a user with proper authorization can
query and subscribe to events, receive the alerts, and view
histories of the system activities.
III. DEPLOYMENT EFFECTIVENESS AND
USABILITY
SASNet employs the concept of a sensor toolbox allowing
for the assigned users to rapidly deploy the system. The
sensor toolbox is a lightweight piece of equipment in which
the soldier ﬁnds necessary tools to instrument an area of
interest where remote surveillance tasks are conducted. The
toolbox typically contains:
• Multiple sensing nodes supporting multiple sensors per
unit (motion, vibration, sound, magnetic ﬁeld, etc) and
a communication module.
• One or multiple ”fusion nodes” that manage the clus-
ters, each consisting of a group of sensor nodes in an
area of interest performing one common or multiple
sensing tasks.
• One advanced sensor node per cluster, for example an
EO sensor, capable of local image analysis.
• Handheld device unit(s) (HHD) used for deploying the
network, tasking a cluster, and monitoring activities.
During the deployment, the fusion nodes are placed ﬁrst
and the user must ensure that they communicate with the
management node. The fusion nodes are equipped with a
GPS receiver and send their position to the management
node and the hand-held device. The fusion nodes can be
connected directly to the management node using long-
haul communication or to another fusion node using ad hoc
routing technology when long-haul communication is not
available on all fusion nodes. Once the fusion nodes have
been deployed successfully, the sensor nodes are deployed
and associate with the nearest fusion node to form clusters.
During the deployment, the hand-held device user needs
to quickly establish and verify the desired network com-
munication coverage and effectiveness. As the nodes are
being deployed, LEDs on the sensor nodes indicate if a
network connection has been established to the fusion node
or to another sensor node. Network formation is done
autonomously. Once the sensor nodes in the system have
calculated their position, completed auto-conﬁguration and
formed the network, users that are authorized to conﬁgure
the system view the sensor nodes and the network status on
their monitoring interface. Once all sensor nodes in a cluster
have been deployed, the network formation of the cluster is
veriﬁed by the user by tasking the system. After the nodes
placement and tasking from the hand-held device have been
completed, the task is sent to the management node using
the database synchronization scheme. The operator can then
add additional tasks if necessary. The hand-held device user
can retreat to a covered area that may be a distance away
from the monitored area.
Authorized users can formulate the query and/or the event
subscription with desired contextual information such as
period of time, geographical area, type of event to trigger
on and an action to perform. An event subscription sets up
the actions following a detection trigger, including further
detection and conﬁrmation of the event, sending an alarm
for the event trigger, etc. A query can retrieve the past
activity reports in the system. Users and operators can be
at a distance of a few hundred meters to up to 1 km, or in
some cases to up to 10 km from the instrumented area.
290
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

The user interface on the hand-held device allows navi-
gation through the system information and quick setup of
event subscription, tasking, and queries. The user can easily
select the geographical area of interest, a period of interest
in time, a pre-conﬁgured type of event and action such as
classiﬁcation of detected vehicle and alarm with event image
reporting.
The operator at the command and control station has
more time and can formulate more complex tasks that can
be dispatched to the right area and nodes in the network.
The useful basic patterns may include as examples, motion
pattern detection such as stop, turning direction, and detec-
tion contextual information setup such as time, location, and
count.
Event subscriptions and associated tasks can be ﬂexibly
modiﬁed during the operation to monitor new events or
to obtain different contextual information of the monitored
events. Upon the subscribed event triggering, the network
performs the actions as assigned in the corresponding task to
collect, coordinate, aggregate the detection information and
to send report/alarm to the required destination device(s).
After completion of the SASNet operation for a cer-
tain mission, the system is decommissioned and reusable
equipments are collected and placed back into the SASNet
toolbox.
IV. PERFORMANCE MEASURES OF THE
NETWORK
In this section, we use a simulation environment to eval-
uate the performance of the SASNet system in two different
topologies.
The simulation environment is based on the discrete-event
model using the OmNet++ architecture and runs the same
protocol stack ﬁrmware as run on the nodes to simulate
a wireless mesh network. The simulator can be easily
conﬁgured via conﬁguration scripts and results are obtained
in the form of reports and detailed event lists. It is also
possible to visualize the network topology at any time using
Matlab/Octave.
The performance of the network was analyzed using
simulation results for two deployment scenarios, namely
a single-hop cluster and a multi-hop linear network. We
considered the following performance metrics: average one-
hop latency, average single node throughput, average rate of
packet loss.
A. Scenario 1: Single-Hop Cluster Network
The ﬁrst scenario represents a cluster of sensor nodes
that connect directly to a fusion node in a single hop. We
deployed clusters of sizes N = {5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 15}
nodes in a star-topology where the fusion node is placed at
the centre of a circle of radius 35m and the sensor nodes are
placed at equal distances along the perimeter of the circle.
This represents a worst-case congestion scenario as all nodes
Figure 4. Average Latency for one-hop cluster networks where each sensor
node sends data at 16bits/sec and 80bits/sec respectively.
are in RF range of one another and therefore can experience
interference from any other node in the network.
Once the cluster networks form in the simulator, we send
10 byte packets from every sensor at the same instants at
two different rates: every second and every ﬁve seconds.
This gives a packet rate of 16 bits/second and 80 bits/second
from each sensor node respectively. We transmit packets
continuously over a 4500 second interval.
In Figure 4, we show the average packet latency of the
single-hop cluster networks of varying size at both packet
rates. We see that when the sensor nodes transmit packets
every 5 seconds, the latency per packet is between 2 and
6 seconds as the cluster size increases. For cluster sizes
less than ten nodes when we send packets every second,
the latency on a typical node is the same as when we send
packets every ﬁve seconds. However for cluster sizes larger
than 12 nodes, we see that the congestion in the network at
80 bits/second causes the latency to sharply increase.
In Figure 5, we show the average packet loss ratio for
both sensor node trafﬁc rates. Here we see that for clusters of
less than 8 nodes and packet generation every 5 seconds (16
bits/sec) we get very low packet loss. However as the cluster
size increases, the congestion of the medium sharply pushes
the loss rate above 20%. For packets generated every second
(80 bits/sec), the packet loss rate increases linearly above
10% for clusters of size 6 and greater. Sensor networks are
known to exhibit severe packet losses due to congestion of
a shared medium when supporting high data rates and this
is often referred to as the Data Implosion Problem when
many nodes simultaneously transmit to a centralized fusion
node. This problem is especially exacerbated here because
all nodes are in interfering RF range with each other and
were forced to connect directly to the fusion node to create
a worst-case scenario. The performance could be improved
by deploying several fusion nodes to effectively share the
network load.
291
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Figure 5.
Average Packet Loss Ratio for one-hop cluster networks where
sensor nodes send data at 16bits/sec and 80bits/sec respectively.
Figure 6.
Average node throughput for one-hop cluster networks where
nodes send data at 16 bits/second and 80 bits/second respectively normal-
ized by that packet generation rate.
In Figure 6, we show the effective average throughput of
a node in the cluster networks for the two different packet
generation rates. To compare the results between the two
packet rates, we have normalized each curve by the packet
generation rates. For packets generated every 5 seconds, the
throughput stays very close to the maximum achievable (16
bits/second) for cluster sizes below 9 nodes and then quickly
decreases as the cluster size is increased towards 15 nodes.
When packets are generated every second, the throughput
drops off for all cluster sizes above 5 nodes in a linear
manner.
B. Scenario 2: Multi-Hop Linear Network
The next set of scenarios studied were multi-hop lin-
ear networks of ﬁxed distance between consecutive nodes
with the fusion node at the head of the network. In all
scenarios, the ﬁxed inter-node distance was 70m between
all nodes. At 15dBm transmission power, this creates a
network such that any node is only in RF range of its two
Table I
LATENCY STATISTICS FOR MULTI-HOP LINEAR NETWORKS OF VARIOUS
LENGTHS AT DATA RATES OF 16 BITS/SEC AND 80 BITS/SEC.
Table II
PACKET-LOSS STATISTICS FOR MULTI-HOP LINEAR NETWORKS OF
VARIOUS LENGTHS AT DATA RATES OF 16 BITS/SEC AND 80 BITS/SEC.
adjacent neighbors. We experimented with network lengths
of N = {5, 10, 15, 25, 30, 50} nodes (N − 1 sensor nodes
and 1 fusion node).
For each N, we studied the performance of the linear
network by sending one 10 byte packet from every sensor
at the same instants at two different rates: every second and
every ﬁve seconds. This gives a packet rate of 16 bits/second
and 80 bits/second from each sensor node respectively. We
transmit packets continuously over a 4500 second interval.
Compared to the star-topology, the linear network where
each node is only in RF range of two adjacent neighbors
will experience much less congestion of the RF medium.
However as we shall discuss later, linear networks have their
own congestion problems. In Tables I, II, and III we show
the statistics for the latency, packet-loss, and normalized
throughput for both data rates with linear networks of
various number of nodes.
If we look at the performance at 16 bits/sec data rate, we
see that we can successfully deliver all packets generated
with optimal latency (about 0.2 sec/hop). When the data rate
is increased to 80 bits/sec, for N ≤ 25 we can deliver all
packets with optimal or near optimal latency (0.356 sec/hop
in a 25 node network). However for N ≥ 25 nodes, we see
that the performance begins to degrade. In particular, we see
nodes close to the fusion node with latencies near 40 seconds
for both 30 and 50 node linear networks with corresponding
packet-loss rates of 95% and 99.5% respectively.
Unlike the star-topology network previously examined,
the performance degradation as the length of the linear
292
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Table III
THROUGHPUT (NORMALIZED BY THE DATA RATE) STATISTICS FOR
MULTI-HOP LINEAR NETWORKS OF VARIOUS LENGTHS AT DATA RATES
OF 16 BITS/SEC AND 80 BITS/SEC.
network increases is the result of buffers being ﬁlled at down
stream nodes close to the fusion node. Basically, the nodes
closer to the fusion node must route all the trafﬁc generated
further upstream and over an extended period of time, their
buffers become full and they will drop packets when this
happens. Again, this is a manifestation of the data implosion
problem of large-scale sensor networks.
In fact, for N ≥ 30 the average values in Tables I, II and
III are somewhat statistically misleading on account of this
data implosion. We see in these tables, that for more than
30 hops in the network, the variance on the latency, packet-
drop, and throughput is on the same order of magnitude
as the average value. In Figure 7, 8 and 9 we plot the
average latency, packet-drop, and throughput of each node
in a linear network to illustrate the relationship between the
hop-distance to the fusion node and the node performance
for N = {25, 30, 50} nodes.
Figure 7 demonstrates well the rapidly increasing per-hop
latency as packets from downstream nodes get congested in
the buffers of nodes closer to the fusion node. For N = 30
nodes, the latency starts to increase around the 11th node
and gets rapidly worse as we approach the fusion node, and
thus about 1/3 of nodes experience latencies far from the
optimal value of about 0.2 sec/hop. For N = 50 nodes,
the latency starts to increase around the 34th node and gets
rapidly worse as we approach the fusion node and so about
2/3 of the nodes experience latencies far from the optimal
value.
Looking at Figure 8, we see that as expected the packet-
loss is much higher for the nodes closer to the fusion node.
In fact for 50 node networks, the packet-loss is actually
relatively low for hop-distances greater than 35 hops. At
hop 34, the packet loss sharply swings to almost 100%.
This same phenomenon happens at the 10th hop for a 30
node linear network. However, we should note here that if
the network were allowed to run for a longer interval and
continue to generate packets every second, we could expect
that these down-stream sensor nodes farther from the fusion
node would one-by-one begin to experience exponentially
increasing congestion and at this point there would be
Figure 7.
The Average Latency for a multi-hop linear network plotted as
a function of hop distance to the fusion node for linear networks of length
25, 30, 50 nodes. Data packets are generated at each node at a rate of 80
bits/sec.
essentially no throughput in the network. Also note that
contrary to our intuition, the node closest to the fusion node
does not have the highest packet-loss rate. For example when
we have a 50 node linear network, there is a region of
about 30 nodes starting at the 5th node that has almost 100%
packet-loss rates. The ﬁrst 4 nodes after the fusion node have
packet-loss rates between 75% and 90%. This phenomenon
can be explained as follows. At ﬁrst, congestion affects the
nodes closest to the fusion node. However, as their buffers
ﬁll up and they drop packets this phenomenon spreads one
node at a time down the network towards the last node in the
network. After a certain point, there is so much congestion
due to packet transmissions and retries that the packets from
the last 1/3 of the network no longer even reach the nodes
closest to the fusion nodes and so the load on these nodes
is slightly less than the nodes in the middle of the network
and they can successfully route more packets.
We also note here that the degradation of linear network
performance at 80 bits/sec data rate is also a function of
the time-window over which the packets are generated. For
shorter windows, the linear network can successfully handle
all the packets. For example, with a linear network of 50
nodes we can generate packets for 78 seconds (a relatively
short window) continuously before the nodes close to the
fusion node begin to experience buffer congestion and the
resulting high packet-loss. For a 30 node network, we can
support the 80 bit/sec packet rate for about 300 seconds
before buffer congestion and the resulting high packet-loss.
Indeed, we can imagine many sensor network applications
where there is a large but short-lived burst of data (for
example a vehicle moving quickly by all the sensor nodes)
and so our networks could support the data generated in
these cases. The durations we have tested in our simulations
are really meant to give a worst-case and long-term picture
of the network performance.
293
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

Figure 8.
Average Packet Loss as a function of hop-distance to the fusion
node for linear networks of length 25, 30, 50 nodes. Data packets are
generated at each node at a rate of 80 bits/sec.
Figure 9.
Average Throughput as a function of hop-distance to the fusion
node for linear networks of length 25, 30, 50 nodes. Data packets are
generated at each node at a rate of 80 bits/sec.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have presented a tiered network archi-
tecture that results in an agile surveillance system with a
focus on improved operational ﬂexibility and usability. It
was shown that two topology families, pure star and pure
linear, are special-cases of what we could reasonably expect
to form in an actual deployment of sensors in the ﬁeld.
In many applications it is reasonable to expect that not all
sensor nodes will be in range of the fusion node and there
will be some leap frogging because some sensors will be
in range of 3 or more devices and so a pure linear network
will form. Thus, what might be expected to form in the ﬁeld
would be closer to a hierarchical tree topology which will
alleviate the buffer congestion seen in long linear networks
and the wireless medium congestion seen in larger star-
topology networks.
REFERENCES
[1] http://defense-update.com/products/f/falcon-watch.htm
[2] http://defense-update.com/products/m/MIS.htm
[3] http://defense-update.com/products/s/SCOUT-UGS.htm
[4] http://defense-update.com/products/r/rembassII.htm
[5] http://www.selex-sas.com/SelexGalileo/EN/Business/
Products/Advanced Sensors/index.sdo
[6] http://www.sownet.nl/download/T-Node product sheet.pdf
[7] http://www.exensor.com/index.php?s=systems&k=
products&ok=yes
[8] M. Zhang, J. Song, and Y. Zhang, ‘Three-Tiered Sensor
Networks Architecture for Trafﬁc Information Monitoring and
Processing,” Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS 2005),
2005.
[9] Y. Ye, V. Hilaire, A. Koukam, and W. Cai, “A Cluster
Based Hybrid Architecture for Wireless Sensor Networks,”
Information Science and Engineering (ISISE ’08), 2008.
[10] O. Gnawali, B. Greenstein, K. Jang, A. Joki, and J. Paek, “The
Tenet Architecture for Tiered Sensor Networks”, Proc. the
4th international conference on Embedded networked sensor
systems, 2006.
[11] http://www.newtrax.com/
294
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

