Towards Intelligent Sensor Evolution: A Holonic-Based System Architecture 
 
Vincenzo Di Lecce 
DEE 
Politecnico di Bari 
Bari, Italy 
v.dilecce@aeflab.net 
Marco Calabrese, Claudio Martines  
Holsys soc. coop. and Politecnico di Bari 
Taranto, Italy 
{m.calabrese, c.martines}@holsys.com 
{m.calabrese, c.martines}@aeflab.net
 
 
Abstract— Rapid developments of smart sensor technologies 
envisage a new era where information handling and knowledge 
sharing will play a crucial role. Traditional sensors were 
conceived as simple hardware transducers of physical 
quantities into measurable signals, eventually requiring an 
analogue/digital conversion to make data available for 
software applications. IEEE-1451 family of standards has 
added to mere transduction some architectural prescriptions to 
mainly address the issue of connection transparency, a 
desirable property virtually making any sensor a plug-and-
play device. Our percept is that next generation smart sensor-
based systems will have to face another challenge: the need to 
endow devices with the ability to process application-level bits 
of knowledge to best accomplish their informative goals. As a 
result, unexpected proactive and dialogue-oriented behaviors 
will have to be taken into account, thus reducing the gap 
between what we commonly refer to as smart sensors and 
intelligent agents. In order to support this view, a semantic-
driven sensor-based system architecture is introduced and an 
example proof-of-concept case study is commented. 
Keywords - smart sensors, intelligent sensor, information 
processing, holonic modeling   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In the latest years, the impressive growth of pervasive 
and ubiquitous devices has entailed a profound evolution in 
the field of measurement systems. In fact, the mere 
transduction of physical quantities into analog or digital 
signals, do not live up to the complexity of modern society 
any more. 
A number of commercial products endowed with 
“intelligent” functionalities are progressively replacing their 
old-generation competitors as it happens, for example, in 
mobile phones [1] or in industrial automotive applications 
[2]. 
The reasons fostering the adoption of smart technological 
solutions on a global scale are both technical and economical 
and can be enlisted as in [3]: 
 
reduction of the data communication with the main 
application processors for some preset functions 
with a specific value; 
 
lower system power consumption since some data is 
filtered and not all of the action  needs to be done by 
the main processor; 
 
easier integration due to standard digital interface 
and pre-defined functions, avoiding developing all 
applications from raw data. 
As a result, a large amount of legacy, incompatible, and 
often proprietary industrial solutions has sprung over years, 
sometimes producing specifications after upgraded to the 
rank of international standards (e.g., the ISO 11992-1 CAN 
bus [4] in the automotive industry). 
When viewed through the lens of (artificial intelligence) 
AI, sensor “smartness” appears to stay in-between merely 
transduction and complex post-processing, with the 
boundary left undetermined. Yet, it is difficult to state with 
certainty to what extent IEEE-1451 compliant sensors can be 
considered as intelligent agents since they share aspects 
related to the measurement field with others related to 
information processing. 
In any case, information processing brings forth the need 
of a reference model for the correct understanding of the 
obtained measures. Hence, especially in distributed settings 
like wireless sensor networks (WSN), the share of local 
ontologies [5] necessary to refine and control the global 
observed phenomenon, become a key point to address. 
Our percept is that next generation smart sensor-based 
systems will have to face this challenge: endowing devices 
with the intelligence necessary to communicate with peers 
and humans to best accomplish their informative goals. The 
paper is devoted to provide a prospective view on this aspect. 
The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section II 
overviews the recent trends in the evolution of smart sensor 
technologies towards solutions with an increasing level of 
intelligence embedded; Section III introduces the employed 
sensor-based communication model; Section IV investigates 
a possible case study; Section V reports on early 
implementations and future perspectives; Section VI 
concludes the work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
As addressed in [6], there is a language gap between 
practitioners in the two fields of measurements and AI.  
In our view, an oversimplified classification may be 
considering the first group as focusing on the statistical 
aspects [7] and the second on the semantics of the measured 
data [5]. In this perspective, lessening the distance between 
the two groups would mean narrowing the gap between the 
measurements 
of 
physical 
phenomena 
and 
their 
interpretation models. 
248
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

At the very core of any sensor, there is a transduction 
action permitting the transformation of measurands into 
electrical/optical outputs. These are more suitable for both 
data analysis and the activation of high-level processes for 
data presentation [8]. 
Once arrived at 
the electrical/optical stage, an 
analogue/digital (A/D) converter determines the passage 
from the physical world to the computational world. In fact, 
from a computational intelligence (CI) perspective, A/D or 
D/A conversions can be revisited and generalized in the 
framework of fuzzy sets and granular computing [8]. In other 
terms, after the A/D conversion process, digitalized 
measurement values become containers of information 
granules that need to be given sense by means of some 
computational task.  
According to this view, smart sensors can be considered 
as a first attempt to bridge the gap between measurements 
and information processing since they are purposely 
conceived as hardware/software transducers able to bring the 
measured physical signal to an application target level. 
IEEE has played a pivotal role in the smart sensors 
standardization process through the IEEE-1451 family of 
transducer interface standards [9]. In particular, the IEEE-
1451 addresses mainly the significant engineering aspect of 
connection transparency. The aim is to aid transducer 
manufacturers in developing smart devices that can be 
interfaced to networks, systems, and instruments in a plug-
and-play fashion.  
However, smart sensors are not conceived to offer 
support in high-level information processing needs such as, 
for example, the possibility to host self-correction on board, 
performing data integration and fusion, managing local 
alarms to reduce the network and the host load. Henceforth, a 
new family of intelligent sensor capable to deal with the 
increasing complexity of modern applications is required to 
go beyond architectural prescriptions defined by the IEEE-
1451 standards.  
As of the latest couple of years, a new class of devices 
referred to as ‘intelligent sensor hubs’ is attracting the focus 
of the market and the academia. These can be viewed as 
sensor platforms endowed with a microcontroller unit that 
pre-process and aggregate external sensor data. An example 
of this new sensor generation is the MMA9550L motion 
sensing platform from Freescale company, housing a 14-bit 
3-axis accelerometer together with a 32-bit CPU, I2C, SPI 
and other GPIOs. The low-power and small size enable 
applications in mobile phones, portables devices and also 
medical and industrial applications. 
The 
enhancement 
of 
sensor 
platforms 
with 
a 
microcontroller unit derives from the need to overcome the 
limits of traditional smart sensor technologies, which cannot 
be customized to any specific application context since the 
embedded logic is fixed. However, the bare availability of a 
microprocessor does not suffice to provide an intelligent 
framework alone. Sensory data, in fact, have to be processed 
in accordance to an ontology shared with the potential end-
users of the information processing task. 
Typical limitations related to application-level tasks such 
as (to cite a few) effective customization, data fusion and 
self-calibration require to employ some kind of ‘software 
intelligence’ currently not addressed by the available 
standards. Consequently, it seems that the concept of sensor 
is broadening in the direction of AI [10] and intelligent 
agents [11]. For this reason, there has been a growing debate 
in the last couple of years on the appropriateness of using the 
term “smart sensor” when referring to functionalities typical 
of intelligent information processing [12].  
Intelligent information processing brings sensory data at 
a higher level where the problems of suitable data 
interpretation models. At this stage, research on sensors 
inevitably floods into AI: at this level, transductions continue 
to occur but at the ontological level thus posing the relevant 
problem of sense disambiguation [13]. 
It is useful to stress that sense disambiguation is 
considered one of the most relevant and difficult problems in 
AI [14]. Semantics is prone to ambiguity because there can 
be multiple interpretation models (ontologies) and a 
reference knowledge [15] crafted by domain experts may not 
be always available. To correctly interpret sensory data, 
disambiguation strategies have to be pursued and some 
recent works begin to focus on that with reference to sensor-
based applications [16] [17].  
When the positive outcome of the disambiguation 
procedure in charge of an agent is hindered by the 
unavailability of sufficient local knowledge, one solution is 
requesting for help to an external source. A dialogue is then 
instantiated between the querying agent and one or more 
respondents (whatever humans or machines), thus producing 
a ‘conversational’ [18] behavior.  
Communication protocols and architectures have been 
extensively studied in the field of multi-agent systems 
(MAS) [19] [20] and human-machine interaction (HMI) [21] 
[22]. Basing on these studies, a semantic-driven dialogue-
oriented system architecture to use in sensor networks for 
knowledge sharing and information processing is introduced 
in this paper. Capitalizing on the experience gained in the 
fields of smart sensors research and CI, we are confident that 
the proposed architecture provides a preliminary step in the 
direction of next-generation intelligent sensor-based systems. 
III. 
PROPOSED SYSTEM 
In [23], a modeling approach for processing information 
at multiple granularity levels was presented. This approach 
grounds on the concept of “holon”, introduced by Arthur 
Koestler in late 60s [24]. Such concept is at the very core of 
our proposal; for this reason, it is useful recalling briefly the 
basic properties of holons and holonic systems. 
A. Holons and Holonic Systems Architecture 
In CI, holons and holonic systems can be considered as a 
recent evolution of agents and MAS [25]. In particular, holon 
is a recursive agent [26] with peculiar computational aspects 
such as self-modularity and self-organization.  
Self-nested hierarchies of holons are properly called 
holarchies: with respect to MAS, they account for a more 
general concept of agent organization comprising multiple 
nested granularity levels. At the base of a holarchy, atomic 
holons are found, i.e., holons that cannot be further 
249
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Atomic 
Holon 
MAS 
* 
1..* 
   Agent 
Figure 1. Architectural agent-based representation of a holonic system 
(slightly adapted from [27]). 
decomposed according to the problem context. Fig. 1 depicts 
an agent-based representation of a holarchy. 
It is noteworthy that holons and holarchies, due to holon 
intrinsic recursiveness, can be considered as two faces of the 
same coin viewed at two adjacent granularity levels [28]. 
Consequently, holon encapsulates in a single concept that of 
system of arbitrary complexity thus overcoming the 
part/whole and abstraction/enrichment dichotomy [29] that 
traditionally impedes Reductionist approaches [30]. As a 
result, the holonic view is highly suitable for modeling 
complex problems under a multi-granularity levels holistic 
[31] perspective. 
B. Holonic Intelligent Sensor Information Processing 
model 
The same recursive concept of holon encompassing 
multi-level agent-based architectures can be used to setup an 
information processing framework for dealing with data 
interpretation at an arbitrary semantic granularity. 
In [13], a holonic model for processing sensor data at 
multiple granularity levels was introduced. Each level 
accounts for a different scale of information granules (in the 
Zadeh’s sense [32]) that can be represented by means of 
linguistic descriptions (whatever fuzzy [33] or categorical), 
i.e., ultimately by words [34].  
The information processing model can be implemented 
as a composition of two layered parts: 
 
the holonic transduction layer (HTL) and  
 
the holonic ontological layer (HOL) 
The HTL is the computational layer. It consists in the 
implementation of the transduction functions necessary to 
functionally map a measured input signal into an output 
digital value. 
The HOL is the agent-based layer.  HOL is engineered as 
to respond to user query by claiming information from the 
subordinate HTL or from other agents listening to the bus. In 
this sense, it encompasses the features of interface and 
broker agents in hierarchical MAS architectures [35]. It is 
useful noticing that the querying user can be another 
intelligent sensor or a human as well. In this last case, system 
dialogue takes the form of human-computer interaction [22]. 
HOL works in strict cooperation with HTL. For example, 
HOL may account for the concepts of ‘ppm’ and ‘ammonia’ 
and answers the query about ‘what is the concentration of 
ammonia’ 
by 
calling 
the 
transduction 
function 
Ppm(ammonia), 
which 
outputs 
the 
part-per-million 
concentration of NH3 at a given sampling time k.  
It could happen that the queried intelligent sensor is not 
able to compute ammonia directly with an acceptable 
accuracy, because of its high cross-sensitivity. In this case, 
intelligent sensor equipped with low-cost ammonia detector 
could ask other sensors to share their data to infer on the 
presence and accurate concentration of ammonia basing on 
some computational inference mechanism as the ones 
presented in [36][37]. 
Fig. 2 depicts a hypothetical setup made of the five 
intelligent sensors in Table 1, each one endowed with a basic 
traditional sensor. By means of the computational techniques 
presented in [36] and [37], an intelligent sensor can answer 
the query about the concentration of ammonia by 
instantiating a dialogue with the other peers connected to the 
bus. 
 
TABLE I.  
INTELLIGENT SENSORS EMPLOYED FOR THE 
HYPOTHETICAL SETUP DISPLAYED IN FIG. 2. 
 
Intelligent 
Sensor 
id 
 
 
Basic sensor 
employed in 
HTL 
Principal 
monitored 
Quantities in HOL 
Basic sensor 
cross-sensitivity 
IS1 
LM335 
temperature 
low 
IS2 
TGS2602 
air contaminants 
high 
IS3 
TGS2180 
humidity 
low 
IS4 
MQ136 
sulfur dioxide 
high 
IS5 
MQ131 
ozone 
high 
user 
HOL
HTL
HOL
HTL
HOL 
HTL 
HOL 
HTL 
HOL
HTL
IS1
IS2
IS3 
IS4 
IS5
what is the concentration 
of ammonia? 
INTELLIGENT SENSORS 
Figure 2. Holonic intelligent sensor example setup. The five intelligent 
sensors of Table 1 have to work in cooperation to minimize the effect 
of high-cross-sensitivity and properly respond to user query. Ammonia 
is not directly measured by any of the employed HTLs, however, it can 
be inferred by applying CI techniques, i.e., by instantiating a dialogue 
among intelligent sensors. 
250
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

C. System Knowledge Organization and Properties 
As shown by early works on sensor-equipped mobile 
robots in 80s [38], the problem of organizing and traversing 
different granularity levels according to both enrichment or 
abstraction criteria is a central issue from the system 
engineer’s point of view.  
In more recent years, the aspect of knowledge granularity 
has been intensively studied in the framework of granular 
computing (GrC) [39] and now seems to offspring in the 
field of holonic systems [28]. 
According to Pedrycz’s view [40], GrC as opposed to 
numeric computing (which is data-oriented), is knowledge-
oriented and accounts for a new way of dealing with 
information processing in a unified way. Since knowledge is 
basically made of information granules, information 
granulation operates on the granule scale thus defining a sort 
of pyramid of information processing where low levels 
account for ground data and higher level for symbolic 
abstraction. 
In the holonic semantic model presented in [41], all the 
holons at the same level (representing one or more sub-
holarchies) share the same ontology. The holons at the 
lowest level receive data from the real world using a set of 
sensors. Furthermore, these holons can handle various 
actuators to operate in the real world. On the other hand, all 
the holons at the higher levels receive data from the holons at 
the neighboring lower level. In sum, holarchy represents 
system knowledge across different granularity levels, 
spanning from the sensors/actuators level to the context-
dependent problem conceptualization.  
D. A Holonic Smart Sensor-Based System Proposal 
By coupling the information processing model with the 
holonic architecture previously reported, a system is obtained 
where architectural and semantic recursion is operated by 
means of communication acts among system agents (the 
interested reader can refer to [42] for a formal specification 
of agents’ communication acts). As a result, a dialogue-
oriented system using intelligent sensors as intelligent agents 
can be modeled. 
The employed ontology sharing mechanism is entirely 
based 
on 
communication 
acts 
among 
holons. 
Communication is a fundamental issue at least for reasons of 
two orders: 
 
It allows for representing bits of local information 
according to a distributed multi-level model of the 
observed system (refer to [13] for an example 
holarchy 
managing 
multi-level 
knowledge 
organization in low-cost gas sensor setups); 
 
It permits the extraction of inference rules from the 
environment where the holarchy dwells by means of 
recently developed computational techniques [43]. 
The proposed system is portrayed in Fig. 3. The querying 
user depicted in Fig. 2 becomes the agent managing the HOL 
while the above mentioned HTL becomes a recursive 
encapsulation of (holonic) intelligent sensors representing 
the knowledge objects to use in the information processing 
task.  
As the figure shows, the system is built around the 
dialogue between HOL and HTL at any possible granularity 
level.  At the maximum possible abstraction level there is, 
generally, a human user (acting in charge of the HOL) who 
queries the subordinate HTL (representing the automated 
part of the system).  
The novelty of the model is that traditional user/system 
dichotomy has disappeared in favor of a holistic view: the 
user (human or machine) is now part of the model. 
 
Figure 3. Conceptual model of a holonic intelligent sensor-based system. Since the model is recursive, the image accounts for a generic granular representation 
level. 
251
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

IV. 
EXAMPLE CASE STUDY 
In this Section, a possible application of the proposed 
intelligent sensor-based system model is discussed. Proof-of-
concept case study is the indoor monitoring of various air 
quality parameters by means of low-cost oxide-based 
resistive sensors. Due to their cheap manufacturing process, 
these sensors are prone to show imprecise and inaccurate 
responses being sensitive to multiple contaminants at once 
[44]. Furthermore, their output changes significantly with 
temperature and humidity. 
Suppose to consider three low-cost sensors: TGS2602 
(air contaminants), MQ131 (ozone and mono-nitrogen 
oxides) and MQ136 (sulfur dioxide). As shown in [16], this 
triplet is sufficient to discriminate among CO, NH3 and SO2 
presence, if appropriate sensor response disambiguation 
techniques are applied. Additionally, LM335 and TGS2180 
can be used for temperature and humidity calibration.  
A. General holonic architecture 
The reference communication bus architecture is the one 
presented in Fig. 2. Five holons account for one measured 
parameter each. One additional holon instead acts as 
representative for the human user interested in interfacing the 
system. 
In general, it happens that a relevant pattern to monitor is 
the result of a composition of distributed events (i.e., 
parameter values involving at least two holons at the same 
time). In this case, one holon queries the other on the 
supposedly occurring pattern. If the queried holon verifies 
that its local parameters are consistent with the warning 
raised by its paired unit, a proper action is triggered. In 
general, the more complex the pattern, the more the rounds 
of communication acts to check pattern verification. 
In the following, two example use cases are commented 
to provide an overview of the possible communication acts 
exchanged among the hosts connected to the bus. The two 
examples have been chosen to depict the flexibility of the 
holonic-based architecture where communication acts can be 
triggered both from high-level holons (e.g., human user) or 
low-level holons (local sensors). 
B. Use case 1: temperature and humidity self-calibration 
In this use case, the action is triggered by the human user 
(super-holon) asking for the instantaneous concentration of 
ammonia. User performs her request by means of the PC 
connected to the LAN bus.  
The queried holon (the one with MQ131 connected), 
according to its datasheet, is highly dependent on 
temperature and humidity. For this reason, to accurately 
fulfill its request, it calls the two holons of temperature and 
relative humidity to receive their data. Once that this 
information has been obtained, the MQ131 holon is able to 
calibrate its output and responds to user query with a text 
string like this: 
 
%ANSWER TO QUERY FROM 192.168.8.137/Human% 
Ammonia is 8 ppm 
measured @  8.44 AM UTC+1 
with  
temperature = 19°C 
 
 
relative humidity = 65% 
in 
 
AeFLab computer science laboratory 
accuracy 
high 
 
If, for example, the temperature holon were off-line, the 
MQ131 holon would continue providing a response, but with 
lower accuracy. In this latter case, the output string could be 
like the following: 
 
%ANSWER TO QUERY FROM 192.168.8.137/Human% 
Ammonia is 8 +/-5 ppm 
measured @  8.44 AM UTC+1 
with  
relative humidity = 65% 
in 
 
AeFLab computer science laboratory 
accuracy 
low  - -> could not find temperature  
information 
C. Use case 2:detecting a gas 
In this use case, the action is triggered by one holon 
locally detecting a transition from one state to another. The 
holon looks up its local knowledge base (KB). KB stores all 
patterns the system consider as important to monitor. For 
example, as shown in [16], the following pattern accounts for 
NH3 presence: 
MQ131< θ AND TGS2602> θ AND MQ136< θ 
being θ an empirically tuned threshold value. 
If MQ136 holon begins to sense local values such that 
the logical state MQ136 < θ is true, then it raises a query to 
TGS2602 and MQ131 holons to know their current logical 
states. If both the two queried holons confirm the NH3 
pattern, then a warning is raised to the PC holon to inform 
high-level holon (human user). 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
A test-bed implementation of the previously described 
holonic architecture is currently under way.  
All holons are supposed to communicate their data by 
means of an Ethernet bus and inform one other about their 
services (e.g., measuring ammonia or CO) by means of a 
shared repository accessible via a Web-service interface.  
Holons connected to the bus are hosted by the following 
devices:  
 
For the HTL, low-cost Linux-based RISC devices 
for continuous data acquisition and local parameter 
monitoring have been used. With reference to the 
overall system holarchy, all these units are 
responsible for hardware/software transductions by 
converting 
physical-level 
signals 
into 
digital 
parameters.  
 
For the HOL: one PC hosting complex data 
processing and visualization. This unit is responsible 
for extracting coherent IF THEN patterns from the 
sampled data sent by the HTL. After such process, 
the HTL is informed of the extracted patterns and 
can use them either for triggering user-defined 
actions (such as local alarms) or for knowledge 
exploration. 
252
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Each Linux-based RISC device is equipped with one of 
the three gas sensors reported in Fig. 2, plus a humidity and 
temperature sensor to host self-calibration on board. 
Software on-board has been written in C language to perform 
data acquisition, compression, storage and publishing. On 
each device, an ever running task constantly analyze real-
time data arriving from all input channels to check if one of 
the monitored patterns verifies (or is about to verify). In this 
case, an action is triggered to the high-level holon (for 
example, a mail is sent to the system administrator if the 
temperature surpasses 25°C).  
The PC station has been equipped with a Java-based data 
analysis framework realized by the Holsys company. In 
particular, the framework called H-GIS (Holonic-Granularity 
Inference System) implements the computational technique 
presented in [36][43] allowing one to extract inference rules 
from sampled data.  
At the moment, employed acquisition devices write the 
sampled data into excel files, which are submitted in batch to 
H-GIS for knowledge extraction. In this setup, H-GIS is the 
true only agent of the architecture capable of exposing a 
high-level interface to an external user. In the long run, we 
aim at endowing each Linux-based RISC device with the 
same ‘intelligence’ of the PC hosting the inference system. 
One pending issue is to find a suitable communication 
protocol to use for distributed information sharing in 
holonic-based systems. According to this objective, our 
schedule is to evaluate the opportunity of using standard 
ontology language (such as the Semantic Sensor Network 
ontology [46]) and rule description language in agent 
message exchange on bus. Figure 4 reports on the 
experimental system architecture. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
When operational contexts are complex, cluttered and 
ambiguous, in addition to the relevant features of connection 
transparency and pre-processing functions, it is useful to 
endow smart devices also with the ability to interpret data 
thus showing an intelligent behavior towards the application 
layer and the human user. 
With this objective, a semantic-driven dialogue-oriented 
system architecture to use in sensor networks for knowledge 
sharing and information processing has been introduced. The 
architecture has its backbone in a bus dwelling all holon 
communication.  
Due to intrinsic holon properties, information can be 
organized according to a multi-level representation. This 
means that the same request can be answered differently 
(dependently on the operational context) since it ingenerates 
communication acts aimed at responding with the maximum 
possible accuracy level permitted by the current knowledge 
available. As a result, a communication among holons is 
instantiated at multiple semantic granularity levels.  
One significant aspect that has been skipped here is the 
reverse engineering effort that has to be carried out in order 
to identify the possible utterances and consequently the 
meaningful context-sensitive queries. Furthermore, a proper 
communication protocol among holons has to be found to 
leverage real-world implementations. Future works will 
concentrate on such language-oriented aspect that still need 
to be formalized and properly tested. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  N.D. Lane, E. Miluzzo, Lu Hong, D. Peebles, T.  Choudhury 
and A.T. Campbell, “A survey of mobile phone sensing”, 
IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 48, Issue 9, Sep. 2010, 
pp. 140-150. 
[2] M.H. Salah, T.H. Mitchell, J.R. Wagner and D.M. Dawson, 
“A Smart Multiple-Loop Automotive Cooling System—
Model, Control, and Experimental Study”, IEEE/ASME 
Transactions on Mechatronics, Vol. 15, Issue 1, Feb. 2010, 
pp. 117-124. 
[3] S. Gervais-Ducouret, “Next Smart Sensors Generation”, in 
Proceedings of the IEEE Sensors Applications Symposium 
(SAS), 22-24 Feb. 2011, pp. 193-196. 
[4] International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 11992-1, 
“Road vehicles — Interchange of digital information on 
electrical connections between towing and towed vehicles”, 
International Standard, Second edition, 2003-04-15. 
[5] T. R. Gruber, “Toward principles for the design of ontologies 
used for knowledge sharing”, International Journal of Human 
and Computer Studies, Vol. 43, pp. 907–928, 1995. 
[6] R. 
Taymanov 
and 
K. 
Sapozhnikova, 
“Problems 
of 
Terminology in the Field of Measuring Instruments with 
Elements of Artificial Intelligence”, Sensors & Transducers, 
Vol. 102, Issue 3, March 2009, pp.51-61. 
[7] J. R. Taylor, “An introduction to error analysis: the study of 
uncertainties in physical measurements”, University Science 
Books, 1997. 
[8] A. D'Amico and C. Di Natale, “A contribution on some basic 
definitions of sensors properties”, IEEE Sensors Journal, Vol. 
1, Issue 3, Oct. 2001, pp. 183 – 190. 
[9] E.Y. Song and K.B. Lee, “Sensor Network based on IEEE 
1451.0 and IEEE p1451.2-RS232”, Proceedings of the IEEE 
Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference 
Proceedings, (IMTC 2008). May 2008, pp. 1728 – 1733. 
[10] S. Russell and P. Norvig (2003), Artificial Intelligence: A 
Modern Approach, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall. 
Figure 4. Test-bed architecture for holon hosting. 
100B-T Ethernet Bus 
Standard ontology 
language 
Inference System 
Linux-based risc device  
Shared repository 
of system services 
253
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[11] A. Rogers, D.D. Corkill and N.R. Jennings, “Agent 
Technologies for Sensor Networks”, IEEE Intelligent 
Systems, Vol. 24, Issue 2, March-April 2009, pp. 13-17. 
[12] S. Y. Yurish, “Sensors: Smart vs. Intelligent”, Vol. 114, 
Sensors & Transducers Journal, March 2010, pp. I-VI. 
[13] V. Di Lecce and M. Calabrese, “Smart Sensors: A Holonic 
Perspective”, Published by Springer in Lecture Notes in 
Bioinformatics, sub-series Bio-Inspired Computing and 
Applications: 7th International Conference on Intelligent 
Computing, ICIC 2011, Zhengzhou, China, August 11-14 
2011, to appear. 
 
[14] R. Navigli, “Word Sense Disambiguation: a Survey”, ACM 
Computing Surveys, 2009, 41(2): 1-6. 
 
[15] V. Di Lecce and M. Calabrese, “Taxonomies and Ontologies 
in Web Semantic Applications: the New Emerging Semantic 
Lexicon-Based Model”, IEEE International Conference on 
Intelligent Agents, Web Technologies and Internet Commerce 
(IAWTIC'08), pp. 277-283, 10-12 Dec. 2008, Vienna.  
[16] V. Di Lecce and M. Calabrese, “Discriminating Gaseous 
Emission Patterns in Low-Cost Sensor Setups”, Proceedings 
of the IEEE International Conference on Computational 
Intelligence for Measurement Systems and Applications 
(CIMSA 2011), Sep 19-21, 2011, Ottawa, Canada, pp. 1-6. 
[17] V. Di Lecce, M. Calabrese and Rita Dario, “Computational-
based Volatile Organic Compounds discrimination: an 
experimental low-cost setup”, Proc. of the 2010 IEEE 
International Conference on Computational Intelligence for 
Measurement 
Systems 
and 
Applications 
Taranto 
(CIMSA2010), Italy, 6-8 September 2010, pp. 54-59.  
[18] F. Quek, “A conversational paradigm for multimodal human 
interaction,” Proc. of the 30th Applied Imagery Pattern 
Recognition Workshop, Oct 2001, pp. 80–86. 
 
[19] M. Wooldridge (2009), An Introduction to Multi Agent 
Systems, 2nd  ed., John Wiley & Sons. 
[20] K. Sycara (1998), MultiAgent Systems, AI Magazine 19(2): 
79-92. 
[21] B. A. Myers, “A brief history of human–computer interaction 
technology,” Interactions Vol. 5(2) pp. 44–54, 1998, ACM 
Press. 
[22] V. Di Lecce, M. Calabrese, D. Soldo, and A. Quarto, 
"Dialogue-Oriented Interface for Linguistic Human-Computer 
Interaction: a Chat-based Application", Proc. of the 2010 
IEEE International Conference on Virtual Environments, 
Human-Computer Interfaces and Measurement Systems 
(VECIMS 2010), Taranto, Italy, 6-8 September 2010, pp. 
103-108. 
[23] M. Calabrese, “Hierarchical-Granularity Holonic Modelling”, 
PhD Thesis, University of Milan, March 2011. 
[24] A. Koestler, The Ghost in the Machine, (1st  Ed.) Hutchinson, 
London (1967). 
[25] F. Amigoni, A. Brandolini, V. Caglioti, V. Di Lecce, A. 
Guerriero, M. Lazzaroni, F. Lombardi, R. Ottoboni, E. 
Pasero, V. Piuri, O. Scotti, D. Somenzi, Agencies for 
perception 
in 
environmental 
monitoring, 
in: 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
instrumentation 
and 
measurement. - 
55:4(2006 Aug), pp. 1038-1050. 
[26] A. Giret and V. Botti (2004), “Holons and agents”, Journal of 
Intelligent Manufacturing, 15: 645-659. 
[27] H. V. D. Parunak and J. Odell (2002), “Representing Social 
Structures in UML”, International Workshop on agent-
oriented software engineering, Vol. 2222, pp. 1-16. 
[28] M. Calabrese, V. Piuri and V. Di Lecce, “Holonic Systems as 
Software 
Paradigms 
for 
Industrial 
Automation 
and 
Environmental Monitoring”, keynote speech paper for the 
IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence - 
SSCI 2011. 
[29] B.T. Clegg and D. Shaw, “Using process-oriented holonic 
(PrOH) modelling to increase understanding of information 
systems”, Information Systems Journal, 2008, 18: 447-477. 
[30] F. Pichler (2000), “Modelling Complex Systems by Multi-
Agent Holarchies”, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
Computer Aided Systems Theory - EUROCAST’99, Springer 
Berlin / Heidelberg, pp. 154-168. 
[31] M. Ulieru and R. Doursat, “Emergent Engineering: A Radical 
Paradigm Shift”, International Journal of Autonomous and 
Adaptive Communications Systems,  
Vol. 4, Issue 1, 
Dec. 2011, pp. 4-38. 
[32] L.A. Zadeh (1979), “Fuzzy sets and information granularity, 
in: Advances in Fuzzy Set Theory and Applications”, Gupta, 
N., Ragade, R. and Yager, R. (Eds.), Amsterdam: North-
Holland, pp.: 3-18. 
[33] L.A. Zadeh (1996), “Fuzzy logic = computing with words”, 
IEEE Transactions on  Fuzzy Systems, 4(2): 103-111.  
[34] J.M. Mendel (2007), Computing with Words: Zadeh, Turing, 
Popper and Occam, IEEE  Computational Intelligence 
Magazine, 2(4): 10-17. 
[35] V. Di Lecce, C. Pasquale and V. Piuri, “A Basic Ontology for 
Multy Agent System Communication in an Environmental 
Monitoring System”, IEEE/CIMSA 2004 – Proceedings of 
International Symposium on Computational Intelliginece for 
Measurement Systems and Applications, Boston, MA, USA, 
pp. 45-50, July 14-16, 2004. 
[36] V. Di Lecce and, M. Calabrese, “Describing non-selective gas 
sensors behaviour via logical rules”, Proceedings of the Fifth 
International IEEE/ACM Conference on Sensor Technologies 
and Applications SENSORCOMM 2011, August 21-27, 2011 
- French Riviera, Nice/Saint Laurent du Var, France, pp. 6-11. 
[37] V. Di Lecce, R. Dario and J. Uva, “A Wireless Electronic 
Nose for Emergency Indoor Monitoring”, 5th International 
Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications 
SENSORCOMM 2011, August 21-27, 2011 - French Riviera, 
Nice/Saint Laurent du Var, France, pp. 274-279.  
[38] R.Brooks, “A robust layered control system for a mobile 
robot”, IEEE Journal of Robotics and Automation, Vol. 2, 
Issue 1, 1986, pp. 14-23. 
[39] W. Pedrycz (2001), “Granular computing: an introduction”, 
Proc. of the Joint 9th IFSA World Congress and 20th NAFIPS 
International Conference, pp. 1349 – 1354.  
[40] A. Bargiela and W. Pedrycz (2003), Granular computing: an 
introduction, Kluwer Academic Publisher, Boston, Dodrecht, 
London. 
[41] M. Calabrese, A. Amato, V. Di Lecce and Vincenzo Piuri 
(2010), Hierarchical-granularity holonic modelling, Journal of 
Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing , Springer, 
Berlin Heidelberg,, 1(3): 199-209.  
[42] M. Verdicchio and M. Colombetti, Communication languages 
for multiagent systems, Computational Intelligence, 25 (2), 
2009, 136–159. 
 
[43] M. Calabrese, “Self-Descriptive IF THEN Rules from Signal 
Measurements. A holonic-based computational technique”, 
2010 IEEE International Conference on Computational 
Intelligence for Measurement Systems and Applications 
(CIMSA 2010), 6-8 September 2010, pp. 102-106. 
[44] K. Ihokura and J. Watson, The Stannic Oxide Gas Sensor, 
Principles and Applications. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 
1994. 
[45] RFC 4511 Standard, Lightweight Directory Access Protocol 
(LDAP): Technical Specification Road Map. 
[46] D. O'Byrne, R. Brennan, D. O'Sullivan, “Implementing the 
draft W3C semantic sensor network ontology”, 8th IEEE 
International Conference on Pervasive Computing and 
Communications Workshops (PERCOM Workshops), 2010, 
pp. 196-201. 
254
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

