 
 
Distributed Chemical Sensor Networks for Environmental Sensing 
 
Fiachra Collins, Dylan Orpen, Damien Maher, John Cleary, Cormac Fay and Dermot Diamond* 
CLARITY Centre for Sensor Web Technologies, National Centre for Sensor Research, Dublin City University, Dublin 9, 
Ireland. 
 
 
Abstract -—Society is increasingly accustomed to instant access 
to real-time information, due to the ubiquitous use of the 
internet and web-based access tools.  Intelligent search engines 
enable huge data repositories to be searched, and highly 
relevant information returned in real time.  These repositories 
increasingly include environmental information related to the 
environment, such as distributed air and water quality.  
However, while this information at present is typically 
historical, for example, through agency reports, there is 
increasing demand for real-time environmental data.  In this 
paper, the issues involved in obtaining data from autonomous 
chemical sensors are discussed, and examples of current 
deployments presented.  Strategies for achieving large-scale 
deployments are discussed.   
 
Keywords-environmental monitoring, chemical sensors, air, 
water, sensor networks. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
We live in a world wherein people are increasingly 
accustomed to instant access to a huge and exponentially 
growing volume of information stored on web-repositories.  
Through highly efficient search engines, people and 
organizations expect the internet to provide instant access to 
repositories spanning entertainment (music, movies, e-books, 
video clips, TV/radio), news and current affairs, hobbies, 
Government and Agency reports, financial data, and so on.  
The recent environmental disaster in Japan again highlights 
the need for access to real-time sensed information that may 
provide early warnings of impending events, and rapidly 
disseminate information to the public to minimize loss of 
life.  This has once again placed the spotlight on how to 
gather, integrate, analyze and share sensed environmental 
data.  We are particularly interested in how to sense the 
chemistry of our environment, and in particular, how to 
realize chemical sensors that are reliable, robust, and able to 
function autonomously for periods of weeks to years. As our 
ultimate goal is to achieve widely deployed networks of 
chemical sensors, it follows that the cost of ownership of 
these devices must be as low as possible.   
 
II. 
THE ELEMENTS OF SCALABILITY 
The basic building block any sensor network is the 
sensor/communications platform [1].  Our specific interest is 
to build autonomous chemical sensor platforms that could 
provide the basis of a widely dispersed sensor network, 
providing frequent updates about the concentration of 
specific target species at many locations [2].  When one 
considers how to deploy and maintain sensor networks that 
will comprise many thousands of individual devices 
scattered across a large geographical area, the issue of 
scalability becomes paramount. The key to scalability is to 
produce sensor platforms that are not overly expensive to 
buy and can function autonomously for as long as possible 
(ideally months, years), while providing a stream of accurate 
data.  For chemical sensing in water bodies, this is a 
formidable challenge, as chemical sensors are typically 
subject to drift and loss of sensitivity over time, and require 
regular calibration in order to maintain accuracy.  Biofouling 
is a particularly difficult issue for environmental water 
monitoring that can have drastic impact on electrodes and 
other sensors directly exposed to the sample within a few 
days or weeks 3]. 
 
In this paper we will demonstrate how a microfluidics 
approach can provide very reproducible sample and reagent 
handling, enabling reliable data to be generated by 
autonomous chemical analysers deployed in hostile 
environments.  The small reagent and sample volumes 
required to perform microfluidic assays means that multiple 
assays can be performed using relatively small reservoirs, 
and a small lead-acid cell can provide enough power to 
sustain the analyzer for a period of up to several months.  For 
example, the typical reagent volume consumed is in the 
region of 50-100 µL per assay, which translates to 1000 -
2000 assays per 100 mL of reagent.  Continuous monitoring 
at a frequency of 1 measurement per hour means that the 
platform can operate for 50-100 days per 100 mL of reagent, 
and provided the reagents are stable, this obviously scales as 
the volume per assay is reduced, or the reagent volume is 
increased.  In parallel, we have fabricated similar platforms 
employing IR gas sensors targeting important environmental 
targets.  These can function unattended for many months and 
yet remain within calibration, as they do not depend on a 
sensitive sensor surface to generate the analytical signal, or a 
supply of analytical reagents to function.  The gas/air and 
water analysis platforms follow the same basic analytical 
approach in that they sense the analyte in the sample, process 
the analytical signal, store the data locally, and transmit the 
data to a remote server, for example, using GSM, Wifi or 
zigbee wireless communications.  Both platforms have an 
integrated power source that can support all operational 
functions for periods of several months without intervention. 
58
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
 
III. 
NUTRIENT (PHOSPHATE) MONITORING 
A. Autonomous Nutrient Analyzer 
The autonomous nutrient analyzer is a compact and portable 
device capable of performing reagent based chemistry in 
remote locations.  The first-generation (GEN1) system 
originally developed at Dublin City University [4] has been 
extensively field trialed both at waste water treatment plants 
[5] and in natural waters [6].  In excess of 10,000 assays 
have been performed using the platform across 12 separate 
field trials.  Current work is focused on the development of 
an improved version of the analyzer platform that provides 
equivalent or better analytical performance for a component 
cost of less than €200 per unit.  Initial field trialing of the 
second generation (GEN2) system has recently commenced 
and the results from a three day field trial are reported below 
along with a description of the analyzer design and 
operation. 
B. Analyzer Design and Operation 
The GEN2 analyzer is a fully integrated system 
incorporating fluid handling, microfluidic technology, 
colorimetric chemical detection, and real time wireless 
communications in a compact and rugged portable device.  
The major system components are shown in Figure 1. 
 
The sensing system is employs the molybdenum yellow 
method, a simple colorimetric technique based on the 
formation of a yellow-colored compound when a reagent is 
mixed with a phosphate-containing sample.  The color of 
the reacted sample is detected at ca. 380nm using an ultra 
violet light emitting diode (LED) light source and a 
photodiode detector.  This reagent chemistry is preferred 
due to its long-term stability even though it is less sensitive 
than other more commonly employed reagent chemistries. 
 
The sensor implements a two-point calibration protocol 
using a blank solution (0 mg/L orthophosphate) and a 
standard orthophosphate solution. The concentration of the 
standard solution can be varied depending on the range of 
orthophosphate levels in a particular sample/site. The two-
point calibration is carried out for each sample measured. 
The importance of this procedure lies in its ability to correct 
for: 
 
• 
Changes in LED output/photodiode response due to 
temperature fluctuations; 
• 
Possible drift in response of detection system over time; 
• 
Possible change in sensitivity of detection system over 
time. 
 
The system communicates using short range ZigBee radio to 
a remote network gateway, which passes the sensor data via 
GSM or Wifi to a web-database for remote access by the 
user.  This setup allows the user to not only monitor sensor 
data in real time but also to remotely change the sensor 
setup parameters, such as sampling rate. 
 
C. Field Trial 
Following an initial laboratory based calibration, the 
system was placed in situ at Broadmeadow Water Estuary, 
Co. Dublin, Ireland on 04/09/2010.  This estuarine water 
body is know to have elevated nutrient levels due to a 
combination of inputs from industry, agriculture and a 
nearby waste water treatment plant.  The trial location is 
shown in Figure 2.  The analyzer was initialised to take 
samples at 30 minute intervals for the duration of the 
deployment. 
The sensor output over the 62-hour deployment period is 
shown in Figure 3. The sensor performed 124 autonomous 
measurements during the trial, and four manual samples 
were collected for lab analysis and validation.  These 
Figure 2: Broadmeadow Water site 
Figure 1: GEN2 Nutrient analyzer design; (1) Sample inlet; (2) 
Control board and detection system; (3) Dual channel peristaltic 
pumps; (4) Reagent bags; (5) IP68 enclosure 
59
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
 
samples were analyzed in the laboratory using a Hach-Lange 
DR890 Portable Colorimeter.  Figure 4 shows the excellent 
correlation (r = 0.9706) between the sensor output and the 
manual sample phosphate concentrations. The manual 
sample collected at 13:35 on 06/09/2010 shows the largest 
deviation from the sensor value. However, on that day, the 
river water levels did not allow this sample to be taken close 
to the sensor sample inlet. All other manual samples were 
taken at the sensor sample inlet.  The daily fluctuations in the 
phosphate level can be attributed to the tidal nature of the 
estuary which lead to significant dilution of the outflow of 
the nearby waste water treatment plant. 
IV. 
AUTONOMOUS GREENHOUSE GAS MONITORING  
European directives [7] have driven a growing need for 
autonomous platforms that can provide real-time monitoring 
of gases in the environment. Such platforms, along with the 
accompanying data recording and interface software, provide 
an attractive alternative to the current norm, which still 
depends largely on labour intensive manual monitoring [8]. 
A. Design concept 
For 
the 
autonomous 
gas-monitoring 
platform, 
components are housed within the same robust casing used 
for the nutrient analyzer, which we knew to be suitable for 
long-term outdoor deployment (Figure 5). Our primary goal 
was to meet a need for a remote autonomous platform for 
monitoring greenhouse gas levels (CH4 and CO2) in landfill 
site boreholes. This system is designed to fit to borehole 
wells, which are typically located at the landfill site 
perimeter, to facilitate monitoring of gas migration [9]. 
 
The monitoring operation is controlled via a custom 
programmed MSP430 microcontroller (1), managing the gas 
extraction (4), gas sampling (5) and data communication (2). 
The power supply (3), a 12V 5Ah lead acid battery, currently 
allows a deployment of 8 weeks at a sampling frequency of 
four sample cycles per day (approximately 220 separate 
sample cycles in total). The principal components of landfill 
gas, carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) [3], are 
measured by infrared gas sensors (Dynament Ltd. IRCEL-
CO2 and IRCEL-CH4). A SKC Grabair pump (SKC Inc., 
222-2301) extracts a sample at 0.6 L/min from a depth of 1 
metre in the borehole well. The data are statistically 
represented and sent in SMS format to a central base-station 
via GSM communication (Siemens MC35iT). As a backup, 
all harvested data are stored locally on an onboard flash 
memory chip. At the central base-station, the communicated 
data are parsed and placed onto a database, whereupon email 
alerts are sent to stakeholders. In addition, all present and 
historical sampled data are accessible to the relevant 
authorities and site personnel via a web-based visualisation 
application.  This communications and web-portal design is 
the same as that used with the nutrient analyzer. 
 
 
Figure 5: Exploded view of the  autonomous landfill gas monitoring 
platform. (1) Control board, (2) GSM Module, (3) Battery, (4) Extraction 
pump, (5) Sample chamber and sensors 
B. Deployment results 
To date, extensive field deployment trials have resulted 
in 
gas 
monitoring 
platforms 
achieving 
continuous 
deployments in excess of 12 months. For the purpose of this 
results section and to highlight the benefits of this system, a 
subset of the data corresponding to June 2009 is displayed in 
Figure 6 [10]. The CO2 levels can be seen to fluctuate 
significantly over this period, and greatly exceeding the 
threshold limit (1.5 % v/v) for significant periods. 
 
Consultation with the landfill site operators revealed that 
an increment in soil cover restricted the dissipation of 
generated gas, resulting in a build-up of CO2 concentration 
(events 1 and 2 as annotated in Figure 2). These actions were 
rectified by increasing in the extraction flow rate by site 
personnel. However, this remedial work was hindered by a 
partial blockage in the underground gas extraction pipe 
(event 3), which was subsequently identified and removed. 
The diagnosis of events and subsequent monitoring of the 
effectiveness of remedial measures illustrates the usefulness 
of this system in landfill site management. 
Figure 4: Phosphate concentrations measured during the trial by the 
phosphate analyzer and by parallel manual samples (red) 
 
60
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Recorded gas concentration data for June ’09 with threshold 
limits of 1.5% v/v for CO2 and 1.0 % v/v for CH4 also indicated [10]. 
C. Further system development 
As mentioned in the introduction, a key goal for 
scalability of deployments has to be the duration of 
autonomous operation. Currently continuous deployments of 
the platform in excess of 12 months have been achieved at 
two locations on an active and dormant landfill site. During 
this time, the system successfully monitored gas migration, 
with the batteries being remotely monitored and manually 
replaced when depleted. The systems uptimes were 
calculated 
upon 
retrieval, 
and 
were 
found 
to 
be 
approximately 83% over the duration of both deployments. 
The discrepancy from complete autonomy was attributed to 
the 12V/5Ah battery depleting below its operating threshold 
(ca. 11.5V) after approximately one month in the field (see 
original code battery decay in Figure 7). Below this 
threshold, the GSM unit cannot draw sufficient current to 
transmit and the data cannot be accessed remotely via the 
website. While battery replenishment can be achieved 
reasonably quickly, it is obvious that a reduction in power 
usage would increase the duration of autonomous operation. 
This has been achieved through optimization of the 
microcontroller C-code to refine the device functionality, 
and in particular introduce sleep modes. Using this 
optimised code resulted in a three-fold increase in battery 
lifetime (i.e. ca. 3 months). The battery decay of a unit 
programmed with both the old (blue series) and new power 
saving code (red series) can be seen in Figure 7. 
 
In order to further extend deployment lifetime, and 
potentially realise a fully autonomous field-deployable 
sensing platform, a solar cell has been assessed as a local 
energy generation source for the platform. A study was 
conducted by coupling the system with a charge controller 
(4Ah, Radionics 706-7934) and photovoltaic module (17.5V, 
0.27A, Radionics 194-149). The solar cell was chosen to 
provide sufficient power to charge the battery even in low 
lighting conditions. The charge controller serves to regulate 
the power being delivered to the battery, and to provide 
protection against battery overload, reverse polarity and feed. 
For the purpose of this study, one of the systems was 
retrieved after the 12-month deployment and retro fitted with 
the charge controller and solar cell (wiring configuration 
shown in Figure 8). Once the solar cell was fitted, the unit 
was setup on a test borehole well, sampling as per the normal 
field setup (with the old inefficient code). The monitored 
battery level can be seen in Figure 9. The graph also includes 
the decay of the battery before it was fitted with the solar 
panel.  This shows the graph initially decaying from its full 
charge until the operating threshold is crossed. 
 
 
Figure 7: Battery decay curves passing operating threshold with both the 
original code (red), and the new updated code (blue) which includes sleep 
routines. 
 
 
Figure 8: Annotated schematic of the solar charging configuration, 
demonstrating the wiring configuration 
 
When integrated, the integrated solar cell immediately 
begins to produce a net positive increase in battery level. 
Voltage fluctuations, as seen from the repeating pattern 
reading at a period of 6 hours, are attributed to the changing 
sunlight conditions. Despite these fluctuations, it is clear that 
the battery charge is accumulating. Although these are only 
initial studies (6 days), we are confident that a fully 
autonomous gas sensing platform will be realised with the 
61
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
 
implementation of the these power saving/generation 
measures.  
 
 
Figure 8: Battery level monitoring showing the initial decay from fully 
charged to failure threshold (ca. 11.5V) at which point the solar panel is 
integrated, and the voltage begins to accumulate while the system continues 
to operate as normal. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The cost of ownership, reliability and duration of 
autonomous operation of chemical sensing platforms for air 
and water monitoring will improve dramatically in the 
coming years, enabling widely distributed networks of these 
devices to be realized.  This in turn will generate new 
information about our environment, which can be made 
available to environmental scientists, technical specialists, 
regulatory agencies, communities and commercial entities.  
In this way, knowledge of the status of our water and air 
chemistry will become integrated with other information 
sources (e.g. satellite based weather and remote sensing data) 
to provide a much richer picture of the dynamics and inter-
relationships that together determine the quality of our 
environment. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We acknowledge support for this research from Science 
Foundation Ireland through the CLARITY Centre (grant 
code 
07/CE/I1147), 
Enterprise 
Ireland 
(grant 
codes 
IP/2008/544 and CFTD/08/111) and the Irish Environmental 
Protection Agency (grant code 2010-ET-MS-10).  We also 
acknowledge support from Episensor Ltd. in project 
IP/2008/544. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
D. Diamond, K. T. Lau, S. Brady, and J. Cleary, “Integration of 
Analytical Measurements and Wireless Communications – Current 
Issues and Future Strategies”, Talanta vol. 75, pp. 606 - 612, 2008. 
[2] 
D. Diamond, S. Coyle, S. Scarmagnani, J. Hayes, “Wireless Sensor 
Networks and Chemo/Bio-Sensing”, Chemical Reviews, vol. 108 
Issue: 2, pp 652-679, 2008. 
[3] 
A. Radu, S. Anastasova-Ivanova, B. Paczosa-Bator, J. Bobacka, A. 
Lewenstam, D. Diamond. “Diagnostic of functionality of polymer 
membrane–based 
ion-selective 
electrodes 
by 
impedance 
spectroscopy”, Analytical Methods, vol 2, issue 10, pp. 1490-1498, 
2010. 
[4] 
C. M. McGraw, S. E. Stitzel, J. Cleary, C. Slater, D. Diamond, 
“Autonomous microfluidic system for phosphate detection”, Talanta, 
Vol. 71, Issue 3, pp. 1180-1185, 2007. 
[5] 
J. Cleary, C. Slater, C. McGraw, D. Diamond, “An Autonomous 
Microfluidic Sensor for Phosphate: On-Site Analysis of Treated 
Wastewater”, Sensors Journal, IEEE , vol.8, no.5, pp. 508-515, 2008. 
[6] 
J. Cleary, D. Maher, C. Slater, D. Diamond, “In situ monitoring of 
environmental water quality using an autonomous microfluidic 
sensor”, Sensors Applications Symposium (SAS), Limerick, Ireland, 
pp. 36-40, 2010. 
[7] 
“Directive 2008/50/EC of 21 May 2008 on ambient air quality and 
cleaner air for Europe”, European Parliament and Council of the 
European Union, 2008. 
[8] 
“Landfill Manuals – Landfill Monitoring”, 2nd edition, 2003, 
Environmental Protection Agency, Ireland. 
[9] 
E. Aitchison, “Methane generation from UK landfill sites and its use 
as an energy source”, Energy Convers. Manage., vol. 37, issue 6-8, 
pp. 1111-1116, 1996. 
[10] S. Beirne, B. Kiernan, C. Fay, C. Foley, B. Corcoran, A.F. Smeaton, 
D. Diamond, "Autonomous greenhouse gas measurement system for 
analysis of gas migration on landfill sites", 2010 IEEE Sensors 
Applications 
Symposium, 
SAS 
2010, 
pp. 
143-148, 
doi 
: 
10.1109/SAS.2010.5439422. 
 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

