Elemental Giant Magnetoresistance (GMR) Sensors
for Neuromorphical Applications
J. G´omez, C. Reig, M.D. Cubells
Dept. of Electronic Engineering
University of Valencia
Burjassot, Spain
email: candid.reig@uv.es
F. Pardo, J.A. Boluda, F. Vegara
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Valencia
Burjassot, Spain
S. Abrunhosa, S. Cardoso
INESC-MN
Lisbon, Portugal
Abstract—Neuromorphic (bio-inspired) strategies have demon-
strated to improve the performance of vision sensors. With the
recent advances in sensor integration, such a paradigm can be
extended to novel applications. With such a purpose in mind, this
paper reports on the design, manufacturing, and characterization
of Giant MagnetoResistance (GMR) based magnetic sensor ar-
rays. Preliminary experimental results show that the developed
sensors can be integrated, for example, in event driven based
magnetic particle tracking systems.
Index Terms—Neuromorphic, GMR sensors, Event Driven
(ED), magnetic particles.
I. INTRODUCTION
Bio-inspired approach to sensor design is a new paradigm
that is changing the way in which some traditional appli-
cations, like artiﬁcial vision, are deﬁned [1]. Retinomorphic
sensors try to mimic the whole human visual process by
considering an Event-Driven representation (ED) of the vision
instead of the classical Frame-Driven (FD) one. By following
this approach, the output of ED sensors consists of serialized
“spiking” signals, grouped in events, which are much more
effective where the speed or the bandwidth are constraints. The
neuromorphic strategy has already been successfully extended
to other human senses such as auditory or olfactory [2]. De-
veloping novel bio-inspired sensors for applications different
from human senses is, nowadays, challenging.
The integration of common sensors in speciﬁc bio-inspired
sensing platforms is not straightforward. Active ‘pixels’,
composed by sensing elements together with the speciﬁc
electronics are necessary. Consequently, their design involves
both electronics and technological issues. In this sense, the
potentiality of using resistive sensors (with variations below
1% in sensors for nominal resistances ranging from 100 Ω to
10 kΩ ) in ED strategies has been recently demonstrated [3].
The use of Giant MagnetoResistance (GMR) sensors for
bio-inspired magnetic ﬁeld sensors is proposed in this work.
GMR sensors are high sensitivity resistive magnetic sensors,
CMOS compatible, suitable for low-ﬁeld detection applica-
tions. Their design, fabrication and fundamental characteri-
zation is described in the following sections. As preliminary
test-benches, current sensing and magnetic particle movement
tracking will be explored.
II. SENSOR DESIGN
8-element arrays of GMR sensors have designed and micro-
fabricated for preliminary testing the potential of the approach,
as described in Figure 1. The sensors were manufactured
at the clean-room facilities of the INESC-MN, following a
typical four-masks ﬁve-lithography-steps, as described in [4].
Spin-valves were considered as the sensing elements. Sensors
included integrated current strips, aligned with the sensors, for
testing purposes. A photograph of a sensor is included as an
inset in Figure 1.
Fig. 1.
Scheme of the considered GMR (spin-valves) sensing array with a
photograph of an encapsulated sensor.
III. RESULTS
Preliminary tests on so obtained sensors included static
characterization (magnetic ﬁeld and electric current), dynamic
measurements, and a scaled proof-of-concept.
A. Static characterization (magnetic ﬁeld, electric current)
The response of sensing elements versus the applied
magnetic ﬁeld was measured with the help of an auto-
mated (GPIB based) testbench, including an electromagnet
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

and a PC. The obtained results are shown in Figure 2.
A clean linear behavior is observed in the range of in-
terest, with values of (1160 ± 10) Ω and sensitivities of
about (1.65 ± 0.05) Ω/Oe. Analog experiments were per-
formed for measuring the resistance of the sensing elements
as a function of the electrical current driving through the
integrated strips (10 µm width). In this case, the measured
sensitivity was about (1.00 ± 0.05) Ω/mA. Then, 1 mA ﬂow-
ing through a current strips is generating about 0.6 Oe on the
below sensing element.
Fig. 2.
Typical normalized resistance versus magnetic ﬁeld of the sensing
elements.
B. Current pulses
Dynamic characterization was carried out by applying cur-
rent pulses to the current strips and measuring the change of
the sensing resistors, connected as voltage dividers, with an
oscilloscope. Rectangular current pulses (10 mA amplitude,
100 us width) were applied, being the sensing elements biased
with a 3.75 mA DC current. Typical results are shown in
Figure 3 (four-channels oscilloscope), which are consistent
with the static characterization. Fabrication tolerance issues
are slightly observed.
C. Small magnet measurements
Finally, small (∅ = 1 mm) spherical neodymium magnets
were placed close to the sensors in order to qualitatively
estimate the potentiality of the sensors for detecting moving
magnetic particles. Output signals were collected with the
oscilloscope, as displayed in Figure 4. The detected ﬁeld by
the sensing elements was in the order of 1 Oe (within its
optimal range) and it was conditioned by the distance from
the magnet and its orientation. Additional measurements are
required in order to give a more precise characterization.
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Speciﬁcally designed spin valve based magnetic sensor ar-
rays have demonstrated to fulﬁll the requirements for being in-
tegrated in sensor systems based on the neuromorphic strategy.
Fig. 3. Oscillograms from the sensing elements being excited by electrical
current pulses.
Fig. 4. Detection of a small spherical neodymium magnet (∅ = 1 mm).
The next steps should include a systematic characterization
for optimizing their parameters, mainly those related to power
consumption and dynamic response. The development of elec-
trical models and the monolithic integration with speciﬁcally
designed ASICs should be done in the next future.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was partially supported by projects TEC2015-
66947-R (Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness)
and PID2019-105556GB-C32 (Spanish Ministry of Science
and Innovation.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Wu, “Neuromorphic vision chips”, Science China Information Sci-
ences, vol. 61, no. 6, p. 060421, Jun. 2018, doi: 10.1007/s11432-017-
9303-0.
[2] A. Vanarse, A. Osseiran, and A. Rassau, “A Review of Current Neu-
romorphic Approaches for Vision, Auditory, and Olfactory Sensors”,
Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 10, no. MAR, p. 115, Mar. 2016, doi:
10.3389/fnins.2016.00115.
[3] C. Reig, M.D. Cubells, J. Sanchis, F. Pardo, J.A. Boluda, F. Vegara,
S. Cardoso, “Address Event Representation (AER) approach to resistive
sensor arrays”, in Proceedings of GMC-ElecEng 2020 (in press), 2020.
[4] M.D. Cubells, C. Reig, D. Ram´ırez, S. Cardoso and P. Freitas, “Full
Wheatstone Bridge Spin-Valve Based Sensors for IC Currents Monitor-
ing”, IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1756–1762, Dec. 2009,
doi: 10.1109/jsen.2009.2030880.
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

