Maximizing Transported Data in a Wireless Sensor
Network: How Much can the Network Transport
Before Partition?
Samta Shukla
Department of Electronic Systems Engineering
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, India
samta@cedt.iisc.ernet.in
Joy Kuri
Department of Electronic Systems Engineering
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, India
kuri@cedt.iisc.ernet.in
Abstract—We consider a scenario where the communication
nodes in a sensor network have limited energy, and the objective
is to maximize the aggregate bits transported from sources to
respective destinations before network partition due to node
deaths. This performance metric is novel, and captures the
useful information that a network can provide over its lifetime.
The optimization problem that results from our approach is
nonlinear; however, we show that it can be converted to a
Multicommodity Flow (MCF) problem that yields the optimal
value of the metric. Subsequently, we compare the performance
of a practical routing strategy, based on Node Disjoint Paths
(NDPs), with the ideal corresponding to the MCF formulation.
Our results indicate that the performance of NDP-based routing
is within 7.5% of the optimal.
Index Terms—Network Partition Time (NPT), Maximal Inde-
pendent Sets(MIS), Node-disjoint Paths (NDPs), Link-Contention
graph (LCG)
I. INTRODUCTION
The model we consider in this paper is motivated by a
wireless sensor network deployed for soil moisture monitoring
in a semi-arid region in the state of Karnataka in South India
[1], [2], [3]. The sensors are embedded at chosen spots where
moisture is to be measured. Usually, the chosen spots are well-
illuminated by sunlight, so that solar panels can be used to
supply energy to the sensors and associated electronics. The
data collection point or Base Station (BS) is several hundred
meters away, and is assumed to be close to an electrical outlet.
The area between the spots being monitored and the BS
is covered by a multihop wireless communication network.
However, there are constraints on the placement of the commu-
nication nodes; for example, there may be patches of ground
that are well-illuminated, but inaccessible (for example, a
patch of well-illuminated ground may be walled off as it
belongs to a third party). This forces the communication nodes
to be located at spots that may be illuminated poorly. In our
model, we capture these realistic aspects by assuming that
sources and destinations are equipped with inﬁnite energy,
but the communication nodes have access to ﬁnite supplies
of energy only.
Given such a network, we are interested in maximizing
the bits transported from source(s) to destination(s) before
the communication network runs out of energy. A solution
with high throughput, but low network lifetime may not be
good for our application scenario; similarly, a solution with
long network lifetime, but low throughput may be undesirable:
A network may remain idle for most of the time claiming
a higher Network Partition Time (NPT), but the useful data
transferred might be substantially less. Therefore, we seek to
maximize the product, which is the aggregate bits transported
before network partition.
Sensor networks have wireless links. Links that interfere
cannot be activated simultaneously. We utilize the notions
of maximal independent sets (MIS) in the link contention
graph [4] to obtain an equivalent wired network model. Then,
we study the problem of route selection in this equivalent
wired network model so that the objective, viz., aggregate bits
transported, is maximized, subject to the nodes’ “available
energy” values. We show that the problem of maximizing the
aggregate bits transported before network partition can be
formulated as a Linear Program. Next, we consider a routing
strategy based on the maximum number of Node Disjoint
Paths between each source-destination pair, and compare its
performance with that of the ideal above. We ﬁnd that the
NDP-based strategy is able to transport an aggregate number
of bits that is within 5%–7% of the optimal, indicating that
it is a promising strategy.
The contributions of this paper are as follows.
• The metric that we seek to optimize, viz., aggregate bits
transported before network partition, is natural. However,
to the best of our knowledge, the metric has not been used
in the literature.
• The equivalent wired network model results after all
wireless-speciﬁc aspects (link technology, MAC duty
cycles, transmit powers) are encapsulated into a module.
The resulting model makes it easier to analyse the per-
formance of routing strategies, in terms of aggregate bits
transported, with limited nodal energies.
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

• We show that the our problem can be recast as a Linear
Program (a Multicommodity Flow problem), even though
the original formulation results in a nonlinear program.
• We examine the performance achievable by a practical
routing protocol based on the principle of Node Disjoint
Paths (NDPs). Our results indicate that this protocol
performs well, achieving an aggregate bit transfer within
7.5% of the ideal value given by the Multicommodity
Flow problem.
In Section II, we survey the related work. The models we
study in this paper are introduced and analyzed in Section III.
A practical routing protocol is discussed in Section IV. Sec-
tion V compares the performance of the routing protocol, in
terms of aggregate bits transported, with the ideal obtained
from the models in Section III. We conclude in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
Our application context requires sources to send data to
the destination at regular intervals. In this context, the “pull”
model of operation, where the network sends data only in
response to queries from the outside, does not seem appropri-
ate; this is because queries would have to be sent repeatedly,
leading to avoidable energy expenditure. So, a lot of the query-
based protocols in the literature are difﬁcult to utilize. Further,
our objective is to maximize the (weighted) aggregate bits
transferred before network partition, and we are unaware of
any work that considers this metric while designing protocols.
Consequently, the protocols we survey below do not really
address our concerns. Nevertheless, for completeness, we
discuss several prominent routing protocols in the rest of this
section.
In [5], Heinzelman et al. proposed a variant of ﬂooding,
SPIN, which disseminates data from one node to every other
node, so that, when needed, required data can be extracted
from any of the nodes. In our context, replication of data at
various nodes is hardly required. Moreover, SPIN does not
guarantee reliable data delivery [6].
Both Directed Diffusion (DD) [7] and its variant Gradient
Based Routing (GBR) [8] are event-driven protocols, that
supply data in response to external queries. Both of them use
in-network aggregation. In [9], Yao et al. discussed COUGAR,
which is a query-driven, in-network aggregation based proto-
col in which a group of nodes choose a leader node who
aggregates their data and sends to Base-Station. ACQUIRE
[10] is similar. However, as mentioned before, event-driven
protocols are not natural in our application scenario.
Similar to DD, in [11], Ganesan et al. presented a Braided
Multipath Routing Protocol, which has 50% more fault re-
silience as compared to the Node-Disjoint Multipath protocols,
but it uses only one path for data transfer; hence the overall
bits transferred is limited by the capacity of a single path. Shah
and Rabaey in [12] suggested the alternative-route routing
paradigm. Data is routed via primary path, in an energy
efﬁcient way; if a fault occurs, alternative-route is chosen for
data transfer.
A sensor network multipath version of AODV, AOMDV
[13], routes along multiple link disjoint paths, where route-
discovery is done through ﬂooding, which is not energy-
efﬁcient [14]. In some protocols, for the sake of improving
reliability, multiple instances of a single packet are routed
through multiple paths. Examples are ReInForm [15], MCMP
[16], ECMP [17]. ReInForm provides reliability at the cost of
high-energy dissipation. MCMP tries to optimise for reliabil-
ity and delay, but is highly interference-prone, which limits
successful data transmissions. ECMP, in addition to MCMP,
optimises for energy-efﬁciency too, but the packet delivery
ratio for ECMP equals that of MCMP. Various protocols which
use packet splitting as a packet salvaging technique like N to
1 Multipath [18], or for Forward Error Check like, EQSR [19],
H-SPREAD [20] suffer heavily due to interference.
Moving to protocols following the node-disjoint routing
paradigm: NDMR [21] chooses three least hop, node disjoint
paths (even if many paths exist) for routing, and switches
to other paths if any of these three paths fails. REER [22]
routes data along two paths; primary path and alternate path,
which are selected on the basis of link-cost. The interference-
free routing protocols like, I2MR [23], EECA [24], limit the
number of paths assigned for routing data to three and two,
respectively. In [25], Radi et al. came up with a throughput
aware multipath node-disjoint protocol; however, it is event-
driven.
In summary, none of the protocols mentioned here raises
the question of “maximising aggregate bits transported before
network partition.” In many cases, the scenario addressed is
such that this question does not arise naturally (e.g., applica-
tion scenarios where minimizing delay is the main objective).
III. NETWORK MODEL AND ANALYSIS
In this paper, we assume the following.
• Each source and destination has access to inﬁnite energy,
but the intermediate communication nodes are powered
by ﬁnite energy sources only.
• Each node has a single radio interface, and a node cannot
transmit and receive at the same time.
• Data ﬂows according to a ﬂuid model.
• Sources have inﬁnite backlogs.
• Propagation delay is negligible.
• Nodes are static.
We represent the network as a directed graph G = (N, L)
with multiple sources given by S1, S2, . . . , SK, multiple des-
tinations by D1, D2, . . . , DK where Si, Di ∈ N, 1 ≤ i ≤ K.
Let N
= |N|, L = |L|. Let w1, w2, ......., wK be the
weights associated with S1, S2, ......., SK, where,
K
P
i=1
wi = 1.
The weight assigned to a source reﬂects its priority. Let Ei
denote the energy available with node i (in Joules), γt the
energy consumed for transmitting a data bit (Joules/bit), γr be
the energy consumed for receiving a data bit (in Joules/bit),
irrespective of the node chosen.
Network partition time, denoted by bT, is deﬁned as the
instant when the ﬁrst source-destination pair disconnects (it
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

is possible that several sources are disconnected from their
respective destinations at this time). We consider the network
to be partitioned because there is at least one source that is
unable to reach its destination.
In a wireless network, links that interfere with one another
cannot be activated simultaneously. To address link interfer-
ence issues, the notions of Link Contention Graph and Max-
imal Independent Sets have been introduced [4]. In the LCG,
each vertex represents a link, and there is an edge between two
vertices if the corresponding links interfere. A maximal subset
of non-adjacent nodes in the LCG deﬁnes a MIS. Evidently,
the links in a MIS can be activated simultaneously because
they do not interfere.
A schedule of wireless link activation can be viewed as a
sequence of MIS-es that are activated in sequence. Typically,
a periodic sequence of MIS-es is used.
A. Scheduling of wireless links
Let the bit rate supported by link l be denoted by C(l),
1 ≤ l ≤ L. Let M1, M2, . . . , MW denote the various MIS-
es for the given graph, and let a periodic schedule be given.
Let ai denote the fraction (of the period of the schedule) for
which the ith MIS is on. A link l ∈ L can be present in any
of the MIS-es (not necessarily disjoint). The fraction of time
for which link l is active is obtained by
νl =
X
i|l∈Mi
ai
The equivalent link capacity for link l is given by,
Cl = νl × C(l)
As the equivalent link capacity Cl is obtained by taking
into account the fraction of time for which link is active, we
can substitute this link by an equivalent wired link of capacity
Cl that is active all the time. Evidently, the bits transported
by the link over the schedule period remains the same, no
matter which view is adopted. This observation forms the basis
underlying our approach of constructing an equivalent wired
network.
Let C be the capacity vector of size L, the lth entry of
which represents the effective capacity of the link l for the
speciﬁed schedule. We represent an independent set Mj by
a column vector rj; the element rl = C(l) if l ∈ M, and 0
otherwise. Thus, we can write the vector C as,
C =
j=W
X
j=1
ajrj
B. Multi-commodity Flow Problem
The Linear programming Problem Formulation: The net-
work topology can be represented by a N × L node-link
incidence matrix A, with the entries Anl, n ∈ N, l ∈ L
being “1” if l originates at n, “−1” if l terminates at n and “0”
otherwise. Set of end-to-end multi-hop ﬂows constitutes the
network trafﬁc where each ﬂow has a source and destination.
Flow trafﬁc is routed by the network along one or multiple
paths from source to destination. For each ﬂow, we denote
by xi the amount of ﬂow (measured in bit/s) injected into
the network per unit of time by the ith S − D pair, x
denotes the amount of ﬂow injected into the network due to
all S − D pairs. yl is the amount of ﬂow traversing link l
per unit of time. Let yi
l denote the ﬂow through link l lying
in the Si − Di path. Hence, x = (xi), ∀i ∈ [1, 2..., K] and
yl = (yi
l)l∈L, ∀i ∈ [1, 2..., K] are the ﬂow rate vector and
ﬂow link rate vector, respectively. Unless otherwise stated, we
will assume vectors are always column vectors. For a vector
z, zT denotes transpose of z.
• Flow Constraint
Assuming lossless transmission, the ﬂow conservation law
implies that for n ∈ N :

Anl


N×L
×


:
:
y1
l
..
yK
l
:
:


L×K
=


x1
:
...
−x1


N×K
and can be compactly written as
Ayi = ui, ∀i ∈ [1, 2, ....K]
where ui = (ui
n), n ∈ N, and ui
n denotes the amount of
ﬂow injected (removed) to (from) the network at node n, i.e.,
ui
n = xi if n = Si, ui
n = −xi if n = Di and ui
n = 0
otherwise, ∀i ∈ [1, 2, .....K].
• Energy Expenditure Constraint
The amount of data transmitted and received by any node
is limited by the maximum allowable energy available i.e.,
the initial nodal energy. Let bA denote the node-link incidence
matrix Anl where all the “−1”s are replaced by γr and all
the “+1”s are replaced by γt. Recalling the deﬁnition of the
NPT bT, we have:
"
b
Anl
#
×
" :
:
:
y1
l
..
yK
l
:
:
:
#
×
"
1
:
1
#
× bT ≤
"
E1
:
EN
#
Or
bA × yi × 1 × bT ≤ E, ∀i ∈ [1, 2, ....K]
where E is N × 1 vector representing the energy available
with each node in network.
• Capacity Constraints
The capacity of a link limits the aggregate bit rate that it can
carry. We have:


:
:
:
y1
l
..
yK
l
:
:
:

 ×


1
:
1


K×1
≤


C1
:
CL


L×1
Compactly,
K
X
i=1
yi
l ≤ Cl, ∀l ∈ L
• Problem Formulation
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Our aim is to maximize the (weighted) aggregate bits carried
till NPT. Let wi, 1 ≤ i ≤ K, represent the weights associated
with the K source-destination pairs; the weights reﬂect
the “importance” of each source-destination pair. Then the
problem can be stated as:
Problem P*:
max
K
X
i=1
wixi bT
s. t. : Ayi = ui, ∀i ∈ [1, 2, ....K]
bA × yi × 1 × bT ≤ E, ∀i ∈ [1, 2, ....K]
K
X
i=1
yi
l ≤ Cl, ∀l ∈ L
yi
l ≥ 0, ∀l ∈ L
xi ≥ 0, ∀i ∈ [1, 2, ......K]
bT ≥ 0
The formulation above is not a linear program owing
to the presence of the product of unknowns xi,
bT in the
objective function. However, we can convert this problem
to a Linear Program in terms of the new variables (x(i) bT),
1 ≤ i ≤ K, (yi
l bT), 1 ≤ i ≤ K, 1 ≤ l ≤ L, and bT, with
suitable modiﬁcations of two of the constraints:
Problem MCF:
max
K
X
i=1
wi(xi bT)
s.t. : A(yi bT) = (ui bT), ∀i ∈ [1, 2, ....K]
bA(yi bT) × 1 ≤ E, ∀i ∈ [1, 2, ....K]
(
K
X
i=1
yi
l bT) ≤ (Cl bT), ∀l ∈ L
yi
l bT ≥ 0, ∀l ∈ L
(xi bT) ≥ 0, ∀i ∈ [1, 2, ......K]
bT ≥ 0
Lemma 1. The optimal objective function values in Problem
P* and Problem MCF are equal.
Proof: Let bT ∗, x∗,i, 1 ≤ i ≤ K, y∗,i
l , 1 ≤ i ≤ K, 1 ≤ l ≤
L, represent the optimal solution to Problem P*. We generate
the following point which is feasible for Problem MCF: b˜T =
bT ∗, (˜xib˜T) = x∗,i bT ∗, 1 ≤ i ≤ K, and (˜yi
l b˜T) = y∗,i
l
bT ∗, 1 ≤
i ≤ K, 1 ≤ l ≤ L. Clearly, the point
b˜T, (˜xib˜T), (˜yi
l b˜T)

is feasible for Problem MCF as the point

bT ∗, x∗,i, y∗,i
l

is feasible for Problem P*, and the objective function for
Problem MCF at
b˜T, (˜xib˜T), (˜yi
l b˜T)

is equal to the optimal
objective function for Problem P*. Therefore,
Optimal objective in Problem MCF ≥
Optimal objective in Problem P∗
Similarly,
starting
from
the
optimal
solution

b˜T
∗
, (˜xib˜T)∗, (˜yi
l b˜T)∗

to
the
Problem
MCF,
we
can
generate a feasible point for the Problem P*, and the
objective function value of Problem P* at this point will
equal the optimal objective function value of Problem MCF.
This implies that
Optimal objective in Problem P∗ ≥
Optimal objective in Problem MCF
From these two inequalities, the claim follows.
EXAMPLE 1
In Fig. 1, nodes N1, N2, N3 have energy 60, 80, 80 J,
respectively. Energy consumed per bit of transmitted and
received data are denoted by γt = 10−4 J/bit and γr =
10−6 J/bit, respectively. The raw capacity of each wireless
link is taken to be C = 8 × 104 bits/sec = 80 Kbps.
The wireless link interference model is as follows. Two
links L1 and L2 interfere with each other if either node of
L1 is within two hops of one of the nodes of L2. With this
model, the MIS-s are: {(1,7),(3,8),(1,8),(3,7),(2),(5),(4),(6)}.
The wired equivalent link capacities [4] are:
C1 = C3 = C7 = C8 = (2/8) × C = 20Kbps
C2 = C4 = C5 = C6 = (1/8) × C = 10Kbps
Fig. 1.
An example showing 2-Ss′transmitting to their respective Ds′. The
paths S1 −N1 −D1, S1 −N2 −D1 for S1 −D1 and S2 −N2 −D2, S2 −
N3 − D2 are the Node-disjoint-paths for S2 − D2, respectively. The links
are marked from 1 to 8.
The solution of Problem MCF yields a weighted aggregate
bits transported till NPT of F1
MCF
= 16.71C
bits for
w1 = 0.25, w2 = 0.75, and F2
MCF = 13.62C bits for
w1 = 0.5, w2 = 0.5.
It is interesting to note that the solution obtained by
solving Problem MCF exactly determines the solution for
Problem P*. Consider the equal weight case for Prob-
lem
P*, the optimal solution for the link ﬂow vector
is
14289.52
9870.35
14289.52
9870.35
9182.33
9182.335
19052.68
19052.68

bits/sec.
The data injected into the network by the two sources’, ﬂow
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

rate vector, is
2415.98
2823.50
bits/sec. The disconnection
time bT is 41.57 sec.
• Clearly, all the link-ﬂows are less than the link-capacity
which indicates that for maximizing aggregate bits trans-
ported, a greedy strategy is not required.
• Problem MCF insists on maintaining the ﬂow rate vector
constant over time, leading to an optimal solution where
all source-destination pairs disconnect at the same time.
So, even though our formulation considered the time
till at least one S − D pair is disconnected, the MCF
formulation provides a solution where all sources get
disconnected at the same time. This is proved in the
following Lemma.
Lemma 2. The optimal solution to Problem MCF yields a
Network Partition Time b˜T
∗
at which all source-destination
pairs are disconnected.
Proof: Suppose that the optimal solution to Problem MCF
has been found, and the NPT b˜T
∗
is such that at least one
source-destination pair is not disconnected. Without loss of
generality, we assume that there is just one source-destination
pair that is not disconnected; in case there is more than one,
the argument below can be repeated.
Consider the source that is not disconnected from its des-
tination. There must be at least one path from this source to
its destination such that all nodes on this path have positive
residual energy. Therefore, this path can sustain data transfer
for a longer duration c
˜T1 (say), where
c
˜T1
b˜T
∗ =: α > 1. Using
c
˜T1, we can generate a solution to Problem MCF at which the
objective function increases strictly. To do this, we consider a
solution where all other source rates are decreased to x∗,i/α,
which allows path lifetimes to increase to αb˜T
∗
= c
˜T1. This
means that the aggregate bits transported by these sources
till time c
˜T1 remains the same as before. The source rate for
the pair that is not disconnected is maintained at the same
level as before. Then, because c
˜T1 > b˜T
∗
, we conclude that
the aggregate bits transported till c
˜T1 is strictly greater than
that transported till b˜T
∗
. This is a contradiction, and hence the
claim follows.
IV. ROUTING
In the previous section, we presented an approach to obtain
the maximum (weighted) aggregate bits transported, before
all sources lose connectivity to their respective destinations.
In this section, we turn to the practical issue of routing. Our
objective is to examine the routing strategy based on Node
Disjoint Paths (proposed in the literature) in terms of the same
criterion, viz., aggregate bits transported before disconnection.
Node-Disjoint-Path Routing
NDP routing is discussed prominently in the literature [18]
[19] [20] [23] [24] [25]. However, many papers use limited
number of NDPs for routing; we consider routing through the
maximum possible number of NDPs.
1) Finding the maximal NDP set for routing: Our approach
is based on Menger’s Theorem[26], which states that “The
min-cut for a S−D pair equals the maximum number of NDP.”
The Node-Disjoint-Paths for each S − D pair is constructed
such that:
1) Each path contains exactly one node belonging to the
min-vertex cut for the S − D pair.
2) The total number of paths formed for a S−D pair equals
the cardinality of the min-vertex cut set for that S − D
pair.
Remark: In case of overlapping min-vertex cut-sets for the
S − D pairs, the total number of NDP might exceed the total
cardinality of min-vertex cut-set for the graph.
2) To calculate the Total Data Transferred: After having
identiﬁed a NDP set for a source-destination pair, our approach
is to consider each of the node disjoint paths, and obtain the
data transferred through it. We assume that sources are greedy,
in the sense that they transmit at the maximum rate possible,
subject to the constraints that link capacities are ﬁnite and have
to be shared among all ﬂows that pass through those links.
Focusing on a speciﬁc path in the NDP path set, our
approach is to ﬁnd the lifetime of each node on the path. The
node lifetime is determined by the node’s available energy,
and the total data rate through it. The smallest node lifetime
is the path lifetime. Finally, we calculate the total number of
bits transported from each source that uses the path to the
corresponding destination. Iterating over paths, we obtain the
weighted aggregate bits transported before disconnection.
EXAMPLE 2
Referring to Fig 1, let TN1, TN2 and TN3 denote the
lifetimes of nodes N1, N2 and N3, respectively. Using the
equivalent wired link capacity values obtained earlier (just
above Fig 1), and recalling that γt = 10−4 and γr = 10−6, we
have, TN1 = 60/((10−4+10−6)×(2×104)×1) = 29.71 sec,
TN2 = 80/((10−4 + 10−6) × (1 × 104) × 2) = 39.61 sec,
TN3 = 80/((10−4 + 10−6) × (2 × 104) × 1) = 39.61 sec.
Let the weights given to S1 be w1
=
0.25, to S2
be w2
=
0.75. Data transferred across S1 − D1
is
(29.7 × (C/4) + 39.6 × (C/8)) = 12.38C. For S2 − D2
it
is
(39.6 × (C/8) + 39.6 × (C/4))
=
14.85C.
Hence
the
total
data
transferred
is
given
by
F1
NDP = (0.25 × 12.38 + 0.75 × 14.85) × C = 14.23C.
Now, let weights be w1 = 0.5, w2 = 0.5. Total data transferred
is given by F2
NDP = (0.5 × (12.38 + 14.85) × C) = 13.62C.
Remark: The data obtained for this example when both the
sources have equal weights are same for both the methods,
but discrepancy in results exist when the weights are unequal.
V. RESULTS
Following are the results obtained for γ = γt = γr = 10−2
Joules/bit, C = 102 Bits/sec for given number of nodes
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

(maximum till 40) and edges (maximum till three times
number of nodes) where the graphs are formed randomly. The
energy allotted to nodes is chosen randomly from values 1 to
100. The weights given to sources are all equal.
After 50 runs in MATLAB, the average percentage deviation
in aggregate bits transported based on the NDP approach as
compared to the MCF approach turned out to be (approxi-
mately) the following:
1)
7.5% for two S-D pairs
Fig. 2.
Performance Comparison of NDP vs MCF for multiple nodes and
two S-D pairs.
2) 4.5% for three S-D pairs
Fig. 3.
Performance Comparison of NDP vs MCF for multiple nodes and
three S-D pairs
3) 5% for ﬁve S-D pairs
Fig. 4.
Performance Comparison of NDP vs MCF for multiple nodes and
ﬁve S-D pairs.
4) 6% for ten S-D pairs
Fig. 5.
Performance Comparison of NDP vs MCF for multiple nodes and
ten S-D pairs.
It was noted that the deviation in results decreases with larger
number of observations. Thus, the performance of the NDP
approach is close to the optimal that can be achieved.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We considered a scenario where the communication nodes
in a sensor network had limited amounts of available energy,
and the objective was to maximize the aggregate bits trans-
ported from sources to respective destinations before network
partition due to node deaths. The metric “aggregate bits
transported” results from considering both network throughput
and network lifetime, and captures the useful information that
a sensor network can provide; by itself, neither factor can
provide this. We formulated an optimization problem that
turned out to be non-linear; however, we showed that it could
be converted to a Linear Program, the solution of which
yielded the optimal objective value. Next, we compared the
performance of a practical routing strategy, based on Node
Disjoint Paths (NDPs), with the ideal obtained from the Linear
Program, and found that the aggregate bits transported by
NDP-based routing strategy was within 7.5% of the optimal,
indicating that it is a promising strategy for our metric.
As part of future work, we will develop a framework for
evaluating routing and MAC protocols in sensor networks,
leveraging the approach given in this paper. The framework
will allow an analytical comparison between candidate routing
and MAC protocol combinations. Each MAC protocol will
lead to a speciﬁc equivalent wired network model, resulting
from MAC characteristics like transmit powers, link speeds
(depending on the MAC technology), duty cycle, etc. The
equivalent network will allow a study of routing protocols in
terms of the aggregate bits transported.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Panchard, S. Rao, T. V. Prabhakar, J.-P. Hubaux, and H. S. Jamadagni,
“Commonsense Net: A Wireless Sensor Network for Resource-poor
Agriculture in the semi-arid areas of Developing Countries,” Information
Technologies and International Development archive, vol. 4, no. 1, 2007.
[2] T. V. Prabhakar, H. S. Jamadagni, N. V. C. Rao, and A. Pittet, “Localized
Data Gathering Paradigms for Small and Marginal Farm Lands in Semi-
Arid regions — Issues and Concerns,” in Proceedings of the UNESCO
Conference, Lausanne, Switzerland, Feb 2010.
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[3] T. V. Prabhakar, H. S. Jamadagni, A. Sahu, and R. Venkatesha Prasad,
“Lessons from the Sparse Sensor Network Deployment in Rural India,”
in Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Distributed
Computing and Networking (ICDCN), Kolkata, India, Jan 2010.
[4] F. Lo Presti, “Joint Congestion Control: Routing and Media Access
Control Optimization via Dual Decomposition for Ad Hoc Wireless
Networks,” in Proceedings of the 8th ACM International Symposium
on Modeling, Analysis and Simulation of Wireless and Mobile Systems,
ser. MSWiM ’05, 2005.
[5] W. R. Heinzelman, J. Kulik, and H. Balakrishnan, “Adaptive protocols
for information dissemination in wireless sensor networks,” in Proceed-
ings of the 5th annual ACM/IEEE international conference on Mobile
computing and networking, ser. MobiCom ’99, 1999, pp. 174–185.
[6] J. Al-Karaki and A. Kamal, “Routing techniques in wireless sensor
networks: a survey,” Wireless Communications, IEEE, vol. 11, no. 6,
pp. 6 – 28, Dec 2004.
[7] C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, D. Estrin, J. Heidemann, and F. Silva,
“Directed Diffusion for Wireless Sensor Networking,” Networking,
IEEE/ACM Transactions on, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 2 – 16, Feb 2003.
[8] C. Schurgers and M. Srivastava, “Energy efﬁcient routing in wireless
sensor networks,” in Military Communications Conference. Communi-
cations for Network-Centric Operations: Creating the Information Force
in MILCOM 2001, IEEE, vol. 1, 2001, pp. 357 – 361.
[9] Y. Yao and J. Gehrke, “The cougar approach to in-network query
processing in sensor networks,” SIGMOD Rec., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 9–18,
2002.
[10] N. Sadagopan, B. Krishnamachari, and A. Helmy, “The acquire mech-
anism for efﬁcient querying in sensor networks,” in Sensor Network
Protocols and Applications, 2003. Proceedings of the First IEEE. 2003
IEEE International Workshop on, May 2003, pp. 149 – 155.
[11] D. Ganesan, R. Govindan, S. Shenker, and D. Estrin, “Highly-Resilient,
Energy-efﬁcient Multipath Routing in Wireless Sensor Networks,” SIG-
MOBILE, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 11–25, 2001.
[12] R. Shah and J. Rabaey, “Energy-aware Routing for Low Energy Ad
Hoc Sensor Networks,” in Proceedings of IEEE WCNC 2002, vol. 1,
Mar 2002, pp. 350 – 355 vol.1.
[13] P. Hurni and T. Braun, “Energy-efﬁcient multi-path routing in wire-
less sensor networks,” in Ad-hoc, Mobile and Wireless Networks, ser.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, D. Coudert, D. Simplot-Ryl, and
I. Stojmenovic, Eds.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2008, vol. 5198, pp.
72–85.
[14] M. Radi, B. Dezfouli, K. A. Bakar, and M. Lee, “Multipath routing
in wireless sensor networks: Survey and research challenges,” Sensors,
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 650–685, 2012.
[15] B. Deb, S. Bhatnagar, and B. Nath, “Reinform: reliable information
forwarding using multiple paths in sensor networks,” in Local Computer
Networks, 2003. LCN ’03. Proceedings. 28th Annual IEEE International
Conference on, Oct 2003, pp. 406 – 415.
[16] X. Huang and Y. Fang, “Multiconstrained qos multipath routing in
wireless sensor networks,” Wirel. Netw., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 465 – 478,
Aug 2008.
[17] A. Bagula and K. Mazandu, “Energy constrained multipath routing in
wireless sensor networks,” in Ubiquitous Intelligence and Computing,
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg,
2008, vol. 5061, pp. 453–467.
[18] W. Lou, W. Liu, and Y. Zhang, “Performance optimization using
multipath routing in mobile ad hoc and wireless sensor networks,” in
Combinatorial Optimization in Communication Networks. Springer US,
2006, vol. 18, pp. 117 –146.
[19] B. Yahya and J. Ben-Othman, “An energy efﬁcient and qos aware
multipath routing protocol for wireless sensor networks,” in Local
Computer Networks, 2009. LCN 2009. IEEE 34th Conference on, Oct.
2009, pp. 93 –100.
[20] W. Lou and Y. Kwon, “H-spread: a hybrid multipath scheme for secure
and reliable data collection in wireless sensor networks,” Vehicular
Technology, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 1320 –1330, Jul
2006.
[21] X. Li and L. Cuthbert, “Stable node-disjoint multipath routing with low
overhead in mobile ad hoc networks,” in MASCOTS 2004, Oct 2004,
pp. 184 – 191.
[22] B. Yahya and J. Ben-Othman, “Reer: Robust and energy efﬁcient mul-
tipath routing protocol for wireless sensor networks,” in GLOBECOM
2009. IEEE, Dec 2009, pp. 1 –7.
[23] J.-Y. Teo, Y. Ha, and C.-K. Tham, “Interference-minimized multipath
routing with congestion control in wireless sensor network for high-rate
streaming,” Mobile Computing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 7, no. 9, pp.
1124 –1137, Sept 2008.
[24] Z. Wang, E. Bulut, and B. Szymanski, “Energy efﬁcient collision aware
multipath routing for wireless sensor networks,” in Communications,
2009. ICC ’09. IEEE International Conference on, Jun 2009, pp. 1 –5.
[25] M. Radi, B. Dezfouli, S. Razak, and K. Bakar, “Liemro: A low-
interference energy-efﬁcient multipath routing protocol for improving
qos in event-based wireless sensor networks,” in Sensor Technologies
and Applications (SENSORCOMM), 2010 Fourth International Confer-
ence on, Jul 2010, pp. 551 –557.
[26] K. Menger, “Zur allgemeinen kurventheorie,” Fund. Math, vol. 10, pp.
95–115, 1927.
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

