Digital Sensing Platform with High Accuracy Time Synchronization Function for 
Management of Buildings and Cities 
 
Narito Kurata 
Faculty of Industrial Technology 
Tsukuba University of Technology 
Tsukuba City, Ibaraki, Japan 
e-mail: kurata@home.email.ne.jp 
 
 
Abstract - In this paper, a diverse and robust digital sensing 
platform is proposed as a practical smart sensing system for 
maintenance management of ageing buildings and cities. High-
accuracy time information is added to measurement data to 
obtain sets of digital sensing data with time synchronization for 
use in multimodal analysis of risk. As a first step, this paper 
describes the development of a sensor device for performing 
high 
accuracy 
time 
synchronization 
sensing 
on 
civil 
infrastructure, such as bridges and building structures using a 
digital high-accuracy acceleration sensor. An ultra high-
accuracy clock, such as a Chip Scale Atomic Clock (CSAC) is 
mounted in the sensor device, and using its time measurement 
accuracy, a mechanism is implemented for time stamping the 
output of the digital sensor. The measurement accuracy of the 
chip scale atomic clocks is too high, so if the CPU of the sensor 
device adds the time stamp, tracking cannot be performed. 
Therefore, a dedicated Field-Programmable Gate Array 
(FPGA) for adding the time stamp is provided. Tests were 
performed on the developed sensor device using a shaking table, 
and the time synchronization performance was checked by 
comparing the measurement results of multiple sensor devices 
and a servo type acceleration sensor.  
Keywords-Time Synchronization; Chip Scale Atomic Clock; 
Earthquake Observation; Structural Health Monitoring; Micro 
Electro Mechanical Systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Aging of civil infrastructure, such as bridges, expressways, 
and high-rise buildings, is advancing, and automation of 
inspection for maintenance and management of these 
structures is an important civil task. Also, Japan is subject to 
natural disasters, such as earthquakes, so it is necessary to 
detect the damage to structures and identify the damage status 
immediately after occurrence of a disaster. To automate the 
detection of such abnormal events, it is effective to collect and 
analyze data from groups of sensor devices.  
The authors have developed sensor devices for earthquake 
observation and structural health monitoring by applying 
wireless sensor network technology, and have verified the 
performance on high-rise buildings [1][2]. One of the 
important tasks in this verification was time synchronization 
between sensor devices. Ensuring time synchronization 
between sensor devices is essential for analysis of sets of data 
measured by multiple sensor devices to evaluate the structural 
safety of a structure. In a wireless sensor network system, time 
synchronization is realized by transmitting and receiving 
wireless packets between the sensor devices [2]. However, 
wireless sensor network technology cannot cover large 
structures, such as buildings and bridges or a wide urban area.  
On the other hand, if the sensor devices installed at the 
various locations can autonomously maintain accurate time 
information, this problem can be resolved. The use of Global 
Positioning System (GPS) signals is effective outdoors, but 
within a building, underground, on the substructure of a bridge, 
in a tunnel and others, this is not possible. Therefore, a 
prototype sensor device autonomously maintaining accurate 
time information using an ultra high-accuracy clock, namely 
a Chip Scale Atomic Clock (CSAC) [3]-[8], was produced 
[9][10]. Next, improvements were made to increase the 
performance and stability of the prototype sensor device, and 
a device for practical use was developed [11]. In addition, in 
order to apply the developed practical sensor device to 
earthquake observation, the logic for the detection of 
occurrence of earthquakes and storage of data for seismic 
events was implemented, and the performance was checked 
using shaking table tests. From these, the performance of the 
sensor device capable of autonomously maintaining accurate 
time information was confirmed, indicating that the sensor 
device can be applied to seismic observation and structural 
health monitoring of civil infrastructures and buildings. 
Furthermore, the developed sensor device was installed on 
actual buildings and bridges, and applied to seismic 
observation and evaluation of structural health [12]. However, 
a Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS) acceleration 
sensor was mounted in the developed sensor device, so it was 
difficult to measure down to microtremors with high accuracy. 
The developed sensor device is equipped with an external 
analog input interface, through which any analog sensor can 
be connected. High-performance servo acceleration sensors 
can also be connected, but the risk of noise being mixed into 
the analog signal remains. Therefore, it was decided to mount 
a digital acceleration sensor in the sensor device, to eliminate 
the risk of noise. A camera sensor can be connected to the 
digital sensor device described in this paper, with the aim of 
developing a diverse digital sensor platform.  
In this paper, Section II shows the existing time 
synchronization methods and describes their problems and 
achievement of the development of the digital sensing 
platform proposed in this research. Section III describes the 
mechanism for providing ultra-high accurate time information 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

to digital sensor data by the CSAC, and explains the 
configuration of the digital sensing platform and the 
development of the actual sensor device. Further, Section IV 
describes the performance confirmation tests on the time 
synchronization of the developed sensor device, and it is 
confirmed that time synchronization among the developed 
digital sensor devices is achieved. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Methods for ensuring time synchronization between 
measurement data from multiple sensors include the method 
of transmitting and receiving wireless packets [13][14], the 
method using a network, such as IEEE 1588 [15], the method 
using a GPS signal, and the Network Time Protocol (NTP) [4] 
designed for time synchronization on the Internet. However, 
these have the restrictions that they cannot be used without 
wireless communication, cable network connections, and an 
environment where GPS signals can be received, respectively. 
When sensors are installed on high-rise buildings or civil 
infrastructure, it is difficult to cover all the installations with a 
single method. For example, with the method of transmitting 
and receiving wireless packets, the convenience is high as 
cables are not required, and if a multi-hop ad hoc wireless 
function is implemented it is considered that this can be used 
on structures within a single building [2]. However, if multiple 
sensors are deployed over long and large structures, such as 
high-rise buildings and bridges or a wide area urban space, it 
is not possible to ensure long term stable operation with 
wireless technology. It is likely that the most stable system can 
be constructed with cable network connections, but laying 
dedicated cables for time synchronization is difficult from the 
cost point of view. Also, the method of GPS signals can be 
easily used outdoors, but GPS signals cannot be used in such 
places as indoors, on bridge substructures, underground and 
in tunnels.  
Even if GPS signals cannot be used, wireless transmission 
and reception is unstable, and cable network connections are 
not possible, in order to stably acquire sets of sensor data with 
time synchronization, the ideal method is to enable each 
individual sensor itself to autonomously maintain accurate 
time information. In other words, if it is possible to add 
accurate time information (time stamp) to the measurement 
data from each sensor, sets of data with time synchronization 
can be acquired. Therefore, it was decided to develop a 
sensing system that autonomously maintains accurate time 
information, by applying high-accuracy clocks, namely 
CSAC [3]-[8]. The size of CSACs has been miniaturized so 
that they can be mounted in boards, and they can realize ultra 
high-accuracy time measurement in the order of several tens 
of picoseconds. Development commenced in 2001 with 
support from the Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (DARPA) of the USA, and in 2011 the commercial 
product was put on the market. Applications include 
countermeasures against obstruction of GPS positioning using 
jamming signals, high-accuracy positioning by mounting the 
product in such devices as smartphones, and high-level 
identification of disaster status, and it is expected that the cost 
will be further reduced as the use spreads. The error in time 
measurement by CSACs is 4 to 8 orders of magnitude smaller 
than the error in time measurement by crystal oscillators or the 
error in time synchronization by NTP or GPS signals. If this 
CSAC is mounted in each sensor device and a mechanism for 
adding a high-accuracy time stamp to measurement data that 
is sampled individually is implemented, sets of sensor data 
with time synchronization can be acquired even when GPS 
signals cannot be used, wireless transmission and reception is 
unstable, and cable network connections are not possible.  
In previous developments, the sensor device was equipped 
with a MEMS acceleration sensor and an external input 
interface that can connect to any analog sensor. However, the 
accuracy of a built-in MEMS acceleration sensor is not high 
and it cannot measure microtremors. High-accuracy servo 
acceleration sensors can be used via the external input 
interface, but a risk that noise will be mixed into the analog 
signal remains. Therefore, in this research, it is decided that a 
fully-fledged digital sensing platform shall be developed. 
Specifically, a high-accuracy digital acceleration sensor will 
be mounted in the sensor device to enable accurate 
acceleration measurements with no risk of noise being mixed 
in, and technology has been developed to add an accurate time 
stamp to the digital sensor output using CSACs. In addition, it 
is intended for a camera sensor to be connected in the next 
development step, with the aim of developing a diverse digital 
sensing platform. 
III. 
DESIGN OF DIGITAL SENSING PLATFORM 
The sensor device normally consists of a CPU that controls 
the measurement, sensors, a memory device, a network 
interface, etc., and the CPU uses a crystal oscillator. When a 
CSAC is mounted in this device, the CPU of the sensor device 
is corrected using the time information of the CSAC as-is, and 
when measurement is performed, a delay occurs due to the 
high-accuracy time measurement of the CSAC. Therefore, a 
mechanism provided with a dedicated integrated circuit, 
Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA), was developed for 
directly adding the CSAC time information to the digital 
sensor measurement data at the hardware level. In this way, 
the measurement data with the CSAC time information added 
by the FPGA is stored in memory without load on the CPU, 
and the data can be collected via a network. Also, the FPGA 
is programmable, so logic for detecting abnormal events using 
the measurement data can be incorporated while handling the 
CSAC time information. In the development to date, it has 
been assumed that analog sensors will be used, but in this 
paper the development of a mechanism for adding an accurate 
time stamp from the CSAC to the output of digital sensors is 
described. 
The sensor device developed in this research consists of a 
CSAC board, an FPGA board, and a sensor board, as shown 
in Figure 1. The CSAC board is equipped with the CSAC, 
GPS, etc., and it generates accurate time information. The 
FPGA board controls the measurement by each sensor while 
adding the ultra high-accuracy time information from the 
CSAC, and after the measurement data is stored in memory, 
the data is transmitted to a network through Ethernet, Wi-Fi, 
or 3rd generation mobile communication system (3G). Two 
types of data are stored: always measured data, and data that 
is only measured in an event, such as an earthquake. The 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

former is constantly stored on a Secure Digital Memory Card 
(SD card), and, when a certain quantity is exceeded, old data 
is deleted to leave space for overwriting with new data. In the 
case of the latter, logic for detecting the start and end of an 
earthquake is incorporated in the FPGA, and, after an 
earthquake, the data for the earthquake event only is 
immediately transmitted to the network. The sensor board 
performs the measurements by the sensors in accordance with 
instructions from the FPGA. The sensors mounted are a digital 
high-accuracy acceleration sensor and a temperature sensor (-
50℃ to +150℃). For checking the time synchronization 
performance, an external analog sensor interface is provided 
to which any external analog sensor can be connected via a 
Sub Miniature Type A (SMA) connector. Table 1 shows the 
specifications of the digital high-accuracy acceleration sensor 
mounted in the sensor board. An A/D converter having 16-bit 
resolution is mounted in the sensor board, and data from 
signals that have passed through the A/D converter is 
branched and amplified by a factor of 10, so analog sensors 
that require a wide dynamic range can also be connected. This 
has been packaged and developed as a digital sensing platform. 
Figure 2 shows the produced digital sensor device in which 
the CSAC is mounted. The CSAC board, the FPGA board, 
and the sensor board are shown in Figures 3 to 5, respectively. 
The autonomous time synchronization digital sensing 
system is constructed using the developed digital sensor 
device. The digital sensor devices in which a CSAC is 
mounted each keep accurate time independently of each other, 
but, in order to construct a sensing system consisting of 
multiple devices, it is necessary to define absolute time 
information in one device as the master device, and 
synchronize the other devices as slaves. Each main board 
contains an input output connector for 1 Pulse Per Second 
(PPS) signal from the CSAC. Using this connector, a 1 PPS 
signal is output from the master device and input to each slave 
device for synchronization, so that the phases of the CSAC 
clocks of the slave devices can be aligned with the master. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Configuration of digital sensing platform. 
TABLE I.  
SPECIFICATIONS OF DIGITAL ACCELERATION SENSOR 
Model 
EPSON M-A351AS 
Range 
±5G 
Noise Density 
0.5 μG/√Hz (Average) 
Resolution 
0.06 μG/LSB 
Bandwidth 
100 Hz (selectable) 
Output Range 
1000 sps (selectable) 
Digital Serial Interface 
SPI 
Outside dimensions (mm) 
24 × 24 × 19 
Weight 
12 grams 
Operating Temperature 
-20 ℃ to +85 ℃ 
Power Consumption 
3.3 V, 66 mW 
Output Mode Selection 
Acceleration, Tilt Angle, or Tilt 
Angle Speed 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Internal configuration of sensor device. 
 
 
Figure 3.  CSAC board. 
CSAC Board 
FPGA Board 
CSAC 
GPS 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 4.  FPGA board. 
 
Figure 5.  Sensor board. 
 
The time measurement accuracy of the CSACs is 
advanced, but they do not have absolute time information 
from the start, so it is necessary that this be separately defined. 
For this purpose, the GPS device mounted in the main board 
may be used, or such information may be manually input. 
Also, during initial setting, all sensor devices may acquire the 
absolute time using their GPS device and they can be 
synchronized together. When all the sensor devices from 
which the sensing system is constituted are initially 
synchronized in this way, they subsequently continue to 
autonomously maintain high-accuracy time information, so 
they can be installed in any location and the measurement data 
can be streamed or can be stored on an SD card and retrieved 
at any time. An accurate time stamp is recorded during each 
sampling process of the measurement data, so a data 
acquisition method, such as Ethernet, Wi-Fi and 3G, can be 
selected. Also, even in places where GPS signals or network 
connection is not available, since just measurement and data 
collection are required, this system is suitable for mobile 
measurement or for use as a transportable sensing system. 
IV. 
PERFORMANCE CONFIRMATION TESTS ON THE TIME 
SYNCHRONIZATION FUNCTION OF DIGITAL SENSING 
PLATFORM 
Tests were performed using a shaking table to confirm the 
performance of the developed digital sensor device. The 
objective was to confirm the measurement performance and 
time synchronization performance of the digital sensor 
device. Three sensor devices and a servo acceleration sensor 
for comparison were fixed on a shaking table, as shown in 
Figures 6 and 7. The same vibrations were applied in one 
horizontal direction and the results were compared. The 
analog output of the comparative servo acceleration sensor 
was input to the sensor devices via the external input interface. 
In the test, a sweep wave of 2 to 20 Hz, as shown in Figures 
8 and 9, was applied to excite the shaking table as an input 
wave, and the measurement sampling frequency of the sensor 
devices was set to 1,000 Hz. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Experimental setup. 
 
Figure 7.  Sensor boards on shaking table. 
FPGA 
Digital 
Acceleration 
Sensor 
3ch External Analog Input 
Shaking Table 
X direction 
Servo Acceleration 
Sensor 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 8.  Input swept sine wave (2 to 20 Hz). 
 
Figure 9.  Power spectrum of input swept sine wave 
 
Figure 10.  Spectrum ratios of Fourier amplitudes of three sensor modules 
to servo-type acceleration sensor (X direction). 
 
Figure 11.  Spectrum ratios of Fourier amplitude of two slave modules to 
master module (X direction). 
 
Figure 12.  Spectrum ratios of Fourier phase of two slave modules to master 
module (X direction). 
Excitation was applied in the X-direction of the sensor 
devices, and measurement was performed by the sensor 
devices and the comparative servo acceleration sensor. 
Figure 10 shows the results of calculation of the Fourier 
amplitude spectrum ratios of the acceleration time history 
measured by the three sensor devices and the comparative 
servo acceleration sensor. The amplitude of the former three 
devices relative to the latter reflected the low pass filter 
characteristics of the digital sensors, so it can be seen that the 
digital acceleration sensor mounted in the sensor boards have 
good performance. 
Next, Figure 11 shows the results of obtaining the Fourier 
amplitude spectrum ratios for the acceleration time history 
from two sensor devices (slaves) on the shaking table when 
the other sensor device was used as the master. The amplitude 
of the former two devices relative to the latter was flat over 
the frequency band 2 to 20 Hz. In addition, Figure 12 shows 
the results of obtaining the Fourier phase spectrum ratios for 
the acceleration time history from two sensor devices (slaves) 
on the shaking table when the other sensor device was used 
as the master. There is no phase delay between the sensor 
devices, and, if the time synchronization was maintained, it 
would be expected that it should be about zero over the 
frequency band 2 to 20 Hz. From the figure, it can be seen 
that time synchronization has been achieved between the 
sensor devices. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper has reported on research into a digital sensing 
platform that autonomously maintains high-accuracy time 
information, by applying CSACs. First, the issues with a 
system that was developed assuming analog sensors were 
pointed out, and a system based on digital sensors was 
proposed and developed as a method of resolving these issues. 
Autonomous time synchronization using CSACs was 
described, and the mechanism for adding ultra high-accuracy 
time information to digital sensor data using a CSAC and the 
development of the sensor devices was described in detail. In 
addition, the results of tests performed to confirm the time 
synchronization performance of the sensor device were 
reported. Three sensor devices were mounted in a shaking 
table and tests were performed by applying vibrations 
(s) 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

simultaneously, and by checking the phase properties of the 
measurement 
results 
it 
was 
confirmed 
that 
time 
synchronization was achieved for sampling at 1000 Hz.  
In the next development step, we intend to additionally 
connect a camera sensor, with the aim of developing a diverse 
digital sensing platform. For absolute time synchronization of 
the camera sensor, a digital input interface will be additionally 
installed to the developed sensor device as a digital sensor 
platform so that a camera sensor can be connected. A function 
for adding the time stamp to the output of the camera sensor 
will be added, the same as for the output of the built-in digital 
acceleration sensor. The developed diverse digital sensing 
platform will be applied to actual structures, to acquire 
acceleration and image data with accurate time information. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by the New Energy and 
Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) through 
the Project of Technology for Maintenance, Replacement and 
Management of Civil Infrastructure, Cross-ministerial Strategic 
Innovation Promotion Program (SIP). This research was also 
partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP16K01283 
and JP19K04963. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Kurata, M. Suzuki, S. Saruwatari, and H. Morikawa, 
“Actual Application of Ubiquitous Structural Monitoring 
System using Wireless Sensor Networks,” Proc. 14th World 
Conference on Earthquake Engineering (14WCEE), Beijing, 
China, Oct. 2008, Paper ID:11-0037, pp. 1-8. 
[2] N. Kurata, M. Suzuki, S. Saruwatari, and H. Morikawa, 
“Application of Ubiquitous Structural Monitoring System by 
Wireless Sensor Networks to Actual High-rise Building,” Proc. 
the 5th World Conference on Structural Control and 
Monitoring (5WCSCM), Tokyo, Japan, July 2010, Paper No. 
013, pp. 1-9. 
[3] M. Maroti, B. Kusy, G. Simon, and A. Ledeczi, “The Flooding 
Time Synchronization Protocol,” Proc. the 2nd International 
Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (SenSys 
'04), Baltimore, USA, Nov. 2004, pp. 39-49, ISBN:1-58113-
879-2. 
[4] D. L. Mills, “Internet Time Synchronization: the Network 
Time Protocol,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 
39, Issue 10, pp. 1482-1493, Oct. 1991, doi:10.1109/26.103043. 
[5] B. W. Parkinson and J. J. Spilker Jr. eds, “Global Positioning 
System: Theory and Applications,” Vol. I & II, American 
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), 1996, ISBN: 
978-1-56347-106-3. 
[6] S. Knappe et al., “A Microfabricated Atomic Clock,” Applied 
Physics Letters, vol. 85, Issue 9, pp. 1460-1462, Aug. 2004, 
doi:10.1063/1.1787942. 
[7] Q. Li and D. Rus, “Global Clock Synchronization in Sensor 
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 55, Issue 2, 
pp. 214-226, Jan. 2006, ISSN: 0018-9340. 
[8] R. Lutwak et al., “The Chip-Scale Atomic Clock - Prototype 
Evaluation,” Proc. the 39th Annual Precise Time and Time 
Interval (PTTI) Meeting, Long Beach, USA, Nov. 2007, pp. 
269-290. 
[9] N. Kurata, “Disaster Big Data Infrastructure using Sensing 
Technology with a Chip Scale Atomic Clock,” World 
Engineering Conference and Convention (WECC2015), Kyoto, 
Japan, Dec. 2015, pp. 1-5. 
[10] N. Kurata, “Basic Study of Autonomous Time Synchronization 
Sensing Technology Using Chip Scale Atomic Clock,” Proc. 
the 16th International Conference on Computing in Civil and 
Building Engineering (ICCCBE2016), Osaka, Japan, July 2016, 
pp. 67-74. 
[11] N. Kurata, “An Autonomous Time Synchronization Sensor 
Device Using a Chip Scale Atomic Clock for Earthquake 
Observation and Structural Health Monitoring”, The Eighth 
International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and 
Applications (SENSORDEVICES 2017), pp.31-36, Rome, 
Italy, 2017. 
[12] N. Kurata, “Improvement and Application of Sensor Device 
Capable 
of 
Autonomously 
Keeping 
Accurate 
Time 
Information for Buildings and Civil Infrastructures,” The Ninth 
International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and 
Applications (SENSORDEVICES 2018), pp. 114-120, Venice, 
Italy, 2018. 
[13] J. Elson, L. Girod, and D. Estrin, “Fine-Grained Network Time 
Synchronization using Reference Broadcasts,” Proc. 5th 
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation 
(OSDI’02), Boston, Massachusetts, Dec. 2002, pp. 147-163. 
[14] S. Ganeriwal, R. Kumar, and M. B. Srivastava, “Timing-sync 
Protocol for Sensor Networks,” Proc. the 1st International 
Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (SenSys 
'03), Los Angeles, California, Nov. 2003, pp. 138-149. 
[15] K. Romer, “Time Synchronization in Ad Hoc Networks,” Proc. 
the 2nd ACM International Symp. on Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networking & Computing (MobiHoc’01), Long Beach, 
California, Oct. 2001, pp. 173-182. 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-745-0
SENSORDEVICES 2019 : The Tenth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

