Electrocardiogram Collection, Pattern Recognition, and Classification Sensor 
System Supporting a Mobile Cardiovascular Disease Detection Aid 
 
 
Patrick R. DaSilva, Paul J. Fortier 
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department 
University of Massachusetts Dartmouth 
North Dartmouth, Massachusetts, USA 
pdasilva@umassd.edu, pfortier@umassd.edu 
Kristen Sethares 
Adult and Child Nursing Department 
University of Massachusetts Dartmouth 
North Dartmouth, Massachusetts, USA 
ksethares@umassd.edu
 
 
Abstract— Current mobile monitoring solutions do not offer 
the ability to recognize cardiac problems without human 
interpretation. A combination of electrocardiogram (ECG) 
detection and classification software running on a mobile 
cardiovascular disease detection sensor is proposed to replace 
the need for human interpretation. The ECG is filtered using 
the Wavelet Transform; the ECG wave points detected using a 
modified version of the Pan Tompkins rule set and the cardiac 
rhythm is classified using an N-ary tree. The wireless mobile 
application is designed on a custom printed circuit board 
(PCB). Testing results show autonomous classifications are 
possible using a three lead ECG system while the patient is at 
rest. The proposed solution serves as a stepping stone towards 
a fully reliable patient disease management teaching tool with 
the potential to serve as an aid to the cardiovascular healthcare 
industry. 
Keywords-embedded ECG sensor; real-time algorithm; ECG 
classification. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
According to the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) Division of Vital Statistics, 24.2% of 
total deaths in 2010 were directly related to heart diseases 
[1]. Preliminary 2011 data shows this lethal disease 
continues to be the number one leading cause of death for 
596,339 Americans [2]. 
Studies have shown as heart failure (HF) symptom 
severity increased, patient symptom uncertainty levels 
decreased [3] correlating with previous studies suggesting 
HF patients delay seeking timely treatment for symptoms 
[4]. Dedicated nurse staffed care facilities have helped 
decrease levels of patient symptom uncertainty [5], but a 
real-time mobile monitoring and motivational solution is 
desired [6]. 
Advancements in science and technology have made it 
feasible to continuously shrink signal processing systems 
aiding in the development of wearable biometric monitoring 
equipment and replacing systems that rendered the user with 
limited mobility. Mobile monitoring systems [7]-[11] are 
not new, but systems that monitor and interact with users in 
ways that improve health management are evolving [6][12]. 
The Electrocardiogram (ECG) subsystem is described as 
an important part of the overall cardiac wellness system’s 
ability to aid patients in learning to recognize disease 
specific symptoms and understand the effect on their health 
[12]. The purpose of this paper is to describe the 
development of a mobile cardiovascular disease detection 
sensor that combines wavelet transformation filtering 
processes with a modified version of the Pan Tompkins 
detection rule set and using an N-ary tree for classification 
of ECG arrhythmias. Research using these three methods 
has been performed before [13]-[21], but nothing combining 
all three methods applied to ECG arrhythmia detection and 
classification in support of a mobile cardiovascular disease 
detection aid has been. 
In Section 2, this paper will discuss ECG raw data 
collection, waveform extraction, waveform classification 
and describe the testing process the system underwent. 
Section 3 will discuss the testing results. A conclusion and 
recommendation for future work will be presented in 
Section 4. 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The ECG subsystem can be broken down into three serial 
processes (see Figure 1); collection, extraction, and 
classification. Each process feeds into the next resulting in a 
heart health classification. Each process is briefly described 
below. 
 
Figure 1. ECG subsystem process representation. 
A. ECG Raw Data Collection 
An ECG is the measured electrical activity representing 
the heart’s conduction system typically recorded on a 1 by 1 
millimetre (mm) gridded paper representing 40 milliseconds 
(ms) by 0.1 millivolts (mV). This paper’s ECG sensor was 
designed using a three lead chest only concept since 
abnormalities of interest are detected using 3 leads. 
Abnormalities of interest include normal sinus rhythm, atrial 
arrhythmias (bradycardia, tachycardia, flutter), conduction 
abnormalities (1st degree AV block, 2nd degree AV block, 
3rd degree AV block), and ventricular abnormalities 
(premature complex, tachycardia, fibrillation).   
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The differential voltage between two silver chloride 
(AgCl) electrodes placed on the right and left side of the 
chest is measured with reference to body ground, amplified 
by a gain of 1000, and fed to an analogue to digital 
converter (ADC) on board an Atmel 32-bit UC3 
microcontroller (MCU). The Atmel UC3 MCU uses a 12-bit 
analogue comparator sampling the ECG at 250Hz with a 
reference at 60% of the supply voltage. Sampling at 250 Hz, 
creates 1 sample every 0.004 seconds. Using a 12-bit ADC 
with an analogue circuit gain of 1000 creates 100 ADC units 
for every 1 mm or 0.1 mV of ECG signal strength prior to 
amplification. 
B. ECG Waveform Extraction 
An ECG waveform is described by its principally 
important points (PIPs) (see Figure 2). In basic terms, the 
PIPs are the onset, offset, and peak height of the P wave, T 
wave, U wave and QRS complex. In total there are twelve 
PIPs. From these PIPs an ECG’s P wave, T wave, U wave, 
QRS complex, PR Interval, Atrial Rate, Ventricular Rate, 
and Rhythm can be calculated. With the PIPs known an 
ECG waveform can begin to be classified. 
 
Figure 2. ECG waveform showing principally important point with widths 
calculated in seconds and heights calculated in millimetres. 
To extract the PIPs, the ECG signal is passed through a 
bank of filters equivalent to the Dyadic Quadratic Spline 
Wavelet Transform focusing on the time frequency analysis 
of the signal. Using the dyadic wavelet allows for faster 
computations on an ECG signal to extract characteristic 
points by distinguishing between the sharp variations 
translated into local maxima and minima on different filter 
scales. 
The wavelet transform (WT) equivalent filter described 
by Li [16] was derived using the work of Mallat [22]. Li 
derived the WT as a series of high-pass and low-pass filters, 
used to deduce the equivalent filter as an antisymmetric FIR 
digital filter with generalized linear phase.  
To sync the output of the filters and avoid busy wait 
loops, an individual delay was added to each filter through 
the use of the translation property of the Fourier Transform. 
This caused an overall unified filter bank delay of 62 
milliseconds and produced the signal output shown in 
Figure 3. 
The Wavelet Transform equivalent filter has the ability to 
separate the different characteristic points of an ECG onto 
various scales, allowing use of individual filter outputs to 
find each waveform’s peak, onset and offset.  
The amplitude-frequency response of the WT filters (see 
Figure 4) shows the first five filters in the bank, used to 
cover the frequency spectrum of an ECG signal sampled at 
250 Hz. 
To find the QRS complex, originally all five filters were 
used as discussed by Bahoura [17].  Preliminary testing 
indicated that filters 21 through 23 are the minimum needed. 
A QRS complex peak is found by locating the zero crossing 
of a set of modulus maximum peaks with different polarities 
on the output of the first three filters simultaneously 
[18][19][20]. 
 
 
Figure 3. Equivalent WT filter bank output. ECG signal is top line and 
filter bank out are bottom 5 signals. Dashed line corresponds to QRS 
complex peak. Dash double dot corresponds to P, T, or U wave peak. 
 
Figure 4. WT filter bank amplitude frequency response. 
Once a possible QRS peak is found, all other QRS 
detections are ignored for a period of 200 milliseconds. An 
autonomous thresholding technique [23] is employed to find 
the local minima and maxima peaks on each filter output, 
allowing the detection algorithm to adjust to a patient’s 
ECG signal strength. The idea behind the technique was to 
capture as much of the possible QRS complexes without 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

low noise with the first threshold and then apply a second 
threshold to capture missing lower amplitude QRS 
complexes due to the initialization process. If no QRS 
complex is found within a 4 second interval, the thresholds 
are reset [23]. 
After the QRS peak is found, filter 22 is used to find the 
onset and offset pair using the location of the local minima 
onset and maxima offset respectively. From preliminary 
testing using the MIT-BIH databases [24], it was noticed the 
Q and S waves periodically appear on the filter 22 output, so 
the onset was shifted to the beginning of a second modulus 
peak found immediately before the first with opposite 
polarity and the same with the offset, looking at the end of a 
second modulus peak found immediately after the original 
offset. Once the QRS complex onset, offset, peak and peak 
polarity data points are found (see Figure 5), these PIPs are 
passed to a post-detection scheme to prepare for the 
classification stage. 
Current methods to find P, T, and U waves require first 
locating the QRS complex and then traversing the ECG 
signal forwards and backwards in time. The problem with 
this solution is it’s not real-time and does not take into 
consideration arrhythmias that do not always include a QRS 
complex for each P and T wave in the ECG, such as Atrial 
Fibrillation.  
Instead, ‘blips’ which are possible P, T, U waves or just 
noise, are detected and then categorized in the post-
detection scheme. This allows QRS complexes and P, T, U 
waves to be detected in parallel similar to Bahoura [17]. 
Preliminary testing proved 23 through 25 are the only filters 
required to find blip waves. A blip peak is found by locating 
the zero crossing of a set of modulus maximum peaks with 
different polarities on the output of either 23 and 24 or 24 and 
25  filters, but not necessarily all three filters simultaneously.  
Once a possible blip peak is found, the location is saved 
for 100 ms before reporting to ensure the blip wave is valid 
and not a QRS complex or noise. If the blip wave is found 
to be a QRS complex, the information for the wave is 
transferred to the QRS complex detection to be categorized 
as such. Again, a thresholding technique is used to find the 
local minima and maxima peaks on each filter output, 
except lower than the thresholds used by the QRS. The 
thresholds adjust to P/T wave amplitudes based upon a pre-
calculated ratio between P/T waves and QRS complexes and 
are re-adjusted every time a new QRS complex is detected.  
After the blip peak is found, filter 24 is used to find the 
onset and offset simply because a blip wave will always 
show on filter 24. The onset/offset pair is found using the 
location of the local minima onset and maxima offset 
respectively on filter 24 similar to QRS onset/offset 
detection.  
In post-detection, a detected blip is run through a set of 
test and checks to verify its validity based upon the last 
detected blip and QRS complex before it is categorized as a 
P, T, or U wave. 
 
Figure 5. Detected QRS complex (green dots, red stars) and blip waves 
(black dots) on record 100 from MIT-BIH Arrhythmia database. 
This nine point rule set for the test and check is used to 
construct a finite state machine running on the MCU. 
1. Upon start-up, if a blip is detected first, then it is 
immediately categorized as a P wave and saved in the 
‘ekgWaveHistory’ buffer. 
2. Upon start-up, if a QRS complex is detected first, then 
it is immediately saved in the ‘ekgWaveHistory’ buffer. 
3. A detected blip is invalid and discarded if its onset 
and/or offset overlap that of the previously detected blip 
or QRS complex. 
4. A detected valid blip is a T wave if its peak is located 
within 50-75% of the current ventricular heart rate from 
the offset of the last detected QRS complex and if no 
other T wave has been detected as of that moment. 
5. A detected valid blip is a U wave if its peak is located 
within 50-75% of the current ventricular heart rate from 
the offset of the last detected QRS complex, if a T wave 
has already been detected, and no other U wave has 
been detected as of that moment. 
6. A detected valid blip is a P wave if its peak is located 
outside 50-75% of the current ventricular heart rate 
from the offset of the last detected QRS complex or if 
within that time frame, then it will be a P wave if a T 
wave and U wave has already been found. 
7. A detected QRS complex is always considered valid. 
8. A detected QRS complex can invalidate the last 
detected blip if that blip overlaps the QRS complex in 
any way. 
9. A detected QRS complex can re-categorize a detected P, 
T, U wave as a T wave that came after the newly 
detected QRS complex if the last detected blip does not 
overlap the QRS complex AND comes after the newly 
detected QRS complex. 
Upon type validation, each wave is saved in an ECG 
buffer by its type, onset, offset, peak and polarity. When the 
buffer contains one QRS or two P waves, the saved 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

waveform is sent to classification the next time a third valid 
P wave is detected or after a second QRS complex has 
arrived. 
The maximum QRS complex detection delay is 462 ms 
before a QRS complex is detected to when it happened and 
similarly is 362 ms for a P/T wave detection. This 
corresponds to 129 beats per minute (bpm) and 165 bpm for 
a QRS complex detection and P/T wave detection 
respectively before a lag is seen after each wave occurs. 
These delays can be attributed to a standard 62 ms filter 
delay, 200 ms QRS blanking window, 100 ms blip blanking 
window, and a 200 ms future value collection window. 
C. ECG Waveform Classification 
Classification is done similar to how a physician 
classifies an ECG. First the rates are examined, followed by 
the rhythm, intervals and wave morphology. When a new 
waveform is detected it’s appended to the end of a three 
waveform historic buffer, shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6. Historic ECG buffer. 
The ECG rates are calculated by measuring the lapsed 
time between each QRS (ventricular) or P (atrial) wave in 
milliseconds and then dividing that number into sixty 
thousand milliseconds or equivalently 1 minute to obtain a 
value in beats per minute (bpm). 
The waveform buffer passes through each branch of an 
N-ary tree (see Figure 7), first eliminating all rhythms that 
do not correlate. The tree uses cardiac rhythms and 
classifications along with normal ECG characteristics from 
best evidence practice literature to determine a waveform’s 
classification. 
If there is at least one P wave in the buffer and all 
available P waves are upright (see Figure 7, branch 00000), 
then the waveform falls into a Normal Sinus Rhythm (NSR), 
Atrial Arrhythmia, Conduction Abnormality, Premature 
Ventricular Contraction (PVC), or Asystole. In this group 
for a waveform to be considered NSR it must have is a 1:1 P 
wave QRS complex ratio with normal morphology, PR 
interval, and ventricular rate. 
If there is at least one P wave in the buffer, all available P 
waves have a negative polarity, are followed by a normal 
QRS complex with a short PR interval, and all available T 
waves have normal morphology (see Figure 7, branch 
00001), then the waveform could either be Supraventricular 
Tachycardia (SVT) or a Junctional Rhythm. In this case, the 
ventricular rate would be used to differentiate between the 
two. 
If there are no P waves available in the buffer (see Figure 
7, branch 00010), then the waveform could be classified as a 
Ventricular Arrhythmia, Atrial Fibrillation, or SVT. In this 
group, the morphology of the QRS complex and ventricular 
rate are used to determine which arrhythmia is present. 
By default, if the waveform is unclassifiable, then it is 
most likely abnormal or if an underlying sinus rhythm is 
present, but the waveform cannot be classified in the given 
tree, it is classified as an Abnormal Sinus Rhythm. 
 
 
Figure 7. Classification N-ary tree. 
The delay between when the heart beats and when that 
beat waveform is classified by the ECG subsystem is 
equivalent to one heartbeat. The way the N-ary tree is built 
takes into account the length of the history buffer in which 
the algorithm analyses an entire ECG waveform three beats 
in length at a time. Therefore an NSR classification will 
only occur when there are three normal heart beats in a row. 
D. ECG Sensor System Testing 
Testing took place in two stages, the first known canned 
events followed by live system testing. For the known 
canned events, ECG signals from the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia 
and Normal Sinus Rhythm databases [24] were resampled at 
a frequency of 250 hertz and fed through the algorithm. The 
results were recorded, reconstructed and analysed using 
MATLAB. 
Only ten minutes of each ECG was used starting at 20 
seconds into the signal with results categorized into five 
areas, positive abnormal classification (PC), positive 
unknown classification (PU), positive normal classification 
(PN), negative or missed abnormal classifications (NC), and 
negative or missed normal classifications (NU). The 
classifications were cross checked with the annotations 
included with each signal. If the abnormal annotation 
matched the abnormal classification, then the result was 
categorized as a positive abnormal classification. If they 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

didn’t match, but the abnormality was not looked for and the 
classification wasn’t normal, then the result was a positive 
unknown classification. If neither case, then the result was a 
negative abnormal classification. In the normal case if the 
annotation and classification agreed on normal, then the 
result was a positive normal classification. If the annotation 
said normal and the classification said anything other than 
normal, then the result was a negative normal classification. 
The ECG records picked from the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia 
database reflected the classifications the software was 
attempting to identify. With the exception of records 100, 
101, and 222, each record contained PVCs mixed in with 
various other arrhythmias and normal sinus rhythms. 
Arrhythmias included Atrial Premature beats, Bundle 
Branch Blocks, Junctional Premature Beats, Ventricular 
Tachycardia, Ventricular Flutter, Atrial Fibrillation, Atrial 
Flutter, and Second Degree Blocks. How well the 
algorithms could classify normal sinus rhythms mixed with 
abnormalities and Paced Beats was of interest. 
 
Figure 8. Known canned event testing results. Records 1xx and 2xx are 
from the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia database. Records 16xxx are from the MIT-
BIH Normal Sinus Rhythm database. 
In general, the algorithm was able to distinguish between 
a normal ECG and an arrhythmia (see Figure 8). An analysis 
of the results showed not one arrhythmia classified as 
normal, though some were classified as unknown abnormal. 
Normal classification results shows room for improvement. 
Majority if not all of the reasons why a given normal 
rhythm was not classified as such are due to invalid P and T 
wave detections and increased heart rate from movement.  
The results from known canned events testing were 
collected and analysed and are depicted in Figure 8. To 
verify the accuracy of the normal sinus rhythm, records 
from the MIT-BIH Normal Sinus Rhythm database were 
also run (see Figure 8). Each of those signals mixed with 
additional noise originating from movement such as running 
or jogging. 
For live system testing and implementation, the ECG 
algorithms were compiled using the Atmel Studio IDE and 
uploaded to a custom designed printed circuit board (see 
Figure 9), running an Atmel 32-bit UC3 microcontroller. 
 
Figure 9. ECG subsystem printed circuit board. 
The crucial point of live testing was to ensure the ECG 
signal collected by the algorithm was the same signal 
measured and not skewed by the algorithm run time. Using 
a 2 channel oscilloscope, measurements were initiated 
during system initialization, when a classification is not 
found or found using a 16MHz clock source for the MCU. 
The relative accuracy of the classification process was also 
studied using a healthy normal ECG by illuminating a series 
of LEDs corresponding to various classifications. 
III. 
TESTING RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
In some instances, a normal ECG was classified as PVC 
or could not be identified. This was mainly due to high 
frequency noise such as in records 108 and 222 or falsely 
identified and/or unidentified P waves due to wave 
morphology and P wave proximity to QRS complexes such 
as in record 222. In other instances a normal ECG would be 
classified as an Abnormal Sinus Rhythm or Sinus 
Tachycardia. An Abnormal Sinus Rhythm came about 
because wave morphology did not fit textbook normal such 
as in records 100, 101, 103, 106, 223, 16265, 16272, and 
16773. Altering the default normal setting in the algorithm 
would fit this very well. Sinus Tachycardia came about 
because of an altered heart rate with normal morphology. In 
a doctor’s office, if the patient was running, this would be 
considered normal, which was the case with records 16265 
and 16773. 
PVCs in records 106 and 109 were classified as 
Unknown Arrhythmias because of incorrect QRS polarity 
detections. In the case of records 109 and 219, PVCs were 
classified as Unknown Arrhythmias because P waves and 
underlying sinus rhythm was not detected, both required for 
a PVC classification. In record 124, the QRS complexes 
were too wide for this algorithm to be able to detect them 
and classify the waveform as PVC, but instead classified it 
as an Unknown Arrhythmia. 
The fibrillatory waves’ amplitude was too low to detect 
an atrial rate in records 219 and 222 in order to classify 
them as Atrial Fibrillation. In record 222, the P waves were 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

back to back causing incorrect polarity detections to classify 
the record as Atrial Flutter. 
While testing a live healthy and normal ECG signal, the 
classification was normal for the majority of the test while 
the user was at rest. The algorithm proved to be resilient to 
small amounts of movement and noise, but failed as 
expected when the user began to jog calling for a need to 
supress invalid classifications with the addition of an 
accelerometer and front end smoothing filter. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Overall a new method of autonomously measuring, 
detecting, and classifying ECG arrhythmias for use in a 
mobile cardiovascular disease detection sensor system was 
introduced through combining the Wavelet Transform 
filtering method with a modified Pan Tompkins detection 
method and classifying with an N-ary Tree. The main 
algorithm modifications needed to continue this work would 
be in the P and T wave detection method and adding an 
algorithm training method to learn a user’s normal sinus 
rhythm wave morphology. 
The training system would include the same detection 
scheme used throughout the system, but instead of 
classifying 
detected sequences, 
would 
examine the 
frequency of the morphology of each P wave, PR interval 
and QRS complex to determine a proper normal setting 
within the classification system. Training would be done in 
the presence of a professional to ensure that a normal ECG 
is actually occurring rather than an abnormal ECG. 
The ECG subsystem would also benefit from a user 
movement indicator to inform the algorithm that the user is 
engaged in activity that raises the ventricular heart rate. This 
battles false classifications of Sinus Tachycardia during a 
Normal Sinus Rhythm. Movement artifact removal would 
also be taken care of outside the subsystem by the main 
monitoring system using motion sensors for scaling. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. L. Murphy, J. Xu, and K. D. Kochanek, "Deaths: Final Data for 
2010," National Center for Health Statistics, Hyattsville, MD, National 
Vital Statistics Reports, vol. 61, no. 4, May 2013. 
[2] D. L. Hoyert and J. Xu, "Deaths: Preliminary Data for 2011," National 
Center for Health Statistics, Hyattsville, MD, National Vital Statistics 
Reports, vol. 61, no. 6, Oct. 2012.  
[3] K. A. Sethares, "Predictors of Uncertainty in Adults with an Acute 
Exacerbation of Heart Failure," Heart & Lung: The Journal of Acute and 
Critical Care, vol. 39, no. 4, Jul. 2010, p. 357.  
[4] C. Y. Jurgens, "Somatic Awareness, Uncertainty, and Delay in Care-
Seeking in Acute Heart Failure," Research in Nursing & Health, vol. 29, 
no. 2, Apr. 2006, pp. 74-86.  
[5] A. Stromberg et al., "Nurse-led Heart Failure Clinics Improve Survival 
and Self-care Behaviour in Patients with Heart Failure: Results from a 
Prospective, Randomised Trial," European Heart Journal, vol. 24, no. 11, 
Jun. 2003, pp. 1014-1023.  
[6] P. J. Fortier, B. Puntin, and O. Aljaroudi, "Improved Patient Outcomes 
through Collaborative Monitoring and Management of Subtle Behavioral 
and Physiological Health Changes," in 2011 44th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), Kauai, Jan. 2011, pp. 1-10.  
[7] Alive Technologies Pty Ltd, "Alive Heart and Activity Monitor," 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.alivetec.com/alive-bluetooth-heart-
activity-monitor. [retrieved: September 2014]. 
[8] 
CardioNet, 
"CardioNet," 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.cardionet.com/index.htm. [retrieved: September 2014]. 
[9] eCardio, "Arrhythmia Monitoring and Solutions," [Online]. Available: 
http://www.ecardio.com/PS/. [retrieved: September 2014]. 
[10] SHL Telemedicine, "SHL Telemedicine," [Online]. Available: 
http://www.shl-telemedicine.com/. [retrieved: September 2014]. 
[11] M. K. Suh et al., "An Automated Vital Sign Monitoring System for 
Congestive Heart Failure Patients," in IHI '10 Proceedings of the 1st ACM 
International Health Informatics Symposium, New York, Nov. 2010, pp. 
108-117.  
[12] P. J. Fortier and B. Viall, "Development of a Mobile Cardiac Wellness 
Application and Integrated Wearable Seansor Suite," in SENSORCOMM 
2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and 
Applications, France, Dec. 2011, pp. 301-306.  
[13] J. Pan and W. J. Tompkins, "A Real-Time QRS Detection Algorithm," 
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 32, no. 3, Mar. 1985 
pp. 230-236.  
[14] V. X. Afonso, "ECG QRS Detection," in Biomedical Digital Signal 
Processing, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall, 1993, pp. 236-264. 
[15] P. S. Hamilton and W. J. Tompkins, "Quantitative Investigation of 
QRS Detection Rules Using the MIT/BIH Arrhythmia Database," IEEE 
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 33, no. 12, Dec. 1986, pp. 
1157-1165.  
[16] C. Li, C. Zheng, and C. Tai, "Detection of ECG Characteristic Points 
Using 
Wavelet 
Transforms," 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Biomedical 
Engineering, vol. 42, no. 1, Jan. 1995, pp. 21-28.  
[17] M. Bahoura, M. Hassani, and M. Hubin, "DSP Implementation of 
Wavelet Transform for Real Time ECG Wave Forms Detection and Heart 
Rate Analysis," Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, vol. 52, 
no. 1, Jan. 1997, pp. 35-44. 
[18] M. Niknazar, B. V. Vahdat, and S. R. Mousavi, "Detection of 
Characteristic Points of ECG using Quadratic Spline Wavelet Transform," 
in 2009 International Conference on Signals, Circuits and Systems, Djerba, 
Nov. 2009, pp. 1-6.  
[19] P. Sasikala and R. WahidaBanu, "Extraction of P wave and T wave in 
Electrocardiogram using Wavelet Transform," International Journal of 
Computer Science and Information Technologies, vol. 2, no. 1, Feb. 2011, 
pp. 489-493.  
[20] P. Ranjith, P. Baby, and P. Joseph, "ECG Analysis Using Wavelet 
Transform: Application to Myocardial Ischemia Detection," ITBM-RBM, 
vol. 24, no. 1, Feb. 2003, pp. 44-47.  
[21] G. K. Prasad and J. S. Sahambi, "Classification of ECG Arrhythmias 
using Multi-Resolution Analysis and Neural Ndtworks," in TENCON 
2003. Conference on Convergent Technologies for the Asia-Pacific 
Region, Oct. 2003, pp. 227-231.  
[22] S. Mallat, "Zero-Crossings of a Wavelet Transform," IEEE 
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 37, no. 4, Jul. 1991, pp. 1019-
1033.  
[23] P. S. Hamilton, "Open Source Arrhythmia Detection Software," 
[Online]. Available: http://www.eplimited.com/software.htm. [retrieved: 
September 2014]. 
[24] A. L. Goldberger et al., “PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: 
Components of a New Research Resource for Complex Physiological 
Signals,” Circulation, vol. 101, no. 23, Jun. 2000, pp. 215-220. 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

