Energy Efficient Embedded Wireless System Used For Localisation In Indoor 
Environments 
 
Nicolas Fourty 
LCIS, Université de Grenoble 2 
IUT de Valence ; F-26901 Valence, France 
nicolas.fourty@iut-valence.fr 
 
 
 
Yoann Charlon, Eric Campo 
CNRS ; LAAS ; 7 avenue du Colonel Roche, F-
31077 Toulouse Cedex 4, France  
Université de Toulouse ; UPS, INSA, INP, ISAE, 
UT1, UTM, LAAS ; F-31077 Toulouse Cedex 4, France 
charlon@laas.fr, campo@laas.fr 
Abstract—The paper presents an embedded telemetry system 
used in combination of localisation algorithm for a precise 
indoor pedestrian localisation. The system is based on the 
association of two wireless technologies: ultrasonic and 
802.15.4. The novelty is the use of 802.15.4 RF signal to give 
the reference starting time of the ultrasonic emission. A ToA 
(Time of Arrival) measurement provides the distance between 
two mobiles or a mobile and a fixed beacon with a few 
centimeters accuracy. A material prototype implementing 
this method was performed and a first evaluation was 
conducted. 
 
Keywords- wireless sensors; telemetry; low power; ultrasonic; 
localization; 802.15.4; indoor environment. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Many localization techniques could be used to track 
people or device in indoor or outdoor environment. In 
indoor, infrared, ultrasound, narrowband radio, WiFi, or 
UWB location systems are the most common [1-3]. In 
outdoor, we find essentially systems based on GPS 
location. The main problem is that these systems require 
heavy and cost infrastructure with a not easy deployment. 
In this context, this paper, which is part of a research 
project funded by the French National Research Agency 
(ANR) aims to define a new indoor localisation system in 
continuation of outdoor localisation system such as GPS 
[4]. The project is trying to address two specific problems: 
• 
Helping people to locate themselves inside 
complex buildings.  
• 
Helping to locate someone moving in a complex 
building. 
Applications 
may 
be 
various: 
security, 
technical 
management, health… The system must enable the user to 
locate or to be located in the building with a good accuracy 
(centimeters) [5]. We could also consider for mobile robot 
applications the improvement to one cm accuracy or more 
using data harvesting from other sensors. Although the 
project is intended to compute the location from different 
sensors and location prediction algorithm, this paper is 
focused on the distance evaluation to fixed points inside 
buildings.  
Several localisation algorithms are used to compute the 
exact location and to enhance the resolution [6,7]. The 
system presented here is a precise telemetry system 
composed of three nodes: a first node, which is an energy 
efficient mobile device and worn by an instrumented 
person, a second node, which is fixed (called “Beacons”). 
These nodes help the mobile device to locate precisely. A 
last 
node 
(a 
remote 
gateway) 
saves 
localisation 
information of all mobile devices. 
In this paper, we first present the basic principles of the 
proposed system, then hardware and software development 
are described. Finally, characterization results of the 
system are presented. A conclusion ends the paper. 
II. 
OPERATING PRINCIPLES 
The system has two main functionalities. The first one is 
to estimate the distance between a user, typically a 
pedestrian in a building, and a fixed reference, and the 
second one is to send distance data to a collecting point 
using radio communications. 
For this last function two operating modes are possible: 
• 
The first one is called “autonomous mode”. In this 
mode the system collects and stores data in a flash 
memory. Data is harvested through the serial link 
when desired. 
• 
The second mode is “normal mode”. In this mode, 
distance data isn’t stored in the system but 
immediately sent to the collecting point using 
radio communications. This mode will be used in 
the rest of the paper. Fig. 1 shows the system 
architecture in the two modes. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  System architecture and two possible modes. 
Depending on the mode remote data collection involves 
several stages: 
• 
Stage 1: the telemeter sends a request radio frame 
to the beacon using its 802.15.4 interface [8]. The 
frame will be presented in the next section. 
44
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

• 
Stage 2: The beacon receives the request from the 
telemeter and replies to the telemeter by sending 
simultaneously an RF response and an ultrasonic 
pulse. 
• 
Stage 3: When the telemeter receives the response 
frame from the beacon, the telemeter starts a timer, 
which is going to measure the flight time of the 
ultrasonic pulse (ToA method [9]). When the 
ultrasonic pulse reaches the telemeter an interrupt 
is generated and the distance is computed. In 
autonomous mode, data (distance, beacon address) 
are stored on the telemeter or are immediately sent 
to a collecting PC using a serial RS232 link. It is 
the end of operations in this mode. 
For normal mode, data are sent to a multi-sensor 
platform, which performs data aggregation from other 
sensors. In order to keep the free positioning of all the 
sensors on the person data are sent using Bluetooth 
protocol (not represented in Fig. 1).  
• 
Stage 4: Data are received from the Bluetooth 
interface of the platform and are processed. Then, 
the platform checks all sensor parameters and 
transmits the status of the person using its WiFi 
interface. 
• 
Stage 5: Data received by a WiFi access point is 
sent through the Ethernet network to the data sink. 
III. 
HARDWARE PRESENTATION 
The telemeter system is constituted of two parts 
separated in two specific boards connected through 
dedicated Programmable Input/Output (PIO). The first 
board contains the processor and radio modem, while the 
second board is dedicated to the ultrasonic pulses 
emission/reception. 
A. Processor and radio board 
The main component of the device is the 13213 from 
Freescale Semiconductors [10]. This component is a 
System In Package (SIP) including a processor and a 
802.15.4 compliant transceiver. Our design is inspired 
from 13213-ICB reference design from Freescale, and all 
necessary interfaces have been integrated on the board to 
configure and to debug our telemeter. The block diagram 
of the system is presented in Fig. 2. 
The 
13213 
processor 
is 
responsible 
for 
both 
functionalities: handling the transceiver and commanding 
the application. This characteristic limits the application 
code size (60kBytes) but enables to decrease the delay due 
to Physical layer (decoding demodulation). Indeed as soon 
as a frame is received a software interrupt is generated on 
the processor, which can start a timer on a beacon response 
(stage 2). 
Moreover, the chip handles the serial RS232 link, 
which enables the system to send data to the multi-sensor 
platform (stage 3). 
At last, several Input/Output and debug ports (BDM) 
have been placed on the MCU board in order to check the 
good communication between the boards. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  System block diagram. 
B. RF and ultrasonic signals 
The ultrasonic part aims at computing the flight time of 
an ultrasonic pulse in the 40kHz frequency range. The 
system combines the use of one RF electromagnetic wave 
with one ultrasonic pulse. The propagation speed of the 
electromagnetic wave being much more important than the 
sonic pulse speed, the flight time of the RF wave can be 
considered as instantaneous.  
 
Figure 3.  Ultrasonic part management signals. 
Thus, the RF beacon response to a localisation request 
starts a timer of the processor, which timer is stopped 
when the ultrasonic pulse generated by the beacon node 
reaches the telemeter. Fig. 3 shows the temporal mode of 
the operation. 
The ultrasonic pulse generation is managed by two 
programmable outputs of the beacon processor in push-
pull mode (Em1 and Em2 signals), while on the telemeter 
the reception of an ultrasonic pulse in the 40kHz frequency 
band generates an interrupt on an input configured in the 
input compare mode (Echo signal). 
Two other outputs of the processor are used for 
managing the ultrasonic board: the “Block” signal, 
enabling to block the listening while an ultrasonic pulse is 
generated, and the “Sleep” signal enabling to put the 
ultrasonic part in low power mode. 
45
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

The 15ms guard time is due to the charging of the 
ultrasonic board input capacitor. The ultrasonic pulses 
have been limited to 2ms in order not to fill the 
environment of parasitic echoes. If the telemeter doesn’t 
receive the ultrasonic pulse in less than 60ms, the telemeter 
puts the ultrasonic board in low power mode and goes to 
sleep mode until the next localisation request. 
The localisation request can be either executed 
periodically from a timer, or requested from the serial link 
from the multi-sensor platform. 
IV. 
SOFTWARE PRESENTATION 
In order to program easily the application Freescale 
offers several software solutions called Code Bases: a 
basic solution called SMAC, a more complex 802.15.4 
compliant stack and a Zigbee compliant stack [8]. 
For our system we have chosen the basic SMAC 
(Simple Media Access Controller) for several reasons. The 
most important reason is that this code base is completely 
open source and gives access to very low level primitives 
enabling maximal energy savings. Moreover this code base 
is very small and easy to implement. The source code is in 
standard C language and the development environment is 
Code Warrior [11]. 
A. Application software 
The application code is integrated in a state machine 
running on the Beacon node and the Telemeter. 
Localisation requests are done periodically using a timer 
on the telemeter. 
1) Telemeter: The state machine is described in Fig. 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Telemeter state machine. 
In order to save energy the system spends the most of 
its time in a deep sleep mode called Hibernate mode. In the 
Hibernate mode both the transceiver and the processor are 
powered off. Only a crystal is powered allowing the 
processor to wake up and after to wake up the radio stage. 
The system is wake up from Hibernate mode (Hib) 
every 1 second by the real time interrupt timer to manage 
pending commands (Idle). If the telemeter doesn’t receive 
any command from the multi-sensor platform the telemeter 
returns to hibernation. 
Every 5 seconds, the telemeter wakes up from 
hibernate and broadcasts a localisation request (Tx). 
Then it waits first the Radio localisation response (Rx) 
and in a second step it waits the ultrasonic pulse (Ru). 
These two states and the sensing stage constitute the 
macroscopic reception state (Rxu). 
When the pulse is received or after 60ms the telemeter 
enters the beacon mode macroscopic state (Bm). This 
mode is used by the system data sink to increase beacon 
range and the robustness of the architecture. In this mode 
the telemeter plays the role of a beacon node for another 
telemeter out of the range. It waits a 3s guard time for 
localisation request from other telemeters (Rxb). If a 
request is received the state machine goes to the Txu state 
where a radio localisation response frame and an ultrasonic 
pulse are generated. Then, the telemeter enters Hibernate 
mode. If there is no received localisation request the 
telemeter directly goes to Hibernate state. 
A special attention must be given to the Rxb guard time 
since radio stage activation consumes more energy.  
2) Beacon: The beacon node state machine is a special 
case of the telemeter state machine since it is the beacon 
mode macroscopic state. The beacon node is always in 
reception mode sensing (Sen) localisation request. As soon 
as the beacon node receives a localisation request (Rxb) 
the beacon node generates a localisation response and an 
ultrasonic pulse (Txu) before returning to sensing mode 
(Sen). 
B. Frame format 
1) Radio frames: The radio frame format uses the 802.15.4 
standard header and adds some fields. Frames are between 
12 and 14 bytes long and are composed of three parts 
described in Fig. 5. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Radio frame format. 
For energy savings it is important to note that several 
fields are useless (Frame type, Sequence number, PAN ID). 
Moreover the address field are oversized (2 Bytes) and 
could be limited to 1 Byte. However the 802.15.4 frame 
header enables to use most of network analyser such as 
Daintree Network SNA [12] to monitor the radio 
communications. 
The frame is composed of three parts: 
• 
The header field. 
• 
Bytes 1 and 2 define the 802.15.4 frame type (Data, 
ACK, Beacon…) 
• 
Byte 3 is the sequence number incremented with 
each emission. 
• 
Bytes 4 and 5 define the network identifier and 
allow creating several networks. 
• 
Bytes 6 and 7 identify the destination address. 
0xFF is used for broadcast (localisation request). 
• 
Bytes 8 and 9 identify the source address. The first 
one identifies the node type (beacon or telemeter) 
and the second one gives them a number (short 
address). 
46
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

• 
Data field: Byte 10 identifies the command type. 
Two commands are implemented: Localisation 
Request and Localisation Response. Bytes 11 and 
12 enable to send the temperature from the beacon 
node to the telemeter in order to take into account 
for US wave propagation speed compensation. 
This field can be used as parameters for other non 
implemented commands. 
• 
The footer field: Bytes 13 and 14 are generated 
automatically by the data transmission primitive 
implemented in the SMAC code base. The FCS 
enables frame error detection. 
2) Serial frames: After the telemeter has received the 
localisation response from a beacon node, the telemeter 
activates a 60ms watchdog and a timer enabling the US 
wave flight time computation. When the US wave reaches 
the receiver (a MEMS microphone) or when the watchdog 
expires, a serial data frame is sent to the multi-sensor 
platform. The format of serial frames is given in Fig. 6. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Serial frame format. 
Byte 1 is used as a start frame delimiter in order to 
limit erroneous frames. 
Bytes 2 and 3 transmit the US wave flight time 
calculated with (1) 
 
 
5,0 µs.
field
Tf
×
=
 
 
   (1) 
Bytes 4 and 5 transmit the beacon temperature 
information to the multi-sensor platform. 
Bytes 6 and 7 transmit the battery level from the 
integrated battery monitoring system. 
Byte 8 gives the link quality indicator, which will 
enable us to compute the Receive Signal Strength Indicator 
(RSSI) with (2) 
.
2
field dBm
RSSI
= −
 
 
 (2) 
Byte 9 is used as a stop frame delimiter in order to limit 
erroneous frames. 
V. 
SYSTEM CHARACTERIZATION 
Electrical and radiofrequency characterization have 
been performed. Comparison with a well-known system is 
also made. 
A. Electric consumption 
In order to characterize electrically the telemeter, we 
have measured the current going through a serial 50Ω 
resistor before the 9V to 5V DC/DC converter. Fig. 7 
represents a telemeter cycle, which is done every 5 seconds. 
In the picture, we have simplified the cycle by removing 
the beacon mode state after the macroscopic receive state 
(Rxu). Four different stages can be identified: 
• 
The first stage is the wake up period. This stage is 
fixed by the LED in initialisation and lasts 40ms 
while current consumption sensed is 5mA.  
• 
The 
second 
stage 
consists 
of 
both 
radio 
transmission and ultrasonic part powering. This 
stage lasts 20ms and while the mobile device starts 
to transmit localisation request the ultrasonic part 
is enabled in order to compensate analog 
component delay. The current consumption is 
about 65mA. 
• 
The third stage is the received period. The device 
listening and the beacon response consume 35mA. 
This stage can be divided in two cases, superposed 
in Fig. 7: In the first case the beacon is in range 
and the radio data frame is received. After the 
reception, the waiting for the ultrasonic (US) wave 
starts and the ultrasonic power is sensed by the 
analog circuit, the radio and the analog circuit are 
turned off. If no power is received the max power 
is reported. In the second case the beacon is not in 
range. The watchdog expires and the device 
returns to Hibernate mode. 
• 
The last stage is the going to Hibernate mode. This 
stage lasts 30ms and is controlled by adjusting the 
LED on delay indicating the US received. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Telemeter current consumption. 
B. Ultrasonic characterization 
1)  Test environment 
The analog part characterization has been realized in an 
empty 9m x 7m lab room. Fig. 8 shows the room 
configuration and angular tests performed. 
The room height is about 3m and the ground and walls 
are mixed reflective surface (concrete, plaster, bricks…). 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Test room configuration. 
47
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

2)  Distance and polarity impact 
This characterization is focused on the distance and 
polarity impact on measurements. The temperature during 
these tests is kept around 22°C (+/- 2°C). 
The measures presented in Fig. 9 were realized at 1.1 
meter from the ground and with constant temperature. 
Due to piezoelectric transducer directivity we tried 
several test pointing positions to compute the directivity 
effects on measurements. Four test positions were 
performed: 30, 60 and 90° from the direct view position. 
The maximal range of the system is 9m but it can be 
improved by increasing the US pulse power. However, this 
modification increases the measurement variance. 
The absolute error in all position stays under 8cm and 
the maximal error is observed when the device is in the 90° 
from the beacon position. 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Distance error function of time and position (22°C). 
Fig. 10 represents the polarization impact on 
measurements. For these measures we only made a quarter 
turn in the board plane to measure the XY directivity of the 
transducer but we haven’t noticed any impact on the flight 
time measured. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Polarity impact on flight time measures. 
 
3)  Temperature impact 
For these tests we kept the same color convention for 
position. Fig. 11 describes the absolute error in function of 
distance for different positions at 12°C (+-2°C). The error 
measured 
is 
computed 
without 
any 
temperature 
compensation. We notice that we have the same behaviour 
as for 22°C. The computed propagation speed is decreased 
from 344.8m/s to 336.9m/s. The maximal error is obtained 
for the 90° position. Although the absolute maximal error 
is increased to 30cm, the relative error stays below 5%. 
 
 
 
Figure 11.  Distance error function of time and position (12°C). 
4)  Attenuation impact 
We covered the mobile device with a piece of cotton 
tissue and we have measured the absolute error in function 
of distance and position. The attenuation due to the tissue 
increases the absolute error and has an important impact on 
the error when the position is at 90° from the direct view. 
However, the results are clearly satisfying since the 
maximal absolute error without any compensation of 
temperature or attenuation stays below 35cm and the 
relative error stays below 8%. 
5)  Multi-path impact 
Fig. 12 shows the two test scenarios performed to 
evaluate 
multipath 
effects. 
The 
first 
scenario 
in 
configuration (a) evaluates the case where the power of the 
echo is superior to the power of the direct path while the 
scenario presented in configuration (b) evaluates the 
impact of a reflective object in parallel at the direct path 
for different distance (Pdirect > Pecho).  
For these scenarios several distances between the 
reflective elements and devices have been tested but none 
of them showed an impact on the computed distance. In 
the case (a) the direct path is always reported. 
 
(a)    
(b) 
Figure 12.  Test configurations for evaluating multipath effects. 
6)  Obstacles and acoustic environment impact 
We tried to evaluate the impact of different objects 
being in the direct path. Several obstacles materials and 
sizes have been tested (cork, wood, carton, persons). The 
results have not allowed us to model precisely the 
behaviour in function of the size or the material but we 
noticed that for a constant distance position and 
temperature when the obstacles size increases the flight 
time increases. The error is superior but the relative error 
due obstacles is negligible (<1%). 
Average error (cm) 
Flight time (ms) 
Distance (m) 
Distance (m) 
Distance (m) 
Error (cm) 
48
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

The last tests evaluate the impact of a noisy 
environment on the measurements. In targeted applications 
(health) the main noise source is voice that’s why we have 
focused our tests on FM radio noise source, white noise 
and pink noise (-3dB/octave). The tests have been 
processed in the same lab room with an ambient audio 
noise measured of 38dBSPL (Sound Pressure Level). The 
noise source was placed at 20cm behind the transmitter 
(worst case) and the noise measures were taken at 20cm 
perpendicularly to the direct path. The noise source was a 
speaker whose indicated bandwidth was 50-25000Hz. Four 
noise levels have been tested 68, 78, 88 and 100dBSPL for 
the 3 noise sources. Until 88dBSPL, no change in 
measured flight time has been noticed. But for 100dBSPL 
the device started to indicate incoherent measurements. 
C. System performance comparison 
The Cricket system from the MIT laboratory [13] is a 
compact embedded system for indoor localisation. It is 
constituted of ultrasonic piezoelectric transducers (40kHz) 
and a 433MHz Radio frequency transceiver. The distance 
computation is based on the round-trip flight time. An 
ultrasonic wave is generated by a transducer and is 
received by the other on the same board. Then, the distance 
is transmitted via the RF transceiver. This system has been 
chosen as the reference level for performance evaluation. 
Another difference between our system and the Cricket 
is that we use omnidirectional transducers whereas the 
Cricket only has a 40° opening. Even if the cricket 
datasheet announced a 40° opening all the position tested 
above 30° have been unreliable and the measurements only 
have been done in the direct path. Moreover the system has 
been designed for short range measurements (anti-collision 
robotic application). Due to the round trip of the ultrasonic 
wave, the attenuation is important and the maximum range 
measured is about 7m. Fig. 13 indicates the relative error 
in function of distance for our telemeter localisation 
system and the Cricket system. 
 
Figure 13.  Relative error of systems comparison. 
The two extreme cases are presented: the best case is 
obtained at 22°C in direct path (dashed) and the worst case 
at 12°C plus attenuation without any compensation in 90° 
position. The Cricket system stays under 10% of relative 
error from 30cm to 3m. In this range, the Cricket system is 
more precise than the worst case of our system however 
only the direct path was measurable for the Cricket system. 
Obviously, 
this 
comparison 
would 
need 
to 
be 
complemented and more detailed for example in energy 
efficiency. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper proposed an original telemeter system 
allowing localisation for pedestrian in indoor environment. 
The system uses the 802.15.4 RF signal to start the time of 
an ultrasonic emission. The measure is computed from the 
flight time of the ultrasonic signal between the telemeter 
worn by the user and a beacon fixed in the environment. 
Characterization of ultrasonic performances shows good 
reliability, linearity and multipath immunity. This system 
have been tested and compared with the MIT Cricket 
system and have demonstrated several advantages such as: 
• 
Good accuracy (better from 5% to 10% in the 
worst case and over 3m). 
• 
Good opening angle (90° from the direct path. 
• 
Good maximal range (up to 10m). 
• 
Energy efficiency: The 802.15.4 low power modes 
enable up to two weeks with standard alkaline 
batteries (for a measurement every second). 
Now, the system is integrating before deploying in real 
building. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been funded by ANR-Telecom French 
program. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Hightower and G. Borriello, “Location systems for ubiquitous 
Computing,” Computer, 34(8):57-66, August 2001. 
[2] P. Bahl and V. Padmanabhan, “RADAR: An In-building RF-based 
User Location and Tracking System,” In Proc. of the IEEE 
Infocom 2000, pp. 775-784, March 2000. 
[3] M. Sugano, T. Kawazoe, Y. Ohta, and M. Murta, “Indoor 
localization system using RSSI measurement of wireless sensor 
network based on Zigbee standard,” in Proc. of Wireless Sensor 
Networks (WSN), July 2006. 
[4] Y. Oster, D. Kubrak, and J.F. Vidal, “FIL project: a low cost 
hybrid positioning system for pedestrians – the user’s viewpoint,” 
Toulouse Space Show, 6p., Toulouse, France, 8-11 juin, 2010. 
[5] O. Woodman and R. Harle, “Pedestrian Localisation for indoor 
environment,” Ubicomp’08, Seoul, Korea, September 2008. 
[6] J. Chen, X.J. Wu, P.Z. Wen, F. Ye, and J.W Liu, “A new 
distributed localization algorithm for ZigBee wireless networks,” 
In Proc. of Control and Decision Conference (CCDC), Guilin, 
China, pp. 4451-4456, june 2009. 
[7] E. Cassano, F. Florio, F. De Rango, S. Marano, “A performance 
comparison between ROC-RSSI and trilateration localization 
techniques for WPAN sensor networks in a real outdoor testbed,” 
In Proc. of Wireless Telecommunications Symposium (WTS), 
Prague,Czech Republic, pp. 1-8, April 2009. 
[8] IEEE 802.15.4 WPANTM Task group 4, IEEE 802.15.4-2006, 
http://www.ieee802.org/15/pub/TG4.html 
[9] M. Ciurana, S. Cugno, and F. Barcel-Arroyo, “WLAN indoor 
positioning based on TOA with two reference points,” In Proc. 
WPNC’07, 4th workshop on positioning, navigation and 
communication, pp. 23-28, March 2007.   
[10] Freescale:http://www.freescale.com/webapp/sps/site/prod_summar
y.jsp?code=MC13213 
[11] Freescale:http://www.freescale.com/webapp/sps/site/homepage.jsp
?code=CW_HOME 
[12] Daintree Networks: http://www.daintree.net/sna/sna.php 
[13] N. B. Priyantha, A. Chakraborty, and H. Balakrishnan, “The 
Cricket Location-Support System,” Proc. of the Sixth Annual 
ACM International Conference on Mobile Computing and 
Networking (MOBICOM), August 2000. 
Telemeter_best case 
Telemeter worst case 
Cricket 
 
Relative error (%) 
Distance (m) 
49
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

