 
 
Abstract – To design a new atmospheric icing sensor, it is 
important 
to 
understand 
the 
existing 
atmospheric 
ice 
detection/measurement techniques. It is found that atmospheric 
icing sensors, which are capable of delivering maximum 
information are based upon direct measurement of the physical 
properties (electrical or mechanical) of atmospheric ice. Most of 
the ice detection methods are not able to deliver combined 
information about atmospheric ice type, its thickness and its rate 
simultaneously (very important factors for ice mitigation and 
design purposes). Based upon this study, it is found that sensors 
based upon the application of complex relative permittivity 
variations for different types of atmospheric ice at different 
ambient conditions offer good potential to detect atmospheric ice 
type, thickness and rate with minimum loading errors (effects of 
freezing ambient environment) due to their capacitive nature. 
This indicates that sensors based on capacitive and impedance 
measurement techniques are mostly suitable for the development 
of robust ice measurement sensors.  
 
Keywords - Atmospheric Ice; Capacitive; Dielectric; Direct 
Measurement; Microwave; Resonance; Ultrasonic. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Due to increasing trend of activities in polar regions, human 
and 
inventory 
hazards 
are 
also 
increasing. 
Hence, 
development of robust techniques to detect and measure 
atmospheric ice accretion on structures is a very critical and 
challenging task. There is no ice sensor commercially 
available that can detect and measure all important icing 
parameters such as: icing rate, load and type under any icing 
conditions simultaneously [1]. Currently, most ice detectors 
available are capable of measuring either one or two 
phenomena such as detecting ice and indicating the rate of 
icing only. Ice sensors can be integrated with anti/deicing 
systems; therefore it is important for these to deliver sufficient 
information to be able to operate ice mitigation devices 
effectively. Power requirements for the removal of snow and 
ice is different hence to distinguish between snow and ice can 
be considered to be a limiting factor for de-icing system, 
because most devices for the removal of snow are normally 
ineffective for the efficient removal of ice or hard packed 
snow [2]. Also, measuring an icing event bounds a set of 
requirements, which include the ability of a sensor to detect 
icing with high sensitivity without influencing the measured 
quantity due to the ambient conditions, this is defined as the 
loading error. These atmospheric ic measurement techniques 
are categorized into indirect and direct methods [3]: 
 
Indirect methods of ice detection involve measuring 
weather conditions such as relative humidity, wind velocity, 
temperature etc. that lead to the prediction of an upcoming 
icing event [4]. Empirical or deterministic models are used in 
indirect methods to determine when icing will occur.  
The direct methods of ice detection are based on the 
principle of detecting property changes caused by accretion 
such as mass, dielectric constants, conductivities, or 
inductance. This paper briefly describes the working principle 
of 
different 
available 
direct 
measurement 
techniques 
(categorized below) of atmospheric ice on structures.  
i. Capacitive based techniques, 
ii. Microwave based techniques, 
iii. Impedance based techniques, 
iv. Ultrasonic based techniques, 
v. Load cell based techniques, 
vi. Infrared based techniques, 
vii. Resonance based techniques. 
 
II. ATMOSPHERIC ICE PARAMETERS MEASUREMENTS USING 
DIRECT MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES 
A. Capacitive based techniques 
Capacitive ice sensors generate an electric field to detect the 
presence of dielectric materials. An electric field radiates 
outward around the probe and a dielectric material in close 
proximity of the field affects the measured capacitance, 
Mughal et. al. [5]. This attribute enables non-invasive 
measurements. In Sihvola et. al. [6], the results indicate that 
the complex dielectric constant is practically independent of 
the structure of snow. It is also mentioned that for dry snow, 
the dielectric constant is determined by the density and for wet 
snow, the imaginary part and the increase of the real part due 
to liquid water have the same volumetric wetness dependence. 
The static dielectric constants rs of both polycrystalline and 
single crystals of ice have been carefully determined by Auty 
and Cole [7]. Also, application electrical properties to the 
measurement 
of 
ice 
thickness, 
temperature, 
crystal 
orientations are presented in Evanes [8]. Weinstein [9] and 
Jarvinen [10] proposed two different capacitive based ice 
detection methods, which are discussed in the following 
sections. Sensing methods proposed by Gerardi [11, 12] also 
use the same principle as proposed by Weinstein [9]. 
Atmospheric Icing Sensors – An Insight 
Umair Najeeb Mughal and Muhammad Shakeel Virk  
Department Of Technology, Narvik University College,  
Narvik, Norway  
Email : unm@hin.no 
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Capacitive ice sensor by Weinstein 
 
The ice sensor proposed by Weinstein [9] as given in 
Fig. 1, can be used for the determination of the thickness of 
ice (22) on the outer surface (12) of an object independent of 
temperature and the composition of the ice (22). First 
capacitive gauge (16), second capacitive gauge (18), and the 
temperature gauge (20) are embedded in embedding material 
(14) located within a hollow portion of outer surface (12). 
First capacitive gauge (16), second capacitive gauge (18), and 
temperature gauge (20) are respectively connected to first 
capacitance measurement circuit (24), second capacitance 
measurement circuit (26), and temperature measuring circuit 
(28). The geometry of first and second capacitive gauge (16) 
and (18) is such that the ratio of voltage outputs of first and 
second capacitive gauge (24) and (26) is proportional to the 
thickness of ice (22), regardless of ice temperature or 
composition. This ratio is determined by offset and dividing 
circuit (29). 
 
Both first (16) and second capacitive gauge (18) are 
made from thin conductors with a thickness of approximately 
0.0254mm. A dual timer LM556 (42), used in an astable mode 
to generate 7s pulses at any frequencies e.g 1.5kHz, to 
trigger a monostable timer (44). The timing capacitor of 
monostable timer (44) is (16). The output from the monostable 
timer is converted by the low pass filter (46) to produce an 
output DC signal, which is directly proportional to the 
capacitance of (16). Capacitance measuring circuits (24) and 
(26) are connected to offset the dividing circuit (29). The 
output voltage Vout of this offset and dividing circuit (29) for 
ice conditions is determined by the relation, 
                          




2
1
o
out
o
V
V
V
V
V



                                    (1) 
 
where V is the voltage output for the ice conditions and 
Vo is the initial voltage for no ice conditions. Subscripts (1) 
and (2) refer respectively to capactive measurements from 
first capacitance measuring circuit (24) and second 
capacitance measurement circuit (26). Vout is independent of 
both temperature and ice decomposition since, both effects 
results in identical scaling factors [13] resulting no changes in 
equation 14.  
 
The variation of capacitance as a function of thickness 
is shown in Fig. 3. The output voltages from first and second 
capacitive measuring circuits (24) and (26) for various 
thickness of ice (22) formed on the outer surface (12) is 
shown. Curve (48) represents the output voltage V1 from the 
first capacitance measuring circuit (24) at a fixed temperature 
and ice impurity level. Also curve (50) represents the voltage 
output V2 from the second capacitance measuring circuit (26). 
At a fixed configuration, both curves will vary with 
temperature change or ice impurity change. Also it can be 
seen that both curves do not go to zero output voltage even 
when the ice thickness is zero. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Construction of Weinstein Ice Sensor, Source[9] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Electrical schematic of capacitance measuring circuit, Source[9] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Ratio of capacitance gauge as a function of thickness, Source[9] 
Capacitive ice sensor by Jarvinen 
The ice sensor designed by Jarvinen [10] is capable of 
detecting the ice, its thickness and type. The dielectric 
properties of ice and snow show variation when an alternating 
current is supplied through it as mentioned by a review of 
Evans [8] and Stiles [14]. A lot of the dielectric measurements 
based upon Cole – Cole plot [15, 16] on wet snow, pure snow, 
granular snow and compact snow were conducted by Kuroiwa 
[17] and many others. In this sensor, Jarvinen [10] used the 
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
method for detecting the presence and the accretion of ice by 
first measuring the properties of the contaminant layer 
overlying the ice sensor. The contaminant layer's temperature, 
thermal conductivity and variation of total impedance versus 
ice sensor electrical excitation frequency are measured. The 
complex dielectric property subsystem monitors the dielectric 
property locus in dielectric space as the excitation frequency is 
varied from near dc to higher frequencies and compares the 
measured results for magnitude and shape with laboratory 
property data taken at the same temperature and stored in the 
processor. It double check using external ice (based upon the 
complex dielectric measurements) sensor whether it is ice or 
rain water or deicing fluid or snow. If the measured results 
form a semicircular shaped locus of dielectric properties in 
complex dielectric space during the frequency scan and those 
measurements are also determined to be in agreement with on 
board stored laboratory ice data, ice is confirmed to be 
present. The presence of ice is also confirmed if a particular 
vector can be constructed from the measured data taken at a 
single preselected excitation frequency and found to have a 
vector angle in agreement with the vector angle from stored 
laboratory results taken at the same measurement conditions. 
In addition, complex dielectric measurement algorithms 
identify whether cracks, flaws or voids or increased electrical 
conductivity exist in the ice covering and sensor from their 
effects on the shape and size of the measured complex 
dielectric locus or from the length of the vector at the pre 
selected frequency. The presence of flaws, cracks or voids or 
enhanced electrical conductivity are determined from the 
values for the low frequency and high frequency intercepts 
and the value for diameter of the complex dielectric locus if 
these values are found to differ from those calculated for ice 
based on stored ice data. These differences, if found to exist, 
are used to correct the initially chosen ice thickness value 
based on the assumption of normal ice: ice with no flaws, 
cracks or voids or higher electrical conductivity, see Fig. 5. 
For more details on the mathematical principle of this type of 
sensing technique see Mugal et. al. [16].  
Pure glaze ice in the temperature range from 0 to -40oC has 
a thermal conductivity value in the range 2.4 to 2.6 W/mK, 
rain water slightly above 0oC has a value of 0.6 W/mK in the 
same units, air 0.023 W/mK and a 50/50 mixture of deicing 
fluid is 0.41 W/mK. The thermal conductivity of rime ice 
(density 0.38 gm/cm3) have a thermal conductivity of 0.4 
W/mK. Thus the presence of glaze ice is easily determined by 
the substantial difference in thermal conductivity between it 
and all other possible contaminants. For more details follow 
[13]. Dielectric values are used in addition to discriminate 
between rain water, deicing fluid and low density rime ice. 
Also, this sensor uses AD5933 high precision impedance 
converter system that combines an on board frequency 
generator with a 12 bit, 1 MSPS, ADC. The frequency 
generator allows an external complex impedance to be excited 
with a known frequency. The response signal from the 
impedance is sampled by the on board ADC and a DFT is 
processed by an on board DSP engine. The DFT algorithm 
returns a real and imaginary data word at each output 
frequency.  AD5933 chip measures total impedance 
magnitudes over the range from 100  to 10M with a total 
system accuracy of 0.5%.  The sweep frequency range of the 
chip normally covers the range from 1kHz to 100kHz. By 
adding a clock dividing circuit we can lower the range to 
10Hz to 20KHz. For this sensor this range is 40Hz to 40KHz. 
From Impedance to Dielectric : It is explained in [18] that ice 
can may be replaced by an equivalent circuit as shown in Fig. 
4.  The total complex impedance Z of the circuit is given by, 
                       
1
1
1
1
1
1
j C
Z
R
R
j C








                            (2). 
 
Now if the ice is characterized by a capacitance C, then 
                         1
o
r
c
j
A
j C
Z
L
  
 

                                  (3)  
 
where L is thickness of ice, A is the surface area of 
block of ice and 
o
   is the permittivity of free space. Also, we 
have  
                


1
&
rs
r
o
o
LC
L
C
C
A
A










                (4) 
 
Eq. (4) when substituted in Cole-Cole equation we get,  
          




1
0
1
1
1
rs
r
r
r
o
o
LC
j
LC
A
j
A




















            (5) 
where  = R1C1 is the dielectric relaxation time of the 
circuit that is time taken for the voltage across the ice block to 
reach 1-e-1 = 0.63 of its final value when a step voltage is 
applied.  
                             
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Equivalent circuit for ice [18] 
 
Figure 5. Cole Cole plot for pure ice, ice with flaw & ice with higher 
conductivity value, Source [10] 
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
B. Ultrasonic based techniques 
   Ultrasonic ice sensors consist of two transducer elements, 
where one element generates ultrasonic vectors, which are 
detected by the second element. By measuring the attenuation 
levels, icing between the two elements can be detected. Like 
capacitive sensors, ultrasonic sensors need low power, low 
cost and are directionally sensitive. Luukkala [19] and 
Watkins [20] proposed two different ultrasonic based ice 
sensing techniques, which are discussed in the following 
sections.  
Ultrasonic ice sensor by Luukkala 
In the ice sensor designed by Luukkala [19] , a mechanical 
ultrasonic signal is transmitted along a thin thread or strip at 
one end and the intensity of the ultrasonic signal having 
passed through the thread is measured at the other end. If the 
thread is covered with a water layer, the ultrasound will not be 
attenuated, however if the water freezes, the ultrasound cannot 
propagate in the thread, but will be abruptly attenuated. If the 
thread is covered with a sludge, the ultrasound will be 
somewhat attenuated to a kind of intermediate level at which 
detection of sludge is also possible. A viscosity difference 
exists between ice and water, and thus the intensity of the 
ultrasound having passed through the thread will also be 
different.  
These ultrasonic sensors are comprised of a measuring 
transducer, a thread-like or tape-like acoustic waveguide 
having an ultrasonic transmitter at one end, an ultrasonic 
receiver at other end, and a device which comprises electronic 
components for measuring the intensity and the attenuation of 
an ultrasonic pulse having passed through the transducer 
thread in the case of ice formation. Electric resistance of the 
thread is measured simultaneously with the measurement of 
the attenuation of the ultrasound. With the help of measured 
resistance, the amount of required heating for the thread can 
be provided optionally to melt the surrounding ice, whereby 
the ultrasound intensity resumes its initial level. 
This technique has been practically utilized in LID-3300IP 
[21] and are primarily aimed to detect ice on wind turbines, 
see Fig. 6a. During icing conditions the ultrasonic signal 
amplitude will start to decrease and the ice alarm will make 
the turbine stop to start the blade heating. Also, just at the 
right time when the ice is detected the sensor start heating 
itself to melt the detected ice. After a set delay, the alarm will 
go off and turbine will start functioning again, see Fig. 6b[22]. 
This sensor have been approved by the Technical Research 
Centre of Finland (VTT), and more than 2,000 units have 
already 
been 
supplied 
to 
the 
largest 
wind 
turbine 
manufacturers LID ice detectors are in use at airports and 
weather stations also.  This ice detector is based on 
longitudinal wire waves [4]. It is reasonably east to adjust the 
parameters of the device to correspond with different icing 
climates. However, Labko’s different versions have suffered 
from snow induced icing conditions and inability to melt all 
the ice.   
 
 
 
 
 
(a)          
(b)                                                              
 
Figure 6. Labcotec Ice Detector, Source [22] (a) Labcotec Ice Detector 
installed on the nacelle of wind turbine, (b). Working cycle of detector 
 
Ultrasonic ice sensor by Watkins 
The ultrasonic sensor designed by Watkins [20] consists of 
two ultrasonic transducers. The first transducer is energized to 
cause propagation of ultrasonic waves through a portion of a 
solid metal sheet along its predominant component parallel to 
the surface of the sheet and detecting the waves by means of 
the first ultrasonic transducer, while measuring the amplitude 
of the waves received by the second transducer, on the 
surface. If a layer of ice forms on the surface, the amplitude 
and intensity of the waves detected by the second transducer 
will decrease [23]. The waves may be horizontally polarized 
guided shear waves, or the waves may be a mode of lamb 
wave  [24] whose predominant component is horizontal. The 
transducers may be attached to the opposite surface of the 
portion of the sheet to which an ice layer may develop, and 
may be generated and received by piezoelectric or 
electromagnetic means. 
In Fig. 7a, the design of Watkins’s sensor to detect a layer 
of ice on a thin solid sheet is shown. Two ultrasonic 
transducers are attached to the sheet; the first transducer is 
adapted to cause propagation of ultrasonic waves through the 
thin solid sheet having their predominant component parallel 
to the surface of the sheet. Such waves will dissipate energy 
into an icing layer adhering to the surface, but not into air or 
liquid water, in the case where liquid water is present. The 
second ultrasonic transducer is adapted to detect the waves 
propagating in the sheet and to give a signal representative of 
their amplitude. A discriminator responsive to the signal 
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
detects the presence of an ice layer on the surface. In Fig. 7b it 
is shown that the transducer comprises six transducer strips 
parallel to each other extending perpendicular to the plane of 
the figure and spaced apart at a distance equal to the 
wavelength of ultrasonic shear waves in the sheet, held in a 
solid matrix. Each strip is of length 30 mm and is bonded to 
the surface by an electrically conducting layer and is made of 
piezo electric material and has contacts on opposing top and 
bottom surfaces by means of which it can be excited into 
vibrations parallel to its length. These vibrations are in phase 
with the other strips, and cause horizontally polarized shear 
waves to propagate in the sheet. 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 7. Working Principle of Watkins’s Icing Sensor ; Source [20] 
 
B. Resonance based technique 
In this ice sensing technique an element is allowed to vibrate 
at its resonance frequency. Due to the deposition of ice or any 
other mass on the vibrating element, its frequency spectrum 
varies. The variation in primarily fundamental/resonance 
frequency will then deliver information about the icing event. 
This type of ice sensor is a single point ice detection device, 
which delivers information about the presence of ice and 
cannot distinguish between the types of icing. Cronin [25], 
Kossmann [26] proposed two different resonance based ice 
sensor designs, which are discussed in the following sections.   
Resonance ice sensor by Cronin 
This ice sensor design [25] uses the principle of 
magnetostriction, which is defined as the ability of 
ferromagnetic materials to change dimensions under the 
influence of a fluctuating magnetic field (see Fig. 8). These 
magnetostrictive sensors vibrate ultrasonically at a set 
resonant frequencies. As ice accretes on the probe, the 
vibrational frequency decreases. At a specified frequency 
shift, usually a decreasing frequency, which is related to the 
ice mass on the probe, an output signal is generated and probe 
heaters are energized to remove the ice. The heater is then de-
energized and when the probe cools down, begins to accrete 
ice again if the icing event was still persistent. This sensing 
method has been practically utilized in [27, 28] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Cronin resonance based ice sensor; Source [25] 
 
Resonance ice sensor by Koosmann 
The ice sensing technique proposed by Koosmann [26] was 
not novel but presented a further improvement on the method 
proposed by Werner et. al. [29]. This technique is different 
from the sensing technique proposed by May [30]  and Roth 
[31] who used a diaphragm as a vibrating element. In the 
technique proposed by Koosmann [26] a vibrating element in 
a tube vibrates along the longitudinal axis of the tube. This 
tube is driven by an excitation coil at its natural frequency and 
is sealed by a diaphragm, which has a surface exposed to an 
air stream in which icing is to be sensed. The exposed 
diaphragm surface is deflectable during vibration of the tube 
at a flexible support portion of the diaphragm. As ice 
accumulates on the exposed surface the natural frequency of 
the cylindrical section changes and is sensed to determine that 
ice is accumulating. The diaphragm is of low mass and small 
size so that the stiffness of small amounts of ice can 
significantly change the spring constant of the flexible 
support. The diaphragm is also shaped to conform to adjacent 
aerodynamic surfaces. 
    
C. Microwave based technique 
In this technique microwave energy is allowed to pass 
through a substance using a waveguide. The amount of 
reflected energy can then be used to deliver information about 
the icing event and the amount of ice. Overall [32] and 
Magenheim [33] proposed two different microwave based ice 
sensors, which are discussed in the following sections. 
Microwave ice sensor by Overall  
The icing sensor designed by Overall [32] can detect the 
presence of ice or water on a road or other surfaces. In this 
detector, microwaves are directed via a waveguide to the 
underside of a window substantially transparent to the 
microwaves and installed substantially flush with the surface 
to be monitored. The presence and thickness, within 
reasonable limits, of any coating of ice or water present on the 
surface of the window is determined by measuring the amount 
of microwave energy reflected by the window. The reflected 
energy can be used to trigger a signal device such as a 
warning sign or to activate ice melting means. 
 
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
In Fig. 9 it is shown the block diagram of the basic 
elements of this sensor design, which serves to define the 
principle of operation.  The microwave generator is coupled 
with the ferrite isolator, which functions to protect the 
generator from the reflected waves and to keep the power 
level and frequency of the generated signal constant in spite of 
variations in the reflected signal and drastic load changes. The 
waveguide couples the ferrite isolator to the window, which 
can be constructed of any dielectric element that is 
substantially transparent to microwave energy, as for example 
polymers 
of 
tetrafloroethylene, 
copolymers 
of 
hexafloropropylene and tetrafloroethylene, polyethylene. The 
microwave energy reflected at the window travels back along 
the hollow waveguide and meets a directional coupler, which 
bleeds from the main guide a small proportion of the reflected 
energy. A crystal rectifier positioned in the directional coupler 
is actuated by the reflected energy and the output from the 
crystal is amplified and displayed on an amplifier to 
quantitatively show the level of the reflected energy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Microwave ice detector by Overal; Source [32] 
Microwave ice sensor by Magenheim 
In this design [33], microwave electromagnetic energy 
(typical frequency falls 2k – 20k MHz) is transmitted into a 
surface of ice, and the reflection or impedance characteristic 
of the ice layer is monitored to determine the presence and 
amount of ice. This ice sensor includes a device to generate 
microwave 
electromagnetic 
energy, 
transmitting 
the 
microwave energy in to a surface layer of ice. The microwave 
energy reflected from the ice layer is used to determine the 
presence and relative amount of ice in the layer. It also 
includes a permanent surface waveguide of such a thickness 
as to allow the propagation of microwave energy even when 
the ice layer is extremely thin. The design of this ice detector 
includes a short circuit element at the end of the surface 
waveguide remote from the end into which the microwave 
energy is transmitted. The short circuit element results in a 
partial or total reflection of the energy back along the surface 
waveguide and reflected energy being detected by the 
reflecto-meter means. Since ice typically contains many 
impurities including a significant amount of unfrozen water, it 
will present a dielectric medium for the transmission of the 
microwave energy, and much less energy is reflected out of 
the waveguide when a layer of ice is present.  
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 10. Microwave ice detector by Magenheim; Source [33], (a) 
Transmittance of microwave energy in iced surface, (b) Working principle 
 
D. Impedance based technique 
The impedance based ice sensing technique is very similar 
to the capacitive measurement technique. The only difference 
between the two is the source of information delivered, which 
is current in the former and voltage in the later. The 
importance of the impedance measurement system is that we 
can avoid saturation of the electrodes in this technique and we 
can increase our data points.  
Impedance ice sensor by Seegmiller 
The design of Seegmiller [34] is capable of delivering 
parameters such as the thickness of ice and the ice load for a 
relatively wide surface. This ice sensor is comprised of 
inductive ice sensing electrodes, temperatures sensors, a 
frequency generator, a voltage detector, resistance bridge and 
a processing unit. The inductive ice sensing electrodes are 
flush mounted on the surface of interest and comprise a 
transmitting electrode (at least one receiving electrode). These 
electrodes are insulated to avoid a spurious reading caused by 
conductive substance or electrolytes. The coefficient of 
coupling between the transmitting and receiving electrodes is 
determined by at least two factors, the first being the 
predetermined geometry and spacing between the electrodes 
and the second being the inductive coupling susceptibility of 
the ice in the general region of the spaced apart electrodes. 
This susceptibility is indicative of the presence and thickness 
of ice. The device for measuring temperatures is flush 
mounted onto the surface of interest. The frequency generator 
supplies an excitation signal and has means for being 
connected to the transmitting electrode of the inductive ice 
sensing array. The voltage detector has means for being 
connected to the receiving electrode of the inductive ice 
sensing array and detects a proportion of the supplied 
excitation signal to the transmitting electrode as a function of 
the coefficient of coupling between the transmitting and the 
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
receiving electrode. The voltage detector device generates an 
output signal representative of the thickness of adhering ice, 
frost or water substance in the general region between the 
spaced apart electrodes. 
 
E. Infrared based techniques 
    This technique is based on the absorption and reflection of 
active infrared light by the ice. By measuring the amount of 
reflected light, one can determine if ice is present at the 
surface.  
HoloOptic ice sensors 
HoloOptics sensor has the potential to detect the presence 
of any type of ice or snow. The working element comprises an 
infrared emitter together with a single head, two head or four 
head receivers, a photo detector and a probe. The operating 
range of this sensor lies in NIR range (0.88 m to 0.92 m), 
[35]. An icing event is recorded if more than 95% of the probe 
is covered with a 5nm thick layer of glaze ice or a 9nm thick 
layer of other types of ice. Once icing is detected, the probe 
internal heating system is activated to melt the accreted ice. 
The time it takes to deice is dependent solely on the icing rate 
if sufficient amount of heating power is provided. The time 
lapse between icing events is used to determine the icing rate 
[36]. 
  
       
 
 
 
               
 
 
Figure 11. T44 Holoptic ice sensor; source [36] 
 
F. Load cell based techniques 
In the international standard ISO 12494 [37], a standard way 
of measuring ice accretion is suggested. In this method it is 
required to measure the load of atmospheric ice on a steel rod 
that is 0.5 meter high (1 meter if heavy icing is expected) and 
has the diameter of 30mm. The rod must be freely rotating or 
forced to rotate at a constant speed. When ice accretes on the 
steel rod, aerodynamic drag will cause it to rotate in the case 
of free rotating icing load monitor, always facing the least 
amount of the iced part towards the wind. This doubling of 
length of the steel rod due to heavy icing is primarily aimed to 
uniform the drag distribution along its profile. By measuring 
the weight of the iced steel rod with the help of load cells, the 
amount of ice that has accreted can be determined. Two ice 
sensors (ice monitor & ice meter) have been developed on the 
basis of this technique. The following sections describes these 
two sensors: 
The IceMonitor 
The IceMonitor® measures the mass of accumulated ice 
gravimetrically. The working element is a freely rotating steel 
pipe resting on a rod placed on a load cell. As ice accretes on 
the freely rotating steel pipe, the ice load is weighed by the 
load cell. The Ice Monitor is manufactured by SAAB 
Technologies and was initially developed for power line 
surveillance systems. It can measure the rate because the 
readings from the load cell are recorded with time. The Ice-
Monitor® is not able to detect ice over a wide area cannot 
distinguish between the two types of in-cloud icing. 
Ice Meter®  
The ice meter was developed by the Institute of 
Atmospheric Physics, Prague, Czech Republic. It measures 
the mass of icing accumulated on the surface of the collector. 
It has a horizontal rod, which is coupled with a cylindrical 
collector to the tensometric. The cylinder is orientated 
vertically in order to eliminate the detection of wet snow as 
much as possible but the orientation of this cylinder can be 
changed to horizontal, if required. In this sensor, the mass of 
accumulated ice is measured by means of a tensometric bridge 
(strain gage load sensor) the output of which is tied to the 
precise A/D converter. The digital signal is preprocessed by a 
micro-controller, which assigns the time and stores the data 
into the device memory. In order to prevent the freezing of the 
horizontal rod, which couples the cylindrical collector to the 
tensometric, which is located together with the electronics in 
the housing. The passage through the housing may be heated 
depending 
on 
the 
passage 
temperature. 
A 
test 
electromechanical impulse is applied each hour to verify the 
free force transition to the tensometric, and thus to check 
whether the acquired data are reliable or not [38]. 
 
III. PROS/CONS OF AVAILABLE SENSORS 
 
A. Measurements in Finland 
The icing climate of the site has been characterized as site 
class A: an elevated site inland in northern Europe with harsh 
and frequent icing climate. The Labko LID-3503 and the 
Rosemount 0872J were installed at the site in the winter 
2001/02. Both ice detectors indicate the presence of icing 
conditions. According to the measurements performed with 
the LID-3503 ice detector it was noted that the sensor is 
inadequate for icing measurements in extreme conditions. 
Also, the conventional humidity instruments measure 
incorrectly in icing conditions [4]. 
 
 
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
B. Measurements in Czech Republic 
The icemeter has been operated on the Milesovka peak 
from 2000. Although icemeters installed in the site measured 
correctly most of the time, but there were also some time 
periods when the instruments gave obviously wrong negative 
values. These times can usually be associated with the periods 
when the horizontal rod coupling the tensometric with the 
vertical collector became icebound to the instrument housing. 
Thus there was no free force transition, which can be 
identified by not observing a proper electromechanical pulse 
in the data. The following changes are expected to be made in 
icemeter for its better performance [4], 
i. Possibility to build an instrument with a rotating 
collector. 
ii. More focus on the sensors that measure accumulated 
icing. 
 
C. Measurements in Finland 
Rosemount 0872J (prototype) at the FMI’s test est. The test 
station is located in northern Finland on the top of Luosto fell 
(500m asl, N 67 08’, E 26 54’). The Luosto test sites represent 
an elevated site inland with harsh and frequent icing climate. 
According to the performance of the instrument used fo rice 
detections were not entirely reliable and difference were found 
between the performances of ice detectors. The ice detectors 
are to some extent insensitive to icing under heavy icing 
conditions. It was possible to record more or less accurately 
the start and ending of icing periods but not the accretions rate 
or type of the icing. The Rosemount sensor has yielded fairly 
good measurements at Luosto and detected the presence of 
icing conditions. In soft icing conditions ice accretion may 
exist on the sensor probe during short periods of time 
especially in the beginning of the icing event but the sensor 
does not detect ice. This sensor is fairly adequate for icing 
measurements and it operated better than the other used 
instruments. Nevertheless, it cannot guarantee accurate 
measurements in all icing conditions especially in soft icing 
conditions [4].  
  
IV. CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTIONS FOR FUTURE WORK 
A. Conclusions/Findings 
Based upon this review study of design and working 
principle of various ice measurement techniques, it is 
found/observed that sensors based upon capacitive and 
impedance techniques offer reasonable potential to detect 
important  parameters pertaining to ice accretion such as ice 
type, ice thickness and icing rate. There is no extensive 
experimental and laboratory based study on the performance 
evaluation of all these sensing techniques because most of the 
literature found is based on theoretical performance evaluation 
hence it is a design conjecture. It is possible to combine two 
or three different techniques together particularly capacitance, 
impedance and resonance in order to measure these 
parameters and empirically develop an analytical relationship 
for the measurement of the icing parameters including ice 
load, it is anticipated to produce a more robust icing 
measurement device. In [3], Homola et. al. have described the 
unsuitable methods and suitable methods for detecting ice on 
wind turbines. He has also created a room for further 
investigations on the capacitive, inductance and impedance 
type of measurement techniques, which according to him 
appear the most promising sensing technique/method, which 
is also based upon conjecture without any detailed design 
study.  During this study it is also observed that the sensor 
utilizing the natural electrical properties of atmospheric ice 
[14, 17] working on an efficient algorithm based upon the 
electromagnetism theory will be expectedly prove an efficient 
sensor and the practical example of this sensor is Jarvenin’s 
total impedance and complex dielectric property icing 
detection sensor. If we adopt the physics of this sensor along 
with a rotating part then we may get a robust sensor. As the 
capacitive sensing technique, provide less loading errors than 
other techniques therefore, it may essentially be a part of new 
robust atmospheric icing sensor. 
  
B. Future Work 
Detailed performance evaluation based upon the laboratory 
experiments and on situ experiments of the different sensing 
techniques/methods is being developed. A prototype sensor 
based upon the dielectric potential of atmospheric ice is 
designed and being developed in the cold room chamber of 
NUC, which can be then optimized according to the area of 
application. Although capacitive based sensing method seems 
reasonable for the measurement of atmospheric ice type, rate 
and thickness yet it has some coupling issues due to the 
fringing effects (electric field lines try to go through the air 
and into the sensor head on the sides), which may lead to 
inefficient calculations. Hence, to avoid this, the same sensor 
can be then further improved to develop a robust atmospheric 
icing detection and analyzing scheme by utilizing other 
sensing techniques such as resonance, impedance, inductance 
etc., which are ought to be reasonable. Also a big challenge to 
build a robust sensor which can work in freezing domains, 
material selection alongwith humidity protection is very 
critical. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
U.N. Mughal, M.S. Virk, and M.Y. Mustafa, ''Electromagnetism based 
atmospheric ice sensing technique - A conceptual review'', International 
Journal of Multiphysics, 2012. 6(4): pp. 341-353. 
[2] 
C. D. Kuhmonen, ''Ice removing machine'', 1980. 
[3] 
M. C. Homola, P.J. Nicklasson, and P.A. Sundsbo, ''Ice sensors for 
wind turbines'', Cold Regions Science and Technology, 2006. 46: pp. 
125-131. 
[4] 
S. Fikke, ''Atmospheric icing on structures, measurement and data 
collection on icing, state of the art'', 2006, MeteoSwiss. pp. 110. 
[5] 
U. N. Mughal, M.S. Virk, and M.Y. Mustafa, ''Atmospheric Icing 
Sensors - Capacitive Techniques'', Sensors and Transducers, 2013. 
18(Special Issue): pp. 24-32. 
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
[6] 
A. Sihvola, E. Nyfors, and M. Tiuri, ''Mixing formulae and 
experimental results for the dielectric constant of snow''. Journal of 
Glaciology, 1985. 31(108). 
[7] 
R. P. Auty and R.H. Cole, ''Dielectric Properties of Ice and Solid D2O'', 
Journal of Chemical Physics, 1952. 20(8). 
[8] 
S. Evans, ''Dielectric properties of ice and snow - a review''. Journal of 
Glaciology, 1965. 5: pp. 773-792. 
[9] 
L. M. Weinstein, ''Ice Sensor'', 1988. 
[10] P. O. Jarvinen, ''Total impedience and complex dielectric property ice 
detection system'', 2008. 
[11] J. J. Gerardi, et al., ''Apparatus for measuring ice distribution profiles'', 
1995. 
[12] J. J. Gerardi, P.R. Dahl, and G.A. Hickman, ''Piezoelectric Sensor'', 
1993. 
[13] W. D. Coles, ''Experimental determination of thermal conductivity of 
low density ice''. Nace Technical Note 3143, 1954. 
[14] W. H. Stiles, and F.T. Ulaby, ''Dielectric properties of snow''. Journal of 
Geophysical Research, 1981. 85(C2). 
[15] R. H. Cole, and K.S. Cole, Journal of Chemical Physics, 1942(9). 
[16] U. N. Mughal, M.S. Virk, and M.Y. Mustafa. ''Dielectric Based Sensing 
of Atmospheric Ice'', 38th International Conference on Application of 
Mathematics in Engineering and Economics. 2012. Sozopol, Bulgaria: 
In press. 
[17] D. Kuroiwa, ''The dielectric property of snow'', Union Geodesique et 
Geophysique International. Association Internationale of Hdrologie 
Scientifique. Assemblee generale de Rome, , 1956. 4: pp. 52-63. 
[18]   P. V. Hobbs, ''Ice Physics'', 2010, Oxford University Press. 
[19] M. Luukkala, ''Detector for indicating ice formation on the wing of an      
          aircraft'', 1995. 
[20] R. D. Watkins, et al., ''Ice detector'', 1986. 
[21]   http://www.labkotec.fi/en/products/ice_detector_for_wind_turbines/. 
[22]http://windren.se/WW2011/55_Labkotec_Hautamaki_Martola_IceDe
tector.pdf. 
[23] J. Wu, ''Sensitivity of Lamb wave sensors in liquid sensing'',  IEEE 
Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control, 
1996. 43(1): pp. 71-72. 
[24] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lamb_waves. 
[25] D. J. Cronin, D.G. Jackson, and D.G. Owens, ''Ice detector 
configeration for improved ice detection at near freezing 
conditions'', 2001. 
[26] M. R. Koosmann, ''Membrance type non intrusive ice detector'', 
1986. 
[27] Goodrich Freezing rain sensor. Brochure: 4085 LIT 03/02,, 2002a. 
[28] Goodrich Sensor Systems : Primary and Advisory Ice Detection 
Systems. Brochure 4079 LIT 03/02, 2002b. 
[29] F. D. Werner and E.A. Grindheim, ''Ice detector'', 1967. 
[30] M. H. May, ''Condition responsive device'', 1947. 
[31] W. Roth, ''Ice detector'', 1966. 
[32] W. W. Overall and W. Woods, ''Ice detection apparatus employing 
microwave reflectance'', 1974. 
[33] B. Magenheim, ''Microwave ice detector'', 1977. 
[34] H. L. Seegmillar,  ''Ice detector and deicing fluid effectiveness 
monitoring system'', 1996. 
[35]http://holooptics.utrymmet.com/Dokument/651.Userguide%20T40.00
4.En.pdf. 
[36]http://holooptics.utrymmet.com/Dokument/651.Userguide%20T40.00
4.En.pdf. 
[37] M. H. Foder, ''ISO 12494 - Atmospheric icing on structures and 
how to use it'', Proceedings of the Eleventh (2001) International 
Offshore and Polar Engineering Conference. 2001. Norway. 
[38]http://www.ufa.cas.cz/html/upperatm/chum/namraza/Icingmeasczech
2.pdf. 
 
 
                                                           
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The work reported in this paper was partially funded by the Research Council of Norway, project no. 195153/160 and partially by the consortium of the project 
ColdTech- Sustainable Cold Climate Technology. 
 
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

