Navigating for Visually Handicapped to Walk Alone with RFID Technologies
Masayoshi Asano
Graduate School of Information Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University
1-1-1 Noji-higashi, Kusatsu, Shiga, Japan
Email: asano@de.is.ritsumei.ac.jp
Yusuke Kajiwara, Hiromitsu Shimakawa
College of Information Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University
1-1-1 Noji-higashi, Kusatsu, Shiga, Japan
Email: kajiwara@de.is.ritsumei.ac.jp
simakawa@de.is.ritsumei.ac.jp
Abstract—Visually handicapped use their white cane to ﬁnd
obstacles. They follow tactile walking surface indicators to ﬁnd
routes and intersections. They use all sensory organs they can
use to acquire the surrounding information. They match the
surrounding information with routing information they have, to
ﬁnd their current location and target direction. However, even
if tactile walking surface indicators are installed, it is difﬁcult
for them to visit unknown places because they have no correct
routing information. When they go outside depending on tactile
walking surface indicators, they have to follow them. They cannot
plan their walking routes for themselves in unknown places.
It is impossible for them to walk around various places such
as shopping malls and station concourses as sighted persons,
which is indispensable to enjoy their daily life. In this work, we
propose a method which supports visually handicapped people
to visit and walk around in their unknown places. We use RFID
technologies to achieve voice navigation with the direction to
their destination from their current location and their moving
direction. To verify effectiveness of our system, we navigate
blindfolded people experimentally. In the experiment, we have
conﬁrmed the success rate is 81%
Keywords–RFID; Visually handicapped; Navigation; Sensor;
I.
INTRODUCTION
Though people get most of their surrounding information
using their eyes, visually handicapped have lost their vision.
They cannot spend their life as the same way as sighted
persons. In particular, visually handicapped suffer from many
difﬁculties to go out. Tactile walking surface indicators are
indispensable for visually handicapped to walk outside. They
are paving blocks with uniformly arranged studs. They are
”tactile” because they are detectable with feet at walking.
They are used to alert visually handicapped of hazards, such
as a road cross before moving car trafﬁc or the edge of a
drop at subway station platforms. Visually handicapped use
not only their feet but also white canes to recognize studs of
tactile walking surface indicators. White cane is also used to
ﬁnd the surrounding obstacle. However, tactile walking surface
indicators might bring nuisance to people poor at walking
such as the elderly and persons on wheelchairs. Because of
the nuisance, they not installed all over a town, much less
in wide public spaces where many people come and go in
various directions. Even if tactile walking surface indicators
are installed, it is difﬁcult for visually handicapped to plan
their walking courses for themselves. A support method is
required for visually handicapped to walk wherever they want
like sighted persons.
When visually handicapped go outside, they use all sen-
sory organs which they can use to acquire the surrounding
information. To ﬁnd their current location and target direction,
they compare information they acquire with routing informa-
tion to their destination. However, they do not always have
correct routing information in unknown places. Though several
methods have been proposed to guide visually handicapped
persons[1][2][3], none of them support for them to walk
around unknown places. When they go out in unknown places,
they have to memorize tactile maps or ask familiar sighted
people such as family members or helpers to accompany with
them[4]. It is burdensome for them to memorize tactile maps.
If they ask familiar people to accompany, it is burdensome for
the familiar people to help them. It is necessary to navigate
visually handicapped without burden of their familiar people
or themselves.
In this work, we propose a navigation method to support
visually handicapped persons walking outside like sighted
persons even in unknown places which are not covered with
tactile walking surface indicators. We guide the visually hand-
icapped, presenting the direction to their destination with
voice navigation. We use radio frequency identiﬁer (RFID)
technologies to identify the current location and the moving
direction of them, from which the direction to their destination
is calculated. In the work, a reader is attached on foots to
acquire the ID of tags embedded in ﬂoors of buildings and
roads in outside. Acquired ID of tags allows us to know the
exact location, which derives the exact moving direction. To
navigate visually handicapped, our system conveys direction
to their destination using voice. To verify effectiveness of
our system, we have conducted an experimental to navigate
blindfolded people. In the experiment, we have conﬁrmed the
success rate is 81%.
The following is an outline of the remaining chapters of
this paper. Section II summarizes related works to navigate the
visually handicapped. Section III proposes a model to navigate
the visually handicapped, as well as a method to acquire the
current location and the moving direction for the destination..
Section IV. explains an experiment to navigate blindfolded
people using the proposed method. We also present results,
which are discussed in Section V. Section VI provides the
summary of the work.
II.
RELATED WORKS
Many navigation systems have been proposed for visually
handicapped. To convey information necessary to walk, the
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

systems have to acquire the current location and the mov-
ing direction in a real time manner. A navigation system
is proposed to convey surrounding information using RFID
technologies[5]. This system installs a reader on a white
cane to acquire tags embedded in tactile walking surface
indicators. It matches the acquired ID of a tag with a tag
map recording the location of all embedded tags in order to
the acquire current location and the moving direction. First,
visually handicapped specify their destinations using their
voice when they use this system. Next, system conveys routes
leading to the destinations. They can walk alone using this
system. However, this system has some problems, because it
installs readers on their white canes. First, increase of the white
cane weight enlarges the burden of visually handicapped. Next,
searching embedded tags with white case could cause acci-
dents, because. white canes are also used to detect surrounding
obstacles. The visually handicapped have to search embedded
tags and surrounding obstacle at the same time, when they
use this system. Distracting visually handicapped could cause
accidents. Finally, it is difﬁcult for this system to acquire the
exact location and the exact moving direction. To plan walking
routes, navigation system should acquire the exact location and
the exact moving direction in any place in a real time. To
achieve it, it is necessary to embed tags in the whole of the
ﬂoor and roads. If a reader is installed on a white cane, many
tags are detected irregularly because the visually handicapped
swing it to ﬁnd surrounding obstacles. Therefore, it is difﬁcult
for this system to acquire exact location and the exact moving
direction.
Some navigation systems conveys surrounding information
using Ultra Wide Band (UWB) 　 technologies[6]. In the
systems transmitters are mounted on the ceiling or pillars to
transmit current location to users terminals. Terminals which
receive signals can recognize the current location and the
moving direction anywhere. However, the usage of UWB
technologies is limited in Japan. The radio act in Japan
constrains the use of UWB system only indoors. Therefore,
this system cannot be used in wide public spaces or street in
the outdoors.
III.
NAVIGATION USING TAG BLOCK
A. Landmark Spot and Navigation Area
In this work, we deﬁne a model to allow visually handi-
capped to walk in a town using ﬂat paving blocks in which tags
are embedded. The paving block is studs free to avoid bringing
nuisance to poor walkers likely the elderly and people using
wheel chairs. It is infeasible to embed tags in all position of a
town. We deﬁne two kinds of spaces to navigate the visually
handicapped in terms of their roles. One is a landmark spot,
while the other is a navigation area. To navigate the visually
handicapped, we make the best use of them in accordance to
purposes of navigation. Figure 1 illustrates Landmark Spots
and Navigation Areas. A landmark spot is a space of several
meters square to notify the visually handicapped of a town
landmark such as a crossroads and a host ofﬁce. Landmark
Spots are settled at surroundings of various landmarks all over
the town. The visually handicapped can arrive their destination,
traversing one landmark spot to other on the route to the
destination. Navigation system acquires the current location
and the moving direction of the user in a landmark spot, to
convey the direction to the next landmark spot using voice
Figure 1. Landmark Spots and Navigation Areas
navigation. Landmark spots are settled, skipping from one to
another, to reduce cost. Though it is impossible to navigate
the visually handicapped in a ﬁne grade, is effective measures
to navigate the visually handicapped according to a speciﬁc
route, which consists of sidewalks and narrow streets.
On the other hand, in a navigation area, tags are embedded
all over it to navigate visually handicapped precisely. A nav-
igation area is effective to navigate them in a shopping mall,
the concourse of a big station, and a wide open space like a
plaza. The proposed navigation system conveys the direction
to their destination in a navigation area. The navigation system
acquires the current location and the moving direction of the
user in a real time way for the navigation. The navigation
system conveys the direction to the destination to the visually
handicapped, using a speaker of their handy terminals. The
system can navigate them at any position inside the navigation
area. Users can avoid obstacles and shorten the path to
destination in a navigation area. In this paper, we focus on
a navigation area.
B. Navigation method
In this work, we use RFID technologies to achieve voice
navigation for the visually handicapped. A navigation system
should acquire the current location and the moving direction
of the user in a ﬁne grade. To achieve it, we embed tags in
ﬂat blocks, while a user wear a reader on user shoes. The
detection of tags by the readers attached on shoes allows
the navigation system to acquire the current location and the
moving direction. The readers attached on shoes also make
it possible to use a white cane only for search surrounding
obstacle. Compared with the conventional methods[5] [6],
our method is safer and more in expensive for the visually
handicapped. Figure 2 illustrates the outline of our navigation
method. Readers are installed on the tiptoe of shoes, because
the tiptoe is touching quite frequently. Tags are embedded in
a ﬂat blocks at even intervals like a chessboard. Each tag
is associated with a unique number, which is is bound to
two-dimensional location information. We refer to this block
as a tag block. The navigation system acquires the current
location, consulting the location information corresponding to
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 2. outline of our navigation method
the unique number. The position of the both foot is regarded
as the location information acquired from the readers attached
to the both toes. In each step, the angle from the previous
step of one side foot to the current step is calculated to get
the current moving direction. It is referred to as the angle
of the step. The proposed method calculates it separately left
and right. It takes their average of them. The average is the
moving direction of the user at that time. The method ﬁgures
out the difference of the moving direction from the angle to
the destination. It is converted to the clock position to convey
direction for visually handicapped persons. Clock position is
conveyed to the visually handicapped using voice to navigate
them. The visually handicapped can understand the direction
to destination. The method enables the visually handicapped
to walk around like sighted persons.
C. Current location and moving direction
It is important to acquire correctly the current location and
the moving direction of a walking visually handicapped person
to navigate him. In this work, tags are arranged in a small
distance all over the ground to acquire the precise location.
A navigation system acquires the current location of the user
every step, detecting tags on the ground.
Let P(Xin, Yin) denote the current location at time point
i. Suppose P0(Xi0, Yi0) indicates the user location n steps
before. The user location at any of these n steps is represented
with Pj(Xij, Yij) , where 0 =< j =< n. The moving
direction of one foot is calculated with (1).
θi =
n
∑
j=1
tan−1
(xij − xi0
yij − yi0
)
n
(1)
Figure 3 illustrates how to derive the angle of the step when
n = 3. θi is derived as follows. P0(Xi0, Yi0) is the origin
in the calculation of the angle at every step. The navigation
system creates coordinate plane at every step. Let P0 denote
the coordinate plane. Its origin is P0(Xi0, Yi0). The user stands
at Pj(Xij, Yij) after he takes J steps, where 1 =< j =< n.
Figure 3. how to derive the angle of the step
The navigation system calculates the angle of the vector from
P0 to Pj at every j. It is the angle of the step. Since j varies
from 1 to n, n angle values are obtained every i. Each of them
corresponds to the angle from the ﬁrst step(θ1) to the angle
of the n-th step(θn). The average from (θ1) to (θn) is the
moving direction of one foot at i. The average of the moving
direction of both feet is the moving direction of the user at. We
deﬁne it as (θd). The navigation system calculates (θd) every
step. Sine tags are arranged in a small distance on the ground,
a reader detects several tags at one step. It makes an error
in the calculation of the moving direction. If a reader detects
tags arranging right and left at one step, the navigation system
calculate as if the user turns the right or the left. If reader
detects tags arranging right and left, the navigation system use
only one of them to calculate the moving direction of the user.
Let D(Xg, Yg) denotes the location of the destination. Since
the user currently stand at P, the angle of the vector from P
to D is the one from the current location to the destination.
We refer to it as the destination angle,θig, which is calculated
using (2).
θig = tan−1(xg − xin
yg − yin
)
(2)
The navigation system derives the navigation angle, θt, sub-
tracting θd from θig. It derives θt every step so that it can
navigate the visually handicapped in any time.
D. Navigation using clock position
The conveying method is important to navigate the visually
handicapped persons. Suppose a visually handicapped person
try to reach a speciﬁc destination. The destination is not
necessarily located in the front of the visually handicapped
person. Sometime, it is located in the diagonal right ahead,
while it exits in the just left of the visually handicapped
person in other time. In an open space like a plaza, it is
preferable for him to move to the destination straightforward
without any turn. The visually handicapped cannot understand
abstract navigation, such as advance the diagonal right ahead.
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 4. the position of the starting point, goal point and relay points
It is necessary to navigate the visually handicapped using
special phrases such as the northeast regarding your front as
the north. The clock position is often used by the visually
handicapped. In this work, we use the clock position to lead
the visually handicapped to their destinations straightforward
because we can specify the precise direction with the clock
position. The navigation system should convert the navigation
angle into the clock position. If the moving direction of a
speciﬁc visually handicapped person is equal to the destination
angle, the navigation angle is equal to 0 degree. In the clock
position, 0 degree corresponds to the direction of 12 o ’clock.
Clock position c is calculated using equations (3) (5), where
x is an integer.
c = arg min
1≤x≤12
f(x)
(3)
f(x) = |θl − θx|
(4)
θx =
{
30x
if(1 ≤ x ≤ 6),
−30(12 − x)
if(6 ≤ x ≤ 12),
(5)
IV.
EXPERIMENT
A. Experiment environment
We have conducted an experiment to navigate blindfolded
people using a navigation system based on the proposed
method. We have examined whether the system can navigate
blindfolded people from one point to another. We have navi-
gated 13 male and 2 female subjects. Figure 4 illustrates the
position of the starting point, the goal point and the two relay
points. Before starting, each subject stands at the starting point,
facing relay point 1. In this experiment, we prepare three paths
as follows.
One of the paths is selects randomly for a subject, to
prevent the subject from suspecting the path the subject is
following. In this experiment, we have navigated the subjects
15 times in each path. An arrival is regarded as the entrance of
a subject within a radius of 50cm from the center of the point.
If a subject arrives the goal point using only the navigation
system, we regard that the navigation has succeeded. On
the contrary, we consider the navigation has failed, if the
navigation is stopped to avoid a danger. The effectiveness of
the proposed method is evaluated with the success rate, which
is calculated with (6).
success rate = arriving score
15
(6)
We have used 5 cm square tags in the experiment. Every
tag is installed every 5 cm, being spread over the 4-by-5 meter
ﬂoor. Tags are covered with a plastic sheet. A reader is attached
at the position 5 cm away from the toe of the shoes. In this
experiment, the navigation system uses the recent 3 steps to
calculate the moving direction of the subject.
B. Results
Figure 5 illustrates the success rate of each subject for
every path. The horizontal axis of the graph represents subjects,
while the vertical one represents the arriving score. The aver-
age of the success rate is 95 %, 80 %, and 68% in path 1, path
2, and in path 3, respectively. The maximum of the success
times is 15 in any path. The minimum of the success times is
9, 4, and 3 in path 1, 4 in path 2, and in path 3, respectively.
The navigation is highly reliable in path 1, where each of the
subjects takes a straight way. However, the navigation is not
trustworthy in path 2 and in path 3 where each subject has to
take a turn, compared with in path 1.
V.
DISCUSSION
It is necessary to improve the success ratio in path 2 and
path 3 to navigate the visually handicapped safely. In the
experiment, failures mainly attribute to the following three
causes.
The ﬁrst one is misinterpretation of the clock-position by
subjects. Failures coming from they are found in all paths. All
the subjects are sighted persons, who are unfamiliar with the
clock position. They cannot map the clock position speciﬁed
in navigation messages into the direction to which they should
proceed. Because of the failures in the mapping, they have
And walked incorrectly, which swerves them from the desired
paths.
The second cause is wrong calculation of the navigation
angle by the system. The wrong calculation arises in path 2
and path 3. In the experiment, the navigation system calculates
the navigation angle uses with the foot location in recent
3 steps, assuming a user walks straightforward during the
steps. The calculation gets wrong, if the user changes the
direction rapidly during the steps. The moving direction before
the change works as the inertia for the calculated moving
direction. Actually, a subject turns quickly at the third step
in the experiment. At that time, the system calculates a wrong
value for the navigation angle, because the ﬁrst and the second
step inﬂuence the calculation of the moving direction of the
subject. The calculated moving direction is much closer to
the one before the rapid turning than the actual one after it.
Quick turns of users make the system ﬁgure out erroneous
values for the navigation direction. To deal with the error,
the system should not navigate users when they turns quickly.
Rapid turns can be detected from the movement of each foot.
We move each foot in turn to take a turn. In the turn, the
moving direction of each foot is renewed in turn. When a user
walks straightforward, the angle vector from onestep to the
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 5. the success rate of each subject for every path
Figure 6. the relationships between the success rate and the walking speed
next of the right foot is close to that of the left foot. On the
contrary, the user is considered to take turn, if the vectors differ
with each other. In this work, the navigation system averages
the vectors of each foot to calculate the moving direction.
However, the calculation is valid only when the user walks
straightforward. When the vectors of one foot largely differs
from that of the other, the navigation system should not issue
any navigation message to users to deal with the error in the
calculation of the navigation direction.
The ﬁnal cause is the walking speed of subjects. It takes
place in path 2 and 3. In the experiment, the navigation
system navigates every 3 seconds. If the walking speed of
subjects is fast, the navigation is too late to lead them to
desired directions. Figure 5.1 illustrates the relationships be-
tween the success rate and the walking speed. The horizontal
axis of the scatter diagram is the walking speed, while the
vertical axis represents the success rate. The walking speed
is negatively correlated with the success rate, where . the
correlation coefﬁcient is −0.64. The faster the walking speed,
the lower the success rate. If the walking speed is over 38
cm/sec, the success rate gets worse rapidly. It implies that
it is difﬁcult for subjects to turn at relay points, when they
are walking the speed over 38 cm/s. To address the problem,
the navigation system has to conveys voice messages more
frequently. However, the visually handicapped persons would
get too enormous information to respond properly, if the
navigation system conveys voice messages more frequently.
The navigation system should changes the frequency of the
navigation in response to the working speed of users.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this work, we have proposed a navigation method to
support the visually handicapped persons walking around like
sighted persons in their unknown places. On a landmark spot,
the navigation system leads the visually handicapped to proper
routes while suppressing cost. In a navigation area, it directly
navigates them to the destination with the clock position. The
method founds on RFID technologies to get precisely the
current location and the moving direction of users. It ﬁgures
out the navigation direction to their destination from their
current location and the moving direction.
To verify effectiveness of the system, we have an ex-
periment to navigate blindfolded people. The average of the
success rate in the straightforward path, is 95% ,while that in
paths containing turns is 68%. It is necessary to improve the
precision to navigate the visually handicapped persons safely
routes where they have to turn. The paper has discussed the
causes of failures in the navigation to improve the precision.
The discussion suggests additional studies to solve issues to
improve the precision.
REFERENCES
[1]
V. Kulyukin, C. Gharpure, and J. Nicholson, RoboCart: Toward robot-
assisted navigation of grocery stores by the visually impaired, Proceed-
ings. IEEE/RSJ International Conference on of Intelligent Robots and
Systems, 2005, pp. 2845 - 2850.
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[2]
A. Helal, S. E. Moore, and B. Ramachandran, Drishti: an integrated
navigation system for visually impaired and disabled, Proceedings. Fifth
International Symposium on Wearable Computers, 2001pp. 149 - 156.
[3]
V. Kulyukin, C. Gharpure, J. Nicholson, and S. Pavithran, RFID in
robot-assisted indoor navigation for the visually impaired, Proceedings.
2004 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems, (IROS 2004), 2004, pp. 1979 - 1984.
[4]
Syed Rizal Alfam Wan Alwi and Mohamad Noh Ahmad: Survey on
Outdoor Navigation System Needs for Blind People, IEEE Student Con-
ference on Research and Development (SCOReD),Putrajaya, Malaysia,
December 16 -17, 2013, pp. 144 - 148.
[5]
Tatsuya Seto and Kazushige Magatani:A navigation system for the
visually impaired using colored navigation lines and RFID tags, IEEE
EMBS Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, September 2-6, 2009, pp. 831 -
834.
[6]
T. H. Riehle,P. Lichter,N. A. , Giudice:An Indoor Navigation System
to Support the Visually Impaired, IEEE EMBS Conference Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada, August 20-24, 2008, pp. 4435 - 4438.
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

