Assessment of Sensor Technologies for  
Gate-Based Object Counting 
Colin Leslie,  Alex Vakaloudis, Kostas Anagnostopoulos, Nikolaos Chalikias, Jian Lang 
Nimbus Centre Cork Institute of Technology 
 Cork Ireland 
{colin.leslie,  alex.vakaloudis, kostas.anagnostopoulos, nikolaos.chalikias, jian.liang }@cit.ie
 
 
Abstract— On the area of automating object counting, we 
concentrate on uniform, disposable products stored on a pile, 
queue or a stack (e.g., a shelf) and examine a number of 
different technologies for sensing input and output through a 
gate to the storage area. We define a set of comparison criteria 
with practical flavor in order to examine and evaluate twelve 
different types of sensors. The intention for our study is to 
form a baseline for anyone needing to implement gate-based 
input/output control. 
Keywords: sensor evaluation; gate control; evaluation of 
sensor technologies 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Product counting is an important aspect of stock control 
and may take many forms depending on the material being 
stocked and counted [4]. Automating this process of object 
counting can bring many benefits by simplifying the renewal 
process, eliminating errors etc. [2].  
In this paper, we concentrate on the context of a gate-
based, disposable material placed in a casing, stored in a pile 
or queue in and examine the case-study of detecting the 
addition or removal of a product and consequently 
calculating reliably the number of items in stock. The 
question this paper deals with is assessing the different types 
of sensors available for automating this process. Towards 
this objective a set of criteria with a practical orientation is 
defined [5].  
Under this perspective, the paper is organized as follows. 
Section II describes current techniques in Supply-Chain 
Management (SCM) and Section III records the factors for 
sensor assessment. Section IV discusses the different types 
of sensors giving a brief definition and listing their 
advantages and disadvantages with reference to the 
assessment factors. This critique is subsequently summarized 
and we finish with outlining a case study and listing 
conclusions and pointers to future work. 
II. 
RELATED  WORK 
Most of the today’s stock control systems use extensive 
use of Radio-frequency identification (RFID) technology [1] 
[2] due to the effective way of recording movement of 
objects within a networked system [3]. In these systems the 
stock control is achieved automatically by the information 
system that supports the Supply-Chain Management (SCM) 
and unauthorized removal of an object is detected by 
electronic gates that monitor continuously the physical entry 
points of the area that the system is installed. To add system 
intelligence, traditional RFID based SCM are integrated with 
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) [4] [5]. These systems 
incorporate advanced sensing technologies while for the 
monitoring of the position of an object, we could use 
localization techniques. 
The above practices though, are applied in large scale 
deployments and are not cost effective for ad hoc or small 
scale deployments. They require changes in the existing 
physical infrastructure and the deployment of sophisticated 
Information Systems for which the support cost is not 
insignificant.  
SCM systems are expensive because of the nature of the 
sensors (RFID) that are deployed and the extensive features 
that are available nowadays. The cost of the SCM is high and 
the problem we set in this paper is the monitoring of stock in 
a pile or queue. The basic requirements are  
 
1. low cost solution,  
2. easily deployable, and  
3. no 
modifications 
in 
the 
existing 
physical 
infrastructure.   
III. 
SENSOR EVALUATION FRAMEWORK 
As mentioned above our assessment has a practical 
orientation and envisages the scenario when products such as 
cans or bottles are stores on shelves, stacks or piles. The 
main, driving requirement of our assessment is to be able to 
count adding or removing products in a reliable way defined 
as  
1. Reject false positives, for example the hand of 
the carrier is not measured as a product. 
2. Spot attempts of cheating, for instance trying to 
extract a product from an input-only entrance. 
3. Work 
under 
environments 
that 
can 
be 
cold/warm  and/or wet (e.g., freezer) 
 
Under this context, we define the assessment factors of 
Table 1 under which the different types of sensors are 
evaluated and consider two main areas namely, usability and 
technology.  The rationale behind this partition is that in an 
industrial setting the decision makers are usually business 
people who are interested in the costs of the sensors and the 
installation process and technical personnel who focus on 
suitability of the sensor from a technical perspective. We 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

decided not to assign weights to these criteria in order to 
leave the decision making open to each case-study.  
TABLE I.  
CONSIDERATIONS DRIVING EVALUATION 
Usability Considerations 
Cost 
 
Installation procedure 
Purchase 
pricing 
per 
unit 
of 
coverage, e.g., per shelf 
Proven in Industry 
Technical 
expertise 
and 
time 
required contributes to ease of use 
Technical Considerations 
Power consumption 
Influences simplicity of installation 
and ease of use 
Form Factor 
Could 
turn 
particular 
choices 
inappropriate 
for 
certain 
applications 
Robustness 
Working in diverse (e.g., wet, 
warm) environments 
Reliability 
Detecting false positive/negatives, 
e.g., human hand 
Integration  
 
 
IV. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
This section lists twelve different types of sensors we 
identified as suitable for gate-based object counting.  Due to 
space constraints, it outlines the way each sensor operates, 
where our survey has revealed that it is mainly used and 
what are the main advantages and disadvantages.  
A. Capacitive Sensors 
Capacity sensors detect changes in their electric field to 
estimate proximity. Industrial Style Sensors detect objects 
passing under/past them. They are widely used in large Form 
Factors and appear in a number of different packages, 
suitable mostly for manufacturing lines. They are relatively 
cheap and can operate under harsh environments. They rely 
on power supply and while they can be in due course 
accurate, their calibration can be very tricky and lengthy 
process requiring software intelligence. 
B. Capacitive array sensors 
Capacitive Arrays are placed on the “floor” side and 
sense an object placed on it. A modern analogy on how they 
operate is how a Smart Phone screen detects touch. They are 
a fairly novel technique and being innovative they are not yet 
industry proven and therefore risky. Occupying a whole side, 
they could be an accurate solution and filter false positives. 
However, they may not work well in potentially wet 
environment and would require employing a clever 
grounding mechanism.  
C. Inductive Sensors 
In a method similar to capacitive sensors, inductive 
sensors employ changes in their magnetic field to pinpoint 
proximity to detect proximity and hence measure distance of 
metal objects. Industrial variants have the same type of form 
factors as capacitive sensors and for all intents and purposes, 
operate the same as Industrial Capacitive Sensors but only 
detect metal objects.  
They are also proven in industry, are accurate, come in 
robust packaging and large form factors, suitable mostly for 
manufacturing lines. Most important could only work with 
products of a metal element like metal caps. 
D. Ultrasonic Sensors 
Ultrasonic sensors transmit a sound wave (“Ping”) of 
ultrasonic frequency and measure the time it takes for the 
wave to return in order to measure distance. They are widely 
used in both industrial and hobby circles and come in 
different form factors. A simple everyday day example of the 
technology is reversing sensors on modern cars.  
They are accurate and cheap but potentially inaccurate 
since they would for example count employee hands. 
E. Camera-based Sensors 
A camera can be paired with a smart controller to detect 
patterns, shapes or colours to detect objects entering a 
storage area. The camera could be trained to watch for a 
distinctive feature of the object, for instance a branding logo, 
a characteristic shape or a specific colour.  
With the appropriate software processing, cameras could 
be extremely accurate. Nevertheless they are a complex 
solution. Cameras are an expensive and sensitive component 
and they would need a more powerful MCU to process 
images while also being susceptible to environmental 
changes, such as lighting. 
F. Switch Technologies 
The usage of simple mechanical switches positioned in a 
way that they switch and count objects as they enter or exit 
the storage area. They are scalable; one can use just 1 on 
each point of entry/exit or an array of switches to reduce the 
chance of false switching and infer direction.  
An interesting aspect is a rotary encoder to detect 
direction as well as actuation. Switches are reliable and 
simple, proven in industry and a very cheap solution. Since 
they require power only when activated, they consume 
minimum power. Although they cannot differentiate between 
object and detect false positives if placed in clever way they 
can minimize such occurrences. They are easy to install and 
replace. 
G. Magnetic switches 
These can be described as small, mechanical switches 
encapsulated in a small glass or plastic enclosure, activated 
by changes in the magnetic field. They are more reliable and 
space efficient to the simple mechanical switches and are 
used in industrial applications. They are cheap, however 
could be fragile especially the ones with the glass enclosure. 
H. Hall-effect switches 
They come in the form of integrated circuits, also 
activated by changes in a magnetic field. They are smaller 
and more sensitive than the magnetic switches and therefore 
can achieve better performance. They are available in analog 
and digital form providing higher resolution and can detect 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

not only presence but also distance and speed (through 
change). Also proven in industry, they add a degree of 
complexity compared to other solution since they are an 
electronic 
component 
with 
power 
and 
enclosure 
requirements.  
I. 
Optical Sensors 
There are various types of optical sensors, two of which 
are applicable in our domain of interest. The first are 
Interrupt Beam type sensors, where the transmitting beam 
and receiving sensor are placed opposite each other. When 
the object passes the beam the interrupted beam would cause 
a switch. 
The other choice are  reflected Beam type Sensors, where 
the transmitter and receiver are next to each other and the 
changed angle of the reflected beam is detected when an 
object passes through it. 
Optical sensors have no mechanical parts, so virtually 
there is no wear. They have many industrial variants that are 
well proven and can be easily simplified to a light source and 
photodiode. They may have very small form factors. Their 
performance though, may be erratic not be able to detect 
different opacities or false positives. 
J. 
Strain gauge 
Load cells are a practical application of Strain Gauges. 
Ultimately, they measure weight; they consist of an array of 
piezoelectric materials that generate a voltage proportional to 
the stress applied. There exist three types worth considering: 
a. 
Bending Beam  
b. Shear Beam 
c. 
Pancake Cell  
This solution would be the most accurate representation 
of how many objects are in a storage area if these objects 
have uniform weight. Since it counts objects individually, it 
would have the least number of false positives. They are in 
cheap price if bending or shear beam but they need to be 
customized for different products. 
K. Barcode 
A barcode is an optical machine-readable representation 
of data relating to the object to which it is attached. 
Originally barcodes systematically represented data by 
varying the widths and spacing of parallel lines, and may be 
referred to as linear or one-dimensional (1D) [6]. In order to 
use barcode sensors extensive rework must happen to the 
mechanical part of the system in order the items to leave 
from a particular exit and with a certain orientation so that 
the sensor would be able to identify them correctly. The 
implementation of the sensors is cost effective since low-end 
microcontrollers have the necessary processing power to 
cope with the algorithm of the barcode decoding [7].  
L. QR code 
A QR code [8] consists of black modules (square dots) 
arranged in a square grid on a white background, which can 
be read by an imaging device (such as a camera) and 
processed using Reed–Solomon error correction until the 
image can be appropriately interpreted; data is then extracted 
from patterns present in both horizontal and vertical 
components of the image [7]. The need for a camera in order 
to capture the image makes the technique expensive, while 
the algorithms in order to decode the QR code are quite 
sophisticated [9]. 
V. 
CASE-STUDY AND DISCUSSION  
Our survey outlines twelve different types of sensors. 
Table 2 presents in an organised format our findings which 
generated the following outcomes: 
1. Although some are relative to each other (e.g., QR and 
Barcode), the number of different available approaches 
makes evident that even in quite specialised situations, 
an optimum solution could be achieved exactly because 
of the sheer quantity of solutions. 
2. Cost does not appear to be a forbidding factor for any of 
the technologies, switch-based approaches seem to be 
the most suitable when cost and simplicity are the main 
requirements.  
3. Sensors are available in three forms, namely, 
mechanical, magnetic mechanical and half-effect 
providing different levels of sensitivity.   
4. As Internet of Things (IoT) grows in importance, 
choosing the right technology of sensor to link to the 
communication module of an IoT device will also be 
pivotal.  
5. Requirements, such as power consumption and 
durability will player a major role as well as 
compatibility among modules and the existence of a 
communication protocol or a feasibility to create one. 
 
This research is currently investigating the applicability of 
these solutions using as a case-study shelves in which objects 
embedded in a cylinder shaped boxes are stored. The setup is 
located in the lab setting and is used to organize and store 
any material used by the Nimbus centre researchers, ranging 
from chips to small mechanical and wooden tools. Placing 
them inside a cylinder box ensures uniformity and eases 
stock control. Moreover it is a shape that is compatible with 
switches, capacitive arrays, QR code and optical sensors. 
Different shelves with the twelve sensors are used to 
measure their reliability, endurance, easiness of installation 
and sensitivity.   The results up to now indicate that the 
mechanical switches suit better. They perform better in the 
sense of minimum cases of false positives and false 
negatives especially when they are used in numbers to verify 
each other’s triggering. The capacitive arrays also provide 
accurate measurements however their installation process is 
longer and need to be refitted for every new shelf.  The 
optical sensors require the usage or development of extra 
software to filter out hand movements of the hand placing 
objects in our out of the shelf.   Finally, the QR and barcode 
choices need special care from the user to scan the code and 
from the system to give feedback (e.g., sound). 
This case-study, while installed in a lab environment can 
be classified as pre-production because of the volume of use 
and the number of users. However, we acknowledge that 
additional levels of testing are needed to extract more results 
and also test different setups.   
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper examined the applicability of twelve different 
types of sensors in facilitating gate input/output control of 
simple, every day products. As requirements and their 
gravity vary on each application, there is no single preferred 
solution. It is remarkable however how technologies of 
diverse orientation could be applied to solve a single 
problem. 
Current and future research work involves not only the 
further specification of the assessment factors but the 
application of techniques, such as fuzzy logic with sets 
associating factors and sensors and different fuzzy rules to 
apply in order to get a qualitative or quantitative marking. 
This will enable to objectify the suitability of every sensor 
technology for specific application needs. We also intend to 
extend this study and perform quantitative analysis with 
specific application domains. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Engel, S. Lunow, J. Fischer, F. Kobler, S. Goswami, H. 
Krcmar. “Value Creation in Pharmaceutical Supply Chains 
using Customer-Centric RFID Applications”, Proceedings of 
2012 European Conference on Smart Objects, Systems and 
Technologies, 2012. pp 1-8. 
[2] Y. Miaji, M.A.A Mohamed, and N. B. Daud, “RFID Based 
Improving Supply Chain Traceability”, Proceeding of the 
2013 IEEE International Conference on RFID Technologies 
and Application, 2013, pp. 1-6. 
[3] Y. Wu, D. Ranasinghe, Q. Sheng, S. Zeadally, J. Yu, “RFID 
enabled traceability networks: a survey”, Distributed and 
Parallel Databases October 2011 vol. 29 pp. 397-443. 
[4] L. Evers, P. Havinga, J. Kuper, and M.E.M. Lijding,   
“SensorScheme: Supply Chain Management Automation 
using Wireless Sensor Networks”, IEEE Conference on 
Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, 2007  pp. 
448-455. 
[5] S. Vellingiri, A. Ray and M. Kande, “Wireless Infrastructure 
for Oil and Gas Inventory Management”, 39th IEEE Annual 
Conference of Industrial Electronics IECON 2013 pp. 5461-
5466. 
[6] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barcode, June 2014 
[7] X. Wang, J. Liu, H. Yi, “Design of Multifunctional Barcode 
System Based on MEGA128L”, Automation and Systems 
Engineering (CASE) 2011 International Conference on 
Control pp. 1-4. 
[8] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QR_code , June 2014 
[9] Y. Liu, J. Yang, M. Liu, “Recognition of QR Code with 
Mobile Phones” Chinese Control and Decision Conference 
2008 pp. 203-206. 
 
Table II.  SYNOPSIS OF SENSORS AND THEIR FEATURES 
 
Sensor 
Costing 
Installatio
n 
Industry 
Power 
Form  
Robustness 
Reliability 
Capacitive Sensor 
Cheap 
medium 
complexity 
Bottling and 
Manufacturing plants 
High 
Small to 
Medium 
High 
High if no unpredicted 
obstacles 
Capacitive Array 
Cheap 
complex / 
difficult 
None 
High 
Small to 
Large 
Medium 
Unproven 
Inductive Sensor 
Cheap 
medium 
complexity 
Manufacturing 
Bottling  
High 
Small to 
Medium 
High 
High 
Ultrasonic Sensor 
cheap to 
medium 
medium 
Diverse 
Medium 
to High 
Small to 
Large 
Low to 
High 
High if no unpredicted 
obstacles 
Optical Interrupt 
Beam 
medium to 
expensive 
medium 
People Counting 
Bottling and 
Manufacturing plants 
Medium 
to High 
Medium 
High 
High if no unpredicted 
obstacles 
Optical Reflected 
Bean 
medium to 
expensive 
medium 
Bottling and 
Manufacturing plants 
Medium 
to High 
Medium 
High 
High if no unpredicted 
obstacles 
QR 
Expensive 
Medium 
Diverse 
High 
Medium 
Low to 
High 
High 
Optical Camera 
expensive 
difficult 
None 
High 
Big 
Low to 
High 
High 
Mechanical 
Switch 
Cheap 
easy 
Diverse, Variety of 
equipment and 
applications 
No  
Small 
Low to 
High 
High if no unpredicted 
obstacles 
Magnetic Switch 
Cheap 
easy 
Diverse, Variety of 
equipment and 
applications 
No  
Small 
Low to 
Medium 
High 
Hall-effect Switch 
Cheap 
easy 
Diverse, Variety of 
equipment and 
applications 
No 
Small 
Medium to 
High 
High 
Weight Load Cell 
cheap to 
expensive 
difficult 
Weighing scales, Mini 
Bar fridges,  
Low 
Small to 
Large 
Low to 
High 
High 
Barcode  
cheap to 
expensive 
medium 
Diverse 
High 
Small to 
Medium 
Low to 
High 
High 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

