Capillary Sensor with Fluorescence Reading of Effects of Diesel and Biodiesel Fuel 
Degradation in Storage 
 
Michal Borecki 
Institute of Microelectronics and Optoelectronics 
Warsaw University of Technology 
Warsaw, Poland 
email: borecki@imio.pw.edu.pl 
Mateusz Gęca 
Institute of Electron Technology 
Warsaw, Poland 
email: mati.geca@gmail.com 
Michael L. Korwin-Pawlowski 
Département d’informatique et d’ingénierie 
Université du Québec en Outaouais 
Gatineau, Québec, Canada 
email: Michael.Korwin-Pawlowski@uqo.ca 
Przemysław Prus 
Blue Oak Inventions  
Wroclaw, Poland 
email: pprus@boinv.com 
 
Abstract-There 
are 
many 
standards 
set 
by 
national 
organizations and fuel producers to test and guarantee the 
quality of diesel fuel and its stability under storage conditions. 
The diesel fuel stability is related with the fuel composition that 
evolved to the modern fuels from the historical ones. The 
stability of modern diesel fuel is mainly due to the reduction of 
the oxidation processes, the result of the presence of 
unsaturated components and components with oxygen as 
organic components and cetane index improvers. The simple 
characteristic of serious degradation of diesel fuel is the 
appearance of resins and sediments. Traditional techniques for 
measuring fuel stability, like the rancimat methods, are 
relatively complex. On the user side, fast and low-cost sensing 
of the degradation of diesel and biodiesel fuel is important. The 
present paper concentrates on the construction of the capillary 
sensor which enables the examination of the presence of resin 
and degradation of the most widely used cetane improver (2-
ethyl hexyl nitrate) in one arrangement. Results of a 
development of a sensor working on the principle of 
fluorescence excited in a disposable capillary cell with high 
power light emitted diodes are presented. We discuss the 
principle of the sensor’s operation, the construction of the 
sensor, and the experimental results of testing diesel fuels 
instability. 
Keywords-biodiesel fuel stability; diesel fuel instability; 
cetane index improvers; capillary sensor; LED excited 
fluorescence.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A. Modern diesel fuels 
Classical petro-diesel fuels are made from stable 
components of straight run distillate products of crude oil 
(alkanes) with an addition of improvers [1]. Biodiesel fuel is 
a mixture of classical petro-diesel fuel and bio-components.  
It was historically postulated that petro-diesel fuel may 
be kept in storage for prolonged periods. But modern petro-
diesel fuels include stable components (alkanes) and cracked 
material which contains olefins (alkenes) characterized by a 
double bond chemical. Alkenes are more reactive than 
alkanes. Bio-diesel components include significant amounts 
of fatty acids esters that are also characterized by the 
presence of double bonds. Oxidation of hydrocarbons with 
double bonds may lead to waxy solids or gums emerge [2]. 
One of the most important diesel fuel quality parameters 
is the ignition quality. The ignition quality depends on the 
molecular composition of the fuel and is characterized by the 
ignition delay time, which is the time between the start of 
injection and the start of combustion. The minimum cetane 
number of diesel fuel differs by region, for example in 
Europe the minimum value is 51, but in some regions of 
United States it is 40. In Europe, the major problem of the 
refineries is obtaining fuel with high cetane number.  
There are two methods to increase the cetane number. 
The first method is to reduce the content of aromatic and/or 
double bonds of fuel by hydrogenation - this is usually not 
done because of a high cost. The second method is using 
cetane improving additives – this method is preferred due to 
its low cost [3]. The alkyl nitrates and peroxides cetane 
improvers have been in use since 1921. Cetane improvers 
decompose rapidly and form free radicals when exposed to 
temperatures above 100°C. As these radicals increase the 
rate of main fuel components decomposition, the ignition 
delay is negatively affected. The use of cetane improvers in 
diesel fuel of high quality increases the engine durability [4].  
The 2-ethyl hexyl nitrate (2-EHN) is the most popular 
cetane index additive. Its production volume in 2014 was 
about 100,000 tons. The ASTM D 4046 standard test method 
is used for determining the amount of alkyl nitrate added to 
diesel fuel to judge compliance with specifications covering 
alkyl nitrates. Unimolecular decomposition of 2-EHN creates 
nitrogen dioxide (NO2), which further reacts with available 
hydrogen atoms to produce hydroxyl radicals. This effect is 
greatest at temperature and density conditions, matching the 
start-up conditions in a diesel engine, and becomes 
negligible at the highest temperature–density conditions 
found in standard engine working conditions [7]. On the 
other hand, the addition of 2-EHN to fuel improves the spray 
formation in diesel engines [8]. Therefore, 2-EHN performs 
well physically and chemically during the combustion of 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

fuel, but can also decompose slowly even at temperatures 
below 100°C [9]. Thus, 2-EHN can be an additional reason 
of the fuel instability, introducing temperature instability and 
being the initiator and promotor of oxidation of fuel.  
The results of diesel fuel instability are sediments and 
gum formation. The bio-diesel fuel has been found to be 
more prone to oxidation than the vegetable oils or petro-
diesel fuel. The effects of bio-diesel fuel instability may be 
the presence in the fuel tank of a wide variety of alcohols, 
aldehydes, peroxides, polymers, as well as the previously 
mentioned insoluble gum and sediments. The results of 
polymer and soluble waxes formation is the increase in the 
diesel fuel viscosity [5]. The changes in molecular 
composition of fuel affect its ignition characteristics. 
Therefore, fuel instability is of concern when the modern 
diesel fuel is stored over an extended period of time. Diesel 
fuel stability may be affected by a large number of 
parameters which can be categorized by oxidation, thermal 
and storage conditions [2]. The storage conditions can be 
described as exposure to air and/or light at the environment 
temperature. Oxidative properties of biodiesel are commonly 
tested according to the EN 14112 standard as rancimat and 
Iodine values, but several other methods have also been used 
in the analysis of oxidation state of oil and biodiesel [6].  
The visible effects of serious diesel fuel instability may 
be described as fuel darkening and sediments presence, as 
presented in Figure 1, on which the degradation is the effect 
of two years fuels samples storage in transparent glass 
vessels exposed to ambient light at room temperature. The 
sediments and darkening are present in cases of premium 
(Cetane Number = 59.6) and standard fuel (Cetane Number 
= 54.1) bought at a fuel station, while the own-mixed fuel 
does not seem affected by instability. All fuels above the 
formed sediment layer are transparent. The own-mixed fuel 
at the beginning of the examination was characterized by a 
worse fit for use parameters than the fuels bought at the fuel 
station. However, the mixed fuel was prepared with clear and 
fresh 
components 
with 
the 
maximum 
permissible 
concentration of antioxidants and the smallest concentration 
of 2-EHN (Cetane Number = 51.2). Some fuels prepared in 
such way show visual effects of instability as a conversion 
into pale and cloudy liquid. The visible effects of four weeks 
exposition to ambient light of premium fuel are presented in 
Figure 2. At first, the fuel instability process leads to fuel 
fading and cloudiness, next the dark phase forms at vessel’s 
bottom and separates from the clear fuel. Hence simple a fuel 
color evaluation is not sufficient for fuel instability 
discrimination. 
 
Figure 1.  Visible effects of fuel instability. 
 
Figure 2.  Visible effects of premium fuel cloudiness after exposition to 
ambient light for four weeks. Fuel sample in the left side container has 
been exposed to light. The sample in right side container has been keept in 
dark conditions. 
B. Optical methods and sensors for diesel fuel testing 
These are a set of spectrophotometric method used for 
diesel fuel testing. The examinations of light absorption, 
scattering, 
fluorescence, 
and 
chemiluminescence 
are 
performed. Some of them are executed in a combustion 
chamber as evidence of the combustion process [10][11]. 
Many of them are performed on processed diesel fuel sample 
and include a tedious liquid to liquid extraction with organic 
solvents. Biodiesel and diesel fuels show native fluorescence 
[12], but with very limited excitation efficiency. However, 
the diesel fuel may contain many fluorophores. The task of 
the determination of the fuel`s condition is further 
complicated by the fact that the fluorophores have different 
characteristic excitation and emission ranges in different 
samples. Despite this, ultraviolet fluorescence spectroscopy 
methods were developed to identify oils by the differences of 
their aromatic compositions. For this purpose, advanced 
measurement technology as synchronous fluorescence 
spectroscopy and time-resolved fluorescence have been 
developed. They demonstrate an improved potential for 
classification of fuels than the classic fluorescence 
spectroscopy [13][14]. But presently available spectroscopic 
methods are still characterized with some disadvantages. 
Mathematical models proposed to convert spectroscopic 
examination results into diesel fuel set of parameters work 
only with known and examined previously components [15]. 
Also, plastic disposable cuvettes are not fit for examination 
as they are slowly dissolved by diesel fuel. Quartz cuvettes 
used 
in 
spectroscopic 
examination 
require 
precise 
maintenance between measurements. The light sources are 
costly when as laser or lamp excitation is used. Despite these 
drawbacks, dedicated components for spectroscopic sensors 
are under development [16][17]. 
Alternative methods to spectroscopy, which include an 
examination of diesel fuel with local heating in a closed 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

capillary vessel and the examination of the dynamical rise of 
fuel in a inclined capillary, show a potential of a fast fuel fit 
for use determination [18-22]. Also, for these methods 
dedicated components have been developed [23][24]. 
But in the routine daily work, the transport business still 
demands the development of new rapid and low-cost sensors 
for reliable determination of fuel fit for use or fuel 
degradation below usefulness.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the idea of a multiparametric sensor for diesel fuel 
instability effects testing. Section III describes the sensor 
construction including sensor head with optrode as well as 
optoelectronics system set-up. Section IV addresses the 
experimental results of the fluorescent signal analysis. 
Section V goes into short conclusions.  
 
II. IDEA OF A MULTIPARAMETRIC SENSOR FOR DIESEL 
FUEL INSTABILITY EFFECTS TESTING  
The idea of the sensor was inspired by the need to come 
up with a low-cost measurement method of a set of diesel 
fuel instability effects in one system that would require the 
minimum of automated mechanical elements.  
The aimed-at set of diesel fuel parameters includes the 
initial state of oxidation and the serious instability effects. 
Both effects are characterized by a transparent liquid state. 
As the fuel is transparent the both fraction may be mixed 
resulting in a visibly uniform color of the fuel. The 
cloudiness of fuel is considered as an intermediate state and 
can be easily determined by human observation or with 
white light scattering measurements. 
The initial state of oxidation may be connected with  
2-EHN degradation that should lead to a reduction of its 
concentration. The concentration of 2-EHN may be 
evaluated with the direct analysis of fluorescence signal 
excited with 366nm wavelength light, selected from the 
output of the xenon discharge light source of 150W power 
with a 3nm slit [15]. Due to the relatively low power of the 
signal, the detection is made with a photon multiplying tube. 
The exit signal with a characteristic shape of double-hump is 
in the range from 380nm to 450nm.  
The serious effect of fuel instability is the presence in it 
of soluble and insoluble gums. Insoluble gums create 
sediments in tanks, while soluble gums can degrade the 
injection system. The laser inducted fluorescence, with 
argon-ion laser operating at 488 nm with the constant power 
of 100mW used as the excitation source, is presently the 
proven measurement method [25]. Due to high laser power, 
the detection is performed with a photodiode array. The 
emitted signals range from 510nm to 750nm with a 
maximum at 570nm. For the real fuels, there was always 
observed some background fluorescence, but its intensity 
was usually low compared to that of the degraded fuel. 
Both the fluorescent measurements were performed in 
our work in standard fluorescence cuvettes, 10mm x 10mm x 
45mm. A cuvette was mounted in place with a shielded 
holder, which also minimized scattered light from the cuvette 
input and output faces. The aperture for the fluorescence 
measurement was 7mm in the central portion of the cuvette. 
III. 
SENSOR CONSTRUCTION 
A. Sensor head 
The set of parameters of interest may be observed using 
the fluorescence excited with 488nm and 366nm radiation in 
the sample of liquid positioned in a capillary vessel using 
optical fibers as probes (Figure 3).  
 
 
Figure 3.  Scheme of the capillary sensor head. 
The use of capillary reduces significantly costs of 
measurement and in two ways.  
First, the measurement of degraded diesel fuel that is 
characterized by the presence of adhesive gums required the 
use of disposable cuvettes or a specific cleaning and washing 
process. Moreover, disposable plastic cuvettes are affected 
by diesel and biodiesel fuels. Therefore, the capillary optrode 
CV7087Q is used here as a replaceable and disposable vessel 
that is of considerably lower cost than a classical 
fluorescence cuvette. 
When a capillary optrode CV7087Q is considered, the 
approximated 
fluorescent 
aperture 
is 
0.7mm. 
This 
fluorescent aperture is 10 times lower than when a classical 
cuvette is used. Therefore, the optical power used for 
excitation of fluorescence in the proposed head may be 
significantly lower (100 times) than when a commercial 
spectrophotometer is used. In the case of the laser inducted 
fluorescence and a spectroscopic cuvette, the excitation 
power is about 100mW. Therefore, in the presented case the 
high power light emitted diodes can be used as their minimal 
specified powers are 3mW from M365FP1 working at 
365nm range, and 1.5mW from M490F2 working at 490nm.  
The FG550LEC step-index multimode fiber was used as 
the light probe, as it enables positioning of the optical axis of 
the probes and the optrode in one plane. Moreover, the fiber 
is characterized by a 550µm diameter of the core, which 
allows the effective coupling with high power light emitting 
diodes, and a low numerical aperture, that reduces the 
fluorescent aperture of the head. This fiber is characterized 
by high attenuation below 400nm, but in the sections used of 
0.5m long, the attenuation is acceptable.  
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The head was also equipped with a temperature sensor 
made with LM35DT circuits. 
B. Optoelectronic system set-up. 
The sensor’s head consists of two functional blocks: the 
head proper and the optoelectronic set-up, shown in Figure 4.  
The optoelectronic set-up is divided into two parts, the 
light source and light detector, both connected to a personal 
computer equipped with spectra acquisition software and 
system script designed for measurement automation. 
As the light source, two fiber-coupled LEDs were used. 
The high power LEDs selected were Thorlabs M490F2, with 
the 490nm dominant wavelength and M365F1 with the 
365nm dominant wavelength. The diodes were connected to 
DC2100 controllers operating in the constant current mode.  
The diodes were coupled into the optical fiber switch of 
our own design, presented in [26].  
The head was connected to two spectrometers Maya 
2000pro with an optical signal divider. This enables 
simultaneous monitoring of the signal of light emitted diode 
and of the excited fluorescence. The fluorescence signal is 
measured in a 6-fibers arm, while the excitation signal uses a 
1-fiber arm. 
The system element causing the highest light damping 
was the DMC1-02 monochromator, the attenuation of which 
is about 1:1000 at analyzed wavelengths.  
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
In this section are presented the experimental procedures 
and the results of examination of different diesel and 
biodiesel fuels.  
The measurement procedure consists of a few steps. 
First, the background signal of for the empty optrode is 
measured, then the optrode is directly filled from the desired 
layer of the fuel in the tank and the outer optrode wall is 
wiped. Next, the signal of fluorescence is measured. Last, the 
spectra are calculated as the difference between the 
fluorescence and the background signals.  
A. Diesel and biodiesel fuels used for examination 
The operation of the sensor was examined with fuels that 
are bought at a petrol station and with mixtures prepared 
from components.  These fuels were not aged. Reference 
fuels were stored at room temperature in glass tanks in 
closed dark containers exposed to natural light. The fuel 
samples that are subject to degradation were stored in 
transparent glass tanks also exposed the same light. The 
exposition was made on a windowsill with direct sun view 
on from south direction in Warsaw. The short term aging of 
4 weeks duration was performed in winter conditions of 
sunlight, for visible effects see Figure 2. Fuels aged for two 
years were exposed to full year cycles, visible effects can be 
observed in Figure 1.  
The four different premium diesel fuels were selected for 
tests. One was a clear mixture of alkanes with no additives 
(CN=49.8), and the three others were mixtures of petrodiesel 
with additives including 2EHN – one commercial with no 
bio-component (CN=59.6) and two with a bio-component, 
one with 1% of fatty acids methyl esters (FAME) (CN=59.1) 
and second with 7% of hydrogenated vegetable oil (HVO) 
(CN=59.2). The standard commercial diesel fuel includes 7% 
of FAME (CN=54.1). 
B. Boundary examinations  
Boundary examinations included measurements of 
fluorescence of fresh fuels and two years aged fuels. In all 
mentioned in this section cases, the outer walls of the 
capillaries were cleaned after the test. Spectra of fresh fuels, 
scanned with a 1-second time frame of scanning, and excited 
with 366nm wavelength, were presented in Figure 5. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Sensor system scheme. 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
Figure 5.  Spectra of fresh fuels excited with 366nm wavelength. 
As stated previously, the excitation and fluorescence 
signals differ significantly, but the signal received from  
2-EHN is relatively high. The 2-EHN signal is not present in 
the 100% FAME bio-diesel fuel and in the clear premium 
petro-diesel, which can be expected as EHN is not an 
additive for such fuels. Except for the 2-EHN, the 
fluorescence signal of bio-contaminants is observed for 
commercial fuels, while the bio-diesel fuel is characterized 
with a higher signal than the premium petrodiesel. The 
biodiesel shows a small fluorescence in the range of 450-
700nm, due to aromatic components. Such fluorescence is 
not observed in the clear premium petro-diesel, which as 
previously stated is prepared from alkanes. 
In the case of gum presence examination with excitation 
at 488nm, the power of excitation and fluorescence signals 
differ so much that their observation requires using both 
arms of photo-detection with different times of scanning. In 
the presented case, the fluorescence was measured with 10-
second scanning and the excitation was measured with 5-
second scanning.  
Spectra of fuels stored for two years on windowsill 
measured with 488nm wavelength excitation are presented in 
Figure 6. The excitation signals are the same in both cases 
and do not affect the fluorescence characteristics. The 
presence of gums is evident, as a fluorescence signal in the 
range from 530nm to 700nm is present. 
 
 
Figure 6.   Spectra of commercial fuels stored two years on windowsill 
excited with 488nm vawelenght. 
In both samples, the signal is almost the same, which 
means that the concentration of gums in both cases is the 
same. That at first view may seem strange. The vertical shift 
of signals can be the result of a difference between radii of 
used capillaries, as a small variation of this parameter is 
normal. In such case, the examination of the excitation signal 
at the receiver arm enables a simple mathematical correction. 
Examinations of fresh fuels do not show any 
fluorescence signals comparable to results presented in 
Figure 6.  
C. Examination of premium commercial fuel exposed for 
light for few weeks 
We examined premium commercial diesel fuel stored at 
windowsill for up to five weeks and compared the results to 
storage of the same fuel in dark conditions. The fuel stored in 
dark condition does not show any visible changes or any 
changes when measured using the method described above. 
The change of appearance of fuel exposed to light can be 
described as follow: after one week the sample color started 
fading, after two weeks the sample becomes cloudy, and 
after five weeks there is an emergence of sludge. The sludge 
color is dark brown, similar to that of buckwheat honey, and 
it is sticky to the touch. The cleaning of outer capillary walls 
after probing of fuel exposed for five weeks need some 
attention, as sticky areas are palpable. Thus one can conclude 
that some reactions occurred in the sample under storage. It 
is interesting, that the examination of fluorescence excited at 
488nm did not show any fluorescence signals. 
The examination results of fluorescence excited at 
366nm when the fuel was stored at a windowsill are 
presented in Figure 7. The observed fluorescence signals 
show significant changes of shape and power. The signal of 
bio-contamination disappeared. The signal power has not 
monotonically reduced. The initial spectrum maxima (point 
4 in Figure 7.) after consecutive weeks of exposition shifted 
toward lower wavelength which was stable for some time 
(wavelength point 3 in Figure 7.). Local signal minima 
wavelength (point 2 in Figure 7.) were stable for some time, 
and then minima disappeared. The same effect applied to the 
first local maxima (wavelength point 1 in Figure 7).  
 
 
Figure 7.   Measurement data of fluorescence excited at 366nm for 
premium commercial fuel stored at windowsill. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Therefore, in the described sensor device, the difference 
of signals S(4)-S(2) values measured in point 4 and in point 
2 may be a good measure of fuel degradation. The 
wavelength at the point 4 was 408nm, and at the point 2 was 
392nm. The results of examinations are presented in Table 1, 
including results for fresh fuels, fuels degraded to five weeks 
as well as seriously degraded fuels with gum presence the 
fluorescence of which was presented in Figure 6. 
TABLE I.  
FUELS CLASSYFICATION  
Fuel type 
Exposition 
for light 
[weeks] 
Visual report 
Difference of 
signals; 
S(4)-S(2) 
[a.u.] 
Premium -  
no additives 
0 
transparent, light 
yellow 
0 
Premium 
commercial 
0 
transparent, yellow 
2585 
Premium 
commercial 
1 
transparent, light 
yellow 
847 
Premium 
commercial 
2 
turbid, light yellow  
-18 
Premium 
commercial 
5 
turbid, light yellow, 
sludge stains 
-523 
Premium 
commercial 
104 
transparent, buckwheat 
honey, sediment 
-563 
Standard 
commercial 
104 
transparent, buckwheat 
honey, sediment 
-346 
 
The proposed measure is lower than zero for degraded 
fuels with are characterized by the presence of turbidity and 
first appearance of gum sludge. The difference is greater than 
zero for transparent fluids. It should be noted that premium 
fuels, that do not shows fluorescence, show zero difference 
the mentioned signals. The measured signal at the excitation 
wavelength (366nm) changes significantly, as can be 
expected for fuel transparency changes.  
V.  CONCLUSIONS 
We proposed a sensor of diesel fuel degradation with 
fluorescence examination in a capillary optrode. The analysis 
of the measured signals of fresh and degraded diesel and 
biodiesel fuels showed the relationship of the degradation 
with measured and processed signals.  
On the base of data collected in the experiments we can 
set the parameters determining the initial diesel fuel 
degradation level as the difference of signals registered at 
408nm and 392nm for fuel sample excitation and 366nm. 
The seriously degraded diesel fuel is characterized by 
fluorescence signals in the range of 530nm to 700nm when 
the excitation signal is at 488nm. 
We conclude that the proposed instrumentation may be in 
future a valuable added module to the capillary sensor 
system for diesel fuel fit-for- use examinations.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by the NCBiR/PGNiG 
grant Polish Technology for Shale Gas, task T3.1.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Technical Committee of Petroleum Additive Manufactures in 
Europe, “Fuel Additives: Use and Benefits,” ATC Document, 
vol. 113, 2013, pp. 1-68. 
[2] S. Jain and M. P. Sharma, “Stability of biodiesel and its 
blends: A review,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, vol. 14, 2010, pp. 667–678. 
[3] T. Herold, “Next Generation Derivered Cetane Analysis: 
High Precision Enables Refineries to Operate Close to 
Specifications and Increase Profitability,” Petro Industry 
News, vol. 15, 2014, pp. 6-7. 
[4] A. Kulinowski, T. Henly, and T. Stocky, "The Effect of 2-
Ethylhexyl Nitrate Cetane Improver on Engine Durability," 
SAE Technical Paper 981364, 1998, pp. 1-9. 
[5] R. A. Korus, T. L. Mousetis, and L. Lloyd, “Polymerization 
of vegetable oils,” American Society of Agricultural 
Engineering vol. 4, 1982, pp. 127-137. 
[6] M. G. Fonseca, et al., “Advanced Techniques in Soybean 
Biodiesel,” in H. El-Shemy (Ed.), Soybean - Bio-Active 
Compounds, , InTech, Rijeka, Croatia, 2013, pp. 23-45, 
ISBN: 978-953-51-0977-8 
[7] D. J. Bogan and R. Guirguis, “Mechanism of ignition 
enchancement by nitro and nitrade compounds,”Preprints – 
ACS, Division of Petroleum Chemistry, vol. 30, 1985, pp. 
327  
[8] B. S. Higgins, D. L. Siebers, and A. A. Aradi, “Comparison of 
2-ethylhexyl nitrate and fuel composition induced changes in 
the diesel spray ignition process,” International Journal of 
Engine Research, vol. 2, 2001, pp. 47-67. 
[9] H. Bornemann, F. Scheidt and W. Sander, “Thermal 
decomposition of 2-ethylhexyl nitrate (2-EHN). Int. J. Chem. 
Kinet., vol. 34, 2002, pp. 34–38. 
[10] A. G Gaydon, The Spectroscopy of Flames, John Wiley and 
Sons, Inc., New York, USA, 1957 
[11] S. S. Merola, L.uca Marchitto, C. Tornatoe, and G. Valentino, 
“Chemiluminescence analysis of the effect of butanol-diesel 
fuel blends on the spray combustion process in an 
experimental common rail diesel engine,” Thermal Science, 
vol. 19, 2015, pp. 1943-1957. 
[12] A. R. L. Caires, V. S. Lima, and S. L. Oliveira, 
“Quantification of biodiesel content in diesel/biodiesel blends 
by fluorescence spectroscopy: Evaluation of the dependence 
on biodiesel feedstock,” Renewable Energy, vol. 46, 2012, pp. 
137–140. 
[13] S. G. Wakeham, “Synchronous fluorescence spectroscopy and 
its 
application 
to 
indigenous 
and 
petroleum-derived 
hydrocarbons in lacustrine sediments,” Environ. Sci. 
Technol., vol. 11, 1977, pp. 272–276. 
[14] M. Wlodarski, A. Bombalska, M. Mularczyk-Oliwa; M. 
Kaliszewski, and K. Kopczyński, , “Fluorimetric techniques 
in analysis and classification of fuels," Proc. SPIE vol. 8703, 
2012, pp. 87030B. 
[15] M. Insausti and B. S. Fernández Band, “Determination of 2-
ethylhexyl Nitrate in Diesel Oil Using a Single Excitation 
Emission Fluorescence Spectra (EEF) and Chemometrics 
Analysis,” J Fundam. Renewable Energy Appl., vol. 4, 2014, 
pp. 1000137 
[16] A. Kociubiński, M. Borecki, M. Duk, M. Sochacki, and M. L. 
Korwin-Pawlowski, “3D photodetecting structure with 
adjustable 
sensitivity 
ratio 
in 
UV 
– 
VIS 
range,” 
Microelectronic Engineering, vol. 154, 2016, pp. 48–52. 
[17] M Borecki, et al., “Large-area transparent in visible range 
silicon carbide photodiode,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 8903, 2013, pp. 
89030H. 
[18] M. Borecki and M. L. Korwin-Pawlowski, “Optical capillary 
sensors for intelligent microfluidic sample classification,” in 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Nanosensors: 
Theory 
and 
Applications 
in 
Industry, 
Healthcare and Defence, T.C. Lim, Ed., CRC Press, Boca 
Raton, FL, USA, 2011, pp. 215– 245. 
[19] M. Borecki, et al., “Fiber Optic Capillary Sensor with Smart 
Optode for Rapid Testing of the Quality of Diesel and 
Biodiesel Fuel,” IJASM, vol. 7, 2014, pp. 57–67. 
[20] P. Prus, M. Borecki, M. L. Korwin-Pawlowski, A. 
Kociubiński, and M. Duk, “Automatic detection of 
characteristic points and form of optical signals in 
multiparametric capillary sensors,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 9290, 
2014, pp. 929009. 
[21] M. Borecki, et al., “Sensing Method and Fiber Optic Capillary 
Sensor for Testing the Quality of Biodiesel Fuel,” IARIA, 
Proc. Sensordevices 2013, pp. 19–24. 
[22] M. Borecki, et al., “Dynamical Capillary Rise Photonic 
Sensor for Testing of Diesel and Biodiesel Fuel,” Sensors & 
Transducers Journal, vol. 193, 2015, pp. 11-22. 
[23] A. Baranowska, P. Miluski, M. Kochanowicz, J. Zmojda, and 
D. Dorosz, “Capillary optical fibre with Sm3+ doped ribbon 
core,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 9662, 2015, pp. 96620Z. 
[24] M. Geca, M. Borecki, M. L. Korwin-Pawlowski, and A. 
Kociubiński, “Local liquid sample heating: integration and 
isolation of a micro-heater,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 9662, 2015, pp. 
96620E. 
[25] D. W. Naegell and R. H. Hill, “Laser inducted fluorescence 
detection of gums in jet fuels,” Aero Propulsion and Power 
Directorate, 
Wright 
Laboratory, 
Air 
Force 
Systems 
Command, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, WL-TR-92-
2015, 1992, pp. 1-50. 
[26] M. Borecki, J. Szmidt, P. Wrzosek, and M. Beblowska, 
“Optical fiber switch for sensor networks: design principles,“ 
Proc. SPIE, vol. 6347, 2006, pp. 63471Q. 
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

