The Development of a Geo-Referenced System for Machine Controlled 
Construction Equipment 
 
Nicholas Muth 
Department of Civil Engineering 
Ryerson University 
Toronto, Canada 
nmuth@ryerson.ca 
Mike Chapman 
Department of Civil Engineering 
Ryerson University 
Toronto, Canada 
mchapman@ryerson.ca
 
 
Abstract—This article outlines the motivation and methodology 
for a reliable, stand-alone, real-time, geo-referencing system 
for construction equipment. The system consists of a fully 
integrated 
Differential 
Global 
Positioning 
System 
(DGPS)/Inertial Navigation System (INS) Kalman Filter to 
geo-reference the main body of the construction equipment. 
Inertial 
Measurement 
Units 
(IMU) 
attached 
to 
each 
operational joint will provide joint angle information between 
each link. The IMU information is used in the Denavit-
Hartenberg Convention (DH), describing the position of the 
end-effector in 3D space with respect to the geo-referenced 
main body of the equipment. There are distinct advantages to 
this type of approach. It is a more complicated, yet cost-
effective, system because lower grade IMUs can be made to 
perform as more stable IMUs by constant re-calibration using 
DGPS measurements in a tightly coupled Kalman Filter. It is 
an autonomous system, unaided by line-of-sight survey based 
equipment. Finally, it creates a unified model approach for 
geo-referencing multi-sensor systems that can be applied 
without accounting for a different set of parameters for each 
sensor. Preliminary results of a decomposed Kalman Filter to 
estimate DGPS baselines show a Root Mean Square Error 
(RMSE) of ±0.003m for variation in successive baseline 
estimations of stationary receivers. 
Keywords-Geosensor networks; Tracking moving objects; 
Application of geosensor networks; Localization and tracking 
using satellites; Movement sensors; Position sensors 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Construction is an integral part of our overall economy 
and is of economic significance to many industry sectors 
and stakeholders. Intense competition, shortages of skilled 
labor and constant technological advances continue to force 
rapid change in the construction industry and in support of 
machine control and Construction Automation (CA) [1]. 
In order to achieve machine control, considerations must 
be made regarding equipment operating procedures, 
construction safety, efficiency, position and navigation. 
Therefore, machine controlled construction equipment must 
have the ability to: 
- 
Reference itself in the same coordinate system as 
the design of the project. 
- 
Navigate in real-time. 
- 
Operate with precision and reliability. 
- 
Position the end-effector accurately. 
The research proposed here aims to advance the use of 
machine control by developing a robust and reliable real-
time geo-referencing system for construction equipment 
focused on the study of an excavator. The geo-referencing 
system will be a stand-alone system based on the integration 
of DGPS [2] and INS [3]. The goal of the research is to 
create a system with centimeter level accuracy in order to 
achieve Quality Level A standards for precise horizontal 
and vertical control of utilities, set by the American Society 
for Civil Engineers Standard Guideline for the Collection 
and Depiction of Existing Subsurface Utility Data [4]. 
The motivation for research is the potential benefits of a 
high precision geo-referencing system, including: 
- 
Safety on the construction site  
- 
Optimization of construction tasks  
- 
Precision construction/limited accuracy checks 
- 
Real-time updating of preliminary survey, design 
drawings and as-built surveys  
In order to complete the research, the project will be 
separated into four components. The first and second 
component-developing a GPS/INS integrated positioning 
system to geo-reference the construction equipment body 
center and relative location of the end-effector with respect 
to the body center-will be combined in the third component 
to create a unified model approach for geo-referencing a 
multi-sensor system. The fourth component will be testing 
system accuracy using one of two approaches: point-to-
point comparison of the end-effector position with known 
locations and comparison of the Digital Elevation Model 
(DEM) [5] of the construction task with the design of the 
construction task. 
The article has five sections. Section II outlines the current 
research in real-time geo-referencing systems in the 
construction environment and the available commercial 
systems. Section III outlines the methodology of the system 
including system components (instrumentation, sensors and 
hardware) and the integration algorithm and architecture for 
geo-referencing. Section IV outlines work to date, 
preliminary results of the tightly coupled Kalman Filter 
decomposed to estimate DGPS baselines and affects this has 
on the DGPS/INS system. The article concludes with Section 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

V, by outlining the need for this type of system and stating 
the overall accuracy goals for geo-referencing. 
II. 
BACKGROUND – GEO-REFERENCING SYSTEMS 
The majority of research into absolute, real-time 
positioning systems has been in Aerial Mapping and 
Terrestrial Mobile Mapping. The focus of the research is on 
GPS/INS integration and the argument of centralized versus 
decentralized integration architecture, which is very well 
balanced and considered application specific [6].  
Aerial navigation is concerned with six degrees of 
freedom, three position (X, Y and Z) and three orientation 
(Pitch, Roll and Yaw) components; the same six 
components 
needed 
to 
geo-reference 
construction 
equipment. However, the accuracy of aerial navigation 
research, in many cases, relies on post-processing even 
though it is implemented in real-time. One would assume 
that vehicle navigation is applicable, however, in vehicle 
navigation it is common to find research on low-order 
vehicle positioning; navigation that deals with the location 
of the vehicle, but limits the orientation to two position 
components (X and Y) and one orientation component 
(Yaw/Heading) . 
A terrestrial multi-sensor GPS/INS system for vehicular 
mobile mapping conducted by El-Sheimy [7] is worth 
mentioning due to promising results. The GPS/INS 
centralized system produced centimeter level accuracy in 
height. 
The majority of studies dealing with positioning 
construction equipment is in the field of machine control 
and is based on relative, not geo-referenced, systems. 
However, large survey companies such as Leica and 
Trimble, are leading the way in production of off-the-shelf 
positioning systems for construction equipment. The latest 
developments include the Leica Powerdigger 3DTM and the 
Trimble GCS900TM.  
Powerdigger 3DTM uses a combination of GPS with a 
pitch, roll and direction sensor to geo-reference the excavator 
main-body, while the GCS900 TM system uses a combination 
of two GPS receivers, a pitch and a roll sensor. Both systems 
are considered ‘black box’ integrated, meaning there is no 
information on the integration algorithm or architecture. 
There is also no information on the system link between 
GPS/INS on the excavator body and the end-effector, 
including the precision of the sensors, the expected accuracy 
of the stand-alone system, system testing or field tests. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The intent of the research is to design a geo-referencing 
system based on GPS/INS integration and multiple sensors 
applicable to several earth-moving machines. However, the 
focus will be on excavators as they have the most complex 
range of motion (as many as six degrees of freedom). 
The research will be separated into four components: 
A. Geo-Referencing the excavator body center.  
B. Relative positioning of the Excavator end-effector 
with respect to the center of the Excavator. 
C. Geo-Referencing of the Excavator end-effector. 
D. Testing system accuracy. 
A. Geo-Referencing of the Excavator Body Center 
This section deals with the selection of the instruments, 
integration algorithm and integration architecture for geo-
referencing. 
1) Instruments 
GPS and INS are the main technologies chosen because 
of their opposing characteristics. For example, the GPS data 
latency and signal loss can be accounted for by the high 
sample rate and high short term stability of INS. 
Consequently, the INS accumulation of error over time can 
be accounted for by the high long term stability of GPS. It is 
this relationship that is the motivation for these sensors to be 
combined in a geo-referencing system. 
Differential GPS (DGPS) using dual frequency receivers 
will be the specific GPS technique because it can provide 
many advantages (correcting for several common errors and 
resolving carrier phase ambiguity) and the centimeter level 
accuracy desired for this type of positioning.  
2) Hardware 
Two GPS receivers (base and rover) will be employed; the 
rover will be fixed to the excavator and the base station set 
over a known point near the rover. The INS must orient the 
equipment in three dimensions. This requires three 
accelerometers and three gyroscopes. The DGPS and INS 
can be combined in a ‘black box’ or the hardware of each 
system run independently and combined on the software 
level. The research will employ the latter technique because 
the former makes it difficult to modify the system. 
3) Integration Algorithm and Architecture 
The integration algorithm will be the Kalman Filter (KF) 
[8]. It is chosen for its optimum performance, versatility, 
and ease of implementation obtaining state estimates of a 
dynamical system in the presence of noisy input sensors. 
Thus it is the integration algorithm of choice for navigation 
sensor data. 
There are two basic implementation architectures for the 
KF based on the extent that GPS and INS data aid the others 
function-tightly coupled and loosely coupled; with no 
coupling understood as no data feedback from either system.  
Tightly coupled, also known as fully integrated or 
centralized systems, is the chosen architecture because these 
systems have the best potential accuracy. It requires 
raw/uncorrelated sensor data. The DGPS will be the main 
source of navigation because it provides geo-referenced 
coordinates and will provide constant recalibration of the 
INS sensors to combat the drifting or unbounded errors of 
INS over time. The INS, operating at a much higher 
frequency output, will provide the orientation of the system, 
as well as, supplement DGPS latency, DGPS outages and 
smooth 
transitions 
between 
less 
frequent 
DGPS 
measurements. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

The result is a non-linear implementation, since both 
DGPS and INS are non-linear systems. One of the limiting 
conditions of the KF is the assumption that the system 
model is linear. Therefore, a method of linearizing the 
process about some known reference is needed. This is 
accomplished by implementing an Extended KF (EKF) [9]. 
The approach has very complex measurement equations, but 
requires only one KF, and thus, is straightforward from the 
processing point of view.  
B. Relative Positioning of Excavator End-Effector 
This section deals with the positioning of the excavator 
end-effector with respect to the excavator body. This 
includes the types of sensors that will be used to accomplish 
this, the errors associated with the sensors and a method to 
propagate the errors to analyze the effect on positioning. 
The problem of positioning the end-effector with respect 
to the equipment main body can be thought of as the 
positioning a rigid body so it is considered a forward 
kinematics problem between the relationship of the 
individual joints of the construction equipment and the 
position and orientation of the end-effector. 
The forward problem is to determine the position and 
orientation of the end-effector, given the cumulative affect 
of the joint variables-in an excavator they are simple 
revolute joints, or the angles between the links (boom, stick 
and bucket of excavator). The advantage is a single degree-
of-freedom of motion for each joint. 
Kinematic analysis rigidly attaches a coordinate frame to 
each link; each coordinate frame must then be related and/or 
transformed in a sequential manner to the inertial frame of 
reference (excavator center/coordinate frame O0) as seen in 
Figure 1. Homogeneous Transformation Matrices (HT) [10] 
offer the ability to locate any point on construction 
equipment with respect to the inertial frame and therefore 
will be used to transform each coordinate frame. 
1) The Denavit-Hartenberg Convention 
The Denavit-Hartenberg Convention (DH) [10] will be 
implemented to reduce the number of parameters in the HT 
from the original six (3 rotations and 3 translations)  
to four (link length, link twist, link offset and joint angle) by 
systematically choosing the coordinate frames.  
2) Sensors 
In order to be a viable option for the private sector, the 
geo-referencing system must be cost effective and accurate 
to 1-2cm. For a large excavator (10m boom length) this 
would require stable sensor accuracy ≤ 0.1° arc seconds. 
This would require high accuracy/stability, high cost IMUs. 
However, by implementing a centralized KF with constant 
re-calibration of IMUs, low-grade, high drift rate IMUs can 
mimic high-grade, low drift rate IMUs. Micro Electronic 
Mechanical Systems or MEMS sensors built to measure 
angle/tilt/rotation will be used due to their size (40 to 
100mm) and shock limits up to 1000g, which is adequate 
for construction environments. 
  
3) Propagation of IMU Errors 
One of the innovations of the relative positioning of the 
end-effector is the propagation of errors of measurement 
devices. IMU sensors will be used at each joint with each 
containing errors. These can be propagated through the 
network of the excavator to see the effect on geo-
referencing, as well as testing the significance of using 
more/less precise measuring devices. 
C. Geo-Referencing the Excavator End-Effector 
This is accomplished by developing a unified approach 
for geo-referencing a multi-sensor system, in this case, 
composed of DGPS/INS and IMU sensors. The unified 
approach provides a very important model for sensor fusion 
in that the model can be applied to sensor data without the 
need to account for a different set of parameters for each 
sensor.  
The model will be derived for an excavator, but with 
slight modifications to the transformation matrices,
T eqp (t)
ee
 
in equation (1), the model be can be used for any type of 
construction equipment. When the navigation component is 
supplied by an integrated DGPS/INS system, the equation 
for the model is of the form (the major steps of equation are 
shown in Figure 1): 
]
( )
( )[
( )
/
eqp
eqp
ee
m
eqp
m
GPS INS
m
ee
a
t
t T
R
t
r
r



    (1)     
where m is the mapping/absolute  reference frame; eqp 
is 
the INS equipment body reference frame; ee is the excavator 
end-effector reference frame; 
m
ree
 is a vector of target point 
coordinates to be positioned in the absolute reference frame; 
( )
/
t
r m
GPS INS
 is a vector of the coordinates of the INS center 
in the absolute reference frame, (estimated by the 
DGPS/INS integration); 
R m (t)
eqp
 is the rotation matrix from 
the INS body frame to the absolute reference frame 
(estimated by the DGPS/INS integration); 
T eqp (t)
ee
 are the 
transformation matrices between the INS body frame and 
the excavator end-effector (there is a transformation matrix 
for each joint); 
aeqp
is the translation vector between the 
INS center and excavator center (constant). 
D. Testing System Accuracy 
Testing of the system is set to begin in early summer 2013 
and will be completed using two methods: point-by-point 
comparison 
and 
Digital 
Elevation 
Model 
(DEM) 
comparison. 
Point-by-point testing will be a comparison of the 
coordinates of known control points (surveyed by a total 
station) with those geo-referenced by the excavator.  
DEM testing will provide a more dynamic test of the 
system, closer to the accuracy one would expect from actual 
operation. It is intended that a human operator will complete 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

a simple excavation task using a Graphical User Interface 
(GUI) showing the position of the end-effector as compared 
to the construction design. After the excavation is complete, 
a topographic survey will be completed creating a DEM. 
The DEM, construction design and the actual trajectory 
measured by the excavator will be compared to quantify 
human error and assess the accuracy of the system. 
In all cases, the excavator will be under human operation.  
The success of the accuracy test will be based on the 
highest accuracy standards. In this case, the American 
Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Standard Guidelines for 
the Collection and Depiction of Existing Subsurface Utility 
Data [4]-one of the major benefits of this research is 
construction safety (geo-referencing with respect to safety 
hazards, i.e., existing underground utilities) and real-time 
updating of construction records-therefore, the accuracy of 
the system should strive for the highest quality, or Quality 
level A, that calls for a vertical accuracy of 15mm [4]. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
To date, a tightly coupled Kalman Filter (KF) has been 
developed to integrate the DGPS/INS for geo-referencing 
the excavator body center. Although a complete DGPS/INS 
data set, to test the KF, has not been attained, a DGPS data 
set has been attained. To gain preliminary results, the KF 
was decomposed to test the DGPS baseline estimation 
accuracy only.  
The DGPS KF utilizes an Extended KF (EKF) design to 
deal with the non-linearity of calculating the DGPS baseline 
estimation. The baseline components are estimated using 
both Course Acquisition (C/A) and Precision (P) code 
pseudorange and carrier phase observations. Preliminary 
results show a Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), for 
variation in successive baseline estimations of stationary 
DGPS receivers, of ±0.003m with maximum variations of 
±0.008m, ±0.005m and ±0.010m in the North, East and 
Down directions, respectively. 
Although the DGPS data is fundamental in the 
determination of the velocity and position of the excavator 
center, in order to position the end-effector, orientation of 
the excavator center, using INS data, must also be solved. 
Nevertheless, the preliminary results are promising given 
that in a tightly coupled KF DGPS data is used in 
comparison with INS to solve the errors of the INS 
orientation, velocity and position, and consequently, 
constantly calibrate the INS sensor data.        
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The article outlined an ongoing research study in the field 
of 
geo-referencing 
machine 
controlled 
construction 
equipment, the role of geo-referencing in machine control 
and the benefits it can provide to the overall construction 
environment. 
Geo-referencing using GPS/INS integration has been left 
to the fields of aerial mapping and terrestrial mobile 
mapping. Although there has been much research on the 
integration of GPS/INS using KF, optimal integration 
architecture is mainly application specific based on motion 
of the object, processing complexity, flexibility, desired 
accuracy, integration level, etc. Not only is there a need for 
the development of a geo-referencing system based on 
GPS/INS integration, but there is a need to develop optimal 
integration architecture for construction equipment. 
The goal of the research is to develop a stand-alone, 
robust, reliable, real-time geo-referencing system with 
centimeter level accuracy, specifically designed for a 
construction environment. Promising preliminary results for 
the decomposed Kalman Filter, estimating DGPS baseline 
components, suggest accuracy goals, on par with ASCE 
Standard Guidelines for the Collection and Depiction of 
Existing Subsurface Utility Data Quality level A-calling for 
15mm vertical accuracy, are achievable. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Q. Ha, M. Santos, Q. Nguyen, D. Rye, and H. Durrant-Whyte, 
“Robotic excavation in construction automation,” IEEE 
[Robotics & Automation Magazine]. 2002, vol. 9, is. 1, pp. 
20-28. 
[2] B.W. Parkinson and P.K. Enge, “Differential GPS,” in Global 
positioning system:theory and applications, vol. II, B.W. 
Parkinson, and J.J. Spilker Jr., Eds. Washington, D.C.: AIAA, 
1996, pp. 3-50. 
[3] K.R. Britting, “Inertial navigation systems analysis,” New 
York: Wiley, 1971. 
[4] American Society for Civil Engineers(ASCE) Code and 
Standards Activity Committee, “Standard guideline for the 
collection and depiction of existing subsurface utility data,” 
ASCE Standard, 2003, ASCE/CI 38-02 [Library of Congress 
Catalog Card No: 2002034155]. 
[5] D.F. Maune, “Digital elevation model technologies and 
applications: the DEM users manual,” Bethesda, Maryland: 
American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 
2001. 
[6] J. Skaloud, “Problems in direct-georeferencing by INS/DGPS 
in the airborne environment,” In an invited paper to an ISPRS 
Workshop [Workshop-direct versus indirect methods of 
orientation, WG III/1, Barcelona], November, 1999. 
[7] El-Sheimy, “The development of VISAT - a mobile survey 
system for GIS applications,” PhD Thesis, Department of 
Geomatics Engineering, University of Calgary, 1996. 
[8] R.E. Kalman, “A new approach to linear filtering and 
prediction problems,” Transaction of the ASME—Journal of 
Basic Engineering. March. 1960, pp. 35-45. 
[9] H. W. Sorenson, “ Kalman filtering: theory and application,” 
H.W. Sorenson, Eds. IEEE Press, 1985. 
[10] R.S. Hartenberg and J. Denavit, “Kinematic synthesis of 
linkages,” New York : McGraw-Hill, 1964. 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
IMU(i.e., Tilt/Angle Sensor)
Graphical User 
Interface/Computing 
Center 
X0
Y0
Z0 
X4 
Z4
Y4
Eqp Frame of Reference 
   ee Frame of 
   Reference 
Target Point 
m
eer
   m Frame of 
   Reference 
Zm 
Xm
Ym
m
GPS INS
r
/
m
eqp
R
Rover GPS Receiver/INS 
Rotation Sensor 
INS eqp Frame 
eqp
a
Figure 1. Elements of Geo-Referencing System 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

