A GSM-based System for the Tracking of Birds
Samuel Matos
University of Tr´as-os-Montes e Alto Douro
Email: samrmatos@gmail.com
Raul Morais
INESC-TEC and UTAD,
Email: rmorais@utad.pt
P.M. Ara´ujo
MARE, University of Coimbra, Portugal
Email: mmiguelinhu@gmail.com
P.J.Q. Tenreiro
ICNF, Portugal
Email: paulo.tenreiro@icnf.pt
P.J.S.G. Ferreira
DETI/IEETA, University of Aveiro, Portugal
Email: pjf@ua.pt
M. J. C. S. Reis
IEETA and UTAD
Email: mcabral@utad.pt
Abstract—We present a prototype of a system for the tracking
of animals, goods or people, by using only Global System for
Mobile Communications (GSM) services. The system consists of
two parts: a base device and at least one location device. The
base device receives the Short Message Service (SMS) sent by
the location devices and forwards the messages to an application
that decodes and stores the location data in a database. The
location device, the part actually attached to the animal, good
or person being tracked, combines reduced size and weight with
extended range. We present the energy consumption proﬁles and
the computer applications developed to test the system and discuss
the results of practical tests with wild and captive birds.
Keywords–GSM-based location, location system, geolocation,
tracking system, bird tracking
I.
INTRODUCTION
Animal movement and migration has long fascinated man.
Due to its scale, bird migration is one of the most strik-
ing. The number of birds involved is in the billions, the
annual roundtrips of some bird species reach 70,000 km
and some birds are known to perform non-stop ﬂights of
10,000 km [1] [2]. Discoveries such as these are in part due to
the use of tracking technology, which is of interest for multiple
reasons. First, tracking is an important tool to better understand
and protect the migrating species. Second, migrant animals are
indicators of change. Human activity is having a global impact
on the planet and migrant animals modify their behaviour due
to human-caused changes and stressors. Birds, being the most
mobile of all animals, are of particular interest in this regard. A
better understanding of migration patterns also impacts climate
change studies, energy generation, airstrike prevention, disease
propagation, planning and urbanisation, agriculture, ﬁsheries,
and more.
Migration studies were once carried out by observation, but
for more than one century they have relied on technological
advances and breakthroughs. Bird ringing was one of those
advances, and began with the efforts of a school master, Hans
Christian C. Mortensen, in Denmark in 1899 [3]. A ring is
a light metal band of appropriate size that carries a unique
number, by means of which the bird can be identiﬁed, if and
when recovered.
The relatively small probability of recapturing a ringed
bird is a drawback that more recent technologies are helping
to solve. One solution is to use electronic devices to send
signals that are then picked up by radio receivers or satellites,
enabling scientists to follow the movement of the tagged
animals without having to recapture them. In fact, the receiver
can be used to home in on the animal to get the device back.
Tracking an animal by radio involves two devices: a trans-
mitter attached to the animal, to send out signals (data); and
a receiver to pick up the signal (data). The transmitter can be
placed around an animal’s ankle, neck, wing, carapace, dorsal
ﬁn or it may even be surgically implanted. The advantages of
implantation of subcutaneous radio transmitters are discussed
in, e.g., [4].
Useful as they are, these devices are far more expensive
than the low-tech, non-electronic tags. Also, their size and
weight makes them useless for tracking some animals, includ-
ing many birds species.
Receivers can also be placed in satellites or, more precisely,
networks or groups of satellites (e.g., Argos). Satellite tracking
ha been used to track caribou, sea turtles, whales, great white
sharks, seals, elephants, bald eagles, ospreys and vultures [5].
For a review of traditional systems used in the tracking/location
of birds, see [6]. In [7], a Global Positioning System (GPS)
based tracking system was used in experiments of homing
pigeons ﬂying in ﬂocks of up to 10 individuals. The GPS
device, based on a commercially available product (u-blox AG,
LEA-5H), is able to log 30,000 data points (latitude, longitude,
altitude and time), measured 25 × 45 mm, and weighed 16 g.
Upon recapture of the birds the log ﬁles are downloaded to a
computer and processed. The GPS trackers used in [8] were
also applied to study pigeons. The complete device measured
71 × 41 × 17 mm, weighed 35 g. Hand-held, non-differentially
corrected 12-channel GPS receivers capable of storing up to
1024 positions were used in central Norway to track hunters
and their interactions with Willow Ptarmigan Lagopus lagopus,
as reported in [9].
The system described in [10] weigths 12 g and includes
a GPS receiver, micro-processor, 4 MB of memory for data
storage, solar panel and battery. It has a tri-axial accelerometer
to monitor behaviour and it is equipped with a radio transceiver
for bidirectional communication with a ground-based antenna
network, which enables data to be downloaded and new
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

measurement schemes to be uploaded remotely. It enables
the study of ﬁne-scale movements (intervals of 3 s) to long-
distance migratory movements (intervals of 20-30 min).
The system used in [11] to study the migratory strategy
of herons uses DUCK III Ecotone GPS/GSM transmitters and
a battery charged by a solar panel. The transmitters provided
accurate information on geographical location every 3, 6, 12
or 24h. No data was provided concerning the device’s weight
besides the fact that “extra weight of the transmitters and
Teﬂon harness varied from 3.4 to 3.9% of (herons’) body
mass”.
A study concerning seasonal differences in migration pat-
terns of soaring birds in relation to environmental conditions
was presented in [12]. Here, 11 adult Booted Eagles were
equipped with 22 g GPS-Argos satellite transmitters, and
one individual with a GPS data-logger of the same weight.
Transmitters were programmed to collect GPS locations on
an hourly basis from 6:00 to 20:00 (GMT—Greenwich Mean
Time) during migrations.
Other solutions can be considered [13]: data recovery
using a VHF beacon data transmitter, radio modem tech-
nology, Argos DCLS, mobile communications (GSM/SMS,
GSM/GPRS—General Packet Radio Services), LEO satellite
telephone data services, Iridium satellites, globalstar satellites,
or node-to-node networking. Note that some of these solutions
have high power/energy consumption requirements.
The coordinates are the fundamental data in the tracking
of birds (or other animals, persons, or goods). In the case of
data loggers, they are saved in log ﬁles and then downloaded
to a computer, upon recapture of the bird.
Light-based geolocation is an alternative when satellite-
based systems cannot be used. Theoretically, a light sensor
and a clock are sufﬁcient to solve the geolocation problem,
at only a fraction of the cost, size and weight of satellite-
based systems. On the negative side, the errors increase near
the equinoxes and the errors can be in the hundreds of
km [14]. The template method [15] improves on this. Light-
based geolocators are loggers and the data can be retrieved
only if the bird is recaptured.
As far as we know, there is no bird tracking system that
relies entirely in GSM technology. In this paper we show that
it is possible to track birds in this way, taking advantage of
GSM services. To this end we have developed a prototype
that combines reduced size and weight with extended range,
and that was tested on birds. Since the device is capable of
transmitting its data, in the form of text messages, there is no
need to recapture the bird.
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II is used to present the location system, which has
two main components: the location device and the base station.
Section III is used to explain how data can be viewed and
interpreted. In Section IV we present the results achieved with
the laboratorial tests. After that, some practical considerations
are presented at Section V. The results of the tests carried on
birds are presented in Section VI. The paper ends with the
major conclusions, presented in Section VII.
II.
THE LOCATION SYSTEM
The location system comprises two parts: the location
device, attached to the animal (bird); and the base station, to
Figure 1. Left—Photo of the prototype with all components; in the PCB
underside is just the modem. Right—Top view of the PCB; the lower view
contains only the modem connections.
receive the data from the location device.
A. Location device
The prototype uses the following main components:
•
GSM
modem—Allows registration in the GSM
cell/network in order to collect the necessary informa-
tion (in this ﬁrst phase is also used to send the data
for later analysis). We have used a GL865-QUAD Telit
modem with the following characteristics:
◦
weight: 2.48 g;
◦
dimensions: 24.4 × 24.4 × 2.7 mm;
◦
connectivity: Quad-band GSM / GPRS stack
and Transmission Control Protocol/Internet
Protocol (TCP/IP) supported.
•
Antenna—Print Circuit Board (PCB) antenna with
extension and U.FL connector.
•
Micro-controller
(MCU)—The
MCU
used
(PIC24FV32KA301) was
chosen
considering the
energy consumption, size and the presence of certain
peripherals. Note, for example:
◦
supply voltage: from 2.0 to 5.5 V;
◦
Consumption in sleep mode: up to 2.2µA;
◦
2 UART units;
◦
Real Time Clock (RTC).
•
Battery—The LiPo (Lithium Polymer) technology
was chosen due to its weight / capacity relation. As a
starting point the battery capacity used was 200 mAh,
with an approximate weight of 7 g.
•
Passive Components—We have used surface-mount
technology; surface-mount device, 0805 capacitors
and resistors.
We developed a “ﬁrst” (working) version of the device, which
was debugged and improved, both in software and hardware.
At the hardware level, the priority was to reduce the weight
and dimensions. Figure 1 (left) shows the “second” version,
referred to as “bTracker V1.1”. To achieve this goal we
produced a new design of the circuit with an array of different
possible components that reduced the area by 36%, and at the
same time reduced thickness from 1.5 mm to 0.5 mm. Some
components have been removed or replaced in order to reduce
the area and weight, while retaining all the features of the ﬁrst
version. This version weighs about 12 g, with all components
and a battery of 180 mAh, and is distributed as follows:
•
printed circuit—2 g;
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Hardware
initialization
Acquire
data
Parse
and store
data
Send data
(SMS)
Configuration
(SMS)
Check
battery
Turn on 
and check
modem
Wait
registration
Sleep
RTC
alarm
Battery OK
Modem or SIM
check failure
noon
(12 o’clock)
Low battery
SMS
OK
Registred
Registration failed
OK
nº of samples
< N
nº of samples
= N
Configuration(PC)
- check ID
- set RTC
- define wakeup 
  date
Figure 2. Location device system state diagram.
Figure 3. Photo of the “based device” to receive SMS data and subsequent
visualization of the results on the map.
•
GSM/GPRS modem—2.5 g;
•
battery (180 mAh)—6 g (7 g for a battery of 200
mAh).
Figure 1 (right) shows the appearance and dimensions of the
PCB.
At the software/ﬁrmware level, the second version rep-
resents an improvement in energy consumption, achieved
through the reduction of downtime and the use of sleep mode
during certain waiting times, leading to a slight reduction
in the total energy consumption. We also reduced the clock
frequency of the processor from 8Mhz to 2MHz; the con-
sumption difference resulting from this change is presented
in Section IV. Figure 2 presents a simpliﬁed state diagram
of the location device. The complete schematics of the ﬁrst
and second versions of the device can be downloaded from
www.mcabral.utad.pt/birds/.
B. Base device
The “base device” is used to receive the SMS sent by
the location devices and to forward the messages to a (Java)
application that decodes and stores the location data in a
MySQL database. It was also used (as an interface card)
to test the modem Telit GL865 and the AT commands. It
allows commands to be sent directly from the PC to the
modem via a terminal. In addition to the modem and SIM
card, this base device contains a USB controller (MCP2200,
Microchip), which is basically a TTL RS232 to USB converter.
A battery, to ensure the 2 A current peaks that the modem used
needs (recommended in the datasheet), and a charge controller
(MCP73831, Microchip) for LiPo battery technology (charging
via the USB port) were also incorporated.
Figure 4. Graphical interface of the Java application responsible for
receiving and storing data in the database.
Figure 3 shows a picture of the implemented “base device”,
in this case with a 200 mAh LiPo battery. The complete
schematic can also be downloaded from www.mcabral.utad.
pt/birds/.
At this point a brief description of the application manage-
ment is in order to help understanding how the base station
and location device work together. The application developed
for data management performs several tasks. First, it must
communicate with the modem via a (virtual) COM port in
order to be able to receive SMS and send commands to the
modem. After receiving the message, the application identiﬁes
the receiver device and sorts out the various ﬁelds of the
received message. Next, the GSM network cell ID where the
location device is linked is searched in the database and the
corresponding geographical coordinates, as well as the address
where the antenna is located, are retrieved from the database.
It is also possible to perform a manual search of a cell ID and
retrieve the corresponding data that are stored in a ﬁle (Excel).
These data are then stored in a database for subsequent online
viewing. Figure 4 shows a screenshot of the application.
III.
DATA VISUALIZATION
This section explains how the data collected by the devices
are presented to the end user.
A. SMS data format
The data collected are sent via SMS. The structure of the
SMS is shown in Figure 5 (left).
The message header comprises a unique device identiﬁer
(4 characters), followed by the battery voltage in mV. After
the header comes the data collected during the operation of
the device. To minimise the message size, the date comes ﬁrst
(yy-mm-dd) followed by the complete set of readings on that
date. Each line comprises time (hh:mm) followed by the GSM
cell ID and Timing Advance. When there is a change in the
data collection day a new date is inserted, as can be seen in
Figure 5 (left).
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 5. Format of data messages sent by the location device. Left—device
identiﬁcation (BT01), the battery voltage in mV (4200) followed by the date,
time, GSM cell ID and Timing Advance (TA). Right—device is in roaming
(bottom) and during normal operation (top).
Figure 6. An example of data visualization on map. The bluish circles show
the geographical location of the device.
B. View on map
All data received via SMS in the base station are interpreted
and stored in the database and can be accessed over the web.
The map showing the estimated device location is shown in
Figure 6. The bluish circles show the geographical location
of the device. As it can be seen, there are bigger circles and
smaller circles, showing that the device was further or closer
away from the antenna (cell ID). This “distance” is given
by the Timing Advance value, and the central values of the
circle correspond to the geographical coordinates of the cell
ID (antenna).
IV.
LABORATORIAL TESTS
The power consumption of the location device is a major
concern since it determines the battery capacity, and the battery
represents a large fraction of the device weight. We now
present results of the energy consumption of the location
device in different states and for different tasks. Note that the
energy consumption of the base device is not a concern.
The operation of the location device can be divided into
three essential states, representing different energy consump-
tions. All these states are linked by periods when consumption
is very low (sleep state), and where a current consumption of
less than 20µA was recorded.
A. Device start-up
The ﬁrst state/task to consider is “start-up” where it is
necessary to do some hardware checks and synchronization
of the real time clock via the SMS service. Because this task
involves sending and receiving SMS, it consumes a signiﬁcant
time (s)
current (mA)
25
50
75
100
125
175
150
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
startup
reading
SMS
Figure 7. Energy consumption proﬁles for the three main states: dashed
green—boot-up; blue—reading; dotted red—SMS.
time (days)
voltage (V)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2.0
2.5
3.5
4.0
3.0
Figure 8. Discharge proﬁle of the 200 mAh battery, for an interval of 10
minutes between acquisitions and every hour uploads (via SMS).
amount of energy. However this is done only once, and
its inﬂuence on the device’s autonomy is therefore reduced.
This proﬁle also includes the ﬁrst acquisition of the cell ID
where the device is connected to. Figure 7 shows the energy
consumption proﬁle (dashed green line) for this task.
This state has the following characteristics:
•
Average current consumption: 38.8 mA;
•
Approximate duration: 36 s;
•
Energy consumption: 1.45 mWh;
•
Consumed
energy
fraction
(200
mAh
battery):
0.195%.
B. GSM cell reading
This state/task directly inﬂuences battery life, because it is
repeated as a part of the normal operation cycle. The device
leaves the state of sleep, does a series of checks, collects the
cell information and returns to the state of sleep. The time that
the modem needs to log into the network prevents the duration
of this task from being shortened. Any change (gain or loss)
on energy consumption in this task has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on the overall battery life and therefore on the frequency
with which data can be acquired. Figure 7 shows the energy
consumption proﬁle (blue line) for this task.
This state has the following characteristics:
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

•
Average current consumption: 44.2 mA;
•
Approximate duration: 15 s;
•
Energy consumption: 0.75 mWh;
•
Consumed
energy
fraction
(200
mAh
battery):
0.101%.
C. Sending SMS
The sending of data via SMS occurs immediately after the
“cell reading” task. The extra consumption attributed to the
SMS can be calculated as the difference to the previous proﬁle:
•
Average current consumption: 51.3 mA;
•
Approximate duration: 24 s;
•
Energy consumption: 1.38 mWh;
•
Consumed
energy
fraction
(200
mAh
battery):
0.187%;
•
Energy consumption (SMS only): 0.630 mWh;
•
Consumed energy fraction (SMS only, 200 mAh bat-
tery): 0.085%.
Figure 7 shows the energy consumption proﬁle (dotted red
line) for this task.
D. Microcontroller consumption measurements
To obtain a good compromise between performance and
power consumption we did a series of consumption measure-
ments, involving only the microcontroller:
•
Sleep: 20µA;
•
8 MHz: 4.9 mA;
•
4 MHz: 2.8 mA;
•
2 MHz: 1.8 mA;
•
1 MHz: 1.3 mA;
•
500 KHz: 1.0 mA.
The frequency of 2 MHz was selected because if allows a
reduced consumption and an acceptable performance.
E. Battery life test
Knowing the energy consumption data it becomes possible
to predict, for a given battery capacity, its expected life under
various scenarios (depending on the acquisition and data send-
ing frequencies). The quality of the network coverage imposes
variations in the power consumption, adding to the difﬁculty of
predicting operating life under real operating conditions. The
data to estimate the battery life are:
•
Energy consumed at startup: 1.445 mWh;
•
Energy consumed by reading: 0.753 mWh;
•
Energy consumed by reading SMS: 1.384 mWh;
•
Energy consumed by SMS: 0.631 mWh;
•
Battery capacity: 200 mAh;
•
Battery rated voltage: 3.7V;
•
Total energy in the battery: 740 MWh;
•
Current consumption in Sleep: 0.02 mA;
•
Energy consumption in sleep per day: 1.776 mWh.
For these data, and for intervals between acquisitions of 10
minutes and data uploads every hour (via SMS), we obtain
the following:
•
Number of acquisitions per day: 144;
•
Number of submissions per day: 24;
•
Total energy per day: 125.44 mWh;
•
Battery: 200 mAh;
•
Estimated Duration: 5 days and 20 hours.
The duration (5 days and 20 h) was tested in practice. Figure 8
shows a typical discharge curve for a LiPo battery technology.
The test agrees with the predictions. In the last hours the
battery condition was already critical, with a cell voltage below
3.5 V.
As another example, imagine that a reading is performed
every hour and data is sent every 8 hours (3 times a day).
Then,
•
Number of acquisitions per day: 24;
•
Number of submissions per day: 3;
•
Total energy per day: 21.76 mWh;
•
Battery: 200 mAh;
•
Estimated Duration: 33 days and 23 hours.
V.
SOME PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
After encapsulation, the devices are ready to be attached
to the birds and cannot be easily turned on or off. To solve
this problem we implemented a device conﬁguration schema
and a magnetic sensor that allows the device to be started
immediately before deploying it.
During the assembly, it is possible to program the starting
date and time at which the device starts gathering information.
It is also possible to deﬁne an operating daily window, e.g.,
from 11:00 till 20:00. The interval between acquisitions is also
conﬁgurable with a resolution of one minute. Thus, depending
on the particular situation, the device can be switched on
immediately after being encapsulated, or a date and time can
be set.
A very important feature is the ability to change the
operation of the device during its normal operation through
a conﬁguration message (SMS). The parameters that can be
changed are:
•
“Opening hours”—the daily window for location ac-
quisitions;
•
“Acquisition interval”—time between each acquisition
(in case it is found that the acquisition time is not
appropriate to the actual situation);
•
“Progress in time”—allows advance in time; for exam-
ple, with a 20 minute advance the device will sample
at 10:20 instead of 10:00.
However, this approach presents the disadvantage of requiring
a longer period of activity, so as to ensure that conﬁguration
messages are received. This is due to that during normal
operation the time that the device is active is not sufﬁcient
to receive pending messages. It was then stipulated that every
day at 12h00 the device remains active for 40 seconds, the
time required to receive pending messages and proceed with
the conﬁguration, if this feature is to be used.
Because birds easily cross country borders, at the beginning
of each message, immediately after the battery voltage, the
country code was added. If the device is in roaming, at the
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 9. Left—Photo of devices ready to be used; “encapsulated” using two
layers of thermo-contractile sleeve in opposite directions and in between a
layer of silicone. Right—Test with cranes; placement of a tracking device.
end of each reading, after the TA ﬁeld, the network code to
which it is connected is also inserted. Only in this way we
can determine the device’s location across multiple countries.
Figure 5 (right) shows the format of the messages when the
device operates in roaming, compared to normal operation.
The device needs to be conﬁgured before being encapsu-
lated and placed on the bird. To simplify this task, we have
created a simple application that allows editing some important
parameters.
The ﬁrst step is to perform communication with the de-
vice so that it returns the parameters that are programmed
by default. After that, the device internal clock can be set
automatically, using the date and time settings of the PC. If
necessary, the device’s ID, the SIM number and the working
schedule can be modiﬁed. Before leaving the conﬁguration
mode, a date and time for the device start-up must be set. After
leaving the setup mode, the device stops responding to the
application and enters the low-power mode (sleep), to return
to the active state only at the scheduled time and date.
In order to adapt the device to the environmental condi-
tions, it is necessary to prevent water and debris from interfer-
ing with the electrical circuitry without adding signiﬁcantly to
the ﬁnal weight. We used thin thermo-contractile plastic ﬁlm,
adding two layers in opposite directions separated by a layer
of silicone. Figure 9 (left) shows photos of devices ready to
be attached to birds.
VI.
TESTS ON BIRDS
We performed three tests with birds in order to evaluate the
devices’ performance in real scenarios. Next, we will describe
how they were made and the results obtained.
All birds were captured and handled by properly trained
and authorised personnel. Two devices were prepared and
placed in wild Mallards (Anas platyrhynchos) in February
2013. The devices failed soon after the start of the test,
probably due to an encapsulation fault and the unforgiving
nature of the environment (water). No useful information was
collected and we decided to do an experiment with domestic
birds, to see if the birds interacted with the device and how the
device and the (meanwhile improved) harness and packaging
behaved.
The second tests took place in March 2013. The results
were positive. Both devices remained fully functional through-
out the experiment and sent data as expected. Since the animals
were conﬁned to a limited space, there was no variation in
position. The devices remained active for two weeks. After
recovering them, we found that they were already showing
some signs of water inﬁltration. This test was important to
optimise the harnesses and the packaging.
TABLE I. SUMMARY OF THE LATEST TEST DATA
Device
Date of last SMS
Likely failure cause (Battery level)
BT01
16-07-2013
Battery (3.4 V)
BT02
17-07-2013
credit of the SIM card (3.6 V)
BT03
05-07-2013
credit of the SIM card (3.8 V)
BT04
did not start
Water
BT05
06-07-2013
credit of the SIM card (3.8 V)
The third test began on June 17, 2013. Five devices were
placed in Purple Herons Ardea purpurea, as seen in Figure 9
(right). Table I shows the date of the last received messages
and the possible cause of device failure. As can be seen, one
of the devices was damaged by water (possibly as a result of a
packaging ﬂaw), in another the battery voltage level suddenly
dropped and in the remaining three cases the device did not
fail until the budget available for the communications run out.
The battery voltage level was still at a level that would have
allowed the devices to work as intended. The herons did not
leave the nest area during the test.
VII.
CONCLUSION
We have presented a prototype of a tracking system that
uses only GSM services. The location device transmits mes-
sages to a base device, which forwards all received SMS to
an application that decodes and stores the location data in a
database. The location device, which is the component attached
to the bird being tracked, combines reduced size and weight
with extended range.
We have presented the energy consumption proﬁles, the
computer applications developed to test it, and the results
obtained in practical tests with birds (wild and domestic). The
results conﬁrm that GSM-based solutions are entirely capable
of tracking, for example, migratory birds.
The accuracy of the system proposed here can be increased
using GSM-based triangulation methods, but it cannot match
that of GPS-based tracking systems (which are often heav-
ier and more expensive). Light-based geolocators are much
smaller and lighter than the GSM-based system proposed, but
are much less accurate. Also, as with any data loggers, the
data that they collect can be used only if the bird is recovered.
With GSM-based tracking, there is no such constraint.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Minton, K. Gosbell, P. Johns, M. Christie, M. Klaassen, C. Hassell,
A. Boyle, R. Jessop, and J. Fox, “Geolocator studies on Ruddy
Turnstones Arenaria interpres and Greater Sandplovers Charadrius
leschenaultii in the East Asian-Australasia ﬂyway reveal widely differ-
ent migration strategies,” Wader Study Bulletin, vol. 118, no. 2, 2011,
pp. 87–96.
[2]
G. W. Cox, Bird Migration and Global Change.
Washington: Island
Press, 2010.
[3]
I. Newton, The migration ecology of birds.
Amsterdam: Academic
Press, 2008.
[4]
M.
Lander,
M.
Haulena,
F.
Gulland,
and
J.
Harv,
“Implanta-
tion of subcutaneous radio transmitters in the harbor seal (phoca
vitulina),”
Marine
Mammal
Science,
vol.
21,
no.
1,
January
2005, pp. 154–161, http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?
article=1191&context=usdeptcommercepub. Accessed: 2015-03-05.
[5]
A. Gavashelishvili and M. J. McGrady, “Radio-satellite Telemetry of a
Territorial Bearded Vulture Gypaetus Barbatus in the Caucasus,” Vulture
News, vol. 56, 2007, pp. 4–13.
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[6]
R. Wilson, D. Gremillet, J. Syder, M. Kierspel, S. Garthe, H. Weimer-
skirch, C. Schafer-Neth, J. Scolaro, C. Bost, J. Plotz, and D. Nel,
“Remote-sensing systems and seabirds: their use, abuse and potential for
measuring marine environmental variables,” Marine Ecology Progress
Series, vol. 228, 2002, pp. 241–261.
[7]
M. Nagy, Z. Akos, D. Biro, and T. Vicsek, “Hierarchical group
dynamics in pigeon ﬂocks,” Nature, vol. 464, no. 7290, Apr 8 2010,
pp. 890–U99.
[8]
D. Biro, T. Guilford, G. Dell’Omo, and H. Lipp, “How the viewing
of familiar landscapes prior to release allows pigeons to home faster:
evidence from GPS tracking,” Journal of Experimental Biology, vol.
205, no. 24, Dec 2002, pp. 3833–3844.
[9]
H. Broseth and H. Pedersen, “Hunting effort and game vulnerability
studies on a small scale: a new technique combining radio-telemetry,
GPS and GIS,” Journal of Applied Ecology, vol. 37, no. 1, Feb 2000,
pp. 182–190.
[10]
W. Bouten, E. W. Baaij, J. Shamoun-Baranes, and K. C. J. Camphuysen,
“A ﬂexible GPS tracking system for studying bird behaviour at multiple
scales,” Journal of Ornithology, vol. 154, no. 2, Apr 2013, pp. 571–580.
[11]
M. Ledwon and J. Betleja, “Post-breeding migration of Night Herons
Nycticorax nycticorax tracked by GPS/GSM transmitters,” Journal of
Ornithology, vol. 156, no. 1, Jan 2015, pp. 313–316.
[12]
U. Mellone, J. De La Puente, P. Lopez-Lopez, R. Liminana, A. Bermejo,
and V. Urios, “Seasonal differences in migration patterns of a soaring
bird in relation to environmental conditions: a multi-scale approach,”
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, vol. 69, no. 1, Jan 2015, pp.
75–82.
[13]
S. M. Tomkiewicz, M. R. Fuller, J. G. Kie, and K. K. Bates, “Global
positioning system and associated technologies in animal behaviour and
ecological research,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B-Biological Sciences, vol. 365, no. 1550, Jul 27 2010, pp. 2163–2176.
[14]
A. M. Fudickar, M. Wikelski, and J. Partecke, “Tracking migratory
songbirds: accuracy of light level loggers (geolocators) in forest habi-
tats,” Methods in Ecology and Evolution, vol. 3, 2012, pp. 47–52.
[15]
P. Ekstrom, “Error measures for template-ﬁt geolocation based on light,”
Deep-Sea Research II, vol. 54, 2007, pp. 392–403.
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-426-8
SENSORDEVICES 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

