 
 
 
Figure 1. Block diagram of a wireless sensor node powered by a vibration 
energy harvester 
 
Performance Testing of a Low Power Consumption Wireless Sensor 
Communication System Integrated with an Energy Harvesting Power Source 
 
Vlad Marsic, Alessandro Giuliano, Michele Pozzi, Meiling Zhu and Stewart Williams 
School of Applied Sciences 
Cranfield University 
Cranfield, Bedforshire, United Kingdom, MK43 0AL 
E-mail: v.a.marsic@cranfield.ac.uk, a.giuliano@cranfield.ac.uk, m.pozzi@cranfield.ac.uk,  
m.zhu@cranfield.ac.uk and s.williams@cranfield.ac.uk  
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents the performance testing results 
of a wireless sensor communication system with low power 
consumption integrated with a vibration energy harvesting 
power source. The experiments focus on the system’s 
capability to perform continuous monitoring and to wirelessly 
transmit the data acquired from the sensors to a user base 
station, 
completely 
battery-free. 
Energy 
harvesting 
technologies together with system design optimisation for 
power consumption minimisation ensure the system’s energy 
autonomous capability demonstrated in this paper by 
presenting the promising testing results achieved following its 
integration with Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) and 
Body Area Network (BAN) applications. 
Keywords - vibration scavenging; energy harvesting; low 
power consumption; wireless sensor communication system; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Technological advances have led to increasing levels of 
automation, but have also contributed to creating new 
vulnerabilities to equipment failure, human error, weather 
conditions and other interfering factors. These vulnerabilities 
need to be addressed using evolutionary approaches. The 
continuity and viability of critical infrastructures can be 
ensured using adaptive approaches that monitor sensory data 
coming from various sensors situated in vulnerable locations. 
Such networks of sensors that monitor different physical or 
environmental conditions, and then communicate this data 
wirelessly to a base station, are known as wireless sensor 
networks (WSN). 
A wireless sensor network consists of sensor nodes that 
possess computing power and the ability to transmit and 
receive messages wirelessly. Each sensor node is typically 
formed of a sensing unit (i.e., sensors), a processing unit 
(i.e., microcontroller), a transmitter/receiver unit (i.e. the part 
that connects the node to the network) and an energy source 
(i.e., a battery or an energy harvester). The energy source is 
one of the most important components of a sensor node, as 
this component determines its life span. The use of a battery 
as energy source would limit the lifetime of the sensor node, 
and of the entire sensor network. This shortcoming can be 
addressed by designing self-powered wireless sensor nodes 
that harvest energy from the surrounding environment and 
use this energy efficiently to ensure a potentially unlimited 
functionality of the sensor node. Energy harvesting from 
external sources such as ambient vibrations, wind, heat or 
light could produce sufficient energy for the sensor nodes to 
be functional indefinitely, as long as the wireless sensor 
network uses this energy efficiently.  
Energy efficiency is a major issue for wireless sensor 
networks. The most power-consuming activity of a WSN is 
communication. In our previous work ([1], [2]) this problem 
was addressed by proposing a novel 
design and 
implementation 
of 
an 
autonomous 
wireless 
sensor 
communication system with low energy consumption 
powered from a vibration piezoelectric harvester. The 
innovative design and implementation technique targeted 
power consumption minimisation at three different levels: 
hardware, software and data transmission, in order to reduce 
the power consumption of the off-the-shelf components 
included in the system with the aim of ensuring its energy 
autonomy through a smart energy flow management. The 
capability of the resulted system to perform continuous 
monitoring and to wirelessly transmit the data acquired from 
the sensors to a user base station was then evaluated in the 
context of SHM and BAN applications. The main motivation 
underlying this paper is to present the results of laboratory 
testing for the designed and implemented low power 
consumption communication sensing system in SHM and for 
BAN technology. 
This article is structured as follows: Section II reviews 
previous related work in this field, Section III describes the 
general structure of our system, while Section IV focuses on 
its implementation. The testing results collected from the two 
different setups for SHM and BAN technology are presented 
in Section V. Conclusions are drawn in Section VI.  
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
In recent years, energy harvesting devices have attracted 
much interest due to an increasing need for battery free 
remote monitoring of different structural parameters. 
Vibration energy harvesters (EH) can scavenge and 
transform environmental vibration into electricity using 
electro-magnetic or piezoelectric structures and, according 
to their design purpose, one can distinguish two categories: 
vibration energy harvesters for SHM, and for BAN. The two 
groups are built differently because of environmental factors 
such as force, acceleration and displacement, which in the 
end determine the weight, internal structure, and the 
impedance of the designed harvester. The devices powered 
by the above presented groups of EH are used to collect, 
monitor and display different data directly related to the two 
domains of BAN and SHM. When powered from a weak 
power source such as an energy harvester, existing 
monitoring technology is not suitable to function and 
provide the full range of monitoring processes such as 
collecting 
data, 
processing 
and 
transmitting 
this 
information. This is why recent research has focused on the 
design and implementation of low power wireless 
communication systems that can be used as autonomous 
health monitoring systems while being powered only from 
an energy harvester. 
In the case of BAN systems, the vibration harvesting 
technology was implemented in wrist watches [5], 
intelligent clothing [6], remote control radio press-buttons 
[7], [8] and implants [9]. In the case of SHM systems, EH 
technology was used for monitoring tyre pressure [10], 
vibrations 
from 
vehicles’ 
rotating 
engines 
[11], 
environmental 
characteristics 
[12], 
vibrations 
from 
buildings and bridges [13]. Some of these applications 
feature a low power wireless communication system whose 
autonomy is ensured through the use of a vibration energy 
harvester. For example, [11] presented a wireless system 
powered from a vibration harvester for an aircraft’s SHM. 
Our previous work [1], [2], focused on the design and 
implementation of a low power wireless communication 
system that uses off-the-shelf available technology and is 
powered from a vibration energy harvester. Laboratory 
measurements indicated a very good performance and 
confirmed the advantages of the three level energy 
consumption optimization approach: the main aim of the 
design and system implementation methodology was to 
reduce power consumption at the hardware, software and 
data transmission levels. The module resulted from our 
previous research is general enough to be employed in a 
variety of applications. Its wide generalization capability is 
demonstrated in the present article, whose novelty lies in the 
fact that it presents the same low power wireless 
communication module functioning with the energy 
produced by a vibrational piezoelectric harvester being 
successfully employed to provide continuous monitoring in 
the context of both SHM and BAN applications.  
There are no previously published reports of any module 
relying on vibration energy harvesters capable of continuous 
self-powering and continuous monitoring both for SHM and 
BAN, and this is where the present work brings its original 
contribution.  
III. 
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
Fig. 1 illustrates a self-powered autonomous wireless 
sensor system composed of a power source and a wireless 
sensing communication system. These two main subsystems 
are further divided into five functional blocks: vibration 
energy harvester block, power management block, wireless 
communication block, wireless sensor management block 
and sensors block. 
The vibration energy harvester block is the power 
supply. The energy it produces is directly dependent on the 
vibration provided by the wireless sensor deployment 
environment. 
The power management block transforms and stores 
the energy generated by the vibration harvester. 
The wireless sensor management block is the link 
between the sensors block and the wireless communication 
block. It takes data from the sensors block and processes it in 
order to be sent to the wireless communication block. 
The 
sensors 
block 
interacts 
with 
the external 
environment 
and 
interprets 
specific 
stimuli 
(e.g., 
temperature, acceleration, light intensity, pressure, etc.) by 
transforming them in useful signals for the management 
block processing. 
The wireless communication block transmits the data 
provided by the wireless sensor management block, to a base 
station which can be linked to the internet or directly to the 
user. 
At the system design stage, the key-problems to be 
resolved are: 
 Reduce the power consumption in the active mode (while 
executing the programmed instructions, reading sensors’ 
data, and transmitting wirelessly the information), and in 
the passive mode (while the device is disconnected from 
the power source or enters an idle mode known as deep 
sleep, until the energy storage device regains enough 
energy for the system to function in active mode); 
 Preserve 
the 
system’s 
basic 
functionality 
and 
compatibility with standards after reducing the energy 
consumption (i.e., preserve the main function of 
transmitting data using a certified protocol like IEEE 
802.15.4, and respect the restrictions involving power 
and license for certain geographic regions). 
IV. 
SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION 
This 
section 
describes 
briefly 
the 
design 
and 
implementation of the system to overcome the challenges 
that appeared during the initial design stages presented in our 
previous articles ([1], [2]). The novelty of our approach lies 
in the analysis and implementation of the optimal strategy to 
reduce the power consumption for all the embedded off-the-
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

shelf subsystems at three different levels: hardware, software 
and data transmission. 
At hardware level, the wireless microcontroller was 
isolated from the power management module during periods 
of inactivity by introducing an Energy Aware Interface 
(EAI) which monitored the amount of energy produced by 
the harvester stored in a charging element, and interrupted 
the power supply to the wireless communication module 
until the minimum level of energy required for the active 
state was reached. The current consumption of the whole 
system was reduced to 1.19µA for the disconnected mode – 
the passive mode of the functioning duty-cycle. This 
represents a 10-times reduction in current consumption 
before undertaking any modification of the system module. 
At software level, the system was improved in terms of 
reducing power consumption by choosing the most suitable 
libraries for the application, the right sensors and by 
designing a suitable power-saving algorithm to read and 
transmit data. 
The choices concerning data transmission were made 
with a view towards minimising data consumption, 
preserving the simplicity of the architecture, avoiding 
collisions and interferences, and ensuring data security. To 
this end, an IEEE 802.15.4 star configuration was selected 
for the data transmission level. The data was wirelessly 
transmitted using 3 different channels corresponding to the 
2.4GHz 
world-wide 
free 
license 
frequency. 
This 
multichannel mode favoured the implementation of a TDMA 
(Time Division Multiple Access) protocol, thus ensuring 
better transmission/reception and efficiency due to solving 
the problem involving the data packets collisions. 
The energy harvester is different for each of the 
applications presented in the following, i.e. SHM and BAN, 
and it was chosen as the most suitable model for 
implementation in these two different technologies. 
For SHM, the vibration energy harvester is based on the 
Macro-Fiber Composite (MFC) [14] and glued to an 
aluminium alloy substrate of the same type used in the 
airplane industry for producing the aircraft lower wing skin. 
The aluminium plate is mounted on a tensile testing machine 
which is used to simulate the airplane wing flying stress 
levels and vibration conditions. 
For BAN, the vibration energy harvester is based on a 
design created at Cranfield University for a project involving 
body wearable energy harvesting sources, and described in 
[15] and [16]. It is composed of four fixed bimorph 
piezoelectric cantilevers which are fitted in the centre of a 
wearable rotating wheel. Small plectra are fixed on the 
interior side of the wheel’s outer ring. The wheel is mounted 
on a stepper motor to simulate the joint-knee movements. 
When the wheel is rotating, the plectrum pluck the bimorph 
piezoelectric material, makes it vibrate, therefore converting 
the leg movement to bimorph vibration, and afterwards to 
electricity. 
 
Figure 2. Implemented system architecture. 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 3. Structural Health Monitoring: application and laboratory testing set-up. 
The implemented design of the wireless sensing module 
powered by a vibration piezoelectric energy harvester is 
presented in Fig.2. In the context of this architecture, the 
harvester which converts the vibration energy to electricity, 
correspondent to the block diagram illustrated in Fig.1 is 
different for each application: SHM and BAN. The power 
management module then rectifies the voltage and stores it in 
two 1mF reservoir capacitors. The energy is discharged 
when a pre-set threshold is reached. This is triggered by the 
energy aware interface present on the back of the module. 
The energy is distributed to each sensor by the wireless 
microcontroller. The microcontroller, represented by the 
JN5148 module manufactured by Jennic-NXP is one of the 
lowest power consumption products currently available on 
the market. It features a 32 bit CPU (Central Processing 
Unit), 4 to 32MHz clock frequency and 128Kb RAM 
(Random Access Memory) [17]. 
The three sensors were chosen to be included in the 
system because of their low power consumption, low 
initialisation 
time, 
and 
also 
due to 
the 
deployed 
environmental stimuli. The first-one is ADXL 335 3 axes 
accelerometer [18], the second one is the temperature sensor 
MCP9700 [19], and the last one is the light intensity sensor 
GA1A2S100 [20]. All sensors are interrogated by the 
JN5148 microcontroller, and afterwards the information is 
sent to the wireless integrated transmitter/receiver (Tx/Rx). 
The Tx/Rx is compliant with the IEEE 802.15.4 protocol 
working at 2.4 GHz frequency and allowing the usage of 16 
different channels. Out of those 16 channels, three channels 
were chosen for a multichannel transmission which allows 
the implementation of a simple TDMA (Time division 
multiple access) anti-collision algorithm, reduces the 
possibility of channel overlapping and interference with the 
existent wireless applications active in the same area, and 
also provides the user the possibility to calculate the location 
of the node using a TOF (Time-of-flight) algorithm. The 
data is sent wirelessly to the user base station equipped with 
the same JN5148 wireless microcontroller, powered by a 
stable power source (battery or DC power source) and linked 
via a USB cable to a computer. The information is displayed 
in LabView using a graphical interface especially designed 
and implemented for this purpose. The signal strength and 
data from the sensors are monitored and saved for further 
analysis in two output text files: one containing all the 
sensors and signal data, and another one counting the 
number of transmissions/receptions and measuring the time 
interval between two consecutive ones. 
Due to the fact that the module is designed to 
continuously monitor the vibration, which is its energy 
source, the system duty cycle is directly related with the 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 4. Time gap between transmissions for SHM. 
TABLE 1. Experimental Data Transmission for SHM 
Test Conditions 
Time gap between two consecutive system duty cycle data transmissions [s] 
  
Applied Force 
(Strain) 
11kN (114 µε) 
21kN (228 µε) 
31kN (342 µε) 
41kN (456 µε) 
51kN (570µε) 
Frequency 
  
1Hz 
39.6 
12.5 
7 
4.9 
3.5 
2.5Hz 
13.5 
4.9 
2.7 
2 
1.5 
5Hz 
6.6 
2.4 
1.5 
1 
0.8 
7.5Hz 
6.2 
1.7 
1.1 
0.7 
0.6 
10Hz 
5.2 
1.4 
0.7 
0.6 
0.4 
 
energy source: if there is vibration, there is energy to 
function, to monitor and transmit the data; if there is no 
vibration, there is no energy and nothing to be monitored. 
In order to test the wireless sensing system’s ability to 
provide continuous monitoring, we powered it, in turn, from 
two different energy harvesting technologies related to SHM 
and BAN, the main criterion used to illustrate the 
performance of the system being the dimension of the time 
gap between two consecutive duty cycle transmissions. 
The data is transmitted with the standard IEEE 802.15.4 
speed of 250 kbps, using three different channels, and the 
total amount of data transmitted during one duty cycle (i.e., 
data payload, network addresses and correction Bytes) 
contains 100 Bytes. The system duty-cycle used for testing 
as presented above and in [2] consists of two stages: 
 Passive mode – the system is waiting for the energy 
stored in the 2mF capacitor to reach the preset level in 
order to start the operations. At this stage, due to the 
smart management of the energy flow accomplished by 
the implemented energy aware interface (EAI), the 
current consumption is 1.19µA. 
 Active mode – the system is reading data from the three 
sensors and transmits wireless the information to the user 
base station using a multichannel transmission. The 
whole process duration is 10ms and the average power 
consumption to read data and transmit 100 Bytes at 
+2.5dBm transmission power is 16.7mW. 
V. 
TESTING RESULTS  
A. SHM 
As previously mentioned in Section III, the wireless 
sensing system integrated with SHM technology is powered 
by a vibration harvester based on NASA’s MFC glued on an 
aluminium plate which is then mounted into the Istron 8500 
tensile testing machine. The tensile testing machine is used 
to apply a range of frequencies from 1 to 10 Hz and a force 
between 11 and 51KN to the aluminium plate, and the 
material stress generates a proportional strain, varying from 
114 to 570µε. 
This investigation is motivated by the intention of 
implementing piezoelectric vibration harvesters in aircraft 
wings so that they power wireless sensing systems embedded 
or mounted in the same area.  
The wirelessly transmitted data would be collected by a 
base station, powered from a regular power source, which 
can be located inside the airplane body. 
The piezoelectric harvesters were chosen against 
electromagnetic ones due to their light weight, small volume 
and possibility to be embedded in layered structures or used 
as patches. The downside of the piezoelectric vibration 
harvester materials is the small amount of power output and, 
as a consequence, the power consumption of the wireless 
sensing system should be reduced at all three levels, 
hardware, software and data transmission, so that it is able to 
grant the continuous monitoring capability of the system. 
The targeted SHM application and the equivalent laboratory 
testing set-up are presented in Fig.3. 
The continuous monitoring capability can be observed in 
Fig. 4 obtained by plotting the data stored by the LabView 
user interface. The data reveals a gap of only 0.4s between 
two consecutive data transmissions for 10Hz vibration 
frequency and 51kN (570µε) of applied force.  
The measured time gap between two consecutive system 
transmissions (duty cycle) is presented in Table 1, for all 
frequencies and strain outputs generated when the applied 
force is present. As results included in the table above 
demonstrate, the system’s continuous monitoring capability 
is achieved not only for higher vibration frequencies like 7.5-
10Hz, when it can monitor and transmit new data every 0.4s, 
but even at a vibration level of 1Hz, when it can transmit the 
100 Bytes of information every 3.5s. 
B.  BAN 
In the case of the BAN technology, the power is supplied by 
the wearable “Pizzicato energy harvester”, [21], [22], 
developed at Cranfield University. 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 5. Body Area Network: application and laboratory testing set-up. 
 
Figure 6. Time gap between transmissions for BAN. 
This system is designed to be fitted externally on the side 
of a human knee in order to produce energy by harvesting 
the body movement. For the tests presented in this paper, the 
harvester was fitted onto a stepper motor controlled via a 
controller driver interface and a National Instruments data 
acquisition card (DAQ). 
The aim of the application is to monitor and to wirelessly 
transmit real time data about the bearer, using the three 
sensors already described, and/or to link future implantable 
sensors with shorter wireless range, interrogating them and 
retransmitting the data to the user base station which can be a 
regular computer or a wearable low power consumption 
display interface (i.e., wrist watch), as in Fig. 5. 
Three simulated testing scenarios were used for the 
harvester movement based on real data gathered from human 
behaviour monitoring. The first scenario simulates the 
movements of a human carrying an empty backpack, the 
second one simulates a human carrying 12kg inside the 
backpack, and the third one a human that has 24kg inside the 
backpack. The power from the piezoelectric harvester, after 
rectification, is transferred via two wires to the wireless 
sensing module. The module stores the energy in the 2mF 
capacitors and transfers it to sensors and microcontroller 
when there is enough to perform the duty cycle. Afterwards, 
it transmits the 100 Bytes to the user base station for further 
analysis. 
A representative example of continuous monitoring 
capability can be observed in Fig. 6. The data shows a gap of 
only 1.1s between any two consecutive data transmissions 
for the simulated scenario when the backpack contains 0kg 
of weight. 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

TABLE 2. Experimental Data Transmission BAN. 
Simulated 
Situations 
Time gap between two consecutive system duty cycle 
data transmissions [s] 
0 kg 
Backpack 
1.1 
12 kg 
Backpack 
1.1 
24 kg 
Backpack 
1.1 
 
The experimental test results obtained for the all three 
tests described above are presented in Table 2. 
The results of these experiments demonstrate the 
system’s continuous monitoring capability for BAN energy 
harvesting technology, being able to transmit the 100 Bytes 
of data every 1.1s for all the three simulated scenarios. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This work relies on a low power consumption wireless 
sensor communication system that was designed and 
implemented so that the power consumption was minimised 
at three levels: hardware, software and data transmission. 
This 
optimisation 
strategy 
that 
guided 
the 
system 
development was directed towards the aim of achieving 
energy autonomy, while at the same time ensuring the 
required functionality only with the power provided by a low 
power vibration energy harvester. The resulted battery-free 
wireless sensor communication system built using only off-
the-shelf components, and powered by a low energy 
vibration harvester, was employed in two different 
applications: SHM and BAN monitoring. The successful 
testing scenarios presented in this paper illustrate the 
system’s ability to not only adapt for usage with two 
different energy harvesting technologies, but also to continue 
monitoring and to transmit wirelessly via multichannel the 
100 Bytes of information, using a standard communication 
protocol and the transmitter power pre-set at the highest level 
of +2.5dBm at the same time achieving a speed between two 
transmission duty cycles of 0.4s for SHM and 1.1s for BAN. 
Further directions of research will focus on each 
deployment environment scenario, and will investigate ways 
to decrease the power consumption either by replacing the 
set of general purpose sensors with one dedicated sensor, or 
by using a different transmission frequency or different 
transmission protocols, or by optimising other application-
specific factors. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Marsic V., Zhu M., and Williams S.,“Design and implementation of a 
wireless sensor communication system with low power consumption 
for energy harvesting technology”, Proceedings of the 19th 
Telecommunications Forum TELFOR 2011, pp. 607 – 610, 2011. 
[2] Marsic 
V.,  
Zhu 
M.., and 
Williams 
S., 
“'Wireless 
sensor 
communication system with low power consumption for integration 
with energy harvesting technology”, TELFOR Journal, Volume 4, 
2012. 
[3] Lee T.H., “The design of CMOS radio-frequency integrated circuits a 
nonlinear history of radio”, A Nonlinear History of Radio, Cambridge 
University, pp. 1-34, 1998. 
[4] Theremin L. S., “Signaling apparatus”, U.S.  1658953, Feb 14, 1928. 
[5] Paradiso J. and Starner T., “Energy scavenging for mobile and 
wireless electronics”, IEEE Pervasive Computing, 4(1), pp. 18-27, 
2005. 
[6] Hum A., “Fabric area network – a new wireless communications 
infrastructure to enable ubiquitous networking and sensing on 
intelligent clothing”, Computer Networks, 35(4), pp. 391-399, 2001. 
[7] Paradiso J. and Feldmeier M., “A Compact , Wireless , Self-Powered 
Pushbutton Controller Design”, pp. 299-304, 2001. 
[8] EnOcean, 
“PTM 
100 
User 
Manual”, 
http://docweb.khk.be/khk/remote/technologie/Enocean/MAN_ENG1.
pdf [Accessed 01 Feb. 2012]. 
[9] Platt S., Farritor S., Garvin K., and Haider H., ”The use of 
piezoelectric ceramics for electric power generation within orthopedic 
implants”, Mechatronics, IEEE/ASME Transactions, 10(4), pp. 455-
461, 2005. 
[10] Daniel S., “Piezoelectric reed power supply for use in abnormal tire 
condition warning systems”, U.S., 4510484, Apr 9, 1985. 
[11] Arms S., Galbreath J. , Townsend  C., Churchill  D., Corneau B., 
Ketcham  R., and Phan N., “Energy Harvesting Wireless Sensors and 
Networked Timing Synchronization for Aircraft Structural Health 
Monitoring”, Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on 
Wireless Communication, Vehicular Technology, Information Theory 
and Aerospace & Electronic Systems Technology, pp.16-20, 2009. 
[12] Del Balzo D., Chen H., Hughes B., Cranford  C.,  and Stewart S., 
“Drag body design in support of wave energy harvesting “, OCEANS 
2010, pp.1-6, 2010. 
[13] Galchev T., McCullagh, J., Peterson R.L., and Najafi, K., “Harvesting 
traffic-induced bridge vibrations”, Proceedings of the 
16th 
International Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems 
Conference (TRANSDUCERS), pp. 1661 – 1664, 2011. 
[14] High J. W. and Wilkie W. K., “Method of Fabricating NASA-
Standard 
Macro-Fiber 
Composite 
Piezoelectric 
Actuators”, 
Technology, pp. 1-30, 2003. 
[15] Pozzi M. and Zhu M., “Characterization of a rotary piezoelectric 
energy harvester based on plucking excitation for knee-joint wearable 
applications”, Smart Materials and Structures, 21(5), 2012. 
[16] Pozzi M., “Analytical Modelling of a Plucked Piezoelectric Bimorph 
for Energy Harvesting”, arXiv.org Physics, arXiv:1204.0070, 2012. 
[17] Jennic-NXP, 
”JN5148-001 
Data 
Sheet” 
, 
http://www.jennic.com/files/product_briefs/JN-DS-JN5148-1v6.pdf 
[Accessed 01 Feb. 2012]. 
[18] Analog Devices, “Small, Low Power, 3-Axis ±3 g Accelerometer 
ADXL335”, http://www.sparkfun.com/datasheets/Components/SMD/ 
adxl335.pdf [Accessed 01 Feb. 2012]. 
[19] Microchip, “MCP9700/9700A MCP9701/9701A, Low-Power Linear 
Active 
Thermistor™ 
ICs”, 
http://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/DeviceDoc/21942e.pdf 
[Accessed 01 Feb. 2012]. 
[20] Sharp, “GA1A2S100SS/GA1A2S100LY OPIC™ Linear Output 
Ambient Light Sensor”, http://sharp-world.com/products/device/ 
lineup/data/pdf/datasheet/ga1a2s100ss_ly_e.pdf [Accessed 01 Feb. 
2012] 
[21] Pozzi M. and Zhu M., “Plucked piezoelectric bimorphs for knee-joint 
energy harvesting: modelling and experimental validation”, Smart 
Materials and Structures, 20(5), 2011. 
[22] Pozzi M. and Zhu M., “Pizzicato excitation for wearable energy 
harvesters”, SPIE Newsroom, SPIE10.1117/2.1201104.003682, 2011. 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-208-0
SENSORDEVICES 2012 : The Third International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

