Metal-Insulator-Metal Gas Sensor Based on Polarizable Thin Films 
 
Martin Schreivogel, Denis Kunz, 
Ralf-Roman Rosenberger 
Corporate Research 
Robert Bosch GmbH 
Stuttgart, Germany 
martin.schreivogel@de.bosch.com 
Martin Schreivogel, Wolfgang Menesklou, Ellen 
Ivers-Tiffée 
Institute of Materials for Electrical and Electronic 
Engineering 
Karlsruher Institut für Technologie (KIT) 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
 
 
Abstract— A new type of Metal-Insulator-Metal (MIM) gas 
sensor sensitive to low concentrations of hydrogen containing 
gases is presented. Less than 5 ppm H2 give rise to significant 
signal changes compared to pure nitrogen or air. Response 
times are in the order of several ten seconds. The capacitive 
structure incorporates two stacked dielectric thin films (SiO2, 
Al2O3) with a thickness of a few ten nanometers sandwiched 
between platinum electrodes. The oxides show a distinct 
polarization 
mechanism 
that 
influences 
the 
dielectric 
properties of the films at elevated temperatures above 200 °C. 
The devices are characterized by I-V measurements and 
impedance spectroscopy. The mobile species create an 
additional polarization mechanism that can be influenced by 
an appropriate DC bias. At low biases the dipoles are moveable 
in the oxide, so they can change their direction by an applied 
alternating field. At high biases the dipoles are pinned in one 
direction and the impedance spectrum of the device 
corresponds to an almost ideal capacitor with no loss 
mechanisms. Similar to an externally applied DC bias, species 
from the gas phase that are adsorbed at the electrode-insulator 
interface can introduce an electric field in the dielectric thin 
film influencing the mobility of the species. Thus, the 
contribution of the polarization mechanism to the impedance 
depends on the gas atmosphere and the change of its real or 
imaginary part can be used as sensor signal. Additionally, with 
this new gas sensor structure one can achieve selectivity for 
reducing and oxidizing gases by choosing appropriate 
operating points set by a DC bias. 
 
Keywords-gas sensor; hydrogen; silicon dioxid; aluminum 
oxid; polarization; impedance spectroscopy 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Gas sensors play a major role in monitoring and 
controlling many kinds of technological processes. One 
prominent example is the use of hydrogen as a renewable 
energy carrier for automotive or stationary fuel cell 
applications. Although there are many optimistic predictions 
concerning hydrogen based technologies, safety issues 
remain a critical aspect for hydrogen storage and transport 
[1].  Therefore, sensing hydrogen leakage with very high 
sensitivity is essential for the introduction of hydrogen as 
fuel for commercial applications. 
During the last decade different physical mechanisms for 
the detection of hydrogen have been investigated. To name 
but a few, there are sensors that use hydrogen partial 
pressure sensitive optical constants, temperature changes due 
to different heat conductivities, resistivity changes of metal 
oxides and field effect devices that detect adsorbed gas 
species on their catalytically active gate electrode [2-6].   
Most of these approaches involve quite elaborate preparation 
techniques and many different process steps. Furthermore, 
relatively complex devices still face considerable challenges 
concerning their long term stability. 
We report a new kind of highly sensitive hydrogen gas 
sensor incorporating a polarizable thin film. The design of 
the sensor is extremely simple as it is basically a parallel 
plate capacitor.  
At first appearance, one would not expect such a 
dielectric capacitance with a dense electrode to be gas 
sensitive. Therefore, after presenting the structure itself and 
its gas sensitivity in subsection II.A we performed current-
voltage measurements (II.B) and impedance spectroscopy 
(II.C) in order to understand the physical mechanisms. Based 
on these measurements we propose a first model for the 
signal mechanism and an equivalent circuit in section II.C 
and II.D. Finally, we emphasize the potential of the MIM 
structures for selective gas detection in subsection II.E. 
 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Investigated structure and gas sensitivity 
Fig. 1 depicts a schematic drawing and scanning  
transmission electron micrograph (STEM) of the examined 
metal-insulator-metal (MIM) structure. The two dielectric 
layers are sandwiched between two dense platinum 
electrodes. Plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposited 
(PECVD) SiO2 was chosen to promote the adhesion of the 
following atomic layer deposited (ALD) Al2O3. Aluminum 
oxide is known to show good stability when exposed to gas 
at elevated temperatures from our former studies [7]. There 
was no additional annealing step after deposition and the 
microstructure of the oxide films is amorphous whereas the 
platinum is polycrystalline, which was shown by the STEM 
measurements.  The layout of the different layers was 
designed in a way that dielectric breakthroughs are avoided.  
In a first step, the effective capacitance (calculated from 
the measured impedance with the assumption of an RC 
element as equivalent circuit for the structure) of the MIM 
structures was measured at a fixed frequency when they were 
exposed to different gases. The response to different 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

concentrations of hydrogen is shown in Fig. 2. The reference 
gas was pure nitrogen. The devices show a very high 
sensitivity and presumably it is possible to measure much 
lower concentrations, because the small signal change 
between 5 and 20 ppm suggests that the response is already 
close to saturation in this range (our home designed 
measurement system is limited to a minimum concentration 
of 5 ppm).  
There was no response observed, when the device was 
exposed to NO or NO2. However, there is cross-sensitivity 
towards other hydrogen-containing gases like C2H6 or NH3.  
As mentioned earlier, these clear and steplike hydrogen 
signals are surprising for a structure like this which 
incorporates none of the known transducer mechanism 
usually utilized for gas sensing. Since geometric changes of 
the dielectric layers can be ruled out as the origin of the 
capacitance change there has to be a variation of the electric 
properties of the dielectric thin films due to different gas 
atmospheres. 
To explain these effects and to understand the most 
interesting gas sensitivity we systematically performed 
further electrical characterizations that are presented in the 
following subsections.  
B. I-V measurements 
One approach to explain the gas sensitivity is an 
influence of the hydrogen on the electronic or protonic DC 
conductivity of the dielectric films. Zhu et al. observed a 
hydrogen-induced increase in the direct current through an 
amorphous (Ba0.67Sr0.33)Ti1.02O3 (BST) MIM structure when 
it was exposed to hydrogen. They explained it by an induced 
polarization potential at the electrode-BST interface [8].  To 
compare their results and validate their theory for our 
structures we measured the current through the dielectric as 
function of voltage in pure nitrogen and 100 ppm hydrogen 
(see Fig. 3). In order to gain information about non-steady 
state processes we introduced a delay between voltage 
application and current measurement at each point. By 
increasing the delay the scan rate was decreased and 
consequently there was more time for the relaxation of non-
steady state processes such as polarization currents. The 
temperature was set to 350 °C, only at these elevated 
temperatures the below described effects emerge. 
In all the measurements there are distinct current maxima 
observed. They occur at voltages that are supposed to 
correspond to the flat band condition in the dielectric layers, 
that means at these biases the electric field in the dielectrics 
becomes zero. They occur in both scan directions showing 
some hysteresis. In nitrogen these maxima are not arranged 
symmetrically to zero volts. Possible reasons for this could 
be different work functions of the metal electrodes or fixed 
charges trapped in one of the oxides. 
When the delay between voltage application and current 
measurement is increased, i.e., the scan rate is decreased, the 
described maxima vanish. This behavior indicates that there 
is a contribution to the current that is no continuous leakage 
current but some kind of polarization current. It should be 
noticed that the according polarization mechanism arises 
from the dielectric film itself and can’t be explained by the 
charging of the geometrical capacitance as the time constant 
is at the order of several seconds. 
Another observation that can be made in the current-
voltage measurements concerns the effect of hydrogen. At 
the same scan rate the whole curve seems to be shifted 
towards lower voltages when exposed to 100 ppm hydrogen. 
Thus, the hydrogen acts like a voltage offset at the electrode. 
This offset can be understood as work function change of the 
platinum at the platinum-dielectric interface induced by 
adsorbed hydrogen [9]. From literature it is well known that 
hydrogen is able to diffuse through platinum thin films [10]. 
This is not the case for gases like NO or NO2, which explains 
the observed selectivity towards hydrogen-containing gases 
for structures with dense front electrodes. 
From the I-V measurements it can be concluded that the 
mechanism described by Zhu et al. is not the origin for the 
gas sensitivity of our structures. However, we got some first 
0
5
10
15
20
33,5
34,0
34,5
5 ppm H2
20 ppm H2
100 ppm H2
Capacitance  Ceff  (pF)
Time (min)
 
Figure 2.  Response of the MIM structure to 5, 20 and 100 ppm 
hydrogen in nitrogen. The measurement frequency was 100 Hz and the 
device temperature was set to 350 °C. 
 
 
           
Pt
Al2O3
SiO2
Sapphire
Gas
 
 
           
 
 
Figure 1.  Schematic drawing and STEM micrograph of the examined 
MIM structure. They consist of a stack of a platinum back contact (20 nm), 
silicon oxide (23 nm), aluminum oxide (6 nm) and a dense platinum front 
electrode stacked on a sapphire substrate (to enhance the contrast between 
SiO2 and Al2O3 a dashed line was added). 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

ideas of the signal formation mechanism for which an 
additional polarization mechanism seems to play a major 
role. 
Thereby 
motivated, 
we 
performed 
impedance 
measurements that are a common technique to characterize 
dielectric thin films with polarization losses. 
  
 
C. Impedance measurements 
In order to gain more information about the nature of the 
present polarization mechanism we measured the impedance 
of the structures as a function of frequency. To interpret 
these impedance spectroscopy data we chose Cole-Cole 
diagrams, which show the imaginary part Z’’ of the 
impedance as a function of the real part Z’, where 
Z=Z’+jZ’’. Fig. 4 shows the spectra for different biases 
applied to the capacitances. In a certain bias range there is 
clearly an additional polarization mechanism present. It is 
expressed by the semicircle emerging for small impedances 
having a minimal radius at a bias of approximately 600 mV. 
This is in good agreement with the offset of the centre of the 
I-V curves from zero described in subsection B. For biases 
that are more than about 500 mV away from that value the 
Cole-Cole plot of the impedance spectrum shows almost a 
vertical line, which corresponds to an ideal capacitor with 
small losses. That means the impedance consists basically of 
a frequency-dependent imaginary part Z’’=-(ωC)-1, where ω 
is the angular frequency and C the capacitance. This implies 
that there are polarizable species that are free to move when 
there is no net electric field in the dielectrics. Under these 
circumstances they contribute significantly to the impedance 
of the structure with a time constant at the order of 10 s. On 
the other hand the dipoles are pinned at one side or in one 
orientation when the magnitude of the applied voltages is 
relatively high. 
The actual microscopic origin of the observed 
polarization and the relative contribution of the different 
oxides are subject of current investigations. There are 
different mechanisms like drifting ionic impurities or the 
switching of monovalent impurity ions, that are connected to 
the amorphous structure by non-bridging oxygen ions, 
imaginable [11]. In both cases the ongoing processes are 
thermally activated, which explains the need of temperatures 
above approx. 200 °C to observe the described effects.   
The reason for the gas sensitivity of the structures can be 
examined with impedance measurements as well (see Fig. 5). 
The adsorbed hydrogen affects the whole frequency range 
and has the same effect as an additional bias of about 400 to 
600 mV (compare to the bias-dependent measurements in 
nitrogen atmosphere in Fig. 4). This effect is at the same 
order of magnitude as the shift of the I-V curves in Fig. 3. 
Additionally, from Fig. 5 the measured gas signal at one 
specific frequency can be understood in detail. As an effect 
of the adsorbed gas accompanied by the induced bias offset 
the influence of the polarization mechanism on the 
impedance spectra changes. This in general means that both 
the real and imaginary part of the measured impedance 
change. From this point of view the first way of plotting the 
gas signal in Fig. 2 as effective capacitance might be 
confusing because the assumption of an ideal capacitor for 
the calculation of the capacitance Ceff is invalid. To describe 
a system like this a little more complex equivalent circuit is 
necessary. A first suggestion is given in subsection D. 
 
-2
-1
0
1
2
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
Current (pA)
Voltage (V)
H2
 
Figure 3.  I-V-curves measured on the MIM structures in different gas 
atmospheres and with different scan rates. The step size of the scan was 
100 mV and there was a delay between voltage application and current 
measurement at each point. The delay was 5 s, 15 s and 60 s (black, red, 
and green, respectively) for the curves in nitrogen at the right and 5 s for 
the curve in 100 ppm hydrogen in nitrogen at the left (square symbols).   
 
-10
0
10
20
30
40
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50
   -300 mV
    200 mV
    600 mV
    900 mV
  1000 mV
  1300 mV
      Fit
Imaginary part of impedance Z''  (M
Real part of impedance Z'  (M)
 
Figure 4.  Impedance spectra of the MIM structures at different biases. The 
measurements were carried out at frequencies from 1 MHz down to 100 
mHz (for clarity reasons there is only 1 MHz to 10 Hz depicted; the small 
red square marks the measured data at 100 Hz.) and at a temperature of 350 
°C. The black crosses are fit values corresponding to the equivalent circuit 
model discussed in subsection D. 
 
 
   
 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

D. Proposed equivalent circuit 
In order to quantitatively describe the behavior of the MIM 
structure it is desirable to use an equivalent circuit model. As 
a first step we propose the circuit shown in Fig. 6. An 
impedance spectroscopy specialist might realize that the 
same electrical behavior can be described by a series 
connection of two RC elements. Nevertheless, we think that 
the shown approach is the physically more intuitive one. The 
physical meanings of the four components are as follows:  
Cgeo is the geometrical capacitance of the structure. Its origin 
is the charging of the parallel plate capacitor taking into 
account the bias-independent permittivity of the dielectrics at 
high frequencies:  
 
A
d
d
d
A
C
hf
r
hf
r
hf
r
hf
r
hf
r eff
geo
,2 1
2
1,
,2
1,
0
,
0










, 
(1) 
where ε0 is the permittivity of vacuum, 
hf
r,eff
 is the 
effective relative permittivity of the dielectric stack at high 
frequencies, 
hf
r,x
 and dx are the relative permittivity and 
thickness of layer x, with d=d1+d2 and A is the area of the 
capacitor. Cgeo is assumed to be constant for all applied 
biases and frequencies. 
Rel is the resistance towards electronic leakage currents 
through the dielectric materials. It should be noted that in 
general Rel is not ohmic but depends on the applied voltage 
as there are different electronic conduction mechanisms like 
Schottky thermoionic emission or Poole-Frenkel conduction 
imaginable [12].  
The lower branch of the circuit is intended to describe the 
additional 
low 
frequency 
gas- 
and 
bias-dependent 
polarization mechanism for biases close to zero. Obviously 
there has to be an additional capacitance Cpol as the 
polarization allows a higher charge to be stored on the MIM 
structure at a certain voltage. To improve the agreement of 
the measured and fitted data one practically uses a so called 
constant phase element (CPE) instead of an ideal 
capacitance. The impedance of an CPE includes a correction 
coefficient n to describe deviations from ideal capacitances 
like rough electrode surfaces: ZCPE=((iω)nC0)-1 [13]. 
Rpol is implemented to take the polarization losses into 
account. Furthermore the series connection of Cpol and Rpol 
means that there is no continuous current through the lower 
branch of the parallel circuit. This physically makes sense 
since the species that are polarized are restricted to the 
dielectric layers and it is a consequence of the observations 
in Fig. 3. 
In order to describe the observed bias dependence of the 
polarization, Rpol is not a constant, but changes with the bias, 
which can be seen by the varying diameter of the first 
semicircle. That means, an increased Rpol describes the 
reduced mobility of the dipoles in high electric fields and it 
shows a minimum at around 600 mV in nitrogen. 
The presented model exemplary was fitted to the curve 
measured with a bias of 600 mV in Fig. 4. The extracted 
parameters are listed in Table 1. They all lie in the expected 
order of magnitude. For example Cgeo with (1) can be 
estimated to be approximately (39±8) pF, using reasonable 
errors for the geometric dimensions (5%) and for the 
permittivities 
hf
r SiO
2
 ,
=4.0±0.5 and 
hf
r Al O
 , 2 3
=7.0±1.0 [14]. 
TABLE 1.  FIT VALUES FOR THE EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT MODEL IN FIG. 6 AND THE IMPEDANCE DATA SHOWN IN FIG. 4 (600 MV) 
Cgeo 
Rel 
Cpol,0 
n 
Rpol 
 (33.7±0.5) pF 
(13.4±0.4) GΩ 
(398±3) pF 
0.894±0.2 
(13.6±0.1) MΩ 
 
Rpol(V)
Cgeo
Cpol
Rel
 
 
Figure 6.  Equivalent circuit model for the MIM structure at elevated 
temperatures. Cgeo is the geometrical capacitance, Rel the electronic leakage 
current and Cpol and Rpol represent the influence of the additional 
polarization mechanism. 
 












 N2
 H2
Z''
Imaginary part of impedance Z'' (M)
Real part of impedance Z' (M)
Z'
 
Figure 5.  Impedance spectra of the MIM structures in pure nitrogen and 
100 ppm hydrogen in nitrogen. In both cases the DC bias was 600 mV and 
the temperature 350 °C. The small red squares mark the measured data at 
100 Hz. 
 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
E. Potential for selective gas measurements 
Since it was observed that there is a relatively narrow 
bias range within which the described polarization 
mechanism occurs, the operating point, i.e., DC bias, at 
which the gas measurement is accomplished, obviously plays 
a critical role. This phenomenon is shown in Fig. 7. Here the 
imaginary part of the impedance was chosen as signal 
variable, the real part or the magnitude could be reasonable 
as well. According to which bias is chosen the gas signal can 
change its polarity or be completely suppressed. This 
behavior can be understood by considering the dependence 
of the impedance on the bias. There is a distinct peak of Z’’ 
at a bias that is supposed to represent flat band condition in 
the dielectric, which means maximal mobility of the 
polarizable species. According to which bias is chosen an 
additional voltage offset caused by the adsorption of 
hydrogen will lead to an increasing or decreasing impedance 
and in one special case to no signal at all. It also can be 
concluded that there is going to be no gas signal for voltages 
smaller than minus one or bigger than plus two volts. 
The described dependence of the working point implies 
great potential for selectivity of the sensor towards different 
gases. For example gases that induce a positive voltage offset 
like hydrogen will lead to a maximal positive gas signal for 
operating points somewhat below the position of the peak of 
the impedance.  
Inversely, gases that cause negative voltage offsets will 
lead to maximal signal when the operating point is above the 
position of the mentioned peak. Of course, it will be 
necessary to employ porous electrodes to enable the 
adsorption at the electrode-dielectric interface for other gases 
than hydrogen. 
III. 
CONCLUSIONS 
A new kind of gas sensor that stands out by a very 
elementary structure, simple fabrication, robustness, and 
high sensitivity is presented. By choosing the proper 
operating point impedance signal changes of almost 100 % 
for 100 ppm hydrogen can be realized. We propose a first 
equivalent circuit model and are able to explain the observed 
gas sensitivity with the acquired knowledge of the system. 
On this basis it is possible to predict a gas-selective operation 
mode of the device. The calibration of the sensors, the gas 
selectivity, the long-term stability and the microstructural 
investigation of the observed polarization mechanism will be 
subject of our further work. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank MicroGaN GmbH for the 
processing of the samples and the German Federal Ministry 
of Education and Research for financial support of the 
publicity sponsored project “InoSens”. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Y.-H. Chen, C.-Y. Chen, and S.-C. Lee. „Technology 
forecasting of new clean energy: The example of hydrogen 
energy and fuel cell,” African Journal of Business 
Management, vol. 4, 2010, pp. 1372–1380. 
[2] P. Tobiška, O. Hugon, A. Trouillet, and H. Gagnaire, “An 
integrated optic hydrogen sensor based on spr on palladium,” 
Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 74, 2001, pp. 168 – 
172.  
[3] I. Simon and M. Arndt, “Thermal and gas-sensing properties 
of a micromachined thermal conductivity sensor for the 
detection of hydrogen in automotive applications,” Sensors 
and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 97–98, 2002, pp. 104 – 108.  
    
-50
-40
-30
-20
0
10
20
30
40
0
50
100
(3)
(2)
 
 
 
 
 
Z'' (M
 
(ppm)
pH2  
 
Bias (V) 
(1)
0,0
0,2
0,4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Time (min)
        
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
-50
-40
-30
 
 
(3)
(1)
(2)
Imaginary part of impedance Z''  (M
Voltage (V)
 
 
Figure 7.  Gas signal - i.e. change in the imaginary part of the impedance - of the MIM structure for 100 ppm H2 in nitrogen at different biases (left). 
The different polarities of the signal for different biases can be explained qualitatively by considering the dependence of the imaginary part of the 
impedance on the bias (right), showing a distinct peak. The horizontal arrows represent a constant voltage offset induced by the hydrogen starting from 
the externally applied bias. 
 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[4] O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, C. A. Grimes, M. Paulose, and N. 
Mukherjeeb, “A titania nanotube-array room-temperature 
sensor 
for 
selective 
detection 
of 
hydrogen 
at 
low 
concentrations,” Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, 
vol. 4, 2004, pp. 733–737. 
[5] K. I. Lundström, M. S. Shivaraman, and C. M. Svensson, “A 
hydrogen-sensitive pd-gate mos transistor,” Journal of Applied 
Physics, vol. 46, 1975, pp. 3876–3881. 
[6] J. Schalwig, P. Kreisl, S. Ahlers, and G. Muller, “Response 
mechanism of sic-based mos field-effect gas sensors,” Sensors 
Journal, IEEE, vol. 2, 2002, pp. 394 – 402. 
[7] D. Kunz, R. Fix, and A. Martin, “Detection device for 
detecting gas within operating temperature range of detection 
device, has electrically conductive metal electrode and rear 
electrode made of metal or semiconductor material,” Patent 
DE-102009029621 A1, 2009. 
[8] W. Zhu, O. K. Tan, and X. Yao, “Amorphous ferroelectric 
(Ba0.67Sr0.33)Ti1.02O3 thin films with enhanced H2 induced 
interfacial polarization potential,” Journal of Applied Physics, 
vol. 84, 1998, pp. 5134–5139. 
[9] M. Fleischer and M. Lehmann, Solid State Gas Sensors - 
Industrial Application. Springer series on chemical sensors and 
biosensors, Springer, 2012. 
[10] I. Lundström, H. Sundgren, F. Winquist, M. Eriksson, C. 
Krantz-Rülcker, and A. Lloyd-Spetz, “Twenty-five years of 
field effect gas sensor research in Linköping,” Sensors and 
Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 121, 2007, pp. 247 – 262.  
[11] F. Argall and A.K. Jonscher, “Dielectric properties of thin 
films of aluminium oxide and silicon oxide,” Thin Solid Films, 
vol. 2, 1998, pp. 185 – 210. 
[12] K. C. Kao, Dielectric Phenomena in Solids - With Emphasis 
on Physical Concepts of Electronic Processes, Elsevier 
Academic Press, 2004. 
[13] J. R. Macdonald, 
E. Barsoukov 
(Editor), 
Impedance 
Spectroscopy: Theory, Experiment, and Applications, 2nd 
Edition, Wiley, 2005. 
[14] S. Jakschik, U. Schroeder, T. Hecht, M. Gutsche, H. Seidl, and 
J. W. Bartha, „Crystallization behavior of thin ALD-Al2O3 
films,” Thin Solid Films, vol. 425, 2003, pp. 216 – 220. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

