A Device for Self-monitoring Breath Analysis
Danila Germanese∗, Marco Righi∗, Massimo Guidi‡, Massimo Magrini∗, Mario D’Acunto∗, Ovidio Salvetti∗
,
∗Institute of Information Science and Technology
National Research Council, Pisa, Italy
Email: name.surname@isti.cnr.it
†Institute of Science of Matter
National Research Council, Rome, Italy
Email: mario.dacunto@ism.cnr.it
‡Institute of Geo-sciences and Earth Resources
National Research Council, Pisa, Italy
Abstract—Let’s think about the numerous diagnostic screening
methods. How many of them are invasive? How many of them
present side effects? How many of them are expensive? We can
afﬁrm that the majority of the regular prophylactic checkups
are sufﬁciently invasive, expensive and, sometimes, painful to
discourage the subjects from participating in preemptive diag-
nostic procedures. As a consequence, in recent years, the need
for the development of low cost, non invasive, rapid tools for the
monitoring of metabolic processes has been increased. Breath
analysis, performed by means of gas sensor array, may be an
example of this kind of tools. In this paper, we will present the
development of a portable, low cost, easy to use device for breath
analysis, based on commercial semiconductor-based gas sensor
array. We will describe its design, both from a hardware and
software point of view. In addition, by describing the functionality
tests of the device and the experimental results, we will highlight
the pros and cons that come from the use of such type of low
cost adopted technology to analyze breath molecules.
Keywords–Breath analysis; Semiconductor gas sensors; Data
analysis; Low cost technology; E-noses.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Many of us frequently avoid classical diagnostic procedures
(gastroscopy, colonscopy, X-rays, blood samples, magnetic res-
onance (RM), etc.) because of their costs, or because often they
are invasive, and sometimes painful, too. As a consequence, the
need for simpler, cheaper, less invasive methods of screening
is becoming more and more considerable.
Many studies have been addressed to investigate the
metabolic pathways of breath molecules in order to exploit
breath analysis to monitor the metabolic processes that occur
in human body in a non invasive way [1][2][3]. For instance,
according to [4], kidney diseases may be investigated by
analyzing the concentration of ammonia in exhaled breath;
ethane and pentane may derive from lipid per-oxygenation in
case of oxidative stress ([5]); acetone has been investigated
as a biomarker for diabetes, as it seems to be correlated with
blood glucose level ([6]).
Such studies were conducted by using chemical analysis
technologies and methodologies: selected ion ﬂow tube mass
spectrometry, for instance, or proton transfer reaction mass
spectrometry, or gas chromatography- mass spectrometry. All
these techniques are the gold standard for gas analysis, being
very sensitive and accurate. On the other hand, they are very
expensive and time consuming; moreover, the results can be
analyzed only by specialized personnel.
As a consequence, in recent years, the idea of exploiting
gas sensor array to analyze breath molecules [7] has been
arisen. E-noses, quicker than a gas chromatograph, are able
to follow the trend in time of breath molecules. In many stud-
ies, they have been employed to monitor volatile biomarkers
related to cancer [8], or microbial infection [9], or asthma [10].
Toshiba’s recent research prototype ”Breathalyzer” [11] is able
to monitor breath acetone. Bedfont [12] Smokerlyzer detects
high concentrations of carbon monoxide present in smoker’s
breath.
Nonetheless, the technology used by the majority of such e-
noses is expensive [13] or requires complex circuitry [14][15].
Moreover, often the existing e-noses used for monitoring
breath biomarkers are not purposely designed for clinical ﬁeld.
In this paper, we present the development of a device, so called
Wize Sniffer (WS) [16], able to monitor in real time a set of
breath biomarkers. In particular, the aim of our work was to
develop a device which was:
•
able to analyse breath gases in real time;
•
portable;
•
based on low-cost technology, to foster its purchase
and use;
•
easy-to-use also for non-specialized personnel, to pro-
mote its use also in home environment.
In particular, Section II lists the molecules detected by the
WS and describes the device’s general architecture; Section
III explains the WS functionality tests and the experimental
results, later discussed in Section IV.
II.
THE WIZE SNIFFER, HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
The idea of the Wize Sniffer was born in the framework of
European SEMEOTICONS (SEMEiotic Oriented Technology
for Individual’s CardiOmetabolic risk self-assessmeNt and
Self-monitoring) Project. SEMEOTICONS aims at developing
a multi-sensory platform, with the appearance of a mirror, the
so called ”Wize Mirror”, which is able to detect, in human
face, all those ”signs” related to cardio-metabolic risk. The
Wize Sniffer will be integrated in the Wize Mirror, detecting
all those molecules present in human exhaled breath related
to the noxious habits for cardio-metabolic risk (smoking,
alcohol intake, metabolic disorders).
Nonetheless, the modular conﬁguration of the Wize
Sniffer allows for changing the gas sensors according to the
molecules to be detected, and, in addition, for using the Wize
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Sniffer also as a stand-alone device.
A. Molecules detected by the the WS
In this section we describe brieﬂy the breath molecules
detected by the Wize Sniffer and how they are related to those
noxious habits for cardio-metabolic risk: metabolic disorders,
alcohol intake, smoking.
•
Carbon Monoxide (CO): it is present in cigarette
smoke, very dangerous for cardio-metabolic risk. Its
baseline value for a non-smoker subject is round about
3.5ppm, and it reaches 14-30ppm in smokers;
•
Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide (O2andCO2): Their
variations show how much O2 is retained in the body,
and how much CO2 is produced as a by-product
of cellular metabolism. Breathing rate inﬂuences the
level of CO2 in the blood: slow breathing rates cause
Respiratory Acidosis (i.e., increase of blood CO2
partial pressure, which may stimulate hypertension
or heart rate acceleration); Too rapid breathing rate
(hyperventilation) may provoke Respiratory Alkalosis
(i.e., decrease of CO2 concentration in blood, it no
longer ﬁts its role of vasodilator, leading to possible
arrhythmia or heart trouble). Their baseline values are
round about 40000ppm for CO2 and 13-15% for O2;
•
Hydrogen (H2): it derives from the breakdown of the
carbohydrates in the intestine and in the oral cavity by
anaerobic bacteria. Its baseline value is round about
9.1ppm;
•
Ethanol (C2H6O): Ethanol derives from alcoholic
drink. It is recognized that ethanol breakdown leads
to an accumulation of free radicals into the cells, a
clear example of oxidative stress. Ethanol may cause
arrhythmias and depresses the contractility of cardiac
muscle. Its baseline value is round about 0.62ppm;
•
Hydrogen Sulﬁde (H2S): it is a vascular relaxant
agent, and has a therapeutic effect in various cardio-
vascular diseases (myocardial injury, hypertension). Its
baseline value is round about 0.33ppm.
B. Hardware and Software
In Figure 1, the Wize Sniffer ﬁrst prototype’s structure
is shown. The acquiring system is based on a gas sampling
box (of 600ml according to the tidal volume [17] and made
up of (ABS) and Delrin) where six gas sensors are placed,
and a micro-controller board. Other two gas sensors work in
ﬂowing-regime by means of a sampling pump. A heat and
moisture exchanger (HME) ﬁlter is placed at the beginning
of a corrugated tube to absorb the water vapor present in the
breath. A ﬂow-meter monitors the exhaled breath volume. A
ﬂushing pump purges the chamber to recovery the sensors’
steady state between two consecutive measures.
As outlined before, our ﬁrst aim was to develop a device
based on low cost technology. Indeed, we used a widely
employed opensource micro controller board to read, collect
and analyze gas sensors’ data: an Arduino Mega2560 with
Ethernet module.
Regarding the gas sensor array, optical, carbon nano
ﬁber (CNF), quartz crystal microbalance (QCM), metal
oxide semiconductors (MOS), conducting polymers (CP),
and surface acoustic wave (SAW), are the most common
gas sensor types employed in e-noses [7]. Although very
sensitive
and
able
to
detect
concentrations
lower
than
10ppb, optical gas sensors are expensive and often they
cannot be miniaturized. Also CNF-based gas sensors are
expensive, especially for their fabrication and manufacturing,
too. SAW and QCM-based gas sensors have very high
sensitivity but they need complex circuitry and, in the case of
QCM-based gas sensors, they have a poor signal-to-noise ratio.
Figure 1. a) Wize Sniffer ﬁrst prototype’s hardware. b) and c) show its
internal conﬁguration.
Then, our choice was to employ MOS-based gas sensors.
They have long life, strong sensitivity, rapid recovery; in
addition, they are low cost and easy to be integrated in
the circuitry. Unfortunately, humidity strongly affects their
behavior, as well as cross-sensitivity [18]. To reduce the water
vapor present in exhaled breath from 90% up to 60% a HME
ﬁlter is used. In addition, humidity (as well as temperature)
is monitored within the gases store chamber (by means of a
Sensirion SHT11). Cross-sensitivity makes these sensors be
non-selective. This may be a problem for data processing (see
Section III). In Table I, all the used gas sensors are listed, as
well as the detected breath molecules.
TABLE I. SENSORS INTEGRATED IN THE WIZE SNIFFER’S ACQUIRING
SYSTEM
Detected molecule
Sensor
Best detection range
Carbon monoxide
TGS2442
50-1000ppm
MQ7
20-200ppm
TGS2620
50-5000ppm
Ethanol
TGS2602
1-10ppm
TGS2620
50-5000ppm
Carbon dioxide
TGS4161
0-40000ppm
Oxygen
MOX20
0-16%
Hydrogen sulﬁde
TGS2602
1-10ppm
Hydrogen
TGS821
10-5000ppm
TGS2602
1-10ppm
TGS2620
50-5000ppm
MQ7
20-200ppm
In a second step of our work, we will try to develop CP-
based gas sensors. Such type of sensors present the same MOS-
based gas sensors’ pros and cons, but they are highly adaptable
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

and they can be conﬁgured in several ad-hoc solutions. In
particular, we will try to exploit Polyaniline sensitivity to detect
Nitric Oxide, a well-known marker for endothelial function
[19].
As outlined in the previous sections, we aimed to develop
a device which could be used not only in medical centers, but
also in home environment. Indeed, a client-server architecture
is implemented in order to send breath test results also to
a remote Personal Computer: the user, after running a test,
can forward the results to the family doctor, for instance (see
Figure 2).
Figure 2. Client- server architecture including Wize Sniffer
It means that Arduino Mega2560 is programmed to process
sensors’ raw data and to execute a daemon on port 23. It waits
a command line from the remote PC and provides the data.
A measure is considered valid if the user’s exhaled volume
equals at least 600ml (store chamber’s volume, see Figure 1).
The next section describes how the WS microcontroller board
analyzes row data.
III.
EXPERIMENTAL TESTS AND DATA ANALYSIS
As described in Section II-B, semiconductor-based gas
sensors are, on one side, very low cost, very easy to be
integrated in the circuitry and very sensitive; on the other side,
they are not selective, because of cross-sensitivity, and their
behavior is strongly dependent on humidity.
Starting from raw data (see Figure 3), our aim is to
calculate, as accurately as possible, the concentrations of the
molecules present in exhaled breath and to be detected by
the Wize Sniffer. It is understandable how the cross-sensitivity
makes this aim a challenge, since there is not a single sensor
for each breath compound. Moreover, we deal with something
extremely variable: breath gases. Exhaled breath composition
is strongly inﬂuenced by factors such as heart rate, breath
ﬂow rate [20], posture [21], ambient air [22], lung volume
[23], breath sampling [24]. Consequently, breath composition
may exhibit not only a strong inter-variability (among different
subjects), but also a marked intra-variability (relative to the
same subject). As a consequence, we have to face, on one
hand, with an uncertainty of measure which derives from all
those factors that affect the gas sensors’ behavior; on the other
hand, we have un uncertainty due to all the physiological
conditions that may inﬂuence the breath composition. This is
summarized in Figure 4. Note that, in our case, also factors
such as BMI, sex, age, subject’s lifestyle may inﬂuence the
breath composition: for example, alcohol disposal in men is
different than the one in women, and, in addition, it depends
on body mass index (BMI), as well.
Figure 3. Raw breath curves. Also temperature and humidity trends are
plotted.
Figure 4. Breath analysis performed by semiconductor-based gas sensors. In
the circles, all the inﬂuencing factors, both for breath analysis and gas
sensors’ behavior.
For these purposes, these are the experimental steps we are
following:
•
to investigate the behavior of semiconductor-based gas
sensors in our measurement conditions: 30C+/-7% and
70%RH+/-5%, that are the ones that occur in the store
chamber when a breath analysis is performed (see
Figure 3);
•
to investigate how the cross sensitivity affects their
output, that means, how the several molecules inﬂu-
ence each other in the chemical interaction with the
sensors’ sensing element;
•
all this knowledge about gas sensors has to be ex-
ploited and applied to perform breath analysis and
calculate molecules’ concentrations.
A. Gas Sensors’ Behavior Data Analysis
The aim of this phase of the work is to understand gas
sensors’ behavior under our measurement conditions: 30C+/-
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

7% and 70%RH+/-5%. In particular, we want to study not only
their response to a well-known gas concentration, but also their
behavior when humidity increases, due to the exhaled breath.
In addition, in this phase, also the cross sensitivity has to be
addressed.
In Figure 5, the MQ7 (CO sensor) output is plotted as
a function of the humidity. The relationship between the
humidity and MQ7 output can be ﬁtted with a power model.
Figure 5. The relationship between MQ7 sensor and humidity is plotted. A
power model is used for ﬁtting curve.
It can be easily noted how the humidity strongly affects
such type of gas sensors; as a consequence, also the gas ﬂow
rate indirectly inﬂuences gas sensors’ behavior: a high ﬂow-
rate leads to a decrease in humidity, which causes (as shown in
Figure 5), an increase in sensor’s output. Keeping the humidity
constant, sensor’s output will depend on the gas concentration
(CO concentration, in this case) only (as shown in Figure 6).
Figure 6. MQ7 sensor output as a function of different carbon monoxide
concentrations. Measurement conditions: 25.98C, 65.3%RH
Unfortunately, when a breath analysis is performed, breath
ﬂow-rate may be kept low and constant, but the humidity
inevitably rises in value. Figure 7 shows the relationship
(modeled by a power law) between MQ7 sensor’s output and
different CO concentrations.
The cross sensitivity is investigated by keeping the humid-
ity constant, of course, and by injecting in the test chamber,
where the gas sensor under investigation is placed, well-known
mixed gases concentrations (the experimental set-up is shown
in Figure 9). In this way, how the different compounds add
together and inﬂuence gas sensors’ output can be understood.
In Figure 8, the contributions of well-known carbon monoxide
and hydrogen gaseous mixes on TGS2620 sensor’s output are
shown. TGS2620, as reported in Table I, is sensitive to ethanol,
carbon monoxide and hydrogen. When, for instance, the sensor
is exposed to a gaseous mix of 100ppm of carbon monoxide
and 20ppm of hydrogen, its output (at about 28C, 61%RH) will
be 1,01V. By investigating such behavior of semiconductor gas
sensors, the ”weight” of each compound on the output can be
addressed. A simple model able to describe this phenomenon
can be based on a linear regression.
Figure 7. The relationship between MQ7 sensor’s output and well-known
CO concentrations is plotted. A power model is used for ﬁtting curve.
Measurement conditions: 25.98C, 65.3%RH
Figure 8. The contributions of well-known carbon monoxide and hydrogen
gaseous mixes on TGS2620 sensor’s output. It can be noted that such sensor
is much sensitive to hydrogen than to carbon monoxide, especially at lower
concentrations.
Finally, as already reported in Figure 4, the knowledge
about sensors’ behavior must be applied to breath analysis
ﬁeld: breath analysis, performed by semiconductor-based gas
sensors, will have to take into account also the model which
describe such type of gas sensors’ behavior.
B. Breath Test Analysis
Our aim is to develop a model in order to calculate, as
accurately as possible, the concentration of breath molecules
to be detected by the WS, in order to compare such concen-
trations with the reference ones (see Subsection II-A). This
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 9. a) Experimental setup for gas sensors tests. b)The humidity is kept
constant by means of a saturated solution of NaCl placed on the bottom of
the vial. c) The data stream from sensors is read by an Arduino board.
model should be based on the data regarding the gas sensors’
behavior (see Subsection III-A), but it also has to take into
account other parameters (see Figure 4) that can inﬂuence
breath composition.
We are developing such model by using a statistical ap-
proach. Meanwhile, we are also exploiting another approach
for data analysis, more classical, based on Principal Com-
ponent Analysis and K-nearest neighbor (KNN) classiﬁcation
algorithm. In Figure IV, we can see how this approach works.
For this purpose, a measurement protocol was draft and it
involved a population of 26 healthy individuals, with different
age (range 30-60 years old), habits, lifestyles, body type.
We choose healthy individuals because, in this case, we are
detecting those breath molecules related to cardio- metabolic
risk. As a consequence, the Wize Sniffer does not make
a diagnosis, but it only should help the user to monitor
his/her well-being and lifestyle. For the measuring protocol,
the methodological issues about breath sampling procedure
had been taken into account [24], since (as shown in Figure
4) the breath sampling may strongly inﬂuence the breath
composition. Actually, there is not a standardized procedure
to sample the breath. The most common methods of sampling
are three: ”alveolar sampling” (it is used if only systemic
volatile biomarkers are to be assessed), ”mixed expiratory
air sampling” (which corresponds to a whole breath sample),
”time-controlled sampling” (which corresponds to a part of
exhaled air sampled after the start of expiration, but this
method shows large variations of samples compositions). For
our purposes, mixed expiratory air sampling method was
chosen, since our interest was focused on both endogenous
and exogenous biomarkers. The individuals took a deep breath
in, held the breath for 10sec., and then exhaled once into the
corrugated tube trying to keep the expiratory ﬂow constant and
to completely empty their lungs. The study was approved by
the Ethical Committee of the ”Azienda Ospedaliera Univer-
sitaria Pisana”, protocol n.213/2014 approved on September
25th, 2014; all patients provided a signed informed consent
before enrollment.
Figure 10. Score plot of the data analysed by Principal Component Analysis.
The raw data can be divided into 9 clusters according
to subjects’ habits: ”Healthy” (that means subjects with low
cardio-metabolic risk), ”Light Smoker”, ”Social Drinker”,
”LsHd” (that means Light Smokers, heavy drinkers), ”LsVHd”
(that means Light Smokers, very heavy drinkers), ”HsHd”
(that means Heavy Smokers, heavy drinkers), ”HsVHd” (that
means Heavy Smokers, very heavy drinkers). The KNN
classiﬁer is able to correctly classify in 85,96% of cases.
It
is
important
to
highlight
that
while
an
alcohol
consumption up to 1-2 Alcohol unit/ day is often considered
not dangerous (in healthy subjects), smoking is considered
very noxious in any case.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we described the development of a portable,
easy-to-use device for breath analysis based on low-cost tech-
nology. In particular, the device makes use of an array of low-
cost, semiconductor-based gas sensor array.
Such type of gas sensors are, of course, very robust,
sensitive and easy to be integrated in the circuitry. That
allows for having a modular conﬁguration for the acquiring
system and then for changing the gas sensors according to the
molecules to be detected. On the other hand, semiconductor-
based gas sensors require a very robust data post-processing
in order to take into account all the inﬂuencing factors. In the
case of breath analysis, the humidity plays an important role
in that sense, as well as the cross sensitivity.
In addition, standardized procedures for breath sampling
should be deﬁned.
Thus, we retain that a big effort in this direction should
be devoted. Having something low-cost, portable, easy to use,
affordable to maintain, and so exploiting the great potential of
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

breath analysis, may allow for a non-invasive daily monitoring
that, even if without a real current diagnostic meaning, could
represent a pre-screening in any case.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was funded in the framework of the Collab-
orative European Project SEMEOTICONS (SEMEiotic Ori-
ented Technology for Individuals CardiOmetabolic risk self-
assessmeNt and Self- monitoring), grant N. 611516. Paolo
Paradisi and COSMED s.r.l. are warmly acknowledged for
useful support.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Lourenco and C. Turner, “Breath analysis in disease diagnosis:
methodological considerations and applications,” Metabolites, vol. 4,
2014, pp. 465–498.
[2]
F. DiFrancesco, R. Fuoco, M. Trivella, and A. Ceccarini, “Breath
analysis: trends in techniques and clinical applications,” Microchemical
Journal, vol. 79, 2005, pp. 405–10.
[3]
W. Miekisch, J. Schubert, and G. Noeldge-Schomburg, “Diagnostic
potential of breath analysis- focus on volatile organic compounds,”
Clinica Chimica Acta, vol. 347, 2004, pp. 25–39.
[4]
I. Essiet, “Diagnosis of kidney failure by analysis of the concentration of
ammonia in exhaled breath,” Jo. of Emerg. Trends Eng. Appl., Science,
vol. 6, 2013, pp. 859–862.
[5]
M. Phillips, R. Cataneo, J. Greenberg, R. Grodman, and M. Salasar,
“Breath markers in oxidative stress in patients with unstable angina,”
Heart Disease, vol. 5, 2003, pp. 95–99.
[6]
Z. Wang and C. Wang, “Is breath acetone a biomarker of diabetes?
a historical review on breath acetone measurements,” J. of Breath
Research, 2013, p. 037109.
[7]
A. Wilson, “Recent progress in the design and clinical development
of electronic-nose technologies,” Nanobiosensors in Disease Diagnosis,
2016, pp. 15–27.
[8]
T. de Meij, I. Larb, M. van der Schee, and et al., “Electronic nose
can discriminate colorectal carcinoma and advanced adenomas by fecal
volatile biomarker analysis: proof of principle study,” Int. J. Cancer,
2014, pp. 1132–1138.
[9]
N. Yusuf and al., “In-vitro diagnosis of single and poly microbial
species targeted for diabetic foot infection using e-nose technology,”
BMC Bionformatics, 2015, pp. 158–169.
[10]
P. Montuschi, N. Mores, A. Trov, C. Mondino, and P. Barnes, “The
electronic nose in respiratory medicine,” Respiration, 2013, pp. 72–84.
[11]
“www.toshiba.co.jp/about/press.”
[12]
“www.bedfont.com.”
[13]
D. Walt and al., “Optical sensor array for odor recognition,” Biosens.
Bioelectron., 1998, pp. 697–699.
[14]
F. Lai and H. Huang, “Fabrication of high frequency and low-cost
surface-acustic wave ﬁlters using near ﬁeld phase shift photolitography,”
Microelectronic Engineering, 2006, pp. 1407–1409.
[15]
L. Fan, H. Ge, S. Zhang, H. Zhang, and J. Zhu, “Optimization of
sensitivity induced by surface conductivity and adsorbed mass in surface
acoustic wave gas sensors,” Sensor Actuat. B- Chem, 2012, pp. 114–
123.
[16]
M. D’Acunto and al., “Wize sniffer - a new portable device designed for
selective olfaction,” in International Conference on Health Informatics,
2014, pp. 577–582.
[17]
D. Shier, J. Butler, and R. Lewis, Hole’s Human Anatomy and Physi-
ology.
McGraw-Hill 11th Ed, 2007.
[18]
P. Clifford and D. Tuma, “Characteristics of semiconductors gas sensors
i. steady state gas response,” Sensors and Actuators, vol. 3, 1983, pp.
233–254.
[19]
R. Cannon, “Role of nitric oxide in cardiovascular disease: focus on
the endothelium,” Clinical Chemistry, vol. 44, 1998, pp. 1809–1819.
[20]
J. Jones and S. Clarke, “Effect of expiratory ﬂow rate on regional lung
emptying,” Clin. Sci., 1969, pp. 343–56.
[21]
N. Anthonisen, P. Robertson, and W. Ross, “Gravity-dependent sequen-
tial emptying of lung regions,” Journal of Appl. Physiol., 1970, pp.
589–95.
[22]
F. DiFrancesco and al., “Implementation of fowler’s method for end-
tidal air sampling,” Journal of Breath Research, 2008, p. 037009 (10pp).
[23]
J. Jones, “The effect of pre-inspiratory lung volumes on the result of
the single breath o2 test,” Respiratory Physiology, 1967, pp. 375–85.
[24]
W. Miekisch, S. Kischkel, A. Sawacki, T. Lieban, M. Mieth, and
J. Schubert, “Impact of sampling procedures on the result of breath
analysis,” 2008, p. 026007 (7pp).
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

