 
Bin Wei 
Department of Computer Science and Technology 
Algoma University  
Sault Ste Marie, Canada 
Email: bin.wei@algomau.ca 
Rahul Iyer 
Department of Mechanical Engineering 
University of Windsor  
Windsor, Canada 
 Email: iyer112@uwindsor.ca 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— The physical model of a piezoelectric road energy 
harvester is successfully illustrated in this work. The principle 
governing the design of the piezoelectric elements of the 
harvester has been explained in detail. The design of the 
piezoelectric elements has been determined by various 
simulations in Matlab, and the plots of which have been 
represented thoroughly. Based on the Matlab results, a physical 
model of the piezoelectric energy harvester has been successfully 
designed using SolidWorks. The dynamic analysis of the 
harvester is used to elucidate the operation of the design. Finally, 
the stress and displacements plots are used to validate the 
proposed design of the piezoelectric road energy harvester. 
 
Keywords - piezoelectric; road energy harvester; modelling. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
With the increase in fossil fuel usage, the imminent 
depletion of non-renewable sources of energy and the negative 
costs associated with it occurred as a consequence of the 
overall ecology [1]. The need for environmentally friendly and 
renewable energy sources has been on the rise for the best part 
of the past two decades. While solar and wind energies have 
proved to be immensely promising in being able to suffice 
more applications than previously envisioned [2]-[5], their true 
potential remains untapped by some countries that cannot 
boast of the same geological advantages as comparing to 
others [6]. Consequently, to remedy some of these difficulties, 
kinetic energy harvesting has garnered tremendous attention in 
recent years aided by the advancements made in the field of 
piezoelectricity.   
A popular application of kinetic energy harvesting using 
the principles of piezoelectricity is the piezoelectric road 
energy harvester. The idea is to utilize the wasted kinetic 
energy emanated by vehicles on the road (vibrations) by 
converting it to electrical energy which may be used for other 
applications. The ability of piezoelectric materials to generate 
electric potential when subjected to ambient vibrations has 
been well documented in numerous pieces of past research [7]-
[9].Piezoelectric energy generation from kinetic energy can be  
obtained by two major approaches: the cantilever beam tactic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the impact-based approach.  
Piezoelectric cantilever beams have been found to be 
highly sensitive to minute ambient vibrations, thus generating 
power at a small scale, making it a viable option for potentially 
powering low power motion sensors, radar systems and speed 
detectors [10]. While the previous study considered the use of 
the principle of impedance matching to maximize power 
output from the piezoelectric cantilever beams, studies 
considering the use of piezoelectric beams fixed at both ends 
[11] have shown to produce much larger deformations and 
thus, marginally improving the power output of the energy 
harvesting system. Moreover, the efficiency of these 
harvesters is heavily dependent on the speed of the vehicles on 
the road which indicated the scope for improvement in terms 
of frequency tuning for covering larger distances. Apart from 
the vehicle velocity analysis, other practical considerations 
such as the position of the harvester along  particular length of 
road, as well as the effect of road surface irregularities on 
power generation of a piezoelectric road harvester has given 
rise to new perspectives with regards to improving the 
efficiency of such harvesting systems [12]. Cantilever beam 
based piezoelectric energy harvesters also offer numerous 
opportunities for further research with regards to altering its 
individual components, especially the tip mass. The use of a 
single tip mass for multiple piezoelectric cantilevers [13] 
illustrates a much simpler circuit structure as it eliminated the 
use of multiple rectifier circuits, as well as made the system 
behaviour more lucid as the cantilever oscillations became 
much more predictable. As a result, power estimation for the 
system is readily obtainable. 
The scientific inquiry into piezoelectric road energy 
harvesters has also led to improvements being made in the 
digital space, wherein empirical data may be easily compared 
with digitally computed results from software packages [14] 
that are specially dedicated to analysing and accruing road, 
environmental and piezoelectric material data over numerous 
years and thus, providing an increased degree of validity, 
which can aid future applications. Various pieces of research 
have also focused on the materials most suitable to amass 
maximum energy from the road harvesters, with complex 
Design and Modelling of a Piezoelectric Road Energy Harvester  
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
composite films providing one of the best results in this 
domain [15].   
Apart from piezoelectricity, electromagnetic approaches 
that can convert kinetic energy into usable forms of electricity 
(as road harvesters) have also been studied extensively in the 
past [16]. Moreover, these approaches have been further 
extended into the mobile domain as opposed to the stationary 
domain (road harvesters) wherein the heat energy dissipated 
by vehicle suspension systems especially, the shock absorbers 
has been electromagnetically converted into electrical energy 
by incorporating regenerative shock absorbers [17].  
In this paper, the aim is to evaluate the performance of an 
impact based piezoelectric energy harvester consisting of 
cylindrical piezoelectric elements that are embedded into a 
robust steel structure that can endure the forces exerted by 
various vehicles passing on the road, which is the main 
contribution of this study. The actuation of the harvester is 
done through a separate hydraulic mechanism [18] with minor 
changes, which transmits the forces exerted by the vehicles 
into a hydraulic piston, which then stresses the piezoelectric 
block to cause electricity generation.     
The structure of the paper is organized as follows: Section 
2 presents the principle of the piezoelectric road energy 
harvester; analysis of the proposed piezoelectric road energy 
harvester is conducted in Section 3; Section 4 illustrates the 
design process of the piezoelectric module; stress analysis of 
the piezoelectric road energy harvester is conducted in Section 
5; and finally the conclusion is given in Section 6.  
 
II. THE PRINCIPLE 
 The piezoelectric material has been used in the form of a 
transformer model [19] as shown in Figure 1:  
 
 
 
Figure 1. The piezoelectric generator transformer model 
 
 The transformer model illustrates two sides: the primary 
side and the secondary side. The primary side of the 
transformer uses the mechanical and dynamic properties of 
the piezoelectric material to model an analogous electrical 
representation, in which the damping constant of the 
piezoelectric material Bm is considered as a resistance, mass 
Mm as an inductor and the mechanical compliance Cm as a 
capacitor. The input source on the primary side is the input 
force F, which is induced mechanically. The resultant current 
on the primary side is the velocity of the piezoelectric layers 
caused due to the mechanical deformation corresponding to 
the applied force F. Fo represents the internal force 
responsible for the electrical energy generation on the 
secondary side of the transformer model.      
 
 
Figure 2. Mechanical realization of piezoelectric generator model 
 
 
On the secondary side, ZL represents the load connected to 
the piezoelectric model. CP' is the blocked capacitance while 
V is the potential difference across the load ZL. I is the 
resultant current generated while IO is the current 
corresponding to the internal force Fo of the piezoelectric 
material. The mechanical realization of this model is shown 
in Figure 2.  
 
III. ANALYSIS                                             
The design of the piezoelectric cylinders is based on the 
simulations performed in Matlab. These simulations are 
performed taking the maximum possible force that can be 
exerted on the piezoelectric energy harvesting system into 
consideration, i.e., the force exerted by the weight of a loaded 
truck. The input force is in the form of two pulses, assuming 
that only the first two sets of wheels have passed over the 
piezoelectric energy harvesting system. Thus in theory, the 
bigger the vehicle, the larger is the power generated. 
However, the corresponding mechanical structure of the 
piezoelectric energy harvester has to be robust to endure the 
stresses exerted by such heavy vehicles, which will be 
discussed further in Section 5. The energy harvesting system 
considers six piezoelectric cells being embedded in one 
mechanical assembly.   
    A circular cross section for the piezoelectric material is 
deemed most appropriate for the piezoelectric energy 
harvester. This is because a cylindrical structure is much 
easier to manufacture for future mass production without 
incurring excessive production costs. The initial iterations 
take into consideration different diameters and thicknesses 
based on which power and voltage are calculated. For 
thickness ranging from 1 to 10 cm, the power plot is 
discontinuous as the curve would go back to zero soon after 
the first impact. Moreover, the plot for power generated for 
diameters ranging from 1 to 10 cm also shows tremendous 
variations. Hence, the thickness to area ratio is a critical factor 
in determining the optimum power generated, which is 
helpful in determining the dimensions of the piezoelectric 
cylinder.  
     The goal is to achieve sustained oscillations for the 
piezoelectric cylinder after impact in order to generate 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
continuous power and thus facilitate continuous energy 
generation, which can later be used in various applications. 
Hence, further iterations are conducted by varying the 
thickness of the piezoelectric cylinder to up to 20 cm. The 
diameter of the cylinder is restricted to a value below 10 cm.    
    The most suitable results are obtained when the 
piezoelectric material is designed according to dimensions 
mentioned in Table 1, the result of which will be used to 
determine the resultant mean power over the time interval [0, 
200] seconds.  
TABLE 1. DIMENSIONS OF THE PIEZOELECTRIC CYLINDER  
Diameter 
6.5 cm 
Thickness 
18 cm 
 
   The resultant plots for input force, voltage and power 
generated versus time are shown in Figure 3.  
 
Figure 3. Input force, voltage, power versus time 
 
 
    The peak values obtained from Figure 4 for voltage and 
power at first impact are listed in Table 2. 
TABLE II. RESULTANT PEAK VALUES FOR VOLTAGE AND 
POWER  
Voltage 
200 V 
Power 
478.1 W 
 
    According to the Table 1, the resultant mean power over 
the time interval [0, 200] seconds is also calculated as shown 
in Figure 4.  
 
 
Figure 4. Calculation of mean power 
 
 
    Thus from Figure 4, it is clear that at thickness 18 cm, the 
mean power obtained is 233W. Further, using the 
optimization curve function in Matlab, Figure 3 is replotted to 
obtain the optimized values for power and voltage, which is 
shown in Figure 5 below.  
 
Figure 5. Optimized voltage and power versus time 
 
TABLE III. RESULTANT PEAK VALUES FOR OPTIMIZED 
VOLTAGE AND POWER  
Voltage 
407.6V 
Power 
2810W 
          
   The optimized values of voltage and power after the first 
impact obtained from Figure 5 is shown in Table 3. For a 
value of maximum possible input force (weight of the 
vehicle), the corresponding power and voltage outputs are 
successfully calculated using Matlab. 
 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
IV. DESIGN OF THE PIEZOELECTRIC MODULE 
 
    The actual force exerted by the vehicle is a complex 
calculation owing to the effect of vehicle suspension systems 
and that of the module itself. The initial design of the 
piezoelectric road energy harvester are inclusive of a spring 
system which aided the movement of the pressuring plate 
back to its initial position. However, a problem identified with 
this design being that the tendency of the springs that causes 
an oscillating effect to the pressuring plate and thus, making 
the system unstable with poor feasibility. Consequently, a 
solution identified to this problem being that the inclusion of 
dampers so as to disintegrate the oscillations produced by the 
springs, and stabilize the spring back motion of the pressuring 
plate. Thus, the dynamic action of the entire system is more 
controlled with added protection offered to the piezoelectric 
cylinders through energy dissipation carried out by the 
dampers.  
     However, the power generation potential of the 
piezoelectric cylinders is predicated mainly on the impact-
based approach of the pressuring plate caused by the 
movement of vehicles on the road. The inclusion of dampers 
causes the movement of the pressuring plate to slow down 
with the entire scenario liable to be analysed in a quasi-static 
state rather than an impulsive impact based state. This affects 
the power generation capacity of the piezoelectric cylinders.  
     The best solution to combat this problem is to make use of 
an embedded system of thick steel block and piezoelectric 
cylinders. The elasticity modulus of steel could be used 
favourably to perform the spring and damping action 
simultaneously. This of course, depends on the applied stress 
being within the elastic limit of the steel. Hence, it is 
imperative to design the steel block in a manner in which its 
height exceeded that of the piezoelectric cylinders. Due to this 
fact, the pressuring plate would first make contact with the 
steel during the impact while causing it to elastically 
compress and gradually exposing the piezoelectric cylinders 
to the input stress. This ensures the durability of the 
piezoelectric cylinders by preventing cracking and sudden 
buckling due to high value of the input stress (impulse). The 
proposed method thus advocates the use of cheap and easily 
available grade of steel, which can be easily replaced as part 
of planned and regular maintenance routines.  
     The grade of steel used for the steel block is AISI 304 
stainless steel. This grade of stainless steel is the most 
commonly used and cheapest grade of steel available 
commercially. The material properties for AISI 304 stainless 
steel is shown in Table 4.  
 
TABLE IV. PROPERTIES OF AISI 304 STAINLESS STEEL  
 
Physical properties  
metric 
1. 
Density 
8 g/cc 
2. 
Hardness B 
70 
3. 
Ultimate tensile strength 
505 Mpa 
4. 
Yield tensile strength 
215 Mpa 
5. 
Modulus of elasticity  
200 Gpa 
6. 
Poisson’s ratio 
0.29 
7. 
Shear modulus 
86 Gpa 
    The material used for the piezoelectric cylinders is PZT-
5H. The material properties for PZT-5H is shown in Table 5.  
 
TABLE V. MATERIAL PROPERTIES OF PZT-5H  
1. 
Density 
7.4 g/cc 
2. 
D33 
585e-12 
3. 
K33 
0.59 
4. 
K(eff) 
0.53 
5. 
Modulus of Rupture 
61.5 MPa 
6. 
Damping Constant  
5e-8 
 
     The selection of the PZT-5H material is based on the 
comparatively 
higher 
values 
of 
D33 
(piezoelectric 
coefficient), K33 (piezoelectric coupling coefficient) and 
K(eff) (effective piezoelectric coupling coefficient) against 
the other grades of commercially available piezoelectric 
material [20]. The material PZT-5H is specifically picked 
considering the application used in this study.  
4.1. Dynamics of the system  
    In order to calculate the acceleration of the piezoelectric 
bodies within the module when stressed by the vehicle above, 
it is essential to consider the following 2-DOF mass and 
spring damper system, as shown in Figure 6.  
 
                          
 
 
Figure 6. 2 DOF mass-spring-damper system 
 
 
     In Figure 6, Ms represents the mass of the vehicle while Ks 
and Cs resemble the spring constant and damping constant for 
its suspension system, respectively. Similarly, Mns represents 
the combined mass of the piezoelectric cylinders within the 
module while Kt and Ct resemble its spring constant and 
damping constant, respectively.  
     The force exerted due to the vertical acceleration of the 
vehicle suspension system is the same force responsible for 
stressing the piezoelectric material within the module. The 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
free body diagram of the two masses in the system yields the 
following two equations:  
 
     
(
)
(
)
s
s
s
ns
s
s
ns
s
M Z
K Z
Z
C Z
Z







            (1) 
     
ns
ns
t
ns
t
ns
s
s
M
Z
K Z
C Z
M Z



 


                (2)  
  
 
Figure 7. Piezoelectric energy harvester module  
 
 
Thus, the acting force on the piezoelectric module depends 
on the vertical acceleration of the vehicle during motion. 
The module design is shown in Figure 7. 
 
V. STRESS ANALYSIS OF HARVESTER 
 
     Stress analysis of the module was essential in determining 
the mechanical feasibility of the proposed design [21]. The 
acting force on the upper plate of the module was fixed as per 
the value discussed in the previous section. The stress analysis 
of the piezoelectric cylinders is as shown in Figure 8. From 
this dynamic analysis, it is shown that the stress exerted on 
the piezoelectric cylinder is approximately 0.8 MPa, which is 
less than the modulus of rupture for the PZT-5H material. 
Hence, the piezoelectric cylinders can be expected to operate 
as expected according to the calculations presented in the 
previous section.  
     Figure 9 represents the displacement plot for the 
piezoelectric cylinders under applied stress. Hence, the 
maximum displacement occurs at the upper layer of the 
piezoelectric cylinder with a value of approximately 2.4e-2 
mm (as expected). The stress analysis of the steel block with 
the upper pressuring plate is as shown in Figure 10. The 
maximum stress experienced by the steel block is within the 
elastic limit of the material. Thus, the validity of the design is 
verified.  
 
 
Figure 8. Stress analysis for piezoelectric cylinders 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Displacement plot for piezoelectric cylinders 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Stress plot for steel block with upper plate 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
VI. CONCLUSION 
     The material selections for the steel block and the 
piezoelectric cylinders are justified according to the method 
of application desired. The piezoelectric cylinders are 
designed according to the value of the input force (weight of 
the vehicle). For a value of maximum possible input force 
(weight of the vehicle), the corresponding power and voltage 
outputs are successfully calculated using Matlab. The average 
power over the time interval [0, 200] seconds, as a result of 
this design is theoretically obtained to be close to 233W, 
which is larger than that of the previous attempts. The design 
of the energy harvester is successfully validated via stress 
analysis in SolidWorks. The actual calculation for input force 
is successfully illustrated in Section 4 of this study. The 
expected price of the proposed energy generator is 
approximately $550 and the expected life of the proposed 
device is about 5 years. Future work will focus on a 
proposition of installation method of converter in real 
situation, which can hold much more load.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Szargut, A. Ziebik, and W. Stanek, “Depletion of the non-renewable 
natural exergy resources as a measure of the ecological cost”, Energy 
Conversion and Management, Vol. 43, pp. 119-1163, 2002.  
[2] N. Papamanolis N, “An overview of solar energy applications in 
buildings in Greece”, International Journal of Sustainable Energy, Vol. 
35, no. 8, pp. 814-823, 2016.  
[3] A. Jamar, Z. Majid, W. Azmi, M. Norhafana, and A. Razak, “A review 
of water heating system for solar energy applications”, International 
Communications in Heat and Mass Transfer, Vol. 76, pp. 178-187, 
2016.  
[4] C. Abbey and G. Joos, “Supercapacitor Energy Storage for Wind 
Energy Applications”, IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, 
vol. 43, no. 3. pp. 769 – 776, 2007.  
[5] L. Mishnaevsky, “Composite materials for wind energy applications: 
micromechanical modelling and future directions”, Computational 
Mechanics, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 195-207, 2012.  
[6] R. Pravalie, C. Patriche, and G. Bandoc, “Spatial assessment of solar 
energy potential at global scale. A geographical approach”, Journal of 
Cleaner Production, vol. 209, pp. 692-721, 2019.  
[7] C. Li, B. Li, X. Yang, and M. Meng, “Finite element analysis of a novel 
piezoelectric arch energy harvester”, 2015 IEEE International 
Conference on Information and Automation, Lijiang, China, pp. 2749-
2754, 2015.  
[8] C. Yang, Y. Song, M. Woo, J. Eom, J. Song, J. Kim, T. Lee, J. Choi, 
and T. Sung, “Feasibility study of impact-based piezoelectric road 
energy harvester for wireless sensor networks in smart highways”, 
Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 261, pp. 317-324, 2017.  
[9] S. Gareh, B. Kok, C. Uttraphan, K. Thong, and A. Borhana, “Evaluation 
of piezoelectric energy harvester outcomes in road traffic applications”, 
in IET Clean Energy and Technology Conference, Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia, pp. 1-5, 2016.  
[10] Y. Song, C. Yang, S. Hong, S. Hwang, J. Kim, J. Choi, S. Ryu, and T. 
Sung, “Road energy harvester designed as a macro-power source using 
the piezoelectric effect”. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, vol. 
41, pp. 12563-12568, 2016.  
[11] H. Yang, L. Wang, Y. Hou, and M. Guo, “Development in stacked-
array-type piezoelectric energy harvester in asphalt pavement”, Journal 
of Materials in Civil Engineering, vol. 29, no. 11, p. 04017224, 2017.  
[12] Z. Zhang, H. Xiang, and Z. Shi, “Theoretical Modelling on 
Piezoelectric Energy Harvesting from Bridges Considering Roadway 
Surface Irregularities”, In Transportation Research Congress 2016: 
Innovations in Transportation Research Infrastructure, Reston, VA: 
American Society of Civil Engineers, pp. 673-684, 2016.  
[13] Y. Song, C. Yang, S. Hwang, J. Kim, and T. Sung, “Design of Road 
Energy Harvester with Multiple Piezoelectric Cantileve Beams and a 
Single Tip Mass”, in 5th International Conference on Renewable 
Energy Research and Applications, Birmingham, UK, pp. 12563-
12568, 2016 
[14] F. Jiménez, M. Rodriguez, D. Alnoso, and J. Frutos, “Virtual instrument 
to obtain an optimal linear model for piezoelectric elements involved in 
road traffic energy harvesting”, Computer Standards and Interfaces, 
vol. 51, pp. 1-13, 2017.  
[15] V. Vivekananthan, N. Alluri, Y. Purusothaman, A. Chandrasekhar, and 
S. Kim, “A flexible, planar energy harvesting device for scavenging 
road side waste mechanical energy via the synergistic piezoelectric 
response of K0.5Na0.5NbO3-BaTiO3/PVDF composite films”, 
Nanoscale, The Royal Society of Chemistry, pp. 15122-15130, 2017.  
[16] Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Rasim, C. Wang, B. Du, and Y. Yuan, “Design, 
modelling and practical tests on a high-voltage kinetic energy 
harvesting (EH) system for a renewable road tunnel based on linear 
alternators”, Applied Energy, vol. 164, pp. 152-161, 2016.  
[17] M. Abdelkareem, L. Xu, M. Ali, A. Elagouz, J. Mi, S. Guo, Y. Liu, and 
L. Zuo, “Vibration energy harvesting in automotive suspension system: 
A detailed review”, Applied Energy, vol. 229, pp. 672-699, 2018.  
[18] T. Ching, D. Tsai, and C. Hsiao, “Developing a mechanical roadway 
system for waste energy capture of vehicles and electric generation”, 
Applied Energy, vol. 92, pp. 1-8, 2012.  
[19] S. Platt, S. Farritor, and H. Haider, “On Low-Frequency Electric Power 
generation with PZT ceramics”, ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, 
vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 240-252, 2005.  
[20] M. Hooker, “Properties of PZT-Based Piezoelectric Ceramics Between-
150 and 250°C”, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, CR-
1998-208707 report, 1998.  
[21] D. Zhang and B Wei, “Interactions and optimizations analysis between 
stiffness and workspace of 3-UPU robotic mechanism”, Measurement 
Science Review 17.2, pp. 83-92, 2017.  
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

