Robust Network Models for using Mobility Parameters for Health Assessment 
 
Abhilash Patolla, Ik-Hyun Youn, and Hesham H. Ali 
College of Information Science and Technology 
University of Nebraska at Omaha 
Omaha, NE 68116, USA  
{apatolla, iyoun, hali}@unomaha.edu 
 
Abstract — With the recent development of wearable mobility 
devices, researchers are pressed to develop advanced models 
to take advantage of these devices. Although wearable devices 
produce a large volume of raw data, the process of extracting 
useful knowledge from the data collected from such devices 
remains limited. In particular, not as much has been 
established on how mobility parameters can be used to 
develop mobility patterns to assess health levels and predict 
potential health hazards.  In this work, we develop a robust 
model, based on a population analysis, to utilize mobility data 
and extract useful information related to health assessment. 
We propose the use of correlation networks as one of 
population based analytics to consider variability and analyze 
mobility. The proposed approach aims at identifying patterns 
associated with changes in health levels that can lead to 
medical intervention at the early stages of a potential 
emerging health hazard as part of a risk management plan. 
We show examples to illustrate how to identify potential risk 
at work and provide an application of correlation network 
approaches using simulated mobility data.  
Keywords – Mobility parameters; network models; Data 
analytics; Population based analysis; Health Assessment. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Human mobility has been studied extensively over many 
years because of its clinical significance. The impact of 
mobility on a number of medical and physical properties has 
been established in various studies. For example, variability 
associated with muscle fatigue, joint problems, or 
neurological problems has been correlated to mobility 
characteristics, and mobility has been used as an efficient 
indicator of such conditions in various studies [1, 2]. 
Specifically, capturing abnormal movement patterns is 
typically used to capture mobility impairment in the domain 
of mobility monitoring. For example, falling risk has been 
widely monitored by the variability of mobility pattern in 
elderly, and cumulated fatigue has been determined by 
capturing decline of physical activity level [3, 4]. Although 
Habib et al. and Gravina et al. have tried to integrate 
heterogeneous physiological data from wearable sensors to 
make informative decisions [5, 6], the importance of 
mobility was not significantly considered. This is the 
motivation behind this study, in which we employ network 
modeling methodology to analyze human mobility patterns. 
Mobility data have at least two natural characteristics 
that have to be considered when analyzed. First, researchers 
have to consider a variation of mobility as mobility patterns 
contains natural variability along subject’s internal and 
external conditions [7]. Deterministic approaches such as 
Manhattan and Euclidean distance methods are not always 
appropriate to comprehensively handle the variations of 
mobility. Secondly, there is a need to establish an objective 
mobility-based criteria to determine whether a certain 
pattern is problematic or not. We argue that such decision 
needs to be flexibly reached using population based 
approaches. In this paper, we propose correlation analysis, 
modeled by correlation networks,  as one of population 
based analytics to take into account variation of mobility 
data and analyze individual’s mobility patterns based on 
their characteristics as related to a given population.  
Correlation analysis measures the statistical relationship 
among items. Using correlation analysis, we are able to see 
embedded associations among subject mobility patterns. 
Although correlation analysis cannot establish a causal 
relationship between mobility patterns, it can examine how 
each mobility patterns are compared with each other. In 
order to understand association among different mobility 
signatures, it is important not only to be aware of mobility 
patterns that enable us to compare mobility in different 
environments but also to be able to consider levels of 
mobility that correlated with various levels of physical 
activities.  
In this study, we introduce the notion of correlation 
networks as the basic tool for modeling and analyzing 
mobility data. In addition, we show how such model can be 
used for prediction of mobility related risk. The proposed 
approach aims to identify various mobility signatures such 
as a sudden increase or decrease of mobility or a sudden rise 
in variability. Such changes in mobility signatures can then 
be used as part of a comprehensive preventive mobility-
based risk management plan.  
The methodology of this study introduces three mobility 
modeling versions. They are the same except that they use 
different ways to assign weights on the edges connecting 
elements while building the correlation network. Pattern-
based modeling is used when several mobility samples 
obtained under different conditions are collected. It is based 
on using Pearson correlation coefficient to define the 
relationships between elements in the correlation network. 
The magnitude-based option is primarily utilized when the 
mobility data is collected under identical or very similar 
circumstances. In this case, the weights on the edges in the 
network are derived from the difference of magnitude of the 
used mobility parameters. The hybrid option is used when 
both magnitude and correlation are integrated into building 
the network. This option is primarily utilized when data is 
collected under conditions that slightly are different or when 
information about the conditions samples collected is not 
well defined.  
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

This paper is organized as follows: Section II provides 
the descriptions of networking methodology including how 
the network is constructed using three different methods; 
pattern-based, magnitude-based, and hybrid modeling. 
Section III includes a practical example to highlight how the 
network model is used to identify potential risk. 
Conclusions are briefly summarized in Section IV. 
II. METHODOLOGY   
Based on the nature of the parameters used for collecting 
the data, this paper discusses three mobility models which 
can be used under different conditions for further analysis. 
 
A. Pattern-Based Mobility Model 
The subjects are represented by the nodes and the 
connecting edge between them represents the similarity in 
mobility 
using 
correlation 
coefficient. 
Correlational 
networks are already built using the genome data in 
Bioinformatics [8]. By applying a specific threshold, only 
some of the subjects are shown in the network. The highly 
connected nodes of the network have similar mobility. 
This model is built using the pattern of the mobility 
parameter values obtained from the subjects. The correlation 
coefficient calculated for any two subjects can be in the 
scale -1 to +1. -1 means perfect negative correlation, and +1 
means perfect positive correlation. In the real world, it is 
hard to observe either of these two. The chance that the 
correlation coefficient between two subjects is trivial is 
determined by the statistical significance parameter (P). The 
value of the statistical significance should be less than 0.05 
to make the correlation significant. In the pattern based 
analysis, statistical significance plays a vital part. 
Using this model, it is possible to perform analysis by 
using mobility samples of different granularity like hours, 
days, weeks, months, etc. Aggregating the mobility samples 
to higher granularity will result in the generalization of the 
subject’s characteristics. 
The pattern based mobility network modelling can be 
used in the situations where the mobility parameter samples 
from the subjects are collected from different environments 
like hard floor, carpet, marble floor, sand, before the 
accident, during the phase of recovery, after the accident or 
in the conditions where the habitat or locality changes with 
time. In all these different environments, we can analyze the 
change in subject’s mobility. These changes can be 
visualized using the pattern based mobility model.  
The pattern based mobility models can only be applied if 
the samples are collected from different environments. 
These conditions make the network more efficient when 
built using the pattern based mobility model. This paper 
claims that the pattern based correlational model can be 
used to build the correlational network only if the samples 
are known to be from a different environment.   
B. Magnitude-Based Mobility Model 
The subjects are represented by the nodes and the 
connecting edge between them represents the similarity in 
mobility using weighted magnitude difference. Table 1 
shows the mobility samples and the weighted magnitude 
difference between the subjects. The desired threshold can 
be defined as the weighted magnitude difference. The 
mathematical expression used to calculate the weighted 
magnitude difference between two subjects A and B is as 
shown below: 
 
Consider two subjects where subject one makes 200 
steps on day one and 3000 steps on day two. And the second 
subject makes 3000 steps and 200 steps on these two days. 
By building the network using a pattern based model, these 
two subjects end up in different clusters since they have a 
negative correlation among them. The two subjects are 
similar in mobility except that they have different mobility 
properties on these two days due to their work timings, 
religious 
commitments 
or 
habits. 
Construction 
of 
correlational networks requires a mobility model that will 
eliminate these discrepancies. 
The magnitude based mobility model can be used if the 
mobility parameter values collected from the subjects are 
from a similar environment. In a similar environment, the 
nature of human mobility shows a similar pattern, but the 
parameter collected from the subjects may be of different 
magnitudes. This weighted magnitude difference between 
the subjects is captured and represented as the edge in a 
correlational network. The paper says that this model can be 
applied if we have the knowledge that the mobility samples 
of the subjects are from a similar environment.  
Using a magnitude based model, we can build the 
correlational network for the concurrent weeks and observe 
the change in the size of clusters and the movement of a 
particular subject from one cluster to another in a network.  
TABLE I. MAGNITUDE BASED MOBILITY MODEL (LEFT: INPUT, RIGHT: OUTPUT) 
 
Sub1 
Sub2 
… 
Sub n 
 
Subject 
Subject 
Magnitude 
Difference 
Day1 
42.3 
… 
… 
84.0 
 
Subj 1 
Subj 2 
0.17 
Day2 
80.1 
… 
… 
61.6 
 
Subj 1 
Subj 3 
0.08 
Day3 
28.1 
… 
… 
89.4 
 
… 
… 
… 
Day4 
46.3 
… 
… 
47.5 
 
Subj m 
Subj n 
0.15 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
This also assists in the predictive analysis of health 
through the correlational network. The level of aggregation 
of the mobility samples results in different networks and 
cluster formations. 
It is vital that the health status of a subject should be 
assessed based on their mobility samples in different 
environments. For illustration, consider a subject having an 
ailment may have good mobility levels in the normal 
environment, but when the subject goes to higher altitudes 
or uneven terrains his/her mobility levels may fall down 
when compared to a healthy subject. In other cases, some 
subjects may have better mobility levels when they are 
active but may completely decline when they are tired or 
having fatigue which shows an abnormality. In these 
situations, it is better to analyze the mobility levels of the 
subjects by building up the correlational network using 
other models using samples from different environments. 
C. Hybrid Mobility Model 
Both the pattern and magnitude based mobility model 
have limitations in their own way to build the correlational 
networks efficiently. They can be used in certain situations 
where the mobility samples are collected from similar or 
different environments. Based on this observation, the paper 
states that if we have limited knowledge about the 
environment of mobility samples, then the hybrid based 
mobility model can be used to develop the correlational 
network.  
In the hybrid based mobility, due to unavailability of 
complete knowledge of mobility samples, we use both the 
correlational coefficient and weighted magnitude difference 
to develop the correlational network. First, the network is 
built using the correlation coefficient between the subjects 
as the connecting edge between them. Later, within each 
identified cluster, the weighted magnitude difference 
between the subjects is calculated, and the subjects in that 
specific cluster are again clustered based on their weighted 
magnitude difference [7, 8]. This can be done in the other 
way by applying the weighted magnitude difference 
followed by the correlation coefficient. This method can be 
widely related to the phenomenon called overlaying in the 
networks.  
This paper states that the hybrid model can be applied 
when the knowledge about the mobility samples collected is 
not well known. By considering both the pattern and the 
magnitude, the resultant correlational network has the most 
important edges and the model can include all the vital 
mobility characteristics in it [10].   
The pattern or the weighted magnitude difference 
between the subjects in the two sets of clusters should be 
significant enough to improve the model by overlaying. 
Otherwise, this may result in minimal information gain from 
the correlational network. Table 2 summarizes important 
characteristics of the three models.  
 
III. EXPERIMENTAL STUDY 
In this section, we illustrate the advantages of using the 
correlation network approach to model and analyze mobility 
data. The seamless monitoring of the subjects will be 
ensured by using a simple wearable sensor such as a 
Shimmer. Shimmers are wireless devices that capture the 
accelerometer reading on three different axes. Using the 
activity classification algorithm embedded in the sensor, the 
different times for which the particular activity performed is 
calculated. Based on the metabolic equivalents of each of 
these activities, the mobility of the subject can be calculated. 
The wireless sensor required for this seamless mobility 
capture is still under development, and a lot of research is 
going on to improve the efficiency and longevity of data 
capture. We are in the process of obtaining approval to 
collect mobility data of various groups to validate the 
effectiveness of the proposed approach. In the meantime, in 
this paper, we are providing a scenario using simulated data 
to illustrate how a correlation network can be used to 
analyze mobility data in a specific case study.  
 
                   
 
Figure 1. Hybrid Network Before and After Clustering 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE II. METHODOLOGY COMPARISON 
 
Pattern Based Mobility 
Model 
Magnitude based Mobility 
Model 
Hybrid based Mobility 
Model 
Meaning of weight 
Correlation coefficient 
between nodes 
Magnitude difference 
between nodes 
Combinatorial meaning  
Sampling condition 
Need to control each 
experimental condition 
Same experimental 
condition is fine 
Need to control 
experimental condition 
Treatment in Experiment  
Heterogeneous 
experimental conditions 
Homogeneous experimental 
condition 
Heterogeneous 
experimental conditions 
Effect of Sample Size 
Larger sample size is better 
to get robust correlation 
coefficient  
Will not affect the 
robustness of network 
Partial effect within clusters 
Advantages 
Robust population-oriented 
analysis 
Comprehensive correlation 
analysis 
Enable to conduct an in-
depth mobility mining 
Shortcomings 
Difficult to control 
heterogeneous experimental 
settings 
Mobility characteristics can 
be excessively aggregated  
Need to have heterogeneous 
experimental conditions 
 
In the simulated scenario, we consider a mobility 
monitoring of thirty nurses in a hospital environment and a 
correlation network is constructed using the magnitude 
based model. Using the activity classification model, the 
time periods for different activities like walking, standing, 
brisk walking and climbing stairs, etc. are recorded and are 
assigned equivalent points based on the metabolic 
equivalents of the activities. Considering the limitations 
mentioned above, this paper focuses on using the 
scientifically manufactured mobility data which satisfies a 
normal distribution which is close to real the time nature of 
human mobility. 
The main goal of this experiment is to analyze the 
correlation between the different subjects and how the 
cluster formation changes during different sampling periods. 
The second goal is to observe changes in mobility behaviors 
of the subjects at different times during the day.  
The first samples of different subjects are generated 
using the normal distribution with a mean value of 500 and 
a standard deviation ‘15.86%’ according to the 68–95–99.7 
rule. In order to show the useful nature of developing a 
correlational network to analyze the mobility, certain 
features of subjects are included in the manufactured data. 
The first ten nurse subjects express a decrease of mobility 
by ten percent for every sampling period, the next ten 
subjects by twenty, and the last subjects by thirty percent, as 
shown in Table 3. 
TABLE III. MOBILITY SAMPLE OF NURSE SUBJECTS 
  
Sub1 
Sub2 
… 
Sub30 
Work start 
553.78 
… 
… 
384.85 
2nd hours 
498.40 
… 
… 
269.40 
4th hours 
448.56 
… 
… 
188.58 
6th hours 
403.71 
… 
… 
132.01 
Work end 
363.34 
… 
… 
92.40 
 
Since the mobility samples are collected from a similar 
environment, the magnitude based mobility model is used to 
develop the correlational network. The weighted magnitude 
difference between these thirty nurse subjects is calculated 
for periodic time intervals, as shown in Table 3. By using a 
weighted magnitude difference threshold of 20%, the 
networks are constructed as shown in Figures 2, 3, 4 and 5. 
The first ten subjects are shown in green, next ten in pink 
and last ten in red color. 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

  
 
 
Figure 2. Mobility Network (Work Start) 
                                                       
Figure 3. Mobility Network (2 Hours) 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Mobility Network (6 Hours)                                                 
 
Figure 5. Mobility Network (Work End) 
 
The correlational network shown in Figure 4 reveals that 
during the initial part of the day all the nurse subjects show 
a similar mobility. After building a new correlational 
network using the second sampling mobility values, in 
Figure 5, we can observe that all the subjects except the 
subjects 13, 28 and 30 show a similar mobility. In Figures 4 
and 5 by observing the subjects and their colors, we can see 
a clear formation of clusters and the developing relation 
between the different subjects based on the mobility values 
collected from the subjects. The final correlational network 
developed in Figure 5 clearly shows that there are three 
clusters formed. By analyzing the nature of the mobility 
data of the subjects, a cluster containing subject 1 through 
subject 10 in green color shows the higher mobility. The 
remaining two clusters show a lesser mobility. The cluster 
with red color nodes shows the least mobility. Some 
subjects like subject 7, 15, 27, 28 and 30 show an erratic 
mobility because they are outliers of the normal distribution 
used to generate mobility data.  
All the correlational networks constructed above show 
how the mobility behavior of the subjects changes over the 
time. The subjects from one to ten show relatively a better 
mobility than the subjects from eleven to thirty. Similarly, 
the subjects from eleven to thirty show a better mobility 
than the subjects twenty one to thirty. In addition, we can 
see the correlation between the subjects and how these 
correlations among the subjects change as the time 
progresses. The final correlational network in Figure 5 
shows us the clear mobility nature of different nurse 
subjects as high, medium and relatively low. So, in order to 
stay cautioned and to reduce the chances of any health 
hazards for the nurses, we would require the correlational 
networks to extract this unknown hidden information. The 
larger the number of subjects, additional analysis and 
extraction of hidden knowledge can be performed from the 
correlational networks. 
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
With the recent development of devices that measure the 
number of steps, distance covered, number of active 
minutes, among other mobility data, attention continues to 
be heavily biased in favor of data collection tools. In order 
to take full advantage of the tools, attention needs to be 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

placed on data integration and data analysis, rather than just 
data collection. In this work, we try to focus on how to 
utilize the collected data in building a robust model based 
on correlation models to extract useful information from the 
raw mobility data.  
The main contribution of this study is to provide a novel 
approach to analyze mobility data for predicting health 
hazards. We proposed a correlation network model to 
structure the raw data and allow for extracting meaningful 
information that could be used to identify patterns 
associated with health hazards. Since, unlike mobility 
monitoring in the laboratory setting, more limitations exist 
to administrate gait monitoring in the free-living condition. 
Hence, robust models need be flexible in order to analyze 
mobility parameters. The proposed analytical model and 
associated methodology provide an important step in that 
direction. Moreover, empirical value of this study is 
supported by a typical scenario. The obtained results show 
the validity of the proposed approaches. Additional 
experiments using genuine data will need to be conducted to 
validate the network models and the proposed approach. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] L.I. Iezzoni, E.P. McCarthy, R.B. Davis and H. Siebens, 
"Mobility difficulties are not only a problem of old age," 
Journal of General Internal Medicine, vol. 16, pp. 235-243, 
2001. 
[2] I.H. Youn, D. Khazanchi, J.H. Youn, & K.C. Siu, 
“Multidimensional Mobility Metric for Continuous Gait 
Monitoring using a Single Accelerometer.” In Int'l Conf. 
Health Informatics and Medical Systems (HIMS), pp. 3-8, 
2016. 
[3] N. Cortes, J. Onate and S. Morrison, "Differential effects of 
fatigue on movement variability," Gait Posture, vol. 39, pp. 
888-893, 2014. 
[4] N. Stergiou and L.M. Decker, "Human movement variability, 
nonlinear dynamics, and pathology: is there a connection?" 
Human Movement Science, vol. 30, pp. 869-888, 2011. 
[5]  R. Gravina, P. Alinia, H. Ghasemzadeh and G. Fortino, 
"Multi-sensor fusion in body sensor networks: State-of-the-
art and research challenges," Information Fusion, vol. 35, pp. 
68-80, 2017. 
[6] C. Habib, A. Makhoul, R. Darazi and C. Salim, "Self-
adaptive data collection and fusion for health monitoring 
based on body sensor networks," IEEE Transactions on 
Industrial Informatics, vol. 12, pp. 2342-2352, 2016. 
[7] N. Giladi, J. Hausdorff and Y. Balash, "Episodic and 
continuous gait disturbances in Parkinson’s disease 22," 
Scientific Basis for the Treatment of Parkinson's Disease, pp. 
417, 2013. 
[8] K. Dempsey, B. Currall, R. Hallworth and H. Ali, "A new 
approach for sequence analysis: Illustrating an expanded 
bioinformatics view through exploring properties of the 
prestin 
protein," 
in 
Bioinformatics: 
Concepts, 
Methodologies, Tools, and Applications, IGI Global, 2013, 
pp. 1536-1556. 
[9] K. Dempsey and H. Ali, "Evaluation of essential genes in 
correlation networks using measures of centrality," in 2011 
IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and 
Biomedicine Workshops (BIBMW), pp. 509-515, 2011. 
[10] K. Dempsey, S. Bonasera, D. Bastola and H. Ali, "A novel 
correlation networks approach for the identification of gene 
targets," 2011 Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences (HICSS 44), pp. 1-8, 2011. 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-580-7
SENSORCOMM 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

