Early Prediction of Hypoxia Based on Vitals Analysis and Predictive
Analytics
Vahram Mouradian, Afarin Famili, Mahdieh Ashiani
Sensogram Technologies Inc.
Plano, Texas, USA
emails: {vahram, afarin, mahdieh}@sensogram.com
Alexandra Kozhemiakina
Sensogram Technologies Inc.
Kiev, Ukraine
email: alexandra@sensogram.com
Abstract — This study investigates the SensoSCAN device for
both its health monitoring properties and prediction of
different diseases by vital sign analysis. The study’s objective is
to develop a probabilistic model for predicting the presence of
hypoxia using correlation chains to assess patients’ vital signs
gathered by the SensoSCAN. Vital signs, including heart rate,
oxygen saturation, activity level, and systolic and diastolic
blood pressure, are used to monitor patients’ health conditions.
Our functional system helps predict hypoxia in its early stages,
when distinctive symptoms are absent and patients may not be
aware of the presence of the disease. Analysis is made using
dependencies in correlation matrix, constructed correlation
chains,
and
predictive analytics.
This study
utilizes the
hypothesis that hypoxia is an effect of consecutive process of
activity where the increase in heart rate and respiration rate
correlate with a decrease in oxygen saturation. The ultimate
goal is to use mathematical Markov processes and build
Markov chains, where elevated heart rate and respiration rate
and depressed oxygen saturation are caused by higher activity
levels.
Alternatively,
Markov
chains
are
constituted
considering other vitals (either heart rate, respiration rate or
oxygen saturation) as independent variables. This system will
ultimately assist doctors in assessing patients’ health by
defining the main dependencies between human vitals.
Keywords-Vitals; hypoxia; SensoSCAN; correlation analysis;
predictive modeling.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A. Introduction to Hypoxia
Oxygen is essential for the development and growth of
multi-cellular organisms. Many sophisticated biological
mechanisms
that
involve
capturing,
binding,
and
transporting
of
oxygen
maintain
our
cell
and
tissue
homeostasis [1]. Two terms are used for oxygen deficiency:
hypoxia and hypoxemia. Hypoxemia is a frequent cause of
hypoxia. They are interrelated as both terms are states of
oxygen deficiency; hypoxemia is a condition when there is a
significant drop in blood oxygenation and arterial oxygen
tension
is
below
normal,
while
hypoxia
is
oxygen
deficiency on the cellular or tissue level. The lack of
treatment of hypoxemia can lead to hypoxia [2][3]. Types of
hypoxia include: hypoxic hypoxia (oxygen deficiency in the
lungs from high altitude or decreased oxygen saturation
(SPO2) in the air) anemic hypoxia (inability of the blood to
accept
oxygen
in
suitable
volume),
stagnant
hypoxia
(inability of cells to accept or use oxygen molecules), and
histotoxic hypoxia (inability of cells to use oxygen [3][4]).
Hypoxemia and/or hypoxia can result in severe changes in
cellular metabolism. In the case of oxygen insufficiency,
normal metabolism turns to anaerobic metabolism that
produces
fewer
molecules
of
energy
(adenosine
triphosphate). Products of this type of metabolism can
destroy cell membranes and lead to cell death and organ
failure [3][5]. Clinical assessment of oxygen is usually
invasive, and a challenging task to tackle. Patients with
cardiac and respiratory illnesses, and patients who smoke,
consume alcohol, or coffee are in the risk zone. Early
recognition,
prediction,
prevention,
and
treatment
of
hypoxemia is very important for patients as the disease can
result in decreasing tissue oxygen consumption and severe
physiological
symptoms
as
organs
begin
to
fail.
Nevertheless, the prediction should be made to prevent
many adverse situations [3][4]. Vitals monitoring can help
in prediction of the early stages of hypoxia; decreased
oxygenation
results
in
abnormalities
that
include
tachycardia (heart rate more than 100 beats per minute
(bpm)), tachypnea, (respiratory rate more than twenty-four
breaths per minute (brpm)) and high blood pressure.
Bradycardia and hypotension are the result of severe
hypoxia [3]. The most logical technique for recognition of
hypoxia is reading the percentage of hemoglobin that is
saturated with oxygen. Normal oxygen saturation is greater
than 95%, whereas 90% and below is connected with
hypoxemia.
The
interval
between
90%
and
95%
is
considered to be an asymptomatic first stage of the disease
that causes confusion. A patient may not be aware of the
presence of the disease. Critical stage of the disease, where
SPO2 is 70% or less, may result in brain damage and death.
Patients are almost incapacitated, lose consciousness, and
stop breathing; their tissues are not provided with an
adequate amount of oxygen, resulting in widespread tissue
necrosis and organ damage that may not be fully reversible
[3][4].
B. Remote Monitoring Systems and Wearable Devices
The traditional hospital treatment model keeps patients
in hospital beds attached to smart monitoring systems for
health assessment. In modern healthcare, wireless sensors
and smart technologies make it possible to monitor patients’
health parameters under remote oversight of a doctor and
can give the ability to effectively monitor health. The
accurate and early prediction of clinical events is an
important part of remote health-monitoring. Continuous
remote health monitoring being established is crucial as it
can reduce the staggering cost of observations as wearable
sensors are available at a very low cost. Such systems also
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

give the ability to save patient waiting time, and solve the
problem with the limited capacity of hospitals. In addition,
there is a possibility to control patients’ health at any time,
from any place [6]. Unfortunately, most remote wearable
prediction systems work only on one vital parameter (such
as a pulse oximeter that measures a person’s SPO2). As a
result, a device that monitors multiple vitals simultaneously
can more accurately predict a clinical condition than one
that relies on one vital statistic alone)
С. General Information about SensoSCAN 
Living tissue is a series of sub-tissues with different
concatenations of absorbing optical segments. Each time a
pressure pulse reaches the illuminated segment, an increase
of the local blood volume occurs, supplements the local
absorption, and decreases the light intensity. This model is
based on measuring light absorption changes and it is the
main model of measuring the blood flow and different vitals
in SensoSCAN.
SensoSCAN is a non-invasive wireless wearable mobile
device that allows real-time, continuous, remote monitoring
and analysis of vital signs. The device works based on an
assessment
technique,
which
provides
a
waveform
illustration of pulsatile blood flow. Light is more strongly
absorbed by blood than the surrounding tissues, so that the
changes in blood flow can be detected by sensor as changes
in the intensity of light and provide information on the
cardiovascular system of a patient. Advantages of this
method include easy set-up, simple and widespread use, low
cost, and the ability to take measurements without direct
skin contact. The system consists of both photodiode and
dual LED emitter as SensoSCAN requires a bi-wavelength
light source for vitals measuring. Both red and infrared
wavelengths are used as light sources because in this way
differences between oxyhemoglobin (HbO2) and reduced
hemoglobin (Hb) with different absorption wavelengths can
be
assessed
for
oxygen
saturation
measurements.
Photodiode (PD PIN-8.0-CSL) is used in combination with
the dual emitter (DLED-660/905-CSL-3 (a 660nm (red) LED
and a companion IR LED with 905 nm)). The device works
in conjunction with iOS and Android smartphones and
tablets to monitor, share and analyze the data. The captured
data is transmitted via Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) to the
smartphone or tablet, which display the parameters. The
SensoSCAN application also allows the user to send the
data to a dedicated secured cloud system that is accessible
via the SensoSCAN web portal.
The system setup is illustrated in Figure 1. The
SensoSCAN Monitoring System is intended for use by
clinicians
and
medically
qualified
personnel
to
simultaneously monitor multiple vital signs.
SensoSCAN is capable of non-invasive measurement of
Respiration Rate (RR), Heart Rate (HR), Systolic and
Diastolic Blood Pressure (Systolic BP, Diastolic BP) and
Oxygen Saturation of Arterial Hemoglobin (SPO2), Pulse
Rate (PR), and skin Temperature (TEMP) in hospital-based
facilities. Vitals are computed based on assessing different
features of patients’ blood flow (e.g., pulse amplitudes,
forms, frequency and analyzing derivatives of the signal
etc.). As a result, there is a complex assessment of patients’
blood flow, cardiovascular and breathing systems. All these
vitals can be used to detect different clinical events and
diseases. Using the existing correlations between the vital
parameters and their dependencies can help predict severe
conditions in their early stages. SensoSCAN is on its final
stage
of
development
and
becoming
a
commercially
available device. Currently, the device is used for in-house
clinical testing, data acquisition and algorithm development.
In the rest of this paper, Section II describes the data
acquisition process and the utilized statistical techniques to
assess clinical conditions. Section III includes the achieved
preliminary results from the subject pool introduced in
Section II. Section IV concludes the results at hand. Finally,
Section V discusses the shortcomings of the current analysis
and our planned path forward.
II.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Experimental Design

Vital Changes Induced by Activity
Four healthy subjects with mean age 25 years (age range
23-26), with a mean heart rate of 72 bpm were recruited.
SensoSCAN was used for continuous vitals monitoring.
Subjects were advised to be at steady state for 5 minutes,
followed by a 10-minute interval activity (while keeping the
sensor still on their finger), and the last 5 minutes at rest.
Data acquisition took around 20 minutes for each subject.
 Vital Changes by Lowering the Amount of Oxygen
Experiments were run on 10 subjects at a clinical lab in
Louisville, CO after approval from the Institutional Review
Board (IRB). Test subjects provided their written consent to
participate in the study and had the right to leave at any
time. The study was conducted by clinical staff in the
clinical lab
environment where subjects lay reclined.
Sensors were placed on subject’s finger to collect vitals
data. Subjects were given medical grade mixtures of oxygen
and nitrogen to induce various hypoxic levels in them. SpO2
levels were brought down to about 70% by inducing more
nitrogen via a breathing mask.
Figure 1. SensoSCAN Measurement System
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

B. Vitals Pairwise Correlation
Future dangerous clinical conditions could be predicted
by examining the correlation between vital parameters. To
this end, Pearson Correlation Coefficient was examined
between the pairs of vitals, aiming at predicting a clinical
condition such as hypoxia. We computed the Pearson
Correlation Coefficient (1) between vital pairs using [7]:
ݎ௫௬ =
ܿ݋ݒ(ݔ,ݕ)
ඥݒܽݎ(ݔ).ݒܽݎ(ݕ)
,(1)
where x and y are the two variables between which
Correlation Coefficient (e.g., the two variables could be
HR and RR) is computed. Cov(x,y) is sample covariance
of the two variables, while var(x) and var(y) are sample
variance of variables x and y respectively. The Pearson
Correlation measures the strength and direction of linear
relationship
between
two
variables.
A
higher,
more
positive
correlation
indicates
a
strong,
direct
linear
relationship between two variables, while a more negative
Pearson Correlation represents the strong, inverse linear
association between the two variables. In order to prove the
statistical significance of the correlations, the p-value
associated with each score is also computed.
C. Correlation Chains in Predicting Hypoxia
The goal is to predict hypoxia from the existing
correlations between the vitals. HR, RR, and SPO2 are the
most relevant vitals recorded by SensoSCAN in predicting
respiratory disease. Elevated HR and RR, accompanied by
depressed SPO2 levels are expected in patients suffering
from hypoxia. As a result, in order to pre-diagnose hypoxia,
correlation chains were generated based on the correlations
between the three aforementioned vitals.
III.
PRELIMINARY RESULTS
A. Vital Changes Induced by Activity
Pearson Correlation Coefficients between the vital pairs
were computed and stored them in a 6 × 6 correlation
matrix (Figure 2). Each cell of the correlation matrix
indicates the strength of the association between respective
vital pairs. The cell color indicates the strength and direction
of the association between two parameters. Dark blue
indicates the strong, positive correlation between vital pairs.
The strong, inverse association between the vital pairs is
further indicated with lighter colors (e.g., yellow indicates
the strongest inverse correlation between the corresponding
variables). TABLE I includes the numerical values of the
scores
associated
with
each
color-coded
cell
of
the
adjacency matrix. As shown in this table, subject’s heart
beats faster and she breathes faster. This is indicated by the
relatively
strong,
positive
Pearson
Correlation
with
magnitude 0.60 (p < 0.01) between HR and RR. The
inverse, strong Correlation between SPO2 and either HR (-
0.63, p < 0.01) and RR (-0.49, p < 0.01) is also observed in
the presence of the interval activity.
Considering the strongest correlations and setting a
threshold correlation score of 0.5 (the probability due to
chance in bivariate analysis), correlation chains between
these vitals were constructed. The chain in Figure 3A is
generated based on the correlation matrix in Figure 2. The
pairwise associations between these vitals (SPO2, HR and
RR) is indicative of hypoxia (Figure 3A), while signs of
hypoxia are absent in the subject shown in Figure 3B as one
of the correlation scores in the correlation chain is below the
specified threshold and is not considered significant.
B. Vital Changes Induced by Lowering Oxygen Levels
Correlation matrices (between HR, RR and SPO2) were
generated for experiments performed at the clinical lab.
TABLE II (the following page) indicates the pairwise
correlation results in a subject. As observed, SPO2 has a
strong, inverse association with HR (r = -0.78, p < 0.01);
meaning HR increases as the amount of oxygen applied in
the mask decreases. This holds true for a weaker inverse
correlation between SPO2 and RR (r = -0.41, p < 0.01),
while HR and RR are positively correlated (r = 0.56, p <
0.01).
C.
Predicting Hypoxia from Vital Chain Correlations
Upon reducing and elevating oxygen levels via the
breathing mask at the clinical lab, correlations between HR,
RR, and SPO2 indicated the presence of hypoxia. The
provided correlation chain in Figure 4 shows the resulting
chain with the specified correlation scores in one of the
participants. Out of 10 subjects participating in this study, 4
happened to be diagnosed with hypoxia based on the
developed algorithm.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This work shows a correlation engine capable of
predicting hypoxia based on pairwise correlations between
vitals. Integration of this engine in SensoSCAN provides
health care professionals with a tool, measuring continuous-
valued vitals data, which can help them make more
educated decisions while diagnosing the
patients and
advance home-based remote monitoring systems.
Figure 2. Correlation matrix containing vital pairs Pearson Correlation
Coefficients
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

A shortcoming of this method was the limited number of
resources due to the invasiveness of the method (as oxygen
levels were decreased by inducing more nitrogen via the
breathing mask). As a part of the ongoing work, more
subjects from varying age groups will be recruited in order
to better validate the algorithm. Furthermore, the correlation
engine design is ultimately aimed at developing dynamic
machine learning algorithms such as Hidden Markov
Models [8], taking advantage of Markov chains features to
develop probabilistic models that are capable of diagnosing
not only hypoxia, but other dangerous clinical conditions
such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and
diseases related to the cardiovascular system. The model
will ultimately be deployed in the device for remote-
monitoring. Prototyping and experimental evaluation will
further be implemented in the system in order to generate
real-time estimation of chronic diseases with a remarkable
accuracy. This is a work in progress and the validity of the
hypothesis in diagnosing dangerous clinical conditions by
continuous vitals monitoring is under scrutiny.
REFERENCES
[1] A.J. Giaccia, M. C. Simon, and R. Johnson, “The biology of
hypoxia: the role of oxygen sensing in development, normal
function, and disease”, Genres & Development 18 2004 Sep 15,
18(18), pp.2183–2194, https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1243304.
[2] T. Meštrović, “What is hypoxemia?” [Online] Available from: 
https://www.news-medical.net/health/What-is-Hypoxemia.aspx
[retrieved: July, 2018], 2014.10.30.
[3]
J.
Considine,
“Emergency
assessment
of
oxygenation”,
Radiometry Medical ApS, Bronshoj, Denmark, 2007.
[4] M. Amini, “A novel optical probe for detection of hypoxia in
the deeper layers of human buccal tissue”, IEEE Sensors Journal,
2012.
12(6),
pp.
9-14,
2016,
https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2011.2177082.
[5] D. Epstein and R. Henning, “Oxygen transport variables in the
identification and treatment of tissue hypoxia”, Heart & Lung, pp.
328-45, July-August, 1993.
[6] A. Fokan and I. Khalil, “Probabilistic estimation of abnormal
clinical events using vital sigh correlations for reliable home-based
monitoring”, Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 38(2), pp. 296-
311, July 2017, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmcj.2016.12.009.
[7] Cohen, J, “Statistical power analysis for the behavioral
sciences” (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
1988.
[8] L. Rabiner and B. Juang. “An introduction to hidden Markov
models”. IEEE ASSP Magazine, 3(1), pp. 4-16, 1986.
TABLE I. PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENT SCORES
BETWEEN SIX VITAL PAIRS
HR
RR
SPO2
Activity
SBP
DBP
HR
1.00
0.60
-0.63
0.85
-0.54
-0.57
RR
0.60
1.00
-0.49
0.61
-0.46
-0.47
SPO2
-0.63
-0.49
1.00
-0.68
0.74
0.75
Activity
0.85
0.61
-0.68
1.00
-0.64
-0.67
SBP
-0.54
-0.46
0.74
-0.64
1.00
0.98
DBP
-0.57
-0.47
0.75
-0.67
0.98
1.00
Figure 4. Generated correlation chains indicating the presence of
hypoxia based on vitals chains
Figure 3. Generated correlation chains indicating the presence (A) and
absence (B) of hypoxia
TABLE II. PEARSON’S CORRELATION COEFFICIENT SCORES
BETWEEN PAIRS OF HR, RR AND SPO2
HR
RR
SpO2
HR
1.00
0.56
-0.78
RR
0.56
1.00
-0.41
SpO2
-0.78
-0.41
1.00
B)
A)
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

