A Fractional Order Impedance Sensor for Measuring the Quality of Drinking
Water
Tarikul Islam, Shibli Shakil, Babita Lohani
Department of Electrical Engineering, Jamia Mllia Islamia
University, Jauhar Ali Marg, Jamia Nagar
New Delhi-110025, India
e-mail: tislam@jmi.ac.in,
shibli.shakil19@gmail.com, babata.lohani@gmail.com
Subash Chandra Mukhopadhyay
Department of Mechanical/Electronics Engineering
Macquire University, New South Wales
Sydney, Australia
e-mail: subhas.mukhopadhyay@mq.edu.au
Abstract—A new stick type sensor is fabricated to analyze the
quality of drinking water.
The sensor has fractional order
impedance, which shows constant phase behavior over a wide
frequency range (200 kHz to 1 MHz) in drinking water. The
parameters of the sensor, such as the constant phase angle (θ) 
and the fractional exponent (α ≤ 1) vary with the change in the 
ionic impurities of water. Fabrication of the sensor is easy,
requires cheap materials, and is bulk producible at low cost.
For 600 ppm change in the total dissolved solids value of the
water sample, there is nearly an 18° shift in the phase angle of
the fabricated sensor. The sensor can be utilized to make a
prototype probe. A preliminary experimental work is carried
out to explore the effectiveness of the sensor to measure the
quality of drinking water.
Keywords- Sensors; fractional order; impedance; drinking
water; quality monitoring.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Water is mankind’s most precious resource and one of
the necessities for the existence of all living beings.
Unfortunately,
it
is
often
contaminated
with
various
impurities,
such
as
organic,
inorganic
solvents
and
microorganisms
[1][2].
Disposal
of
industrial,
pharmaceutical and other waste materials to different water
resources causes water contamination [2][5]. The most
common drug contaminant found in the fresh water is the
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug ibuprofen. Similarly,
the teratogenic and the carcinogenic effects of the phthalate
esters, which are used to manufacture different plastic food
packages and the other plastic containers pose great danger
to all living beings and to the environment [5]. Other
common sources of water contamination are the use of
nitrate and phosphate salts for agriculture [6][7]. In many
developing countries, the contaminated drinking water is a
major concern for the human health. Due to inadequate
supply of the pure drinking water, people sometimes are
compelled to consume untreated ground
water or to
purchase costly commercially available packaged (plastic
container) mineral water [2][5]. Because of high price,
sometimes, local vendors add untreated low-cost water to
costly mineral water for earning more money. Water
impurities can be defined based on the dissolved solids and
microorganisms present in the water. A high amount of the
dissolved solids can indicate poor water quality, which is
harmful for health.
The conventional methods of impurities measurement
require separation of the impurities using liquid or gas
chromatography technique and subsequently, the mass
measurement
using
a
mass
spectrometer.
The
recent
technique called electronic tongue is reported for water
quality analysis by the authors [8]. The arrays of the sensors
in electronic tongue may be of different types, such as
surface acoustic wave, conductive polymers, metal oxides,
Chem FET, optical, electrochemical, etc. These methods are
accurate and reliable but are costly, require skilled man
power for their operation, have long analysis time and are
not portable for the field testing. Due to the constraints
associated with these techniques, the routine analysis of the
water samples is normally avoided.
Important parameters for water quality monitoring are pH
value,
chlorine
concentration,
flowrate,
temperature,
turbidity, conductivity etc. A review article on current
technologies and future needs of water quality analysis is
reported in [9]. Some other reported techniques employ
multi sensors fusion data analysis using Dempster -Shafer
evidence theory [10] or optical method for bacterial growth
monitoring [11]. Some simple methods are present to
measure
the
Total
Dissolved
Solids
(TDS)
like
the
gravimetric method, and the electrical conductivity method
[1]. TDS meter is based on the second method, where one
can measure the TDS value by dipping the probe into the
water sample. Sometimes, a capacitive sensor is used to
determine the electrical parameters of water [12] but the
sensor
has
complex
design
and
requires
necessary
precautions to measure the small capacitance value in
presence of unwanted parasitic earth capacitance. According
to the world health organization (WHO), the TDS value of
the drinking water below 600 ppm is safe for consumption.
Therefore, there is a need to develop a quick, low cost and
user-friendly probe to measure the ionic impurities of the
water sample [1].
This paper presents a constant phase (CP) fractional order
sensor to analyze the quality of commercial mineral water
available in the market. A fractional order device is
identified by two important parameters, (i) the fractional
order α, and (ii) the constant phase angle over a certain 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

range of excitation signal frequency. There are several real-
world phenomena which show fractional order behavior. An
infinite ladder network or a domino network shows the
constant phase behavior over a certain frequency range at
the fractional order value of nearly 0.5 [13]. The constant
behavior is also observed by a conductivity sensor as
reported in [14] but rarely any constant phase sensor is
available in the market. A constant phase element can also
be fabricated by making fractal structure on silicon substrate
at α = 0.46-0.5 [15].  
In this work, we have studied the response of a fractional
order (α) impedance sensor fabricated with double sided 
copper cladded printed circuit board substrate to measure
the ionic impurities of mineral water. Due to the change in
ionic impurities, the phase angle and the fractional exponent
of the sensor will change. The order and the phase angle
vary within 0-1 and 0-90° respectively. Thus, motivation
behind this work is to develop a fractional order probe to
measure the quality of commercial packaged drinking water.
The proposed sensor is easy to fabricate, requires cheap
materials for fabrication and is bulk producible at low cost.
A preliminary experimental result with some commercial
packaged mineral water samples are reported. Theory of the
sensor is discussed in section II. In section III, detailed
experiments including the sensor fabrication, experimental
methods and results are given. Discussion about the
experimental results is given in section IV. In section V, the
conclusion about the research work is discussed.
II.
THEORETICAL ASPECTS
The impedance of a fractional sensor in Laplace form
can
be
expressed
by
the
expression
[13],


( )
2
Q
Z S
QS
Q j














 




 where, S (= jꞷ) 
is the Laplace operator, ω is given by

2
 f
, with f is the
signal frequency, and α is the order of the element. The 
magnitude (= Q/ꞷα) depends on the frequency, and the
fractional exponent α. But the phase angle 
2






 



depends on the value of the fractional exponent only.
Thus, a fractional order sensor is identified by the value
of fractional exponent and the constant phase angle over a
certain frequency range. The
value
of the
fractional
exponent varies from -1 to +1. An ideal capacitor, an
ideal
resistor and
an
ideal
inductor
behave
as
the
constant phase device for α = 1, α = 0, and α = −1
respectively. These fractional devices in recent times are
found
some
interesting
applications
in
measurement
systems and circuits [14]–[16].
For sensing applications,
the characteristics of the constant phase impedance (CPI)
in presence of the ionic impurities are mainly functions
of three parameters as given by [16]


, ,
f A t



,
where, σ represents the ionic concentration of the medium 
under test, A is the area of contact of the probe with the test
medium and t is the thickness of insulation film on the
electrodes. However, the porous rough surface of the
insulating film plays an important role for
the
CP
behaviour. The measurement of the response is based on
the change in phase angle and the fractional order of the
CPI due to the change in ionic property of water. Due to the
variation of ionic impurities, the parameters of the CPI
will change, which in turn helps us to analyze the quality of
water.
III.
EXPERIMENTS
A. Preparation of the Polymer Insulation Solution
Insulating layer for the fabrication of the CPI is the film
of polymethayl metha acrylate (PMMA). 5 % PMMA
solution was prepared using PMMA flex and chloroform
[16]. Nearly, 5 gm PMMA flex was added in 95 ml
chloroform, and then, the solution was
stirred on a
magnetic hot plate stirrer at 50°C temperature for 2 hrs.
Finally, the solution was de-aired to remove the bubbles
formed during the stirring process.
B. Fabrication of the CPI Sensor with Double side
Copper Cladded P C B S ubstrate
Fabrication of the sensor requires double or single
sided metal coated (copper cladded) printed circuit boards
(PCB). These boards are normally used to solder the
discrete components of a circuit. The circuit board may be
of the copper cladded epoxy resin glass or the copper
cladded polyimide substrate, on which a thin porous
insulating film was deposited. The porous insulating film
may be made of polymer or metal oxide material. While
selecting an insulating film, care must be taken to ensure
the stability of the insulating film. Desirable characteristics
of the fabricated sensor depend on (1) electrode geometries
(2) crack free film (3) thickness of the film (4) film
uniformity and the morphology of the porous film. Copper
cladded polyimide (Upilex, Japan) was used for the CPI
fabrication. Polyimide materials are lightweight, flexible,
resistant to heat and chemicals and the cost is cheap for the
bulk production. A polyimide substrate with double side
copper cladded film of size 4 cm × 1 cm was cleaned in
dilute sulphuric acid solution (H2SO4) for 5 min. The
substrate
was
then
dipped
into
the
PMMA solution
vertically with the dip in length 20 cm for nearly 30 s.
Figure 1. PMMA coated CPI sensor on polyimide PCB substrate.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

An automatic dip coater was used to deposit the
PMMA film of nearly 250 µm thickness on both sides of
the substrate. The substrate was then dried in air at normal
atmospheric condition for 24 hrs. Two copper wires were
soldered at the electrodes for the electrical connection. Fig.
1 shows the photo of the PMMA based double sided
CPI sensor.
B. Fabrication of the IDT Electrode CPI Sensor
For the fabrication of the IDT electrode CPI, the
schematic diagram of the sensor is shown in Fig. 2(a). The
IDT structure with the dimension shown in the diagram was
designed using Autocad software. A screen of the design
was prepared. The design was then printed manually on the
single
side
copper
cladded
polyimide
substrate.
The
substrate with the IDT electrode structure was dipped into
the copper etching solution (Ferric chloride) for nearly ~ 10
min to remove the copper layer from the unmasked area.
The substrate was then cleaned in DI water and in acetone.
Finally, the substrate with the IDT electrode was dipped into
Figure 2. IDT electrode PMMA coated CPI sensor (a) schematic diagram,
(b) photo of the sensors.
the PMMA solution for nearly 30s to deposit the insulating
thin film of the PMMA. Fig. 2(b) shows the photo of the
IDT
sensor. Three IDT structured CPI sensors with
different insulation thickness were fabricated to optimize
the performances of the
sensors. The insulating film
deposited on the electrode is having large number of voids
of ~ um dimension resulting high effective surface area
[16][17]. The FESEM image of the insulating film is shown
in Fig. 3. The IDT sensor with single PMMA coating
provided better performance and was tested for analyzing
the quality of water.
Figure 3. FESEM image of the PMMA insulating film deposited on the
electrode.
C. Testing of the Sensors with Different Water Samples
Impedance analyzer (LCR meter) was used for testing
the fabricated sensors. Parameters like impedance, and phase
angle of the sensor in Z-θ mode were measured by the 
instrument. Each sensor was excited by the sinusoidal AC
voltage signal of 1 V (rms) and the frequency was varied in
the range of 5 kHz to 5 MHz. For determining the
parameters of the CPI, mineral water samples from local
market around the University campus, (New Delhi, India)
were collected. Initially, the TDS value of each water
sample was measured by the commercial TDS meter
(accuracy  5%). We used the commercially available TDS
meter as a reference meter to measure ionic impurities
present in the water samples. TDS meter works on
conductivity measurement principle. With increase in ionic
impurities, the conductivity increases, hence, the TDS value
of the water sample increases.
The TDS value of the water samples is shown in Table I.
All the water samples are having TDS values, which are
within the limit suggested by WHO. Deionized water (DI)
which was almost ions free prepared using Millipore water
purifying system was also used for testing the sensors (TDS
=
0 ppm). Each water sample of 80 ml was taken in a
cleaned glass beaker of 100 ml. The sensor was dipped into
the beaker at a dip in length of 1 cm. Since, the behavior of
the CPI depends on three parameters, so one parameter is
the variable that is the ionic concentration of the medium
and the other two parameters such as the contact area with
the medium and the thickness of insulating film were kept
constant.
Temperature
of
the
water
samples
was
maintained at 25◦C. The readings of the LCR meter in
Z-θ mode w e r e  acquired into the computer. Each 
experiment for a water sample of fixed volume was repeated
at least for five times to ensure the repeatability of the
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

reading. Average values of five readings were plotted. The
maximum standard deviation of the readings of the phase
angle value was approximately 0.48. Small deviation from
the average value was due to minor variation of the dip in
length of the sensor, since the phase angle of the sensor also
depends on the contact area. Fig. 4 shows the variation of
the phase angle of the sensor. For a certain frequency
range, the sensor shows the constant phase behavior. The
phase angle of the sensor for different water samples
varies with the variation of the signal frequency, but it is
almost constant phase over a wide frequency above 200
kHz. There is nearly a 10° shift in the phase angle of the
sample 5 from the sample 1, a commercial popular brand
(Bisleri). Bisleri is one of the most popular mineral
water brands in Delhi. We also performed experiments to
determine the response of the sensor with the mineral water
sample 1 adulterated by adding impure water having more
TDS value. Bisleri was assumed to be a pure reference
water and untreated ground water having high TDS
value was taken as the impure water.
TABLE I: TDS VALUE OF DIFFERENT WATER SAMPLES
WaterSamples
TDSvalue(ppm)
DIWater
Sample 1 (commercial bisleri)
Sample 2
Sample 3
Sample 4
Sample 5
0
120
250
295
340
600
Figure 4. Change in phase angle of the sensor with frequency of
different water samples.
The change in phase angle of the sensor for
different
adulterated
water
samples
with
the
variation of the frequency is shown in Fig. 5. Again,
the CPI sensor shows well defined constant phase
behavior above 200 kHz for the adulterated and the
pure water but the shift in phase angle of the
adulterated sample is very significant. For 20%
adulteration of the Bisleri water, there is nearly 20°
shift in the phase angle (at f = 400 kHz).
Figure 5. Change in phase angle of the sensor with frequency for the
adulterated water samples.
Experiments were then performed with the IDT CPI
sensor. Variation of the phase angle with the variation of
the signal frequency in the range of 5 kHz-1 MHz is
shown in Fig. 6. The IDT sensor also shows the constant
phase response over a certain frequency range. However,
the sensor in Fig. 1 shows much better constant phase
behaviour than the IDT sensor shown in Fig. 2.
Figure 6. Variation of the phase angle with frequency of the IDT
sensor for different pure water samples.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

IV.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Figure 7. Variation of the phase angle and the fractional exponent with
TDS value of the sensor.
The CPI sensor is identified by the constant phase
behavior, and the fractional exponent (α), which are 
independent of the frequency. The parameter α can be 
determined using the expression α = −2θ/π, where θ is 
the phase angle of the sensor. Using this expression, the
values of α were determined at different frequency.  
Fig. 7 shows the variation of the phase angle and the
fractional exponent of the CPI sensor with the variation of
TDS value of the drinking water samples at 400 kHz signal
frequency. With increase in TDS value, the conductivity of
water increases, hence, the values of the phase angle and the
fractional exponent decrease. Therefore, the sensor shows a
correlation between the TDS value and the parameters of the
CPI sensor.
Figure 8. Complex impedance plot of the sensor for different water
samples.
Experiments were also performed with DI water (Grade
II) having resistivity of 14 MΩ.cm. DI water is almost free 
from ions, therefore, the sensor is having fractional exponent
value close to 1 (α = 1 for perfect capacitor). 
The complex impedance data showing the negative of
imaginary component of the impedance (Z) is plotted
with the real component of the impedance with the variation
of the signal frequency. The plot is shown in Fig. 8.
Data of the impedance was obtained from the actual
experiments with different water samples in Z

mode of
the Impedance analyzer over a frequency range of 5 kHz to
5 MHz. Each of the responses has two distinct parts namely
(i) a semicircular part and (ii) a curved straight line. Both
the parts vary with the variation of the water types.
Semicircular
response
at
higher
frequency
can
be
represented by the parallel combination of the resistance and
the capacitance. The radius of the semicircle reduces with
increase in conductivity of the water samples. The curved
straight line towards the lower frequency indicates the
diffusion of ions through the macro pores of the insulating
film on the electrode [16]. Insulating film of PMMA has
macro porous structure as shown in the FESEM image of
Fig. 3. Pores are of different size but of the order of
micrometer 
m
. When the sensor is dip into water, the
water molecules contact the electrode through these macro
pores. In presence of water, each pore can be represented by
an RC network. Values of the equivalent resistance and
capacitance of the network depend on the conductivity as
well as dielectric constant of the water. Inhomogeneous
macrostructure of the insulation and the presence of large
number of voids, cause formation of a distributed RC
network
with
different
(RC)
time
constants.
Such
distribution of the time constant gives the constant phase
behavior of the sensor [13], [16]-[17]. For a protype meter,
this change in phase shift of the sensor can be converted into
a voltage signal using a phase detection electronic circuit.
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper presented the initial study of the constant
phase sensors and their application for analyzing
the
quality of drinking water. Fabrication of the sensors is
very easy and is bulk producible at low cost. The sensors
were tested with pure and the adulterated mineral water
samples. The sensors showed the constant phase behavior
over a wide frequency range. But the CP and the fractional
exponent varied with the variation of the ionic impurities.
The phase angle at a particular excitation frequency can be
converted into a voltage signal using an interface circuit.
The output of the interface can be calibrated to make a stick
type probe for the vendors and household application.
Initial results showed that the sensor may be suitable to
make a ball pen type probe for testing drinking water
including its adulteration with impure water. However,
detailed investigation with large number of water samples
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

from different commercial brands and different CPI sensors
with different pore morphology with more stable insulating
films are needed to establish the effectiveness of the sensors
for water quality monitoring.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This
work
was
supported
by
Defense
Research
Development
Organization,
(DRDO)
(Grant
no.
CC/TM/ERIPR/GIA/16-17/0382/041, New Delhi, India.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Bartram, and R. Ballance, “Water quality monitoring: a
practical
guide to the design and
implementation
of
freshwater
quality
studies
and monitoring programmes”,
CRC Press, 1996.
[2]
SC Mukhopadhyay, and A Mason, “Real time water quality
monitoring”, SSMI 4, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg
2013, pp. 1-24.
[3]
V. J. Nagaraj, M. Jacobs, K. M. Vattipalli, V. P. Annam, and
S. Prasad, “Nanochannel-based electrochemical sensor for the
detection
of
pharmaceutical
contaminants
in
water,”
Environ. Science: Processes & Impacts, vol. 16, no. 1, 2014,
pp. 135–140.
[4]
M. Santono et al., “Investigating single sensor ability in the
characterization of drinkable water: a pilot study”, J. Water
and Environment, 2016, pp. 1-8.
[5]
A. I. Zia, M. S. A. Rahman, and S. C. Mukhopadhyay,
“Technique for rapid detection of phthalates in water and
beverages,” J.
of Food Engineering, vol. 116, no. 2, 2013,
pp. 515–523.
[6]
X. Wang, et al., “Mechanism and experiment of planar
electrode sensors in water pollutant measurement”, IEEE
Trans. Inst. and Meas., vol. 64, no. 2, 2015, pp. 516-523.
[7]
J. Jiang, X. Wang, R. Chao, Y. Ren, C. Hu, Z. Xu, et al.,
“Smart- phone based portable bacteria pre-concentrating
microfluidic sensor and impedance sensing system,” Sensors
and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 193, 2014, pp. 653–659.
[8]
E.
Garcia-Breijo,
J.
Atkinson,
and
L.
Gil-Sanch,
“A
comparison
study
of
pattern
recognition
algorithms
implemented on a microcontroller for use in an electronic
tongue
for
monitoring
drinking
waters”,
Sensors
and
Actuators A 172, 2011, pp. 570–582.
[9]
Storey MV, B. van der Gaag, and B. P Burns, “Advances in
on-line drinking water quality monitoring and early warning
system”, Water Research, 45(2), Sep 2011, pp. 741-748.
[10] D. Hou, H. He, P. Huang, G. Zhang, and H. Loaiciga,
“Detection of water-quality contamination events based on
multi-sensor fusion using an extended Dempster–Shafer
method”, Meas. Sci. Technol., 24, 2013, pp. 055801-19.
[11] Bo Højris, and S. C. Boesgaard Christensen, “A novel,
optical, on-line bacteria sensor for monitoring drinking water
quality”, Scientific Reports, 6, 2016, pp. 23935-45.
[12] H. Golnabi, and
M. Sharifian, “Investigation of water
electrical parameters as a function of measurement frequency
using cylindrical capacitive sensors,” Measurement, vol. 46,
no. 1, 2013, pp. 305–314.
[13] S.
Roy,
“On
the
realization
of
a
constant-argument
immittance or fractional operator”, IEEE Trans. on Circuit
Theory, vol. 14, no. 3, 1967, pp. 264–274.
[14] J. Lario-Garc´ıa, and R. Pallas-Areny, “Constant-phase 
element identification in conductivity sensors using a single
square wave,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 132,
no. 1, 2006, pp. 122–128.
[15] T. C. Haba, G. L. Loum, and G. Ablart, “An analytical
expression for the input impedance of a fractal tree obtained
by
a
microelectronical
process
and
experimental
measurements of its non-integral dimension,” Chaos, Solitons
& Fractals, vol. 33, no. 2, 2007, pp. 364–373.
[16] T. Islam, Z. U. Rahman, and S. C. Mukhopadhyay, “A
novel
sol–gel thin-film constant phase sensor for high
humidity measurement in the range of 50%–100% R H ,”
IEEE Sensors, vol. 15, no. 4, 2015, pp.2370–2376.
[17] S. Amand e t a l. , “Constant-phase-element behavior caused
by inhomogeneous water uptake in anti-corrosion coatings,”
Electrochimica Acta, vol. 87, 2013, pp. 693–700.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-659-0
SENSORCOMM 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

