An Overview Over Yarn Mass Parameterization Methods 
 
Vítor Carvalho, Nuno Gonçalves and Filomena 
Soares 
Dept. industrial electronics 
Minho university 
Guimarães, Portugal 
vcarvalho@dei.uminho.pt, a42109@alunos.uminho.pt, 
fsoares@dei.uminho.pt 
Michael Belsley1 and Rosa Vasconcelos2 
1Dept. physics , 2Dept. textile engineering 
Minho university 
1Braga, 2Guimarães, Portugal 
1belsley@fisica.uminho.pt, 2rosa@det.uminho.pt
 
Abstract—This paper presents a description of two different 
approaches to determine and measure the yarn mass 
parameters. The first approach (YSQ) is based on: a capacitive 
sensor to determine yarn mass and on optical sensors with 
Fourier optics to determine yarn hairiness and diameter. The 
second approach determines all yarn mass parameters using 
image processing techniques. Both approaches present 
innovative, low cost, portable and high-precision yarn 
evaluation testers, for quality control of yarn characteristics 
under laboratory conditions. It is believed that the solution 
based on image processing techniques allows a high level of 
advantages, among others, reduced hardware and maintenance 
necessities with a very high resolution. The software was 
developed in LabVIEW, using the toolbox IMAQ Vision for 
image processing. 
Keywords-yarn mass parameters; optical signal processing; 
yarn hairiness; yarn diameter;capacitive sensors; optival sensors; 
image processing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The correct and accurate evaluation of yarns is a subject 
of major importance to the Textile Industry, as the final 
fabric quality depends directly on the yarn quality. To 
undertake these yarn tests several companies have 
developed specific equipment. The Tester 5 from Uster [1] 
is important for its relevant contribution to the development 
of quantitative yarn characterization.  
However, these yarn testers have a significant cost, 
require a considerable area for their installation and present 
limited resolution and precision in the evaluation of certain 
yarn parameters.  
As a result, many yarn producers do not have their own 
yarn testers and, instead, choose to subcontract dedicated 
testing laboratories for yarn quality determination. This 
process is time consuming and eliminates the possibility of 
acting in useful time during yarn production, reducing 
efficiency. 
To overcome these drawbacks, we have developed new 
equipment, entitled YSQ (Yarn System Quality) [2]. The 
YSQ measures the yarn diameter, the yarn hairiness and the 
yarn irregularity based on optical and capacitive sensors. 
Moreover, it integrates an external module to obtain yarn 
production characteristics, based on image processing (IP). 
At present, in the Textile Industry there are no available 
commercial equipment or known prototypes to obtain these 
characteristics automatically. Instead, they are obtained 
manually by human ocular inspection or by using an 
analogue microscope, being the results susceptible to errors 
[3, 4].  
The high precision levels of parameterization performed 
by the YSQ, together with its low cost and high portability 
make it a reliable and efficient solution for the Industry. 
Furthermore, and after studying the image processing 
possibilities in the production characteristics module of the 
YSQ, we started considering to specify the traditional yarn 
mass parameters as technological solutions based on IP, as 
they are characterized by high reliability and efficiency and 
can present some advantages over the traditional methods 
(very low cost, small size and weight, reduced hardware, 
reliability and possibility of very high resolution).  
IP based applications have been used in the textile field 
since 1964 [5], although they have not yet been converted to 
viable quality control methods [6]. 
Due to its influence on the quality of textiles, yarn 
hairiness is considered to be one of the most significant 
parameters. In textile industry the equipment used to 
measure the hairiness are based on photoelectric methods, 
like the Shirley’s apparatus and the Uster Tester 3 devices 
[7]. Several algorithms are currently under development to 
characterize the yarn hairiness with IP. The method 
proposed by [8], measures the real length of the protruding 
fibers from the yarn core, as well as, their number in order 
to quantify hairiness. Reference [9] introduced a new 
method to measure hairiness, based on the assumption that 
the hairs close and parallel to the yarn core would be a 
better indicator of hairiness, proposing then a new 
parameter: Hair Area Index. This concept measures the area 
covered by hairs and is divided by the area of the yarn core 
to obtain a dimensionless quantity. Nevertheless, it is still 
necessary to develop algorithms to detect and characterize 
loop fibers length and to clearly distinguish between 
protruding fibers and loop fibers when they are interlaced. 
Another important parameter is the yarn diameter, since it 
18
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

is used to predict fabric structural parameters such as width, 
cover factor, porosity and fabric comfort [10]. The 
characterization of yarn diameter with IP can also be 
achieved with algorithms already applied to the extraction 
of yarn core [11, 12]. But, algorithms to measure the exact 
length of yarn irregularities (thin places, thick places and 
neps) [13] need to be developed. The characterization of 
yarn mass can be inferred from the yarn diameter, 
depending, among other parameters, on the yarn fiber 
density and porosity [14, 15]. 
Besides the YSQ, this paper also presents a new solution 
to automatically characterize the mass parameters of yarn 
and a preliminary study to identify and quantify the loop 
and protruding fibers (hairiness) based on IP.  
This paper considers the following organization: Section 
I – Introduction, presents an overview over the traditional 
methods of yarn parameterization as well as describes the 
evolutions obtained with the solutions presented in this 
work; Section II – Textile Parameters Theoretical 
Considerations, describes the theoretical concepts of the 
yarn parameters quantified; Section III – YSQ Sensors 
System, presents the electronic and optical hardware used as 
well its configurations over the technical solutions of this 
work; Section IV – Yarn Mass Parameterization Using 
Image 
Processing, 
describes 
the 
image 
processing 
algorithms used to quantify the yarn parameters measured in 
this work; Section V – Conclusions and Future Work, 
presents the final remarks and the project following steps. 
II. 
TEXTILE PARAMETERS THEORECTICAL 
CONSIDERATIONS 
This section describes the typical configuration of a yarn, 
the definition of faults, hairiness and the most important 
yarn production characteristics [3, 4, 16-18]. 
A. Yarn Configuration, Faults and Hairiness 
The most important parameters used to specify yarn 
quality are linear density, structural features and fibre 
content. An example of yarn configuration is shown in 
Figure 1.  
Mean Value
Diameter
Length
Mean Value
Diameter
Length
 
Figure 1.  Yarn configuration example 
As Figure 1 suggests there is a direct relationship 
between the variation of yarn mass and the yarn diameter. 
Thus the calculation of the diameter can be obtained by 
d(mm) = 0.037sqrt( Tex) , where Tex is the mass of the yarn 
in one kilometer of length (g/km) – yarn linear mass. This 
relation allows the possibility of determining yarn 
irregularity based on yarn diameter measurements.  
The number of yarn faults and yarn mass measurements 
enables a quality rating of the products tested. There are 
three kinds of yarn faults, classified as (Figure 2): thin 
places - a decrease in the mass during a short length (4 mm); 
thick places - an increase in the mass, usually less than 100 
% of the sensitivity, and lasting more than 4 mm; neps - 
huge amount of yarn mass (equal or superior to 100 % of 
sensitivity) in a short length (typically from 1 mm to 4 mm).   
Thin Places
Thick Places
Neps
 
Figure 2.  Types of yarn faults 
Apart from faults, another important feature which 
greatly influences the appearance of fabrics is the level of 
yarn hairiness. Hairiness is the result of released fibres over 
the strand. Figure 3 presents an example of hairiness [3, 17, 
19-21]. 
  
 
Figure 3.  Identification of yarn hairiness in an electron microscope picture 
The hairiness coefficient (H) specifies the length of hairs 
in a meter of yarn. 
Measurements of the yarn hairiness, mass and diameter, 
allow the determination of several statistical parameters 
which are relevant when characterizing yarn quality and, 
subsequently, the fabrics. 
 
B. Yarn Production Characteristics  
Four important production characteristics of commercial 
yarns are the fiber’s twist orientation, the number of cables 
(folded yarns and non-folded yarns), the folded yarn twist 
step and the folded yarn twist orientation [3, 4]. The two 
final production characteristics mentioned are only obtained 
when dealing with folded yarns. Figure 4 identifies the four 
19
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

described production characteristics using as an example an 
electron microscope image of a 4.2 g/km cotton yarn. It is a 
folded yarn as two separate cables are clearly visible. The 
folded yarn twist step (d) is 0.3334 mm, with an orientation 
clockwise and a fiber twist orientation opposite (anti-
clockwise) to the folded yarn direction.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Identification of the yarn production characteristics in an 
electron microscope picture 
III. 
YSQ SENSORS SYSTEM 
This section describes the optical and electronic setups 
used to obtain the measurements of yarn hairiness, yarn 
diameter and mass variation in the YSQ [22-24]. Moreover, 
it also describes the hardware of the external YSQ module, 
employed to obtain the yarn production characteristics. 
A.  Three Directions Optical Configuration – Main 
Module 
In order to reduce YSQ volume and cost, one diode laser 
source was employed (Eudyna FLD6A2TK [18]) to 
establish three different beams. This single source (Src) was 
divided in three beams using two beam splitters (S1, first 
beam splitter division 50 % / 50 % of full signal for each 
resultant direction, S2, second beam splitter division ≈ 2 % / 
48% of full signal for each resultant direction), as presented 
in Figure 5.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Light signal source intensity beam division 
Figure 6 presents the YSQ optical setup employed 
where, Src is the diode laser source that emits light at 685 ± 
10 nm in both a single transverse and a single longitudinal 
mode, with a low aspect ratio of 1.3, the two HPF represent 
a high-pass spatial filter, LPF is a low-pass spatial filter, FL 
is the Fourier lens, S1 is the first beam splitter, S2 is the 
second beam splitter and L1 to L4 are plano-convex lenses. 
 
    
 
Figure 6.  YSQ optical configuration 
Observing Figure 6 one can see that the beam splitters 
were placed immediately after the Fourier lens. As in this 
case there are two different types of spatial filters (high-pass 
filters, HPF and low-pass filters, LPF), the beam division 
should be performed before the signal filtering to allow the 
application of different filters. Figure 7 presents an image 
obtained in the image plane of lenses L2 (HS-Hairiness 
Sensor) and L3 (PDA-Photodiode Array), where only the 
yarn contours and hairiness are highlighted by the high-pass 
spatial filter (the yarn core and light which is not blocked by 
the yarn were eliminated). 
 
Figure 7.  Image plane of lenses L2 and L3 
Figure 8 presents an image obtained in the image plane of 
lens L4 (DVS-Diameter Variation Sensor), where only a 
shadow of the yarn core and light which is not blocked by 
the yarn are transmitted by a low-pass spatial filter (the yarn 
contours and hairiness were eliminated). 
20
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
Figure 8.  Image plane of lens L4 
B. Electronics Configuration – Main Module 
The images obtained in the image plane of lenses L2 
(HS) and L4 (DVS) are aquired by two equal configurations 
of the developed electronic yarn measurement hardware 
shown in Figure 9 [22, 23]. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Custom developed electronic yarn measurement hardware for 
the HS and DVS 
The measurement of precise yarn diameter (PDA) was 
based on line profile analysis [24]. Figure 10 presents the 
line profile analysis indicated in Figure 7 for 512 pixels, 
where the red plane intensity line profile signal, is 
proportional to the voltage signal resulting from the 
hairiness distribution image of the linear array photodiodes.  
Considering the typical hairiness distribution profile 
(Figure 10), starting from the yarn core signal (reduced 
signal intensity of between the two main distribution peaks), 
in the right and left directions, respectively, the first signal 
peak intensity is obtained for the yarn contours.  
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
100
200
300
400
500
Pixels 
Red Plane Intensity 
right yarn countour
left yarn countour
main released yarn fibre
 
Figure 10.    Line profile analysis example 
The yarn diameter characterization can be determined 
considering the number of pixels between the left and right 
yarn contour pixels, the optical amplification (0.37) and the 
pixels pitch. 
The experimental setup was developed based on the 
S8378-256Q CMOS line array and the C9001 Driver 
Circuit, both from Hamamatsu [25].  
The yarn mass variation system considers a 1 mm parallel 
plate capacitive sensor based on the integrated circuit 
MS3110 from Irvine Sensors [16, 26, 27], allowing direct 
yarn mass measurements in samples of 1 mm. The sensor 
adopts a differential configuration to assure a higher 
robustness to variations in temperature, air humidity and 
pressure. It integrates transducer amplification and signal 
conditioning as shown in Figure 11.  
 
 
Figure 11.  Capacitive sensor configuration [C1,C2 – Adjustable capacitors 
to calibrate the sensors, AMP – Capacity to voltage converter and 
amplifier, S/H – Sample and hold, LPF – Two pole low pass filter, and 
BUFF – Output buffer] 
The software to acquire and process the data was developed 
in LabVIEW from National Instruments [28].   
C. Yarn Productions Characteristics ExternalModule  
Hadware Design – Optics and Electronics 
In order to keep the total system price at an acceptable 
level, a low cost analogue microscope coupled to a web 
CMOS camera was used. The microscope provides 
sufficient amplification and image detail, while there are no 
special requirements regarding the camera resolution. Figure 
12 shows the flowchart of the designed system.  
 
 
Figure 12.    Yarn Image Acquisition Flowchart 
The analogue microscope employed is the Biolux Al 
from Bresser [29] and the USB Web Camera used is the 
Deluxe from Hercules [30]. The web camera was placed at 
the exit plane of the microscope ocular, capturing the 
analogue image produced by the microscope. With an 
optical amplification of 40X, it was found that a sensor 
resolution of 640x480 pixels is adequate to correctly 
evaluate the yarn production characteristics. 
In order to obtain higher contrasts for the yarn geometry 
relief, the illuminated yarn surface must be as close as 
possible to a monochromatic light source. As the white led 
illumination available on the microscope emits a wide range 
of wavelengths, an external yellow light source was used, 
which is somewhat closer to an ideal monochromatic light 
source. Figure 13 presents an example of a picture of a 22 
g/km linear mass yarn obtained using the described setup. 
 
21
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
Figure 13.    Picture of a 22 g/km yarn  
Therefore, considering the clear contrast between the 
yarn zones with higher relief, corresponding to the most 
accentuated twist areas or yarn areas which are closer to the 
light source (as seen in Figure 13), a tool was developed 
using the IMAQ Vision software [31-33] for LabVIEW, to 
determine the yarn production characteristics. Then it was 
possible to classify the yarn production characteristics by 
the following: 
• 
Folded (multiple cable) yarn twist step: obtained by 
the average of the horizontal pixel distance 
between particles;  
• 
Folded yarn twist orientation: determined by the 
orientation angle for each particle, under the 
following conditions: If the orientation angle lies 
between 90º and 180º, then the twist orientation is 
anti-clockwise; if the orientation angle lies between 
0º and 90º, than the twist orientation is in the 
clockwise direction. 
• 
Number of cables (folded or non-folded (single) 
yarn): If only one particle is identified - single 
cable (non-folded yarn); if the number of particles 
is greater than one - multiple cables (folded yarn).  
• 
Fibers twist orientation: in folded yarns, the fibers 
twist orientation is opposite to the twist orientation. 
This is a general fact in Textile Industry to avoid 
the fibers untwist over the yarns [3, 4]. 
IV. 
YARN MASS PARAMETERIZATION USING IMAGE 
PROCESSING 
This section describes the methodology used for 
measuring the diameter, for calculating of the hairiness 
coefficient and the detection of imperfections in the yarn, 
through image processing techniques. Furthermore a 
preliminary study for the detection and differentiation 
between protruding and loop fibers is also presented. 
 
A. Diameter Determination 
Figure 14 represents the block diagram of the algorithm 
used to determine the diameter by image processing 
techniques. 
The algorithm summarizes the application of various 
techniques of image processing that allows obtaining, as 
final result, the contours of the yarn core, excluding, all 
hairiness around the core. The diameter calculation is made 
through the detection of all the edges along a set of parallel 
searching lines. Once all edges are detected, the distance is 
calculated between the pairs of edges detected by all the 
search lines. The diameter is obtained by, the average of all 
the distances calculated. Once calculated the diameter, the 
yarn mass is easily obtained through the theoretical 
correlation between mass and diameter, presented in section 
II-A. 
 
Figure 14.  Diameter determination block diagram 
Figure 15 presents the image-based sample of the yarn 
captured by the image acquisition system and Figure 16, the 
result after the application of the sequence of functions 
presented in Figure 14. 
 
 
Figure 15.  Original sample image acquired 
 
Figure 16.  Image resultant from the aplication of the Figure 14 functions to 
Figure 15. 
22
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

B. Determination of yarn faults (Thin and Thick places) 
With the yarn diameter and due to the correlation 
between the mass and the diameter, thick and thin places can 
be analyzed by comparing the distances measured along the 
yarn with the average diameter at several levels of analysis. 
Figure 17 shows the algorithm applied. 
 
 
Figure 17.  Algorithm used to detect yarn faults 
C. Yarn Hairiniess Determination 
 
In this study, spatial pre-processing techniques, as well as 
segmentation and spatial filtering techniques were used to 
isolate the yarn core and to highlight and quantify the 
protruding and loop fibers from the original image. In order 
to isolate the protruding and loop fibers from the yarn, 
logical operators were used between the image with the 
highlight fibers and the yarn core. Figure 18 presents the 
algorithm implemented. 
 
 
Figure 18.  Algorithm used to measure the yarn hairiness index 
Figure 19 shows the sample base yarn image where the 
image processing techniques were applied and Figure 20, its 
result. 
 
 
Figure 19.  Original sample image acquired 
23
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

 
Figure 20.  Image resultant from the aplication of the Figure 18 functions to 
Figure 19. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents two different approaches to quantify 
the yarn mass parameters, namely, based on capacitive and 
optical sensors and based on image processing techniques. 
To perform the measurements of the first approach, the 
equipment YSQ was built. A capacitive sensor is used to 
measure yarn mass, and optical sensors, with optical signal 
processing are used to quantify yarn hairiness and diameter. 
An additional module of yarn production characteristics was 
developed using image processing. This equipment presents 
several advantages when compared to the commercial 
available equipment, like low cost, high portability and 
superior resolution (all the analysis is performed in steps of 
yarn length of 1mm or inferior). 
Considering the computational power evolution of 
computers, a solution to measure the yarn mass parameters 
(diameter, hairiness and mass) with image processing was 
developed. This solution presents even more advantages to 
the traditional equipment, as low cost, equipment hardware, 
maintenance, dimension and high resolution. 
Future work will consider a comparison of results 
between both approaches. Furthermore, the optimization of 
the algorithms of image processing applied in the second 
approach is still under work. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors are grateful to the Portuguese Foundation 
(FCT) for funding through the scholarship (BD/ 19028/ 
2004) and to the Portuguese Research Centers Algoritmi and 
2C2T for financial support of the project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] www.uster.com (access in May 2011)  
[2] V. Carvalho, M. Besley, R. Vasconcelos and F. Soares, “Automatic 
Yarn Characterization System”, IEEE Sensors 2008, 26-29 October, 
Lecce, Italy.  
[3] B. Goswami, J. Martindale and F. Scardino, “Textile Yarns: 
Technology, Structure and Applications”, 2nd Edition, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York, 1977. 
[4] M. Castro and M. Araújo, “Manual de Engenharia Têxtil - Vol. II”, 
Gulbenkian, Lisbon, 1986.  
[5] Shiloh, M., “A computer for the evaluation of the crimp diameter of 
textile fibers” Textile Research Journal, 1964, 34(5): p. 430-434. 
[6]  S. Jaganathan, “Characterization Methods and Physical Properties of 
Novelty Yarn” , MSc Thesis, North Carolina State University, 
Raleigh, 2005. 
[7] Anirban Guha, C. Amarenath, S. Pateria and R, “Measurement of 
yarn hairiness by digital image processing” The journal of the Textile 
Institute, Vol. 101, Issue 3, March 2010, pp. 214-222. 
[8] M. Kuzanski and L. Jackowska-Strumillo, “Yarn Hairiness 
Determination – The algorithms of computer measurement methods”, 
MEMSTECH’2007, May 23-26, Lviv-Polyana, Ukraine, p.154-157. 
[9] http://www.indiantextilejournal.com/articles/FAdetails.asp?id=552 
(access in May  2011). 
[10] M. Kuzanski, “The Algorithms of the Yarn Shape Detection and 
Calculation of the Protruding Fibres Length”, MEMSTECH’2008, 
May 21-24, Lviv-Polyana, Ukraine, p.98-100. 
[11]  W. Jian and Y. Li, “Evaluation of Yarn Regularity Using Computer 
Vision”, 9th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, Vol. 2,  
November 14-17, p.854-856. 
[12]  V. Carvalho, “Automatic Yarn Characterization System”, PhD 
Thesis, Minho University, Braga, 2008. 
[13]  B.C. Goswami, J.G. Martindale and F.L. Scardino, Textile Yarns: 
Technology, Structure and Applications, 2nd Edition, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York, 1977. 
[14]  A. Cay, S. Vassiliadis, M. Rangoussi and I. Tarakçioglu, “On the 
Use of Image Processing Techniques for the Estimation of the 
Porosity of Textile Fabrics”, Proceedings of World Academy of 
Science, Engineering and Technology – PWASET, Vol. 2, January 
2005, p.73-76. 
[15]  J.G. Pinto, R. Vasconcelos, F.O. Soares and J. L. Monteiro, “A new 
system for direct measurement of yarn mass with 1mm accuracy”, 
IEEE International Conference on Industrial Technology, Bangkok, 
Dezembro, 2002, pp. 1158 1163. 
[16] V. Carvalho, “Parametrização de Fio Têxtil Baseada na Análise de 
Massa”, Msc Thesis, Minho University, Guimarães, 2004. 
[17] J. Neves, “A Irregularidade dos Fios Têxteis, Sua Origem, Medição e 
Análise”, Oporto, 1968. 
[18] R. Furter, “Evenness Testing in Yarn Production: part I”, The Textile 
Institute and Zellweger Uster AG, Manchester, 1982. 
[19] A. Anand, V. Chhaniwasl and C. Narayanamurthy, “Hairiness 
Measurement of Textile Yarns Using Crossed Polarizers”, Review of 
Scientific Instruments, 2005, 76. 
[20] A. Barella, “Yarn Hairiness”, Textile Progress, 1981, 13, p.1. 
[21] A. Barella, ”The Hairiness of Yarns”, Textile Progress, 1992, 24, p.3. 
[22] V. Carvalho, P. Cardoso, M. Belsley, R. Vasconcelos and F. Soares, 
“Yarn Hairiness Parameterization Using a Coherent Signal 
Processing Technique”, Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, Volume 
145, Issue 1, p217-224. 
[23] V. Carvalho, P. Cardoso, M. Belsley, R. Vasconcelos, F. O. Soares, 
“Yarn Diameter Measurements Using Coherent Optical Signal 
Processing”, IEEE Sensors Journal, Vol. 8, Issue 11, November 2008, 
pp.1785-1793. 
[24] V. Carvalho, P. Cardoso, M. Belsley, R. Vasconcelos, F. O. Soares, 
“Yarn Hairiness Characterization Using Two Orthogonal Directions”,  
IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, 2009, in 
press, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2008.2005082. 
[25] www.hamamatsu.co.jp (access in May 2011) 
[26] V. Carvalho, J. Pinto, J. Monteiro, R. Vasconcelos and F. Soares, 
“Yarn Parameterization Based on Mass Analysis”, Sensors and 
Actuators A: Physical, Vol. 115, Issues 2-3, September 2004, p.540-
548. 
[27] www.irvine-sensors.com (access in May 2011) 
[28] www.ni.com (access in May 2011) 
[29] http://www.bresseroptics.co.uk (access in May 2011) 
[30] http://www.hercules.com (access in May 2011) 
[31] IMAQ, IMAQ Vision Concepts Manual, National Instruments, 
Austin, 2004. 
[32] T. Klinger, “Image Processing with LabVIEW and IMAQ Vision”, 
Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 2003. 
[33] C.G. Relf, “Image Acquisition and Processing with LabVIEW” CRC, 
Boca Raton, 2003. 
24
SENSORDEVICES 2011 : The Second International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-145-8

