PLD as Possible Tool for the Fabrication of Chemosensors Based on Amorphous 
Membranes 
Winfried Vonau, Frank Gerlach, Kristina Ahlborn 
Kurt-Schwabe-Institut für Mess- und Sensortechnik 
Waldheim, Germany 
email: info@ksi-meinsberg.de 
 
Abstract— Electrochemical sensors with sensitive membranes 
from amorphous materials, in particular, in case of pH elec-
trodes are traditionally fabricated by glass-blowers. For a 
more effective manufacturing, sometimes so-called blowing 
machines are used. Thereby, on the one hand a miniaturisation 
of these electrodes is limited due to technological reasons. On 
the other hand, this makes it impossible to achieve planar sen-
sors. In addition, a relatively large amount of functional special 
glass is necessary for such processes. Pulsed laser deposition 
(PLD) could provide ideal conditions to reduce the above-
mentioned drawbacks. In this contribution results of using this 
method for the fabrication of planar glass based electrochemi-
cal sensors are demonstrated, whereby an amorphous silicate 
glass is in the focus for the sensor membrane. 
 
Keywords- electrochemical sensor; pulsed laser deposition; 
planarity; sensor miniaturisation; thin film. 
 
I  INTRODUCTION 
Sensitive membranes are essential functional compo-
nents of potentiometric chemosensors. In this respect, ac-
cording to Figure 1, a distinction is made between solid-
based and liquid membranes. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Classification of membrane materials for electrochemical sensors 
 
For solid membranes, amorphous materials play a signif-
icant role. The reason is that especially the pH determina-
tion, which is one of the analyses performed most frequently 
worldwide, is carried out with electrochemical electrodes 
based on such membranes according to standards [1]. The 
membrane materials used here are silicated glasses with 
high electrolytic conductivity which mainly are achieved by 
using alkaline, as well as alkaline earth metal oxides, chang-
ing the silicate glass network [2] like is shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Two-dimensional structure of a silicate glass with network 
changing components 
●  Si,   o  brige oxygen bridge,   ʘ  separate oxygen,   X   network chang-
ing component,   +   cation 
 
Silica based electrode glasses, as a rule, are generated by 
melting their basic materials in covered platinum crucibles 
for several hours at temperatures > 1300 °C and subsequent 
quenching. For the further processing by the glassblower it 
is useful to outpour the liquid glass material, e.g., in a 
graphite flume. In this way, rods of the special glass are 
obtained. From these, glassblowers for the most parts pro-
duce basket or dome-shaped conventional pH electrodes in 
quantities of several million pieces per year in its interiors 
containing a buffer solution and an electrochemical refer-
ence system (as a rule an electrode of 2nd kind). Modifying 
the glass composition makes it possible to realise similarly 
constructed silicate glass based electrodes with sensitivities 
for a number of other cations, mainly of metals of the first 
group of the periodic table [3]. 
Beside the above mentioned sensors, whose functionali-
ty is based on electrolytic conductivity, there are also probes 
with electron conducting amorphous membrane materials. 
These include redox glass [4] and chalcogenide glass elec-
trodes [5]. For both types of electrodes the selection of an 
optimal internal reference system is relatively simple. As a 
result of the predominant electron conductivity of the sensi-
tive membrane materials a direct contact of the special 
glasses with a (noble) metal is appropriate. Liquid system 
components therefore are not applicable for chemosensors 
based on such materials. From constructional view on the 
one hand it is possible to fabricate compact electrodes by 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

sticking a wire directly on the surface of the functional 
amorphous body, e.g., using a conductive varnish (see Fig-
ure 3); on the other hand, it is also possible to form a thin 
metal coating directly on the electron conducting glass by 
electro-plating (see Figure 4). 
 
 
platinum wire
polypyrrole/nafion
platinum ring with PPy
chalcogenide glass
Glass or PVC tube
copper wire
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Schematic drawing of a chalcogenide glass electrode [6] 
 
 
fusion region of the
glasses needed for
the sensor
electrode cap
electrical lead
(Ag or Cu wire)
coaxial cable
silver conduction laquer
elastomer
shaft glass
silver coating
redox glass
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Schematic drawing of a redox glass electrode [7] 
 
Also for silicate glass based cation selective electrodes, 
due to the purpose of their application, it is an interesting 
task to replace the common liquid system components by 
solids. The functionality causing electrolytic conductivity of 
siliceous pH- but also pLi-, pNa or pK-glasses [8] requires 
an interlayer with mixed electrical properties on the reverse 
side of the sensitive membrane. A transition from an ionic 
conducting material to an electronic conductor (for example 
a metal) leads to a so called blocked interface and conse-
quently to an unfavourable measurement behaviour [9]. 
In the past, several suggestions were made to realise 
such interlayers. In the context of the investigations present-
ed here, the possibility to form thin layers of zinc oxide or 
titanium oxide between sensitive glass and a noble metal 
should be mentioned [10]. Previous work on corresponding 
all solid state glass electrodes dealed with sensors fabricated 
with precision manufacturing techniques and screen printing 
(see Figure 5a+b). Here, a clear stabilisation of the half cell 
potentials over the time could be obtained compared to a 
direct metal contacting [11]. 
Following, it is reported on investigations using PLD as 
fabrication technology to realise planar all solid state pH 
electrodes according to above described approach, in other 
words to the forming of a layer design metal/ mixed con-
ducting interlayer / cation selective amorphous membrane 
on dielectric substrates (SiO2, oxide ceramic, glass). 
Beside the realisation of an adherent metallic basic elec-
trode and a semiconducting metal oxide film special atten-
tion will be paid to the transfer of the functional sensor layer 
from a prefabricated ion selective target material by the la-
ser to the substrate. In this process, on the one hand, no ma-
terial losses may occur. On the other hand, also the target 
component must be amorphous. This paper is focused on the 
results of research work focused on this fundamental sub-
task to create all solid state pH glass layers in PLD. 
 
 
a 
 
          b 
 
Figure 5.  All solid state pH glass electrodes based on ZnO as interlayer 
   a 
fabricated in fine and glass mechanics according to [12] 
   b 
fabricated in thick film technology according to [13] 
 
 
In section II, the fabrication of the glass targets, the PLD 
process for the glass layer deposition and the characterisa-
tion of these layers are described. Results of micro-X-ray 
fluorescence analysis, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and 
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy are presented in 
section III. 
 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

II  EXPERIMENTAL 
 
A. Fabrication of the glass targets 
The targets of the sensitive pH glasses for the PLD process 
are obtained by pouring the molten glass in a preheated 
graphite mould according to Figure 6. This manufacturing 
method delivers homogeneous and also amorphous target 
materials with defined geometries. According to Figure 7 
glass cylinders were fabricated that were singularised in 
discs with a thickness of 5 mm by means of a precision saw 
(Accutom-50, Fa. Struers). 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Pouring of molten glass in a graphite mould 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Targets of pH glass 
 
B. PLD process 
The preparation of the thin sensory functional layers was 
carried out by sputtering methods and PLD. For this pur-
pose, a combined coating system „CREAMET 500 PLD 
S2“ of the company Creavac (see Figure 8) was used which 
provides both deposition processes. Furthermore, a simulta-
neous substrate and mask handling is possible without an 
interruption of the vacuum during the coating process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Combined coating system CREAMET 500 PLD S2 of the com-
pany Fa. Creavac, sputter chamber 
left: mask and substrate handler and PLD chamber 
right: mask und substrate handler with transfer device 
With integrated substrate handler and mask change sys-
tem two sputter targets, six PLD targets and altogether five 
changeable masks can be used and combined for the pro-
cess. 
As substrates pre-cleaned glass plates consisting of soda-
lime glass with a size of 50 mm x 15 mm and a thickness of 
1 mm were used. They were pretreated with the initial plas-
ma process at a chamber pressure of 3.0 x 10-2 mbar under 
an argon atmosphere. As chamber pressure for the following 
sputtering processes of the adhesive layer (Ti) and the elec-
trical conducting discharge electrode (Au) a value of 7.0 x 
10-3 mbar was used. After finishing the sputtering processes 
the coated substrates were removed and the masks were 
changed in a so called „Load-Lock-Box“. Prepared in this 
way, the substrates were transferred in the PLD coating 
chamber using a carrier and the PLD process was started. 
The deposition of the thin pH glass films was conducted by 
a KrF excimer laser source (ComPexPro 110 of the compa-
ny Coherent) using a wave length of 248 nm, a fluence of 
5.6 J/cm2 at pulse lengths of 20 ns and a pulse frequency of 
10 Hz. The determination of the laser power before and after 
the coating process in connection with a periodical cleaning 
of the entry window ensured long-term stable and reproduc-
ible basic conditions. The PLD process was carried out at a 
chamber pressure of 3.1 x 10-7 mbar in a N2 atmosphere. 
The substrate was kept at room temperature. As ablation 
time of the sensitive layers a period from 10 to 30 minutes 
was selected. The substrates were positioned perpendicular 
to the plasma club (On-Axis-PLD). 
 
C. Characterisation 
The thin films of pH sensitive glasses prepared by PLD 
were comprehensively characterised with respect to material 
composition and electrochemical behaviour. A possibility 
for the nondestructive determination of homogeneity and 
material composition of thin pH glass films is micro-X-ray 
fluorescence analysis. The energy dispersive micro-X-ray 
fluorescence system M4 Tornado (Fa. Bruker Nano GmbH, 
Berlin) was used for the position-sensitive elemental analy-
sis and allows the analysis of large and inhomogeneous 
samples as well as smallest particles fast and at low vacuum 
under environmental conditions. 
With X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic measurements 
the chemical composition in the first few atomic layers of a 
material surface can be detected because of a low excitation 
energy of only 12.5 kV compared to values of other radio-
graphically methods like, e.g., µ-RFA with excitation ener-
gies up to 50 kV. 
The new pH thin film sensors presented here use gold as 
discharge material for the electrochemical potential formed 
at the sensor surface in contact with the analyte. This inter-
layer between glass substrate and pH sensitive glass layer 
was deposited by laser ablation. Thus, the existence of gold 
on the sensor surface is an indicator for the tightness of the 
PLD-based pH glass thin film. To demonstrate this tightness 
the measurement system SAGE HR 100 Compact High 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Resolution (company SPECS Surface Nano Analyses 
GmbH) was used. The excitation of the sample was carried 
out with MgKα-radiation and an X-ray power of 250 W. To 
evaluate the electrochemical behaviour, in particular for the 
estimation of the electrical conductivity of the glass thin 
films, impedance measurements were carried out in a neu-
tral NBS buffer solution (pH= 6.86) by means of the poten-
tiostat Gamry Interface 1000 (company Gamry Instruments 
Inc.). 
In addition to the here described micro-X-ray fluores-
cence analysis and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, which 
allows statements about bulk properties of the target materi-
als and adsorptive contaminations as well as surface effects, 
it is also possible to use energy dispersive X-ray analysis 
and x-ray diffraction as further radiographical research 
methods. Their application shows that it is possible to real-
ise amorphous sensor membranes using PLD as thin film 
production method. 
 
III  RESULTS 
 
A. Micro-X-ray fluorescence analysis (µ-RFA) 
The results of µ-RFA demonstrate that PLD coated pH 
sensitive glass films possess a good homogeneity (see Fig-
ure 9). 
 
 
a 
b 
 
Figure 9.  PLD-based pH glass thin film on glass substrate with Au/Ti-
conducting path  10x magnification (a) and 100x magnification (b) 
 
Element mappings deliver a uniform distribution of the 
elements over the entire analysed surface; no pronounced 
defects or areas with an accumulation of an element were 
detected (see Figure 10). This ensures compared to conven-
tional glass electrodes identical conditions of the sensor 
membrane concerning the interface between measuring so-
lution/ surface. 
 
 
 
Mapping 821
600 µm
 
 
Figure 10.  Element mapping of a PLD-based pH glass thin film 
 
B. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) 
Both the used glass targets and the fabricated PLD-based 
pH glass thin films were investigated by means of XPS 
overview spectra and spectra of the single elements in re-
gions of their highest sensitivity. Figure 11 demonstrates in 
an exemplary manner a comparing presentation of the over-
view spectrum from a glass target and of a glass thin film 
deposited from this source by PLD. These spectra showed 
no differences in the chemical composition. In addition, a 
determination of the gold content on the surface of the pH 
thin film sensors was carried out (see Figure 12).  
 
glass target
pH glass thin film
Binding Energy [eV]
CPS
 
 
Figure 11.  Comparing presentation of XPS spectra from a glass target 
and a pH glass thin film obtained from this target by PLD 
 
Binding Energy [eV]
CPS
 
 
Figure 12. XPS spectrum obtained at a PLD based glass thin film, re-
gion of the highest sensitivity for gold 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
The spectra indicate that there are no holes in the pH 
sensitive layer and that this layer is tight because no peaks at 
the typical positions for binding energies of gold and its 
compounds are present. 
 
 
C. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) 
 
Figure 13 shows results of EIS determinations using a 
pH glass thin film and a glass bead as working electrode, in 
each case a KCl-saturated silver chloride electrode as refer-
ence and a platinum sheet as counter electrode. Although 
the phase characteristic in Figure 13a is not yet understood 
advantageously, a clearly lower electrode resistance can be 
identified for the PLD based electrode (Figure 13b). By the 
way, electrodes with layers produced by PLD technology 
deliver measurement signals with a higher repeatability. 
This is due to the fact that this manufacturing process pro-
vides a better reproducibility of the thicknesses of the de-
posits.  
 
ph ase [gr d]
0, 01
0, 1
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
100
1000
10000
100000
1000000
1E 7
- 90
- 80
- 70
- 60
- 50
- 40
- 30
- 20
- 10
0
im pedance
 phas e
impedance [ ]
Ω
frequency [Hz]
a 
0, 01
0, 1
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
100
1000
10000
100000
1000000
1E 7
1E 8
1E 9
- 90
- 80
- 70
- 60
- 50
- 40
- 30
- 20
- 10
0
im pedanc e
 phas e
impedance [ ]
Ω
ph ase [gr d]
frequency [Hz]
b 
 
Figure 13.  Impedance spectra of the 3-electrode system: thin film 
glass (a) and glass bead (b)/Ag/AgCl, KClsat./ Pt in a NBS-buffer solution 
(pH=6.86) 
 
D. pH measurement 
Previous studies, as already written above, in the main 
were carried out to coat planar metallised glass substrates 
with ion conducting selective glass films by improving and 
adapting PLD technology for this special purpose. For the 
fabrication of corresponding pH glass electrodes with con-
stant stable electrode potentials and electrode functions fol-
lowing the Nernst equation the realisation of an additional 
semi- or mixed conducting interlayer (for example zinc ox-
ide [12]) by the same technology is necessary [14]. This will 
be the subject of future projects.  
However, it could already be shown, that PLD based pH 
glass layers in direct metal contact deliver sensor sensitivi-
ties of approximately -42 mV/pH at 25 °C. Drift behaviour 
and long-term stability have to be optimised for the reasons 
outlined above by forthcoming integration of interlayers. In 
case of a positive outcome of the development with respect 
to resolution, repeatability and accuracy,  it can be expected 
to realise miniaturised planar all solid state glass electrodes 
with properties comparable to widely used sensor types. 
 
IV  CONCLUSIONS 
 
In the present contribution, results derived from the ap-
plication of PLD as a new method for the deposition of sen-
sitive electrode glasses are described. Homogeneity and 
leak-tightness of thin glass films fabricated in such way 
could be demonstrated by µ-RFA and XPS analyses. Due to 
the low thickness of the glass membrane planar PLD based 
pH sensors possess significantly smaller electrode resistanc-
es compared to conventionally fabricated ones. This fact, as 
well as the possibility to deposit the sensitive membranes on 
different sensor substrate materials (metal, ceramics) and 
also on glass offer a variety of applications, e.g. in the area 
of cell research. Here and in a lot of biomedical and bio-
technological utilisations the transparency of glass is a 
strong advantage. 
It should also be mentioned that the previously estab-
lished thin film method for the fabrication of chemosensors 
(CHEMFETs) is based on CMOS technology, mainly. This 
requires high investment and running costs and can be in-
troduced economically only if products in large quantitites 
are needed. The described sensor fabrication by means of 
PLD allows, among others, to abstain completely from us-
ing photolithographic processes and additional encapsula-
tion steps with simultaneous cost-efficiency also for small 
and medium quantities. Contrary to CHEMFETs, the sen-
sors described in this contribution work according the po-
tentiometric prinicple. Thus, future appliers can still use 
their measurement devices for conventional sensors. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
DIN EN ISO 10523:2012-04. 
[2] 
K. Schwabe, pH-measurement, Dresden: Theodor Stein-
kopff, pp. 120-186, 1976. 
[3] 
G. Eisenman, Glass electrodes for hydrogen and other cati-
ons, New York: Marcel Dekker, 1967. 
[4] 
B. P. Nikolsky et al., „Electron-conductive glass,” Patent US 
3 773 642. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

[5] 
V. G. Vlasov, „New solid-state ion-selective electrodes-
Sensors for chemical analysis of solutions,“ Fresenius Z. 
Anal. Chem., vol. 335, pp. 92-99, 1989. 
[6] 
S. Pollrich, „Chalcogenide glasses as ion-sensitive membra-
nes for potentiometric sensors,“ Diploma Thesis, Hochschule 
Mittweida, 2004. 
[7] 
M. M Schults et al., „Glass electrode,“ Patent DE 2645623. 
[8] 
H. Galster, pH-determination, Weinheim: VCH, pp. 115-123, 
1990. 
[9] 
F. Oehme, Ion-selective electrodes, Heidelberg: Dr. Alfred 
Hüthig, pp. 1-2, 1986. 
[10] T. Bachmann, J. Spindler, F. Gerlach, and W. Vonau, „Glass 
electrode with metal contact for electrochemical applica-
tions,“. Scientific Reports, J. Univ. of Appl. Sci. Mittweida, 
vol. 6, pp. 3-7, 2006. 
[11] W. Vonau, F. Gerlach, U. Enseleit, J. Spindler, and T. 
Bachmann, „New solid-state glass electrodes by using zinc 
oxide thin films as interface layer,” J. Solid State Electro-
chem., vol.13, pp. 91-98, 2009. 
[12] T. Bachmann, J. Spindler, F. Gerlach, and W. Vonau, „Glass 
electrode and procedure for its fabrication,“ Patent DE 10 
2005 059 680 A1. 
[13] W. Vonau, F. Gerlach, U. Enseleit, J. Spindler, and T. 
Bachmann, „Chemical indicator electrode and procedure for 
its fabrication,“ Patent DE 10 2007 016 197 A1. 
[14] W. Vonau, and U. Guth, “pH Monitoring: a review,” J. Solid 
State Electrochem., vol. 10, pp. 746-752, September 2006. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-494-7
SENSORDEVICES 2016 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

