Dynamic Mode AFM Measurement of CMUT Diaphragm Deflection Profile 
Sazzadur Chowdhury 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
University of Windsor 
Windsor, ON, N9B 3P4, Canada 
e-mail: sazzadur@uwindsor.ca 
Abstract—Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) measurement 
results of the deflection shape and ISO 25178 roughness 
parameters of the diaphragm of an adhesive wafer bonded 
Silicon-on-Insulator (SOI) based Capacitive Micromachined 
Ultrasonic Transducer (CMUT) has been presented. The AFM 
measurements were carried out using the dynamic mode 
operation of an atomic force microscope to achieve higher 
resolution. The measurement results were used to construct the 
3D deflection shape of the CMUT diaphragm with actual 
height parameters. The measured deflection shape of the 
CMUT diaphragm can be used to determine the stiffness, 
residual stress, and other physical parameters in a CMUT 
diaphragm to facilitate more accurate calibration and CMUT 
sensitivity. 
Keywords-CMUT; SOI; AFM; Dynamic mode; Residual 
stress. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
Capacitive 
Micromachined 
Ultrasonic 
Transducers 
(CMUT) are advantageous over the piezoelectric ultrasonic 
transducers as they offer superior sensitivity, better temporal 
and axial resolution, higher fractional bandwidth, and higher 
energy transduction efficiency [1]. CMUTs also offer lower 
mechanical impedance, lower self-heating, lower dielectric 
loss, lower internal loss, and better thermal dissipation than 
their piezoelectric counterparts [1]-[4]. All of these positive 
features of CMUTs translate into better image quality as has 
been experimentally verified in [5]-[7]. Additionally, unlike 
the piezoelectric transducers, the CMUTs can be batch 
fabricated with sub-micrometer resolution using CMOS 
compatible highly matured conventional microelectronic 
fabrication techniques to reduce per unit production cost [7]. 
The CMUTs rely on electrostatic or acoustic vibration of 
a thin diaphragm which is separated from a fixed backplate 
by a thin airgap or vacuum space to generate ultrasound in a 
surrounding medium (transmit mode) or to generate an 
electrical signal corresponding to an incident ultrasound 
wave on the diaphragm (receive mode) [1]-[3]. As the 
CMUTs rely on the vibration of a diaphragm to transmit or 
receive ultrasound, accurate measurement of the deflection 
profile (shape) of the diagram and surface roughness is 
crucial for proper characterization of transducer operation 
[8].  
The deflection profile of a diaphragm depends on the 
stiffness of the diaphragm that in turn depends on the shape 
of the diaphragm, support conditions, homogeneity of the 
diaphragm material, residual stress, Poisson ratio, diaphragm 
thickness uniformity and the shape of the cavity. The CMUT 
cavity is either a sealed vacuum entity or filled with 
atmospheric air if the diaphragm has perforations.  
A CMUT diaphragm experiences different types of 
stresses, such as tensile or compressive residual stress due to 
the fabrication process, stress due to atmospheric pressure 
indentation (vacuum cavity), and stress due to the expansion 
of the trapped residual gas in the sealed cavity during 
fabrication [9]. Fabrication process induced imperfections 
may also contribute to cavity shape alternations, diaphragm 
thickness variation, and the quality of the diaphragm. 
Consequently, such structural imperfections affect the 
electrostatic pressure generation during transmit operation or 
capacitive 
readout 
during 
ultrasound 
reception. 
A 
measurement of the diaphragm deflection profile and surface 
roughness can be used to determine proper balance of 
laminate thickness of different materials used to fabricate the 
diaphragm, improve thickness uniformity of the diaphragm, 
material properties adjustments by modifying fabrication 
process parameters and steps to achieve optimized residual 
stress. All of these will contribute to superior yield, superior 
array operation, and better imaging resolution. 
Optical profilometry is one of the widely used techniques 
for surface characterization in microfabrication applications. 
White Light Interferometry (WLI), Confocal Laser Scanning 
(CLS) 
microscopy, 
and 
Confocal 
Grid 
Structured 
Illumination (CGSI) microscopy are commonly used 
techniques to characterize thinfilm thickness, reflectivity, 
and height measurement. Stylus based contact profilometry 
techniques are also used but that needs additional fabrication 
steps to prepare the sample and imposes risk of device 
damage. Possible uses of different optical profilometry 
techniques for CMUT characterization are available in [9]. 
In this context, this paper presents initial results of the 
dynamic (tapping) mode AFM characterization of the 
deflection profile of a CMUT diaphragm [10][11]. The 
measurements were carried out using a FlexAFM™ with 
C3000 controller from Nanosurf™ [10]. Relative advantages 
and disadvantages of AFM as compared to optical systems 
have also been discussed in the context of CMUT diaphragm 
deflection profile characterization. 
The rest of the paper has been organized in the following 
way: In Section II, major specifications of the measured 
CMUT sample are given. Section III provides a brief 
theoretical description of the dynamic mode AFM, Section 
IV provides AFM measurement set up and data processing 
and finally Section V makes the concluding remarks.  
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

II. CMUT SPECIFICATIONS
A cross section of the measured CMUT sample is shown 
in Figure 1 and the device specifications are provided in 
Table I. The CMUT was fabricated using an adhesive wafer 
bonding technique using BCB as the dielectric spacer and the 
device layer of an SOI wafer was used to realize the CMUT 
diaphragm [12].  
Figure 2 shows a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) 
image of one of the diced CMUT cell array. The array was 
fabricated for an automotive collision avoidance application. 
Detailed description of the fabrication process is available in 
[12]. 
TABLE I. 
CMUT CELL SPECIFICATIONS
Parameter 
Value 
Unit 
Diaphragm laminate thickness 
800 
nm 
Gold layer thickness  
100 
nm 
Silicon device layer thickness 
700 
nm 
Cavity thickness 
1 
m 
Cavity width 
28 
m 
Sidewall width 
10 
m 
Bottom wafer thickness 
500 
m 
Figure 1. Cross-section of the measured CMUT cell.  
The array has 40 x 40 CMUT cells with specifications as 
listed in Table I in a footprint area of 1870 x 1870 m2. 
Figure 2. SEM image of a singulated CMUT die.  
III. AFM DYNAMIC MODE OPERATION
An AFM technique creates a 3D topography of the 
sample's surface using a cantilever probe with a sharp tip as 
the probe or the sample is scanned in x-y plane [10][11]. As 
an AFM provides the vertical height data directly from 
measurements, the technique is very different from an optical 
imaging microscope, which measures a two-dimensional 
projection of a sample's surface [13].  
Despite the advantages of the optical systems as 
summarized in [13], as a two-dimensional image from an 
optical system does not have any height information in it, 
such images must infer the height information from the 
image or rotate the sample to see feature heights [13]. The 
AFM also provides various types of surface measurements 
and can generate images at atomic resolution with angstrom 
scale resolution height information for both conducting and 
insulating surfaces with minimum sample preparation [14]. 
In [15], it has been mentioned that the spatial and "Z" 
resolution of the AFM is much better than that could be 
obtained by an optical profilometer whatever optical system 
is used. In [15], it has also been mentioned that the AFM 
images are more faithful to nanoscale surface topographic 
variations compared to optical profilometers. Furthermore, 
an AFM measuring system is free of any errors related to 
optical focusing, depth of field adjustment, or sample 
illumination angles. Consequently, an AFM allows one to 
measure surface topography with unprecedented resolution 
and accuracy [16]. As the capacitance change during the 
CMUT diaphragm vibration is very small (attofarad to 
femtofarad range) corresponding to picometer range 
deflection of the CMUT diaphragm, precision measurement 
of the diaphragm deflection profile is crucial for proper 
characterization of CMUT operation to improve imaging 
resolution. 
For the current research work, the AFM measurements 
were done using a FlexAFM™ from Nanosurf™ operating 
in dynamic mode. The dynamic mode was chosen over the 
static mode due to the fact that the static mode AFM does 
not achieve atomic resolution due to the mesoscopic 
properties of the tip, which induces a contact zone dispersed 
over many atoms as opposed to a single atom [11]. 
Additionally, the dynamic mode offers the following 
advantages: (1) gentle interaction of the probe tip with the 
surface during tapping to preserve the sharpness of the tip to 
improve accuracy, (2) minimized torsional forces between 
the probe and the sample, and (3) by using the cantilever’s 
oscillation amplitude as the feedback parameter, the user is 
able to fine-tune the interaction between probe and sample 
between different regimes- such as attractive and repulsive 
ones- to control the tip–surface distance on an atomic scale 
[10].  
The dynamic mode operation of an AFM is illustrated 
conceptually in Figure 3. During operation, the cantilever is 
forced to vibrate at its resonance frequency using a piezo 
element. As the oscillating cantilever is brought closer to the 
sample surface, it experiences a repulsive force that increases 
the resonance frequency of the cantilever.and its vibration 
amplitude decreases [10]. The vibration amplitude of the  
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 3. AFM dynamic mode operation. 
cantilever is detected using a laser and photodiode based 
detection system as shown in Figure 3.  
Figure 4. FlexAFM Spect-0067 data processing steps. 
The measured laser beam deflection or cantilever 
vibration amplitude is then used as an input for a feedback 
loop that keeps the tip–sample interaction constant by 
changing the tip height. The output of this feedback loop 
thus corresponds to the local sample height. This amplitude 
reduction is a direct measure of the feature height on the 
sample surface that is mapped in a 2-D x-y plane [10][11]. 
IV. THE AFM MEASUREMENT SET UP FOR CMUT
The AFM measurements of the CMUT sample were 
done using FlexAFM™ with C3000 controller from 
Nanosurf™ operating in dynamic mode with active vibration 
isolation and acoustic isolation.  
An ACLA™ cantilever with nominal spring constant of 
58 N/m was used to collect the data. The ACLA™ probes 
are silicon probes with long cantilevers used for tapping 
mode and other applications that allow for larger laser 
clearance, and have aluminum coating on the reflex side to 
increase laser signal quality. Detailed measurement setup 
instructions are available in [17].  
Once the AFM measurement was done, the height data 
was processed following standard AFM data processing 
steps as shown in Figure 4. The generated pseudo-color view 
of the surface is shown in Figure 5. The Gwyddion™ [18] 
AFM data processing software has been used next to 
generate a 3-D height image of the surface as shown in 
Figure 6. The statistical roughness parameters following IS0 
25178 have been extracted using Gwyddion™ and provided 
in Table II.  
As the AFM data are usually collected as line scans along 
the x axis that are concatenated together to form a two- 
dimensional image, the scanning speed in the x direction is 
considerably higher than the scanning speed in the y
direction. As a result, the x profiles are less affected by low 
frequency noise and thermal drift of the sample as compared 
to the y profile [18]. 
Consequently, standardized one dimensional roughness 
parameters are considered more accurate [18]. Accordingly, 
the one dimensional roughness parameters for a scan line 
centered approximately at the middle of the CMUT 
diaphragm along the y-axis direction as shown in Figure 7 
was extracted using Gwyddion™ and are plotted in Figure 8. 
Figure 5. Pseudo-color image of the sample. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 6. 3D height image of the sample.  
TABLE II. 
STATISTICAL ROUGHNESS PARAMETERS
Parameter 
Value 
Unit 
RMS roughness, 
Sq
10.50 
nm 
Mean-sqaure roughness, 
Sa
9.08 
nm 
Skew (
Ssk
) 
0.06925 
Excess kurtosis 
-1.185 
Maximum peak height,
Sp
19.24 
nm 
Maximum pit depth, 
SV
19.01 
nm 
Maximum height,
SZ
38.25 
nm 
Projected area:            
2025 
µm² 
Surface area 
2026 
µm² 
Volume 
38.50 
µm³ 
Corresponding texture and waviness data are also shown. 
Detailed roughness parameters along this scan line are 
provided in Table III. The waviness average along this 
particular scanning line as determined from Gwyddion™ is 
8.77 nm with a cut-off wavelength of 7.69 m. The same 
measurement was carried out along a y-axis scanning line as 
shown in Figure 9 and the corresponding texture, roughness, 
and waviness parameters are shown in Figure10. Finally, the 
waviness parameters are plotted for an arbitrary diagonal 
direction as shown in Figure 11 and the corresponding 
waviness profile is shown in Figure 12.  
Figure 7. Scan line to determine standardized roughness parameters along 
the x-axis direction. 
Figure 8. Roughness, texture, and waviness profile along an x-directional 
scan line as shown in Figure 7. 
TABLE III. 
ONE DIMENSIONLA ROUGHNESS PARAMETERS
Parameter 
Value 
Unit 
Cut-off 
7.69 
m 
Roughness average (
a
R )  
3.09 
nm 
Root mean square roughness (
q
R ) 
4.87 
nm 
Maximum height of the roughness (
tR ) 
34.58 
nm 
Maximum roughness valley depth (
v
R ) 
10.67 
nm 
Maximum roughness peak height (
p
R ) 
23.91 
nm 
Average maximum height of the roughness (
tm
R ) 
17.92 
nm 
Average maximum roughness valley depth (
Rvm
) 
6.97 
nm 
Average maximum roughness peak height (
Rpm
) 
10.95 
nm 
Average third highest peak to third lowest valley 
height (
R3z
) 
20.34 
nm 
Average third highest peak to third lowest valley 
height (
R3z
ISO) 
14.38 
nm 
Average maximum height of the profile (
z
R ) 
20.83 
nm 
Average maximum height of the roughness (
z
R ISO) 
17.92 
nm 
Maximum peak to valley roughness (
max
Ry
 R
) 
34.58 
nm 
Skewness (
sk
R ) 
1.87 
Kurtosis (
ku
R ) 
10.46 
Waviness average (
a
W ) 
8.77 
nm 
Root mean square waviness (
q
W ) 
10.16 
nm 
Figure 9. Scan line to determine standardized roughness parameters along 
the y-axis direction. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

Figure 10. Roughness, texture, and waviness profile along an y-directional 
scan line as shown in Figure 9. 
Figure 11. Scan line to determine standardized roughness parameters along 
an arbitrary diagnonal direction. 
Figure 12. Waviness profile along an arbitrary diagnonal direction as 
shown in Figure 11. 
Figure 13. Pseudo-color image of the surface after applying a Gaussian 
filter. 
Figure 14. Roughness, texture, and waviness profile along the x-directional 
scan as shown in Figure 13 after applying a Gaussian filter. 
Figure 15. Waviness profile measurement over a length on filtered data. 
Topview 
Bottom view 
Figure 16. 3D top and bottom views of the deflection profile after Gaussian 
filtering. 
Figures 7-12 show that using an AFM it is extremely 
convenient to measure the CMUT diaphragm deflection 
profile with a very high degree of precision along any 
direction from which physical properties such as stiffness, 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

residual stress, etc. of the diaphragm laminate can be 
extracted using appropriate mathematical models. 
Further processing of the AFM data using a Gaussian 
filter removes the high frequency roughness artifacts further 
and provides a smoothed out deflection shape of the CMUT 
diaphragm along an x directional scan line as shown in 
Figure 13. A 40 pixel magnitude Gaussian filter was used. 
The smoothed texture, roughness, and waviness profiles 
are provided in Figure 14 for comparison. Corresponding 
waviness values over a length of 7.66 micrometers (two red 
markers) are shown in Figure 15. The waviness average 
height (
a
W ) for this scanned profile is 8.85 nm and 
maximum height is 11.18 nm to 10.67 nm over this range 
shows almost a flat surface. Corresponding top and bottom 
view of the 3D deflection profile are shown in Figure 16.  
V.
CONCLUSIONS
The presented dynamic mode AFM measurement and 
data analysis of a CMUT diaphragm appears to be a valuable 
method to evaluate the deflection profile of a CMUT 
diaphragm with a very high degree of precision. Main 
advantage of the proposed method is that the height data is 
measured directly with nanometer scale precision instead of 
inferring from a 2D projection of an optical image. Such 
deflection profiles can be used to determine the residual 
stress and other physical parameters of a CMUT diaphragm 
to aid in fine tuning of the process parameters to optimize 
CMUT diaphragm vibrational characteristics to obtain high 
quality images. Additionally, the dynamic mode enables to 
measure the deflection shape of insulating materials, thus 
enabling to measure the diaphragm shapes where the 
diaphragm has an insulating top surface. Overall, the 
dynamic mode AFM can provide high accuracy high 
resolution nanometer scale measurements to characterize 
CMUT surfaces. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research work was supported by the Natural Science 
and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC)’s 
discovery grant number RGPIN 293218. The authors also 
greatly acknowledge the generous measurement support 
provided by Nanosurf™. The authors also acknowledge the 
collaborative research support provided by the IntelliSense 
Corporation, Lynnfield, MA, Remcom, PA, Angstrom 
Engineering, ON, and the CMC Microsystems, Canada. 
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Ergun, G. Yaralioglu; and B. T. Khuri-Yakub, “Capacitive 
Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducers: Theory and Technology,” 
Journal of Aerospace Engineering, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 76-84, Apr. 
2003, 
[2]
B. T. Khuri-Yakub and Ö. Oralkan, “Capacitive Micromachined 
Ultrasonic Transducers for Medical Imaging and Therapy,” Journal 
of Micromech .and Microeng, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 054004–054014, 
May, 2011. 
[3]
M. Klemm, “Acoustic Simulation and Characterization of Capacitive 
Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducers,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dresden 
University of Technology, TUD Press, Dresden, Germany, 2017.  
[4]
S. Berg, “Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducers,” Ph.D. 
Dissertation, 
Dept. 
of 
Electronics 
and 
Telecommunications, 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, 
Norway, 2012. 
[5]
E. Cianci, et al., “Fabrication Techniques in Micromachined 
Capacitive Ultrasonic Transducers and their Applications,” in 
MEMS/NEMS Handbook, Springer, Boston, MA, C. Leondes (eds), 
2006, pp. 353-382. 
[6]
S. Savoia, G. Caliano, and M. Pappalardo, “A CMUT Probe for 
Medical Ultrasonography: From Microfabrication to System 
Integration,” IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and 
Frequency Control, vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 1127-1138, Jun.2012.  
[7]
A, Unamuno, "New Applications for Ultrasound Technology 
Through CMUTs," Fraunhofer IPMS, Presentations at the joint event 
MNBS 2013 and EPoSS general assembly annual forum 2013/eposs-
annual-forum-2013-26-september-2013, [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.smart-systems-integration.org Accessed on: Oct. 5, 2020. 
[8]
M. Rahman, J. Hernandez, and S. Chowdhury, “An Improved 
Analytical Method to Design CMUTs with Square Diaphragms,” 
IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency 
Control,” vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 834-845, Apr. 2013. 
[9]
A. Bakhtazad and S. Chowdhury, “An evaluation of optical 
profilometry techniques for CMUT characterization,” Microsystem 
Technologies, Springer, vol. 25, pp. 3627-3642, Sep. 2019. 
[10] Nanosurf AG, Switzerland, “Flex-Axiom The most flexible AFM for 
materials 
research,” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.nanosurf.com/downloads/Nanosurf-Flex-Axiom-
Brochure.pdf, Accessed on: Oct 2, 2020. 
[11] L. Chaurette, N. Cheng, and B. Stuart, “Atomic Force Microscopy,” 
University 
of 
British 
Columbia, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://phas.ubc.ca/~berciu/TEACHING/PHYS502/PROJECTS/AFM
16.pdf, Accessed on: Oct 2, 2020. 
[12] A. Bakhtazad, R. Manwar, and S. Chowdhury, “Fabrication and 
Characterization of Sealed Cavities Realized by Adhesive Wafer 
Bonding with Dry Etched Cyclotene,” Microsystem Technologies, 
Springer, vol. 21, issue 11, pp. 1-8, Jan. 2015. 
[13] Biomedical Engineering Reference In-Depth Information, “Atomic 
Force Microscopy, “ [Online]. Available from: http://what-when-
how.com/Tutorial/topic-55iija/Atomic-Force-Microscopy-10.html, 
Accessed on: Sep. 4, 2020. 
[14] Park Systems, “How AFM Woks, [Online]. Available from: 
https://parksystems.com/medias/nano-academy/how-afm-works, 
Accessed on: Oct. 4, 2020. 
[15] C. Serra-Rodríguez, Re: Can we compare average roughness values 
obtained from AFM and Optical Profilometer? [Online]. Available 
from: https://www.researchgate.net/post/Can_we_compare_average_ 
roughness_values_obtained_from_AFM_and_Optical_Profilometer2/
52d6cd50d2fd64580c8b45c3/citation/download. 2014, Accessed on: 
Sep. 10, 2020. 
[16] M. Raposo, Q. Ferreira, and P. Ribeiro, “A Guide for Atomic Force 
Microscopy Analysis of Soft-Condensed Matter”, Modern Research 
and Educational Topics in Microscopy,” vol. 1, pp. 758-769, Jan. 
2007. 
[17] Nanosurf 
AG, 
Switzerland, 
Nanosurf 
FlexAFM 
Operating 
Instructions for SPM Control Software, Version 3.1, July 2012. 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.uel.br/proppg/portalnovo/pages 
/arquivos/arquivos_gerais/espec/Nanosurf%20FlexAFM%20Operatin
g%20Instructions.pdf, Accessed on: Sep. 5, 2020. 
[18] P. Klapetek, D. Neˇcas, and C. Anderson, “Gwyddion user guide,” 
[Online]. Available from: http://gwyddion.net/documentation /user-
guide-en/, Accessed on: Sep. 4, 2020.                  .
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-820-4
SENSORDEVICES 2020 : The Eleventh International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

