A Simulation Framework for the Performance Evaluation of Localisation 
Techniques over WSNs 
 
Aggeliki Prayati 
Dept. of Telecommunication 
Systems and Networks, 
Technological Educational Institute 
of Messolonghi 
Nafpaktos, Greece 
prayati@ece.upatras.gr 
Nikos Paliatsas 
Dept. of Telecommunication 
Systems and Networks, 
Technological Educational Institute 
of Messolonghi 
Nafpaktos, Greece 
tastoises@hotmail.com 
 
Vassilis Triantafillou 
Dept. of Telecommunication 
Systems and Networks, 
Technological Educational Institute 
of Messolonghi 
Nafpaktos, Greece 
triantaf@teimes.gr
 
Abstract— Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are nowadays 
considered to be a very active research field. WSNs consist of 
interconnected small devices, which are managed by users. 
Their demands in hardware are limited and the usage of 
particular communication protocols lead in great autonomy. Α 
WSN application is the localization of targets invading in the 
area covered by sensors’ range. This target may be an animal, 
human, object or anything else. Localization can only take 
place when the sensors are capable of processing data and of 
communicating with each other. When these conditions hold, 
localization is achieved. A simulation environment has been 
developed in Matlab for studying the above described problem, 
where the localization algorithm may be integrated together 
with different scenario parameters. These scenarios have been 
implemented 
for 
evaluating 
the 
localization 
algorithm 
performance for different mobile object trajectories and 
speeds as well as for different network topologies. Finally, the 
evaluation results are discussed and conclusions drawn are 
presented. 
Keywords-wireless sensor networks, localization, simulation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
As wireless sensor network (WSN) applications cover a 
growing number of fields, the need for fast yet accurate 
exploration 
of 
optimal 
alternatives 
becomes 
more 
demanding, thus necessitating the development of structured 
and efficient performance evaluation strategies. 
An efficient localization algorithm is expected to predict 
the path of the mobile object with high accuracy. 
Localization applications using WSNs range from health 
monitoring to house safety and even to military surveillance 
[1]. On the other hand, the localisation performance is 
affected by a series of parameters that need to be addressed 
and co-evaluated during the simulation process [2]. These   
parameters are related to the communication channel, to the 
target mobility pattern and to the localization nodes’ 
positions. The type of signal used for the target position 
varies from RF to IR and ultrasound depending on their 
suitability for different application scenarios and on the 
available power [3]. The mobile target speed and mobility 
pattern are important parameters as they directly affect the 
time that the target resides in communication range and 
indirectly the tracking accuracy. Moreover, the network 
topology may facilitate or harden the localization task, i.e. a 
randomly deployed set of nodes has less probability to 
achieve high communication coverage in the localization 
area than a pre-defined deployment scheme. Finally, the 
limited resources of WSNs impose restrictions to their 
capabilities and performance; the limited memory restricts 
the use of complicated and demanding algorithms and the 
limited battery storage restricts the power consumption and 
extensive execution time [2]. After sensing and processing 
data, WSN nodes need to consume it or send it immediately 
to a storage point [4]. 
Several approaches have been proposed in the literature 
for the evaluation of localization techniques in WSN 
deployments. A methodological approach to the evaluation 
of localization algorithms is thoroughly presented in [5]. 
Other approaches focus on comparing the localization error 
with respect to energy [6] and others are limited to customize 
the simulation environment to specific deployment and 
application characteristics [7]. However, all of them base 
their evaluation procedure on theoretical models for the 
signal propagation, do not consider the particularities of the 
network topology scheme or the environmental conditions 
that affect network connectivity and the communication 
pattern. 
In this work, the issue of localisation applicability and 
performance with WSNs is discussed. For this purpose, a 
simulation strategy and environment has been developed, 
incorporating models of all aspects of WSN performance 
affecting the localisation accuracy. Section 2 presents the 
most commonly used localisation techniques, whilst Section 
3 covers WSN related parameters that need to be considered 
during a performance evaluation study. Section 4 presents 
the simulation process and scenarios followed by this work, 
as well as the simulation environment developed to perform 
the experiments and Section 5 discusses the experimental 
results. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 6. 
II. 
LOCALISATION TECHNIQUES 
As many localization techniques exist in the literature, 
this work focuses on the most widely used for fixed network 
topologies and analyses them with respect to the network 
122
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

and mobility parameters to select the most representative 
one for studying localization performance of a mobile target 
in fixed WSN topologies. 
At the initial phase of the localization algorithm, every 
fixed node makes known its position to the rest of the nodes 
in the network. At the end of this phase, nodes keep only 
their neighbor’s positions so as not to overload their 
memory. Once a mobile target enters the localization area, 
the fixed nodes attempt to track its path based on their 
relative distances from the target. The result of the 
localization algorithm is then either communicated to a node 
centrally placed in the network area or consumed by the 
mobile target or even by a set of fixed nodes in the network. 
This last step depends on the application case. 
The complexity of impact factors and varying application 
cases affecting the localization task success have led to a 
wide variety of existing localization techniques targeted to 
specific application requirements. These techniques differ in 
the type of signal used to estimate the target position, with 
the most popular being the RF signal, ultrasound, infrared 
and the received signal strength (RSS). Some techniques 
have been developed for fixed topologies and others for 
dynamically changing networks. Focusing on the fixed 
topology localization techniques, grid and random scenarios 
are discriminated as the varying impact factors are seriously 
affecting localization performance.  
For grid topologies, the most common technique is the 
fingerprinting approach, which computes the target position 
based on the comparison between the RSSI and predefined 
signal strength measurements stored in a database [8]. For 
random topologies, the most famous technique is hop-
counting, which uses RF signals and hop count tables for 
every node’s neighbors [9]. 
The work presented in this paper adopts the triangulation 
technique based on RSSI, which belongs to the hop-
counting localization family. This method bespeaks at least 
three fixed nodes in the vicinity of the mobile target, for the 
localization to be performed. The mobile target can be 
tracked inside the triangular area covered by the three fixed 
nodes in communication range to the mobile, as shown in 
Fig. 1. The distance among each nearest fixed node and the 
mobile target is calculated based on the RSSI from the 
mobile target. This procedure is repeated for all fixed nodes 
nearest to the mobile target along its path until the mobile 
target exits the communication area of the WSN.  
 
III. 
WSN MODELING PARAMETERS  
The WSN parameters have been modeled to facilitate the 
evaluation of the triangulation technique for localization 
through simulation. These parameters are: 
a) the signal propagation model used to translate RSS 
to distance and vice versa,  
b) the fixed nodes topology, 
c) the mobile target speed and  
d) the mobile target mobility pattern. 
 
A. Signal propagation model 
Distance computation is achieved based on the RF 
propagation model developed in [2], which takes into 
account environmental parameters and the fixed topology 
impact on the RSSI. As such, the propagation model adopted 
by this work is based on experimental measurements and is 
accurate enough and representative of a real-life scenario, as 
opposed to the theoretical RSS-distance characteristic 
provided by the TelosB manufacturer [12]. 
As discussed and concluded in [11], for a RSSI-based 
triangulation technique to be applied in a fixed topology with 
satisfactory results, the mobile target is considered to be at 
0.5m and the fixed nodes at 0.55m. The RSSI vs. distance 
characteristic, adopted by [11], shown in Fig. 2, represents a 
realistic RSSI characteristic, considering the environmental 
impact on communication and connectivity conditions. The 
blue characteristic has been quantified to form the RF 
propagation model during the simulation experiments 
conducted in this paper. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Location calculation based on triangulation 
123
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

 
 
 
Figure 2.  RSSI-distance diagram with mobile object at 0.5m and fixed 
nodes at many heights 
B. Network Topology 
The network topology has a high impact on the 
localization accuracy, as the fixed nodes positioning defines 
the communication links quality with the mobile target and 
thus the localization success. If the fixed nodes are deployed 
in a grid, the probability that the mobile target is reachable 
by at least three fixed nodes is high and thus it can easily 
located. On the other hand if the network topology is 
random, the communication quality is less probable to be 
good in the whole localization area, leading to low mobile 
target connectivity to the fixed nodes and thus degrading 
localization performance. Following the analysis of [10], the 
network topology of the fixed nodes is considered to be a 
grid with distance of 55m among them in order to achieve 
high communication quality and thus good connectivity. 
 
Figure 3.  the Grid topology scheme used in the experimental analysis 
C. Mobile object parameters 
The two parameters affecting localization accuracy are 
the speed and the trajectory of the mobile target. If the speed 
of the mobile target is low, the three nearest nodes have 
enough time to apply localization calculations and to predict 
its position. For low mobile target speed, the three fixed 
neighboring nodes may need more rounds of predictions for 
increasing the localization accuracy. On the other hand, if 
the mobile object moves too fast, the time window during 
which the mobile target moves in the fixed nodes’ 
communication area may not be long enough to allow 
message exchange and position calculation.  
As far as the second parameter is concerned, namely the 
mobile target trajectory, its impact is lower relatively to 
speed. However, in combination with the fixed nodes 
topology, it can make communication very difficult and thus 
the localization task too hard. In this work, the impact of 
both the mobile target’s speed and trajectory on localization 
accuracy are studied. 
 
IV. 
SIMULATION PROCESS AND SCENARIOS 
The evaluation methodology followed in this work 
assumes a fixed network topology and a mobile target 
moving in the network range. The localization technique 
adopted in this work is triangulation and the parameters 
affecting its performance are modeled in a simplified yet 
efficient way in order to provide a complete set of impact 
factors for inclusion in the developed simulation framework. 
As shown in Fig. 4, the simulation-based evaluation 
procedure starts when the mobile object starts moving from 
a known starting point in the WSN covered area. While the 
mobile object enters the localization area, the fixed nodes 
start communication with it in order to compute the mobile 
object’s RSSI. The three fixed nodes with the highest 
mobile object’s RSSI are considered to be the nearest to it 
and start the localization process. The three fixed nodes 
translate the RSSI into distance based on the radio 
propagation model developed in [2], which depicts the real 
signal propagation of the TelosB platform [12]. Based on 
the range of each fixed node the algorithm calculates the 
points at which, the three communication ranges intersect. 
Thus, the triangle that the localization algorithm needs has 
been formed and its middle point is computed. For 
simplicity reasons, the mobile target position is assumed to 
be the center of the triangle formed by the communication 
range of three nearest fixed nodes. This procedure is 
repeated by the fixed nodes corresponding to the nearest 
range of the mobile object trajectory until the mobile object 
leaves the network area.   
The impact factors on the localization algorithm 
performance form the set of simulation parameters and their 
combination the relative simulation scenarios:  
• 
fixed network topology: grid and random 
• 
the speed of the mobile object: 5Km/h (man 
walking) and 15Km/h (man running) 
• 
the trajectory followed by the mobile object: 
beeline and random  
The performance metric of the localization algorithm is 
the localization error.  
124
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

RF Propagation 
Model
Start
Network
Deployment
Scheme
Mobility 
Pattern
Formation of fixed nodes
neighboringtable
Select Deployment 
Scheme
Initialize Mobile Target 
path and speed
Fixed nodes communicate to 
allocate 3 neighbors of mobile 
target 
{n1, n2, n3}
Fixed nodes 
{n1, n2, n3}
communicate  with mobile 
target to compute RSSI
Fixed nodes 
{n1, n2, n3}
compute distance to mobile 
{dn1, dn2, dn3} based on RSSI
Mobile position pm1= 
center of triangle 
{dn1, dn2, dn3}
Localization error = distance 
{nm1, pm1}
Mobile moves to 
next position 
{nm1}
 
 
Figure 4.  Evaluation Process Diagram 
V. 
LOCALISATION SIMULATION RESULTS 
The simulation environment developed has been 
implemented in MATLAB 2009. The results of the 
simulation scenarios are presented and discussed in the 
following. Each figure depicts a ground plan (x-y axes grid 
in meters) of the network, with fixed nodes represented by 
blue squares, the blue line representing the actual trajectory 
of the mobile target, the small red crosses representing the 
positions predicted by the triangulation algorithm and the 
light green area representing the communication range of 
the mobile target to the nearest fixed  nodes. 
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 show localization results of a mobile 
target in a grid fixed topology moving slowly (speed = 
5Km/h), in a beeline and a random path respectively. The 
average localization error is 3.7m and 5.6m respectively, 
with low variance. As long as the mobile targets moves at 
low speed within the communication area of fixed nodes, the 
effect of its trajectory on the localization success is relatively 
low. 
On the other hand, when the speed of the mobile target is 
tripled for the same network conditions and fixed nodes 
processing time, the percentage of successfully received 
packets is reduced by 30%, thus leading to position 
miscalculations. As shown in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8, the number 
of position calculations is considerably reduced to 53% for 
the straight path line and to 71.5% for the random path. 
Another conclusion drawn from the 4 latter figures is that 
the localization algorithm is easier to predict the straight 
path than the random path with the localization error to be 
4.5m and 5.8m respectively. The red spots that the 
algorithm predicts in straight move is nearest than them in 
random move. Therefore the prediction in straight move is 
better than the random move. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Straight move in grid topology with speed 5km/h 
 
Figure 6.  Random move in grid topology with speed 5km/h 
 
125
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

 
Figure 7.  Straight move in grid topology with speed 15km/h 
 
Figure 8.  Random move in grid topology with speed 15km/h 
Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 depict the mobile target localization in 
a random fixed grid, moving at slow speed of 5Km/h. It is 
evident that the random placement of fixed nodes narrows 
the communication range along the mobile target trajectory, 
thus leading to localization failure in spots, where 3 fixed 
nodes cannot be found within range of the mobile target. 
That is the reason why, in Fig. 9, the mobile target trajectory 
from points (140,110) until (200, 150) is not tracked at all. 
This is not the case for the random mobile path shown in 
Fig. 10, where the mobile target has more spots within the 
communication range of fixed nodes, causing the prediction 
to rise up to 20.5% more than the straight move. However, it 
must be noted that for the random deployment scheme, even 
though the prediction level increases, the localization error is 
higher. It is, therefore, evident that the fixed nodes should be 
deployed in such a way as to cover as evenly as possible the 
localization area from a communication point of view. 
 
Figure 9.  Straight move in random topology with speed 5km/h 
 
Figure 10.  Random move in random topology with speed 5km/h 
Fig. 11 and Fig. 12 show localization results of the worst-
case scenario, where the network topology is random, the 
mobile target moves at high speed of 15Km/h and its path 
goes out of the fixed nodes’ communication range for a high 
percentage. The triangulation algorithm performance is 
seriously degraded with a low percentage of localization 
success close to 10.6m and 38.3m for beeline and random 
trajectory respectively. 
Overall, for the triangulation technique to achieve high 
accuracy, the network topology should be carefully studied 
to be at least similar to a grid. The mobile target trajectory 
plays a minor role for the localization error, as long as the 
target stays within the fixed nodes communication range. 
Finally, the mobile target speed has high impact on 
localization performance but as this is a parameter that 
cannot always be managed, the density and deployment 
scheme of the fixed nodes is again a parameter that should 
be used to compensate to achieve the localization goal. 
126
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

 
Figure 11.  Straight move in random topology with speed 15km/h 
 
Figure 12.  Random move in random topology with speed 15km/h 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This papers deals with the issue of localisation 
applicability and performance in WSNs. For the evaluation 
of localization techniques, several approaches have been 
studied and the triangulation technique has been chosen for 
the case study. WSN characteristics have been modelled and 
a simulation strategy has been developed. The simulation 
environment, developed in Matlab, incorporates these 
models of all aspects of WSN performance affecting 
localisation accuracy. The presented methodology principles 
may be applied to other localization evaluation attempts and 
be cross-validated by experimental setups. 
The simulation environment that has been developed 
follows a holistic approach covering all aspects of WSN 
nature and as such may be generalised to incorporate a 
library of localization techniques. Moreover, further 
enhancements of the type of evaluation scenarios may 
support the applicability study of existing or new 
localization techniques to different applications i.e. the 
variation of network topology schemes or the number of 
mobile targets. Overall, the simulation framework has been 
developed in a modular way as to cover the mobility 
parameters in combination to the network topology and 
radio propagation characteristics and is extensible as to be 
able to incorporate more evaluation and impact parameters 
in the form of libraries. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Marin, E. Arceredillo, A. Zuloaga, and J. Arias, “Wireless 
Sensor Networks: A Survey on Ultra-Low Power-Aware 
Design”, Proceedings of World Academy of Science, 
Engineering and Technology, Vol. 8, pp. 44-49, October 2005 
[2] T. Stoyanova, F. Kerasiotis, A. Prayati, and G. Papadopoulos, 
“Evaluation of Impact Factors on Accuracy for Localization 
and Tracking Applications”, Proceedings of the 5th ACM 
international workshop on Mobility management and wireless 
access, pp. 9-16, 2007 
[3] L. Barboni, and M. Valle, “Experimental Analysis of Wireless 
Sensor Nodes Current Consumption”, The 2nd International 
Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications, pp. 
401-406, Aug. 2008 
[4] Paolo Baronti, Prashant Pillai, Vince Chook, Stefano Chessa, 
Alberto Gotta, and Y. Fun Hu, “Wireless Sensor Networks: a 
Survey on the State of the Art and the 802.15.4 and ZigBee 
Standards”, Computer Communications, Vol. 30, Nr. 7, pp. 
1655-1695, May 2007 
[5] Michael Allen, Sebnem Baydere, Elena Gaura, and Gurhan 
Kucuk. “Evaluation of Localization Algorithms”, Chapter in 
“Localization Algorithms and Strategies for Wireless Sensor 
Networks: Monitoring and Surveillance Techniques for 
Target Tracking”, Information Science Reference, 2009, 
ISBN: 1605663964 
[6] M. Keshtgary, M. Fasihy, and Z. Ronaghi, “Performance 
Evaluation of Hop-Based Range-Free Localization Methods 
in Wireless Sensor Networks”, ISRN Communications and 
Networking, vol. 2011, Article ID 485486, 6 pages, 2011, 
doi:10.5402/2011/485486 
[7] Ahmad Hatami, Bardia Alavi, Kaveh Pahlavan, and Muzaffer 
Kanaan, “A Comparative Performance Evaluation of Indoor 
Geolocation Technologies”, Interdisciplinary Information 
Sciences, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 133–146, 2006 
[8] Ana-Belén, García-Hernando, José-Fernán Martínez-Ortega, 
Juan-Manuel López-Navarro, Aggeliki Prayati, and Luis 
Redondo-López, “Problem Solving for Wireless Sensor 
Networks”, Springer Verlag London Limited., November 
2008, ISBN: 978-1-84800-202-9 
[9] Eddie B. S. Tan,  J. G. Lim,  Winston K. G. Seah,  and S. V. 
Rao, “On the Practical Issues in Hop Count Localization of 
Sensors in a Multihop Network”, Proceedings of the 63 rd 
IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, pp.358-362, May 
2006 
[10] T. Stoyanova, F. Kerasiotis, A. Prayati, and G. Papadopoulos, 
"Communication-Aware Deployment for Wireless Sensor 
Networks", 2nd IEEE International Conference on Sensor 
Technologies and Applications, pp. 217-222, August 2008 
[11] F. Kerasiotis, T. Stoyanova, A. Prayati, and G. Papadopoulos, 
“A Topology-oriented Solution Providing Accuracy for 
Outdoors RSS-based  tracking in WSNs” , Proceedings of the 
2008 
Second 
International 
Conference 
on 
Sensor 
Technologies and Applications, pp. 239-245, 2008 
[12]  “TelosB mote platform”, Document Part Number: 6020-
0094-01 Rev B, Crossbow Technology, Copyright 2009
127
SENSORCOMM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-144-1

