Integrating Smart Items and Cloud Computing in Healthcare Scenarios 
Sarfaraz Ghulam, Johannes Schubert, Gerrit Tamm, Vladimir Stantchev 
Institute of Information Systems (IIS) 
SRH Hochschule Berlin 
Berlin, Germany 
e-mail: opsit@srh-hochschule-berlin.de 
 
Abstract-Use of cloud computing in healthcare is a promising 
trend, particularly in utilization of smart items. Access, 
affordability and quality to proper healthcare is a great 
challenge in world society. With the utilization of smart 
sensors, there are possibilities to improve the quality of 
healthcare services whenever needed. Hence, such smart 
items services lead to economic advantages for the whole 
healthcare system. Keeping in mind these opportunities as 
well as challenges such as security or legal issues, it is 
important to bring healthcare and IT together. As a result, 
healthcare business processes need to be modeled in order to 
provide 
IT 
solutions 
tailored 
for 
practice-oriented 
applications. In this paper, we present a three-level 
architecture for a smart healthcare infrastructure. Our 
approach is based on recent literature work and results from 
conducted expert interviews with healthcare specialists and 
IT professionals. To demonstrate the applicability of this 
architecture model, we provide an example use-case as a 
template for any kind of smart sensor-based healthcare 
infrastructure. 
Keywords-sensors; cloud computing; smart healthcare; 
business processes; reference model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
During the time of its emergence, it was believed 
that cloud computing might not be successful for long. 
But against all the predictions made by IT pundits, 
cloud computing turned into a big success and kept 
benefitting different sectors which is continue till 
today [1]. Cloud computing is the focus of interest for 
institutions with different backgrounds, including 
pharmaceuticals, healthcare outfits and medical 
researches where institutions are highly engage in 
finding cure and solutions for chronic diseases. 
Integration of cloud computing with smart items which 
allows healthcare professionals to monitor the 
patients’ treatment is a significant achievement, which 
was difficult a decade ago. One reason for its success 
is the economical features. Sophisticated Information 
and Communication Technology (ICT) is often 
expensive and not affordable for medium size 
businesses including hospitals, where smaller budget 
hinder the adaptation of latest ICT [2]. Contrary to 
other ICT, cloud computing and smart items are 
relatively cost effective and easily adaptable [3]. 
Adopting cloud services can relatively reduce the 
burden of infrastructure and save the maintenance cost 
and 
provide 
relieve 
while 
maintaining 
the 
infrastructure. The usage of smart items like 
collaborative radio frequency identification (RFID) 
solutions in the textile and medical industry have 
already shown a positive impact, such as continuous 
quality improvement [4]. Furthermore, patients can 
privately maintain it in a private environment which is 
supportive to medical adherence. A report issued by 
world health organization (WHO) states that there is a 
majority of patients who do not adhere with their 
medical prescriptions as they are supposed to which 
results in delay or failure in the treatment of the 
diseases [5]. In such scenarios smart healthcare items 
can support in monitoring patient adherence and 
support the better treatments by providing solutions to 
such challenges like smart pill boxes, which come up 
 
Figure 1. OpSIT architecture prototype 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

with solutions like opening at accurate time and 
recording of pill time. Furthermore smart healthcare 
items like physiological parameter monitors can 
automatically record the health parameter and update it 
to the cloud, which become available for patient and 
the healthcare staff who can make comparison with 
record history and can take corrective decisions on 
behalf it. 
While the economic opportunities of cloud 
computing in healthcare are quite promising and often 
subjects of recent research [6], optimization of smart 
items infrastructure for healthcare processes is 
underrepresented 
in 
research 
[7]. 
There 
exist 
approaches that define composability for such 
embedded architecture [8] with a specific focus on 
dependability in distributed environments [9]. In this 
regard the approach of architectural translucency [10] 
[11] aims to offer standardized ways of controlling 
such architectural properties via an architecture-wide 
view while using standardized measures such as 
replication [12] [13]. Applications range from position 
sensing [14] to project portfolio management [15] and 
consider applications in the healthcare domain 
specifically [16] [17]. 
The project “Optimaler Einsatz von Smart-Items-
Technologien in der Stationären Pflege”, Germany 
(OpSIT) builds on these existing works and is 
conducting literature research, workshops, and expert 
interviews with healthcare specialists as well as IT 
professionals to model reference processes for 
practice-oriented cloud applications in the healthcare 
domain. Figure 1 shows an overview of the working 
mechanism of the project. In smart environment, smart 
sensors are responsible for monitoring different vital 
signs of human health, and upload and update it to the 
respective cloud server where the data become 
available and accessible for individuals who are 
involved in the treatment process or directly related to 
the patient. 
The aim of this paper is to introduce an 
architectural approach for smart items in healthcare 
environments that is being developed as part of the 
research objectives of the OpSIT project. In Section II, 
we will introduce the benefits of sensors in healthcare. 
Subsequently, we will explain how sensors are used in 
cloud computing environments (Section III). As a 
consequence, in Section IV, we will define eHealth in 
the context of cloud computing. Section V presents our 
architecture model, including an application example 
and how it can be modified for individual purposes. 
Managerial implications will be presented in Section 
VI for smart homecare and in Section VII for smart 
stationary care. We will finish the paper with a 
compact conclusion in Section VIII. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The use of smart items has successfully been 
practiced in the hospitals and other healthcare 
institutes. Nowadays, sensors are embedded in a 
variety of instruments for use at home, elderly houses, 
clinics, and hospitals and providing a critical 
evaluation of physiological, physical and mental state 
of the patients. Most of the diagnosis will not be 
possible nor affordable without using even simple 
sensors, such as thermometer, blood glucose monitors, 
electrocardiography, electro-encephalography etc.  
These sensors are composed of transducers and 
capable of detecting electrical, thermal, optical, 
chemical, genetic and other signals with physiological 
origin.  Signal processing algorithms can help to 
calculate, forecast and measure different features of 
human health based on input from these sensors. 
Measuring the vital state of a patient is also important 
for devices like pacemakers and insulin pumps [18]. 
The dimensions which are helping in advancing 
computer technologies in healthcare can be structured 
as follows: 
 
Sensing: Involvement of new, effective and cheap 
technologies with the ability to diagnose and 
provide immediate results and solutions to the 
healthcare and public sectors on promising basis. 
For example, a non contact electrocardiogram can 
be helpful in detecting the symptoms like heart 
diseases, [19]. 
 
Cost: During past few years, mostly available 
sensors 
were 
quite 
expensive 
and 
hardly 
affordable for small clinics. But now, the 
revolution in this industry and availability of 
cheap sensors, such as RFID, made it possible for 
clinics to afford it even making personalized 
treatment possible. 
 
Size: The sensors are quite handy and easily 
adjustable in pockets which facilitate to carry 
them anywhere. These devices are available in 
different shapes and types like blood pressure 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

monitors, pulse reading wrist watches, blood 
glucose monitors, etc. 
 
Data: Data collected by the sensors are relatively 
in mass, and require proper evaluation by experts 
from time to time. The only solution in this regard 
is to transfer it to the cloud, which is the best 
solution to handle and maintain the big data. 
 
Cloud services: The three fundamental cloud 
services models which are available to any type of 
businesses are also available to healthcare to 
support the industry in their information systems 
management [19]: 
a) IaaS: Enables the healthcare service provider 
to rent the fundamental cloud resources like 
storing, processing, and networking. 
b) PaaS: Helps the healthcare service providers to 
deploy their own or rented applications, software, 
libraries and tools on cloud infrastructure. 
c) SaaS: Configured software running on cloud 
infrastructure is available where healthcare 
institutes can subscribe under the management of 
the cloud contractor. 
III. 
CLOUD COMPUTING AND SMART ITEMS 
A large variety of definitions for cloud computing 
exists, but there is no single universal upon agreed 
definition. Authors and experts define cloud according 
to their own understandings. The most commonly used 
definition comes from NIST (National institutes of 
standard and technology) “Cloud computing is a model 
for enabling convenient, on-demand network access to  
a shared pool of configurable computing resources 
that can be rapidly provisioned and released with 
minimal management effort or service providers 
interaction“ 
e.g., 
networks, 
servers, 
storage, 
applications, and services that can be rapidly 
provisioned and released with minimal management 
efforts or service providers interaction [20]. The 
utilization of the word "cloud" gives reference to the 
two essential concepts [21]: 
 
Abstraction: The notion of the technology is not 
disclosed to the users and developers. Unspecified 
physical systems are used to run the applications, 
location of the data is undisclosed, further it 
allows to delegate the administration of the 
infrastructure while maintaining ubiquitous access 
of the users.  
 
Virtualization: It is a pool of resource sharing. 
Centralized storage capability offers storage 
provisioning and can be done when required. The 
cost model is similar to utility model. Moreover it 
offers multi tenancy, while providing dynamic 
resource allocation. 
When we speak about cloud computing in 
healthcare, it becomes very obvious that like for other 
industries, healthcare can also take full advantage out 
of it. Internally it can ease the burden of the 
infrastructure and number of people associated with it 
[22] and allows the institutes to focus on their core 
competencies. Synergistically cloud computing and 
smart items are helping patients, clinics and insurance 
providers to access the health records of the patient 
whenever needed. As a result, the development in 
smart 
healthcare 
technologies 
such 
as 
mobile 
healthcare, wireless sensors and cloud computing 
lessen the requirement for visiting medical facilities 
and consultation, which can be remotely fulfilled and 
significantly reduce the manpower requirements, while 
providing quality treatment to the patient by making 
remote treatment and consultancy possible and 
achievable [19]. However, the implementation of such 
technologies implicates different challenges such as 
security and privacy issues [23], technological 
restrictions, or management and governance issues [6]. 
On one side, it's highly important to understand the 
evolving business processes occurring in healthcare 
environments before developing a cloud and smart 
items infrastructure. On the other side the technical 
possibilities and requirements needs to be understood 
to create an architectural approach for smart 
healthcare. 
Wireless sensors can easily be deployed in any 
environment and with the help of cloud computing, the 
information can be gathered and saved from these 
sensors at any time. Smart devices are evolving at a 
rapid pace in health monitoring, while meeting the 
needs and demands of assisted living and healthcare 
providers. This system focuses on the different 
features for a mobile healthcare system. 
The active smart systems with the help of mobile 
devices collect physiological signals such as body 
temperature, pulse rate, etc. Once the data collection is 
completed, it will be transmitted through Wi-Fi or 
another compatible system network, which will be 
stored, synchronized, and shared instantaneously on a 
server. 
Health 
symptoms 
can 
be 
diagnosed 
continuously and immediately. The collected health 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

data can be consolidated and accessed with a cloud 
service in order that health professionals can analyze 
the information and continue patient treatment on the 
conclusion of the collected data. 
IV. 
EHEALTH AND CLOUD GOVERNANCE 
WHO defined health as a "state of complete, 
physical, mental and social well-being and not merely 
the absence of infirmity" [24]. As a consequence, 
healthcare can be defined as the maintenance of 
physical and mental well-being, supported by available 
medical services. Finally, eHealth is the maintenance 
of physical and mental well-being while employing 
computer technology resulting in improved and better 
quality of services. 
Cloud Governance denotes the idea of applying 
corporate governance concepts to the world of cloud 
computing [25]. This can be of particular relevance for 
healthcare, due to the complex requirements regarding 
data 
privacy 
and 
information 
security 
[26]. 
Furthermore, aspects of performance evaluation [27] 
or ensuring the reliability of systems, e.g., through 
replication [12] [13]. 
V. 
COMMUNICATION IN A SMART ITEM ENVIRONMENT 
Communication among the devices is empowered 
by proper communication channels between them. In 
the past, when sensors’ connectivity was isolated to an 
integrated user interface, it was difficult to connect 
with. Contrary to that, modern day sensors are capable 
of connecting with a large number of interfaces, such 
as wired, RS 232, USB and Ethernet as well as 
wireless ones, including Bluetooth, Zigbee, UWB for 
short distance and Wi-Fi, radio frequency, or ZigBee 
for longer range [18] [28]. Some devices come with 
the capability of connecting directly to Smartphones 
and computers allowing sensors to save data in the 
non-volatile memory and make them available for later 
usage.   
It is a recursive process, where the respective 
sensors remain active and observe even minor changes 
in the pattern of human body which human cannot 
easily observe. As shown in Figure 2, this process is 
divided in three different levels. In each level, devices 
are responsible to perform the assigned tasks and 
forwarding the data to the further level, or triggering 
directly an output process. The entire process 
accomplish in a short period of time (in nanoseconds) 
making it very fast while helping human to have good 
control over their health and take corrective measures 
and steps as soon as possible. 
In general, Figure 2 shows the process flow 
modeled with Business Process Modeling Notation 
(BPMN) based on the working mechanism of smart 
 
Figure 2. BPMN Model of process steps of the application scenario  
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

sensors architecture from the OpSIT project. As 
BPMN is an established way to analyze and design 
operational process flows regarding multiple kinds of 
resources [29] it is utilized in the presented 
architecture which aims to enhance current healthcare 
processes. Moreover, the architecture model can be 
seen as a process flow template for any specific use-
case, importing it and revising its tasks with modeling 
software such as Modelio. 
As a very basic example use-case, we consider a 
blood pressure measurement process in home care. To 
analyze the traditional process, it is important to keep 
in mind three different levels matching with the levels 
presented in our approach. Hence, the “smart items 
level” can be entitled in the traditional process as 
“measuring device level” where a patient uses the 
blood pressure gauge that directly outputs the data on a 
display. The “gateway level” can be compared with a 
“short-term storage level” where the patient will be 
manually note down the value shown on the display. 
The “cloud level” illustrates permanent access and 
evaluation of the data, while its equivalent in the 
traditional process may be called “evaluation level”, 
when the doctor receives the patients’ data in order to 
evaluate whether medical intervention is necessary or 
not. This simple comparison points out the disruption 
within the traditional process flow. Obviously, every 
level in the traditional process ends with an output task 
and is not directly connected to the next level. 
Analyzing this problem is made possible by 
considering the proposed BPMN model even at the 
stage of modeling the status quo process. 
VI. 
SMART HOMECARE 
Mobile networks give rapid access to the patient 
data provided by the servers of the healthcare cloud 
computing environment. 
Smart healthcare items benefits are broad range 
and dual natured (benefiting healthcare providers as 
well as the patients). These are the physically 
interconnected hardware performing 
their tasks 
seamlessly through a network. For 
healthcare 
providers, it is valuable for several reasons: At first, it 
reduces the number of labor due to the replacement of 
human based monitoring. Moreover, it reduces the 
chance of human error. Secondly, wearable sensors are 
capable of sensing even very small changes in vital 
signs and recording it, which a human cannot easily 
observe, such as pulse and blood oxygen level. 
Thirdly, on-time measurement can help in saving lives 
while collected health data of the patient stored in the 
cloud can support in decision making process 
whenever needed as enabling the doctor in making 
well informed decisions. And last but not least human 
physicians will be able to get valuable assistance from 
the "electronic physician" [30]. 
Patients will be benefitted in several ways. They 
can get quality healthcare treatment at home within 
their own private environment while living close to 
their family members while feeling more comfortable 
and relaxed resulting in less mental stress. Other 
significant 
factors 
involved 
are 
dignity 
and 
convenience which are highly supported while the 
patient gets treatment at home. 
VII. 
SMART STATIONARY CARE 
Most of the smart items available in the healthcare 
sector can be utilized in stationary care scenarios as 
well. Due to cost pressure, hospitals as well as 
intensive care units or other patient care facilities, are 
facing challenges like less financial resources. As a 
result, reduction of labor cost becomes the critical 
criterion for the implementation of smart items 
infrastructure in a stationary setting. 
According to a study conducted by the European 
Commission, the large majority (81%) of the hospitals 
within the EU are connected to the internet and two 
third (66%) of all surveyed hospitals have an in-house 
wireless infrastructure, an increase of twelve percents 
points within two years. Moreover, most of the used IT 
services are managed in-house which means that 
qualified IT staff is generally available [31]. 
Consequently, the basic infrastructure for smart items 
implementation is already provided in the majority of 
hospitals. The ongoing challenge is the integration of 
IT professionals and medical experts to realize smart 
items solutions supporting healthcare processes in a 
proper way. 
VIII. 
CONCLUSION 
 
Cloud computing based smart healthcare solutions 
and stationary items can play a vital role in improving 
the quality of health services in near future by 
remarkably supporting care staff in fulfilling their 
tasks in a well managed manner. 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Wireless 
communication 
channels 
between 
sensors, 
gateways 
and 
other 
devices 
enables 
continuous data transfer to the cloud and making it 
available for doctors, care staff and patient to access 
the health status and maintain the records time to time. 
Hence, 
synergistic 
combinations 
among 
smart 
healthcare solutions and cloud help the doctors and 
other care staff in making highly informed decision 
and produce better output with quality of care service 
provided. 
Understanding healthcare processes and modeling 
them for IT application is an inevitable task to create 
practice-oriented cloud solutions with the aim of 
providing high quality smart healthcare services. The 
approach presented in this paper can be used as a basic 
design for further developments. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This publication is based on the research project 
“OpSIT” which received financial funding from the 
ministry 
of 
education, 
science, 
research 
and 
technology (BMBF) under the funding sign 16SV6048 
within the program „IKT 2020 – Forschung für 
Innovationen“ and by the German Federal Ministry of 
Economics 
and 
Technology 
through 
project 
PrevenTAB (KF3144902DB3). The authors are 
responsible for the content.  
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Sultan, "Making use of cloud computing for 
healthcare provision:Opportunities and challenges," 
International Journal of Information Management, vol. 
34, no. 2, pp. 177-184, 2014. 
[2] European Commission, "Benchmarking deployment of 
eHealth services," Luxembourg, 2013. 
[3] Y. Han, "On the clouds: a new way of computing," 
Information Technology and Libraries, vol. 29, no. 2, 
pp. 87-92, 2013. 
[4] C.M. Birkmeyer et al., "Will Electronic Order Entry 
Reduce Health Care Costs?," Eff Clin Pract., vol. 5, no. 
2, pp. 67-74, 2002. 
[5] World Health Organization, "Adherence to long-term 
therapies: evidence for action," Geneva, Study ISBN 
9241545992, 2003. 
[6] A. M.-H. Kuo, "Opportunities and challenges of cloud 
computing to improve health care services," Journal of 
medical Internet research, vol. 3, no. 13, 2011. 
[7] Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences, 
"Technical Report TR-08-05," Harvard University, 
2005. 
[8] M. Werner et al., "Composability concept for 
dependable embedded systems," in Proceedings of the 
International Workshop on Dependable Embedded 
Systems in conjuction with SRDS, 2003. 
[9] P. Ibach et al., "CERO: CE RObots Community," IEE 
Proceedings Software, vol. 152, no. 5, pp. 210-214, 
2013. 
[10] V. Stantchev, Architectural Translucency, 8th ed. 
Berlin: GITO mbH Verlag, 2008. 
[11] V. Stantchev and M. Malek, "Architectural translucency 
in service-oriented architectures," IEE Proceedings-
Software, vol. 153, no. 1, pp. 31-37, 2006. 
[12] V. Stantchev, "Effects of replication on web service 
performance in WebSphere," International Computer 
Science Institute, Berkeley, 2008-03, 2008. 
[13] V. Stantchev and M. Malek, "Addressing web service 
performance by replication at the operating system 
level," in Internet and Web Applications and Services, 
2008, pp. 696-701. 
[14] P. Ibach, V. Stantchev, and C. Keller, "DAEDALUS–A 
Peer-to-Peer Shared Memory System for Ubiquitous 
Computing," in Euro-Par 2006 Parallel Processing, 
2006, pp. 961-970. 
[15] V. Stantchev, M.R. Franke, and A. Discher, "Project 
portfolio management systems: Business services and 
web services," in Fourth International Conference on 
Internet and Web Applications and Services, 2009, pp. 
171-176. 
[16] V. Stantchev, "Intelligent systems for optimized 
operating rooms," in New Directions in Intelligent 
Interactive Multimedia Systems and Services - 2. Berlin 
Heidelberg: Springer, 2009, pp. 443-453. 
[17] V. Stantchev, "Enhancing health care services with 
mixed reality systems," in The Engineering of Mixed 
Reality Systems. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer, 2009, ch. 
17, pp. 337-356. 
[18] J.G. Ko et al., "Wireless Sensor Networks for 
Healthcare," in Proceedings of the IEEE 98.11, 2010, 
pp. 1947-1960. 
[19] E.-M. Fong and W.-Y. Chung, "Mobile Cloud-
Computing-Based Healthcare Service by Noncontact 
ECG Monitoring," Sensors, vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 16451-
16473, 2013. 
[20] NIST. (2011) The NIST Definition of Cloud 
Computing. Special Publication 800-145. 
[21] B. Sosinsky, Cloud computing Bible. Indiana: Willey, 
2011. 
[22] Hitachi Data Systems, "How to Improve Healthcare 
with Cloud Computing," California, 2012. 
[23] J. Schubert et al., "Datenschutzrechtliche 
Rahmenbedingungen für die Datenerhebung durch 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

AAL-Infrastruktur bei der Pflege," in Wohnen–Pflege–
Teilhabe–"Besser leben durch Technik", Berlin, 2014. 
[24] World Health Organization. (1948, Apr.) WHO 
website. [Online]. 
http://www.who.int/about/definition/en/print.html 
(Accessed: 20 September 2014) 
[25] K. Petruch, V. Stantchev, and G. Tamm, "A survey on 
IT-governance aspects of cloud computing," 
International Journal of Web and Grid Services, vol. 7, 
no. 3, pp. 268-303, 2011. 
[26] S. Dzombeta et al., "Governance of Cloud Computing 
Services for the Life Sciences," IT Professional, vol. 
16, no. 4, pp. 30-37, 2014. 
[27] V. Stantchev, "Performance evaluation of cloud 
computing offerings," in Advanced Engineering 
Computing and Applications in Sciences, 2009, pp. 
187-192. 
[28] J.-S. Lee, Y.-W. Su, and C.-C. Shen, "A Comparative 
Study of Wireless Protocols: Bluetooth, UWB, ZigBee, 
and Wi-Fi," in The 33rd Annual Conference of the 
IEEE Industrial Electronics Society (IECON), Taipei, 
2007, pp. 46-51. 
[29] W.M.P. van der Aalst et al., "Business process 
management: A survey," in BPM 2003 Proceedings, 
Eindhoven, 2003, pp. 1-12. 
[30] J.A. Stankovic et al., "Wireless Sensor Networks for In-
Home Healthcare: Potential and Challenges," in High 
confidence medical device software and systems 
(HCMDSS) workshop, Virginia, 2005, pp. 2-3. 
[31] European Commission, "European Hospital Survey: 
Benchmarking Deployment of eHealth Services," 
Brussels, 2014. 
[32] M.H. Baeg et al., "Building a Smart Home Environment 
for Service Robots Based on RFID and Sensor 
Networks," in International Conference on Control, 
Automation and Systems, Seoul, 2007, pp. 1078-1082. 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

