Development of a Vital Signs Monitoring System Using Radio Frequency 
Communication 
 
Fábio Ferreira, Vítor Carvalho 
School of Technology 
Polytechnic Institute of Cávado and Ave (IPCA) 
Barcelos, Portugal 
vcarvalho@ipca.pt 
Filomena Soares, José Machado, Filipe Pereira, Vítor 
Carvalho 
Algoritmi Research Centre, CT2M (2nd author) 
University of Minho 
Guimarães, Portugal 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, the data transmission of an 
acquisition system for biomedical vital signs via Radio 
Frequency (RF) communication is explored. It was 
developed a platform capable of recording the patient´s 
physiological 
signals 
to 
check 
if 
any 
medical 
evolution/change occurred. The system allows also 
acquiring the environment data, as for example the 
room temperature and luminosity where the patient is. 
The main achievement of this paper is the patients’ real-
time health condition monitoring by the medical 
personnel or caregivers that will contribute to prevent 
health problems. 
Keywords—ambient asssisted living (ALL); radio 
frequency (RF); medical care terminal (MCT) 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
This work is part of a research and development 
project in Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) topic. 
Continuous monitoring of biomedical signals is 
crucial in diagnosis and clinical monitoring of 
patients. Nowadays, several biomedical signals are 
analyzed. The health assistant needs to have 
information of the patient's vital signs in order to be 
permanently informed about the patient heath status 
[1][2]. However, this procedure is not easy to 
accomplish. Regarding the acquisition of biomedical 
signals various sensors are placed on the patient 
including a series of cables to connect the sensors, 
which could be invasive and uncomfortable for the 
patient and his/her mobility [3]. At this moment, the 
commercial cost associated to the remote monitoring 
of biomedical variables in bedridden systems is 
expensive and unaffordable for most of families [4]. 
An example of a Medical Care Terminal (MCT) from 
BioPlux can be observed in Figure 1 [4].  
 
Figure 1. Bioplux clinical biofeedback software GUI [4] 
BioPlux clinical biofeedback software Graphical 
User Interface (GUI) is used in muscle rehabilitation 
allowing a more efficient medical intervention as well 
as a faster patient recovery. It is a web-based 
application, supported also by mobile operating 
systems. 
The main objective of this work is the 
development of an electronic system using wireless 
transmission capable of registering the patient's vital 
signs. Moreover, this project gives also the possibility 
to the health aide to access the database of the patient, 
including 
the 
medical 
records 
and 
personal 
information. This project is a first step in order to 
achieve a minimum invasive biomedical data 
acquisition system, as it is further expected to 
integrate the sensors in the patients’ clothes and/or in 
other common daily life tools. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section II 
presents the biomedical sensors principle of operation 
used in the project; Section III presents the developed 
system, Section IV presents some results. Section V 
presents the conclusion and future perspectives of 
work. 
II. BIOMEDICAL SENSORS 
In this section, we describe some of the biomedical 
sensors used in this project.  
A. Electrocardiogram (ECG) 
During 
the 
electrical 
activation 
of 
the 
myocardium, the heart is swept by a "front activation" 
whose meaning and direction are modified in fractions 
of a second. The ECG detects the electrical activity of 
the heart, reflecting its activity, Figure 2 [5]. 
 
 
Figure 2. Electrocardiogram wave [5] 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

B. Body Temperature Sensor 
The 
junction 
of 
two 
metals 
generates 
a 
temperature difference. The principle of operation of 
the temperature sensor is based on this process 
(thermocouple). Two materials of two different types 
are attached; the potential difference is measured 
between two points. Through this potential difference, 
it is possible to obtain the temperature. Figure 3 shows 
an example of the structure of the temperature sensor 
(thermocouple) used [6].  
 
 
Figure 3.  Thermocouple [6] 
C. Airflow Sensor 
The airflow is obtained by heating a wire by an 
electric current. The resistance of the wire increases as 
the temperature of the wire increases as a consequence 
of the airflow variation. Thus, it is possible to measure 
the airflow through the amount of current passing 
through the wire; see Figure 4 [7]. 
 
 
Figure 4. Airflow sensor [7] 
Apart from these sensors, other sensors are 
considered in the project as the oximeter, the galvanic 
skin response, the patient position and the glucometer. 
III. SYSTEM DEVELOPED 
Figure 5 presents the overall block diagram of the 
system developed. This system registers the patient´s 
physiological signs; it allows the medical personnel to 
access the patient´s personal information and medical 
condition, as well as the applied treatment.  Moreover, 
it also allows the remote access to monitor the 
patient's condition.  
The database can store the data of the patient, 
medical personnel, health aid and health unit. 
 
Figure 5.  Block diagram of the program 
A. System Hardware 
The system hardware is based on the Arduino 
platform, including an Atmel microcontroller AVR 
[8]. The programming languages used are C and C++. 
Figure 6 presents an example of the connection 
between the room luminosity sensor, i.e., Light 
Dependent Resistor (LDR), the Arduino and the Radio 
Frequency (RF) module. 
 
 
Figure 6. Room luminosity sensor (LDR) physical connection 
The sensor (Figure 6) is plugged into the Arduino 
Analogue to Digital Converter (ADC) input (with a 
resolution of 12 bits [9]). After reading the sensor, the 
value is transmitted via the Arduino serial port (RX, 
TX) to the XBee and then to the acquisition system. 
This procedure is also used for the other system 
sensors. 
B. Developed Database 
The software used for data modeling was the 
Microsoft Access [10]. Figure 7 shows the developed 
database for data storage considering seven main 
tables plus one auxiliary table. 
 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 7.  Data modeling 
The 
developed 
database 
records 
the 
data 
associated to the patient (tables Patient, Report, 
Sensors and Readings), the data associated to the 
medical 
personal 
responsible 
(tables 
Responsible_nurse and Responsible_doctor) as well as 
the data associated to the health unit (table 
Health_unit). 
C. LabVIEW Interface 
Figure 8 shows an example of the user interface 
developed in LabVIEW to consult information about a 
patient [11]. The database is accessed via a Universal 
Data Link (UDL) connection. UDL was created to 
store connections with databases. The serial port 
establishes the connection between LabVIEW and 
Xbee. A time period is defined for each sensor 
reading. The value is stored in the database along with 
the date and time when the acquisition was performed.  
 
 
Figure 8. LabVIEW user interface – patient database consult 
 
 
Figure 9 shows an example of the interface 
developed to register the light present in the patient’s 
room [12]. 
 
Figure 9.  Light sensor LabVIEW interface [12] 
Apart from the light intensity in the patient’s 
room, the system also registers the air carbon 
monoxide level, the air alcohol level and the room 
temperature. 
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
In this section, three examples of the experimental 
results are presented, namely the temperature 
monitoring of the patient room, the access to the 
patient´s data and also the patient´s body temperature.   
A. Temperature Room Sensor 
In the menu from Figure 10, the medical personnel 
may choose to monitor the room temperature 
throughout the day by selecting the overall time of the 
acquisition. By observing Figure 10, it is verified that 
the patient room temperature was around 30ºC during 
the system measurement (one hour). 
 
 
Figure 10.  Room temperature monitoring 
B. Medical Reports  
As it is seen in Figure 11, the medical personnel 
can select a time interval and list the patient reports. 
To accomplish this, it has to insert the code of the 
patient and click on the “Search” button.  
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 11.  Consult reports 
C. Biomedical Sensors 
The system was first tested with two healthy 
persons: a) 28 years old, female, measuring 1.73 m 
and weighting 62 kg; b) 31 years old, male, measuring 
1.76 m and weighting 79 kg. The first test was carried 
out to obtain the value of body temperature. Figure 12 
refers to the sensor placement and Figure 13 shows 
the user interface where the temperature is acquired 
through wireless communication and registered in a 
chart.  
 
Figure 12. Placement of the body temperature sensor in the patient 
[12] 
 
The conjunction of the biomedical sensors and the 
environmental sensors allows obtaining a very useful 
profile of the patients heath condition as well as the 
environment were he is exposed. The transmission of 
this information via RF allows a less invasive system 
to the users (patients and caregivers).  
V. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
This paper described a system based on a medical 
care terminal using data transmission via RF. The 
physiological and environment data are acquired. An 
added value of this project is the real-time monitoring 
allowing the medical personnel to observe the patient 
healthcare condition at anytime and anywhere. All the 
data in registered in a database, allowing the physician 
to monitor the patient´s evolution over time.  
So far, the system was tested in laboratory. In the 
near future, we aim to integrate all the sensors and test 
the system in clinical environment.  
This work aims to develop a minimum invasive 
vital signs data acquisition system including the 
biomedical sensors either in the patients’ clothes 
and/or in other common daily life tools.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by FCT – Fundação 
para a Ciência e Tecnologia within the Project Scope: 
PEst-OE/EEI/UI0319/2014. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Tianbing M. F. and Chuanzhi F., “Sensors state monitoring 
based on labview and wireless nodes”, Procedia Engineering, 
Vol. 15, 2011, pp. 2639-2643. 
[2] 
Alonso S. V., “Autonomous optical system for the 
measurement 
of 
biomedical 
parameters”, 
Catalunya: 
Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya, 2010 (in spanish).  
[3] 
Burns A. et al, “SHIMMERTM-A wireless sensor platform for 
noninvasive biomedical research”, IEEE Sensors Journal, 
Volume 10, Issue 9, Sept. 2010, pp.1527-1534. 
[4] 
bioPLUX 
research 
user 
manual, 
2010, 
http://www.plux.info/biopluxresearch (acessed in September 
2014): 
[5] 
Prutkin J., ECG tutorial: Basic principles of ECG analysis, 
2013, 
http://www.uptodate.com/contents/ecg-tutorial-basic-
principles-of-ecg-analysis (acessed in September 2014) 
[6] 
Thermocouples, 
An 
Introduction, 
http://www.omega.com/thermocouples.html 
(acessed 
in 
September 2014) 
[7] 
How 
sensors 
work, 
mass 
air 
flow 
sensor, 
http://www.sensorland.com/HowPage060.html (acessed in 
September 2014) 
[8] 
Arduino, http://www.arduino.cc (acessed in September 2014) 
[9] 
Arduino, 
analog 
read 
resolution, 
http://arduino.cc/en/Reference/AnalogReadResolution 
(acessed in September 2014) 
[10] Microsoft Access, http://office.microsoft.com/en-us/access/  
(acessed in September 2014) 
[11] NI 
LabVIEW, 
http://www.ni.com/labview 
(acessed 
in 
September 2014) 
[12] Pereira F., Carvalho V., Soares F., Machado J., Bezerra K. 
and Matos D., “Development of a mechatronic system for 
bedridden people support”, The Romanian Review Precision 
Mechanics, Optics & Mechatronics, 2013, no. 48, pp.138-14
 Figure 13. Obtaining the body temperature profile in the MCT [12] 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-375-9
SENSORDEVICES 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

