 
 
Detection of Hydrocarbon Oil in Seawater by Light Absorption Analysis 
 
Sangwoo Oh and Moonjin Lee  
Maritime Safety Research Division 
Korea Institute of Ocean Science & Technology (KIOST) 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
swoh@kiost.ac 
 
 
Abstract—A new optical sensing method is proposed to detect 
hydrocarbon oil in the sea. As a sensing methodology, a light 
absorption analysis is used with a laser source and two different 
types of photodiode sensors. To obtain information about the 
presence of oil on water and the thickness of oil, the intensity of 
the penetrating light through the oil–water mixtures is 
measured. In the experiment, bunker C and lubricating oil are 
used, and three different lasers having different wavelengths 
are applied and compared for the selection of an optimal light 
source. By using a photodiode sensor, we can convert the 
intensity of the penetrating light through a liquid into an 
electrical signal. As a result, it is observed that the intensity of 
the light on the optical sensor decreases with an increase in the 
oil thickness. Through this relation, both the presence of oil and 
the thickness of oil can be determined. This result shows the 
applicability of a hydrocarbon detection sensor. 
 
Keywords—Optical sensor, Hydrocarbon spill detection, Light 
absorption analysis, Blue laser, Photodiode  
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
A hydrocarbon spill accident in the sea is a major 
catastrophe that can have bad effects on every life in the ocean. 
Hence, rapid detection of hydrocarbon and response are very 
important and helpful for the prevention of environmental 
pollution. 
In response to this need, various types of hydrocarbon spill 
detection sensors for the ocean application have been 
developed, and some of them have been applied in a real site 
[1], [2]. However, these developed sensors have some 
economic weaknesses. The sensing methodologies of the 
initially applied sensors are based on laboratory analysis 
equipment, such as mass spectrometry. These sensors can 
analyse the detailed components of hydrocarbon as well as the 
type of hydrocarbon. However, these sensors are mostly large 
in size and require a long analysis time because of their many 
processes [3]. Then, an initial type of sensor, sensors that use 
fluorescence analysis by UV rays [4], and electrical 
capacitance measurement [5] were developed. These sensors 
can detect not only the existence of hydrocarbon but also 
analyse their components down to the parts per million level. 
However, these sensors are generally not cost effective, and it 
is therefore very difficult to increase the number of detection 
points in the ocean. To solve these problems of the existing 
hydrocarbon spill detection sensors, in this research, we have 
focused on the development of a sensor, which has advantages 
of cost-effectiveness with respect to installation and 
maintenance, and a simple detection mechanism. To realise 
these requirements, the difference in light absorption between 
oil and water is used as a sensing principle. Further, by using 
electro-optical devices such as laser and optical sensor, we 
have estimated the detection capability of a proposed sensor in 
this research. To select the optimal wavelength of the laser, 
three different types of laser are compared and the prototype 
of the sensor platform is described in the body of paper. 
II. SENSOR DESIGN 
A. Sensing Principle 
In this research, laser is used as a light source, and an 
optical sensor is used for evaluating the light intensity. These 
two electric devices are very cheap and easy to use, thus 
satisfying the aims of sensor development.  
This research is partially motivated by existing research 
on the sensing mechanism [6], where light emitting diodes 
(LEDs) and light-dependent resistors (LDRs) were used for 
monitoring oil, with multiple LED/LDR pairs positioned 
vertically. In this former research, the detection resolution of 
the oil thickness was on the centimetre scale. However, in the 
current research, the light source (laser) is positioned 
underwater and the penetrating light energy is evaluated by 
the optical sensor above the water surface. Further, the optical 
sensor is used for directly converting the light intensity into 
voltage; hence, there is no need for an additional converting 
process. The changes made to the light source and the optical 
sensor are different from former research.   
The methodology in this research involves the use of (1) a 
blue laser to illuminate the monochromatic high-powered 
light to the heavy oil in seawater and (2) an optical sensor to 
evaluate the intensity of the light that penetrated the oil in 
seawater. As the sensing principle, the difference in the light 
absorption rate between oil and water is used.  
 
           =                                           (1) 
 
where z = path length 
           I0 = initial intensity of light 
           a = light absorption coefficient 
  
Equation (1) is Beer’s law, which describes the light 
absorption in the seawater [7]. In this equation, the light 
absorption coefficient is dependent on the type of medium and 
the wavelength of light. If the light diffuses into different 
types of media, the decreasing tendency of the light intensity 
varies. Moreover, the wavelength of light is a major part of the 
determination of the condition of light absorption. If the light 
source having a different absorption characteristic between oil 
and seawater is chosen, using this light source, we can find out 
the oil existence and the oil thickness. 
Normally, it is common sense that a light having a blue 
wavelength region has considerably selectivity with respect to 
an absorption rate when it penetrates the oil in seawater. When 
a blue light diffuses through oil or seawater media, the light is 
considerably more absorbed in the oil than in seawater. Hence, 
with an increase in the oil thickness, the possibility of light 
attenuation in the oil layer increases (see Fig. 1). Therefore, 
the energy of the penetrating light on the optical sensor will 
decrease. By using this optical sensing mechanism, we can 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
monitor the existence and the thickness of oil on the water. 
Hence, in this research, three different types of lasers (blue, 
green and red) are compared for the selection of an optimal 
light source, which has considerable selectivity between oil 
and seawater. 
 
B. Experiment 
To determine the optimal wavelength of the laser, 
experiments are conducted using three different lasers (473 
nm for blue, 532 nm for green and 650 nm for red) with 
increasing oil thickness (see Fig. 2). For the exact 
measurement of light intensity, external lights (sunlight and 
electric light) are blocked by a black box. Further, the oils 
used in the experiment are lubricating oil and bunker C oil 
(type A), which can be very harmful when spilt in the ocean. 
Two different types of optical sensors are used in the 
experiment. The first one is a 2 × 2 photodiode array shown in 
Fig. 3. This sensor can transduce the light intensity to the 
voltage output. The supply voltage of this sensor is 5.0 V, and 
the output range is 0.8 V–5.0 V. The gap between the laser 
and the water surface is 5 cm. The measurements are 
conducted five times under the same condition at each case of 
laser. In the measurement of bunker C oil, a 2 × 2 photodiode 
array sensor is applied to measure the light intensity. The 
increment in the oil thickness is 0.5 mm, and the experiment is 
conducted up to a thickness of 2 mm.  
In the second experiment, the lubricating oil is used, and 
the optical sensor having a single photovoltaic photodiode is 
applied to evaluate the light intensity (see Fig. 4). This optical 
sensor operated under an unbiased condition and output the 
current signal. The increment in the oil thickness is 1 mm, and 
the experiment is conducted up to a thickness of 4 mm.  
 
C. Results 
In the first experiment (bunker C oil), the sensor output 
results obtained using blue, green, and red lasers under 
conditions of increasing oil thickness are shown in Figs. 5–7. 
Through these three results, in the case of the blue laser, it is 
observed that with an increase in the oil thickness, the 
intensity of the light decreases linearly and the selectivity is 
the highest among the three laser sources. Hence, the blue 
laser is the optimal light source for the detection of oil 
presence and the measurement of the thickness of the bunker 
C oil. 
In the second experiment (lubricating oil), the sensor 
output results obtained using blue, green, and red lasers under 
the conditions of increasing oil thickness are shown in Figs. 
8–10. Through these three results, in the case of the blue laser, 
it is also observed that when the oil thickness increases, the 
intensity of the light decreases linearly and the selectivity is 
the highest among the three laser sources. Green and red 
lights generally have a low power output. This implies that 
these lights are absorbed mostly in the seawater layer. Hence, 
the blue laser is also the optimal light source for the detection 
of oil presence and the measurement of the thickness of the 
lubricating oil. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the sensing mechanism 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Experimental setup to select a laser as an optimal wavelength                                                                                                                                               
light source for the oil-spill detection sensors 
 
 
 
Figure 3. First optical sensor used in the bunker C measurement 
(2 × 2 photodiode array and voltage output) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Second optical sensor in the lubricating oil measurement 
(Single photovoltaic diode and current output) 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Sensor output results using a blue laser in bunker C oil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Sensor output results using a green laser in bunker C oil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Sensor output results using a red laser in bunker C oil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Sensor output results using a blue laser in lubricating oil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Sensor output results using a green laser in lubricating oil 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Figure 10. Sensor output results using a red laser in lubricating oil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Schematic representation of the sensor platform 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Schematic representation of the sensor architecture  
 
 
D. Sensor Platform 
For the future work, the sensor platform needs to be 
designed and manufactured in the form of the monitoring 
buoy. For effective detection on the sea surface, a 
dish-shaped floater is designed as a sensor platform; through 
two holes on the water-line side of the floater, the oil can 
enter and contact the optical detection part of the sensor (Fig. 
11). The system architecture of the total sensor is shown in 
Fig. 12. It consists of the optical sensor, the laser source, the 
electrical power supply, the main controller and the 
communication part including the antenna. 
III. CONCLUSION 
In this research, to find out the optimal wavelength laser, 
experiments using three lasers and two different oils were 
conducted and it was concluded that the blue laser was the 
optimal light source for the detection of oil presence and the 
measurement of oil thickness.  
In this paper, a new optical oil detection methodology was 
proposed using the difference in light absorption between 
water and oil using the blue laser and the optical sensor. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This work is carried out as a part of the study on 
“Development of Oil Spill Response Supporting System 
based on 3-D Oil Dispersion Modelling” and “Development 
of 
HNS 
Spill 
Response 
Information 
Supporting 
Technologies based on HNS Dispersion Model” under the 
support by the Korea Institute of Ocean Science and 
Technology. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. MacLean, C. Moran, W. Johnstone, B. Culshaw, D. Marsh, P. 
Parker, "Detection of hydrocarbon fuel spills using a distributed fibre 
optic sensor", Sensors and Actuators A, vol. 109, 2003, pp. 60–67. 
[2] 
G. Griffiths, "Review of oceanographic equipment and sensors for the 
detection 
and 
measurement 
of 
pollutants", 
Southhampton 
Oceanography Center Research and Consultancy Report, no. 99, 2005, 
pp. 1-24. 
[3] 
G. Reeves, “Introduction to hydrocarbons and monitoring”, Common 
HydroSense Questions and General Information Guide, Arjay 
Engineering Ltd., 2000, pp. 2-8. 
[4] 
C. Henry, P.O. Roberts, “Background fluorescence values and matrix 
effects observed using smart protocols in the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf 
of Mexico”, International Oil Spill Conference, Florida, 2001, pp. 
1203-1207. 
[5] 
J. Andrews, “Automated marine oil spill detection system development 
update”, Marine Environmental Update, 97(1), US Navy SPARWAR 
Systems Centre., 1997. 
[6] 
H. Denkilkian, R. Ohannessian, M.S. Chalfoun, M. Joujou, A. Chehab, 
I.H. Elhajj, “Wireless sensor for continuous real-time oil spill thickness 
and location measurement”, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and 
Measurement, vol. 58, no. 12, 2009, pp. 4001-4011. 
[7] 
E. Friedman, J. Miller, “Photonics Rules of Thumb”, 1st ed., SPIE 
Press, McGraw Hill, 2003, pp. 220-240. 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-297-4
SENSORDEVICES 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications

