Monitoring the Marine Environment using a low-cost Colorimetric Optical Sensor  
Brendan Heery, Lorna Fitzsimons, Timothy 
Sullivan, James Chapman, Fiona Regan, Kim Lau 
and Dermot Brabazon 
Marine and Environmental Sensing Technology 
Hub (MESTECH), National Centre for Sensor Research 
Dublin City University 
Dublin, Ireland 
 
Brendan.heery3@mail.dcu.ie 
Lorna.fitzsimons@dcu.ie 
Timothy.sullivan2@mail.dcu.ie 
James.chapman@dcu.ie 
Fiona.regan@dcu.ie 
Kimlau01@gmail.com 
Dermot.brabazon@dcu.ie 
 
Jung-Ho Kim and Dermot Diamond 
CLARITY, Sensor for Web Technologies 
National Centre for Sensor Research 
Dublin City University 
Dublin, Ireland 
 
Kimjungho@gmail.com 
Dermot.diamond@dcu.ie 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— Anthropogenic activities have led to increased stress 
on our marine and other aquatic environments. There is a 
pressing need to monitor, measure, understand and mitigate 
the causes of these pressures. This paper presents the 
development and preliminary testing of a low-cost colorimetric 
optical sensor to detect colour-linked events in the marine 
environment. Potential applications may include the detection 
of Harmful Algal Blooms (HAB), which due to the production 
of toxins have deleterious effects on marine ecosystems and can 
ultimately lead to human, fish, bird and mammal deaths. 
Preliminary results indicate the capability of the sensor to 
differentiate between the colour signatures of several 
environmental samples. 
Keywords-environmental monitoring; colorimetric sensor; 
marine sensing; optical sensor. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Recognition of the incontrovertible facts that the marine 
environment (1) plays a vital role in sustaining life and (2) is 
rapidly deteriorating, has led to a greater focus on the health 
of the European marine environment [1]. European 
frameworks such as the Water Framework Directive [2], the 
Bathing Water Directive [3] and the Marine Strategy 
Framework Directive [4] acknowledge that the marine 
environment, and water in general, are heritages and “must 
be protected, preserved and, where practicable, restored 
with the ultimate aim of maintaining biodiversity and 
providing diverse and dynamic oceans and seas which are 
clean, healthy and productive [4]”. 
 Several water quality monitoring requirements are 
identified in the aforementioned directives and current FP7 
projects address several of these areas of concern. For 
example, the focus of EPOCA [5] is ocean acidification (the 
drop in ocean pH caused by absorption of atmospheric 
CO2). MedSeA [6] is again concerned with ocean 
acidification but specifically in relation to the Mediterranean 
Sea. The overall objectives of Hypox [7] and Viroclime [8] 
are to continuously monitor oxygen depletion in aquatic 
systems and to investigate the impact of climate change on 
viral flux (i.e., the growth, death and transport of viruses) 
respectively. Despite this significant increase in marine 
monitoring activity, there remain several important research 
areas that require detailed investigation, for example: 
1. Continuous real-time monitoring of harmful 
bacterial species;  
2. Improvement in continuous, long-term marine 
monitoring capabilities in terms of both sensor 
development and deployment e.g. antifouling and 
sensor marinisation (i.e., the design of a system for 
survival in the harsh marine environment). 
To put some of these contamination risks in context, 
harmful bacterial species in the marine environment such as 
microcystins can lead to severe human and animal 
intoxication [9]. Symptoms can range for vomiting to liver 
and neurological dysfunctions which, in severe cases, can 
ultimately result in the death of consumers.  
Certain harmful bacterial species of interest have 
specific colour footprints. For example, cyanobacteria, 
which include the microcystins, are characterised by bright 
green algal blooms [10]. Other harmful algal blooms, which 
contain species such as Karenia brevis and Alexandrium are 
characterised by the colour red, commonly known as red 
tides [11, 12]. Therefore, the application of low-cost 
colorimetric optical sensors may potentially be very 
beneficial to detect colorimetric events such as harmful 
algal blooms and to serve as an early warning alarm and 
decision support tool for more sophisticated bacterial 
sensors. 
Traditional approaches to monitor and detect harmful 
bacterial species have typically involved the intermittent 
338
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

collection of samples at the relevant monitoring location 
(grab sampling), the transportation of the samples to the 
laboratory, the analysis of samples using various lab-based 
analytical techniques and the evaluation of results. This 
approach is not always ideal for a number of reasons, 
including: (1) the possibility of missing events due to low 
sampling frequencies, (2) the potential for sample 
contamination during transport from the point of collection 
to the laboratory, and (3) the inherent lead time from sample 
collection to analytical results. This can be problematic with 
regards to delayed reaction protocols and cause traceability. 
Lead times can be considerable in the analysis of bacterial 
samples which require culturing in the laboratory. There is 
therefore a strong argument for continuous in-situ 
monitoring. However, the development of long-term, 
continuous bacterial sensors in the marine environment is 
far from trivial. The objective of this research is to develop 
a low-cost, continuous, long-term, optical colorimetric 
sensor to detect colorimetric events, and thus act as a 
decision support tool for more sophisticated bacterial 
sensors, for example, to inform sampling frequency.  
Much research has been conducted in the area of 
monitoring the inherent optical properties (IOP) of water 
and its relation to biological content. This is mainly done 
using satellite imaging of the ocean surface. Woods Hole 
Oceanographic Institution has reported vertical profiling of 
attenuation and scattering characteristics of New England 
coastal waters using a Wetlabs AC-9 meter. [13] 
The Wetlabs AC-S in-situ spectrometer [14] a descendent 
of the AC-9 is a highly sensitive device with high spectral 
resolution for the detection of IOP, using a flow through 
detection system.  
The OCS is an inexpensive, imprecise sensor intended for 
detecting significant changes in the bulk optical properties 
of marine waters. The OCS has several important 
advantages. First, it is low cost (less than €500 per unit for 
parts). A second advantage is ease of deployment; the 
sensor requires no support structure, only a mooring. These 
features allow for multiple strategic deployments to allow 
both temporal and spatial monitoring. 
 
II. 
DEVELOPMENT OF OPTICAL COLORIMETRIC SENSOR 
The Optical Colorimetric System (OCS) was based on a 
first generation prototype developed by researchers in 
CLARITY, Centre for Sensor Web Technology, Dublin City 
University (Fig. 1).  
 
Prototype 1 was essentially a laboratory version and 
features included; 
 
LED array light source (IR, red, amber, green, blue) 
 
 h t di de dete t rs   0   and   0   to the light 
source) 
 
Short-range wireless communications. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Prototype 1 showing measurement system below the water and 
communications above the water – separated by the float. 
 
Prototype 2, the Optical Colorimetric Sensor (OCS), was 
developed to be a more robust field version of the original 
(Fig. 2). Additional features include: 
 
Robust marine deployable design 
 
Antifouling measures 
 
GSM communications. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Prototype 2. 
 
The Prototype 2 OCS is deployed using a single point 
mooring. It floats at the surface with the sensing elements 
submerged at 1 m. GSM telecommunications equipment is 
housed in the upper compartment above the water line. The 
OCS is designed for inshore use thus GSM communication is 
adequate in most Irish scenarios. Detection involves the use 
of 5 LEDs at differing wavelengths as a light source and 
photodiode detectors at 180 degrees and 90 degrees to the 
source. The detectors measure attenuation and reflectance 
respectively.  
Optical detection in the marine is subject to interference 
such as scattering due to suspended particulate matter. Also 
significant drift in readings over time will be expected due to 
the formation of biofilms on optical windows. Antifouling 
research previously carried out by MESTECH has been 
incorporated into the sensor design to mitigate fouling 
Signal processing  
and communications 
Detection 
chamber 
Floatation 
Signal processing 
and 
communications 
Detection chamber 
with antifouling 
Floatation 
Mooring point 
339
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

effects. The objective of the OCS is to inform of shifts in 
colour or particle density with respect to a baseline, but not 
to quantify these changes accurately. Issues of sensor 
robustness will be addressed as part of future testing in the 
marine environment. 
III. 
RESULTS TO DATE 
Preliminary system evaluations were carried out using 
varying concentrations of food dye in tap water, which were 
chosen as being representative of typical environmental 
colorations. Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 show the system response (per 
LED) to changes in concentrations of red and green food 
dyes in tap water respectively. The percentage attenuation 
refers to the reduction in light transmission through the 
sample from a baseline of transmission in tap-water. Based 
on these initial results, the system demonstrates sensitivity 
to dye concentration changes in water, and can, therefore, 
distinguish between differing depths of colour. For example, 
the red dye (Ponceau 4R E124) absorbs light from 350 nm 
to 500 nm (i.e., UV to green). Thus in Fig. 3 the blue and 
green light is attenuated strongly by the red dye. In Fig. 4, 
the green dye (Tartrazine E102, Green S E142) absorbs light 
between 350 nm and 450 nm and also between 570 nm and 
700 nm, thus the blue, amber and red lights are attenuated. 
In both Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, it can be seen that IR (850 nm) is 
not attenuated by either dye. However, it can be seen to 
attenuate strongly in environmental samples; see Fig. 5. 
This can be due to absorption in dissolved organic matter. 
 
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
% Attenuation
Red dye concentration µL/L (n = 3)
Blue
Green
Amber
Red
IR
 
 
Figure 3. Response of the prototype 2 sensor to red dye. 
 
 
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
% Attenuation
Green dye concentration µL/L  (n = 3)
Blue
Green
Amber
Red
IR
 
 
Figure 4. Response of the prototype 2 sensor to green dye. 
 
A follow-on objective of the research was to establish the 
ability of the OCS to differentiate between the colours of 
samples taken from various aquatic environments. Samples 
from several locations throughout Dublin were analysed in-
situ using the sensor. These samples included both riverine 
and estuarine waters. The percentage changes in light 
transmission through samples were recorded and were 
referenced against clean tap-water. The results are shown in 
Fig. 5, which clearly demonstrate the capability of the sensor 
to distinguish between the different absorbance signatures of 
the various water samples. These preliminary results are 
significant and point towards potential marine monitoring 
applications. 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Freshwater 1
Freshwater 2
Estuary 1
Estuary 2
% Attenuation
Environmental samples (n = 10)
Blue LED
Green LED
Amber LED
Red LED
IR LED
 
 
Figure 5. Field analysis of environmental samples using OCS. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Based on preliminary tests and results, the OCS shows 
promise for marine environmental applications. The OCS 
system is robust and deployable in the aquatic environment. 
Of particular importance, the OCS shows potential to detect 
events in the environment such as a shift in water colour due 
to a pollution event.  
340
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Future work includes longer-term deployment in the 
marine environment (SmartBay, the National Test and 
Demonstration Infrastructure, Galway). Events detected will 
be cross referenced against commercial sensing equipment 
(YSI sonde 6600) and standard laboratory analysis as part of 
an ongoing sampling programme. Future research will also 
involve the characterisation of the colorimetric response to 
simulated environmental events.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to acknowledge the Marine and 
Environmental Sensing Technology Hub (MESTECH), 
which is funded under the Beaufort Marine Research Awards 
and carried out under the Sea Change Strategy and the 
Strategy for Science Technology and Innovation (2006-
2013), with the support of the Marine Institute, funded under 
the Marine Research Sub-Programme of the National 
Development Plan 2007–2013.  
In addition, the authors would like to acknowledge the 
system development work carried out by Prof. K.T. Lau 
(MESTECH) and Dr. J-H Kim in CLARITY, Centre for 
Sensor Web Technology, which is funded by Science 
Foundation Ireland under the CLARITY award (07/CE/ 
I1147).  
The authors would also like to thank Mr Matthew 
Meagher for his assistance.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] European Commission Fact sheet: protecting and conserving 
the 
marine 
environment, 
[on-line], 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/pubs/pdf/factsheets/marine.p
df, (Accessed April 2012). 
[2] European 
Water 
Framework 
Directive, 
DIRECTIVE 
2000/60/EC. 
[3] European Bathing Water Directive, DIRECTIVE 2006/7/EC.  
[4] European 
Marine 
Strategy 
Framework 
Directive, 
DIRECTIVE 2008/56/EC.  
[5] EPOCA website, [on-line], http://www.epoca-project.eu/, 
(Accessed April 2012). 
[6] MedSeA 
website, 
[on-line], 
http://medsea-project.eu/, 
(Accessed April 2012). 
[7] Hypox website, [on-line], http://www.hypox.net/, (Accessed 
April 2012).  
[8] Viroclime 
website, 
[on-line], 
http://www.viroclime.org/, 
(Accessed April 2012).  
[9] B. Byrne, E. Stack, N. Gilmartin, and R. O’Kennedy, 20 2, 
“Antib dy-based sensors: Principles, Problems and Potential 
f r Dete ti n  f  ath gens and Ass  iated T xins”, Sens rs, 
9(6), 4407-4445. 
[10] M.T. Madigan, J.M. Martinko, P.V. Dunlap, and D.P. Clark, 
Brock Biology of Microorganisms, 12th edition, 2009, 
Pearson, San Francisco, United States.  
[11] J. T. Turner, V. Roncalli and P. Ciminiello, 2012, 
"Biogeographic Effects of the Gulf of Mexico Red Tide 
DinoflagellateKareniaBrevis on Mediterranean Copepods," 
Harmful Algae, 16(0) pp. 63-73.  
[12] Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution website, [on-line], 
http://www.whoi.edu/oceanus/viewArticle.do?id=13406, 
(Accessed April 2012). 
[13] Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution website, [on-line], 
http://www.whoi.edu/science/B/sosiklab/063.pdf, (Accessed, July, 
2012) 
[14] WetLabs 
AC-S 
specification 
sheet 
(Accessed 
July, 
2012) 
http://www.wetlabs.com/products/pub/specsheets/acsssd.pdf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
341
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

