Anchor-free Localization in Wireless Lamp
Networks using Superimposed RSSI Measurements
A. Caracas, T. Eirich, T. Kramp, M. Oestreicher
IBM Research - Zurich
(xan,eir,thk,oes)@zurich.ibm.com
M. Hoffman, C. Gargiulo, G. Soros
ETH - Zurich
(moritzho,gargiulo,gabor.soros)@ethz.ch
Abstract—Localization is a crucial aspect in providing context-
aware services and applications. Existing approaches often re-
quire a ﬁxed infrastructure or specialized hardware, providing
varying degrees of accuracy. For certain application scenarios,
high accuracy is not required, if the objects to localize are ﬁxed
or slowly moving. For such relatively static scenarios, we propose
a novel RSSI-based localization technique using multiple antennas
and multiple channels in the 2.4 GHz band. As a concrete
application, we present a wireless lighting control system for
ofﬁce lamps in an Internet of Things (IoT) scenario. The lamps
participate in a wireless sensor network (WSN) and cooperatively
adjust the ambient light based on the self-determined topology
correlated with occupancy information. Our experimental results
show that we are able to achieve an accuracy of 2 m in 93% of
distance estimates with cost-effective IoT technology, improving
existing results by 1 m.
Keywords—RSSI-based
localization,
multi-antenna,
multi-
channel, wireless lighting
I.
INTRODUCTION
Localization is a crucial aspect for context-aware appli-
cations and services. We take for granted and rely on the
suggestions given by our navigation systems when driving
to a new destination, or, we check the 15-minutes updates
of the rain radar before starting the bike journey home. The
most prominent outdoor localization system is the satellite-
based global positioning system (GPS). However, GPS is
not able to provide accurate information or no information
at all in certain scenarios. These scenarios occur when the
line of sight to GPS satellites is obstructed, in particular, for
indoor environments [1] as well as outdoor, in dense forest
areas [2], [3] or mountainous regions. In such cases, wireless
sensor networks (WSNs) represent a viable, and often the only
possible alternative for enabling positioning services [4] in
local areas.
In this paper, we focus on improving radio-based local-
ization using the standard received signal strength indicator
(RSSI), which is a measurement readily available on off-
the-shelf WSNs. One important criterion for our localization
system is to operate without any additional infrastructure, e.g.
setup and conﬁguration, no ﬁxed beacons, and no extra cabling.
To test the feasibility and accuracy of our proposed lo-
calization approach, we concentrate on a concrete application
scenario: a wireless lighting control system. We enable lamps,
positioned in large, open-ofﬁce environments, to autonomously
determine their location and topology information. Based on
this information, and combined with motion detection informa-
tion, the lamps cooperate in adapting and creating ergonomic
ambient lighting conditions.
This paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we discuss
related wireless localization systems and how our localization
technique advances the state of the art. Following, in Sec-
tion III, we describe the details of our proposed localization
technique. As a concrete application, in Section IV, we focus
on an example scenario for a wireless lighting control system.
In Section V, we present our experiments and evaluate the
results of our localization technique in the context of the
lighting control scenario. Finally, in Section VI, we conclude
the paper and provide an outlook for future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
Localization is an extensively researched topic. Different
technologies exist to determine the location of objects in a
global or relative frame of reference using various signals
(e.g., radio, light, temperature or sound). Due to their extended
range, radio-based localization (RBL) systems can be applied
to a wide range of environments [4].
In an RBL system, an estimate for the distance between
two objects can be obtained based on several techniques
such as time-of-ﬂight (ToF), angle of arrival (AoA), or time-
difference of arrival (TDoA), e.g. between an acoustic signal
and a radio signal. However, such techniques require highly-
specialized and time-synchronized hardware [4]. An cost-
effective alternative is the received signal strength indicator
(RSSI), measured automatically by modern radio chips. This
indicator can be related to distance using different path-loss
models [5]. However, multipath fading effects signiﬁcantly
affect the accuracy [1] of any RBL system irrespective of the
technique for distance estimation.
The best-known RBL example is the global positioning
system (GPS). Most RBL approaches, such as GPS, work well
for outside environments, far from obstacles or disturbances
which may affect the signal propagation. At present, these RBL
systems typically utilize a costly infrastructure, based on ﬁxed
beacons (in the case of GPS, these beacons are sent by mobile
satellites orbiting the Earth) with known positions. For indoor
settings, Ubisense [6] provides a commercial RBL solution,
based on a ﬁxed beacon infrastructure and highly specialized
hardware tags. The tags are able to measure both the AoA and
TDoA of beacons signals, which are broadcasted by the ﬁxed
infrastructure. Typically such systems operate in the 6-8 GHz
(ultra-wide) band as well as the 2.4 GHz band.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

In contrast to specialized solutions, the standardized IEEE
802.15.4 radio technology in the 2.4 GHz and 800-900 MHz
frequency bands, used by modern WSNs, promises a relatively
cheap and off-the-shelf solution for realizing location-based
applications and services. This technology is pervasive and
applicable to both indoor and outdoor Internet of Things (IoT)
scenarios. Because RSSI measurements come at no additional
costs, they are performed automatically by the underlying radio
hardware of WSNs, we focus on such techniques for eliciting
the distance estimates in a cost-effective manner.
Previous work on RSSI-based localization failed to de-
liver results which were accurate enough for context-aware
applications. The best result [7] using RSSI-based localization
showed, with off-the-shelf WSN components, an absolute error
of less than 3 m (with a probability of 95%). In this case,
the application scenario involved a beacon-based infrastructure
for improving the tracking of a moving shopping cart in
combination with odometric measurements from an inertial
measuring unit (IMU). More recent work [8] in this space
suggests that using multiple channels can improve the accuracy
of RSSI-based localization. However, the authors present no
values for the error of the distance estimation.
Most localization approaches focus on tracking moving
targets such as controlling cattle in agriculture [9], correlating
monitoring information in logistics applications[10], locating
shopping carts [7] for marketing purposes, and ensuring rapid
response times when elderly persons in assisted living en-
vironments [1] are involved. Moreover, available solutions
often require a ﬁxed infrastructure, which must be minutely
calibrated [6], [1] for best results. However, interesting and
business-relevant application scenarios can emerge where rel-
atively static objects (e.g. lamps, computing assets, or shared
lab equipment) are able to determine their location without the
need of a ﬁxed infrastructure. The self-determined location can
be subsequently used as the basis for localizing moving targets.
To summarize, our approach focuses on providing a perva-
sive, cost-effective, and self-conﬁgurable localization solution.
Our main contribution addresses the multipath fading by
combing RSSI information from multiple frequencies as well
as multiple antennas for the same physical location. While we
focus on a static scenarios our approach can be extended for
tracking moving targets, once the self-conﬁgured infrastructure
is in place.
III.
A NOVEL LOCALIZATION APPROACH
To counteract the detrimental effects of multipath fading,
we propose leveraging the different frequencies (also called
channels) combined with spacially-separated observations for
a given physical position. Such observations are achieved by
using multiple antennas, at least half a wavelength apart.
For practical purposes, to emulate multiple antennas, we use
multiple motes placed next to each other in the same location.
To enable a commercial solution, multiple antennas can be
controlled by the same radio chip and integrated into a single-
mote design.
A. Rationale for Multiple Channels and Multiple Antennas
In an ideal case, i.e., without multipath fading, the same
RSSI measurements will be reported for all frequencies. (or
Fig. 1.
The distribution of RSSI measurements for individual channels as
measured by an observer mote for a given observed mote. When considering
the opposite observation direction the RSSI measurements typically follow a
similar distribution.
channels) and for all antennas. By varying the channel, the
wave-length is varied, which in turn changes the propagation
paths of the indirect signals, because of different reﬂection
patterns. For the direct radio signal, based on Friis’s equation
[5], the received power is proportional with the square of
the wavelength. However, it can be easily shown that for
the different wavelengths (of ≈12.5 cm) in the 24 GHz band,
the received signal strength would vary by less than 1% at
distances of more than 1 m. In other words, some propagation
paths will not occur, while others may be induced. The same
effect is introduced by placing multiple, spacially-separated
antennas in the same location. Intuitively, overlapping RSSI
measurements, on different channels, and observed by different
antennas, are a very strong indicator for the presence of a
component for the correct RSSI value. The RSSI candidate
value can then be computed as a linear combination of these
strong components.
Using multiple channels and multiple antennas for per-
forming RSSI measurements introduces a new challenge: the
different channels report different, albeit relatively stable, RSSI
measurements. Fig. 1 shows, for each channel, the distribution
of RSSI measurements of the messages sent by the observed
mote and received by the observer mote. In our experiments,
the difference in the stable RSSI measurements for different
channels and different antennas, for the same physical location,
were as much as 25 db. The challenge in this case is to select
an RSSI value which best represents the distance between the
observer and observed mote.
Literature [8] suggest that averaging RSSI measurements
across all channels can improve the RSSI-based estimations.
However, such a straight-forward approach is biased and
extremely sensitive to noise.
B. Selecting the Best RSSI Candidate
Our proposed algorithm for selecting the best RSSI can-
didate operates in three stages. Because a pair of motes (or
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 2.
Distribution of RSSI candidate values for a given pair of motes. The
x-axis represents the RSSI candidates, whereas the y-axis shows how many
times the RSSI value was selected as a candidate value, for both observation
directions and across all channels.
group of motes) corresponds to a single distance, both RSSI
observation directions are considered for each distance pair.
In the ﬁrst stage, the algorithm creates a distribution
(histogram) of RSSI candidates. For each channel, and for each
observation direction, a candidate is selected based on the most
stable RSSI value from the given measurements. Selecting
the stable value instead of the mean (which is sensitive to
noise) has a signiﬁcant effect on the ﬁnal result. Note that in
noisy situations, for a given channel and pair combination, it is
possible that no selection is made. Effectively, only selections
with a minimum conﬁdence (given by the coverage ratio of
the stable value) are kept.
Fig. 2 shows such an example distribution of the most
stable RSSI candidates for a given pair of motes, where both
observation directions are combined. The x-axis shows the
candidate RSSI values, whereas, the y-axis shows the number
of occurrences (across all channels and both observation direc-
tions). For this example, the RSSI candidate value of 39 db was
selected 6 times (on 6 channels), based on the measurements
performed in both observation directions.
Because we operate on all 16 channels, we obtain a
maximum of 32 RSSI selections for each distance pair. In
the general case, when grouping motes (treated as multiple
antennas) for each distance pair we obtain a maximum of 32·k2
candidate RSSI values, where k is the number of motes (or
antennas) in a group.
In the second stage, we ﬁlter from the histogram all RSSI
values with a low number of occurrences. A low occurrence
means there is no correlation with measurements from other
channels. The ﬁltering step also separates clusters of RSSI
values which are at least 5 db units away from each other. We
consider these clusters (shown as ellipses in Fig. 2) to be the
strong components for the ﬁnal RSSI value.
Clusters (marked by ellipses) of most frequent candidates
indicate strong components for the actual RSSI value. Note
that in comparison to Fig. 1, for a given pair, both observation
directions are used. The linear combination of clusters gives
an RSSI value which best represents the given pair in terms of
the estimated distance. For each cluster c, we then compute
the cluster average rc. Finally, we compute the best RSSI
candidate R, which is later used for estimating the distance,
as the weighted average of clusters
R =
K
X
i=1
wcrc
(1)
where K is the number of clusters and wc is the weight for
each cluster, obtained as the sum of candidates in each cluster.
In the ﬁnal stage, we estimate the distance d(R) using
the exponential decay path-loss model, which has been widely
validated by experimental data [10], [11], [12]. Using this
model, the distance estimate can be computed as:
d(R) = 10
G−R
10f
(2)
where G is the gain constant, and f is the damping factor.
The damping factor f is speciﬁc to a certain environment,
whereas, the gain constant G is speciﬁc to a certain mote
hardware. These parameters can be determined experimentally
by applying a least-square means optimization on the measure-
ments with known distances. Alternatively, the parameters can
be obtained from previous experimental results [12].
C. A TDMA-based RSSI-collection protocol
To rapidly construct different topologies and for perform-
ing RSSI measurements on large areas (requiring multi-hop
communication) over extended periods of time, we designed
and implemented a custom TDMA-based protocol. We are thus
able to gather the individual RSSI observations of each mote
in the network. A TDMA-based approach allows the motes
in the network to save power because measurements can be
performed only when messages are expected. Thus, longer
periods of operation are possible with the initial set of batteries.
Our protocol implementation uses the IBM Mote Runner
platform [13] for WSNs.
Fig. 3 shows an overview of the time slots in the protocol.
The protocol uses beacon messages (B) for several purposes:
network synchronization, RSSI measurements, and encoding
(the computed) topology information. At the beginning of each
slot, every mote listens for beacons for a short period of time.
This process ensures that the network remains synchronized.
Beacons also trigger the initial network formation. Shortly after
the beacon, a child mote can request a parent mote for an
association (A), which determines the routing tree and occurs
in the network formation step.
Once the network is formed (i.e., the routing tree and
child parent relations between motes are established), the RSSI
values for all received beacon messages are recorded. Beacons
are sent by all motes at the beginning of slots of 200 ms. Slots
are pre-allocated based on the mote unique identiﬁers. Based
on a round-robin schedule, beacon messages are sent on the
full spectrum of available channels (16 channels from 0x0B
to 0x21) in the 2.4 GHz ISM band of the IEEE 802.15.4
standard (commonly available for low-power WSN). For each
superframe (which acts as a container for all slots), the same
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Slot 0
Slot 1
Slot 2
Slot 3
B
B
B
B
D/A
D/A
D/A
D/A
B
– beacon
D/A
– data/association
Channel 0x0B
Channel 0x0C
...
. . .
6 s
200 ms
Fig. 3.
Overview of slots in the TDMA-based protocol used for collecting
RSSI measurements. RSSI values are measured on beacon (B) messages. The
measurements are forwarded using data (D) messages, whereas association
(A) messages are used to form the routing tree. The arcs show the routing
tree between motes to which the slots are assigned to. In this example, the
motes in slot 1 and 3 are children of mote 2, which in turn is a child of the
edge mote 0. For this example, the slots greater than 4 are yet to be used.
channel is used. In our current implementation a superframe
last 6 s, supporting a maximum of 30 slots (or motes). Both the
slot duration and number of slots are conﬁgurable parameters
and can be scaled to accommodate for larger networks.
The remaining time (after the beacon) in a slot is used by
child motes to communicate the recorded data (D) to the re-
spective parent. Effectively, motes without children only need
to record beacons from other motes and sleep the remaining
time. Parents append all the data collected from children to
their own data and forward the entire set of measurements
towards the edge mote.
Finally, The edge mote is attached to a gateway PC, which
saves the measurements locally. The RSSI measurements are
then analyzed periodically and transformed into distance esti-
mates.
D. Topology from Distances
Computing a physical topology from distance estimates is a
well-studied problem and several generic algorithms exists [4],
[14] to address this issue. In our experiments, computing the
topology using an iterative trilateration [4] approach deemed
sufﬁcient for reconstructing a recognizable map for our phys-
ical deployments. For larger deployments, which must scale
with the number of nodes and limit the cumulative trilateration
errors, algorithms derived from the classical multi-dimensional
scaling (MDS) method, such as MDS-MAP [15] are better
suited [14].
IV.
A WIRELESS LIGHTING CONTROL SYSTEM
To demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of our
localization approach, we are developing a wireless lighting
system for open ofﬁces. The goal is to construct a system that
can autonomously determine the topology of lamps. Based on
the self-determined topology combined with motion detector
and light sensors, the lamps collaboratively control their out-
puts in order to create an ergonomic working environment.
The advantages of such an autonomous lighting system is
that it requires no time-consuming conﬁguration step compared
to existing, wired, central-control systems. Moreover, our
system relies on cost-effective technology readily available
in modern WSNs and there are no cost associated with
cabling. Effectively, such a wireless lighting control system
can be installed not only during the construction phase of new
buildings but it can also retroﬁt older (historical) buildings
without requiring structural modiﬁcations.
Another important requirement for such a wireless system
is to allow for convergence times on the order of several
hours. Intuitively, best results are achieved outside of normal
ofﬁce hours, i.e., at night time, when (most) humans (and
their personal wireless devices) are not present. To a certain
extent, the localization algorithm should be robust against
moving humans and the noise present during normal ofﬁce
operations. To achieve such robustness, the algorithm requires
a longer convergence time, on the order of 4-6 hours. The only
assumption is that the objects to be localized, the lamps in our
case, are static for the duration of the topology computation.
Effectively, using our system, the lamps only need to be
placed at their intended location. Subsequently, they construct
a wireless network for bi-directional communication fully
autonomously. The wireless network serves as the backbone
for measuring the radio signal strength, used to derive the
topology of the WSN motes, which are attached to the physical
lamps. The topology together with information about motion
detection and actual sensed light represent the input which
determines the output of the individual lamps. Thus, a ﬁner and
context-aware control over ambient lighting can be achieved.
Studies have shown that the lighting conditions and pro-
ductivity in ofﬁce environments are correlated [16]. Proper
control of lighting and blinds is a crucial factor in reducing
the operating costs of buildings [17]. Lighting can also in-
duce psychological effects. For example, anxiety is a natural
reaction in a large ofﬁce space, where the individual working
area is lit but the boundaries are entirely dark. In such cases,
anxiety can be reduced, and the comfort can be increased, if
the perimeter and the walls of the ofﬁce-space are lit.
A. System Architecture
Our wireless lighting solution is structured in three major
components as shown in Fig. 4. The ofﬁce lamps themselves
represent the core components. Following the IoT paradigm,
each lamp is augmented with an off-the-shelf mote to allow
the lamp to participate in a wireless network, which is respon-
sible for running the protocol described in Section III-C for
collecting RSSI measurements.
In a commercial setting, the lamp design will be fully
integrated with the components of a WSN mote. In other
words, the antenna for wireless communication would be
indistinguishable from the lamp design, and the MCU and
radio chip will be hidden from view. A further design factor
may consider using power directly from the lamp supply
for powering the WSN mote, instead of batteries currently
employed by our development WSN platform.
The second major component of our system is a gateway
composed of an embedded PC, with more compute power
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 4.
Architecture overview for the wireless lighting control system. The
IoT-augmented lamps form a WSN for collecting RSSI measurements used
for automatic localization.
available than the motes attached to each lamp, and an
edge mote for connectivity with the WSN. In our current
architecture, the gateway is responsible for performing the
localization computations and communicating the respective
results back into the WSN. In a commercial setting, the local-
ization algorithm can be adapted to run directly on the wireless
motes. The gateway runs an embedded Linux distribution and
creates a public WiFi (IEEE 802.11) access point to which the
visualization client can connect to.
Finally, the visualization component displays the computed
topology and the state of the WSN. In addition, the user in-
terface is also intended for setting desired ambient parameters
for creating a pleasant and ergonomic working environment.
For example, it should be possible to enable a light fading
effect towards the perimeter, or setting a brighter lighting in
the center of the ofﬁce space.
V.
SYSTEM EXPERIMENTS AND EVALUATION RESULTS
To test the feasibility and accuracy of our localization
solution, we conducted several experiments both indoors and
outdoors (see Fig. 5). In both cases motes are placed on
wooden posts. To emulate multiple antennas multiple motes
were placed in groups at the same physical location.
For our experiments, we used standard, off-the-shelf wire-
less motes, which were deployed in homogeneous networks.
To study the effects of different hardware and antennas, we
used two platforms: Memsic IRIS motes, with a quarter
wavelength dipole antenna, and Atmel AVRRAVEN motes,
with a loop printed antenna. Both hardware platforms are
based on the same ATMEGA1281 micro-controller operating
the same RF230 radio chip, and both run our RSSI-collection
protocol on top of the IBM Mote Runner OS [13].
The initial step in our evaluation is determining the pa-
rameters for the path-loss model: the damping factor f and
the gain constant G. Our measurements conﬁrmed previous
experimental results for the damping factor, i.e. f = 1.8 for
the indoor (corridor) settings and f = 2.5 for the outdoor
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5. Indoor (a) deployments using IRIS motes and outdoor (b) deployments
using AVRRAVEN motes.
setting. Note that the damping factor applies to both the IRIS
and the AVRRAVEN hardware. By contrast, to accommodate
for the difference in the antennas, based on the hardware
speciﬁcations, we used G = 55 for the AVRRAVEN motes
and G = 45 for the IRIS motes respectively.
Our deployments used a maximum of 24 motes, which
were deployed in different topologies: linear as well as rect-
angular meshes. To test the effects of spacial separation of
antennas we deployed groups of one (1X), two (2X), three,
and respectively four motes in the same physical position. The
maximum covered area for the outdoors deployments was a
ﬁeld of 200 m2, with a maximum distance of 20 m between
motes. For the indoor deployments, in ofﬁces and corridors, we
covered a maximum area of 50 m2, with a maximum distance
of 15 m between motes. For both the indoor and outdoor
deployments, the motes were placed on wooden (70 cm high)
posts to avoid high path fading effects due to proximity to the
ground. Measurements were collected over periods of 24 h.
Fig. 6 compares the cumulative relative error for different
experimental settings. The y-axis shows the probability that
the absolute error of the estimate is below a value of x meters
as represented by the x-axis. Our results show that using
multiple channels signiﬁcantly improves the distance estimates
when compared to using a single channel only. This result
is applicable for both single motes as well as groups of two
motes for the same physical location. The results also show
that a further improvement of distance estimation is achieved
by using two antennas for the same physical location when
compared to single antennas. Groups of two antennas (motes)
using 16 channels for RSSI measurements achieve a maximum
error of 2 m in 93% of distance estimates. Note that simply
averaging all RSSI values on all channels increased the error
by a few meters. By contrast, single motes using one channel
for RSSI measurements, achieve a maximum error of 4.3 m in
90% of the cases.
Our results show that the best estimates are achieved by
using multiple channels together with groups of 2 motes placed
at the same physical location. In this case, for distances of up to
12 m, we are able to provide distance estimates, which have a
maximum error of less than 2 m for 93% of the estimates. The
maximum error for all estimates is 2.7 m. Our results reduce
the absolute error of distance estimates by more than 1 m
compared to previously reported results [7]. For our wireless
lighting scenario, where lamps are positioned at least 8 m apart,
the absolute errors are well within bounds.
Our experiments also showed that more than two (even
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 6.
Comparison between the cumulative relative error for distance
estimates for pairwise groups of 1 mote (1X) and 2 motes (2X) using all
16 channels or only a single channel.
though passive) antennas can act detrimentally. In some cases,
for three and four antennas, the distance estimates are worse
compared to using a single antenna. This represents an inter-
esting aspect for optimizing the antenna design, which is out
of the scope of this paper.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented a novel RSSI-based localiza-
tion approach, which combines measurements from multiple
radio channels and observed by multiple antennas. Our results
show that the pervasive, off-the-shelf, and cost-effective WSN
technology is able to provide an accuracy of 2m for 93% of
estimates for a range of up to 12 m when using two antennas
and 16 channels. Such accuracy levels are sufﬁcient for many
classes of indoor and outdoor applications.
As a showcase, we presented a wireless lighting control
system, currently under development, which allows ofﬁce
lamps to autonomously determine their topology, used to
control the lighting. Our localization approach can also be
applied to other scenarios, e.g., to eliminate time-consuming,
manual inventories for locating computing assets or shared
lab equipment. Furthermore, our approach works without the
installation and conﬁguration steps required by a ﬁxed beacon
infrastructure. Once in place, such a relatively static and self-
localized infrastructure can be used to localize mobile objects
for both indoor and outdoor scenarios.
For a commercially-viable solution, we envision that the
trilateration algorithm will be distributed in the WSN itself,
effectively eliminating the need for a gateway. Furthermore,
we foresee that the visualization client (e.g., tablet PC or
smartphone) can directly connect to any mote in the WSN.
This requires either that the smartphones are equipped with
radios for the IEEE 802.15.4 standard or that the WSN motes
are able to respond using near ﬁled communication (NFC),
Bluetooth, or WiFi which represent the norm for wireless
communication in the smartphone space.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. A. Stelios, A. D. Nick, M. T. Efﬁe, K. M. Dimitris, and S. C. A.
Thomopoulos, “An indoor localization platform for ambient assisted
living using UWB,” in Proceedings of Advances in Mobile Computing
and Multimedia (MoMM).
ACM, 2008, pp. 178–182.
[2]
C. Bo, D. Ren, S. Tang, X.-Y. Li, X. Mao, Q. Huang, L. Mo, Z. Jiang,
Y. Sun, and Y. Liu, “Locating sensors in the forest: A case study in
GreenOrbs,” in Proceedings of INFOCOM.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 1026
–1034.
[3]
W. Xi, Y. He, Y. Liu, J. Zhao, L. Mo, Z. Yang, J. Wang, and
X. Li, “Locating sensors in the wild: pursuit of ranging quality,” in
Proceedings of Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (SenSys).
ACM,
2010, pp. 295–308.
[4]
Y. Liu and Z. Yang, Location, Localization, and Localizability.
Springer-Verlag, 2011.
[5]
H. Friis, “A note on a simple transmission formula,” Proceedings of the
IRE, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 254–256, 1946.
[6]
Ubisense, http://www.ubisense.net.
[7]
P. Coronel, S. Furrer, W. Schott, and B. Weiss, “Indoor location tracking
using inertial navigation sensors and radio beacons,” in Proceedings of
Internet of Things (IOT).
Springer-Verlag, 2008, pp. 325–340.
[8]
A. Bardella, N. Bui, A. Zanella, and M. Zorzi, “An experimental study
on IEEE 802.15.4 multichannel transmission to improve RSSI-based
service performance,” in Proceedings of Real-world Wireless Sensor
Networks (REALWSN).
Springer-Verlag, 2010, pp. 154–161.
[9]
J. I. Huirc´an, C. Mu˜noz, H. Young, L. Von Dossow, J. Bustos,
G. Vivallo, and M. Toneatti, “ZigBee-based wireless sensor network
localization for cattle monitoring in grazing ﬁelds,” Comput. Electron.
Agric., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 258–264, 2010.
[10]
X. Wang, O. Bischoff, R. Laur, and P. Steffen, “Localization in wireless
ad-hoc sensor networks using multilateration with RSSI for logistic
applications,” Procedia Chemistry, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 461–464, 2009.
[11]
D. Puccinelli and M. Haenggi, “Multipath fading in wireless sensor
networks: measurements and interpretation,” in Proceedings of Wireless
Communications and Mobile Computing (IWCMC).
ACM, 2006, pp.
1039–1044.
[12]
T. Rappaport, Wireless Communications.
Prentice Hall, 1996.
[13]
Mote Runner, http://www.zurich.ibm.com/moterunner.
[14]
G. Zanca, F. Zorzi, A. Zanella, and M. Zorzi, “Experimental compari-
son of RSSI-based localization algorithms for indoor wireless sensor
networks,” in Proceedings of Real-world Wireless Sensor Networks
(REALWSN).
ACM, 2008, pp. 1–5.
[15]
Y. Shang, W. Ruml, Y. Zhang, and M. Fromherz, “Localization from
mere connectivity,” in Proceedings of Mobile ad hoc Networking &
Computing (MobiHoc).
ACM, 2003, pp. 201–212.
[16]
S. Begemann, G. van den Beld, and A. Tenner, “Daylight, artiﬁcial light
and people in an ofﬁce environment, overview of visual and biological
responses,” International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, vol. 20, pp.
231–239, 1997.
[17]
N. Fergus, M. Wilson, and C. Chiancarella, “Using ﬁeld measurements
of desktop illuminance in European ofﬁces to investigate its dependence
on outdoor conditions and its effect on occupant satisfaction, and the
use of lights and blinds,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 38, no. 7, pp.
802–813, 2006.
Some of the product, company or services names referred to in this paper
may be trademarks or registered trademarks of third parties in the USA, other
countries, or both. All web references were last accessed in June 2013.
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

