A Domain-Speciﬁc Platform for Research in Environmental Wireless Sensor
Networks
Sebastian Bader, Matthias Kr¨amer, Bengt Oelmann
Department of Information Technology and Media
Mid Sweden University
Sundsvall, Sweden
sebastian.bader@miun.se
Abstract—Wireless Sensor Networks have the ability to
improve a multitude of existing application domains. These
networks are built up from a number of sensor nodes with
sensing, communication and processing capabilities and the
performance of the networked system is deﬁned by the per-
formance of the node platform it is based on. In this paper,
we present SENTIO-em, a hardware platform for research
in the environmental monitoring application domain. Based
on the application domain requirements, the architecture and
implementation of SENTIO-em is optimized for environmental
monitoring constraints, while it is sufﬁciently ﬂexible to be
reused for different applications within the domain. The
architecture of the platform is presented and evaluated under
both laboratory and different environmental conditions. The
obtained results are compared to a number of existing node
platforms, demonstrating that SENTIO-em provides high en-
ergy efﬁciency with increased processing performance, short
state transition times, and low quiescent currents.
Keywords-Sensor Node Platform, Environmental Monitoring,
Domain-speciﬁc Design
I. INTRODUCTION
Sensor nodes are the basic building blocks of any wireless
sensor network. It is therefore of great importance that the
platform on which the sensor node is based, supports the
application requirements for the usage of the the intended
system. Furthermore, the required tasks for the sensor node
should be carried out as efﬁciently as possible, in order
to prolong the lifetime of the system, to constrain the
development time, as well as the system costs.
In ﬁnal product solutions this will typically result in an
application-speciﬁc hardware design, supporting the task
execution without unnecessary overhead. In research appli-
cations, however, hardware platforms have to be reusable
and hence make application-speciﬁc solutions inefﬁcient.
To allow for reusability, the platform has to be sufﬁciently
ﬂexible for it to be adjusted for requirements of different
applications. Nevertheless, the system should perform well
in each of the different use cases and thus, should not be
hindered by its own ﬂexibility.
A common approach to achieving reusability of sensor
node hardware is the design of general-purpose hardware
platforms, such as those presented in [1]–[4]. These plat-
forms typically have no speciﬁc application in mind, but are
designed to be usable as a prototyping platform for a wider
area. On the downside, general-purpose nodes require more
development time once they are used in speciﬁc applications.
Additionally, they may not allow the performance of certain
application tasks or are inefﬁcient in their execution.
In this paper, we are introducing SENTIO-em, a hardware
platform that is speciﬁcally intended for wireless sensor net-
work applications in the environmental monitoring domain.
By designing the sensor node platform in an application-
domain-speciﬁc manner, we are able to include typical
domain-speciﬁc requirements, while maintaining a ﬂexible
platform for operations in different applications within the
domain. In this way, the platform becomes reusable without
any loss in application focus or increase in overhead.
II. RELATED WORK
The application domain of environmental monitoring
presents requirements that are well matched by wireless
sensor network technology. This has led to the adoption
of this technology in a number of ﬁeld-trial evaluations,
such as those presented in [5]–[7], where a network of
sensor nodes has been utilized as a measurement instrument.
Despite their differences in the application constraints, a
similar fundamental platform architecture remains.
Since the beginning of wireless sensor network research,
a large number of node platforms have been introduced. As
these represent too many different systems, only a subset
of solutions are mentioned. A more detailed presentation of
existing hardware platforms can be found in [8].
The systems proposed in [1]–[4] represent general-
purpose research platforms, which are mainly targeted for
wireless sensor network prototyping. While the general ar-
chitecture of these nodes is similar, different device choices
have been made for system implementation. The platforms
contain processing, storage, communication and power units,
but require sensors and other extension to be attached via
an expansion interface.
A different architectural choice has been made in [9].
While still a general-purpose platform, the whole system
can be constructed of a variety of building blocks and
therefore suits different scenarios. Although this building
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

block approach allows for very ﬂexible use of the different
modules, it is not suited for fast development times, because,
in the majority of cases, an application-speciﬁc design will
be required in order to assemble the building blocks into a
complete platform.
In order to provide platform access to a wider community,
several companies have made sensor nodes commercially
available. Examples of these platforms include Libelium’s
Waspmote, Zolertia’s Z1 and the Shimmer node. The major-
ity of these platforms, however, have only limited application
focus in order to be usable by a wider community.
With
the
SENTIO-em
platform
we
propose
an
application-domain-speciﬁc
design.
Instead
of
basing
the design choices of the platform on general-purpose
constraints or on the requirements of a single application,
the design of the platform has been based on typical
requirements
found
in
the
application
domain
of
environmental monitoring. Thus, the platform remains
ﬂexible
to
variations
between
different
applications
in environmental monitoring, while showing a higher
domain speciﬁc performance as opposed to completely
general-purpose platforms.
III. SYSTEM DESIGN
After an analysis of typical characteristics in environmen-
tal monitoring wireless sensor networks, we describe how
these characteristics have been taken into account in the
design of SENTIO-em, and present the resulting hardware
and software architectures of the platform. A ﬁnal overview
on the system’s implementation is given at the end of the
section in Table III.
A. Environmental Monitoring Requirements
Environmental monitoring is typically performed by col-
lecting sample data in the natural environment [10, chap. 2].
As wireless sensor networks enable for new measurement
instruments with high spatial and temporal resolution with-
out the requirement of a ﬁxed infrastructure, they have been
used in a plethora of different environmental applications,
ranging from the monitoring of glaciers in Iceland [11] to
the observation of rain forests in Australia [12].
Environmental monitoring wireless sensor networks typi-
cally operate in a time-driven manner, which means that they
are collecting data at preordained intervals. The collected
data, or information extracted from it, is in the majority of
systems transfered to a central gathering point, which leads
to a simple sample-and-send operation for individual sensor
nodes. Due to the monitoring of slowly changing parameters,
such as temperature, humidity or gas concentrations, the
resulting sampling rate of sensor nodes in environmental
monitoring is rather low as well. The number of nodes within
the network, on the other hand, is commonly large in order
to cover a given terrain with a desired spatial resolution.
This has two effects. On the one hand, the low sampling
rate poses only limited processing power demands on the
computational unit within the sensor node. On the other
hand, the possibility of a large number of sensor nodes
within the system requires the individual sensor nodes to
be of low cost and the maintenance requirements to be
kept at a minimum in order to make the system utilization
economically feasible. In order to minimize maintenance,
the lifetime of the sensor nodes must be long. As the sensor
nodes, however, typically operate on capacity-limited energy
storage devices, the lifetime is bound by the energy capacity
available. An increase in capacity, however, also leads to
an increase in cost and size of the sensor node. Thus,
energy efﬁcient operation is the principal requirement for
the successful application of wireless sensor networks in the
environmental monitoring domain.
Furthermore, the target setting for environmental mea-
surement systems are typically outdoor environments, which
means that the ﬁnal system has to withstand harsh weather
conditions and operate reliably under varying ambient con-
ditions. Because these conditions are difﬁcult to reconstruct
in laboratory environments, the development of an environ-
mental wireless sensor network requires outdoor test de-
ployments. As it is often necessary during the development
stage to make changes to already deployed sensor nodes,
the underlying platform should support easy deployment,
reconﬁguration and recovery.
Finally, due to the long system deployment periods and
the desire for low per-node cost, platform overhead is a
parameter to be kept at a minimum. With platform overhead
we describe components, modules and functionalities, which
are included in a node platform although they are not
required for the intended task to be accomplished. Typical
examples of these are functionalities that are added in order
to simplify system development.
B. SENTIO-em Hardware
The SENTIO-em hardware architecture has been designed
with the requirements, as previously mentioned, in mind. A
block diagram of the overall system architecture is presented
in Figure 1. The detailed description of the design concepts
and implementation is divided into sub-categories, which
are organized according to computation, communication,
sensing, power, form-factor and interfaces.
1) Computation: As is the case with the majority of
existing sensor node platforms, the computational unit of
SENTIO-em is built around a microcontroller. Due to the
low processing capabilities, which are generally necessary
and the requirement for low energy consumption, earlier
systems are based on simple 8-bit or 16-bit processors, such
as the Atmel ATMega family and the series of MSP430
controllers. However, as semiconductor technology has ad-
vanced since the introduction of these platforms, more recent
microcontroller cores offer higher processing power with
201
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Table I
COMPARISON OF TYPICAL MICROCONTROLLER CHOICES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF HARDWARE PLATFORMS IN SENSOR NETWORKS
ATMega1281
MSP430F1611
AT32UC3L
EFM32G280
Manufacturer
Atmel
Texas Instruments
Atmel
Energy Micro
Architecture
8-bit
16-bit
32-bit
32-bit
Clock Frequency [MHz]
0–16
0–8
0–50
0–32
Flash [kB]
64–256
48
16–64
32–128
SRAM [kB]
8
10
8/16
8/16
Operating Voltage [volt]
2,7–5,5 (<8 MHz)
1,8–3,6 (<4 MHz)
1,62–3,6
1,8–3,8
4,5–5,5 (>8 MHz)
2,7–3,6 (>4 MHz)
Current Draw
Active [mA MHz−1]
1
0,5
0,2
0,18
Sleep [μA]
5–100
1,1–75
5–45
0,6–0,9
Off [nA]
250
100
9
20
Table II
COMPARISON OF CONSIDERED RADIO TRANSCEIVER CHOICES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF SENTIO-EM
CC1101
SX1233
CC2520
XBEE 802.15.4
Manufacturer
Texas Instruments
Semtech
Texas Instruments
Digi International
Frequency [MHz]
315/433/868/915
433/868/915
2400
2400
Max. Data Rate [kbps]
500
600
250
250
Sensitivity [dBm]
-116
-120
-98
-100
Output Power [dBm]
-30 to +12
-18 to +17
-18 to +5
-10 to +18
Current Draw
TX [mA]
12–34
16–95
25–37
45–250
RX [mA]
14–17
16–17
18–25
50–55
Sleep [μA]
0,2
0,1
<1
<10
Implemented Protocols
none
none
low-level
low / high-level
similar or even lower power consumption, thus increasing
the energy efﬁciency dramatically. For this platform an
Energy Micro EFM32 controller was chosen, which is based
on an ARM Cortex-M3 processor core. Table I provides a
comparison of previously used low-power microcontrollers
and the EFM32 controller on SENTIO-em. The parameter
comparison shows that the EFM32 microcontroller outper-
Cortex M3 Microcontroller
Real-Time Clock
RF Transceiver
Sensors and 
Extensions
Power Supply
Power
Regulation
Program/Debug 
Interface
USB Connection
microSD Card
Core
External
Figure 1.
Block diagram of the SENTIO-em hardware architecture. The
core node is shown in center, supported by application-speciﬁc extensions
(left) and development functionalities (right).
forms the other listed processor choices in almost all regards.
The EFM32 controller is driven by a 32 MHz Q-MEMS
crystal and has a connection to a Real-Time Clock (RTC)
for accurate time-keeping. The RTC has an integrated crystal
with temperature compensation, which improves the time-
keeping accuracy in outdoor applications due to reduced
environmental inﬂuences. In comparison to other controllers,
the EFM32 stands out particularly because of its high energy
efﬁciency.
2) Communication: The de-facto communication stan-
dard in research and commercial sensor networks are IEEE
802.15.4 based transceivers. These transceivers are available
for both 868/915 MHz, as well as 2.4 GHz, both being part
of the license-free ISM bands. Although this transceiver
choice comes with some advantages, such as compliance
with other systems, an existing community (i.e., available
protocol solutions) and comfortable usage, its drawbacks are
its limited ﬂexibility and the considerable packet overhead.
This plays a role, especially when payload sizes are low, as is
typically the case in environmental monitoring applications.
In environmental monitoring, moreover, lower frequency
bands are preferable, as attenuation is reduced and hence
longer communication ranges can be achieved with the
same output power. On the other hand, low-frequency radio
transceivers come without protocol implementations and
thus require more development time.
Table II provides an overview of radio transceivers
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

(a)
(b)
Figure 2.
Pictures of the implemented SENTIO-em platform (a) mounted on the laboratory dock; (b) mounted in a protective enclosure. These two
scenarios demonstrate the usage of the platform during development and deployment, respectively.
that have been considered for the implementation in the
SENTIO-em platform. In addition to the standard transceiver
chips, the XBee, a transceiver module with higher process-
ing capability, has been listed. This module enables the
implementation of high-level protocols (i.e., routing and
networking) directly on the transceiver, but at the cost of
higher overhead (e.g., energy consumption).
Due to the difﬁculty of predicting the exact commu-
nication requirements of individual applications, for the
architecture of SENTIO-em a ﬂexible solution has been
chosen, which allows for the exchange of radio modules. The
interface is based on the XBee transceiver module, which
is available with different protocol implementations (e.g.,
802.15.4, Zigbee or 802.11). Furthermore, low-level, low-
frequency transceivers based on the Semtech SX1233 and
TI CC1101 have been designed with the same interface in
order to provide a ﬂexible solution for custom protocols. By
this means, it is possible to choose between general, easy
to implement communication modules for rapid prototyping,
or customized modules with optimized performance charac-
teristics.
3) Sensing: Sensors are the modules which have the
greatest variability between applications within the same ap-
plication domain. While in environmental monitoring typical
sensor types reoccur (e.g., temperature, humidity or baro-
metric pressure), the amount, combination and requirements
placed on the sensors can differ tremendously.
Due to this uncertainty in relation to sensor require-
ments and the targeted reusability within the application
domain, SENTIO-em does not contain any sensors on its
core module. Instead, sensors are connected to the platform
via a 22-pin sensor interface, which provides a variety of
microcontroller connection possibilities, including I2C, SPI,
UART, as well as analog and digital I/O pins. In order to
reduce overhead, the conversion to other interfaces, such
as 4-20 mA or IEEE 1451, must take place on the sensor
extension, if necessary.
4) Power Supply: In a similar manner to that for the
sensor interface, a power interface has been implemented to
allow for the usage of different power sources. While it is the
case that during development platforms are usually powered
from the grid, a laboratory power supply or an USB port,
during deployments energy is typically taken from batteries
or ambient energy sources.
The power interface provides a 16-pin connection to
the designated power source module, which includes, in
addition to the power path, communication and monitoring
capabilities. The output from the power supply unit should
lie between 3 V and 5.5 V, but can be unregulated as a power
regulation unit is part of the core platform.
5) Form-Factor: Although the form-factor of a sensor
node platform is typically not its ﬁrst design criteria, it has
a major inﬂuence on usability, size and cost of implemented
systems. Initially, platforms were supposed to be tiny and
inexpensive, but more recently usability has gained a greater
focus. In the physical design of SENTIO-em we have at-
tempted to incorporate the usability, in particular in relation
to the environmental monitoring constraints as presented in
Section III-A. While previous solutions have demonstrated
form-factors that have enabled easy development by creating
a USB-stick structure [2], or providing extreme reconﬁg-
urability from building blocks [9], in this platform both
laboratory and deployment constraints were considered.
In the resulting physical implementation, modules that
are only used in the laboratory development of the system
are divided from the general platform core. As a result,
a docking station-like board has been designed, whereon
the SENTIO-em platform can be mounted during develop-
ment. Because this laboratory docking solution is usually
not deployed with the system, it is not restricted by size.
Furthermore, as not every node platform requires its own
docking station, price is also not a major concern. As a
result, extra functionality can be provided for laboratory
development, which, in a normal setting, would be omitted
due to the hardware overhead. Moreover, the size and cost of
the actual node platform can be reduced, as modules that are
only required during development can be removed. Figure
2a depicts such a laboratory docking solution, which in this
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Table III
OVERVIEW OF THE SENTIO-EM PLATFORM IMPLEMENTATION
Microcontroller
Energy Micro EFM32
Clock Frequency
32 MHz
RAM/Flash
16/128 KB
Local Storage
SD card
Time Keeping
Temp. compensated RTC
Radio
CC1101/SX1233
XBee 802.15.4
Frequency
433 MHz
2.4 GHz
Data Rate
500/600 kbps
250 kbps
Development
USB, ARM 20
Extension
Sensor, Power, Debug (72-pin)
Size
75 mm × 49 mm
Sleep-mode Consumption
<2 μA
case includes a USB interface, programming connection,
a complete debugging interface, multiple LEDs and push
buttons, as well as a selection of power supply connections.
Furthermore, the form-factor of the SENTIO-em core
module has been chosen with simple deployability in mind.
The module has a physical size of 75 mm × 49 mm, which
allows for a screwless mounting of the platform in a Ham-
mond 1591T plastic enclosure, as shown in Figure 2b. In
the same way a sensor extension module (also shown in the
picture) and a power supply unit can be stacked within the
same box in a matter of seconds.
6) Interfaces: The SENTIO-em architecture includes sev-
eral input and output interfaces. As previously mentioned,
the core module provides interfaces for sensor extension,
power supply connection, docking, as well as radio module
integration. Furthermore, the module contains an SD-card
slot that allows for local storage of large amounts of data
in a size and cost-efﬁcient manner. The user interface of the
platform is rather simplistic, consisting of a reset button, a
single programmable push button and a few status LEDs. In
addition, the platform has been equipped with two magnetic
switches, which allow user interaction with the sensor node
without opening its physical enclosure. This, for example,
allows to set the packaged system to a shipping mode, in
which the node conserves energy until it has ﬁnally been
deployed. For the usage of additional user interfaces, the
platform can be placed on its laboratory docking solution.
C. SENTIO-em Software
For the development of the applications, a software stack,
as depicted in Figure 3, has been implemented. For this,
standard operating systems, such as TinyOS or Contiki,
have been avoided, but the development of application code
mainly relies on a C++ API. This allows for a uniform code,
wherein individual hardware modules are interfaced via class
instances, while keeping the overhead of the software stack
at a minimum.
In order to support the development of larger applications,
a state machine interface (SMI) has been developed on top
Hardware Abstraction
API
Hardware
SMI
Application
Figure 3.
Layered software organization from hardware to application for
SENTIO-em. The ﬁgure shows all available software layers, which do not
have to be implemented in every application
of the platform’s API. The SMI allows for the deﬁnition
of application states in an abstract manner, as well as the
state transition conditions. The state transitions can occur
directly at the end of the current state (e.g., based on some
condition), but are typically triggered by some external
event, such as a timer, sensor or user interrupt. Furthermore,
the state machine interface allows for the implementation
of hierarchical ﬁnite state machines, which increases code
readability and reusability in more complex applications. For
more detailed information on the fundamentals of the SMI
framework, we refer to [13].
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
For the evaluation of the SENTIO-em platform several
tests have been conducted, which can be grouped into the
following categories.
1) Platform evaluation under laboratory conditions
2) Platform evaluation with environmental inﬂuences
3) Platform comparison with existing solutions
While some previously presented system properties can
only be described qualitatively (e.g., easy deployability),
because of objectivity reasons, the presentation of results
mainly focuses on quantitative data. Design decisions in
compliance with qualitative constraints have been described
in the previous section.
The primary quantitative parameter of interest is energy
efﬁciency, which includes energy consumption, timings and
computational performance. Additionally, the communica-
tion range is of interest in many outdoor sensor network
deployments. However, as the communication range is de-
pendent on the operational environment, and hence objective
measurements are difﬁcult to obtain, the radio module output
power is analyzed instead, which allows for the estimation
of the range in different environmental settings.
For energy consumption measurements, a fully imple-
mented SENTIO-em platform (equipped with an SX1233
radio) is supplied from a constant voltage source and is
conﬁgured for the respective system state under test. The
current consumption of the platform is measured in the
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

supply line by means of an Agilent 34410A digital multi-
meter. The consumption measurements are conducted under
laboratory conditions to estimate ideal behavior, as well as
under different environmental inﬂuences. For the tests under
environmental inﬂuence, a TestEquity 1000H environmental
test chamber has been used in order to generate deﬁned
environmental conditions.
In a similar setup, platform timings have been evalu-
ated. These measurements include the time for the system-
wakeup, as well as transition times between different op-
erating states. A TechTools logic analyzer has been used in
order to conduct the measurements of the time periods. This
logic analyzer provides a resolution of 10 ns.
In order to compare the energy efﬁciency of the SENTIO-
em platform with that of existing platforms, we have an-
alyzed the maximum clock frequency and the sleep-mode
power consumption of a set of popular sensor nodes. While
for SENTIO-em its obtained measurement results have been
used, the data on the other nodes is extracted from the
respective datasheets or research publications.
Finally, the RF output power of the Semtech SX1233
module implementation has been measured using an Anritsu
MA24106A power meter.
V. RESULTS
The evaluation results are presented separately in respect
to energy efﬁciency and communication performance. All
the presented results on the SENTIO-em platform are based
on measurements.
A. Energy Efﬁciency
Energy efﬁciency in low duty-cycle applications, such as
those that typically occur in the environmental monitoring
domain, is determined by two platform parameters. These
parameters are the power consumption of the sensor node
during inactive periods and the time period the node has to
remain active. In order to reduce the active time, in turn,
the state transitions and the processing tasks have to be
performed as quickly as possible.
Because the SENTIO-em platform is always operated
at a constant supply voltage, the measurement of power
consumption is performed by measuring the current con-
sumption. The operating voltage of the platform is 3 V,
which can be used to compute the power consumption, if
this is necessary.
Table IV shows the results of the current consumption
measurement for different operating states under laboratory
conditions. All values represent the complete platform con-
sumption and are measured as described in Section IV.
During the measurements of the microcontroller consump-
tion, the radio module is set to sleep mode, while the
microcontroller is asleep (EM3) for radio measurements.
Overall the measured values comply with the expecta-
tions from the theoretical datasheet numbers. For example,
Table IV
ENERGY CONSUMPTION OF SENTIO-EM IN ITS DIFFERENT OPERATION
STATES (LABORATORY CONDITIONS)
State
Current
Condition
Active
6.1 mA
14 MHz
8 mA
32 MHz
Low-Power
2.3 μA
EM1
1.6 μA
EM2
1.2 μA
EM3
1.8 μA
EM3 + RTC
Radio
11–50 mA
TX
16.5 mA
RX
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
10
20
30
40
50
RF Output Power [dBm]
Current Consumption [mA]
Figure 4.
Current consumption of the Semtech SX1233 radio transceiver
operating at different output power levels. Output power can be conﬁgured
from −18 dBm to 13 dBm in 1 dBm steps
in energy mode 3 (EM3) a current draw of 1.2 μA was
measured, which is in accordance with the expected value
(600 nA MCU + 500 nA voltage regulation + 100 nA radio
transceiver). Special attention should be paid to the operating
state EM3 + RTC, which represents the microcontroller in
energy mode 3 operating with an external RTC. This state
is the one most often used during sensor node inactive
periods (i.e., between sensor samplings and radio activi-
ties). Due to the typically low duty-cycle in environmental
monitoring applications, this value determines the lifetime
of the sensor node, and thus closely correlates to that of
the system lifetime. During transmission, the node’s power
consumption depends tremendously on the RF output power
to be used, which, in turn, is deﬁned by the distance between
the transmitter and the receiver. The measured relationship
between these two parameters is depicted in Figure 4.
Because the majority of environmental monitoring ap-
plications take place in outdoor environments, the sensor
nodes will be exposed to different environmental conditions.
Therefore, conducting evaluations purely under laboratory
conditions is insufﬁcient. Figures 5 and 6 depict the re-
sults of measurements conducted under different temperature
conditions. Figure 5 shows the platform’s leakage current
over a wide temperature range, whereas Figure 6 displays
the temperature inﬂuence on active communication. All
measurements have been conducted using a constant humid-
ity setting of 40 %. In addition, the inﬂuence of different
relative humidity conditions has been tested, but is ignored
in this paper as its impact was found to be minimal. The
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Temperature [degree C]
Current Consumption [uA]
EM2
EM3
EM3+RTC
Figure 5.
Current consumption of the SENTIO-em platform in its low-
power modes over its entire temperature range. Humidity levels have been
constant at 40 %
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
15
16
17
18
19
Temperature [degree C]
Current Consumption [mA]
RX
TX (0 dBm)
Figure 6.
RF transceiver current draw during transmission (0 dBm output
power) and reception under varying temperature conditions. Humidity levels
have been constant at 40 %
measurement results show the expected increase of current
draw with increasing temperature. While the temperature
inﬂuence in the active communication shows a linear effect,
in low-power modes the typical temperature dependency
of leakage currents at a pn-junction can be observed. The
leakage current in the platform remains low over the entire
temperature range, but shows a drastic increase in relation
to the laboratory conditions at temperatures above 40 ◦C.
Table V shows the transition times between the different
operating states of the SENTIO-em platform. As many appli-
cations within the environmental monitoring domain follow
a sample-and-send scenario with low duty-cycles (i.e., nodes
periodically read sensor values and transmit them, while
staying in low power modes as much as possible), transition
times can play a signiﬁcant role for the overall power
consumption. The measurement results show that SENTIO-
em can wake-up from low-power modes in less than 6 μs
and be ready to transmit or receive in a few hundred μs. In
combination with the typically low amounts of sensor data to
be transmitted, these short transition times allow SENTIO-
em to operate on very low duty-cycles.
Figure 7 indicates the energy efﬁciency of the presented
platform in respect to popular existing sensor node plat-
forms. In this ﬁgure, the sleep-mode power consumption
of each platform is plotted against the maximum clock
frequency, at which the respective platform can operate. The
resulting location on the grid indicates how fast the platform
can accomplish its tasks, and at which cost the processing
performance comes.
Table V
TRANSITION TIMES BETWEEN DIFFERENT OPERATION STATES OF THE
SENTIO-EM PLATFORM
From
To
Transition time
Sleep
Active
1.8 – 5.8 μs
Radio sleep
TX
150 μs
Radio sleep
RX
380 μs
TX
RX
390 μs
RX
TX
70 μs
B. Radio Performance
As mentioned previously, a parameter of interest concern-
ing the radio transceiver is its communication range. This is
particularly true in environmental monitoring applications,
as the sensor networks might cover large outdoor areas.
If the network does not have to simultaneously offer high
spatial resolution, then long communication range can limit
the system cost, as nodes with a purely relaying functionality
can be omitted.
However, communication range is not a value that can
be objectively measured. While it mainly depends on two
transceiver parameters, the output power of the transmitter
and the sensitivity of the receiver, several system external
parameters will also inﬂuence the communication range.
These parameters include the physical environment (i.e.,
objects in or close to the communication path, which re-
sult in multipath propagation, signal scattering or increased
attenuation), as well as interference sources. As the ex-
ternal parameters are not under the direct control of the
network/system operator and will vary from one location
to the other, the evaluation of radio performance has been
limited to the evaluation of transceiver properties.
Figure 8 shows the relationship between conﬁgured and
measured output power of the SX1233 transceiver imple-
mentation, which indicates that no power is lost in the
transmission line or the matching network.
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
50
100
150
Max. Clock Frequency [MHz]
Sleep-mode Power Consumption [uW]
Mica
Mica2
TinyNode
Telos
Mulle
MicaZ
XYZ
Opal
SENTIO-em
Waspmote
Z1
Figure 7.
Comparison of different sensor node hardware platforms in
respect to their energy efﬁciency. Energy efﬁciency is here measured by
max. clock frequency and sleep-mode power consumption.
206
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
Configured RF Output Power [dBm]
Measured RF Output Power [dBm]
Figure 8.
Comparison of theoretical and measured RF output power as
an evaluation for radio transceiver implementation
VI. CONCLUSIONS
With SENTIO-em, we have presented a wireless sensor
node platform particularly designed for the environmental
monitoring application domain. While typical application-
speciﬁc solutions limit the reusability of the node platform,
which is hindering the research process, general purpose de-
signs often lack the performance for the speciﬁc applications
at hand. The application-domain-speciﬁc design of SENTIO-
em, combines the advantages of both ﬁelds, which results
in a platform that is optimized for a speciﬁc application
domain, but which can be reused in different applications
within the domain.
We have described the system architecture of SENTIO-
em, which has been based on the typical application re-
quirements of the environmental monitoring domain. These
include long operating times, outdoor deployment, coverage
of large areas, and low sampling rates. For the node platform,
these requirements have been translated into system de-
mands, such as energy efﬁciency, low quiescent current, long
communication range, low hardware overhead, and simple
deployability.
The implemented platform has been evaluated under both
laboratory and different environmental conditions. The re-
sults show a reliable operation even under extreme temper-
atures, but also the typical temperature-dependent current
draw of the involved semiconductor components, which will
inﬂuence the lifetime of the system in different environ-
ments.
In comparison with typical existing platform solutions,
SENTIO-em shows a high energy efﬁciency. The combi-
nation of fast processing times due to its 32 MHz clock
frequency, short state transition times, and low power con-
sumption in inactive states, proves the high energy efﬁciency
of SENTIO-em, which determines the long system lifetimes
desired in low duty-cycle applications within the environ-
mental monitoring domain.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Hill and D. Culler, “Mica: A Wireless Platform for Deeply
Embedded Networks,” IEEE Micro, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 12–24,
Nov. 2002.
[2] J. Polastre, R. Szewczyk, and D. Culler, “Telos: Enabling
Ultra-low Power Wireless Research,” in Proceedings of the
Fourth International Symposium on Information Processing
in Sensor Networks, 2004, pp. 364–369.
[3] H. Dubois-Ferriere, R. Meier, L. Fabre, and P. Metrailler,
“TinyNode: A Comprehensive Platform For Wireless Sensor
Network Applications,” in Proceedings of the 5th Inter-
national Conference on Information Processing in Sensor
Networks, 2006, pp. 358–365.
[4] P. Sikka, P. Corke, L. Overs, P. Valencia, and T. Wark, “Fleck
- A Platform for Real-World Outdoor Sensor Networks,” in
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Intelligent
Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information Processing, 2007,
pp. 709–714.
[5] A. Mainwaring, D. Culler, J. Polastre, R. Szewczyk, and
J. Anderson, “Wireless Sensor Networks for Habitat Monitor-
ing,” in Proceedings of the 1st ACM International Eorkshop
on Wireless Sensor Networks and Applications, 2002, pp. 88–
97.
[6] K. Martinez, R. Ong, and J. Hart, “Glacsweb: A Sensor
Network for Hostile Environments,” in Proceedings of the
First Annual IEEE Communications Society Conference on
Sensor and Ad Hoc Communications and Networks, 2004,
pp. 81–87.
[7] G. Werner-Allen, J. Johnson, M. Ruiz, J. Lees, and M. Welsh,
“Monitoring Volcanic Eruptions with a Wireless Sensor Net-
work,” in Proceeedings of the Second European Workshop on
Wireless Sensor Networks, 2005, pp. 108–120.
[8] M. Healy, T. Newe, and E. Lewis, “Wireless Sensor Node
Hardware: A Review,” in IEEE Sensors Journal, Oct. 2008,
pp. 621–624.
[9] P. Dutta, J. Taneja, J. Jeong, X. Jiang, and D. Culler, “A Build-
ing Block Approach to Sensornet Systems,” in Proceedings
of the 6th ACM Conference on Embedded Network Sensor
Systems, 2008, pp. 267–280.
[10] J. Artiola, I. Pepper, and M. Brusseau, Environmental Moni-
toring and Characterization. Elsevier Academic Press, 2004.
[11] K. Martinez, P. Padhy, A. Elsaify, G. Zou, A. Riddoch, J. Hart,
and H. Ong, “Deploying a Sensor Network in an Extreme
Environment,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Con-
ference on Sensor Networks, Ubiquitous, and Trustworthy
Computing, 2006, pp. 186–193.
[12] T. Wark, W. Hu, P. Corke, J. Hodge, A. Keto, B. Mackey,
G. Foley, P. Sikka, and M. Brunig, “Springbrook: Challenges
in Developing a Long-term, Rainforest Wireless Sensor Net-
work,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on
Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information Pro-
cessing, 2008, pp. 599–604.
[13] M. Kr¨amer, S. Bader, and B. Oelmann, “Implementing Wire-
less Sensor Network Applications using Hierarchical Finite
State Machines,” in Proceedings of the 10th IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Networking, Sensing and Control, 2013.
207
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-296-7
SENSORCOMM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

