Generic Control Architecture for Heterogeneous
Building Automation Applications
Armin Veichtlbauer, Thomas Pfeiffenberger, Ulrich Schrittesser
Advanced Networking Center
Salzburg Research Forschungsgesellschaft m.b.H.
Salzburg, Austria
{ﬁrstname.lastname}@salzburgresearch.at
Abstract—In home automation systems, and even more in build-
ing automation systems, the interoperability of installations from
different vendors constitutes a signiﬁcant problem for planners,
construction companies and users. A generic communication
infrastructure on All-IP basis, which can be used by several
building automation applications like lighting, heating, ventila-
tion, air conditioning (HVAC), access control, evacuation support,
etc., can help to reduce costs during the whole building lifecycle.
These applications perform control tasks with distributed sensors
and actuators; many of these tasks are highly safety and security
relevant. During the project Robust Facility Communication
(ROFCO) we explored the requirements of a generic, but robust
communication infrastructure in a building automation environ-
ment, designed and implemented a prototypical solution, and
conducted a validation trial at the site of our project partner
Techno-Z Salzburg.
Index Terms—Control Systems; Building Automation; Supervi-
sory Control and Data Acquisition Systems; Generic Infrastruc-
tures.
I. INTRODUCTION
Home automation (HA) and building automation (BA) sys-
tems usually consist of a variety of different sensors and actua-
tors (ﬁeld level) as well as control devices (automation level),
which are interconnected via several ﬁeld bus technologies,
like European Installationi Bus (EIB), Modbus, Local Oper-
ating Network (LON), Digital Addressable Lighting Interface
(DALI), etc. Alternatively, radio or powerline communication
may be used to reduce mounting costs, especially for older
surroundings. The management level, if existing, supervises
and controls the automation tasks; in many cases this is
realised via web-based services in order to allow a remote
control of the automation applications [1].
The market for HA and BA solutions has been rapidly
growing in recent years; yet in most cases buildings are not
equipped with an integrative solution from a system provider,
but with individual solutions for different building automation
applications [2]. The lack of interoperability of these heteroge-
neous solutions prevents the shared use of existing equipment,
e.g., information from access control systems (like the number
of persons in certain parts of a building) could be a valuable
input for evacuation support systems in cases of danger, but
is usually not accessible due to the proprietary nature of both
solutions.
Our approach to overcome these drawbacks was to use
open protocols and generic standards at every communication
layer and at every level of the automation pyramid. Basically
we intended to integrate different applications and different
infrastructures via a convergence layer on All-IP basis, which
we referred to as “X-Model”. Yet it was quite obvious that
some additional functions have to be added to a working
solution.
For instance, by ensuring interoperability in the way that
applications should have access to the whole network and
sensor/actuator infrastructure, the danger of potential misuse
arises; this implicates the necessity to deﬁne appropriate
security means in order to avoid damages. Thus the main goals
of the generic architecture, which we have developed during
the funded project “ROFCO” [3], is to ensure dependability,
i.e., robustness, reliability, availability, safety and security [4].
Based on the requirements of a distributed heterogeneous
BA system we deﬁned three layers for for our generic ROFCO
architecture, as shown in Fig. 1 [5]:
• An infrastructure layer, which embodies all the necessary
networking functionalities for our control architecture
• A middleware layer, which provides appropriate robust-
ness, reliability, availability, safety and security means on
an end-to-end basis
• An application layer, which is responsible for the dis-
tributed control tasks of the applications using the
ROFCO architecture
The application layer comprises several control logics (e.g.,
implemented with Programmable logic controller (PLC) or
Direct Digital Control (DDCs)) at automation level as well as
supervisory tools for end users (so called “SCADA” systems)
at the management level.
In this paper, we concentrate on the infrastructure and
middleware layers of this generic BA control architecture. We
start with an overview of the scientiﬁc state-of-the-art and an
assessment of existing market-ready solutions, in Section II.
In Section III, we describe the communication infrastructure
and the testbed we set up at the Techno-Z in Salzburg. This
section is followed by Section IV, a description of the protocol
functionalities we used in order to realise a robust and reliable
communication system, and of the safety and security means
we integrated in the prototype [6], constituting the ROFCO
middleware. The subsequent section explicates the validation
trials we conducted with our prototype, based on the use
cases we deﬁned for blinds and lighting control. We conclude
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 1.
ROFCO Architectural Concept [5]
with the ﬁndings derived from the conducted system trials in
Section VI and an outlook in Section VII to potential follow-
up research topics and exploitation activities.
II. RELATED WORK
The heterogeneity of BA solutions has been identiﬁed as
a potential barrier for BA technologies since about the turn
of the millennium [7] [8]. Big vendors may offer integrative
solutions, e.g., “Total Building Solutions” from Siemens [9]
or “Raumtalk” from ABB [10], yet based on proprietary
communication and control technologies.
Several research teams have tried to overcome this barrier
by proposing interoperability features for BA systems, e.g., via
gateways between ﬁeld bus technologies [7], or by providing
complete BA architectures for interoperable BA applications
[1] [11]. For communication infrastructures, the idea of using
the IP standard is not new [8].
A fully integrated approach however requires solutions
for the whole automation pyramid, i.e., on every level of
the control process: setting and getting values at ﬁeld level,
performing a control task at automation level, and supervising
this at management level. A standardised middleware for that
purpose needs to provide more than just IP communication;
especially a generic modelling of BA objects and variables is
inevitable.
For that purpose, the American Society of Heating, Refrig-
erating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) deﬁned
the BACnet standard [12]. With BACnet, complete BA envi-
ronments could be built based on one generic technology [13];
yet in reality this approach has several drawbacks:
• The calculatory power required by the BACnet protocol
suite is rather high, thus many ﬁeld layer devices are not
able to implement the BACnet stack, i.e., these devices
have to be integrated via gateways.
• The support of the very common IP protocol is weak, as
it is not part of the native BACnet stack. A work around
named BACnet-IP is provided, i.e., basically a tunneling
of BACnet messages through an IP network.
• State-of-the-art network management concepts like QoS
(Quality of Service) are not supported with BACnet,
which is especially critical with the use of safety or
security relevant control applications (e.g., evacuation
Fig. 2.
ROFCO Network Infrastructure
support) [14], as they require very high dependability
standards, especially concerning availability of commu-
nication infrastructure.
The deﬁnition of the OPC-UA [15] standard, which is
already commonly used for the control of industrial production
[16], may help to overcome these shortages. By using OPC-
UA in combination with TCP as transport protocol we can
integrate IP networks and all the QoS mechanisms existing for
the TCP/IP protocol stack. Some academic implementations
of OPC-UA for BA systems are already existing, e.g., the
solutions of the TU Vienna [17]. Yet the requirements for
end systems still are rather high, resulting in the necessity to
provide gateways to legacy systems containing older devices
with not sufﬁcient calculatory power.
There are some further research activities in the area of
BA systems. These include topics as safety and security [18],
control strategies and technologies [19], as well as perfor-
mance issues [20]. Especially the safety and security topics
are of notable interest in order to produce saleable solutions,
as open systems always are always prone to outages [21] in
consequence of improper use or even planned attacks.
III. INFRASTRUCTURE
The goal of our work was to create a generic BA architecture
which allows for easy integration of dependability, i.e., provid-
ing generic interfaces for different BA applications, including
visualisation and supervisory control.
For that purpose we deﬁned an IP based network backbone
(Fig. 2), which connects all legacy components via gateways.
SCADA systems however, e.g., “Zenon” from our project
partner Copa-Data, can be integrated natively, i.e., as a part of
the ROFCO robustness domain. This is realised by providing
an open software interface containing IP sockets. Due to this
openness several SCADA manufacturers may share different
end devices and data servers; thus our solution provides
a holistic concept to integrate global dependability means,
opposed to currently available island solutions.
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 3.
ROFCO Testbed
A. Testbed Network
In order to test the feasibility of our concept, we built a
prototypical solution, which we tested at the site of the project
partner Techno-Z Salzburg.
Fig. 3 shows the network topology of the ROFCO testbed,
which expanded over three buildings (3, 10, 12) at the Techno-
Z. It was basically composed of two class C IP subnets:
• Subnet I is the management subnet of the Techno-Z used
in Building 10 and 12
• Subnet II the control subnet from the ROFCO laboratory
at Building 3
In both subnets we used switches with two redundant
GBIC ports, thus connecting both subnets with redundant ﬁber
connections between Building 3 and Building 10. A third
switch in the ROFCO laboratory builds the interface to the
various ROFCO servers. As part of the robustness concept
these (manageable) switches are conﬁgured with the spanning
tree (STP) mechanism. Due to the ROFCO security concept
two Virtuel Local Area Networks (VLAN) are conﬁgured on
these three main switches, i.e., the devices connected to these
switches can be run in both VLANs.
Both subnets are connected with respective company net-
works (Techno-Z and Salzburg Research) via a router/ﬁrewall
combination. For further security issues an internal sniffer
was installed to monitor the trafﬁc inside the control and
management subnets. Both functionalities, along with an in-
trusion detection system, can be performed by using the “MF-
Security-Gateway” from the project partner Underground8.
B. Testbed Components
Each building at the Techno-Z Salzburg is equipped with
different BA systems, e.g., a Somfy system to control blinds
and a Sauter system to control the lighting and all HVAC
components via EIB/KNX. In the following, we will describe
those components which we have researched as part of the
ROFCO testbed.
• Somfy Control, Building 10
To control the blinds of the Buildings 10 to 15, the Somfy
blind control is separated into three zones. In zone one, a
single Somfy control system at the 3rd Floor regulates the
whole blinds for Building 10. At this place a controller
of our project partner cTrixs was installed, which serves
as gateway between the blind circuit (over relay control
and digital I/Os) and the Ethernet wiring.
• Facility Management Room, Building 12
For managing the BA systems for the Techno-Z complex,
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

a control computer is situated in the facility manage-
ment room in Building 12 on the ground ﬂoor. On this
computer e.g., the Sauter BA system (which includes the
HVAC capabilities) or the Designa access control system
are visualized. Also the central ﬁre indicating equipment
is located in this room.
• Engineering Room, Building 12
The Sauter BA system, the EIB lighting system and the
central switch are located in the engineering room at the
ground ﬂoor in Building 12. The entire building is wired
from this switch. For the ROFCO network a port on the
central switch was reserved and activated. There is also
the possibility to conﬁgure VLANs on this Catalyst 2950
switch. A second cTrixs controller provides the interface
to the EIB lighting in the congress room in Building 12;
it is connected to the central switch and to the EIB bus
to control the lights at the ground ﬂoor.
• ROFCO Laboratory, Building 3
The laboratory is equipped with a cTrixs Application
Server (CAPS) and a Zenon machine with master/backup
function. On the Zenon Display the use cases we con-
sidered in ROFCO (lighting and blind control) can be
visualised and controlled. The CAPS is used as a central
server for the cTrixs controllers.
At the ground ﬂoor in Building 12, the lighting is not
fully represented in the current building management. Thus
the lighting data points and also the blinds functions in the
ROFCO Showcase are implemented and visualised on the
CAPS and Zenon surfaces. In Building 3, the blinds are
handled by an IP-enabled cTrixs controller, but in opposition
to the solution in Building 10, the connection is done directly
via analog outputs and relays, and not via EIB. A Wireless
Local Area Network (WLAN) bridge has been installed to
transmit data to the controller.
IV. MIDDLEWARE
The ROFCO Middleware layer (RML) is used to establish
a dependable end-to-end communication between different
entities (Fig.
1). It supports the independent distribution of
control information between different end systems.
A. Dependability Requirements
A main requirement of the ROFCO system is to use
commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) hardware. As the ROFCO
hardware must support high reliability and calculable availabil-
ity, the mean time between failure (MTBF) and the mean time
to repair (MTTR) metrics of each hardware device must be
known in order to derive the overall availability of the ROFCO
system. For authentication and authorisation well established
mechanisms have to be used, such as ITU-T X.501 [22] or
IETF RADIUS/DIAMETER [23] [24]. Encryption is a further
main requirement to establish a secure connection over a
distributed heterogeneous communication system. For the un-
derlying network functionalities classical network devices like
CISCO switches and routers are used. Address management
and routing are based on IP [25], routing metrics [26] must
be supported.
B. ROFCO Entities and Roles
After determining the requirements for our prototype we
compared potential technologies for our intended solution and
decided for the use of OPC-UA as generic communication and
management protocol. Using the free OPC-UA stack from the
OPC foundation [27] we implemented the basic functionalities
prototypically. OPC-UA can be used as a good base to create
a generic control architecture, yet in order to integrate the
intended dependability means, we had to deﬁne functionalities,
which go beyond an ordinary OPC-UA implementation. The
entities we deﬁned for that purpose and their speciﬁc tasks in
the ROFCO system are listed in the following:
• Client
• Server
• Registrar
• Mediator
The Client communicates and exchanges information with
the Server. To be part of the installed ROFCO system the
Client and all deﬁned parts must register at the Registrar. To
communicate with a non-ROFCO entity or device the Mediator
maps the information between ROFCO entities and non-
ROFCO entities. The Server supports the possibility to present
the information in OPC-UA style. The Registrar provides
interfaces for authentication and authorisation to the ROFCO
system. To integrate QoS, service classes are deﬁned for the
different requirements of the supported applications.
C. Registration and Authentication Process
ROFCO devices, such as sensors, actuators, controllers,
etc. must register to a ROFCO Registrar. This is necessary
to exchange session keys and validate user certiﬁcates. Each
ROFCO device sends its valid user identiﬁcation to the corre-
sponding ROFCO device. The corresponding ROFCO device
can verify the received user certiﬁcate. If the ROFCO device
does not trust the user it can check the certiﬁcate by sending
it to the Registrar. Within the registration process the access
levels of ROFCO devices are managed. In the ROFCO show
case some ROFCO devices have limited access level to some
resources. Fig. 4 shows a scheme of the registration process,
which has to be performed by all devices taking part in the
ROFCO system.
D. Quality Assurance
To identify potential failures in the design and the applica-
tion life cycle in the whole ROFCO system a procedure called
failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA) has been used. The
FMEA gives an overview about which parts of the ROFCO
system have the most important impacts on failure.
The ROFCO system supports the dependable operation of
a communication infrastructure. To detect misbehaviour of
the end systems, keep alive messages are sent during normal
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 4.
ROFCO Registration Process
Fig. 5.
ROFCO Use Case Blinds Maintenance
operation. Messages sent between different devices are signed
and authenticated.
Anomaly detection is a further goal of the ROFCO archi-
tecture to ﬁnd faulty messages and trafﬁc in the system. With
trafﬁc monitoring this trafﬁc can be detected and isolated from
the system.
V. VALIDATION
To develop a dependable system it is a basic precondition to
use well established and standardised methods for veriﬁcation
and validation. These methods are based on several different
standards, e.g., IEC 61508 [28]. In this paper we concentrate
on the validation steps of the ROFCO project. The validation
strategy is based on pre-deﬁned use cases. During the course
of the project these use cases were adapted to needs and
requirements. Thus we have achieved an iterative product life
cycle process during the project lifetime in order to enhance
the quality of the ROFCO architecture. The requirement en-
gineering process and the product life cycle process are based
on standards [29].
As an example for the whole validation mechanism in
ROFCO, Fig. 5 shows the use case of the maintenance
sequence of sun-blinds. User stories have been used to describe
the use case in such a way, that all stakeholders could under-
stand the requirements and the interaction with the ROFCO
system. For requirement gathering the verbal description of
the use case and the discussion with the stakeholders improved
the understanding for the developers.
For validating the ROFCO system different steps were
deﬁned. Like in an agile software development process, each
single use case had to be validated. Based on the verbal
description and the UML Use Case Diagram of each use case
we deﬁned the respective tests. Each test deﬁnition had some
attributes, such as test description, pre-conditions and post-
condition, as deﬁned in [30]. The whole ROFCO system, as
described above, was validated in the ROFCO validation trial.
All involved stakeholders and project partners have prepared
the deﬁned use cases to validate the ROFCO system. During
some pre-tests, some misconﬁgurations in the controller setup
could be identiﬁed and ﬁxed. The validation trial showed the
interworking of a heterogeneous building automation system
as expected.
VI. CONCLUSION
As a result of our validation trial we proved the feasibility
of our approach, as we were able to access the control devices
using different OPC-UA clients. We were able to implement
getter and setter functions for the data points in different
building units (lighting, blinds). Furthermore, we developed a
robustness concept based on availability calculations according
to IEC 61508 [28] functional safety standard and assessed the
system relevant risks with an FMEA.
A possible barrier for a wide adoption of our approach in fu-
ture commercial solutions are the relatively high requirements
on the used devices. In order to be able to proceed all the
session and rights management data as well as the OPC stack
the devices need a certain minimum of calculatory power;
for practical reasons this can not be guaranteed in all cases.
Here this can be counteracted by the use of gateways to those
legacy systems, which are not able to implement a native OPC
connection, yet this limits the beneﬁciaries of our system to
a more narrow system border. However, future developments
have to be observed accurately, as the progress of calculatory
power in embedded devices may make this drawback obsolete
in a few years.
VII. FURTHER WORK
For safety and security relevant applications like evacua-
tion support, not only principle concepts need to be shown,
but solutions have to be provided which meet certiﬁcation
requirements. In parts such standards are existing (e.g., for
certiﬁcation of evacuation systems) but the whole process of
installing and maintaining different applications in a building
environment is not standardised as such, i.e., changing the set
up of any other linked automation subsystem would enforce
another accreditation for the security relevant application,
as the environment of the security relevant subsystem has
changed. This is a major obstacle to install interoperable sys-
tems and one of the reasons why integrated HA/BA solutions
are still rare.
An interesting research ﬁeld is emerging through the current
developments in the smart grid sector. The establishment of
communities which are sharing energy resources generates
many questions regarding not only security, but also privacy,
billing, optimisation of resource usage, and thus controlling
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

not only single buildings but bigger unions. Especially the in-
tegration of a distributed energy control network with existing
solutions in HA/BA is a considerable challenge.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work described in this paper was conducted during the
project “Robust Facility Communication” (ROFCO) funded by
the Austrian Federal Ministry for Transport, Innovation and
Technology (BMVIT).
REFERENCES
[1] K. Charatsis, A. Kalogeras, M. Georgoudakis, J. Gialelis, and G. Pa-
padopoulos, “Home / Building Automation Environment Architecture
Enabling Interoperability, Flexibility and Reusability,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE International Symposium on Industrial Electronics 2005
(ISIE 2005), vol. 4, Jun. 2005, pp. 1441–1446.
[2] F. Ferreira, A. Osorio, J. Calado, and C. Pedro, “Building Automation
Interoperability – A Review,” in Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on Systems, Signals and Image Processing (IWSSIP 2010),
2010, pp. 158–161.
[3] Salzburg Research Forschungsgesellschaft. (2012) ROFCO – Robust
Facility Communication. Accessed: 2012-06-19. [Online]. Available:
http://www.salzburgresearch.at/en/projekt/rofco en/
[4] G. Panholzer, A. Veichtlbauer, P. Dorﬁnger, and U. Schrittesser, “Simula-
tion of a Robust Communication Protocol for Sensor Data Acquisition,”
in Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Wireless and
Mobile Communications (ICWMC 2010), Valencia, Spain, Sep. 2010,
pp. 145–150.
[5] A. Veichtlbauer and T. Pfeiffenberger, “Dynamic Evacuation Guidance
as Safety Critical Application in Building Automation,” in Proceedings
of the 6th International Conference on Critical Information Infrastruc-
ture Security (Critis 2011), Lucerne, Switzerland, Sep. 2011.
[6] C. Probst, “Konzeptionierung eines Benutzermanagements f¨ur den Zu-
griff auf vertrauliche Daten von IP f¨ahigen Sensornetzen,” May 2010,
in German.
[7] J. P. Thomesse, “Fieldbuses and interoperability,” Control Engineering
Practice, vol. 7, iss. 1, pp. 81–94, Jan. 1999.
[8] E. Finch, “Is IP everywhere the way ahead for building automation?”
Facilities, vol. 19, iss. 11/12, pp. 396–403, 2001.
[9] Siemens AG. (2011) Total Building Solutions f¨ur intelligente Geb¨aude
– Siemens Building Technologies. Accessed: 2012-06-19. [Online].
Available:
http://www.industry.siemens.de/buildingtechnologies/de/de/
total-building-solutions/Seiten/total-building-solutions.aspx
[10] ABB Asea Brown Boveri Ltd. (2012) Raumtalk – Building Auto-
mation over IP. Accessed: 2012-04-11. [Online]. Available: http://www.
abb.at/cawp/deabb201/24d156e58bc98443c125720b0025238d.aspx
[11] W. Granzer, W. Kastner, G. Neugschwandtner, and F. Praus, “A Modular
Architecture for Building Automation Systems,” in Proceedings of the
6th IEEE International Workshop on Factory Communication Systems
(WFCS ’06), Jun. 2006, pp. 99–102.
[12] American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engi-
neers Inc., “BACnet - A Data Communication Protocol for Building
Automation and Control Networks,” ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 135-
2004, 2004.
[13] D. Snoonian, “Smart buildings,” Spectrum, IEEE, vol. 40, pp. 18–23,
Aug. 2003.
[14] U. Schrittesser, “Synthese von redundanten vermaschten WLAN,” Jun.
2008, in German.
[15] CAS.
(2010)
OPC
Uniﬁed
Architecture.
Accessed:
2012-06-
19. [Online]. Available: http://www.commsvr.com/UAModelDesigner/
Index.aspx
[16] W. Mahnke, S.-H. Leitner, and M. Damm, OPC Uniﬁed Architecture.
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2009.
[17] A. Fernbach, W. Granzer, and W. Kastner, “Interoperability at the
Management Level of Building Automation Systems: A Case Study for
BACnet and OPC UA,” in Proceedings of the 16th IEEE Conference on
Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA ’11, Sep. 2011.
[18] W. Granzer, W. Kastner, G. Neugschwandtner, and F. Praus, “Security
in Networked Building Automation Systems,” in Proceedings of the
6th IEEE International Workshop on Factory Communication Systems
(WFCS ’06), Jun. 2006, pp. 283–292.
[19] T. I. Salsbury, “A Survey of Control Technologies in the Building
Automation Industry,” in Proceedings of the 16th IFAC World Congress,
vol. 16, part 1, Prague, Czech Republic, Jul. 2005.
[20] S. Makarechi and R. Kangari, “Research Methodology for Building
Automation Performance Index,” International Journal of Facility Man-
agement, vol. 2, no. 1, 2011.
[21] C. Probst and A. Veichtlbauer, “Security Features of a Generic Sensor
Data Acquisition System,” in Proceedings of the 6th International
Symposium on QoS and Security for Wireless and Mobile Networks
(Q2SWinet 2010), Bodrum, Turkey, Oct. 2010.
[22] International Telecommunication Union. (2008) X.501. Accessed:
2012-06-19. [Online]. Available: http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.501
[23] C. Rigney, A. C. Rubens, W. A. Simpson, and S. Willens, “Remote
Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS),” IETF RFC 2865, Jun.
2000.
[24] P. Calhoun, J. Loughney, E. Guttman, G. Zorn, and J. Arkko, “Diameter
Base Protocol,” IETF RFC 3588, Sep. 2003.
[25] J. Postel, “Internet Protocol,” IETF RFC 791, Sep. 1981.
[26] R. Baumann, S. Heimlicher, M. Strasser, and A. Weibel. (2007, Feb.)
A survey on routing metrics. TIK Report 262. Accessed: 2012-06-19.
[Online]. Available: http://www.baumann.info/public/tik262.pdf
[27] OPC Foundation. (2012) OPC – The Interoperability Standard for
Industrial Automation & Other. Accessed: 2012-06-19. [Online].
Available: http://www.opcfoundation.org
[28] International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). (2012) Functional
safety and IEC 61508. Accessed: 2012-06-19. [Online]. Available:
http://www.iec.ch/functionalsafety
[29] “Systems and software engineering - software life cycle processes,”
Tech.
Rep.,
2008,
Accessed:
2012-06-19.
[Online].
Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.2008.4475826
[30] “IEEE
standard
for
software
test
documentation,”
Tech.
Rep.,
1998,
Accessed:
2012-06-19.
[Online].
Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs all.jsp?arnumber=741968
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-207-3
SENSORCOMM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

