Certiﬁcation Matters for Service Markets
Marie-Christine Jakobs, Julia Kr¨amer, Dirk van Straaten and Theodor Lettmann
Paderborn University
Paderborn, Germany
Email: {marie.christine.jakobs,juliadk,dirk.van.straaten,lettmann}@upb.de
Abstract—Whenever customers have to decide between different
instances of the same product, they are interested in buying the
best product. In contrast, companies are interested in reducing
the construction effort (and usually as a consequence thereof, the
quality) to gain proﬁt. The described setting is widely known as
opposed preferences in quality of the product and also applies
to the context of service-oriented computing. In general, service-
oriented computing emphasizes the construction of large software
systems out of existing services, where services are small and self-
contained pieces of software that adhere to a speciﬁed interface.
Several implementations of the same interface are considered as
several instances of the same service. Thereby, customers are
interested in buying the best service implementation for their
service composition wrt. to metrics, such as costs, energy, memory
consumption, or execution time. One way to ensure the service
quality is to employ certiﬁcates, which can come in different kinds:
Technical certiﬁcates proving correctness can be automatically
constructed by the service provider and again be automatically
checked by the user. Digital certiﬁcates allow proof of the integrity
of a product. Other certiﬁcates might be rolled out if service
providers follow a good software construction principle, which
is checked in annual audits. Whereas all of these certiﬁcates are
handled differently in service markets, what they have in common
is that they inﬂuence the buying decisions of customers. In this
paper, we review state-of-the-art developments in certiﬁcation
with respect to service-oriented computing. We not only discuss
how certiﬁcates are constructed and handled in service oriented
computing but also review the effects of certiﬁcates on the market
from an economic perspective.
Keywords–Service; Certiﬁcation; Service-Oriented Computing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In today’s complex world, it is nearly impossible to base
decisions on sufﬁcient knowledge about all relevant facts.
One way around this dilemma is to make use of certiﬁca-
tion. According to Wikipedia [1], certiﬁcation refers to the
conﬁrmation of certain characteristics of an object, person,
or organization. Real-life examples are manifold, from pro-
fessional certiﬁcations, such as master’s degrees awarded by
universities, to product certiﬁcation such as the CE confor-
mity marking in the European Economic Area. Especially,
professional certiﬁcation often denotes not only procedures
for validating expertise before granting a certiﬁcate, but also
programs by which necessary competences are developed.
Here, we restrict ourselves to the impact of the ﬁnal certiﬁcates
on a market. Certiﬁcates provide a certain amount of evidence
that some required characteristics of a good, a person, or a
process are given. No further testing is needed, except for
testing the validity of the certiﬁcation itself. Therefore, using
widely adopted certiﬁcations is a key issue for increasing
the competitiveness of a company. However, if a third party,
usually a government agency, is interested in establishing
minimum standards, we talk about licensing and accreditation
instead of certiﬁcation. Whereas, licensing is a non-voluntary
process used as an entry condition of a market, accreditation
is a voluntary process granting (public) recognition, e.g., for
schools or universities. In this paper, we want to take a closer
look at the role of certiﬁcation in a service-oriented computing
market.
Service-oriented computing aims at facilitating the con-
struction of large software systems by assembling existing ser-
vices. We consider services as a single, platform-independent
piece of software that is speciﬁed using an interface. Service-
oriented computing gives rise to a global market where nu-
merous service providers offer their own implementations of
speciﬁc services and where services of different providers
interoperate with each other in service compositions to deliver
highly customized software to users. In service compositions,
a single faulty or data-leaking service may ruin the overall cor-
rectness or privacy requirements. This is a crucial characteristic
of service-oriented computing as it might lead to unsatisﬁed
customers resulting in a drop of market efﬁciency and ﬁnally
in a market failure [2]. This can be prevented by installing
quality-ensuring mechanisms that provide quality signals to
customers and, hence, enable them to choose the best ﬁtting
service provider.
In online shops, it is common practice to use the reputation
provided by customer reviews [3] as a quality signal. In this
case, previous customers rate the delivered product or service
according to their own experience. Although this quite simple
example of a reputation system works well in many domains,
there are some drawbacks in markets for highly specialized
goods such as markets for service-oriented computing. First,
since service quality is reported by users, there must be a
reasonable number of people willing to provide ratings for the
same service, otherwise no measure of quality exists. Because
of the diversity of services and service compositions and their
continuous improvement, many users will have to run services
without any prior information about service quality. Second,
customer ratings are subjective by nature and therefore not an
objective quality signal. As service quality and performance
depends on the use case, there is an additional source of unreli-
ability. Since services are not only offered by a few well-known
global players but also by unknown and untrusted entities, a
reliable source for service quality information is necessary, in
particular in markets for service-oriented computing.
Certiﬁcation is not yet another mechanism to signal the
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-528-9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

quality of services even for inexperienced end-users. In con-
trast to reputation, certiﬁcates can allow judging the quality of
a service or a service composition directly when it is available
in the market and, thus, especially before any user might be
annoyed or even harmed by a bad-quality service. In addition,
the producer of a service himself is responsible for this type
of trust management and bears the risk of abuse. Hence,
certiﬁcates are a customer-friendly, complementary instrument
besides reputation when it comes to signaling service quality.
Theoretical results support this complementary interaction for
certain market models [4].
Contribution. In this paper, we study certiﬁcates in service
markets as a complementary approach to signal quality. On the
basis of the app store example, we deﬁne all ingredients of
certiﬁcation in service markets that may inﬂuence the validity
of a certiﬁcate. We also review state-of-the-art literature in
certiﬁcation wrt. to service-oriented architectures and introduce
a taxonomy to classify existing approaches. Additionally, we
discuss the need for certiﬁcation in service markets and iden-
tify open challenges for certiﬁcation in these markets.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we give an
overview of certiﬁcation, introducing the ingredients of certiﬁ-
cation, and reviewing existing certiﬁcation approaches. Section
III introduces our taxonomy for certiﬁcates and classiﬁes the
reviewed certiﬁcation approaches. Section IV highlights the
need for certiﬁcation in service markets from an economic
perspective before the corresponding challenges are discussed
in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.
II.
OVERVIEW OF CERTIFICATION
Markets in which software products are assembled and
delivered on-the-ﬂy give rise to intricacies in quality assurance.
We think that these intricacies in quality assurance cannot
be solved by solely using reputation systems and that they
challenge the application of standard certiﬁcation techniques.
In this section, we use app stores as an instance of on-
the-ﬂy service markets to introduce important ingredients of
certiﬁcation.
App Stores as On-The-Fly Service Markets: Nowadays,
smartphones often run many different apps at the same time.
Often, these apps interoperate with each other. While it simpli-
ﬁes daily life if tasks, calendars, mails etc. are automatically
kept consistent across platforms and apps, it carries a tremen-
dous risk for the safety and privacy of user data. Typically,
cross-platform consistency is achieved by storing the data in
cloud storage. If such a service for cloud storage goes out
of business, important data such as notes, mails and contacts
might be lost forever. If these cloud services sell private user
data, companies using these services might go out of business
themselves. To complicate things, different service providers
offer different apps realizing the same functionality – some
of them might be free of charge, available only for a certain
type of Android device, or might consume more or less space.
Hence, users not only need to know which functionality they
want to buy, but also need to have the chance to make informed
decisions in favor or against certain providers or apps in order
to ﬁnd the most reliable provider and the app with the highest
quality among all the existing options.
Instead of estimating the quality of a software and the reli-
ability of a provider on the basis of user recommendations or
previous experiences with other products of the same provider,
nowadays, customers use certiﬁcates indicating quality such
as expert recommendations or editors’ choices of good apps,
award winning apps, top or featured developers, apps with
signed Android application packages (APKs), or trusted apps.
In the following, we restrict ourselves to these examples to
explain the ingredients of certiﬁcation.
A. Ingredients of Certiﬁcation
Essentially, certiﬁcation is the process of attesting a spec-
iﬁed (minimum) qualiﬁcation, quality, or standard by granting
a certiﬁcate [1] [5]. Standards to meet and guidelines for the
certiﬁcation process are often developed by organizations of
interested parties. The certiﬁcation process itself is performed
by an (accredited) certiﬁcation body. In the app store exam-
ple, the roles of the standard-deﬁning organization and the
certiﬁcation body issuing the certiﬁcate often coincide due to
rapid advancements and missing established standards in this
ﬁeld. In the recommendation example, the certiﬁcation body is
the expert writing the recommendation, whereas the developer
himself signs apps with APK keys and is thus the certiﬁcation
body in the APK key example.
The scope of certiﬁcation identiﬁes the entity (e.g., product,
process, service) that the certiﬁcation is granted for, the stan-
dard or normative document stating the certiﬁcation criteria,
and the certiﬁcation scheme that speciﬁes rules and procedures
for testing conformity with the standard. The certiﬁcations
mentioned in the app store example vary widely wrt. their
scope. For instance, recommendations and signed APK keys
certify single apps, whereas listings of featured developers
certify app providers. As a result of a certiﬁcation, a certiﬁcate
is granted which is an accreditation that the scope of certiﬁ-
cation is met, i.e., the entity conforms to the standards wrt.
the certiﬁcation criteria tested. This implies that certiﬁcation
criteria should be objective and comparable requirements. The
examples show that certiﬁcates have different certiﬁcation
credibility. Signed APK keys are digital proofs of the identity
of the developer and, thereby, an objective criterion, whereas
experts, which have personal preferences, may write recom-
mendations rather subjectively. The certiﬁcate checker [6] [7]
is the entity validating a certiﬁcate. In most cases, this will
be the user. Referring to the term trusted computing base,
we use the term trusted base to denote all ingredients of
the certiﬁcation process, which one needs to rely on to trust
the certiﬁcation technique. We continue with an overview of
existing certiﬁcation approaches (including our examples from
this section) in the context of service markets.
B. Overview of Existing Certiﬁcation Approaches
A broad range of certiﬁcation techniques can be found in
the literature and in practical use. To simplify the following
discussion, we separate the presentation of the existing ap-
proaches of certiﬁcates along technical and documentary evi-
dence. Technical evidence carries machine processable infor-
mation to reinvestigate if the certiﬁcation criteria are met while
documentary evidence records that the certiﬁcation process
was performed.
1) Technical Evidence: In Proof-Carrying Code (PCC) [8]
techniques, typically the producer himself is the certiﬁcation
body that carries out a formal proof of correctness wrt. some
property. The certiﬁcate is made up of certain parts of the
proof, which a certiﬁcate checker may use at any time to
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-528-9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

formally prove correctness wrt. the same property faster. All
PCC techniques are tamper-proof, the certiﬁcate check always
fails if the property is invalid and the check is correctly
implemented. PCC techniques like [9] allow to fully auto-
matically apply the PCC principle. Like the original approach
[8], most of the approaches deal with functional properties.
For dedicated non-functional properties, PCC approaches for
software [10] and hardware services [11] exist.
Remote Attestation [12] is used to ensure the integrity of
code running on a remote system, the (partial) state of a remote
system, or even its behavior. To prove integrity, the remote
system (the certiﬁcate body) provides collected evidence, e.g.,
monitoring information, information about the state or crypto-
graphic hashes of those information. A certiﬁcate checker, e.g.,
the user who executes his code on a remote system, investigates
if the received evidence matches its expectations.
Digital Certiﬁcates [13], which are based on cryptographic
signatures, are a technique to ensure code or data integrity.
A very prominent example are hash values to check the data
integrity after a download. Digital certiﬁcates are also used for
authentication and identiﬁcation. For example, on GitHub [14],
secure shell (SSH) in combination with passphrases are used
for authentication, whereas Android APKs must be signed to
identify the originator.
Certifying Algorithms [6] add to the result of a computation
information, which witnesses the correctness of the result.
Instead of certifying the result, computation certiﬁcation [7]
certiﬁes the integrity of the computation. Next to the result,
checkpoints such as intermediate states of the computation
are returned. A certiﬁcate checker can parallelly compute for
each checkpoint the subsequent checkpoint and check if the
computed checkpoint is identical with the provided one.
Damiani et al. [15] propose Web Service Certiﬁcates. Their
idea is to attach a test set for a (non-)functional property to a
web service. To validate the correctness of the web service
wrt. the property, the certiﬁcate checker may execute the
tests. Alternatively, a third trusted authority may run the tests
and provide a signed document summarizing the test result.
For this alternative, Damiani et al. [16] present an approach
that constructs a certiﬁcate for a service composition on the
basis of the test-based certiﬁcates of all single services in the
composition.
2) Documentary Evidence: To ensure reliability, Buckley
et al. [17] propose pattern-based reliability certiﬁcation which
combines certiﬁcation with monitoring. Given a reliability
property plus a reliability pattern, the certiﬁcation body checks
if the pattern matches the property. If this is true, he adds a
set of monitoring rules, each consisting of a description and a
reference to a standard toolkit to monitor the corresponding
metric. Thus, the monitoring rules allow to validate if the
implemented service complies to the reliability pattern. A
trusted certiﬁcate checker applies the monitoring rules during
execution of the service to validate the reliability property.
Ardagna et al. [18] combine certiﬁcation and monitoring in
the context of dependability certiﬁcation. Based on an initial
model-based prediction (a Markov model), they certify the
dependability of a service for a ﬁxed amount of time. There-
after, an (automatic) recertiﬁcation becomes necessary. When
monitoring of the service execution reveals that the service
currently does not fulﬁll the certiﬁed property, the certiﬁcation
body tries to downgrade the certiﬁcate, i.e., it tries to grant a
certiﬁcate for a dependability policy which is derived from the
original one via relaxation of some of the policy conditions.
If the downgrade fails, the certiﬁcate is revoked. Note that
when the real behavior again matches the originally certiﬁed
property, the downgrade or revocation will be undone. The
approach can also be applied to service compositions.
A common form of documentary evidence is a Seal of
Approval. Next to the seal, a certiﬁcation document is often
available. The StarAudit [19] certiﬁcate for cloud service
providers belongs to this category. To be certiﬁed, an inde-
pendent certiﬁcation body, an organization or an accredited
auditor, performs an audit in which the offered infrastructure
as a service, platform as a service, and software as a service are
evaluated according to a publically available catalog of criteria.
Depending on the results of the audit, either a certiﬁcate for
one of three trust levels is issued for two years or no certiﬁcate
is issued. The certiﬁcates are valid only if they are published
on the StarAudit website. In contrast to StarAudit, the level
of the Security, Trust & Assurance Registry (STAR) [20]
certiﬁcate offered by the cloud security alliance depends on
how the certiﬁcation process is performed. The lowest level
uses self assessment. The cloud provider must only provide
a report that documents the compliance. The highest level
requires continuous auditing. The specialty behind the Certiﬁed
Cloud Service [21] seal offered by the German Technischer
¨Uberwachungsverein (T ¨UV) is that although the certiﬁcate is
granted for three years, compliance is checked once a year and
if compliance is no longer given the certiﬁcate is revoked. In
the context of cloud services, relative documentary evidences
such as a ranking of a set of cloud storage providers [22] also
exist.
Participating in a certain market is sometimes also a kind
of certiﬁcate if the goods or the producer must fulﬁll certain
requirements for participation in the market. For example, in
the Apple Store each app provided for download passed a
review [23] that it adheres to various guidelines.
Furthermore, the quality management processes of many
of today’s companies are certiﬁed to be compliant with the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 9001
standard. In the certiﬁcation process, an external certiﬁcation
body performs an audit including interviews with employees
and reviews of documents [24]. Additionally, after passing a
dedicated exam, people can get a document, a certiﬁcate, that
they are experts in the corresponding domain. For example,
consider the Amazon web service certiﬁcates [25], which are
valid for two years.
On the basis of the reviewed certiﬁcation approaches, next
we introduce a taxonomy for certiﬁcates.
III.
THOUGHTS ON A TAXONOMY FOR CERTIFICATES
The goal of our taxonomy is to enable the comparison and
ranking of certiﬁcates that are issued for the same scope. To
that end, we identiﬁed four different characteristics.
The ﬁrst criterion is the type of a certiﬁcate. Like in
the previous section, we distinguish between two types of
certiﬁcates: technical evidence and documentary evidence.
Certiﬁcates that are technical evidence carry machine process-
able information needed by an algorithmic certiﬁcate checker
to investigate whether the certiﬁcation criteria are met. In
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-528-9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

contrast, documentary evidence records that the certiﬁcation
body performed the certiﬁcation process. Typical examples are
seals, badges, and documents.
The second criterion is the duration of the validity of a
certiﬁcate. For example, certiﬁcates of the technical evidence
type are always valid wrt. the certiﬁed entity. Their duration is
unlimited. The duration of documentary evidence may either
be limited or unlimited. Often, a limited duration corresponds
to a time limit [19] [20] [21] [24] [25]. However, we are
aware of one approach [18] in which the duration additionally
depends on the momentary status of the certiﬁed entity.
The next criterion, quality assurance, describes how pre-
cisely a certiﬁcate reﬂects the adherence of the certiﬁed entity
to the certiﬁcation criteria. A dichotomous quality assurance
means that the certiﬁcate either does or does not guarantee the
adherence, whereas a gradual quality assurance expresses that
the certiﬁed entity adheres only up to a certain level to the
criteria or the complete entity is not checked (e.g., only a test
set is executed on the service implementation [15]). A relative
quality assurance, e.g., a ranking like [22], ranks different
certiﬁed entities and only describes that the adherence of one
certiﬁed entity is better than another. If the entity that the
certiﬁcate is issued for and the entity delivered to the customer
are not identical, but the quality check itself is dichotomous,
gradual or relative, we say that the quality assurance of the
certiﬁcate for the delivered entity is projected dichotomous,
gradual or relative.
The last criterion refers to the existence of a countercheck,
i.e., whether it is possible for the certiﬁcate checker to check
that the certiﬁed entity adheres to the certiﬁcation criteria. The
information carried by a technical certiﬁcate, e.g., a mathemat-
ical proof [8], a cryptographic hash [13], monitored data [12],
or a test suite [15], naturally imposes such a countercheck.
Counterchecks for certiﬁcates based on documentary evidence
include monitoring [17] [18] or sample examination. Table I
gives an overview of the approaches discussed in Section II-B
and their classiﬁcation.
We continue with a detailed motivation for certiﬁcation in
service markets.
IV.
ON SERVICE QUALITY IN SERVICE MARKETS
One underlying characteristic of service markets is that
heterogeneous products, i.e., different implementations of the
same service but, for example, with diverse non-functional
properties are offered. Without further information about a
service implementation, service markets, as well as any market
for experience goods, face the problem that before the purchase
producers, the developers, in the case of service markets, and
customers have different levels of knowledge about the ser-
vice implementation’s functional and especially non-functional
properties. This constellation is called information asymmetry
and arises whenever a product or service is traded whose
full characteristics are revealed to the customer only after he
bought and experienced it.
Information asymmetry is one reason why high-quality
products are driven out of the market in market constellations
without signals such as customer reviews, which reﬂect the
product quality [2]. The reason is that developing a service
implementation with better (non-)functional properties, e.g., a
better performance, is typically more expensive. High-quality
developers set higher prices to cover their expenses. However,
without the revelation of the service quality low-quality de-
velopers may also set the same price to increase their proﬁts.
Customers who are aware of different quality levels do not
trust the developers and show a lower willingness to pay
these higher prices. Hence, the prices decrease, high-quality
developers cannot cover their expenses and they go bankrupt.
In contrast, low-quality developers can cover their expenses
with low market prices and remain in the market whereby
high quality is ﬁnally driven out of the market.
In addition, online service markets have to deal with two
further characteristics. First, there is a high ﬂuctuation of
service providers, i.e., there are numerous developers which
enter and leave the market at any time. Second, often various
services are composed to sell a complete software solution.
These characteristics may cause problems even in service
markets with an existing reputation system especially when
new developers enter the market. First, the developers face the
moral hazard problem since they can deceive their customers
without fearing any sanctions. They can claim to sell an
efﬁciently working service with an appropriate price although
their services are working inefﬁciently. Obliging customers,
who buy these services because they are cheap, will be unsat-
isﬁed and leave the market for future purchases of services due
to this so called adverse selection [26]. Second, the developers
indeed offer a high-quality service, but because they have no
positive reputation, potential buyers are not willing to pay the
demanded price. Hence, the suppliers have two options: 1)
They can reduce their prices and invest in a reputation or
2) they can leave the market. Neither of these alternatives is
desirable since one party is unsatisﬁed. In addition, when sin-
gle services are combined into software packages, customers
are hardly enabled to review the single components. Hence,
reviews are written for the whole composition and it is difﬁcult
to establish reputation for single services since these reviews
must be disaggregated to assess the single services.
To overcome these likely occurring problems, information
signals on quality can be induced into the market. There
are two ways to provide this information: signaling and
monitoring. Monitoring is the most often used approach in
online markets. Customers who already have experienced the
seller’s service write a review and in this way monitor the
observed quality. The purpose of this approach is to build
up trust [27]. As already stated above, this approach comes
along with problems, in particular for new market participants.
This is a severe disadvantage especially in markets for service
compositions without few ’big players’ but with numerous
small and specialized service developers.
The second approach is for the seller to signal the quality
by showing his trustworthiness. This can be implemented
by offering warranties, presenting satisfaction guarantees, or
testing the product by a third party and receiving a certiﬁcate in
return [28]. In markets for service compositions, the signaling
approach has weighty advantages: 1) New market participants
can reveal the true quality of their services from the begin-
ning. 2) The costs for signals are borne individually by the
service developers. 3) The necessity of the disaggregation of
customer ratings is removed: The above-mentioned problem of
disaggregating customer reviews to assess the single services
is bypassed when the quality is signaled by every single
developer.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-528-9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

Table I. CLASSIFICATION OF EXISTING CERTIFICATION APPROACHES ACCORDING TO OUR PRELIMINARY TAXONOMY
Approach
Type
Unlimited Duration
Quality Assurance
Countercheck
Amazon Web Service Certiﬁcate [25]
documentary
×
gradual
×
Apple Store App [23]
documentary
✓
gradual
×
Certiﬁed Cloud Service [21]
documentary
×
gradual
×
Certifying Algorithm [6]
technical
✓
dichotomous
✓
Computation Certiﬁcation [7]
technical
✓
dichotomous
✓
Dependability Certiﬁcation [18]
documentary
×
gradual
✓
Digital Certiﬁcate [13]
technical
✓
dichotomous
✓
ISO 9001 [24]
documentary
×
gradual
×
Pattern-Based Reliability Certiﬁcation [17]
documentary
✓
gradual
✓
Proof-Carrying Code [8]
technical
✓
dichotomous
✓
Ranking
documentary
?
relative
×
Remote Attestation [12]
technical
✓
dichotomous
✓
STAR [20]
documentary
×
gradual
×
StarAudit [19]
documentary
×
gradual
×
Top Developer Award
documentary
?
gradual
×
WS-Certiﬁcate [15]
technical
✓
gradual
✓
These advantages show the potential of certiﬁcates in
service markets although they come along with the challenges
we address in the next section.
V.
CHALLENGES FOR CERTIFICATION IN SERVICE
MARKETS
On-the-ﬂy markets challenge the use of standard certiﬁca-
tion techniques. For instance, offered services, the market it-
self, and also market participants are heterogeneous. Thus, ser-
vices with technical certiﬁcates compete or even interoperate
with services provided by companies with a certiﬁed workﬂow.
Also, solutions to a user request, the (composed) service plus
the execution environment, are created on-demand and hence
challenge the creation of certiﬁcates in time. Addressing these
and further issues in this chapter, we show future directions of
research on certiﬁcation in on-the-ﬂy markets.
A. Composition of Certiﬁcates
At the core of on-the-ﬂy computing is the conﬁguration
of service compositions out of existing services. Certiﬁcation
must be become compositional. First, it is important to ﬁnd
out which types of certiﬁcate criteria are compositional at all,
e.g., expected runtime might not be compositional if services
generate unusual data with a high probability. Second, certiﬁ-
cation processes for compositional properties must be deﬁned.
This is especially interesting for the certiﬁcation of functional
properties. Important questions to answer include whether
service compositions can be certiﬁed only if all services used
have a special technical certiﬁcate and how to deﬁne technical
certiﬁcates for models of service compositions. Considering
the limited duration of certiﬁcates, procedures have to be
deﬁned to deal with a composition of certiﬁcates when for a
subset of services the certiﬁcates are expired. This is even more
important when the expiration is not necessarily a consequence
of time-limited validity but also of varying service quality. A
third issue addresses the customers’ perception of certiﬁcates
from different sources. If customers trust different certiﬁ-
cates (e.g., those with technical and documentary evidence)
differently this must be taken into account since certiﬁcates
for compositions might not lead to trust though most of the
services are certiﬁed with trust-building certiﬁcates.
B. On-the-Fly Certiﬁcation
In on-the-ﬂy markets, user requests are not known in
advance and often a request must be served, which has not been
entered into the market before. In this case, a new solution
must be created for the user request. Simultaneously, the
newly created solutions must be certiﬁed. Typically, issuing a
certiﬁcate is laborious, e.g., resource and time consuming. The
high costs, especially a high issuing time, conﬂicts with an on-
the-ﬂy offer of a solution, i.e., a user gets an offer after a few
seconds of his request. Thus, one must rethink the certiﬁcation
process to reduce the certiﬁcation effort of the new solution,
a (composed) service plus the execution environment. An
important question is which tasks of the certiﬁcation process
can be done ofﬂine in advance. For example, to certify worst
case execution time, the worst case execution time of single
services can be computed in advance for the available proces-
sor architectures in the market. To certify the new solution,
one can treat the single services in the composition as a black
box considering the worst-case execution time corresponding
to the processor architecture that the service will run on. Thus,
one only needs to analyze the paths of the composition.
C. Business Secrets
Certiﬁcates disclose attributes of the underlying service,
which may conﬂict with business secrets. Composing multiple
certiﬁed services scales up this problem since two sources
of information are supplied with each service. A certiﬁed
composition of services likely reveals information about the
composition process performed by a so called on-the-ﬂy
provider and about the single services constructed by several
service providers. More importantly, service providers must
grant on-the-ﬂy providers, potential competitors in the market,
sufﬁcient insights into their single services for certiﬁcation of
the composed service. Moreover, certiﬁcates are not checked
by the customer himself, but by third entities such as compute
centers or on-the-ﬂy providers.
D. Economic Perspective
Certiﬁcation is tied to costs and beneﬁts in consequence of
the reduction of information asymmetries and the customers’
higher willingness to pay. In conventional market situations
this value is easy to evaluate by comparing certiﬁed products
with non-certiﬁed ones. Hence, suppliers will bear the costs of
certiﬁcation if beneﬁts exceed them. In markets for composed
services with compositions including different types of certiﬁ-
cates, this suppliers’ trade-off is much harder to handle since
beneﬁts can hardly be estimated. Mechanisms must be found
to predict suppliers’ beneﬁts and to distribute them among
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-528-9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

the single suppliers. This is even more difﬁcult as different
certiﬁcates with different signal power and costs are employed.
E. Realization of Certiﬁcation
To integrate certiﬁcation in distributed service markets such
as on-the-ﬂy markets, one must make several design decisions.
First, one must choose how to realize the certiﬁcation bodies. A
certiﬁcation body could be just a service offered by the market
infrastructure or it could become a proﬁt-oriented market
participant. In the latter case, one must deal with strategic
behavior of the certiﬁcation bodies. For example, they may
be corrupt and grant a certiﬁcate although the certiﬁed entity
does not meet the certiﬁcation criteria, or they may offer
certiﬁcates ensuring insigniﬁcant properties. Second, it must
be speciﬁed who deﬁnes the scope of certiﬁcation, i.e., the
certiﬁcation criteria, the certiﬁcation scheme, and so on. For
example, one could use a consortium of the market participants
or certiﬁcation bodies can decide themselves. These decisions
are important since they have strong and direct implications on
the whole market. Other design decisions relate to contracts,
penalties for misuse of certiﬁcates, or dealing with customer
complaints regarding certiﬁcates.
F. Certiﬁcation Impact on Service Markets
So far, certiﬁcates are perceived as add-ons to single
services. It is unclear whether a certiﬁcation system in the
sense of a centralized reputation system (as described in [29])
has implicit consequences on the market functionality. The
quality of offered services might be affected and therefore
also the market prices. The dynamics of these effects on
entities, services, compositions, or participants are unclear. In
addition, certiﬁcates can be considered as entry requirements
on some markets, e.g., the Apple app store, as every app is
checked by Apple before it is listed in the store, whereas
an app does not need to have any certiﬁcate to be published
in Google’s Play Store. Hence, a high weight of certiﬁcates,
such as an entrance requirement in the Apple store, might also
distinguish different markets (not only apps or services) from
each other. Further, interactions of certiﬁcation systems, e.g.,
with present reputation systems need to be investigated. It is
not certain whether these systems address different dimensions
of service attributes or not and, hence, whether these systems
are complements or substitutes.
VI.
CONCLUSION
We presented the necessary ingredients for certiﬁcation,
reviewed existing certiﬁcation approaches, and classiﬁed them
according to our taxonomy. Additionally, we motivated the
need for certiﬁcation in service markets and discussed open
problems wrt. their usage.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was partially supported by the German Research
Foundation (DFG) within the Collaborative Research Centre
“On-The-Fly Computing” (SFB 901).
REFERENCES
[1]
Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, “Certiﬁcation,” 2017, https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Certiﬁcation [retrieved: 01-10-2017].
[2]
G. A. Akerlof, “The market for ”lemons”: Quality uncertainty and the
market mechanism,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 84, no. 3,
pp. 488–500, 1970.
[3]
P. Resnick, K. Kuwabara, R. Zeckhauser, and E. Friedman, “Reputation
systems,” Commun. ACM, vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 45–48, 2000.
[4]
M. van der Schaar and S. Z. Zhang, “A dynamic model of certiﬁcation
and reputation,” in EC ’14, pp. 967–968,
ACM, 2014.
[5]
ISO,
“Certiﬁcation,”
2017,
http://www.iso.org/iso/home/standards/
certiﬁcation.htm [retrieved: 01-10-2017].
[6]
R. McConnell, K. Mehlhorn, S. Nher, and P. Schweitzer, “Certifying
algorithms,” Computer Science Review, vol. 5, pp. 119–161, 2011.
[7]
S. M. Khan and K. W. Hamlen, “Computation certiﬁcation as a service
in the cloud,” in CCGrid ’13, pp. 434–441,
IEEE, 2013.
[8]
G. C. Necula, “Proof-carrying code,” in POPL ’97, pp. 106–119, ACM,
1997.
[9]
M.-C. Jakobs and H. Wehrheim, “Certiﬁcation for conﬁgurable program
analysis,” in SPIN ’14, pp. 30–39,
ACM, 2014.
[10]
K. Crary and S. Weirich, “Resource bound certiﬁcation,” in POPL ’00,
pp. 184–198,
ACM, 2000.
[11]
T. Wiersema and M. Platzner, “Verifying worst-case completion times
for reconﬁgurable hardware modules using proof-carrying hardware,”
in ReCoSoC ’16, pp. 1–8, June 2016.
[12]
G. Coker, J. Guttman, P. Loscocco, A. Herzog, J. Millen, B. O’Hanlon,
J. Ramsdell, A. Segall, J. Sheehy, and B. Sniffen, “Principles of remote
attestation,” Int. J. Inf. Secur., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 63–81, 2011.
[13]
W. Difﬁe and M. Hellman, “New directions in cryptography,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 644–654, 1976.
[14]
“Ssh passphrase on github,” 2017, https://help.github.com/articles/
working-with-ssh-key-passphrases/ [retrieved: 01-10-2017].
[15]
E. Damiani, N. E. Ioini, A. Sillitti, and G. Succi, “Ws-certiﬁcate,” in
2009 Congress on Services - I, pp. 637–644,
IEEE, 2009.
[16]
M. Anisetti, C. A. Ardagna, and E. Damiani, “Security certiﬁcation
of composite services: A test-based approach,” in ICWS, pp. 475–482,
IEEE, 2013.
[17]
I. Buckley, E. B. Fernandez, M. Anisetti, C. A. Ardagna, M. Sadjadi,
and E. Damiani, “Towards pattern-based reliability certiﬁcation of
services,” in OTM ’11, pp. 560–576,
Springer, 2011.
[18]
C. A. Ardagna, R. Jhawar, and V. Piuri, “Dependability certiﬁcation
of services: a model-based approach,” Computing, vol. 97, no. 1, pp.
51–78, 2015.
[19]
EuroCloud, “Staraudit,” 2017, https://staraudit.org/ [retrieved: 01-10-
2017].
[20]
C. S. Alliance, “Security, trust & assurance registry (STAR),” 2017,
https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/star/ [retrieved: 01-10-2017].
[21]
T ¨UV, “Certiﬁed cloud service,” 2017, http://www.tuv.com/cloud/ [re-
trieved: 01-10-2017].
[22]
PCWELT,
“Ranking
cloud
storage,”
2017,
http://www.pcwelt.
de/ratgeber/Onlinespeicher-ohne-NSA-Die-besten-kostenlosen-
Cloudspeicher-in-Deutschland-Schweiz-9829982.html
[retrieved:
01-10-2017].
[23]
A. Inc., “App review,” 2017, https://developer.apple.com/app-store/
review/guidelines/ [retrieved: 01-10-2017].
[24]
ISO, “ISO 9000—selection and use,” 2009, ISO Technical Committee
ISO/TC 176.
[25]
Amazon, “Amazon webservice certiﬁcation,” 2017, https://aws.amazon.
com/certiﬁcation/ [retrieved: 01-10-2017].
[26]
G. Lewis, “Asymmetric information, adverse selection and online dis-
closure: The case of ebay motors,” The American Economic Review,
vol. 101, no. 4, pp. 1535–1546, 2011.
[27]
P. Resnick and R. Zeckhauser, “Trust among strangers in internet trans-
actions: Empirical analysis of ebays reputation system,” The Economics
of the Internet and E-commerce, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 23–25, 2002.
[28]
D. Dranove and G. Z. Jin, “Quality disclosure and certiﬁcation: Theory
and practice,” J. Economic Literature, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 935–963, 2010.
[29]
S. Brangewitz, A. Jungmann, R. Petrlic, and M. Platenius, “Towards
a ﬂexible and privacy-preserving reputation system for markets of
composed services,” in SERVICE COMPUTATION ’14, pp. 49–57,
IEEE, 2014.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-528-9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

