Always stay agile! 
Towards Service-oriented Integration of Business Process and Business Rules 
Management 
 
Christopher Gäth, Alexander Hödicke, Sophia Marth, Jörn Siedentopf, Andreas Hausotter, and Arne Koschel 
Hochschule Hannover – University of Applied Science and Arts  
Competence Center Information Technology and Management 
Hanover, Germany 
christopher.gaeth@stud.fh-hannover.de, alexander.hoedicke@stud.fh-hannover.de, sophia.marth@stud.fh-hannover.de, 
joern.siedentopf@stud.fh-hannover.de, andreas.hausotter@hs-hannover.de, and arne.koschel@hs-hannover.de 
 
Abstract— To keep their competitive edge, enterprises need to 
change their operational processes in a flexible and agile 
manner. A Service-oriented Architecture (SOA) may help to 
meet these needs. One key feature of a SOA is the 
externalisation of business process logic. However, process logic 
is often complex, hard to understand and difficult to adapt. This 
issue is due to a mingling of process and decision logic. In order 
to ensure flexibility and agility, decision logic should be moved 
to a separate service. There are several approaches to realise 
such a “rule” service conceptually. In this paper, a decision 
framework to select the appropriate rules execution approach is 
developed, based on a set of “factors”. The decision framework 
is applied to an application scenario from the insurance 
domain. 
Keywords - Business Process Management (BPM); Business 
Rules Management (BRM); Business Rules Management System 
(BRMS); 
Service-oriented 
Architecture 
(SOA); 
Workflow 
Management System (WfMS) 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Workflow Management Systems (WfMS) support com-
panies in the management and execution of business pro-
cesses [1]. Nowadays, the latest challenges for insurance 
companies such as the dynamic business environment and 
compliance with legal requirements highlight the need for 
business agility [2][3][4]. Business agility requires the indi-
vidual, quick, and flexible composition and adaption of busi-
ness processes [5][6]. This can be done in the context of 
Business Process Management (BPM). As a result of the 
composition and adaption, the number of decisions may rise 
within the processes. Hence, the complexity of the business 
processes can lead to a lack of business agility [4][5]. 
Business rules provide an opportunity to reduce the com-
plexity of the processes, whilst the complex decision logic is 
encapsulated. The necessary changes with respect to agility 
often relate to the complex decision logic and not to the pro-
cess or business logic. Thus, the separation of decision logic 
and process logic on the modelling and implementation level 
is a useful approach to reduce complexity [4]. 
Comprehensive service-oriented approaches have poten-
tial to create business agility [7]. Thus, a Service-oriented 
Architecture (SOA) can help to address challenges like the 
dynamic business environment. The service-oriented integra-
tion of BPM and Business Rules Management (BRM) pro-
vides potential to change business processes in an agile man-
ner [4]. The results of interviews with experts of the insur-
ance service sector emphasised the issue to choose an ade-
quate approach to automate the execution of business rules 
with respect to a missing decision support. Considering the 
dynamic business environment in the insurance services sec-
tor, the topics of the presented work are of potential value for 
several insurance companies in Germany [2][3]. 
The aim and the major contribution of this paper is a de-
cision framework for choosing an adequate business rules 
execution approach. The result of the application is based on 
a characteristic application scenario for companies operating 
in the insurance services industry.  
The subsequent research activity is to develop a proto-
typically service-oriented integration of BPM and BRM 
based on the results of the applied decision framework.  
Thus, the paper illustrates the work in progress related to 
the current research activities of the Competence Center In-
formation Technology and Management (CC_ITM). 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In 
the first part (section II), the prior and related work are pre-
sented. The main sections (III to V) refer to the description 
of the service-oriented approach based on a workflow en-
gine, followed by an introduction of the application scenario 
as well as a description and an application of the developed 
decision framework. Finally, the paper ends with a conclu-
sion and looks upon some future research activities (section 
VI). 
II. 
PRIOR AND RELATED WORK 
Potential application scenarios regarding the combination 
of BPM and BRM were analysed in accordance with the 
requirements of the CC_ITM collaboration partners [8]. As a 
result, the application scenario “handle a goodwill request” 
was selected. The scenario, introduced in this paper in sec-
tion IV, is inspired by the insurance application architecture 
of the General Association of the German Insurance Indus-
try. The insurance application architecture describes inter 
alia reference process models for the insurance services in 
Germany [9]. The application scenario was already imple-
mented in prior research projects. The scenario was used for 
the evaluation of the prototypic implementation regarding a 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

service-oriented approach based on a workflow engine 
[10][11][12].  
In addition, the elements, which are to be implemented 
with a rule-based approach, were determined within the sce-
nario. In the process, the business rule “set goodwill adjust-
ment” was identified. [13] suggests an extraction process for 
business rules identification from business process models. 
This process is useful, because business rules are often not 
explicitly included in the process models. A decision guide-
line for distinguishing between business process and busi-
ness rule is presented in [14]. Requirements concerning 
business rules technologies are defined in [2][3]. [15] illus-
trates variables for determining suitable solutions for busi-
ness rule implementation. As a result of the literature review, 
the decision guideline, the requirements and the variables 
provide a contribution to the decision framework. Since no 
previous research allows a simple choosing of an adequate 
business rules execution approach this decision framework is 
the first to extend the current state of research through the 
linking of factors, indicators and business rules execution 
approaches. The determination of the specific business rules 
execution approach depends on the elements, which are to be 
implemented with a rule-based approach. 
III. 
SOA APPROACH BASED ON A WORKFLOW ENGINE 
Figure 1 illustrates the simplified concept of an already 
implemented SOA. The architecture comprises several com-
ponents, which were developed in the context of Business 
Process Management, Business Activity Monitoring, and 
Service-oriented Architecture within the prior research pro-
jects and implements the application scenario “handle a 
goodwill request”. Based on the results of this research activ-
ity, the architecture is extended towards the service-oriented 
integration of BPM and BRM by a corresponding business 
rules execution approach. 
The workflow engine is used for the coordination and ex-
ecution of workflow models. Thus, the engine is responsible 
for ensuring that every activity within the workflow defini-
tion is executed in the defined order and that the data flow 
between the workflow client and the invoked service is rout-
ed correctly. 
 
Business Activity 
Monitoring System
Service
Workflow Client
Task Manager
Workflow Engine
 
Figure 1. Overview of the architecture 
The workflow client presents a user interface to call and 
activate the workflow. Users take their individual tasks from 
a “task list”. Some activities require input from the user. 
Therefore, the engine will request the input from the client as 
a result of a client call. 
The task manager is used to decouple the workflow en-
gine and the workflow client. Thus, the task manager is a 
software component, which abstracts from a specific work-
flow engine. The decoupling is necessary because the techni-
cally tight coupling to a specific workflow engine limits the 
opportunity of flexibility in the event of an enterprise merger 
or acquisition [11]. 
The invoked service implements the business logic nec-
essary to execute the activities specified within the workflow 
model. In accordance with the defined process model, the 
workflow engine invokes the service to execute the activity. 
The invoked service performs the activity and returns the 
result to the workflow engine. 
The Business Activity Monitoring System (BAMS) rep-
resents the software component, which is used for the real-
time monitoring of critical performance indicators to im-
prove the speed and effectiveness of business functions. The 
required data are collected within a data warehouse by the 
performance of extract, transform, and load processes. Based 
on these data, the BAMS generates complex events to build 
critical performance indicators. The complex event pro-
cessing is realised by triggers and stored procedures in active 
databases. The events are analysed and reported by the 
BAMS [10][11]. 
IV. 
APPLICATION SCENARIO 
Figure 2 illustrates the application scenario “handle a 
goodwill request”. The scenario constitutes a part of the sim-
plified insurance process “claim processing” and is required 
to apply the decision framework to choose an adequate busi-
ness rules execution approach. In the future, the scenario will 
be used to evaluate the prototypic implementation.  
With the handling of the process “handle a goodwill re-
quest”, insurance companies check whether and in what 
amount the customer claims are to be satisfied without obli-
gation of the insurance companies. The task “check good-
will” checks whether a claim without obligation of the insur-
ance company should be regulated in order to not compro-
mise the business relationship. In particular the privity of 
contract and the relation with the customer are checked. The 
amount of goodwill will be determined within the business 
rule “set goodwill adjustment”. The last task checks whether 
a contractual alteration is appropriate for the policyholder. 
As a result, it may also be determined that no contractual 
alteration is necessary or that a reasoned recommendation to 
contractual design shall be given [9].  
 
Claim processing
Handle a goodwill request
Check goodwill
Set goodwill
adjustment
Check and cause
contractual alteration
Refuse goodwill
Claim regulation
 
Figure 2. Application scenario “handle a goodwill request” 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

V. 
DECISION FRAMEWORK 
To define the corresponding execution approach for the 
identified business rule “set goodwill adjustment” a decision 
framework was determined. A decision framework was cre-
ated based on factors gained by the performed literature re-
view. Table I describes the used factors. 
TABLE I.  
FACTORS OF THE DECISION FRAMEWORK 
Factor 
Definition 
Frequency of rule 
change 
The volatility can be seen as a measure of flexibil-
ity in terms of changing business rules. To deter-
mine the expected volatility of a business rule, 
changes in the past can be considered. 
Understanding of 
implications 
Understanding of implications regarding a business 
rule modification describes whether the potential 
impact can be safely predicted or not. The risk 
level of changes is reflected by this factor. 
Distribution  
time 
Distribution time defines the time the business rule 
needs to give effect. Thus, the time between the 
release and the business rule provision is defined. 
Transparency 
The factor “transparency” specifies the need for 
justification of decisions regarding the execution of 
a business rule. 
Transaction  
volume 
The factor “transaction volume” defines the re-
quired volume of facts for rule execution. 
Versioning 
Most business rules are revised after some time. 
Here it is important to determine whether the old 
version of the rule must continue to be present, or 
whether the business rule is simply overwritten and 
only the new rule has to be available. 
 
There are several approaches to provide the needed busi-
ness rules execution approach. [2] identifies an inference 
machine, a database management system, a business applica-
tion, and configurations as possible approaches to execute 
business rules. The decision framework can help in choosing 
one approach by considering several application scenarios 
and the factors. Due to economic restrictions in this exempla-
ry implementation only the described application scenario is 
considered. Every rules execution approach has advantages 
and disadvantages in regard to the adopted factors. 
Inference machines enable the efficient and flexible exe-
cution of business rules. The encapsulation of complex deci-
sion logic allows an easier and faster implementation of nec-
essary adjustments. An inference machine enables transpar-
ency if the engine includes an explanation component. For 
business rules execution the inference machine requires all 
relevant facts. This can lead to increased transaction vol-
umes. Most of the inference machines allow rule versioning. 
Database management systems are not developed for fre-
quent changes in their structure but triggers, constraints, and 
stored procedures allow depicting rules. There has to be a 
high understanding of the implications when changes to da-
tabases are made. This leads to a long distribution time. The 
firing of triggers is often not transparent and changes are 
often not trackable. Databases are built for data processing 
and so allow high transaction volumes. 
Business applications are built for long-lasting business 
cases and not for frequent changes. A high understanding of 
the implications is needed for changing a business applica-
tion. So, the distribution time for changes made in business 
applications is long. Business applications need to be built to 
allow transparency in their decision logic if necessary. 
Providing several executable versions of business applica-
tions is difficult to handle. 
Configurations often allow fast modifications but are not 
designed for frequent changes. As configurations often only 
allow adjustments in a defined range the understanding of 
implications is medium. If the configuration is not accessible 
by the user it may take hours to provide a change. Transpar-
ency in the configuration decision logic is only possible 
through implementation in the business application that ac-
cesses the configuration. Versioning is hardly possible for 
configurations. Table II presents the mapping of indicators to 
the business rules execution approach. 
TABLE II.  
DECISION FRAMEWORK 
Factor 
Indicator  
Business rules execution approach 
Frequency of 
rule change  
High (hourly to 
weekly) 
Low (monthly to 
annually) 
Never 
Inference 
machine 
Configuration / 
Database 
Business Ap-
plication 
Understanding 
of  
implications 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Inference  
machine 
Configuration 
Database / 
Business Ap-
plication 
Distribution 
time 
Minutes 
Hours 
Days 
Inference  
machine 
Configuration 
Database / 
Business Ap-
plication 
Transparency  
Yes 
n/a 
No 
Inference  
machine 
n/a 
Database / 
Configuration / 
Business Ap-
plication 
Transaction 
volume 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Inference  
machine 
Business Applica-
tion / Configura-
tion 
Database 
Versioning 
Yes 
n/a 
No 
Inference  
machine 
n/a 
Configuration /  
Database /  
Business Ap-
plication 
 
The requirements for choosing an adequate business rules 
execution approach results from the presented application 
scenario “handle a goodwill request”. In this context, a low 
frequency of rule change is assumed on average. The under-
standing of implications is high. A distribution time of 
minutes is expected and there should be transparency. Only a 
low transaction volume is assumed but there has to be ver-
sioning of business rules. The decision framework provides 
the opportunity to weight the factors. Depending on the re-
spective application scenario the importance of the factors 
has to be determined. Table III presents the weighting of the 
factors concerning the application scenario “handle a good-
will request”.  
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

TABLE III.  
IMPORTANCE OF THE FACTORS 
Factor 
Importance 
Frequency of rule change 
20% 
Understanding of implications 
10% 
Distribution time 
40% 
Transparency 
10% 
Transaction volume 
5% 
Versioning 
15% 
 
The importance of the factors is not generally valid and 
depends on the individual application scenario. Table IV 
shows the rating regarding the appropriate business rules 
execution approach. The rating results from the requirements 
and the importance of the factors. For example the rating for 
the inference machine is 70%. Based on the requirements for 
choosing an adequate business rules execution approach 
concerning the factors distribution time, transparency, trans-
action volume, and versioning the inference machine is the 
result. Regarding the rating result of the inference machine 
the importance of the factors distribution time (40%), trans-
parency (10%), transaction volume (5%), and versioning 
(15%) were cumulated.  
TABLE IV.  
RATING RESULTS 
Approach 
Result 
Inference machine  
70% 
Database 
30% 
Configuration 
20% 
Business Application 
10% 
 
As explicated above, an inference machine is suggested 
by the decision framework. The application of the decision 
framework can be considered as a decision-making aid. In 
addition to the illustrated factors within the decision frame-
work further factors were identified. To reduce the complexi-
ty for choosing an adequate business rules execution ap-
proach only factors that are relevant to the application sce-
nario were considered. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The combination of technologies and concepts such as 
SOA as well as business rules processing / management is a 
promising approach for companies operating in the insurance 
services industry. As the key contribution of this article a 
decision framework for choosing an adequate business rules 
execution approach was developed and applied. By applying 
the decision framework one gets a criteria list, which decides 
when to use a particular concept to implement the business 
rules approach – especially an inference machine, a DBMS-
based approach, a configuration or a hard-coded application. 
Applying the decision framework to the “handle a goodwill 
request” scenario results in an inference-machine-based 
(BRM-based) approach to be most useful. Since the decision 
framework is so far work-in-progress it will be extended in 
future work. The future work has to include the evaluation of 
the usefulness, applicability, and validity of the decision 
framework and the corresponding results. This could be done 
by applying the decision framework in practice and deter-
mining framework extensions in the context of interviews 
with experts. Our subsequent research activity is to develop 
design decisions for the prototypical service-oriented integra-
tion of business process management and business rules 
management regarding the application scenario “handle a 
goodwill request”. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Schäl, “Workflow Management Systems for Process 
Organisations,” Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1996. 
[2] M. Schacher and P. Grässle, “Agile Enterprises with Business 
Rules: The Business Rules Approach,” Berlin: Springer 
Verlag, 2006, ISBN: 978-3540256762. 
[3] J. Boyer and H. Mili, “Agile Business Rule Development: 
Process, Architecture, and JRules Examples,” Berlin: 
Springer Verlag, 2011. 
[4] C. Gäth, “Potential of the Business Rules Approach - 
identifying and exploiting the potential in consideration of 
supportive and complementary approaches,” bachelor thesis, 
University 
of 
Applied 
Science 
and 
Arts, 
Hanover, 
unpublished, 2013. 
[5] T. van Eijndhoven, M. E. Iacob, and M. L. Ponisio, 
“Achieving Business Process Flexibility with Business 
Rules,” 12th Int. IEEE Enterprise Distributed Object 
Computing Conference (EDOC), 2008, pp. 95-104. 
[6] M. Döhring, L. Karg, E. Godehardt and B. Zimmermann, 
“The Convergence of Workflows, Business Rules and 
Complex Events,” 12th Int. Conference on Enterprise 
Information Systems (ICEIS), 2010, pp. 338-343.  
[7] G. Starke and S. Tilkov, “SOA Expert Knowledge,” 
Heidelberg: dpunkt.Verlag, 2007, ISBN: 978-3898644372. 
[8] J. Siedentopf, “Concept for a BRM-System and prototypical 
implementation of an application scenario,” bachelor thesis, 
University 
of 
Applied 
Science 
and 
Arts, 
Hanover, 
unpublished, 2013. 
[9] General Association of the German Insurance Industry, “The 
application architecture of the insurance industry”. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.gdv-
online.de/vaa/vaafe_html/dokument/psl.pdf (2013, Dec. 22). 
[10] T. Bergemann, A. Hausotter, and A. Koschel, “Keeping 
Workflow-Enabled Enterprises Flexible: WfMS Abstraction 
and Advanced Task Management,” 4th Int. Conference on 
Grid and Pervasive Computing Conference (GPC), 2009, pp. 
19-26. 
[11] A. Hausotter, C. Kleiner, A. Koschel, D. Zhang, and H. 
Gehrken, 
“Always 
Stay 
Flexible! 
WfMS-independent 
Business Process Controlling in SOA,” 15th IEEE Int. 
Enterprise 
Distributed 
Object 
Computing 
Conference 
Workshops (EDOCW), 2011, pp. 184-193. 
[12] A. Hödicke, “Conception and Prototypical Implementation of 
a Software Architecture for a BPM and BRM System,” master 
thesis, University of Applied Science and Arts, Hanover, 
unpublished, 2013. 
[13] O. Levina, O. Holschke, J. Rake-Revelant, “Extracting 
Business Logic from Business Process Models,” 2nd IEEE 
Int. Conference on Information Management and Engineering 
(ICIME), 2010, pp. 289-293. 
[14] M. Zur Muehlen, M. Indulska, and K. Kittel, “Towards 
Integrated Modeling of Business Processes and Business 
Rules,” 19th Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
(ACIS), 2008, pp. 690-697. 
[15] M. L. Nelson, R. L. Rariden, and R. Sen, “A Lifecycle 
Approach towards Business Rules Management,” 41st Hawaii 
Int. Conference on System Sciences (HICCS), 2008, pp. 113-
123.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

