Towards Context-Aware EHR-Based Healthcare Systems 
 
Bogdan Niţă, Dan Luca Şerbănaţi 
Faculty of Engineering Taught in Foreign Languages 
Politehnica University of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
nita_bogdan_07@yahoo.com, luca@serbanati.com 
 
 
Abstract—In 
the 
medical 
world 
of 
today, 
healthcare 
professionals need to access the Electronic Health Record 
(EHR) of a patient not only on their desktop computer but also 
on mobile devices such as smart phones or tablets. Through the 
use of mobile electronic devices in everyday medical activities, 
the shortcomings of paper-based medical documents are 
limited removing the need of transcription or loss of 
documents and improving access to and search of patient’s 
medical data. Mobility means awareness of a dynamic context 
whose richness can be used for infering new information and 
we believe that context-aware software approach is suitable for 
the medical world as healthcare professionals mobility is 
increasing. 
The 
proposed 
approach 
uses 
contextual 
information on the users of software applications involved in 
healthcare activities, patients and healthcare professionals to 
provide them with personalized, user-tailored views on the 
patients’ EHR according to the scenario for which the 
application has been accessed. We have designed a system 
capable of perceiving context and reacting to ambiental 
changes to provide healthcare professionals and patients with 
EHR data dynamically generated according to the gathered 
information from the context. The user receives a customized 
view on the patient’s EHR tailored upon her/his current 
context. 
Keywords-context aware computing; pervasive healthcare; 
mobile computing 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the last years, attempts to implement national or 
regional healthcare systems supported by information 
systems that intensively use electronic devices have 
encountered many barriers: cultural, social and financial [1]. 
A major shift in healthcare will take place when care 
providers will realize that the critical element in work is the 
ability to exchange ideas, information and knowledge in a 
collaborative environment and that improved information 
communication benefits caregivers and their patients. From 
a social point of view, the main concerns are the privacy and 
the security of the stored data; it is well-known that a 
computer system is not 100% protected from data leaks or 
hackers’ attacks. Regarding the financial issues, most of the 
professionals involved in the healthcare domain consider 
that investing in a system that would provide assistance in 
healing patients is not a must-have. This argument arises 
especially in countries or regions where capital resources 
are limited [1]. 
In the last years, the concept of mobility gained new 
dimensions by the multitude of devices emerging on market: 
personal device assistants (PDAs), smart-phones, tablet-PCs 
and notebooks. Nowadays, these devices are light, powerful 
and accessible and they provide mobility, ubiquitous access 
to information and enable easy interconnection of their users 
[9]. The growing market of mobile devices has encouraged 
the development of applications in medical fields. Several 
hospital-based 
prototypes 
have 
been 
proposed: 
"WardInHand" [6], "MobileWARD - Mobile Electronic 
Patient Record” [5], "Intelligent Hospital Software" or 
"Context-aware mobile communication". Each of these 
programs ended with questionnaires filled up by medical 
staff that interacted with it and the feedback is generally 
positive. Except "WardInHand", these prototypes make use 
of the idea of context-aware computing, a term first 
introduced by Schilit and Theimer and defined as “the 
ability of a mobile user’s applications to discover and react 
to changes in the environment they are situated in” [8]. 
Studies [1, 7, 9] have shown that in last few years 
healthcare professionals have started using mobile devices 
as assistants in their daily work. However, ubiquitous access 
to EHR database does not improve the medical workflow. 
The guiding idea of this paper is that on the one hand, not 
all the information from a patient’s EHR is needed at some 
point but only those relevant to the current situation, 
sometimes browsing a large amount of medical data and 
selecting the useful one may prove difficult and time-
consuming. On the other hand context information can be 
used to better customize the presentation of the EHR’s 
selected information to the final user. We explore the idea of 
endowment of an EHR system with the ability to perceive 
the contextual information of its users and to use it to sort 
out EHR data and consequently provide the users with it. 
We propose a system to react dynamically to situations for 
which it is accessed and provide its users with a customized 
view of the patient’s EHR. A customized selection of 
EHR’s data built upon contextual information will provide 
users with increased access and shorten the time needed to 
browse and search clinical data, increasing the efficiency of 
the medical staff. We also explore the idea of adapting EHR 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

data to user’s preferences and profile (e.g., font size, font 
color or background picture). 
The paper is structured as follows: Section II depicts the 
contribution 
of 
the 
context-awareness 
paradigm 
in 
improving EHRs security and afterwards focuses on 
contextual attributes of healthcare domain’s actors and 
emphasizes their particularities. Section III describes the 
overall structure of our model. In particular, we propose an 
architecture, make a thoroughly description of our approach 
and discuss its utility from a patient point of view. Section 
IV concludes the paper. 
II. 
CONTEXT DATA IN HEALTHCARE ENVIRONMENTS 
This section begins with a discussion regarding EHR 
systems security issues and improvements that may be 
brought by considering users’ context. Afterwards, we 
outline how context-aware computing paradigm may add 
value to a conventional EHR system, and finally, we review 
various definitions of context-aware computing and present 
the contextual attributes of the actors involved in the 
healthcare process, healthcare professionals and patients, 
emphasizing their particularities. 
A. Security and privacy 
In the last few years, some of the reasons of reluctance 
in implementing EHR systems were the security and the 
privacy concerns regarding the data stored [11]. As many 
EHR systems are centralized (region- or country-wide) 
unauthorized access can have negative effects; once you are 
logged in to the system one can access and even modify 
private data of the patients causing possible permanent loss 
of data. Besides the integrity concerns, all the reads must be 
thoroughly authorized as the healthcare data distinguishes 
by its sensitivity. However, significant improvements were 
made towards security. For example, in the United States, 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) stipulates that patients can request a detailed list of 
all the accesses through their medical records [1]. One way 
to implement this facility is a user-centric auditing system, 
i.e., a portal where the user logs and sees a history of 
individuals who accessed their personal data. 
Moreover, each patient having a network-accessible 
EHR can indicate which are the public information from 
her/his own record and which are private, each country 
implementing regional or countrywide EHR systems has 
imposed regulations regarding security and privacy of 
electronic stored data and backup systems have been 
proposed such that intentional or unintentional loss of data 
to be prevented.  
As regarding security of EHR systems, studies have 
been made regarding healthcare domain actors’ contextual 
attributes particularities and their influence in improving 
EHR's access control and security. Shetty and Loke 
proposed a dynamic context-aware access control model 
[12] and they suggested using subject, time and activity 
while replacing location with resource as location cannot 
stand on its own without resource or subject. 
B. Mobility and context-awareness 
Paper-based health records have shortcomings for both 
patients and healthcare providers, e.g., usually the health 
record of a patient is a single hard-copy kept by one medical 
institution rendering outside access to it difficult and 
cumbersome; manually search of data may be time-
consuming; volatility of paper brings risks like partial loss 
of data or even irretrievable loss of data. Paper-based health 
records provide to healthcare providers an amount of data 
difficult to access, search or summarize and to the owner a 
risk of losing it.  
Through the implementation of centralized EHR systems 
the mobility of medical documents has increased requiring 
to each healthcare institution only an Internet connection to 
be able to access the remote EHR. Studies [9, 11] have 
reported that implementation of EHR systems tend to reduce 
or even eliminate shortcomings of paper-based health 
records by increased security, ubiquitous access, reduced 
costs and the ability to predict and reduce the effect(s) of 
medical conditions. Implementation of different healthcare 
systems (e.g., WardInHand [6], MobileWard [5] or Clinical 
Trials Information System [7]) brought to the forefront of 
healthcare providers the mobiles devices, e.g., PDAs, tablets 
or smart phones moving the task of accessing, updating and 
changing medical data from desktop computers to mobile 
devices. This transition brought mobility to healthcare 
providers enabling access to EHR virtually anywhere, 
anytime being no longer constrained to use a desktop 
computer. 
Powered with mobility enabled by mobile devices and 
the context-aware paradigm, the EHR systems may be seen 
from a new perspective, by adapting itself to the user’s 
context in one specific situation, thus facilitating easy, quick 
and comprehensible access to situation-tailored EHR data. 
The transition of medical documents from desktop 
computers access to mobile devices involves moving from a 
relative static context to a dynamic one where not only the 
healthcare provider specialization involved is important but 
also the actors’ location and the patients’ circumstances, 
e.g., a routine or emergency situation or the device used for 
accessing data. 
C. Particularities  of contextual attributes in the 
healthcare domain 
Interaction between the healthcare providers and an 
individual begins when the health state of the latter 
significantly worsens with respect to its regular state. From 
this point a team of healthcare providers (e.g., physicians, 
surgeons, nurses or radiologists) work together to cure the 
patient and to bring his health state to a normal level. 
During a medical treatment the team members provide each 
other with data according to their medical specialization and 
collaborate for improving the medical condition of the 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

individual. Each member of the team has a specific role and 
given tasks which must be accomplished in a given period 
of time. The interaction with patients needs to be supported 
by accurate and detailed information regarding patients’ past 
medical condition so the clinical history of the individuals 
should be structured and accessible in a meaningful way. 
In [15], a context service is designed enabling the 
collection of contextual information which is further 
forwarded to interested clients. Henricksen, et al. [16] 
suggests that in pervasive computing applications the most 
relevant context information consist of the capabilities of 
the mobile devices, the characteristics of the network, user 
specific information and user preferences. Schilit, et al. [8] 
observed that contextual information goes beyond user’s 
location because other things of interest are changing. 
Bettini, et al. describes a situation as being “a temporal state 
within context” [17]. 
Two of the most used context-aware computing 
definitions, that of Schilit, et al. [8] and that of Dey [18] 
place the space above other context categories. Individuals 
tend to associate a particular location with specific 
situations which they analyze and infer additional 
information upon [17]. The interaction of a healthcare 
provider with the EHR system begins when he logs in, at 
this point the system should gather the user’s attributes (e.g., 
name, position inside medical institution or medical 
specialization), graphical interface preferences (e.g., font 
size or font type), location (e.g., inside hospital, inside 
ambulance or inside extrication car), the capabilities of 
her/his mobile device accessing the system (e.g., touch 
screen one, full keyboard one or size of the screen), etc. 
During a session, while some context information remain 
unchanged (e.g., user specific information or the capabilities 
of the mobile device accessing the system) others may 
evolve (e.g., user location or user preferences for 
information presentation). 
Gathering patient-side context information is not a 
simple task to do as these data may be subject of uncertainty 
or/and inaccuracy of the source (e.g., human or devices). In 
certain circumstances like calling an ambulance or 
extrication 
service 
a 
second 
person 
reports 
about 
individual(s) requiring medical assistance. As in most cases 
the caller has little or no medical knowledge she/he may 
report vague information (e.g., the caller reports that an 
individual is bleeding but does not know the source of 
bleeding) or inaccurate data (e.g., an individual may have 
fainted but in fact he suffered a heart attack). Dey’s 
definition of the context concept “any information that can 
be used to characterize the situation of an entity” [18] 
suggests that any information regarding the individual’s 
needing medical assistance may be helpful to the system; of 
course, interpretation of possibly inaccurate data should be 
approached carefully. On the other hand, when the patient is 
hosted inside a healthcare organization medical observations 
are made by healthcare professionals, medical equipment is 
used for monitoring and all these data can be considered 
reliable, that is they accurately reflect the patient’s health 
condition. 
Our approach considers the context information 
emerging from a dynamic context analysis and uses it to 
compose a view on the patient’s EHR that delivers to its 
users data tailored according to their current context, thus 
improving access and browsing of medical data. 
III. 
CONTEXT-AWARE ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORD 
This section starts by presenting two scenarios and is 
followed by the description of our approach to an intelligent 
EHR system. We present how the system is able to react to 
the context inferred from the gathered contextual data of 
both the healthcare provider and patient and how it selects 
relevant data from patient’s EHR and displays it according 
to the user’s preferences. An architecture for the Context-
Aware System is presented in Fig. 1. Throughout this 
section, short paragraphs expose current issues and based on 
these, we motivate choices to our approach. We conclude 
this section with a discussion on patients’ benefit from using 
the system. 
A. Scenarios 
This section present two common medical scenarios and 
the main concerns of the roles playing these scenarios are 
identified. We then discuss how the Context-Aware EHR 
system can provide medical data to healthcare professionals 
and patients according to situation, place, time and available 
resources of both doctor(s) and patient(s). 
Scenario 1 
A paramedic working at SMURD Bucharest, an 
emergency rescue service established in Romania, during 
his shift is informed that he must take part in an extrication 
mission. On his way to the accident site he has 7 minutes to 
examine the EHR(s) of the victim(s) involved in the car 
accident and to gather personal information like age, 
previous diseases and chronic conditions of victim(s). 
After providing first aid and after patient(s) stabilization 
the paramedic takes them to the hospital. Meanwhile, (s)he 
fulfills a mission report and enters it to the system providing 
all the details about the victim(s) and their health status to 
doctors from the emergency room.  
Note: The 7 minutes interval is the average time of 
intervention of a SMURD ambulance in Bucharest [13]. 
Scenario 2 
Andrew, a 16 years-old athlete is hospitalized for 2 days 
in Orthopedic Unit of the Hospital of St. John and St. 
Elizabeth from London. From the first medical tests doctors 
diagnosed the young boy with Osgood-Schlatter disease and 
before prescribing medications and sending him to a 
physical therapist doctors want to perform additional tests 
as his disease has relapsed. Meanwhile, during his stay in 
hospital, Andrew wants to know more on his disease and on 
possible causes of relapse. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

 
Figure 1: The architecture for the Context-Aware EHR System 
In the first scenario, the time-critical situation requires 
an efficient management of both information and resources. 
On his way to the accident site the paramedic should be 
informed on the accident (e.g., number of victims, their 
health status, accident severity, weather conditions) and on 
the victim(s) (e.g., age, last known health status and 
previous diseases). When the paramedic accesses the EHR 
system (s)he should be provided with data according to both 
her/his and victim(s) context so that only the information 
needed for providing first aid (for example: age, last known 
health status, previous diseases) to be displayed upon his 
preferences which may include for example font type, font 
size, with/without images. 
In the second scenario, while trying to inform about his 
disease, Andrew accesses his EHR and browses his past 
personal medical information. As his EHR stores a large 
amount of data, finding the desired information may prove 
laborious and also several medical terms specific to 
healthcare professionals may prove difficult to be 
understood. On one hand he needs to find out information 
on past symptoms and medical tests and on the other hand 
he needs to find out information on followed medical 
treatment and physical recovery. 
When accessing the EHR, one way of making the EHR 
data comprehensible and easy to browse by the user is to 
perceive the user’s context. For instance using Hyun-Yong 
Noh, et al. [19] indoor localization technique Andrew’s 
location inside hospital can be determined with a high level 
of accuracy (Orthopedic Unit). Location along with 
information on device used for accessing the EHR (e.g., 
tablet PC or smartphone), the user’s profile and preferences 
(e.g., font size or background picture) are used by the 
system for sorting out information and displaying it 
according to user’s concerns. Moreover, for a non-
professional, i.e., the user belongs to the patient profile, the 
system may provide more comprehensible synonyms of 
medical terms and web-site links related to current disease 
to provide information on treatments or physical recovery. 
B. Context discovering 
In order to react according to current needs, the system 
has to gather specific data about the current situation as well 
as data related to the main stakeholders: patients and 
healthcare professionals. As a registered user logs on to the 
system his profile and personal preferences are retrieved 
from the user database and used by the system to customize 
the user interface. This is particularly important as the user 
should feel comfortable with the way the data are displayed. 
According to her/his stored preferences, text will be 
formatted with the desired font size, font type and font color 
and the images will be properly sized.  
As the user may access the system from a multitude of 
devices (e.g., desktop computer, tablet, smartphone or 
notebook) the next step is to gather the device capabilities 
(e.g., screen size, input mode or network connection speed). 
Sensing the device capabilities along with the available 
bandwidth avoids locking the connection until the transfer 
of a high resolution image (such as radiography) in which 
case it may be suitable to send a lower resolution image to 
the requesting device. Device’s contextual information help 
improve the visual appearance of data displayed by smart 
scaling the images and the text to fit the screen size [14]. 
Once the user is authenticated, a session instance is 
created for her/him. As individuals have the right to expect 
their EHR data are kept confidential and they are the only to 
decide which medical information is public and which is 
private, our system comply with these regulations through 
inheritance of security, privacy and confidentiality levels 
regarding EHR data, owned by the EHR system. On each 
session instance an encrypted communication channel with 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

the EHR database is established ensuring that the data 
cannot be intercepted by unauthorized persons. 
During the user’s session, the Context Service that runs 
in background continuously gathers contextual information 
from the context-associated sensors (e.g., GPS sensor, 
temperature sensor or light level sensor) and updates to the 
content of a Context Repository with it, in this way 
consistent and up-to-date contextual data is provided to the 
system. 
Sensors can be both physical and “virtual”. The physical 
sensors gather information such as:  
 
Environmental, e.g., temperature sensor or light 
level sensor; 
 
Location, e.g., by means of a GPS sensor; 
 
Medical data, e.g., heart rate or blood pressure. 
“Virtual” sensors gather context data from software 
applications or from operating system. Regarding our 
approach, the “virtual” sensors may supplement certain 
unavailable sensors or communicate with third-party 
institutions (e.g., emergency call centers or police). For 
example, as the position inside a building cannot be 
determined using the GPS sensor, a “virtual” sensor invokes 
a localization service which determines the position of the 
user using indoor localization techniques proposed by 
Hyun-Yong Noh, et al. [19]. As emergency call centers have 
implemented an automatic detection system of the caller’s 
context (e.g., GSM cell-based location, name or age) it is 
suitable 
to 
have 
a 
background 
application 
which 
automatically gathers these patient contextual data removing 
the need of manually forwarding these data to emergency 
medical institution. 
However, sensors capabilities are limited. As there are 
situations in which the sensors cannot gather a particular 
contextual information we think it is important to endow the 
Context-Aware EHR System with the ability to manually 
input authoritative contextual data and thus enable explicit 
user actions (e.g., manual entry of the patient’s symptoms) 
[20]. 
In the context discovery phase, the Context Service 
gathers all the available contextual information and stores 
them in the Context Repository and it is further updated as 
information changes. 
 The stored Context Repository data provide to the 
“Inference Engine” contextual information to be used in the 
inference phase which will further provide the user with a 
personalized view on the EHR’s data and a quick and 
comprehensible access to medical data relevant for the 
concrete, particular state of affairs. Table 1 summarizes the 
contextual categories proposed for our system and offers a 
detailed view upon contextual attributes of each category. 
C. Making context information useful 
Field studies reported that the topic of searching 
information within EHRs is insufficiently explored and the 
lack of the search functionality often hampers healthcare 
professional’s access to patient’s data [21, 22]. However, as  
the patient’s EHR comprises large amount of data, a 
keyword search utility [22] does not ease access to 
information nor facilitates browsing. During clinical 
workflows contextual attributes and patient’s health state 
change and we envision that a system which proactively 
gathers these parameters will be capable of continuously 
provide situation tailored data. 
The aim of a doctor is to heal the patient or at least to 
soothe his pain in case of an incurable disease. Doctor’s 
medical knowledge is somehow insufficient as making a 
proper diagnostic relies not only on knowledge or aptness to 
predict patient’s health state evolution but on patient’s 
clinical history. Setting a proper diagnostic is one of the 
critical points of the workflow as it backs the patient’s 
healing process. The clinical history offers a better 
understanding of how the patient’s health state evolved up 
to the current one and how past medical conditions 
influenced the current health state. 
The “Inference Engine” endows the Context-Aware 
EHR System with the ability of acting proactively. It 
accesses the Context Repository and based on the acquired 
contextual information it queries the EHR database and 
extracts situation relevant information. The search through 
EHR considers three of its major sections: 
 
Text-based information, e.g., name, age, 
medical history or allergies; 
 
The collection of clinical images, e.g., 
radiographs or photos; 
 
The collection of videos, e.g., oral examination 
videos made with an endo-oral camera or colon 
videos. 
One of the challenges of the system is to extract and provide 
the user with medical data according to a given context and 
to filter irrelevant information. This is done by the 
“Inference Engine”. Namely, it follows the idea of ranking 
text-based information according to its relevance in a given 
context. Using patterns, the raw contextual information is 
associated with a collection of related terms which are 
further searched within EHR database. As for example if the 
patient has a dislocated right ankle the system will search 
his medical history to search for medical data related to his 
TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF CONSIDERED CONTEXTUAL 
ATTRIBUTES 
Context category 
Attributes 
Source 
Personal profile 
Name, 
age, 
specialization... 
Users’ repository 
Preferences 
Font type, font size, 
font color... 
Users’ repository 
Device capabilities 
Screen 
size, 
input 
mode... 
“Virtual” sensors 
Environmental 
Date, 
time, 
temperature, 
light 
level... 
“Virtual” or physical 
sensors 
Location 
GPS 
coordinates, 
place inside building 
“Virtual” or physical 
sensors 
Medical data 
Heart 
rate, 
blood 
pressure... 
Physical sensors 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

right ankle. All the EHR data related to the patient’s right 
ankle (e.g., diagnosis, medication prescribed or clinical 
decisions) will be high ranked as opposed to those which 
refer to his left ankle. A “Decision Frame” [23] is included 
to present the patient’s relevant information. For the clinical 
images and videos the search is made through attached tags. 
Finally, gathered medical data are displayed according to 
the stored user’s preferences and profile. In Section 4, we 
describe how specific medical terms and codes can be 
converted to general ones thus helping patients to 
understand their own medical data.  
Additionally, 
a 
“Context 
Knowledge 
Base” 
is 
maintained and updated with information from the 
applications of healthcare professionals. It provides a 
collection of context-patterns extracted from previous 
contexts (e.g., the victim has suffered a frontal car accident 
so it may have caught his feet in the car body or the victim 
has suffered a heart attack and he may faint). Namely, each 
medical event and its contextual attributes is stored and in 
case of further events that match to a great extent it is 
shown. 
Previous 
medical 
situations 
and 
healthcare 
professionals’ reports may offer a better insight of the actual 
situation as similar circumstances are probably to have 
similar effects. Each pattern is associated to the possible 
effects it may produce. Matching the current context with 
context-patterns 
in 
the 
knowledge 
base 
contextual 
information gain meaning and can be better used by the 
system to provide users with different point of views 
derived from previous similar cases. This inferred 
information will provide useful data for the current situation 
based on previous circumstances, thus predictions on 
patient’s health state evolution can be made. 
As noted above, the sensors, be they physical or 
“virtual” cannot gather certain information. Therefore, the 
context information may be vague and thus the system may 
retrieve insufficient EHR data. The Context-Aware EHR 
System does not restrict the user to one particular, scenario 
specific, patient’s data view, if more EHR data are needed 
the system can be further interrogated by standard queries 
requesting the missing pieces of information. The retrieved 
data are further merged with the inferred one. 
  
D. The Context-Aware EHR System. A patient point of 
view 
The EHR is a collection of medical information which 
reflects patients’ past medical history. It comprises highly 
structured data and its entries use standard codes and 
classifications 
for 
representing 
medical 
data. 
This 
standardization may seem fair for healthcare professionals 
since the EHR systems promote collaborative and goal-
directed treatment planning [27, 26] but may appear 
cumbersome as patients don’t usually have medical 
knowledge and thus they may encounter problems in 
accessing and understanding their own medical records. 
Recent works [25, 28] have explored the concept of “active 
patient” which no longer sits on the sideline waiting for the 
doctor to cure her/him but actively participate in his own 
care. Of course, to increase the efficiency of the “active 
patient” he must be endowed with tools.  
MedlinePlus Connect is a health information resource 
freely provided by National Library of Medicine (NLM), 
National Institutes of Health (NIH), and the Department of 
Health and Human Services (HHS) aiming both patients and 
healthcare providers. It handles medical standard codes and 
retrieves related information (e.g., for a medication code the 
side-effects, dosage or special precautions for that 
medicine).  
In order to obtain a patient-friendly EHR data view we 
make use of the above mentioned MedlinePlus Connect 
Web Service; a standard encoded message is converted to a 
non-professional user-friendly format and, consequently, lab 
tests, medications and diagnostic codes and other specific 
medical information gain meaning for the general public. 
Additionally, through “Context Knowledge Base” more 
context-specific information will be available for each 
context-pattern, i.e., patients can review similar previous 
medical situations thus be aware of the evolution of their 
disease and possible complications. 
    “Sensing user” role empowers patients to participate 
more in their healthcare workflow process and to be aware 
of what has been done and what is further planned in their 
care process. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES AND PROTOTYPES 
As the proposed system needs to proactively act 
according to a medical situation we first need a services 
platform to support context-aware application. In our future 
implementation we plan to use WASP platform [29], a 
robust and configurable services platform which gathers and 
provide contextual information to subscribed clients. We are 
aware that unavailability of certain contextual information 
may lead to incomplete data shown to users so we will 
implement and test the facility to refine the results through 
manually specifying certain contextual attributes and 
through standard queries. 
One important issue regarding EHR systems is the 
unavailability of medical data due to its absence from the 
medical records or due to owner’s desire to keep it private. 
We will develop several test scenarios and together with 
patients and healthcare providers we will try to enhance the 
quality of retrieved results. The patients are those to set their 
own EHR level of confidence and with respect to the 
proposed scenarios to have healthcare providers’ opinion 
upon retrieved medical data degree of detail. This particular 
research is important on one side for patients as they can see 
the impact of different levels of confidentiality upon 
retrieved medical data and on the other side for healthcare 
professionals as unavailability of certain data leads to 
incorrect diagnostics or hinder him to have patient’s clinical 
picture. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
As sometimes search of information in large databases may 
be difficult, structuring EHR’s information according to 
situations’ specific needs enables a predictive medical 
information retrieval. Of the patient the system brings the 
opportunity of accessing the EHR medical information 
without the need of knowing the messaging standards (e.g., 
HL7 v3 or HL7 v2.x). The system uses the perceived 
contextual information and determines which medical data 
match the given circumstances and may be of interest. 
 The leading idea of this paper is to build a system to 
help EHR users retrieve medical data other than using 
standard ways which in certain cases proves to be 
cumbersome and time-consuming. To our knowledge, this 
study was the first to embed the conventional EHR database 
into a system which gathers user’s contextual information 
and uses it to proactively retrieve patient’s medical data 
tailored on user’s device capabilities. Through a customized 
view of the EHR data, healthcare providers have they work 
supported by easy and comprehensible data access and also, 
patients are offered an interpretation of their medical data 
for a better insight. However, it is important to note that 
users are not restricted to this particular, scenario specific, 
patient’s data view. If the Context-Aware EHR System 
retrieves exiguous information the user can query the EHR 
database typically in order to obtain the missing pieces of 
information.  
We are currently planning a pilot deployment of our 
proposed approach followed by in-depth interviews and 
surveys with its users on application’s usefulness. We also 
plan to build a complementary system to support entering to 
the EHR medical data along with of contextual information. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D. Gans, J. Kralewski, T. Hammons and B. Dowd, „Medical 
Groups’ Adoption Of Electronic Health Records and 
Information Systems,” Health Affairs, 24, no.5 (2005):1323-
1333, doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.24.5.1323. 
[2] 
http://ehealth-
strategies.eu/database/documents/Estonia_CountryBrief_eHSt
rategies.pdf. Retrieved: February, 2012. 
[3] 
http://www.sante.gouv.fr/acces-web-patient.html. Retrieved: 
February, 2012. 
[4] 
http://ehealth-
strategies.eu/database/documents/France_CountryBrief_eHStr
ategies.pdf. Retrieved: February, 2012. 
[5] 
M. B. Skov and R. T. Høegh, “Supporting Information Access 
in a Hospital Ward by a Context-Aware Mobile Electronic 
Patient Record,” in Crestani, F. et al. (Eds.) Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing, 2006, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 205-214. 
[6] 
M. Ancona, E. Coscia, G. Dodero, M. Earney, V. Gianuzzi, F. 
Minuto, and S. Virtuoso, „WardInHand: Wireless Access to 
Clinical Records for Mobile Healthcare Professionals,” 
Proceedings of 1st Annual Conference on Mobile & Wireless 
Healthcare Applications, London, United Kingdom, 2001. 
[7] 
M. 
A. 
Grasso, 
“Clinical 
Applications 
of 
Handheld 
Computers,” Proceedings of the 17th IEEE Symposium on 
Computer-Based 
Medical 
Systems (CBMS 
'04), 
IEEE 
Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 2004, pp. 141-. 
DOI:10.1109/CBMS.2004.28. 
[8] 
B. Schilit, N. Adams, and R. Want, “Context-Aware 
Computing Applications,” Proceedings of the 1994 First 
Workshop 
on 
Mobile 
Computing 
Systems 
and 
Applications (WMCSA 
'94), 
IEEE 
Computer 
Society, 
Washington, 
DC, 
USA, 
pp. 
85-90, 
DOI:10.1109/WMCSA.1994.16. 
[9] 
N. Bricon-Souf and C. R. Newman, “Context Awareness in 
Health Care: a Review,” International Journal of Medical 
Informatics 76(1), pp. 2–12 (2007).  
[10] 
L. Barkhuus and A. K. Dey, “Is Context-Aware Computing 
Taking Control away from the User? Three Levels of 
Interactivity Examined,” Proc. Ubicomp '03, Springer (2003), 
pp. 149-156. 
[11] 
N. Menachemi, T. H. Collum, „Benefits and drawbacks of 
electronic health record systems,” Risk Management and 
Healthcare Policy Journal, vol. IV, pp. 47-55 (2011). 
[12] 
P. Shetty and S. W. Loke, “Modelling Context-Aware 
Security for Electronic Health Records,” Encyclopedia of 
Information Ethics and Security (ed) M. Quigley, 2007, pp. 
463-469, IGI Global. 
[13] 
http://www.paginamedicala.ro/stiri-medicale/SMURD-
Bucuresti-implineste-doi-ani_7437/. Retrieved March, 2011. 
[14] 
D. Zhang, Z. Yu, and C. Chung-Yau, “Context-Aware 
Infrastructure for Personalized Healthcare,” The International 
Workshop on Personalized Health (pHealth 2004), IOS Press, 
pp. 154-163, December 13-15, 2004, Belfast, Northern 
Ireland, United Kingdom. 
[15] 
H. Lei, D. M. Sow, J. S. Davis, G. Banavar, and M. R. Ebling, 
“The design and applications of a context service,” 
SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev. 6, 4 (October 
2002), pp. 45-55, DOI:10.1145/643550.643554. 
[16] 
K. Henricksen, J. Indulska, and A. Rakotonirainy, “Modeling 
Context Information in Pervasive Computing Systems,”, 
Proceedings of the First International Conference on 
Pervasive Computing (Pervasive '02), Friedemann Mattern 
and Mahmoud Naghshineh (Eds.), Springer-Verlag, London, 
UK, pp. 167-180. 
[17] 
C. Bettini, O. Brdiczka, K. Henricksen, J. Indulska, D. 
Nicklas, A. Ranganathan, and Daniele Riboni, “A survey of 
context modelling and reasoning techniques,” Pervasive Mob. 
Comput. 6, 
2 
(April 
2010), 
pp. 
161-180, 
DOI:10.1016/j.pmcj.2009.06.002. 
[18] 
A. K. Dey, “Understanding and Using Context,” Personal 
Ubiquitous 
Comput. 5, 
1 
(January 
2001), 
pp. 
4-7, 
DOI:10.1007/s007790170019. 
[19] 
N. Hyun-Yong, L. Jin-Hyung, Sae-Won Oh, H. Keum-Sung, 
and Sung-Bae Cho, “Exploiting indoor location and mobile 
information for context-awareness service,” Inf. Process. 
Manage. 48, 
1 
(January 
2012), 
pp. 
1-12, 
DOI:10.1016/j.ipm.2011.02.005. 
[20] 
P. Coppola, V. Della Mea, L. Di Gaspero, S. Mizzaro, I. 
Scagnetto, A. Selva, L. Vassena, and P. Z. Rizio, „MoBe: 
Context-aware mobile applications on mobile devices for 
mobile users,” Proc. of 1st int. workshop on exploiting 
context histories in smart environments (ECHISE 2005). 
[21] 
T. Christensen, A. Grimsmo, “Instant availability of patient 
records, but diminished availability of patient information: a 
multi-method study of GP's use of electronic patient records,” 
BMC medical informatics and decision making, Vol. 8 (28 
March 2008), 12, doi:10.1186/1472-6947-8-12. 
[22] 
K. Natarajan, D. Stein, S. Jain, and N. Elhadad, “An Analysis 
of Clinical Queries in an Electronic Health Record Search 
Utility,” International Journal of Medical Informatics - July 
2010, 
Vol. 
79, 
Issue 
7, 
pp. 
515-522, 
DOI: 
10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2010.03.004. 
[23] 
E. Bayegan, Ø. Nytrø and A. Grimsmo, “Ranking of 
Information in the Computerized Problem-Oriented Patient 
Record,” Medinfo 10 (Pt 1) (2001), pp. 594–598. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

[24] 
K. Sadegh-Zadeh, „Fundamentals of clinical methodlogy 4. 
Diagnosis,” Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Vol. 20, Issue 
3, pp. 227-241, November 2000. 
[25] 
D. Vawdrey, L. Wilcox, S. Collins, S. Bakken, S. Feiner, A. 
Boyer, and S. Restaino, „A tablet computer application for 
patients to participate in their hospital care,” Proc AMIA 
2011, pp. 1428-1435. 
[26] 
K. J. Leonard and W. J. Winkelman, „Overcoming Structural 
Constraints to Patient Utilization of Electronic Medical 
Records: A Critical Review and Proposal for an Evaluation 
Framework,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, 2004, March-April, 11(2), pp. 151-161. 
[27] 
H. Stam van Ginneken, “Computer-based patient record with 
a cardiologic extension”, Medinfo 1995,  8(Pt 2):1666. 
[28] 
L. P. Vardoulakis, A. Karlson, D. Morris, G. Smith, J. 
Gatewood, and D. Tan, “Using mobile phones to present 
medical information to hospital patients,” In Proceedings of 
the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems(CHI '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
2012, 
pp. 
1411-1420, 
DOI=10.1145/2207676.2208601, 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2207676.2208601. 
[29] 
http://www.freeband.nl/kennisimpuls/projecten/wasp/. 
Retrieved: 
March 
2012.
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

