Improving Games by SMS Through the MobileDeck Concept: A Quiz Game 
Proposal Focused on Emerging Markets 
Mauro Ricardo da Silva Teófilo 
Service Experience Department 
Nokia Technology Institute 
Manaus, Brazil 
ext-mauro.teofilo@nokia.com 
Marlon Farias da Luz 
Service Experience Department 
Nokia Technology Institute 
Manaus, Brazil 
ext-marlon.luz@nokia.com
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes a case study of a quiz 
game designed to be used using SMS technology; the 
study consists of monitoring the game adaption to the 
MobileDeck concept. In the MobileDeck concept, the 
SMSs are received and sent through an appropriate 
graphical user interface. System efficiency and game 
improvement will be analyzed and discussed in this 
paper, in order to infer that the use of this proposed 
model is beneficial to the ecosystem of games based on 
SMS. The integration of the cited game to MobileDeck 
concept was proved a success, providing a new way of 
playing games via SMS. 
Keywords-mobile game; emerging market service; mobile 
application; SMS (Short Message Service) 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Short Message Service (SMS) has long been established 
as the de facto standard for sending and receiving text 
messages on mobile phones. As one of the most widely 
adopted communications services, it has been successfully 
used for over a decade as a marketing and services channel 
[1][2]. 
According to [1], the success of SMS communication 
may be attributed to 3 main reasons: it is ubiquitous, it has 
near real time delivery and it follows the “store and forward” 
mechanism, with later retransmission in case of failure. 
Moreover, the communication service holds a huge active 
users base [3], and a high response rate [4]. 
In emerging markets, those characteristics are especially 
crucial when designing mobile services, considering that 
mobile Internet is still gaining momentum [5]. In this 
scenario, text messaging is the most viable way to reach 
larger audiences, albeit compromising a considerable portion 
of the engagement effect [6][7]. 
Coulton et al. [8] conclude that although developing 
cellular applications for entertainment can be very 
challenging, it is also highly rewarding in that it provides the 
opportunity to produce new and exciting entertainment 
applications.  Hence this paper makes use of the MobileDeck 
[9] concept to try improving the usability of games based on 
SMS exchange. MobileDeck is a complete solution, designed 
to improve the user experience of services that make use of 
SMS, adding a Graphical User Interface (GUI) to better 
represents the service. Thus, this implementation allows text 
messaging to behave exactly like a data feed to a rich 
application. In this sense, it offers a new, user-friendly 
channel for several existent SMS services like news, 
horoscope, promotions, and so forth [9]. 
The MobileDeck solution was launched in the Brazilian 
market in 2009 with various services, such as, location, 
weather forecast, news, etc., and by mid-2011 it had over 
600,000 active users.  
The purpose of this paper is to present a feasibility study 
of adding a game as a service to the MobileDeck solution. 
The game to be studied is a simple game in which the 
players attempt to answer questions correctly, like a quiz. In 
this case, the questions and alternatives are sent to the player 
via SMS. The interaction occurs when the user chooses an 
alternative, and sends it via SMS. This described game 
should be adapted to the MobileDeck concept, building a 
GUI to facilitate the interaction between players and game. 
Besides the general description of the technology used to 
enable it, this paper also aims to demonstrate the acceptance 
by potential users, establishing if this idea is valid for games 
adaptation or not. 
II. 
MOBILEDECK 
To better understand this study, it is necessary to 
introduce the MobileDeck concept. The key idea behind 
MobileDeck is to provide an attractive front-end for 
requesting and receiving content via SMS. On the client side, 
it consists of a mobile application capable of displaying both 
textual information and graphics using predefined layouts 
that are accessed through instructions contained in a binary 
SMS. In other words, every time the user requests a service, 
the application sends an SMS that is received by a specific 
server, and the response is again redirected to the 
application. The returning SMS acts like a script that builds 
and feeds the next screen with the appropriate content.  
This solution can be explained through the example in 
Figure 1. From the main menu, which is a grid of icons, the 
user can choose one of the services, e.g. horoscope. That 
procedure activates the service screen (in this example, 
another grid menu). Once the desired content is chosen, the 
application requests the data by sending an SMS to a 
predefined short code. That request is then processed, while 
the application displays a “receiving data” feedback. When 
the response is received by the application (binary SMS), a 
result screen is populated with the respective data. 
 
139
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

 
Figure 1. Example of a service being accessed (horoscope) [9] 
All the SMS traffic involved in this data request/receive 
process is thus transparent to the user. The response time is 
usually just a few seconds, so that the whole experience is 
extremely close to accessing content directly from the web 
using a mobile device. From that perspective, it is important 
to stress that this solution was designed for emerging 
markets, where fast data networks are still inaccessible to the 
majority of the population. 
III. 
MOBILEDECK ARCHITECTURE 
MobileDeck is divided in four subsystems: a) a mobile 
client application, embedded into the mobile phone; b) a web 
based system, responsible for handling the requests and 
building a response message [10]; c) an aggregator that 
allows SMS traffic [11]; d) an information provider for each 
service. 
The way each MobileDeck architecture component 
interacts is shown in Figure 2. This example illustrates the 
user requesting a service and receiving a response. First, an 
SMS is sent using the embedded application to a specific 
number using a standard protocol of the MobileDeck, then 
the SMS aggregator routes the message turning SMS into an 
HTTP request to the MobileDeck web server, which 
identifies the request and sends it to the appropriate 
information provider, which in turn returns the response 
content to it. The web server then builds a response using a 
security code and asks the aggregator to send a binary SMS 
with the return of service. At the end of the process the user 
receives the response from his service on the application 
embedded in his phone. 
 
 
Figure 2. MobileDeck Architecture (high level design) [9] 
 
The embedded application, designed for Nokia Series 40 
and Series 60 devices, sends an SMS with a specified short 
code to achieve a determinate service. The service response 
is done by binary SMS, listing a predefined SMS port. The 
core programming language used to develop the mobile 
application was J2ME and its WMA 1.0 (Wireless Message 
API, JSR 120). The Series 60 version has a user interface 
developed with the Lightweight UI Toolkit (LWUIT), which 
is a free UI library and tool for creating richer and more 
portable Java ME user interfaces [12]. 
As MobileDeck sends protocol information inside a 
binary SMS body, a brief explanation of how it works is 
valid here. A binary SMS uses the port concept just like any 
Internet socket does. Thus, a message can be received in a 
given port that activates a specific service (in JME this is 
accomplished through the Push Registry API). 
IV. 
INTEGRATING A QUIZ GAME INTO MOBILEDECK 
This section covers the process of integrating a set of 
questions and answers into the MobileDeck concept, creating 
a Quiz game by SMS with a rich user interface (UI). 
This game of questions and answers, like a Quiz, has a 
version designed to be played by exchanging SMSs, with a 
good acceptance in the Brazilian market. 
The game consists of receiving, via SMS, a text in the 
mobile phone’s inbox with a question and a list of 
alternatives. The player then sends by SMS what he believes 
to be the correct answer.. 
After receiving a positive feedback of the improved 
usability of SMS based services when they were adapted to 
the MobileDeck model, the decision was made to integrate 
and adapt the quiz game to the MobileDeck model, where 
the SMS exchanging is transparent to the user because he 
can interact with graphical elements that make up a 
representative screen of the service.  
The first step was to add an icon to access the game in 
the main menu of MobileDeck. 
The original game had to be adapted to the MobileDeck 
concept that offers the possibility of making the game more 
attractive to the user. 
At the beginning of the game a list of categories from 
which the player can choose is displayed. The questions are 
based on the chosen category. 
After choosing the category, the player chooses the name 
that will identify him/her in the game. The screen will 
contain a list of player names that have played using this 
application to facilitate the selection and an option to insert a 
new player name. 
The name and category choice screens are illustrated in 
Figure 3(a) and (b), respectively. 
After choosing the category and the player name a SMS 
with the data is sent that represents a request to start 
receiving questions, the SMS sending is transparent to the 
player and only messages like “sending request” and 
“waiting for question” are shown to the user. 
 
140
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

 
Figure 3. (a) Player name, and (b) Category choosing screen 
 
The web server processes the sent question and, based on 
the category and player history, a binary SMS is sent 
following the “question screen” protocol, which contains all 
information to build properly the cited screen. 
The embedded MobileDeck receives the binary SMS 
with all information needed to build a question screen, as 
illustrated in Figure 4. The question screen was designed to 
be used to choose an alternative and send the answer in a 
simple, intuitive and clear way. 
When the player selects one of the alternatives on the 
question screen a SMS with the alternative chosen is sent to 
the web service which in turn processes it and defines a 
response depending on the fact if the player choose the right 
answer. 
Together with the information about the last answer a 
new question is sent that is part of a set of questions to be 
answered by the player. At the end of the set, the score is 
shown as illustrated in Figure 5(a). 
To make the game more attractive a ranking was created 
that displays the player names that have the highest score. 
Points are awarded to the player name every time he answers 
a question correctly. The ranking screen is shown in Figure 
5(b). 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Question screen 
 
 
Figure 5. (a) Score points of the player shown at the end of a set of 
questions, and (b) General ranking screen 
 
V. 
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF 
APPROACHES  
In this section, we aim to make a comparison between 
three approaches used to develop a mobile application which 
is described below. The idea of this application, which was 
created by [13], is to validate the creation of mobile 
entertainment applications.   
The application was chosen in order to have a basis for 
comparison between existing services, a previously proposed 
service and the approach proposed in this paper.  
The proposed application is based on the English Premier 
League, which is arguably one of the best football leagues in 
the world, and fans in the UK support it passionately. 
The current service, which is in this section is called the 
first scenario, offers to mobile users work over the Short 
Message Service (SMS), and is generally limited to goal 
alerts, with the user paying by the number of SMS messages 
received. The application proposed by [13], which we call 
the second scenario, intends to improve both the timeliness 
of information and the range of information available. By 
providing information such as goals, red cards, yellow cards, 
substitutions, 
and 
so 
on, 
this 
application 
offers 
comprehensive updates on all the football matches on a 
given day. All the information is displayed in an easy 
accessible format, where a user can simply scroll through the 
event-by-event coverage of all the league games on that day.  
Once all the events of the day become available to the 
application, the second part of this application becomes 
possible: a real-time fantasy football game. Fantasy football 
is played with a typical maximum budget of around £80 
million for purchasing players. Players are selected from a 
list featuring over 500 footballers from Premiership clubs. 
In the common approach, the user must use the native 
SMS editor to be able to order the SMS subscribe or order on 
demand. This approach is quite common and widely used; its 
main disadvantage is that to access the service you need to 
know its short number and an identification service 
code. Generally, media are used to achieve high penetration 
of the target audience, such as TV. Another disadvantage 
with this approach is that user interaction is extremely 
limited, with poor usability. Its main advantage is to work 
141
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

with a large user base and the adoption of this approach by 
many users generates massive user expertise.  
The approach cited in Section 4 is called the third 
scenario. 
In the approach that uses the MobileDeck concept 
working with a technology that is highly known and adopted 
is the great advantage over the second scenario approach, 
which uses GPRS technology to communicate with the 
information provider, thus limiting  the number of potential 
users. When usability is concerned, the second and third 
scenario approaches, take a great leap in quality by adding a 
visual layer, as well as adding a range of options to create 
different kinds of applications. 
The main disadvantage of the second and third scenarios 
is that for the user to be able to use these approaches,  he 
needs to have an application installed on his mobile 
phone; the best solution to minimize this disadvantage is to 
have the application installed at the factory. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
After completing game integration one could note that no 
feature of the questions and answers game designed 
originally for SMS was removed. New features such as name 
registers for identification and requests for overall rankings 
were added to the game. It is therefore possible to infer that 
the integration of the game to MobileDeck was proved a 
success in view of adaption and of providing a new way of 
playing games via SMS, where an attractive visual layer is 
added to enhance user interaction. Hence we can summarize 
that the main contribution of this paper is to demonstrate 
that the usability of games by SMS can be improved 
significantly through the use of the MobileDeck concept. As 
future work, a usability study should be conducted to try to 
measure the gain in usability by adopting the visual layer and 
whether the users of SMS games prefer to use the game via 
MobileDeck in case the game is brought to the emerging 
markets. If positive results are achieved, the integration of 
other games that can be played by SMS should be designed. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Zerfos, P., Meng, X., Wong, S. H., Samanta, V., and Lu, S. 2006. A 
study of the short message service of a nationwide cellular network. 
In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCOMM Conference on internet 
Measurement (Rio de Janeriro, Brazil, October 25 - 27, 2006). IMC 
'06. 
ACM, 
New 
York, 
NY, 
pp. 
263-268. 
DOI= 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1177080.1177114 
[2] Hwu, J., Hsu, S., Lin, Y., and Chen, R. 2006. End-to-end security 
mechanisms for SMS. Int. J. Secur. Netw. 1, 3/4 (Dec. 2006), pp. 
177-183. DOI= http://dx.doi.org/10.1504/IJSN.2006.011777 
[3] Enck, W., Traynor, P., McDaniel, P., and La Porta, T. 2005. 
Exploiting open functionality in SMS-capable cellular networks. In 
Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Computer and 
Communications Security (Alexandria, VA, USA, November 07 - 11, 
2005). CCS '05. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 393-404. DOI= 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1102120.1102171 
[4] Eberspaecher, J., Bettstetter, C., and Vhogel, H. 2001 Gsm: 
Switching, Services and Protocols. 2nd. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
[5] Tsang, M. M., Ho, S., and Liang, T. 2004. Consumer Attitudes 
Toward Mobile Advertising: An Empirical Study. Int. J. Electron. 
Commerce 8, 3 (Apr. 2004), pp.65-78. 
[6] Kolko, B. E., Rose, E. J., and Johnson, E. J. 2007. Communication as 
information-seeking: the case for mobile social software for 
developing regions. In Proceedings of the 16th international 
Conference on World Wide Web (Banff, Alberta, Canada, May 08 - 
12, 2007). WWW '07. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 863-872. DOI= 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1242572.1242689 
[7] Page, C. 2005. Mobile research strategies for a global market. 
Commun. 
ACM 
48, 
7 
(Jul. 
2005), 
pp. 
42-48. 
DOI= 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1070838.1070864 
[8] Paul Coulton, Omer Rashid, Reuben Edwards, and Robert Thompson. 
2005. 
Creating 
entertainment 
applications 
for 
cellular 
phones. Comput. 
Entertain. 3, 
3 
(July 
2005), 
pp. 
3-3. 
DOI=10.1145/1077246.1077254 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1077246.1077254 
[9] Risi, D. and Teófilo, M. 2009. MobileDeck: turning SMS into a rich 
user experience. In Proceedings of the 6th international Conference 
on Mobile Technology, Application & Systems (Nice, France, 
September 02 - 04, 2009). Mobility '09. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 1-
4. DOI= http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1710035.1710068 
[10] Pillai, P. 2005. Experimental mobile gateways. Crossroads 11, 4 
(Aug. 
2005), 
pp. 
6-6. 
DOI= 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1144389.1144395 
[11] Brown, J., Shipman, B., and Vetter, R. 2007. SMS: The Short 
Message Service. Computer 40, 12 (Dec. 2007), pp. 106-110. DOI= 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MC.2007.440  
[12] White, Jim. Java ME User Interfaces: Do It with LWUIT. 2007. 
DevX 
online 
magazine. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.devx.com/wireless/Article/38461 
[13] Paul Coulton, Omer Rashid, Reuben Edwards, and Robert Thompson. 
2005. 
Creating 
entertainment 
applications 
for 
cellular 
phones. Comput. 
Entertain. 3, 
3 
(July 
2005), 
pp. 
3-3. 
DOI=10.1145/1077246.1077254 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1077246.1077254 
142
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

