Implementation of the Information System of the Telecom Operators Using the 
ITIL V3 Methodology for the Service Design Phase 
 
 
Anel Tanovic 
Department for IT development of multimedia services 
BH Telecom d.o.o. Sarajevo 
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
anel.tanovic@bhtelecom.ba 
Fahrudin Orucevic 
Department of Computer Science and Informatics 
University of Sarajevo, Faculty of Electrical 
Engineering 
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
forucevic@etf.unsa.ba
 
 
Abstract - In order for any business organization to perform on 
a successful level, it is necessary that it has a defined set of 
activities that manage IT processes and services. Defined set of 
activities constitutes the Service Management of that 
organization. There are many types of Service Management, 
and this paper is based on the type of which is called 
Information Technology Infrastracture Library V3 (ITIL V3). 
ITIL V3 has a total of five phases: Strategy Service, Service 
Design, Service Transition, Service Operation and Continual 
Service Improvement. This paper is focused on the description 
of its second phase, which is called Service Design. The aim of 
this paper is to describe information systems development of 
the Telecom Operator for Service Design phase of the ITIL v3 
methodology in all seven of the processes that are contained in 
these phases. These are: Service Catalogue Management, 
Service 
Level 
Management, 
Capacity 
Management, 
Availability Management, IT Service Continuity Management, 
Information Security Management and Supplier Management. 
This paper attempts to show to the telecom operators that 
during the realization of their IT processes they do not 
necessarily have to use the eTOM standard, but may use other 
standards and concretely they can use ITIL V3 standard. This 
paper in its conclusion, with previously detailed analysis of the 
implementation of the Service Design processes according to 
ITIL V3 methodology in the information system of the telecom 
operator, needs to define which teams are required to 
implement the Service Design processes and which are the 
activities that each team has during the implementation of the 
information system of the telecom operators. 
 
Keywords-ITSM, ITIL V3, Service Design, Service Catalogue 
Management, 
Service 
Level 
Management, 
Capacity 
Management, Availability Management, IT Service Continuity 
Management, Information Security Management, Supplier 
Management 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
    Any organization that wants to increase the level of their 
business depends on the way of the IT Service Management. 
In order to make IT processes and services successfully 
conducted, it is necessary that the organization defines a set 
of specialized organizational capabilities that are provided 
to customers in the form of the service. This set of 
specialized skills consists the Service Management 
organization. There are many standards for Service 
Management practices such as ITIL, COBIT, CMMI, 
eTOM, PRINCE2 and ISO 20000 [6]. 
     
    ITIL is an acronym for "Information Technology 
Infrastructure Library," and falls under ITSM, which is an 
acronym 
for 
"Information 
Technology 
Service 
Management". ITSM is defined as a discipline for managing 
IT systems, which is centered on the customer perspective 
of IT's contribution to the business. ITIL is the best practice 
environment for companies that provide IT services as its 
core business functions. ITIL takes a "life" approach for the 
development of IT services and produces the best practices 
and guidelines throughout each "life" stage to help IT 
companies to deliver the best possible services to their 
customers. ITIL V3 defines five main phases of life cycle 
[1], [2], [3], [4], [5]: 
1. Service Strategy  
2. Service Design   
3. Service Transition  
4. Service Operation  
5. Continual Service Improvement  
 
    1. Service Strategy provides guidance on how to design, 
develop and implement Service Management, not only as an 
organizational capability but also as a strategic asset. These 
guidelines are based on the principles that underpin the 
practice of Service Management, which are useful for the 
development of Service Management policies, directives 
and processes through ITIL lifecycle development services 
[1]. Service Strategy includes the following five processes: 
Strategy 
Generation, 
Risk 
Management, 
Demand 
Management, Financial Management and Service Portfolio 
Management. 
 
    2. Service Design is the second phase of the development 
lifecycle of IT services for ITIL v3 methodology and an 
important element within the business processes aimed at 
82
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

change. The role of Service Design can be defined as 
developing appropriate and innovative IT services, 
including their architecture, processes, policies and 
documentation to meet current and future agreed business 
requirements [2]. Service Design has the following seven 
processes: Service Catalogue Management, Service Level 
Management, 
Capacity 
Management, 
Availability 
Management, 
IT 
Service 
Continuity 
Management, 
Information 
Security 
Management 
and 
Supplier 
Management. 
 
    3. Service Transition phase has a role to let the 
operational use of the services that have been designed in 
the Service Design phase. Service Transition performs the 
same thing in a manner that it receives the Service Design 
Package and transferred to the Service Operation phase of 
each element required for operations that are executed [3]. If 
the business assumptions, forecasts or request change from 
the Service Design phase, then they may need modification 
during the Service Transition stage in order to deliver 
necessary IT service. Service Transition has a total of six 
basic processes: Change Management, Service Asset and 
Configuration Management, Knowledge Management, 
Transition Planning and Support, Release and Deployment 
Management and Service Validation and Testion. 
  
    4. Service Operation phase has a role to ensure that the 
user  is provided with the agreed level of quality service that 
is necessary for this phase to be able to manage applications, 
technologies 
and 
infrastructure 
that 
supports 
the 
implementation of services. The goal of Service Operation 
is the coordination and execution of activities and processes  
that are necessary for enablement and management of the 
services at agreed levels [4]. Service Operation has a total of 
five processes: Event Management, Incident Management, 
Problem Management, Request Fullfilment and Access 
Management.    
 
    5. Continual Service Improvement is the last fifth stage of 
the development lifecycle of the IT services for the ITIL V3 
methodology, which is responsible for continuously 
changing business needs by improving business needs by 
improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the process 
[5]. Duration of the Continual Service Improvement 
depends upon the size of the organization and takes several 
weeks to several months. The result of Continual Service 
Improvement is reflected through improved IT services 
throughout all of the first four phases of the ITIL V3 
lifecycle. 
 
    Section II begins with a description of the importance of 
building a unified Telecom Operator information system 
with the aim to improve its business, and continues with a 
concrete description of the implementation of all processes 
of the Service Design phase of the information system of the 
Telecom Operator. Conclusion of the work, which 
originated as a result of the analysis carried out in Section 
II, proposes teams for implementation of all Service Design 
phase processes, the time period for action of each team and 
the guidance in which direction should further research in 
this field be aimed.  
 
II. IMPLEMENTATION OF SERVICE DESIGN PROCESSES IN 
INFORMATION SYSTEM TELECOM OPERATOR 
    In condition of competitive environment and objective 
geopolitical circumstances, one of the basic tools for the 
successful positioning of telecom operators in area of some 
region is to construction of the system that will enable rapid 
implementation of the services and flexible tariff plan [10], 
[12]. The realization of such a system is aimed at providing 
conditions for the service users to be able to request in an 
identical manner and only in one step through multiple 
channels of access (Telecom center or web) each individual 
service, or any combination of available services in any part 
of the area in which operates Telecom operator and to 
receive personalized account for these services. Information 
System of the Telecom Operator, whose development for 
the Service Design phase of the ITIL V3 methodology is 
described in this document, should consolidate all of the 
databases for the Telecom operator’s technologies: fixed 
telephony, mobile telephony and Internet services and their 
billing systems into a single database and a unique billing 
system. Development of the information system is based on 
development of the two key applications: application of the 
user data and sales applications that use Oracle database. 
Construction of the entire system involves the definition of 
business requirements with the creation of infrastructure 
design, logical and physical database design with the 
specification of the target business processes and 
functionality of the new applications, development and 
functional testing of the system with the development of 
applications 
and 
scripts 
for 
data 
migration 
and 
implementation of systems with migration of data into a 
new system and performing tests for checking the 
functionality of the new system. 
 
    General functionalities that need to be supported by the 
information system are: 
• 
Administration of users, data entry and data 
management of all user-oriented activities. 
• 
Support for complex hierarchical structure of the 
customer. 
• 
Interaction with systems in the environment. 
• 
Recording of the complaints and grievances. 
• 
Generation of reports on service users. 
• 
Sales Management with the complete supervision 
of the transactions execution. 
• 
Dynamic generation of reports, documentation, and 
monitoring the sales process. 
• 
Provision of the efficient distribution channels. 
83
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

• 
Enablement of the review of the customer 
informations regarding subscription packages, 
included products, equipment and services. 
• 
The execution of the integration with other 
applications.   
 
A.  Service Catalogue Management  
 
    The definition of a unique catalogue of IT services is 
affected by: products, product catalogue, product offer and 
price of the products whose value is affected by the first 
three mentioned parameters (Figure 1). 
         
 
 
Figure 1. The parameters that influence the definition  of IT service  
                catalogue  
                          
    During the construction of information system what 
should be taken into consideration is to build several 
different types of product catalogues, depending on the 
different categories of end users [8], [26]. It is necessary to 
define a total of seven product catalogues depending on the 
different categories of the users: 
1. Product Catalogue for the business users  
2. Product Catalogue for the residential customers  
3. Product Catalogue for the disabled  
4. Product Catalogue for the war veterans  
5. Product Catalogue for the students  
6. Product Catalogue for people with special needs   
7. Joint product catalogue  
 
    Each of the displayed product catalogues should provide:  
 
Membership of the certain offer to a particular 
specification. Specification represents a group of a 
services with similar characteristics, which are sold 
and implemented in a similar manner.   
 
The associated products that define the way of 
payment and price. 
 
Link to a specific sales channel.  
 
Link to certain types of network elements. 
 
Connection to distribution channels.  
 
Connection to marketing promotions.  
 
Description of the data that must be entered for each 
of the products sold in conjunction with validating 
the rules. 
    External factors are affecting definition of the final 
structure of the product that is inserted into the product 
catalogue, and these factors are: a view of the end user, the 
marketing impact, the impact of the accounts by the end user, 
the financial impact and payment structure of the product 
catalogue [6], [26] (Figure 2).   
 
    Price list of the information system should primarily  
include: the price of connecting practice, a subscription, the 
cost of monthly fees and the basic price of the device. It may 
or may not contain the costs of the service which is charged 
by usage and prices that are charged by duration or quantity. 
Catalogue of the IT services should enable discounts upon 
several different categories: 
 
Discounts on the basis of action offer 
 
Discounts for the duration of the contract  
 
Discounts for the length of the subscription service  
 
Discounts for each user  
 
Discounts for the number of connections  
 
Discounts on special conditions 
                                        
 
 
    Figure 2. The parameters that influence on definition of the final structure 
                     of the product 
 
B.  Service Level Management   
 
    In the analysis of Service Level Management three types 
of agreements are taken into account: Service Level 
Agreements (agreements with end users), Operation Level 
Agreements (agreements within organizational units of the 
firm) and Contracts (agreements with the partner company 
that participates in the implementation of a project) [19]. All 
three agreements must ensure that service levels are aligned 
with business expectations. 
 
    Construction of agreements with customers (Service Level 
Agreements) involves the construction of a single document 
that represents a description of the mutual rights and 
obligations that need to be followed by the Telecom 
operators and their end-users when two sides agree to sign a 
contract on the use of a Telecom service operators by the end 
user. The  document itself should contain seven items: 
1. Defining the price of services that is defined by the 
Telecom operator through the catalogues of IT 
services and the payment method that requires the 
end user.  
84
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

2. Defining the implementation of the services in 
which the Telecom operator needs to commit to a 
service realization time starting from the date on 
which end-user submitted a request to fulfill 
services.  
3. Defining the terms on which Telecom operator 
can’t implement the request for a service made by 
the end user because there is no technical possibility 
for the realization of the service.  
4. Defining the termination of the contract between 
Telecom operators and end-user if the user does not 
pay the debt in cash within a defined time, is not 
available at the registered address or if there is 
reasonable suspicion that the user intends to misuse 
or abuse the service that is leased.  
5. Defining the deadline for returning the terminal 
equipment by the end user if he withdraws from 
service or his service is turned off for legitimate 
reasons.  
6. Defining the timeframe for abandonment of the 
implementation of services by the end user.  
7. Defining the responsibilities of Telecom operator 
for any damage inflicted upon a user or third party 
due to misuse of user data from a person that 
performs before mentioned responsibility. 
 
    Required elements in the user data application for full 
implementation of the agreements with customers are: 
• 
Provide monitoring of the data about all users of 
technology for Telecom operator to look at the 
details of user data from all billings and all of the 
technologies, as well as for creating a billing group 
according to user needs.  
• 
Develop a clear hierarchy of users with the 
possibility to record the different roles that physical 
or business person may have, as well as defining the 
connections and relations between different users.  
• 
Provide a flexible system of allocation of the 
discounts and affordable packages throughout 
segmentation of the users. 
• 
Give the possibility to create different user profiles 
and assign user profiles defined for the purposes of 
reporting based upon user profiles.  
• 
Support monitoring and recording of objections, 
claims and complaints of users, as well as creating 
and monitoring their implementation stratus.  
• 
Define mechanisms for the integration of various 
technologies users into a single application user 
data. 
    Agreements 
between 
different 
organizational 
units 
(Operation Level Agreements) imply an agreement described 
in the document on cooperation in building a unified 
information system. The document must be a deal agreed 
between all organizational units of the Telecom operators 
should commit to mutually exchange data and information 
when building information systems. Telecom operator’s 
organizational units that should be included in the building 
of a new information system are: Division of fixed 
telephony, mobile telephony department, department of 
private Internet users, department of business Internet users, 
call center operator Telecom, Telecom Center and 
Department VPN. 
 
    Agreements 
with 
foreign 
company 
- 
consultant 
(Contracts) are achieved only after a public process of 
choosing IT consultant who will help the telecom operator in 
the implementation of information systems [23]. The choice 
of IT consultants is done in two phases: phase 
prequalification stage and calls for submission of bids. 
Required steps for the candidates to pass the prequalification 
status are: 
a) If there is no legal impediment to their participation 
in the competition for the selection of the best IT 
consultant.  
b) To be entitled to pursue professional activities and 
is registered in appropriate professional registers.  
c) To have economic and financial condition to realize 
a successful implementation of the contract.  
d) That their technical and professional capacity  
guarantees the successful implementation of the 
contract. 
 
    As for the technical and professional skills, candidates 
should meet the following minimum requirements: 
a) Employees at least 20 certified IT consultants.  
b) At least one reference to the information system 
implementation project in the telecom industry.  
c) Employeed at least 10 certified IT consultants who 
will be constantly involved in the project and who 
have participated in at least 3 projects of 
implementation of information systems in the 
industry. 
d) Owning your own HW/SW infrastructure necessary 
to start the project (testing and development) and 
other necessary technical preconditions.   
 
    The second phase is the phase of invitations to tender 
where it is necessary to establish criteria for evaluating bids. 
There are three basic parameters by which the IT consultant 
is selected from all of the candidates: the lowest price (with 
percentage share of 60%), the quality of the offered solutions 
(with percentage share of 25%) and a time deadline for 
delivery of the offered solutions (with percentage share of 
15%). The contract will be assigned to the IT consultant who 
submitted the top rated acceptable bid. 
 
    Telecom operators may, after completion of the first 
phase, and before the second phase, stop the process of 
selecting IT consultant for one of the following reasons: 
85
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

a) No bids have been submitted within a certain 
deadline.  
b) None of the bids received is not technically 
acceptable.  
c) Prices of all eligible bids were significantly higher 
than the budget for the contract signing with the IT 
consultant.  
d) Number of acceptable offers is less than 3 and does 
not ensure genuine competition.  
e) Number of qualified candidates is less than 3 and 
does not ensure genuine competition for the actual 
contract. 
 
C.  Capacity Management   
 
    In order to verify system performance and architecture on 
which the system is based upon, during the design of 
information systems it is required to perform tests of system 
performance and stress tests [15], [20]. The aim of these tests 
is: 
• 
Prove that the system is able to handle the expected 
load.  
• 
Prove that the system is able to withstand the 
excessive load.  
• 
Find errors in the architecture of the system that 
cause oversized stress.  
• 
Propose a strategy to optimize the system.    
 
    For the purpose of measuring performance it is necessary 
to use the following three tools: 
• 
Enterprise Service Bus (ESB) Console – used to 
measure the performance of business applications 
and communication between them. 
• 
Business Process Execution Language (BPEL) 
Console - used for definition of web service 
compositions. 
• 
Windows Task Manager – should be used on 
servers in order to verify the efficiency of the CPU. 
 
    For each technology, telecom operators should perform 
the following five tests: 
1. Functional test - Only one request is sent to the 
subsystem of the technologies in order to prove the 
functionality and initialization of internal structures. 
2. Scenario with an expected average load - simulating 
the expected load on the system in order to prove 
that the system is stable at this load. 
3. Scenario with the expected excess load - Excessive 
load on the system is simulated in order to prove 
that the system is stable at this load. 
4. Extreme scenario (shock) loads - Excessive 
workload increases by 10 times to prove that the 
system can withstand this pressure. 
5. Scenario long test - This scenario has the same 
structure as the scenario with an expected average 
load, only taking into account that the time of the 
load is increased. 
 
    There are two general conclusions that should result from 
the above tests that are done before the system itself is 
released into production: 
1. Information system is ready to withstand the 
expected load level with respect to capacities that 
are currently available. 
2. Information system is ready to withstand the 
excessive load level if it faces in the future the 
expanded capacity which currently has system 
itself. 
 
    Systems analysts should be taking into account the results 
of the testing and with knowledge of  the system architecture 
propose four recommendations that will enable the system 
stability when it comes down to it’s current and future 
capacity: 
1. Use direct calls between Java Enterprise Service 
Bus (ESB) and Business Process Execution 
Language (BPEL). 
2. Reduce the level of logging in a production 
environment. 
3. Reduce Business Process Execution Language 
(BPEL) control level in a production environment. 
4. Perform regular cleaning of the log files from the 
ESB and BPEL after measurements of system 
performance. 
 
    Giving the above recommendations requires the creation 
of the links of the Capacity Management with Demand 
Management for the formation of the necessary requirements 
for the implementation of the above proposals. So the link to 
the Demand Management influences on the formation of the 
budget. 
 
D.  Availability Management 
 
    The new information system of the Telecom operator 
should be available and functional 24 hours a day during 365 
days year. The reason for this is the Billing system and web 
portal that always must be functional. This means that the 
only possible value of the availability of the system is the 
maximum one (100%). For this purpose a stable system 
architecture needs to be built, design accessibility plan and 
and form a group of IT professionals that will release the 
information system in production, constantly update the 
program status because of the eventual changes in the 
architecture of the system. 
 
    The plan includes access to all components of the 
architecture of information system that must always be 
functional [16], [24], [25]. Components of the architecture of 
the system are summarized in Figure 3. Note that the server 
side architecture are web services, Java services, Enterprise 
86
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

Resource Planning (ERP), Oracle databases, and SAP; the 
user updates the database. The client-side architecture are 
web, application user data and application sales. The 
connection between server and client side architecture is 
realized through the Business Process Execution Language 
(BPEL), which is primarily used for definition of web 
service compositions. 
                 
 
 
  Figure 3. Components of the architecture of the Information system  
                  which are involved in the Availability plan 
    
    Availability plan consists of the following items: 
• 
Defining the interoperability of systems - Define 
the integration of heterogeneous systems purchased 
from different suppliers based on different 
technologies into a single system.  
• 
Defining the flexibility of the system - Define the 
integration of new applications into existing system 
structures. The whole logic of the integration of the  
information systems should be contained in one 
place and should not be placed in applications 
because it has to be defined in XML documents 
(BPEL 
processes). 
Business 
processes 
and 
information system should be flexible and tolerant 
to the changes in the integrated applications and 
systems. Integration platform should be such to 
provide a central point that the applications are 
associated to.  
• 
Defining the independence of the data structure - 
Data within the system should be such that they are 
exchanged in form of XML documents that can be 
transformed so that the independence of the data 
structure is achieved.  
• 
The definition of the integration based on events - 
BPEL processes should provide almost instant 
exchange of data and events between the integrated 
applications.  
• 
Defining the performance and reliability - The 
platform should support a web server for fast 
execution of the program so that the BPEL Process 
Engine running on Oracle application server 
provides high availability and scalability of the 
application servers.  
• 
Defining user tasks - Oracle BPEL Process 
Manager needs to support the creation of workflows 
and integrate business processes with the BPEL 
processes. Standard graphical user interface for 
defining user tasks that can be partially or 
completely changed should be provided that way.  
• 
Definition of system maintenance - Plan should 
include the availability of an algorithm for solving 
the problem. Every problem that impairs the availa- 
bility of services, within a certain period of time.  
 
    If a problem results in termination of the entire system, 
the problem must be solved 24 hours from the hour of the 
occurrence problem. If the problem represents a decline in 
the primary service, then this problem must be solved 48 
hours from the hour of creation. If the problem represents 
decline in the secondary service, then this problem must be 
solved six days from the date of creation. If it is a minor 
problem that caused the fall of a service, then this problem 
should be settled within 7 days from the date of the problem 
occurence. 
 
    Each time delay regarding solution of these problems 
violates the above maximum systems availability. Every 
problem that has been successfully resolved in the timeframe 
described above maintains maximum availability of IT 
system. The Telecom partner and firm partner are 
responsible to solve the above-mentioned types of problems. 
Each one of the defined items of the accessibility plan must 
be updated regularly by a group of IT professionals.  
 
E.  IT Service Continuity Management 
 
    The basic step in the implementation of IT Service 
Continuity Management in Information System of the 
Telecom operator is to build the Business Continuity Plan 
[6]. Business Continuity Plan in information system contains 
the steps that need to be implemented when one of the 
services stops working in order to achieve faster construction 
of a new service that will continue to operate on the same 
level it operated before the old service failure [2]. It consists 
of four phases: initialization, definition of requirements and 
strategies, implementation and preparing for the production. 
 
    For the software engineering team to start the 
implementation of the Business Continuity Plan at all, it is 
necessary that reports reagarding termination of an old 
service’s funcioning are delivered to them. To come to the 
team for a software engineering that is responsible for 
implementiation of the Business Continuity Plan, it is 
necessary to pass through the four lower levels of support. 
The first level of support is reporting a problem, another 
level of support is to locate the problem, the third level of 
support does support the site, which is responsible for 
normal technical requirements, and the last fourth level of 
support 
is 
a 
technical 
support. 
Of 
course, 
the 
implementation of the Business Continuity Plan will come if 
any of the first four levels of support fails to recover the old 
87
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

service. Table I. shows the Business Continuity Plan for the 
information system of Telecom operator. 
TABLE I. BUSINESS CONTINUITY PLAN FOR INFORMATION SYSTEM OF 
TELECOM OPERATOR 
Name of Business 
Continuity Plan  
 phase 
Name of the under phases of Business 
Continuity Plan 
            1. Document drafting job descriptions 
2. Detailed specifications for the functionality  
     application development solutions 
3. Specification of target business processes  
    and functionality of new application modules  
 
 
 
 
I. Initialisation 
4. Detection and specification of services and  
    orchestration integration flows  
1. Design data models and messages 
2. Design integration architecture 
3. Development of test strategy 
4. Preparation of development platform 
5. Implementation of database 
6. The development, implementation and  
    Functional test of web service 
 
 
II.Definition  
    requirements and  
    strategy  
7. The formation of the final documentation 
1. Documentation of system  
2. Preparation of test platform 
3. Functional tests 
4. Integration tests 
5. End-2-End tests 
6. Creation production platform 
  
 
 
III.Implementation 
7. The formation of final documentation 
1. Acceptance tests 
2. Training end users 
 
IV. Preparation for  
       production 
3. Moving into production 
 
F.  Information Security Management 
 
    Security in applications of information systems [25] of the 
Telecom operators are implemented on the basis of 6 levels 
where the most important role is played by a database 
administrator, application server administrators and end 
users: 
• 
The level of database  
• 
The level of web services  
• 
The level of application server 
• 
The level of application 
• 
The level of URL 
• 
The level of page 
  
    Each level of security must ensure the possibility of 
executing the action and review of the data only to a certain 
specified entities under a certain conditions. Figure 4 shows 
the relationship between the six levels of security to be 
realized when implementing this process. 
 
    1. The level of database 
    There should be a database user who will have access 
rights to all actions of the database and who will have access 
to all data in an information system. This user has all rights 
of access to all data that are needed for work. Its features, 
such as user name and password, knows only the chief 
administrator of the database. For the purposes of access to 
data from the database, it is necessary to access the 
application server which contains username and encrypted 
password. 
 
    2. The level of web services 
    Web services that are used in applications of the 
information systems can provide more tools to help out of 
which the Oracle Web Service Manager is often used, which 
is primarily used against Oracle databases (OWSM). 
Exposed Web services can not be accessed except through 
defined channels and defined access rights. All monitoring or 
unauthorized attempts to access web services is done through 
OWSM application on application server. 
                                 
 
 
Figure 4. Information Security Management in Information system 
                Telecom operator  
 
    3. The level of application server 
    Oracle Application server has a application for server 
management - Enterprise Manager Application Server 
Control. This application is executed on the server and it can 
be accessed by knowing the administrator username and 
password. The main application server administrator is 
responsible for creating, assigning roles and access rights to 
the application server. Roles and users of applications can be 
maintained in the application server. 
 
    4. The level of the application 
    Security-sensitive applications and information system 
components are divided into: URL (images, files, etc.), page 
(JSP, HTML, CSS, etc.) and part of the site. Any safety 
sensitive component represents a system of privilege. List of 
privileges that a user can have is constructed on that 
foundation. All privileges are grouped into application roles. 
Whenever security-sensitive components are accessed, it is 
checked whether the user belongs to a role that has the right 
of access privileges. If it does, the process goes smoothly. If 
user has no right of access, he gets notified that he is trying 
to access a protected resource. If it is the page that the user is 
accessing, then the forbidden part of the page is invisible or 
the access is denied. Most of the application options are in 
the menu of applications. Each user will have defined rights 
88
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

to access certain options of the menu. The real URL that is 
shown during the selection of menu options is presented as a 
privilege and it is indirectly assigned to a user through a 
specific role. 
 
    5. Application roles of access to applications   
    The goal of application roles is to group access rights in 
order to facilitate the granting, revocation or modification of 
the rights. All users belong to a single application of 
application roles. User roles activated in applications are 
shown in Table II.  
 
    6. The level of URL  
    URL level of security is tied to the resources that are 
accessed through the Application Server. URL can represent 
images, files, pages, etc. If it is a security sensitive 
component, then it will be assigned to the role whose 
members have access to these components. They will be 
located in specific-protected directories, which will be 
accessed only with prior checking of the access rights. If it is 
a safety sear components, then they can be located in public 
folders that can be accessed simply by specifying the URL of 
the web address in your browser.  
TABLE II. DEFINED  ROLES  RIGHTS OF ACCESS  TO INFORMATION SYSTEM  
TELECOM OPERATOR 
The role of user 
applications 
Description of the role of application users 
Application user 
User that monitors other users.  
Application 
Administrator  
User who performs user registration process and 
has access to codes 
IT Administrator 
Super user who manages the applications, 
maintains codes and review the logs. 
Back Office 
Administrator 
User who has a right of access to all  options of 
applications in information system. 
Front Office 
Administrator 
Users that has greater subset of the access rights 
as opposed to the Administrator of the Back-
Office that is required to work at the Telecom 
operators counter service. 
Call Centre 
Administrator 
Users that has greater subset of access rights as 
opposed to the Administrator of the Back-Office 
that is required to work at the Telecom operators 
call center.  
VPN 
Administrator 
User who has a right of access to VPN and other 
parts of applications required for managers of 
large accounts of Telecom operator 
 
    7. The level of page 
    If a review or modification of data in a table on the form: a 
user will be able to review only the information from the 
table, while others will be able to change data in the table. 
This is the hardest part of the implementation, so it is 
recommended that, whatever possible, it is implemented 
through one of the above ways, and then if there is no 
acceptable solution this method is to be approached. 
 
G.  Supplier Management 
 
    Telecom operators need to save money and human 
resources engage partner firm that will assist in 
implementation of a new information system. Modules that 
are implemented by the firm partner during the project, are 
obligatory to be maintained by firm partner after the system 
is available for production [8], [23]. Accordingly, it should 
define levels of support that the contract partner of the firm 
should implement in order to define hierarchies for problem 
solving (Table III). 
 
    With levels of maintenance contract should define levels 
of problems, definitions of failures, response time and 
problem removal that due to the contract should be addressed 
by the firm partner (Table IV). 
 
    After defining the level and types of problems, we can 
define a workflow to solve problems for which the firm 
partner should be in charge of according to the contract 
(Figure 5). 
 
    A signed agreement between telecom operator and 
companies partner needs to define the total time of the entire 
information system’s construction and a time deadline to 
complete the activities for which the partner firm in charge 
of. The selected firm partner should be an IT company that 
has already implemented a number of systems, and it should 
take over much of the analysis of the new system andthe 
entire design and implementation of a whole new system. 
Figure 5 shows the workflow of the support in the five 
defined levels of the support in order to resolve the problem 
by the firm partners.  
     
    Telecom operators should take the following actions:  
1. Planning, system analysis and definition of 
requirements specifications in accordance with all 
the necessary activities (final project and a term 
plan, defining frameworks and boundaries of the 
system, 
analysis 
existing 
processes 
and 
applications, defining business processes and 
specification of requirements that the new system 
should satisfy, as well as setting technical 
architecture, 
systems 
hardware 
platform-way 
necessary for project development).  
2. Conduct testing of new systems implemented in the 
category of functional, integration, and tests 
end2end final checks.  
3. To build a production database, and create a 
production platform on the basis of a detailed 
written plan for transition to production.  
4. Integrate new system with the billing system, 
execute the migration of data from old system to 
the new system according to a pre-defined plans for 
transition to the new system.  
5. Conduct user training that will work on a newly 
implemented information system. 
     
    The company partner should execute the following 
activities:   
89
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

1. Execute the whole system design that includes 
architectural solution’s design, modeling and 
database design (logical and physical data model) 
and the creation of the development of the 
database.  
2. Set up and test system development platform.  
3. Implement the security level and define the role of 
administrative control over the new system.  
4. Design, build and develop applications including 
the preparation of interfaces to other applications, 
with special emphasis on the interpretation of the 
business logic and processes.  
5. Define the integration of the old information 
system’s customer base.  
6. Define, encode, and make all the necessary 
mechanisms for the integration of information 
systems with other relevant information systems.  
7. Document system as defined by the methodology 
of development of the information system within 
the telecom operator and the recommended 
methods of the partner companies in all stages of 
solution’s development. Final papers should be 
such to have a form of the derived state with a 
detailed plan of the transition to producing. 
TABLE III. LEVELS OF THE MAINTENANCE OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEM, 
WHICH DUE TO THE CONTRACT NEED TO BE MAINTAINED BY A SUPPLIER                     
The level of 
maintenance 
system 
The job of maintaining the level of the system 
level support in the maintenance of a new 
information system 
Level 1  
Logging and tracking requests of Telecom 
Operator 
Level  2 
First line of support, location of problems and 
issues forward in the right department 
Level  3 
Support the site for normal technical requirements 
Level  4 
Technical support in case of escalation of 
problems that precedes the software engineering 
Level 5 
Software engineering, which includes work on the 
code and changes the design of the system   
TABLE IV. CATEGORIES OF THE PROBLEMS WITH THE TIME FOR RESOLUTION 
THAT SUPPLIER MUST SOLVE DUE TO THE CONTRACT 
Level of the 
problem 
Definition 
Time for 
call off 
Removal time 
Level I  
 
A complete 
system crash 
1 hour of 
receiving a 
verbal 
notification 
of the 
problem 
24 hours after 
receiving oral 
notice of the 
problem 
 
   
Level II 
 
Fall of crucial 
part of the 
system 
24 hours 
after 
receiving 
oral notice of 
the problem 
48 hours after 
receiving oral 
notice of the 
problem 
   
 
Level III 
Fall of 
operating part 
of the system 
that is crucial 
for the whole 
system  
2 business 
days of 
receiving 
notice of the 
problem 
 
6 working days 
of receiving 
notice of the 
problem 
 
A minor 
3 working 
7 working days 
Level of the 
problem 
Definition 
Time for 
call off 
Removal time 
Level IV 
problem that 
does not affect 
the operation of 
the system 
days of 
receiving 
notice of the 
problem 
of receiving 
notice of the 
problem 
 
 
 
 
Level V 
 
 
A request of 
Telecom 
operator for 
additional 
functionality in 
the system 
By 
agreement 
with a 
management 
of foreign 
firm 
In case of 
agreement, the 
time of delivery 
and installation 
as well as the 
prices will be 
defined in 
cooperation with 
the telecom 
operator 
   
 
                                    
     Figure 5. Workflow of the support for problem resolution for which 
                       the supplier is in charge of 
III.  CONCLUSION 
    For the realization of the Service Design processes in an 
information system of the telecom operator, it is necessary 
to establish more teams of IT professionals for each of the 
Service Design processes before starting the actual 
implementation of selected recommendations of ITIL V3 
[2], [6]. Service Catalogue Management Code required a 
team that will define the seven product catalogues, which 
should be given to the end user. Service Level Management 
requires the formation of three teams of IT specialists to 
define three different types of agreements: Service Level 
Agreements, Operating Level Agreements and Contracts. 
With Capacity Management only one team that should 
define five functional tests that measure the current and 
future IT available capacities that are available to the system 
itself is required. Availability Management demands 
formation of the two teams of IT professionals: the first 
team to define system components that should go into the 
future plan of the availability and other team that should be 
responsible for implementation of all of the defined items of 
the accessibility plan. When IT Service Continuity 
Management is concerned four teams are required for the 
implementation of each of the four phases of the Business 
Continuity Plan. Information Security Management requires 
the formation of two teams of IT experts: the first team that 
is responsible for implementation of the six defined levels of 
90
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

security, and a second team to assign administrative roles 
for management of the system itself. For Supplier 
Management three teams of IT professionals are required: 
the first team that is responsible for monitoring activities to 
be 
implemented 
by 
the 
Telecom 
operator 
while 
implementing information system, the second team to 
monitor activities to be implemented by the firm partner 
when implementing IT Systems specialization, and the third 
team to monitor the speed of solving problems at levels of 
priority for which the company partner is responsible. 
 
     Each of the 16 teams in all seven Service Design 
processes, except for three teams of Supplier Management, 
is independent from one another and can be carried out 
continuously. Time limit for completion of team activities 
for the first six Service Design process is a maximum of 2 
months. Regarding the activities of Supplier Management 
teams, they start with just three months after signing the 
agreement with the partner company and are valid 
depending on the category of agreements which can be six 
months, one year or two years. 
 
    Further research in this area is related to the development 
of similar studies for the remaining four phases of ITIL V3 
standards, primarily for the Service Strategy phase because 
of its close links with the Service Design phase. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
    The autors would like to thank management and technical 
staff of the BH Telecom for suggestions regarding creation 
of this document.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Taylor, M. Iqbal, and M. Nieves, “ITIL Version 3 Service 
Strategy”, The Office of Government Commerce, May 2007.  
[2] 
S. Taylor, V. Lloyd, and C. Rudd, “ITIL Version 3 Service Design”, 
The Office of Government Commerce,  May 2007.   
[3] 
S. Taylor, S. Lacy, and I. Macfarlane, “ITIL Version 3 Service 
Transition”, The Office of Government Commerce,  May 2007. 
[4] 
S. Taylor, D. Cannon, and D. Wheeldon, “ITIL Version 3 Service 
Operation”, The Office of Government Commerce,  May 2007. 
[5] 
S. Taylor, G.Case, and G.Spalding, “ITIL Version 3 Continual 
Service Improvement”, The Office of Government Commerce,  May 
2007.  
[6] 
J. van Bon, A. de Jong, A. Kolthof, M.Pieper, R. Tjassing,  A. van der 
Veen, and T. Verheijen, ”Foundations of IT Service Management 
Based on ITIL V3”, The Office of Government Commerce,  
September 2007.  
[7] 
R. Steinberg, “Measuring ITIL: Measuring, Reporting and Modeling 
– the IT Service Management Metrics That Matter Most to IT Senior 
Executives”, The Office of Government Commerce, April 2008.  
[8] 
J. van Bon, A. de Jong, A. Kolthof, M.Pieper, R. Tjassing,  A. van der 
Veen, and T. Verheijen, ”Service Design based on ITIL V3”, The 
Office of Government Commerce, June 2008.  
[9] 
P. Brooks, J. van Bon, and T. Verheijen, “Metrics for IT Service 
Management”, The Office of Government Commerce, April 2006.  
[10] L. Shwartz, N. Ayachitula, M. Buco, G. Grabarnik, M.N.Surendra, C. 
Ward, and S. Weinberger, “IT Service Provider’s Multi-Customer 
and Multi-Tenant Environments”, 9th IEEE Int. Conference on E-
Commerc Technology and 4th IEEE Int. Conference on Enterprise 
Computing, E-Commerce and E-Services, July 2007, pp. 559-566. 
[11] A. Wegmann, G. Regev, G.A. Garret, and F. Marechal, ”Specifying 
Services for ITIL Service Management”, The International Workshop 
on Service-Oriented Computing Consequences for Engineering 
Requirements, 16th IEEE International Requirements Engineering 
Conference, September 2008, pp. 85-94.  
[12] S. Kovacevic and F. Orucevic, “Using ITILv3 methodology for 
implementing new e-mail services in operator for producing and 
distributing electrical energy”, in Proceedings of the 32nd 
International Conference on Information Technology Interfaces, June 
2010, pp. 147-154.  
[13] M. Sharifi, M. Ayat, and S. Sahibudin, “Implemented ITIL-Based 
CMDB in the Organizations to Minimize or Remove Service Quality 
Gaps”, 2nd Asia International Conference on Modeling & Simulation 
(AMS), May 2008, pp. 734-737. 
[14] M. Spremic, Z. Zmirak, and K. Kraljevic, „IT and Business Process 
Performance Management: Case Study of ITIL Implementation in 
Finance Service Industry”, 30th International Conference on 
Information Technology Interfaces, June 2008, pp. 243-250.  
[15] E. Orta, M. Ruiz, and M. Toro, ”A System Dynamics Approach to 
Web Service Capacity Management”, 7th IEEE European Conference 
on Web Services, November 2009, pp. 109-117.  
[16] J. Zeng, “A Case Study on Applying ITIL Availability Management 
Best Practise”, Contemporary Management Research, vol. 4, 
December 2008, pp. 321-332.  
[17] X. Su, “An Overview of Economic Approaches to Information 
Security Management”, Centre for Telematics and Information 
Technology, University of Twente, August 2006.  
[18] M. Brenner, “Classifying ITIL processes: A Taxonomy under Tool 
Support Aspects”, 34th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, July 2006, pp. 19-28.  
[19] G. Blokdijk and I. Menken, “Service Level Management Best 
Practise Handbook: Building, Running and Managing Effective 
Service Level Management SLAs – Ready to use supporting 
documents bringing to ITIL Theory into Practise”, Emereo Pty Ltd, 
October 2008.  
[20] G. Blokdijk and I. Menken, “Capacity Management Best Practise 
Handbook: Building, Running and Managing Effective Capacity 
Management – Ready to use supporting documents bringing to ITIL 
Theory into Practise”, Emereo Pty Ltd, October 2008.  
[21] B. Johnson and J.Higgins, “ITIL and the Sotware Lifecycle: Practical 
Strategy and Design Principles”, Van Haren Publishing, August 2007.  
[22] M. Wedemeyer, G. Blokdijk, and I. Menken, “The ITIL V3 Service 
Management Awareness Pocket Guide – The ITIL V3 Pocket 
Toolbook: A Quick Reference Guide to all the processes and 
activities for Improving Quality and Speed”, Emereo Pty Ltd, 
December 2008.  
[23] G. Blokdijk and I. Menken, “Supplier Management Best Practise 
Handbook: Evaulating, Sourcing, Managing and Delivering Supplier 
Excellence In Relationships. Quality and Costs”, Emereo Pty Ltd, 
August 2008.  
[24] G. Blokdijk and I. Menken, “Availability Management Best Practise 
Handbook: Building, Running and Managing a IT Security 
Management Governance, Risk and Compliance Process – Ready to 
use supporting documents bringing to ITIL and GRC Theory into 
Practise”, Emereo Pty Ltd,  October 2008.  
[25] G. Blokdijk and I. Menken, “IT Security Management Best Practise 
Handbook: Building, Running and Managing Effective Availability 
Management – Ready to use supporting documents bringing ITIL 
Theory into Practise”, Emereo Pty Ltd,  October 2008. 
[26] G. Blokdijk and I. Menken, “IT Services Portfolio Management Best 
Practise Handbook: Planning, Implementing, Maximizing Return on 
Investment of Strategic IT Portfolio Management– Ready to use 
bringing Theory into Action”, Emereo Pty Ltd, July 2009.
 
91
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

