Service-Oriented Architecture Concept for Intelligence Information System 
Development 
 
Jugoslav Achkoski 1, Vladimir Trajkovik 2, Danco Davcev 3 
1 Military Academy „General Mihailo Apostolski“, 
Skopje, Macedonia 
2, 3 Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technologies, 
Skopje, Macedonia  
jugoslav_ackoski@yahoo.com, trvlado@feit.ukim.edu.mk, etfdav@feit.ukim.edu.mk 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents an idea for Service Oriented 
Architecture (SOA) approach in prototype of Intelligence 
Information System (IIS). IIS prototype, based on SOA, 
could offer better coordination among institutions involved 
in intelligence thus providing increase of intelligence 
effectiveness. This approach can serve as a foundation for 
the establishment of the Integrated Intelligence System, 
which is based on services as software components. In this 
paper, we propose five postulates that can serve as checklist 
for integration of SOA in IIS.  
Keywords- concept; SOA; intelligence information systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Intelligence, as a public service, has a great 
significance for a country [1]. 
Frequently used 
information systems, which support intelligence activities, 
have high influence in the decision making process.  
Modern information technology considerably contributes 
to the processes’ (activities) improvement by supporting 
intelligence cycles (planning, collecting data, analyzing 
data and dissemination). Although, there is constant 
improvement in the field of information technology, 
significant advancement in the quality of work in the field 
of intelligence has not taken place in the last ten years [2].     
 SOA offers possibilities of making new opportunities 
for increasing efficiency of IIS. These opportunities could 
be found in a form of expanded solutions for designing 
intelligence and information systems [3], [4], and [5]. 
SOA approach in information systems is a logical 
solution, not only for temporary and short term 
exploitation, but also as a perspective solution for general 
strategy in companies and governmental institutions [6].     
Every modern intelligence system is based on some 
type of information system [7]. Usage of contemporary 
technology, 
especially 
Information 
Communication 
Technology (ICT), is giving more efficient execution of 
all phases of the intelligence service. 
This article is divided in several sections. Section III 
describes the model of Intelligence Information System. 
Section IV demonstrates functions of the distributed 
Intelligence Information System. Finally, in the Section 
V, expected achievements enabled by deploying SOA 
concept for developing intelligence information system 
are explained. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There are numerous IT projects which dedicated their 
work on designing information systems for military 
purposes. This paper will give survey on recent projects 
explaining Macedonian approach related to this problem. 
In addition, the development of these solutions in SOA 
based purposes will be discussed.   
Within the Macedonian e-Gov project (2004-2011) 
[8], different services have been developed within 
different information systems. These solutions have 
increased efficiency and transparency in specific public 
sectors, but problems appear when the interoperability of 
such services has to be established.   
The following information systems: Information 
System Documentum; Information System еParliament; 
Information Border Management System (IBMS) and 
Interoperability System, can be considered as related to 
IIS.  
All these Information Systems are SOA-based. As a 
result, information integration between IIS and selected 
Information Systems should be simple.  
The goal of the Information System Documentum is 
to manage and store documents with different functions in 
a proper and convenient way. This system’s consumers 
are:the government of the Republic of Macedonia; The 
Ministries; The General Secretariat; The Parliament; The 
Justice 
Secretariat; 
The 
Euro-Atlantic 
Integration 
Secretariat; The Ohrid Framework Agreement Secretariat; 
The Administration service.  
Information System еParliament solution refers to 
the interior judicial processes. It is responsible for the 
daily coordination in decisions making which is derived 
from the judicial processes in Parliament. At the same 
time, this Information System integrates the Parliament 
and different institutions that are involved in the decision 
making.      
The Integrated Border Management System – 
IBMS provides a platform for Information sharing, 
controlling and monitoring the state border. This system 
should provide coordinated information sharing between 
the state authorities that are responsible for the border 
management and security. 
32
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

Important information for the IIS contained in the 
IBMS is:State entry or exit of people, goods and vehicles; 
Detecting 
organized 
crime; 
Monitoring 
potential 
smuggling across the borders; Checking and monitoring 
the transfer of materials and infectious diseases, etc. 
Data sharing between these systems has to be fast and 
efficient. The Interoperability System should help 
avoiding data duplicates and reduce errors caused by 
different systems’ inconsistencies.   
Technologically advanced countries use SOA based 
information systems in military domain. The main reason 
for this is increased level of security. Medlow [9] explains 
the interest about deploying SOA in ICT systems which 
are part of the military and civilian domains. SOA 
implementation in military domains of the systems used 
by land forces, peacekeeping or other kind of operations 
as a part of multinational contingents (led by NATO, UN 
or EU) is usually a big challenge.   
Anschuetz [10] shows that the SOA implementation in 
the systems can be used as a possible solution for 
reorganization and optimization of the business processes 
which affords platform’s independent application usage 
and implementation and its integration into organizational 
infrastructure. The usage of SOA offers benefits in terms 
of service interaction with external clients. As an 
example, the usage of SOA in a chain of supplying 
partners and other clients can be indicated. New 
generations of applications joined with integration 
processes 
of 
automation, 
business 
analysis 
and 
information integration allow the operators to extend the 
SOA benefits. In addition, recent researches related to this 
issue show that various information systems are created 
with emphasis on the evolution of business processes and 
information toward SOA that can be used to design 
suitable solutions for unsafe missions and network centric 
operations.                   
Bruce [11] explains that authorities responsible for 
building defense systems recognize the neediness of 
creating a full service oriented platform which will be 
used for operational military applications and services. As 
examples, the concepts for Network Core Services 
(Department of Defense (DoD)) and Network enabled 
core services (NATO) can be mentioned. In the same 
framework, the Australian Department of Defence 
suggest 
similar 
architecture 
(Single 
Information 
Environment Architectural Intent 2010). The IBM SOA 
Foundation (Triton Core) integrates different software 
products, best practice and consists of pattern which 
provides the elements required to implement and integrate 
SOA [12], [13] in organizational infrastructure [14], 
without financial implication caused by the coding and 
modifying processes.       
Triton Core System consists of Enterprise Service Bus 
(ESB) and core for services [15], which is connecting the 
applications and resources of the other services in order to 
establish “Net-Centric” solution. Generally, the newly 
created Triton Core System has decreased the costs of 
Australian Defense Department and Australian defense 
industry. This solution raises the efficiency toward Single 
Information Environment architecture.     
Mechling in [16] is describing the usage of the SOA 
by the Finnish Defense Forces (FDF). FDF are requested 
to increase their membership in the coalition with various 
specifics of military and civilian organization. Critical 
scenario which should be expected during their activities 
is coordination between Air Force, Navy, Police, 
Hospitals, 
and 
other 
military 
and 
civil 
groups. 
Technological incompatibility can cause coordination 
complications in the moment when groups use different 
technological architectures and communication protocols.  
FDF C4 (command, control, communications and 
computing) systems were created to support military 
domain, but these systems are „stove-piped“ for 
supporting land forces, Navy and Air Force operations in 
the same time. In order to avoid this potential obstacle, 
the Program FINED was developed. The main reason for 
developing this program is implementation of the SOA 
for increased efficiency and creating reusable technology.  
Radcliffe [17] is explaining that command and control 
(C2) information systems exploited in headquarters and in 
an operational level are using SOA. In order to increase 
capability of information sharing in military environment, 
the SOA approach allows flexible increase of the 
capability to share information through integration and 
systems interoperability based on commercial-off-the 
shelf (COTS) technology and standards.  
This paper will give contribution in usage of SOA for 
developing 
prototype 
of 
IIS, 
which 
fulfills 
the 
requirements for intelligence disciplines as an Imagery 
Intelligence (IMINT), Signals Intelligence (SIGINT), 
Measurement and Signature Intelligence (MASINT), 
Electronic 
Intelligence 
(ELINT), 
Open-source 
Intelligence (OSINT), Human Intelligence (HUMINT)   
that answer to the requirements for intelligence cycle on 
which 
contemporary 
model 
of 
the 
Macedonian 
intelligence should be based.       
33
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

 
 
Figure 1. Model of SOA-based Intelligence Information System 
 
III. 
IIS MODEL 
The Model of SOA-based Intelligence Information 
System shown on Figure 1 should completely fulfill the 
intelligence role and assignments and its connection to the 
information systems of similar institutions.    
Presented IIS model shows three types of users: 
service providers, service consumers and Intelligence. 
Service consumers are institutions (Crisis Management 
Center, MOI, Intelligence Agency or others) that have the 
need to get information from IIS or to give information as 
a notification. 
According to security procedures service providers 
provide the consumers with required information. 
Intelligence 
is 
based 
on 
several 
intelligence 
disciplines: IMINT, SIGINT, MASINT, OSINT, etc. In 
order to fulfill the requirements of intelligence disciplines, 
several tasks should be completed; gathering information 
(assessments, analyses, generating reports, etc.), then its 
verification and notification (e.g., political and security 
situation in foreign countries related to security of 
investments), etc. 
All services are getting information from appropriate 
service providers through Information systems of the 
government institutions or the agencies which are 
included in Intelligence cycle. In addition, it is possible 
other Information systems to be service provider for inter-
institutional governance. Service providers among system 
support for workflow processes define web services 
which are exploited from the users with appropriate 
security level to service registers. 
Our 
methodology 
of 
developing 
SOA-based 
Intelligence Information System consists of several 
postulates. Experiences from recent researches which 
refers to SOA show that agencies, departments, 
institutions and other stakeholders can push and pull data 
on a standardized and flexible manner through 
communication interfaces using XML schema and web 
services.  
The 
first 
postulate 
defines 
data 
exchanging 
methodology within SOA. It should be compatible with 
publicly described solutions for information systems 
which are supporting intelligence functions. 
The second postulate focuses on the usage of SOA for 
information systems design, with the intention of finding 
relevance for developing Intelligence IIS.  SOA should be 
treated as a standard for reusing information that is 
loosely coupled. This postulate enables independency of 
the implementation platform provided that hardware and 
software replacement without negative implications 
toward other components of a system as far as 
communication interface of service is not changed.         
The third postulate describes functionalities for system 
end users of the IIS. According to user’s division, user’s 
functionalities of IIS can be explored from different 
aspects. Intelligence, as a system end user of IIS, is based 
on intelligence disciplines that are divided on sub-
intelligence disciplines. These disciplines have different 
implementation as services within different government 
institutions, departments or military force units as a 
component of national security systems (Intelligence 
Agency, Ministry of Interior (MOI), Ministry of Defense 
(MOD), Ministry for Foreign Affairs and others). 
Intelligence services can be divided in three categories: 
data 
entering, 
data 
verification 
and 
notification 
(assessment of services for certain country could vary 
depending of security policies of the country).  
34
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

 
Figure 2. Example process of IIS [18] 
The fourth postulate provides means that enable the 
future development of the IIS. In order to meet its future 
requirements, information infrastructure should be 
adoptable and flexible, and thus it needs to fully support 
information sharing process.  The information sharing 
should be the basis for system development. It can help 
the authorities in decision making process, enabling them 
to plan actions in a convenient way. In order to 
accomplish this, one should define the model of 
information system integration which is undependable of 
the unique technologies and integration platforms. 
The fifth postulate suggests that security standards 
needed to be implemented in order to achieve certain 
level of security. SOA-based information systems must be 
protected from intrusions and other vulnerabilities. Term 
security in these circumstances indicates establishing 
mechanisms which have system protection functions. In 
the phase of system designing, possible attacks and 
threats should be explored and according to them system 
protection mechanism should be designed. Usual 
vulnerabilities related to information system security refer 
to message interception, changing the context of message, 
denial of service, access denied, etc.        
These five postulates can be used as the basis for SOA 
system deployment on the top of appropriate IT 
infrastructure. Such IIS achieves minimum requirements 
for designing services that are needed to be implemented 
in intelligence process with internal functions which can 
be processed from external IIS peer [18].   
IV. 
EXAMPLE PROCESS WITH INTELLIGENCE 
INFORMATION SYSTEM 
In this chapter we will demonstrate the function of 
distributed IIS that follows suggested postulates. Figure 2 
presents typical 
example 
process 
of 
request 
for 
intelligence information that should be established in 
intelligence sectors departments or agencies. This process 
has three functions which should be performed from 
external nodes in the network [18]. 
Function 1: As the client issues requests for certain 
information, this request ought to be accepted without 
exception if there is information available. In the case 
when there is no available information the request should 
be treated as request for creation of such information by 
certain agency that will be delegated to be information 
provider. The necessary inputs of data that have to be sent 
to external peer include the form request for information. 
According to this, this function executes computation 
steps in order to check whether information can be sent 
directly to the client who requested the information or 
additional data would be needed for creation of the 
information related to request. At the end, external 
functions send information messages back for local 
process. 
Function 2: If there is not sufficient data for creation 
of intelligence information, a second function is started 
and its basic role is to decide which data is necessary or 
critical for creating intelligence information. Input values 
for this function is data from received request for 
35
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

intelligence information, followed by the information of 
intelligence disciplines which should be used for 
collecting information about  which department, agency 
or sector is responsible for every part of process.  In that 
manner this function is starting information planning, then 
collection and later analyses of collected information. In 
order to simplify this process, one can suppose that an 
agency which is responsible for producing intelligence 
information should deliver information in time. The value 
of the function in this case is a complex object and it 
consists of data related to intelligence information and 
expired date for their usage.     
Function 3: When there is enough data related to 
Intelligence in a database of stakeholders, information 
creation can be started. The third function creates data 
records to whom intelligence information are sent 
explaining how long the information is valuable, etc. All 
data is wrapped as a complex object and it is sent to node 
of IIS which is the requestor for intelligence information.  
Local peer in this example wraps requested data as 
objects in which the remote function calls are. Local 
database of intelligence stakeholder receives complex 
return objects and record them as a second master data.  
This example shows how single functions of a process 
for requesting intelligence information is done on external 
IIS peers and how a local IIS system benefits from using 
external business logic, e.g., by using optimization 
functions.      
V. 
EXPECTED ACHIEVMENTS 
Expected achievements that refer to SOA concept for 
developing intelligence information system are the 
following [19]: 
1. Proposed model of IIS fulfills requirements for 
intelligence disciplines, and answers to requirements 
for intelligence cycle on which the contemporary 
model of Macedonian intelligence should be based.       
2. Proposed approach for application integration which 
shows how selected information systems from 
Macedonian 
e-Gov 
project 
should 
exchange 
information. 
3. Proposed approach describes which describes how to 
avoid technology dependence for the creation of 
information systems completely based on SOA. 
4. Proposed approach which suggests that SOA security 
standards should be used in order to achieve 
appropriate level of access control and authentication.     
5. Proposed model which integrates protocol for the 
information’s distributed searching (online or near-
line) depending on situation’s importance in order to 
make the senior decision-makers an appropriate 
decisions.   
 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
Intelligence 
Information 
System 
Model 
gives 
contribution in Homeland Security and Civil Military 
Emerging Risks assessment through the possibility of 
providing information in the appropriate way by 
implementing pushing and pulling mechanisms into 
information systems, then by selection of data and creation 
of information from raw data, that can be used in creating 
intelligence products and dissemination reports to the 
authorities. In our case, this is done by IIS based on SOA 
which follows the five postulates that enables flexible and 
secure design of IIS. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Air Combat Command, - Version 2, CONOPS UAV, 
Section 
6 
- 
Communication 
Integration 
and 
Interoperability, http://www.fas.org/irp/doddir/usaf, US Air 
Force; 3 Dec 1996 
[2] P. Baglietto , M. Maresca, et al.. "Stepwise deployment 
methodology of a service oriented architecture for business 
communities." 
Journal: 
Information 
and 
Software 
Technology 47(6), pp. 427-436. 2005 
[3] R. R Burk.. “Enabling Citizen-Centered Electronic 
Government” 2005-2006 Action Plan. USA. Office of 
EGovernment and Information Technology. 2005 
[4] M. H. Burstein "Dynamic Invocation of Semantic Web 
Services 
That 
Use 
Unfamiliar 
Ontologies." 
IEEE 
INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS (JULY/AUGUST). (vol. 19 
no. 4) pp. 67-73. 2004 
[5] M. Castellano “An e-Government Cooperative Framework 
for Government Agencies“. 38th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences. Hawaii, IEEE. pp. 121c-
121c. 2005 
[6] T. Erl, Service-Oriented Architecture: A Field Guide to 
Integrating XML and Web Services, Published by Prentice 
Hall. 2004 
[7] “Exploring New Command and Control Concepts and 
Capabilities Final Report”, NATO SAS-050, January 2006 
[8] e-Gov Project - Paves the way for modern Macedonia, 
http://www.egov.org.mk, consulted of January 2011 
[9] D. MedlowSaab Systems, “Extending Service Orientated 
Architectures to the Deployed Land Environment”, 
Military 
Communications 
and 
Information 
Systems 
Conference (MilCis) Australia, http://www.milcis.com.au/, 
2009 
[10] B. Anschuetz, Director, SOA WW Business Development 
& Client Engagement Management, IBM Software Group, 
“Service Benefits – Life Beyond SOA”, Military 
Communications 
and 
Information 
Systems 
Conference(MilCis) Australia, http://www.milcis.com.au/, 
2009 
[11] M. Bruce and A. Heys, IBM, “Introducing the Triton SOA 
Foundation for Military Systems Integrators and Developers”, 
Military 
Communications 
and 
Information 
Systems 
Conference(MilCis) Australia, 
 http://www.milcis.com.au/, 2010 
[12] M.P. Papazoglou. “Extending the Service Oriented 
Architecture”. Business Integration Journal, pp. 18-21. 
February 2005 
[13] S. Kumar and R. Rana. “Service on demand portals: A 
primer on federated portals”. Web Logic Developers 
Journal:WLDJ, pp. 22-24. September/October 2004 
36
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

[14] D. Krafzig, K. Banke, and D. Slama. “Enterprise 
SOA:Service Oriented Architecture Best Practices”. 
Prentice Hall, 2005 
[15] A. Anagol-Subbaro. “J2EE Web Services on BEA 
WebLogic.” Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, Newy 
Jersey, 2005 
[16] J. Mechling, Lecturer in Public Policy,”Finnish Defense 
Forces – Network-Centric Operations”, John F. Kennedy 
School of Governance, Harvard University, 2007 
[17] S. Radcliffe, L. Trotman, and H. Duncan  “Supporting 
Capability Evolution Using a Service Oriented Architecture 
Approach in a Military Command and Control Information 
System”,  
http://nectise.com/pdfs/2_Stewart%20Radcliffe.pdf  
[18] N. Brehm , J.M. Gómez,: Secure Web Service-based 
resource sharing in ERP networks. International Journal on 
Information Privacy and Security (JIPS) 1 pp. 29-48, 2005  
[19] J. Achkoski, V. Trajkovik , and M. Dojcinovski “SOA 
Approach in Prototype of Intelligence Information System” 
ICT Innovations 2010, Web Proceedings, ISSN 1857-7288 
pp. 149-160. 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

