Collecting Factors for Motivating Energy-Saving Behavior
Marc Jentsch, Marco Jahn, Ren´e Reiners, Uwe Kirschenmann
Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Information Technology FIT
Schloss Birlinghoven
D-53754 Sankt Augustin, Germany
{marc.jentsch, marco.jahn, rene.reiners, uwe.kirschenmann}@ﬁt.fraunhofer.de
Abstract—Ubiquitous computing systems are deployed for
support in many different domains, one of them is energy
efﬁciency. Existing ubiquitous computing systems, which aim
at helping people to save energy, usually give feedback about
their users’ energy consumption. But these systems do not
take into account age or gender of the users coming with
different attitudes and motivation. Since we are considering
user awareness as important factor for the success of pervasive
energy saving support systems, we are going to develop a system
on our own. In this paper, we investigate what requirements
our system must meet and how it should be designed. We
explore people’s knowledge about energy efﬁciency and the
motivation to save energy. Then, we investigate the impact of
age on these aspects. The target groups are female, divided into
two age groups ranging from 13 to 15 years and 23 to 30 years.
Finally, we draw conclusions how to design our user-adaptive
energy saving support system.
Keywords-energy management, user interfaces, context adap-
tation, ubiquitous application;
I. INTRODUCTION
Today’s energy consumption behavior is characterized by
a high amount of wasting. This causes unnecessary costs
for companies or private households. In addition, global
warming is being boosted, because more energy has to be
produced which leads to higher CO2 emissions. The reason
for this behavior is often a lack of knowledge about the
current energy consumption. In many cases, it is hard to
identify energy-wasting devices. The only feedback about
the own energy consumption is a yearly bill only allowing
a retrospective, summarized view. This makes a change of
behavior difﬁcult due to the lack of a direct connection
between cause and effect.
Current feedback-based ubiquitous systems are mainly
based on the results from early studies in the ﬁeld of
environmental psychology that experiment with different
interventions like feedback, goal-setting and rewards. Abra-
hamse et al. [1] provide a review of such studies, most of
them resulting in energy savings up to 15%. But, Abrahamse
et al. also note that most of these studies did not take
into account determinants like knowledge, attitude, age etc.
and that little is known about the long-term effects of the
applied interventions. Other analyses come to similar results
regarding the power of constant real-time feedback [2], [3]
but also mention that environmental, social, and educational
factors need to be considered when aiming at behavioral
changes.
Since demographic aspects inﬂuence energy consumption
behavior [4], we state that applications must be customized
for different population groups. Our goal is to develop a
pervasive system that supports people in saving energy.
Unlike existing approaches, our system shall be context
aware by taking the individual user into account. In this
paper, we want to ﬁnd ideas how to design our energy saving
support system which adapts to different user groups. We
have conducted a study that ﬁnds out about some differences
in attitude and motivation towards the topic of saving energy
with regard to different demographic aspects. This serves as
basis for design decisions for our ubiquitous energy saving
support system.
As starting point for investigation we take individual dif-
ferences into consideration, as it is known from psychology.
As this research topic is rather complex, the focus here is
on age differences in prosocial behavior and will continue
with gender differences in a following study. In this sense,
Baldassare and Katz [5] show that women are signiﬁcantly
more likely to engage in environmental practices. That is the
reason why we start investigating female behavior. Aging
has a direct impact on energy consumption as the attitude
tends to change over lifespan [6]. Therefore, we investigate
possible differences between younger and older women with
regard to energy saving and discuss how our energy saving
support system should be individually designed.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In
Section II, we discuss related work which is occupying with
the psychological background about motivational aspects to
save energy. Additionally, we present existing feedback-
based systems. In Section III, the setup of the study is
described, its results follow in Section IV, the discussion
in Section V. An outlook on future work is given in Section
VI.
II. RELATED WORK
Blocket et al. [7] analyzed the 1993 General Social Survey
and found out that women show more environmental concern
than men. On the other hand, they are not more likely
to engage in environmental action. Steel [8] performed
four waves of mail surveys and telephone follow-ups to
1
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

investigate the link between environmental attitude and
behavior. As a result, women are more likely to participate
in environmentally protective behavior. This is conﬁrmed
by Stern et al. [9] who found that women express stronger
intentions to act than men. And later they found females
having stronger biospheric-altruistic values [10]. Schahn et
al. [11] again conﬁrmed women having more environmental
concerns. At the same time, men showed higher knowledge
about environmental problems in their study.
A survey [12] of 801 women at 18 years or older
addressing attitudes and awareness about energy emphasizes
the importance of the role of women when it comes to energy
awareness. For example, 77% of the women take primary
or equal responsibility for paying their electricity bills. 97%
try to save energy, e.g., by turning off lights, using energy
saving lamps etc.
Almost all industrial and scientiﬁc efforts to increase
energy awareness of users are based on the concept of
providing constant real-time energy consumption informa-
tion. Several products focussing on feedback are currently
entering the market, e.g. Google PowerMeter [13], Microsoft
Hohm [14], Greenbox [15] or The Power Tab [16]. As
an example from the scientiﬁc community, Mattern et al.
[17] present the eMeter system, which connects a smart
meter with a mobile phone to provide the user with real-
time feedback on device level. The user interface visualizes
consumption data as well as historical data and costs per de-
vice. The power-aware cord [18] is a classical example for a
ubiquitous computing system that aims at enhancing energy
awareness: It is an electrical power strip that visualizes the
amount of energy passing through it by animating the wire
with lights. Jacucci et al. [19] present the EnergyLife system,
which combines real-time feedback information with goal
setting and awareness tips.
All systems miss to take into account the individual
social and educational background. They show consumption
data, costs and CO2 emission and assume that the same
visualization works equally well for different gender or age,
associated with different attitude and motivation of users. In
this paper, we will show that different user groups come up
with different attitude and motivation towards energy saving.
Additionally, we will draw conclusions how our own user
adaptive energy saving support system can be designed.
III. STUDY
In order to ﬁnd out how the age of participants inﬂuences
motivation and knowledge about energy consumption, we
created a questionnaire that we gave to two groups at
different ages. We expected to ﬁnd ideas how to design our
user-adaptive energy saving support system. As related work
promises women to be higher motivated to save energy, we
started comparing girls and women.
The survey was conducted in two sessions, each lasted
30 minutes. In the ﬁrst session, we engaged eight girls in
the age of 13 to 15 representing teenagers. The second
session contained eight women at the age of 23 to 30
representing grown-ups. All participants had never used
any energy saving support system. At the beginning, both
groups were briefed that we are investigating knowledge and
motivation regarding energy saving. We explained that the
questionnaire was anonymous and they will not be judged in
order to decrease potential inhibitions. Each participant got
one questionnaire. A moderator read aloud every question
which the participants should answer. This procedure had
the advantage of clarifying arising issues together with the
participants.
The ﬁrst three questions investigated the background
knowledge regarding energy savings in order to ﬁnd out what
kind of information needs to be provided by our assisting
system. First, we wanted to know if there is awareness of
energy consumption behavior at all. Then, we asked for
methods for energy saving without predeﬁned options. Next,
we gave predeﬁned options and a free text ﬁeld for ﬁnding
out the source of this knowledge.
The latter two questions asked for the motivation for
saving energy. From the gathered results, we expected to
draw conclusions on how we can increase peoples’ moti-
vation. The ﬁrst question ”What can be reasons for you or
others to save energy?” targeted to ﬁnd every possible mo-
tivation in general. The whole group should name possible
motivations for energy saving aloud. The second question
asked each participant individually to rank the collected
aspects by personal priority. Reasons that were personally
not relevant should be listed unranked in a special area of
the questionnaire. By this, we expected to get an overall
ranking of the importance of motivational aspects.
IV. RESULTS
In this section we present and arrange the results of the
questionnaire which will then be discussed in Section V.
Awareness: All participants answered that they have
reﬂected how energy can be saved. At the same time,
everyone stated to try to save energy at least once in a while.
Knowledge: With respect to the question how energy
can be saved we identiﬁed two classes of answers. On the
one hand the participants proposed to change equipment. On
the other hand, a change of behavior was proposed. Each
class could be divided into four subclasses.
The equipment class consisted of using Energy Saving
Lamps, buying Efﬁcient Devices, Thermal Insulation and
Solar Plants. For the Efﬁcient Devices subclass the women
suggested to pay attention to energy efﬁciency when buying
new devices in general or gave examples like new washing
machines or new refrigerators.
In the behavior class, the participants argued to completely
remove unused devices from the power line instead of using
the stand-by mode. They also stated to switch off lights when
not being in the room. We summarized further answers as
2
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

Figure 1.
Grouped answers to the question: ”How can energy be saved?”
deliberate Efﬁcient Usage. Examples are ”Close the window
when heating” and ”Don’t start the dish washer before
it’s full”. For the last subclass the participants proposed to
abandon e.g. a dryer, the elevator or to live vegan. Figure 1
illustrates the distribution of answers to the question about
ways to save energy.
Knowledge Sources: Figure 2 shows the distribution of
the answers to the question ”How do you know about energy
saving?” All four girls who ﬁlled in the Misc ﬁeld wrote:
”I have found out myself”. One of the women who ﬁlled in
the Misc ﬁeld wrote: ”By usage”, the other one answered
”Radio, Friends”.
Figure 2.
Answers to the question: ”How do you know about energy
saving?”
Motivation: During the group discussion, the girls
identiﬁed six motivational factors for saving energy: En-
vironment Protection, saving Costs, parental Bringing-Up,
Side Effects, Personal Visualization and Games. Side Effects
was explained using the example of vegetarian lifestyle
which has a lower energy need than non-vegetarian lifestyle.
In this example, the motivation to live vegetarian was to save
animals while saving energy is just a side effect. Personal
Visualization means that if the girls just see how much
energy they consume, this would be a reason to try to save
energy.
Figure 3 shows how often the reasons for saving energy
were put on which rank by the girls. For example, Envi-
ronment Protection was classiﬁed by six of the girls on the
ﬁrst rank, placed by one girl on the third and another one
on the fourth. The diameter of each circle is proportional
to its value. The idea to come up with Games where the
goal is to save energy was seen as promising during the
group discussion but in the end none of the girls ranked it
as relevant.
Figure 3.
Overview of girls’ motivation rankings
The women came up with eight motivational factors: Sav-
ing Costs, Environment Protection, Social Pressure, Laws,
Less Attrition, Raising Awareness, being Trendy and being
Opposed to Energy Companies. Laws refer to the assumption
that if more laws like the prohibition of traditional light bulbs
had been adopted, less energy would be wasted. Less Attri-
tion means that devices are better preserved when being less
used. The women also argued that starting to save energy
would raise the self-awareness which is a good motivation.
Figure 4 shows the women’s ranking distribution. Being
Trendy and being Opposed to Energy Companies was not
ranked as relevant by any of the women.
V. DISCUSSION
In this section we discuss the results of Section IV and
conclude how to design our energy saving support system.
Awareness: The fact that everyone in our study states
to have reﬂected about how energy can be saved shows
that there is a general awareness of energy consumption.
Also everyone answered that she tried to save energy. So,
in general the motivation to save energy exists and does not
need to be arisen by our system. This result may be biased
by the fact that being motivated to save energy is socially
requested.
Knowledge: When comparing the answers how energy
can be saved, the most obvious difference between the
groups is that six of the women mentioned to pay attention
to energy efﬁciency when buying new devices while none
3
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

Figure 4.
Overview of women’s motivation rankings
of the girls had this idea. This is probably because girls do
not have to buy new devices. As a conclusion, our energy
saving support system will not suggest any hints to younger
users because this would be a useless tip for them. It only
might lower the acceptance of the system. For grown-up
users, these kind of hints will be included in the system.
Two of the girls mentioned Solar Plants. Although, solar
plants do not help to save energy, our system could show
how the energy is produced.
As for the other answers the difference between the groups
is two at maximum, we do not consider any distinction for
different aged users of our system on these topics.
Since the answers No Stand-By and Lights Off were
named very often, we interpret that the knowledge about
these energy saving options is omnipresent. So, our system
will not introduce them, small reminders will sufﬁce. In
contrast, information on rarely mentioned alternatives, like
Thermal Insulation, needs to be introduced.
Knowledge Sources: With respect to the probands’
knowledge about energy saving, there are again only two
categories with a difference between the groups. The fact
that nearly all of the women but none of the girls know
about energy saving from the Internet may be biased by the
fact that some of the women work as computer scientists.
That is why we don’t make conclusions for our system in
this case.
The second difference is that much more girls think they
worked out energy saving methods by themselves. This
may indicate missing awareness of the amount of external
information they are exposed to on a daily basis.
Regarding the sources Work, School, Family and Friends
the information is rather pushed to the user. Coming to
the sources Internet, Newspaper, TV and Radio users rather
select which information to get, so these are pull services.
Summarized, women named eight push and 16 pull sources
while girls wrote eight push and seven pull sources. Since
people have complete freedom to choose pull services,
we conclude that pull services are prefered by women. In
contrast, as the younger participants of our study do not
use pull services regularly, information rather needs to be
pushed. Hence, our energy saving support system will rather
push information to younger users but provide information
to be actively requested for older ones.
As interesting overall result, the family is a knowledge
source for nearly everybody while work resp. school is not.
While being prominent at home, saving energy does not
seem to be covered at work and at school. So, we will
deploy our energy saving support system in work and school
environments.
Motivation: The main motivational aspects were named
by both groups. Besides Environment Protection and Costs,
Bringing-Up is similar to Social Pressure and Personal
Visualization denotes the same factor as Raise Awareness.
Law and Less Attrition were only mentioned by the women,
while Side Effects was stated solely by the girls.
The motivational aspects’ ranking differs more. While the
women ranked Environment Protection and Costs almost
equal, the girls gave a much higher priority to Environment
Protection. We conclude this is again because girls do not
have to pay the energy bill by themselves. Our energy saving
support system will keep in mind what motivates the user
group and provide the appropriate incentives.
In general, Environment Protection and Costs are the most
important motivational aspects since everyone ranked one of
them ﬁrst. On the other hand, the approach to use Games
to get people to save energy does not seem to be promising
since nobody felt attracted. The same applies to the attempt
to make energy saving trendy and ways to incite against
energy companies.
VI. FUTURE WORK
With the conclusions drawn from this survey we derived
features that we will implement in our adaptive energy
saving support system. Next, we will set up the same study
with appropriately aged groups of men to investigate gender
as other inﬂuencing factor. After that, we will implement
adapted systems for each group and evaluate them in user
tests.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by the European Commission
within the SEEMPubS project (project No. 260139).
REFERENCES
[1] W. Abrahamse, L. Steg, C. Vlek, and T. Rothengatter, “A
Review of intervention studies aimed at household energy
conservation,” Journal of Environmental Psychology, vol. 25,
pp. 273–291, 2005.
4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

[2] G.
Wood
and
M.
Newborough,
“Dynamic
energy-
consumption indicators for domestic appliances: environment,
behaviour and design,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 35, no. 8,
pp. 821–841, 2003.
[3] S. Darby, “The effectiveness of feedback on energy consump-
tion,” A Review for DEFRA of the Literature on Metering,
Billing and direct Displays, no. April, 2006.
[4] D. Newman and D. Day, The American energy consumer.
Ballinger, 1975.
[5] M. Baldassare and C. Katz, “The personal threat of envi-
ronmental problems as predictor of environmental practices,”
Environment and Behavior, vol. 24, no. 5, p. 602, 1992.
[6] E. Yamasaki and N. Tominaga, “Evolution of an aging society
and effect on residential energy demand,” Energy Policy,
vol. 25, pp. 903–912, 1997.
[7] T. Blocker and D. Eckberg, “Gender and environmentalism:
Results from the 1993 general social survey,” Social Science
Quarterly, vol. 78, pp. 841–858, 1997.
[8] B. Steel, “Thinking globally and acting locally?: environmen-
tal attitudes, behaviour and activism,” Journal of Environmen-
tal Management, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 27–36, 1996.
[9] P. Stern, T. Dietz, and L. Kalof, “Value orientations, gen-
der, and environmental concern,” Environment and behavior,
vol. 25, no. 5, p. 322, 1993.
[10] P. Stern, L. Kalof, T. Dietz, and G. Guagnano, “Values,
Beliefs, and Proenvironmental Action: Attitude Formation
Toward Emergent Attitude Objects1,” Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, vol. 25, no. 18, pp. 1611–1636, 2006.
[11] J. Schahn and E. Holzer, “Studies of individual environmental
concern: The role of knowledge, gender, and background
variables,” Environment and Behavior, vol. 22, no. 6, p. 767,
1990.
[12] G. Q. R. Research, “Women’s Survey on Energy & the
Environment,” 2009.
[13] Google, “Google PowerMeter,” 2011, available online at http:
//www.google.org/powermeter; visited on June 30th 2011.
[14] Microsoft, “Microsoft Hohm,” 2011, available online at http:
//www.microsoft-hohm.com; visited on June 30th 2011.
[15] SilverSpring Networks, “greenbox - Empowering energy cus-
tomers to better manage their usage,” 2011, available online
at http://getgreenbox.com; visited on June 30th 2011.
[16] energyaware, “The PowerTab In-Home Display,” 2011, avail-
able online at http://www.energy-aware.com/our-products/
ihd; visited on June 30th 2011.
[17] F. Mattern, T. Staake, and M. Weiss, “ICT for green,”
in Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on
Energy-Efﬁcient Computing and Networking - e-Energy ’10.
Passau, Germany: ACM Press, 2010. [Online]. Available:
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=1791314.1791316
[18] A. Gustafsson and M. Gyllensward, “The power-aware cord:
energy awareness through ambient information display,” in
Computer Human Interaction, 2005, pp. 1423–1426.
[19] G. Jacucci, A. Spagnolli, L. Gamberini, and P. Monti, “De-
signing Effective Feedback of Electricity Consumption for
Mobile User Interfaces,” PsychNology, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 265
– 289, 2009.
5
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

