Optical Node Architectures in the Context of the Quality of Service
in Optical Networks
Stanisław Kozdrowski
Institute of Telecommunications,
Warsaw University of Technology
Warsaw, Poland
Email: s.kozdrowski@tele.pw.edu.pl
Sławomir Sujecki
Department of Telecommunications and Informatics,
Wrocław University of Science and Technology
Wrocław, Poland
Email: slawomir.sujecki@pwr.edu.pl
Abstract—We show a new generation reconﬁgurable add drop
optical node architecture in the context of evolution of the ﬂexible
photonic layer in telco networks. We compare the proposed node
architecture with the existing classic reconﬁgurable optical add
drop multiplexer (ROADM) architectures and also directionless,
colorless and gridless techniques. We focus particularly on various
aspects of the quality of service in optical network, such as
blocking probability and full automation including touchless
provisioning of bandwidth and a reduction of manual errors.
Additionally, we stress the beneﬁts of the proposed node archi-
tecture in both near term and long term future.
Keywords–DWDM network; node architecture; reconﬁgurable
optical add/drop; CDC optical node; QoS; blocking probability.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Optical networks are undergoing signiﬁcant changes due
to the exponential growth of trafﬁc (e.g., internet trafﬁc,
increasing demands for multimedia and cloud computing).
The continuous growth of customer IP trafﬁc in combination
with high-rate applications, such as video on demand, high
deﬁnition TV, cloud computing and data center storage systems
require cost-effective and scalable networking infrastructure.
It is predicted that IP trafﬁc will grow still rapidly in the
next years [1]. This prompts for increasing the capacity and
transport efﬁciency of optical networks in order to realize
all client demands and to be able to guarantee high Quality
of Service (QoS) that is crucial within a large corporation
networking environment (i.e., ﬁnancial corporation, banks,
network providers). On the other hand, the design of a modern
optical network has to have an ability to accommodate both
large demands (e.g., 1Tb) and a small ones (e.g. 1 Gb).
For example, multi-core processing network storage or cloud
computing applications are requesting data ﬂows from 1 Gb
up to 1 Tb. Existing Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing
(DWDM) network operators provide 10 Gb, 100 Gb, 400 Gb
and 1 Tb bit rates and therefore a ﬂexible node architecture is
needed.
In recent years, the reconﬁgurable optical add/drop multi-
plexers (ROADMs) have been widely deployed in DWDM net-
works [2]. ROADM enables in a ﬂexible way to add and drop
WDM channels without manual engineer intervention at the
network operator site [3][4]. However, most current network
operators have still ROADM nodes with limited automatic pro-
visioning. ROADM architectures for colourless, directionless
and contentionless (CDC) WDM nodes are of great interest for
future generation optical networks since they allow access to
any colour and arbitrary direction from any transponder within
a network node [5]. Such architectures enhance network ﬂex-
ibility and increase QoS. Also they improve overall availability
and simplify routing algorithms for network management. The
deployment of advanced CDC ROADMs node architectures
and implementation of generalized multiprotocol label switch-
ing (GMPLS) within control plane in DWDM networks are
another signiﬁcant advantages. Such activity causes the close
cooperation among vendors and network operators [6]. It is
currently one of the major drivers for network operators to
deploy GMPLS in their DWDM networks, mainly because of
failure survivability and very quick network restoration after
a failure event. This signiﬁcantly increases QoS of optical
networks from the network customer point of view.
Flexible grid spectrum is another important feature of
modern WDM networks and is a way for operators to future-
proof networks that will ultimately need to content with
transport speed beyond 100 Gb/s bit rate [7]. The proposed
solution is a more granular version of the ITU grid that brakes
spectrum down to 6.25 GHz granularities [8]. Low utilization
in provisioning a lightpath becomes more severe when the
frequency slot granularity becomes larger. For example, it
is spectrally efﬁcient for an optical channel with 12.5 GHz
frequency spacing to carry a 40 Gb/s lightpath. However, it
will be spectrally wasteful for the same lightpath if 25 GHz
frequency spacing is applied. From this perspective, for better
spectrum utilization a gridless allocation mode was evaluated
[9].
One of the most profound engineering problems in op-
tical network is refered to as the Routing and Spectrum
Allocation (RSA) problem and essentially consists in ﬁnding
currently unoccupied spectrum resources to establish a given
set of lightpaths in a trafﬁc efﬁcient way with respect to
a future demand. Due to the spectrum contiguity constraint,
the RSA optimization problem is NP-hard, considerably more
challenging than the corresponding Routing and Wavelength
Assignment (RWA) problem in ﬁxed-grid networks [10][11].
During the last decade the RSA problem attracted a con-
siderable attention of the telecommunications community. In
effect, numerous exact and heuristic approaches for solving
various RSA instances are now available [12][13]. On the
other hand, an important problem concerning optimal cost
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

design of Elastic Optical Networks (EON) was investigated
[14] - namely the problem of optimizing the conﬁguration of
sliceable-bandwidth variable transceivers (S-BVT) in the EON
nodes. In our opinion, however, all those approaches have a
common drawback in that, they do not effectively treat the
optical node.
In this paper, we focus on the optical node architectures
in optical DWDM networks. We compare them and show the
beneﬁts of such solution in the near term and long term future
of optical DWDM networks.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, we present optical node architectures. Then, in Section III
we focus on the beneﬁts of the architectures. Last Section
concludes the paper and shortly describes our future work.
II.
OPTICAL NODE ARCHITECTURES
New Generation Reconﬁgurable Optical Add Drop Mul-
tiplexers (NG ROADM) consist of four functionalitiess: dir-
ectionless, colourless, contentionless and ﬂex grid (CDC-F).
The functions can be deployed all together or in different
combinations, such as CD, CDC or CDC-F.
A. Conventional ROADM
Classic ROADM architectures have two important limita-
tions. Firstly, they are coloured. This means that each transpon-
der coresponds to a ﬁxed wavelength. The second constraint
is that the add/drop process is directional. This means that
outband direction of the add signals is limited to the same
degree and can not reach other ROADM degree. This prevents
the added signals to be routed to different optical paths and
thus limits the ﬂexibility of the node and the network. An
illustrative example of conventional ROADM is depicted in
Figure 1.
Figure 1.
Conventional ROADM. Designed for metro to long haul infra-
structures with mesh connectivity.
B. Directionless ROADM
The NG ROADM needs to have the directionless func-
tionalities. It is deﬁned that for any channel dropped at the
local node, the coresponding add channel can go to any
output port, regardless of which input port it comes from.
The directionless feature allows more efﬁcient sharing of
transponder in a node among different ports, and therefore
improves the protection process. Figure 2 shows the functional
schematic of directionless feature.
Figure 2.
Directionless ROADM. Remotely route wavelenghts across any
viable path.
C. Colourless ROADM
Network operators are demanding colourless functionality
for NG ROADM, where the add/drop ports are not wavelength
speciﬁc and any transponder can be tuned to any channel
(colour). This feature allows full automation of wavelength
assignment. Colorless feature also allows the network operator
to use different wavelength for different sections in the optical
paths to avoid congestion situation in the network. Direction-
less and colourless ROADMs are increasingly being discussed
together as “must haves” for true optical layer ﬂexibility.
Colorless ROADM node architectures automate the assign-
ment of add/drop wavelength functionality. There are several
variations for building colourless ROADMs. Regardless of
architectures approach, the ﬁnal result is that any wavelength
(colour) can be assigned to any port at the add/drop site,
completely by software control and tunable transponders, now
widely deployed, without any technician intervention on site.
An example of colourless ROADM architecture is depicted in
Figure 3.
Figure 3.
Colourless ROADM. Reconﬁgurable and restorable infrastructure.
Receive any wavelength on any port.
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

D. Contentionless ROADM
The notions of colourless and directionless ROADMs have
been discussed within the industrial research community and
by optical network operators for a number of years now.
The concept of contentionless ROADM networks, on the
other hand, is fairly new and was introduced only relatively
recently. The main driving the factor behind contentionless
ROADMs is the fact that even with colourless and directionless
functionality, a ROADM network still has severe limitations.
Namely, in a colourless or directionless ROADM network a
manual on site intervention may still be required. In other
words, a colourless or directionless ROADM network is not
fully ﬂexible.
Another problem inherent to colourless and directionless
ROADM networks is that a wavelength blocking event may
occur when two wavelengths of the same colour arrive sim-
ultaneously at the same WSS structure, which results in
wavelength contention. A network operator may avoid an
occurrence of such wavelength contention events by parti-
tioning the add/drop structure so that differently coloured
wavelengths are associated with different structures. In this
way the possibility of a simultaneous arrival of two identical
wavelengths at the same add/drop structure is eliminated.
However, it needs to be noted that whilst such solution
eliminates an occurrence of wavelength contention from a
channel provisioning perspective, it reduces at the same time
the dynamic ﬂexibility of the network. Further, an additional
add/drop structure is required to handle the trafﬁc when two
wavelengths compete for the same WDM channel. Therefore,
a more effective solution of the problem is an introduction
of a contentionless ROADM architecture. The contentionless
ROADM architecture, illustrated in Figure 4, by contrast,
allows multiple copies of the same wavelength to be handled
by a single add/drop structure.
Figure 4.
Contentionless ROADM is able to add and/drop the same
wavelength on the same mux/demux module. In this particular 3-degree
ROADM CDC architecture there is possible to add/drop 3 λ1 (green colour)
on the same mux/demux module.
Hence, a colourless/directionless architecture combined
with truly contentionless functionality is the end goal from the
perspective of any network operator that has deployed - or is
planning to deploy - a ROADM network. Such architectures,
namely colourless, directionless, contentionless (CDC), offer
an ultimate level of ﬂexibility in the optical layer.
E. Flex Spectrum
The fourth key concept in NG ROADM architectures,
depicted in Figure 5, is the concept of a ﬂexible spectrum
(also called gridless WDM). The ﬂexible spectrum is a way
for operators to future-proof networks that will ultimately need
to contend with transport speeds beyond 100 Gb/s. For speeds
beyond 100 Gb/s - i.e., 400 Gb/s or 1 Tb/s - more than 50
GHz of spectrum may be required. Network operators would
also like to be able to accommodate those future transmission
speeds using the same 40 G and 100G ROADM networks.
In essence, gridless WDM is a more granular version of
the ITU grid that breaks spectrum down to 6.25 GHz inter-
channel spectral distance. Thus, ROADM nodes supporting a
ﬂexible grid are capable of routing any WDM channel that has
a bandwidth, which is a multiple of 6.25 GHz, e.g., 25 GHz,
75 GHz, etc. It is future-proof solution that prepares optical
network for any higher capacity channel that needs more than
50 GHz spectrum.
Figure 5.
Fix grid and Flexible grid spectrum. Discover to increase network
spectral efﬁciency.
III.
BENEFITS OF NG ROADM ARCHITECTURES
NG ROADM architectures are of great interest to network
operators since these network architectures allow connection
of any wavelength from any transponder in any direction.
This helps service providers to enhance network ﬂexibility
and survivability whilst reducing operational costs. Currently
100 Gb/s standard is beginning to move from long-haul
networks to metro/regional networks. As operators move to
metro coherent 100 Gb/s standard, they are simultaneously
upgrading their layer 1 and photonic metro infrastructure.
Advanced modulation schemes and super channels, enabled
by coherent detection, are leading operators to future-proof
their ROADM networks by deploying ﬂex spectrum hardware
today, in anticipation of variable channel widths in the future.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

Another beneﬁt is opex and capex reduction. Opex re-
duction is delivered primarily via the touchless provisioning
and activation of network bandwidth and in particular by
automating the activation of the end points of photonic layer
circuits. As noted, a classic ROADM WDM system delivers
a level of automation in the network by enabling touchless
provisioning of bandwidth. CDC functionality eliminates the
need for technician truck rolls, thus saving on labor costs as
well as reduce the time to provision. Another important opex
beneﬁt delivered through automation is the reduction of manual
errors and dirty connection - risks that can be completely
avoided through automation.
There is also another advantage connected with the integ-
ration of NG ROADM with Optical Transport Network (OTN)
solution. This solution allows network operators achieving
almost optimal ﬁber bandwidth utilization. The gain resulting
from an application of NG ROADM with OTN is signiﬁcant
because it provides for grooming of “smaller lambdas” (e.g.,
sub-wavelength level trafﬁc like SDH, Gigabit Ethernet and
Fibre Channel) and consequently the available wavelengths are
utilized optimally before they are switched in the ROADM
layer. Such solution leads to further capex savings by in-
tegration of OTN switches and CDC-F ROADMs within the
same system. We also note that an application of a CDC-
F ROADM layer allows for an implementation of Software
Deﬁned Networks (SDN) and thus allows for a multi-vendor
and multi-layer integration.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The implementation of the ﬂexible optical layer in back-
bone network optical ﬁber based technology is currently on
the way. NG ROADM allows end to end automation and
increases QoS through ﬂexible provisioning of bandwidth, an
elimination of technician visits on sites and of related human
errors.
Our future work will be concentrated on the optimization
of the optical node resources in optical networks and a
comparison of various nodal architectures. For this purpose we
intend to develop speciﬁcally tailored optimization algorithms
including integer linear programing and heuristic approach.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank anonymous reviewers for
valuable comments and remarks, and also Wrocław University
of Science and Technology (statutory activity) for ﬁnancial
suport.
REFERENCES
[1]
URL:https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/
service-provider/visual-networking-index-vni/
mobile-white-paper-c11-520862.html [accessed: 2018-01-02].
[2]
P. N. Ji and Y. Aono, “Colorless and directionless multi-degree re-
conﬁgurable optical add/drop multiplexers,” in Wireless and Optical
Communications Conference (WOCC), 2010 19th Annual, 11431732,
(Shanghai, China), IEEE, June 2010.
[3]
R. Jensen, A. Lord, and N. Parsons, “Colourless, directionless, con-
tentionless roadm architecture using low-loss optical matrix switches,”
in Optical Communication (ECOC), 2010 36th European Conference
and Exhibition on Optical Communication, (Torino, Italy), IEEE, Aug.
2010.
[4]
R. Jensen, A. Lord, and N. Parsons, “Highly scalable oxc-based
contentionless roadm architecture with reduced network implementation
costs,” Journal of the Optical Society of America, Mar. 2012.
[5]
L. Zong, G. N. Liu, H. Zhao, T. Ma, and A. Lord, “Ultra-compact
contentionless roadm architecture with high resiliance based on ﬂexible
wavelength router,” Journal of the Optical Society of America, Aug.
2014.
[6]
J. Pedro and S. Pato, “Towards fully ﬂexible optical node architectures:
Impact on blocking performance of dwdm transport networks,” ICTON,
Aug. 2011.
[7]
M. ˙Zotkiewicz, M. Ruiz, M. Pióro, and L. Velasco, “Reoptimization
of dynamic ﬂexgrid optical networks after link failure repairs,” IEEE
Journal of Optical Communications and Networking, vol. 7, pp. 49–61,
Jan. 2015.
[8]
W. Zheng, Y. Jin, W. Sun, W. Guo, and W. Hu, “On the spectrum-
efﬁciency of bandwidth-variable optical ofdm transport networks,” OSA,
May 2010.
[9]
G. S. Shen and Q. Yang, “From coarse grid to mini-grid to gridless:
How much can gridless help contentionless?,” Journal of the Optical
Society of America, Mar. 2011.
[10]
M. Klinkowski and K. Walkowiak, “Routing and spectrum assignment
in spectrum sliced elastic optical path network,” IEEE Communications
Letters, vol. 15, pp. 884–886, Aug. 2011.
[11]
M. Ruiz, M. Pióro, M. ˙Zotkiewicz, M. Klinkowski, and L. Velasco,
“Column generation algorithm for rsa problems in ﬂexgrid optical
networks,” Photonic Network Communications, vol. 23, pp. 53–64, Dec.
2013.
[12]
Y. Wang, X. Cao, and C. Qiao, “Minimize sub-carrier re-allocation
overhead in slice networks with dynamic trafﬁc,” Journal of the Optical
Society of America, Mar. 2013.
[13]
S. Shakya and X. Cao, “Spectral defragmentation in elastic optical path
networks using independent sets,” Journal of the Optical Society of
America, June 2013.
[14]
A. de Sousa, A. Tomaszewski, and M. Pióro, “Bin-Packing Based
Optimization of EON Networks with S-BVTs,” Optical Network Design
and Modeling (ONDM), 2016 International Conference, 2016.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

