A Study of the InnoDB Storage Engine in the MySQL 5.6
Hong-Jin, Park
School of Computer, Information and Communications
Sangji University
83 Sangjidae-gil, Wonju, Gangwondo, Korea
hjpark1@sangji.ac.kr
Abstract—MySQL is the most widely used open source
relational database management system. The logical structure
of MySQL is largely divided into three layers and the storage
engine belongs to the last layer. The purpose of this paper is to
evaluate the performance of InnoDB engine, the engine that
supports transaction of several storage engines used in MySQL
5.6. TPC-C (Transaction Processing performance Council – C),
an international standard model of benchmarking, is used for
performance evaluation and performance evaluation was
carried out by installing HammerDB for this purpose. It was
found that, if the number of user requests increases and the
number of transaction processing requests increases, then the
number of transactions processed in InnoDB also increases.
Keywords- InnoDB, Storage Engine, TPC-C, MySQL 5.6
I.
INTRODUCTION
A database management system (DBMS) is used when
many users deal with a large amount of data in large
computer systems. In particular, the relational database
management system is a system for managing data to be
stored in a two-dimensional data format composed of rows
and
columns. Generally, data on the
server can be
manipulated and modified according to commands written
in SQL. Even now, several databases such as MySQL,
PostgreSQL are used because the reliability is high and data
classification, sorting and navigation speed are fast. Many
relational
database
systems
showing
high
evaluative
performance are used and MySQL is the database system
the most widely used universally as an open source among
them.
The logical structure of MySQL database system
consists of three layers. From these, the storage layer, which
is the last layer, plays a role in storing and retrieving data
into MySQL. MySQL 5.6 has 9 storage engines and the
InnoDB engine is the one which is the most suitable for
transaction processing among them. Compared to other
engines, InnoDB engine provides a variety of functions such
as
excellent
performance,
automatic
failure
recovery
function,
concurrency
support,
various
optimization
supports as well as transaction processing. Currently, the
InnoDB engine performs as MySQL’s default engine.
This paper evaluates the performance of the InnoDB
engine, which shows the best performance when processing
transaction from several storage engines in MySQL 5.6. For
performance analysis, we used TPC-C, one of benchmark
models announced by Transaction Processing Performance
Council (TPC). TPC-C is one of international standard
models used as a performance benchmark for databases
through
Online
Transaction
Processing
(OLTP)
work.
Ubuntu 14.04 LTS (Long Term Support) was used as an
operating system and HammerDB was installed to evaluate
performance with TPC-C.
II.
MYSQL LOGICAL STRUCTURE : INNODB
MySQL
is
an
open
source
relational
database
management system currently distributed by Oracle. The
logical structure of MySQL is largely divided into three
layers. There is a Handing layer in the highest layer and
processes
DB
connection,
authentication
and
security.
Parsing of query, analysis, review, optimization and caching
are performed in the middle layer of the logical structure in
MySQL. There is a storage engine in the last layer and play a
role of searching queried data in MySQL.
A.
InnoDB Storage Engine
MySQL 5.6 provides a total of nine storage engines such
as CSV, MRG_MYISAM, MyISAM, MEMORY, InnoDB
etc. The available storage engines in MySQL can be checked
with MySQL command SHOW ENGINES\G. MyISAM and
InnoDB are the most widely used storage engines among
them. The functions of MyISAM are simple and the speed
for data search is faster than InnoDB. However, since the
transaction to ensure safety for a series of operations
performed at a time in the database is not supported, InnoDB
engine is used if the data integrity should be ensured.
InnoDB engine is adopted as a default engine from MySQL
5.5 and can process transactions. The InnoDB engine is also
widely used in situations when the transaction does not
necessarily need the best performance or an automatic failure
recovery
function
among
storage
engines
supporting
transactions. InnoDB engine uses MVCC (MultiVersion
Concurrency Control) to increase concurrency and performs
a variety of optimization internally. Adaptive hash index is
used to make the inquiry faster and functions to bring data
predicted to be needed on the disk in advance; the Insert
buffer is used to make the insertion faster.
III.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this paper, after installing MySQL 5.6 on Ubuntu, we
selected InnoDB as a storage engine for evaluation. In order
to evaluate the InnoDB performance, HammerDB 2.19 was
installed and the evaluation was carried out by using TPC-C.
TPC defined a benchmark for database and transaction
processing as benchmark test models. These models were
announced
by
the
transaction
processing
performance
council and these are used to measure the performance of
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-528-9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

systems such as Disk I/O, etc. The TPC benchmark is meant
to comprehensively evaluate the hardware performance
including network and software performance, as well as
operating system (OS) performance.
In this paper, we used HammerDB as the tool to evaluate
the performance with TPC-C and the evaluation settings we
used are as follows. After installing MySQL 5.6 on Ubuntu,
we measured TPM (transactions per minute) values while
gradually increasing virtual users from 2 people to 10 people
and performing TPC-C. The performance evaluation is
shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2.
Figure 1. The View of Performance Evaluation – 1
Figure 2. The View of Performance Evaluation – 2
Fig. 3 shows MySQL InnoDB Engine Performance
evaluation. TPM is shown while gradually increasing the
number of users from 2 people to 10 people. First, it can be
seen that, if there are two users, 668,112 transactions are
processed per minute and if users are 10 people, 802,806
transactions are processed per minute. If based on 2 users,
transactions per minute were processed more quickly by 9%
in the case of 4 people than in the case of 2 people and the
processing speed was faster by approximately 12%, 18%,
20% in the case of 6 people, 8 people, 10 people,
respectively. That is, the processing speed was faster by 20%
when each of 10 users requests 10,000 transactions, than
when each of 2 users requests 10,000 transactions and this
shows that transaction processing is a lot within the same
time.
Figure 3. MySQL InnoDB Engine Performance
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, after installing MySQL 5.6 on Ubuntu, we
selected InnoDB as a storage engine for evaluation. In order
to evaluate the InnoDB performance, HammerDB 2.19 was
installed and the evaluation was carried out by using TPC-C.
It was found that, if the number of user requests increases
and the number of transaction processing requests increases,
then the number of transactions processed in InnoDB also
increases.
REFERENCES
[1] Cornelia Győrödi, Robert Győrödi , George Pecherle, Andrada Olah, 
“A comparative study: MongoDB vs. MySQL”, 13th International
Conference on Engineering of Modern Electric Systems (EMES), 2015
[2] Letkowski, Jerzy, “Doing database design with MySQL”, Journal of
Technology Research, Jan. 2015
[3] Rafael Almeida, Pedro Furtado, Jorge Bernardino, “Performance
Evaluation MySQL InnoDB and Microsoft SQL Server 2012 for
Decision Support Environments”, Journal of the Web Technologies and
Applications, Nov. 2015
[4] Yong Chen, Xuanzhong Xie, Jiayin Wu, “A Benchmark Evaluation of
Enterprise
Cloud
Infrastructure”,
Proceedings
of
the
Eighth
International Conference on Computer Science & Software Engineering,
2015
[5] Jae-Hwan Lee, Young-Hun Lee, Jong-an park, “Performance Analysis
Measurement of Storage according to INNODB Parameter Change”,
International Journal of Software Engineering and Its Applications,
2013
[6] http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.6/en/ [accessed January 2017]
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-528-9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

