4R of Service Innovation: Research, Requirements, Reliability and Responsibility 
Anastasiya Yurchyshyna 
CUI, University of Geneva 
Battelle - Batiment A 
7, Route de Drize 
CH - 1227 Carouge 
+41 22 379 02 59 
Anastasiya.Yurchyshyna@unige.ch 
Abdelaziz Khadraoui 
CUI, University of Geneva 
Battelle - Batiment A 
7, Route de Drize 
CH - 1227 Carouge 
+41 22 379 02 31 
Abdelaziz.Khadraoui@unige.ch 
Michel Léonard 
CUI, University of Geneva 
Battelle - Batiment A 
7, Route de Drize 
CH - 1227 Carouge 
+41 22 379 77 77 
Michel.Leonard@unige.ch 
 
 
Abstract—This research aims at resolving the challenges 
arising from the processes of service innovation and evolution. 
It continues and extends our works concerning different 
aspects of services innovation and analyzes the “4R” 
phenomena of service engineering: service research, service 
requirements, reliability and responsibility in services. By 
studying the interdependence of these aspects for services 
development, we investigate the phenomenon of corporate 
social responsibility and discuss its development through the 
information kernel of services. In order to integrate the 4R-
analysis for service innovation, we propose a framework for 
innovation in services and illustrate the role of responsibility in 
the development of its information kernel. Finally, we discuss a 
usage scenario implementing this approach, which is related to 
the treatment of authorization requests for building at the 
canton of Geneva.  
Keywords-service; 
service 
innovation; 
requirements; 
reliability; compliance; corporate social responsibility 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Today, services have become the key element for all 
aspects of business and corporate activities, whilst the 
importance of their innovation process can hardly be 
overestimated. Indeed, dynamic collaborative processes of 
services innovation and evolution form the kernel for 
development and communication in the organizational 
context of an enterprise, and define the main principles of the 
corporate management within the services society [1]. 
Based on the current state of the art on modeling 
initiatives and services and studying the phenomena of 
innovation and evolution for supporting services, this 
research is within a series of works aiming to define the 
notion of corporate social responsibility, identify the main 
challenges for services innovation, study the interdependence 
of different layers of services and develop a methodology for 
services innovation while taking into account the challenges 
in both conceptual modeling and practical implementation.  
By 
underlining 
the 
increasing 
importance 
of 
collaborative creation in services and the role that 
responsibility plays in it, we show how such collaborative 
creation becomes one of the main factors in innovation in 
services in services society. 
This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we 
present the general state of the art concerning the problem of 
service innovation and analyze its complex aspects. Section 
3 describes our approach for service innovation and focuses 
on its main axis: research in services, requirements for 
services development and engineering, reliability in services, 
the notion of responsibility in services innovation, and 
analyses their interdependence through the phenomenon of 
corporate social responsibility. A conceptual framework 
representing different (R-)layers of services and their 
interdependences is introduced in Section 4. Section 5 
describes a simplified usage scenario illustrating the 
proposed approach. Finally, section 6 concludes the paper 
and discusses the envisaged future works and perspectives of 
this research. 
II. 
GENESIS AND STATE OF THE ART 
We start by introducing the existing definitions of the 
main concepts related to the problem of corporate social 
responsibility and services through innovation and corporate 
management, by analyzing and arguing these notions and 
thus, by constructively describing their semantics in the 
context of our research. 
A. Service 
In our previous research [15], we described a service as 
the result of a process of acquiring knowledge in the context 
of the IS (information systems) engineering, defined at the 
junction of the organizational domain, the ontological 
domain, the technological domain and the informational 
domain.  
Consequently, it is based on four dimensions: (i) 
ontological dimension; (ii) informational dimension; (iii) 
technological dimension; and (iv) organizational dimension. 
The ontological dimension of a service describes not only all 
the invariants of the information system domain, in particular 
knowledge and concepts, but also some business rules and 
roles of actors, which are independent of the information 
system development. The informational dimension of a 
service defines the information semantics necessary for 
defining services. This dimension of a service describes the 
static aspects, the dynamic aspects and the integrity 
constraints aspects. The organizational dimension of a 
service relates to the business rules, the organizational roles, 
the responsibility zones and business processes inside an 
enterprise/organization. It allows one to clarify the decisions 
and responsibilities inside the enterprise/organization. The 
technological dimension of a service allows one to study the 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

implementation of the specified entities. It is a challenge of 
choosing the appropriate technology, the informatics 
architecture and the corresponding environment, in order to 
implement this service. 
B. Innovation and Evolution of Services 
There is a certain ambiguity in general understanding of 
the phenomenon of innovation. Traditionally, it is seen as 
introduction of something new: a new material, way of 
doing, a new concept, etc. This definition is however 
different from the widely used meaning of the notion of 
innovation – the process that aims at bringing new features 
into an existing entity (concept, good), renewing something 
that already exists, i.e., evolution of an existing thing. On 
analyzing these aspects [15], we identify different but 
interdependent phenomena: innovation and evolution. 
Innovation represents the process that allows the change of 
state of the component of a system, so precipitating the 
emergence of a system, whose characteristics or behaviors 
are different from the previous time [3]. It can be thus 
viewed as the source of evolution. In other words, we 
envisage innovation as a dynamic and participative process 
that leads to co-creation and value creation of a product 
(artifact, method, etc.) thanks to its evolution. 
Defined 
by 
both 
dynamic 
and 
collaborative 
characteristics, each of these processes (i.e., innovation and 
evolution) generally leads to sustainability of a product 
(good, process, service, etc.). In their interdependence, they 
also contribute to enriching the semantics and usability of 
related services and knowledge bases. Indeed, lets us take an 
example of the process of evolution of e-government 
services. While they are developed and modified, the 
corresponding regulatory ontologies are also modified and 
enriched, and new organizational contexts are identified and 
adopted. In other words, both innovation and evolution 
processes result with added value to a product, service, 
related knowledge bases, information systems and services 
in their dynamic environment. 
C. Requirements for Service Engineering 
By meeting the challenge of designing sustainable 
services, service engineering addresses the specification, the 
compliance and the management of interoperability of 
services 
across 
public 
institutions 
or 
governmental 
organizations. 
The service compliance aims to enhance the quality of 
services to offer to the stakeholders. We consider that the 
verification of compliance is based on three criteria: (i) how 
to build a stable service from the organizational context?; (ii) 
how to support evolution of services?; (iii) how the 
interoperability of services is managed? [5]. 
The phenomenon of service compliance with legal 
aspects is nowadays gaining increasing importance.  
Indeed, the institutional activities are governed by legal 
sources represented by a set of laws, which regulates their 
execution. The compliance of services with legal aspects is a 
crucial issue for each public administration. This issue 
becomes more difficult with the fast-evolving dynamics of 
laws [7]. 
Another challenge is to describe how to get service 
engineering and legal compliance in closer interaction. The 
main issue is to consider the requirement for service 
compliance analysis and for service overlap management 
when we engineer services.  
In order to face these new challenges, we proposed a 
methodological approach for service specification [2]. It 
aims to describe the interactions among the organizational 
layer, the informational layer of a service and the 
responsibility dimension in order to verify the compliance of 
services. 
D. Reliability 
Reliability is normally seen as the ability of a service to 
perform a required function, under stated conditions, for a 
stated period of time. In service design, reliability reflects a 
measure of how long an IT-service can perform its function 
without interruption or how likely required outputs will be 
delivered within a stated period of time.  
According to the definition of the Technical Committee 
on Communications Quality & Reliability [14], the service 
reliability is a complex notion, which combines the 3 
following characteristics: (i) accessibility – a service is 
available when it is required; (ii) continuity – a service has 
an uninterrupted duration when required by a customer; (iii) 
performance – a service is designed and able to meet the 
customer’s expectations. 
It is important to note that our vision of reliability 
concerns both its interdisciplinary and temporary aspects: a 
service and an information system are known to be reliable if 
they are coherent for different information systems and/or 
services integrating them, as well as for different time frames 
of the lifecycle of the same information system/service. 
E. Responsibility 
To define the phenomenon of responsibility, we rely on 
the research [5]. The authors propose to model it as a state 
assigned to an actor to signify him its accountabilities 
(accountability defined at [10] as a process of being called to 
account to some authority for one’s actions) concerning a 
business activity and the capabilities and the right necessary 
to perform it (the right represents the resources provided by 
the company to an employee required to perform the 
accountability. 
Moreover, 
the 
authors 
point 
to 
its 
interdependence with the phenomena of capability, right and 
accountability, and put these concepts into the core of the 
methodological approach for services specification, by 
particularly specifying the links between the organizational 
and informational layers of services and by enriching the 
model with the responsibility dimension.  
In this context, the concept of responsibility is composed 
of the accountabilities to perform an obligation in a business 
activity and it specifies, at the same time, the rights and the 
capabilities that are required therein.  
In the further research [2], these conceptual findings 
allowed 
to 
develop 
a meta-model 
that 
show 
the 
interdependencies between the four layers of services (i.e., 
ontological, organizational, technical and informational) and 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

the concept of responsibility, by integrating capabilities, 
rights and accountability.  
Such a complex model enlightens the fact that the 
responsibility dimension contributes to the added-value of a 
service since it facilitates the alignment between the different 
layers. Indeed, on the organizational layer, responsibility is 
assigned to a role that performs business activities, the 
informational layer identifies the responsibilities-required 
knowledge, the responsibility on the technical layer can 
partially be incorporated in security and or accessibility 
characteristics, and the ontological layer allows one to 
correctly specify the business rules, the ontological roles and 
the fundamental concepts dedicated to specify this service, 
whilst taking into account the responsibility requirements. 
F. Research in service innovation: towards collaborative 
decision constructing 
It is difficult to overestimate the importance of 
innovation in the development of new services that are aimed 
at answering the challenges our services-based society brings 
today.  
By relying on the interactive exchange and functioning of 
interoperable services [1], our services-oriented society, is, to 
some extent, dependant from the progress and innovations in 
services. Services are becoming “mirrors” of specific 
competences (e.g., knowledge, skills, technologies) of one 
economic entity for the benefit of another economic entity. 
Hence, whilst value creation occurs when a resource is 
turned into a specific benefit, the classical supply chain is 
thus re-conceptualized as a network of service systems, the 
service value creation network [9]. 
To answer come of these challenges, in [8], we proposed 
our approach for innovation in services thanks to 
collaborative decision constructing, and demonstrated how 
decision constructing can be supported by the processes of 
knowledge actionalising during the process of service 
innovation.  
Introduced in this work, we consecutively developed the 
methodology for collaborative decision constructing, which 
is practically implemented in the CPS, a collaborative 
platform for services innovation.  
III. 
TOWARDS CONCEPTUALIZING THE PROCESS OF 
SERVICE INNOVATION: 4R-ANALYSIS  
This research aims at answering the challenges of the 
process of service innovation and evolution. Based on our 
previous works [2], [8], [15], its motivation is to investigate 
the interdependence of “4R” aspects of service innovation: 
service research, service requirements, reliability and 
responsibility in services.  
A. Service Research 
Recently, the complex problem of research in the 
services domain has attracted significant interest in both 
academic and business worlds.  
In the context of this work, we focus on selected aspects 
of this problem, which highlight the importance of co-
creation in services development and identifying the 
information kernel of a service, by taking into account its 
different 
layers 
(i.e., 
ontological, 
organizational, 
informational and technical). 
Based on our approach for innovation in services, we 
claim that the information kernel is developed thanks to the 
collaborative decision constructing process [8] and is defined 
by the interdependence of its layers [6]. 
This leads to an (initially) intuitive idea to study if the 
responsibility dimension provides an additional added value 
to decision-constructing processes. Consequently, it is 
debated that this makes the process of innovation in services 
more efficient. 
B. Service Requirements 
By analyzing service requirements, we focus on the 3 
main 
processes: 
identification 
of 
services, 
service 
compliance and service specification. The interoperability 
characterizing these processes and their interdependence 
ensure the quality of service integration into existing and 
developed information systems, as well as allows creating 
added value in the process of service engineering. 
The problem of service identification in the processes of 
services innovation and evolution was discussed in [15] 
where we analyzed the role of initiatives for developing the 
services information kernel, which describes the knowledge 
required for creation of a service. 
The process of service identification benefits from 
another important aspect of service engineering: the 
compliance of services with legal aspects.  
In [7], we introduced a novel approach that allows 
establishing and clarifying the links between laws and 
services, in particular the alignment between the amendment 
of laws and the evolution of services. In other words, we use 
laws as a source of knowledge to analyze and construct the 
ontological level of an institutional domain. The exploitation 
of these sources of knowledge permits one to find stable 
concepts and invariant concepts. The analysis of the legal 
framework permits one to identify the main characteristic 
concepts of the domain, the ontological roles and the 
ontological business rules (cf. Figure 1). We use the 
ontology model elaborated from the legal framework to 
design the IS Kernel.   
 
 
Figure 1.  IS kernel and the compliance of services with legal aspects  
One of the main advantages of such an approach is to 
explicitly match the legal framework, which provides the 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

basis of the activities of a public administration to the 
developed services. 
Another challenge in the context of service engineering 
concerns the specification of a service upon multiple already 
existing IS. Linking ISs with regulations / laws they have 
inherited from is a primary importance for people in charge 
of managing legacy ISs.  
In [6], an approach for the specification of domain 
services upon multiple existing information systems is 
proposed. This approach is based on the construction of a 
referential around the services and the analysis of its required 
data. More precisely, it helps to preserve the legacy 
information system by creating services upon them via a 
common base capturing the overlap between all related 
information systems. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Specification of domain services upon multiple existing 
information systems. 
In fact, this approach is adapted to transform legacy 
information system, since organizations are forced to 
continue to operate taking into account these existing 
applications and legacy information systems (cf. Figure 2).  
C. Service Reliability 
In the context of services society, where the problem of 
sustainable development needs to be considered and 
addressed, it is also important to study how to use services to 
identify the sources of added value, to elaborate an approach 
aimed at facilitating effective diffusion of scientific 
knowledge and technology transfer, and to develop 
knowledge infrastructure and networks. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Reliability and its components. 
We thus propose to enrich the notion of service reliability 
by integrating the characteristics of sustainability (cf. Figure 
3). Indeed, today we are interested in how services might 
contribute to sustainable development, how they should be 
developed to increase the added value of related processes, 
which is the approach for making them most adaptable for 
business environments. 
The accent is put on sustainable services, which we 
envisage as services that are capable of adapting to their 
environment, to dynamically integrate the ever-changing 
conditions of the environment, and as such to be sustainably 
coherent with its evolving challenges. 
Analogically, it seems promising to enrich the notion of 
service reliability by integrating the sustainability criterion. 
Service reliability can be envisaged as a complex notion 
combining 
the 
4 
interdependent 
characteristics: 
(i) 
accessibility (availability when required by an actor/service); 
(ii) continuity (an uninterrupted duration when required by 
different actors/services); (iii) performance (being designed 
and implemented in the way to meet the customer’s 
requirements); 
and 
(iv) 
sustainability 
(possibility 
to 
dynamically and coherently integrate the ever-changing 
conditions of the environment). 
D. Responsibility in Service Innovation 
Analogically to Corporate Social Responsibility (CRS), 
there is no unique definition of the Responsible Research and 
Innovation. It is often seen as a transparent, interactive 
process by which societal actors and innovators become 
mutually responsive to each other with a view to the (ethical) 
acceptability, sustainability and societal desirability of the 
innovation process and its marketable products [12]. 
In order to explore the phenomenon of responsibility in 
service innovation, we first need to concretize the notion of a 
service in the context of service engineering. We propose to 
envisage a service as the result of a process of acquiring 
knowledge in the context of the information system 
engineering. It corresponds to an action or series of actions 
to characterize the relationships between the stakeholders.   
While adapting the approach for responsible research and 
innovation, the services are thus developed by respecting the 
following aspects [13]: (i) the deliberate focus of research 
and the products of innovation to achieve a social or 
environmental 
benefit; 
(ii) 
the 
consistent, 
ongoing 
involvement of society (incl. public & non-governmental 
groups) during the innovation process; (iii) assessing and 
effectively prioritizing social, ethical and environmental 
impacts, risks and opportunities, alongside the technical and 
commercial; (iv) where oversight mechanisms are better able 
to anticipate and manage problems and opportunities and 
which are also able to adapt and respond quickly to changing 
knowledge and circumstances; (v) where openness and 
transparency are an integral component of the research and 
innovation process. 
E. Corporate Social Responsibility: interdependence 4R’s 
through services layers 
Initially, the notion of Corporate Social Responsibility 
was defined in [4] as “the continuing commitment by 
business to behave ethically and contribute to economic 
development while improving the quality of life of the 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

workforce and their families as well as of the local 
community and society at large”.  
At the same time, despite the main motives – to improve 
qualitatively (the management of people and processes) and 
quantitatively (the impact on society) – are the same, and an 
international standard to provide guidelines for adopting and 
disseminating social responsibility (ISO 26000 – Social 
Responsibility) is being developed by the ISO, it is up to 
companies to define their own CSR objectives. 
In the context of this research, we argue that corporate 
social responsibility for the problem of innovation in services 
is defined as the interdependence of layers of services: 
ontological, organizational, informational and technical. 
Moreover, the responsibility dimension provides a promising 
added-value since it facilitates the alignment between the  
different layers : the organizational layer (a responsibility is 
assigned to a role that performs business activities), the 
informational 
layer 
(the 
responsibilities 
required 
information), and the technical layer (the responsibility has 
an existence at the technical layer: e.g., by assigning the role 
of a facilitator during the decision-constructing process or by 
defining the criteria for accepting or refusing the initiative in 
the process of service innovation [15]). 
IV. 
CONCEPTUAL 4R-FRAMEWORK FOR INNOVATION IN 
SERVICES 
In this section, we introduce a conceptual framework for 
innovation in services by focusing on the 4 layers and the 
responsibility dimension. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Responsibility in the framework for innovation in services. 
Based on the analysis of the main service layers and the 
responsibility dimension [2], we argue that responsibility is 
the phenomenon that is concretized thanks to the 
interdependence 
of 
the 
ontological, 
organizational, 
informational and technical layers of a service and defines 
the essential conceptual information related to this service. In 
other words, the responsibility dimension allows one to 
identify the information kernel of the service.   
From a different viewpoint, our model for constructing 
the collaborative environment for services innovation [8] is 
developed thanks to the process of knowledge actionalising, 
which helps to identify the information kernel of a 
corresponding initiative leading to service development. It 
also means that the information kernel of an initiative serves 
as a starting point for the process of service innovation, 
which, thanks to multiple interactions with the decision-
making actors, the existing ontologies and the usage-based 
feedback, leads to concretizing the information kernel of a 
developed service.  
V. 
USAGE SCENARIO 
In order to illustrate the 4R-analysis for service 
innovation, let us consider the following case related to the 
treatment of authorization requests for building at the canton 
of Geneva.  This case study was done in the context of our 
project collaboration with the Center of Information 
Technology at the Canton of Geneva (Switzerland). 
At the Canton of Geneva, requests for building permits 
are submitted to the department responsible  for construction. 
As soon as the legal conditions are met, the department shall 
issue the building  authorization.  
Authorization requests are subject to an advisory notice 
to municipalities, departments and agencies concerned. The 
Department's decision is based primarily on the notice of 
architectural committee or on that of the Committee on 
monuments, nature and sites. It takes into account those 
issued by the municipality or the competent department. 
There are several stakeholders concerned by this 
services: (i) Directorate of building permits; (ii) Directorate 
General of Water; (iii) the architectural committee; (iv) 
Committee on monuments, nature and sites; (v) Department 
of Geology, soils and wastes; (vi) Land Registry; (vii) 
Energy Department; and (viii) Protection Administration of 
the population 
In order to facilitate the access to the information, a 
national commission has been charged to define the 
appropriate service. 
Research. We use the legal framework, which describes 
the conditions to manage the access to confidential and 
public information related to authorization requests. The 
fundamental concepts and relationships (e.g., who decides if 
a building is compliance to existing norms; which are the 
accessibility requirements to take into account, etc.) are 
defined on the ontological level, the roles and business 
activities are manages at the organizational level (e.g., which 
is the procedure for certification, timescale for handling the 
authorization request, etc.). All related knowledge is 
specified on the informational level and processed on the 
technical level. As the result, the decision-constructing 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

environment handling authorization requests is developed as 
a specification of the global framework of the cross-
pollination space, and it is enabled by services interoperable 
with the existing legal framework. 
Requirements. The answers to the main challenges for 
requirements modeling are in fact acquired thanks to the 
dynamic development of the cross-pollination space for 
handling authorization requests. Indeed, (i) “how to build a 
stable service from the organizational context?” is ensured 
by the fact that the information kernel of the CPS is based on 
the organization context itself; (ii) “how to support evolution 
of services?” is possible thanks to the dynamic evolution of 
the information kernel according to the feedback from the 
usage; and (iii) “how the interoperability of services is 
managed?” is ensured at the ontological layer of the CPS for 
its semantics, at the informational layer for its statics, 
dynamics and integrity, as well as at the technical layer for 
services realization. 
Reliability and responsibility. These characteristics are 
closely connected to the ability of a service to handle 
authorization requests  according to the updated legal base 
(ensured at the ontological layer) and for a stated period of 
time (handled at the technical layer). Moreover, thanks to the 
dynamic enrichment of the CPS by the knowledge of 
decision-makers, one can witness a certain shift in defining 
the quality of a service: from “technical” reliability to 
“human” responsibility of individual and collective decision-
makers.  
In other words, the interdependence of services layers of 
a service for handling authorization requests permits the 
capitalization of contributions from each of them (i.e., 
ontological, organizational, informational, and technical) and 
as such – ensures the corporate social responsibility for 
development of such a service.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper was developed in the scope of research 
concerning different aspects of innovation in services and 
particularly focuses on the analysis of the 4Rs of service 
innovation: service research, requirements, reliability and 
responsibility in services. By analyzing these phenomena, we 
showed that it is thanks to their interdependence that the 
responsibility dimension in the process of service innovation 
can be identified. From a different viewpoint, we argued that 
the responsibility dimension within the decision-constructing 
process is dynamically constructed as the information kernel 
of a service initiative. This research thus demonstrated how 
the responsibility dimension defines and guides the process 
of developing the information kernel of an initiative leading 
to the creation of a service, and as such, the process of 
service innovation itself. 
Among the main perspectives envisaged for this research, 
we are to focus on: (i) the formalization of the responsibility 
dimension and the study of its interoperability in the both 
contexts of services layers and the decision-constructing 
model; (ii) the analysis of the measurability of the 
responsibility dimension and its integration into a services 
lifecycle; and (iii) more complex and more heterogeneous 
case 
studies 
with 
further 
conceptualization 
and 
generalization of the acquired results.  
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Demirkan, R. Kauffman, J. Vayghan, H. Fill, D. 
Karagiannis, and P. Maglio. “Service-oriented technology and 
management: Perspectives on research and practice for the 
coming decade”. In Electronic Commerce Research and 
Applications 7(4): 356-376, 2008  
[2] C. Feltus, A Khadraoui, A. Yurchyshyna, M. Léonard, E. 
Dubois, “Responsibility aspects in service engineering for 
eGovernment”, in Proceedings of the Interoperability for 
Enterprise Systems and Applications conference (I-ESA'12) 
Workshop Service Science and the Next Wave in Enterprise 
Interoperability, Valencia, Spain, 2012. 
[3] K. Frenken, “Innovation, Evolution and Complexity Theory” 
In: Cheltenham UK and Northampton MA: Edward Elgar. 
2006 
[4] L. Holme, and R. Watts, “Corporate Social responsibility: 
making good busness sense”. WBCSD (World Business 
Council 
for 
Sustainable 
Development), 
available 
at 
www.wbcsd.ch, last accessed 9/02/2012 
[5] A. Khadraoui, C. Feltus, “Service Specification and services 
compliance: How to consider the Responsibility Dimension?” 
Submitted for publication, Journal of Service Science 
Research (JoSS),  2012. 
[6] A. Khadraoui, W. Opprecht, M. Léonard, and C. Aïdonidis, 
“Service Specification Upon Multiple Existing Information 
Systems”, 2011 Fifth International Conference on Research 
Challenges in Information Science RCIS 2011, May 19-21, 
Gosier, Guadeloupe. 
[7] A. Khadraoui, W. Opprecht, C. Aïdonidis, and M. Léonard, 
“Laws-Based 
Ontology 
for 
e-Government 
Services 
Construction Case Study: The Specification of Services in 
Relationship with the Venture Creation in Switzerland”,  
PoEM 2008: 197-209. 
[8] M. Leonard and A. Yurchyshyna, “Decision constructing as 
conceptualisation of service innovation” Proc. of IJCSS2011, 
the International Joint Conference of Service Sciences, 25-27 
May 2011, Taipei, Taiwan 
[9] R.F. Lusch, S.L. Vargo, and G. Wessels. “Towards a 
conceptual foundation for service science: Contributions from 
service-dominant logic”. IBM Systems Journal, Vol. 47, No. 
1, (2008) 
[10] R. Mulgan, “Accountability: An Ever-Expanding Concept?” 
Public Administration 78 (3), 2000: 555–573. 
[11]  A. Murray, K.Haynes, L. Hudson, “Collaborating to Achieve 
Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility 
and 
Sustainability? 
Possibilities and problems”. Sustainability Accounting, 
Management and Policy Journal 2010, 1(1), 221-231. 
[12] von 
Schomberg 
(2011) 
“Prospects 
for 
Technology 
Assessment in a framework of responsible research and 
innovation” in: M. Dusseldorp and R. Beecroft (eds). 
Technikfolgen 
abschätzen 
lehren: 
Bildungspotenziale 
transdisziplinärer Methoden,Wiesbaden: Vs Verlag 
[13] H. Sutcliffe. What is Responsible Research & Innovation? 
Retrieved 
from 
http://ec.europa.eu/research/science-
society/document_library/pdf_06/rri-report-hilary-
sutcliffe_en.pdf, last accessed 9/02/2012 
[14] The Technical Committee on Communications Quality & 
Reliability, available at http://committees.comsoc.org/cqr/, 
lasr accessed 22/03/2012 
[15] A. 
Yurchyshyna, 
A. 
Khadraoui, 
W. 
Opprecht, 
and 
M. Léonard, “Innovation and Evolution of Services: Role of 
Initiatives” Proc. ePart 2011: 262-273, 2011 
 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

