Reputation as a Service  
João C. Ferreira, Porfírio P. Filipe, and Paulo M. Martins 
Instituto Superior de Engenharia de Lisboa 
Lisbon, Portugal 
{jferreira@deetc, pfilipe@deetc, paulo.martins@dec}.isel.pt 
 
 
Abstract— In this research work, we introduce the concept of a 
reputation service to evaluate user collaboration towards 
community or system goal. Online reputation mechanisms 
allow members of a community to submit their opinions 
(feedback) regarding other community members and their 
publication 
activity. 
Submitted 
opinions 
are 
analyzed, 
aggregated with feedback posted by other members and made 
publicly available to the community in the form of member 
feedback profiles. We propose a conceptual system that can be 
used in several contexts, namely in our public transportation 
recommender system developed in the framework of the 
European Project START.  
Keywords-Reputation; 
Recomemnder 
System; 
Public 
Transportation; Service 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
Online reputation mechanisms allow members of a 
community to submit their opinions (feedback) regarding 
other community 
members. Submitted opinions are 
analyzed, aggregated with feedback posted by other 
members and made publicly available to the community in 
the form of member feedback profiles. Several examples of 
such mechanisms can already be found in a number of 
diverse online communities. Perhaps the best-known 
application of online reputation mechanisms are the trust 
system in electronic markets. The first Web sites to introduce 
reputation schemes were on-line auction sites such as 
eBay.com. They are now also used by company reputation 
rating sites such as BizRate.com, which ranks merchants on 
the basis of customer ratings. Consumer Reports Online’s 
eRatings rates merchants on the basis of test purchases 
carried out by Consumer Reports staff.  
Online reputation systems have appeared as a viable 
instrument for encouraging cooperation among strangers in 
such settings by guaranteeing that the behavior of a player 
towards any other player becomes publicly known and may 
therefore affect the behavior of the entire community 
towards that player in the future. Knowing this, players have 
an incentive to behave well towards each other, even if their 
relationship is a one-time deal. The rise of online reputation 
systems is already indirectly changing people’s behavior. 
Circumstantial 
evidence 
suggests 
that 
people 
now 
increasingly rely on opinions posted on such systems in 
order to make a variety of decisions. The growing 
importance of online reputation systems in different subject 
raise new challengers in the study of participant’s behavior 
in the communities where they are introduced.  We have 
developed several recommender systems for Electric 
vehicles [1], transportation system [2], electric market [3] 
and the study of user behavior was always created. This raise 
the question of a definition of a service that can be used for 
several systems (recommender or not) in order to evaluate 
user performance towards the system or community goal. 
This work is divided eight sections. In Section I, we 
define the problem context. Section II describes the 
European project associated with our work. Section III 
describes the recommender engine used to send user relevant 
information. In Section IV, we present the collaboration 
system used by the registered users to create and share 
transportation related information. Section V presents the 
reputation system to motivate and evaluate user participation 
towards a common system goal. In Section VI, we describe 
the developed approach based on services. Section VII 
presents the system (Social Mobility Advisor) developed. 
Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section VIII. 
II. 
START PROJECT 
This work describes ISEL (Instituto Superior Engenharia 
de Lisboa, Portuguese polytechnic) contribution of a 
reputation system applied for a public transportation 
recommender system for the Seamless Travel across the 
START project (Atlantic Regions using sustainable 
Transport). START Project is a European Commission’s 
Transnational Territorial Cooperation Program with 14 
partners from the UK, France, Spain and Portugal. Its 
mission is the establishing of a transnational network of 
regional & local authorities to promote enhanced 
accessibility, giving tools to make easy to travel to, from, 
and around the Atlantic regions using environmentally 
friendly, 
collective 
modes 
of 
transport 
greater 
interconnectivity 
between 
transport 
systems 
clearer 
information within regional gateways, airport hubs ports & 
rail interchanges. The focus on this work is aligned with the 
“Integra concept” [4], whose aim is to provide a single 
brand that links together and provides information on the 
different public transport operations across the Atlantic 
Area. So, the system should allow the query of multiple 
information sources through a unique interface. The queries 
and answers to them should reflect a single data model. The 
existence of this common data model takes the software 
applications with the difficult task of dealing with various 
technologies and their relational schemas. Different public 
transportation systems can be added from the end user point 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-270-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

of view. Also, this integration allows the creation of mobile 
systems oriented for tourism purposes, other main goal of 
Integra, where “low budget tourism” can be guided, to reach 
POI (Point of Interest) by public transportation. 
III. 
RECOMMENDER ENGINE 
 The Recommender Engine (RE) is the same engine used 
for the recommendation of electric vehicles defined in [1]. 
This engine matches information dedicated to public 
transportation from web and our social network with the 
user profile to bring the right information to a mobile 
device. Applied to the reality of smart cities with increasing 
mobility and sustainability needs the proposed system 
integrates a diversity of functionalities. The main system 
modules are: (1) GPS module: The RE receives the 
information of the geographical positioning information on 
the current position of the vehicle and the features that 
enable the calculation of distances between two points; (2) 
Public transportation Information module: a system with 
public transportation routes, schedules. The reception of 
such information is through an exchange file in XML format 
that contains information prepared and compiled by 
different operators. The file includes the geographical 
location of sites where you can embark on public transport 
scheme. The public transport information is incorporated 
into items of candidate recommendation system by 
allocating an item property that indicates whether or not is 
close to public transport. This information is another 
dimension that enters the calculation of the usefulness of 
each item positively or negatively affects your score 
accordingly to the choices that have been made before by 
the driver; (3) collaboration system to handle user 
participation towards community goal.  
IV. 
COLLABORATION SYSTEM 
Users can also interact and collaborate among themselves 
to improve their knowledge, or by allowing them to express 
their needs, preferences and also create valuable information 
related to public transportation. The features presented below 
are created to keep users informed, motivated and with 
intention to collaborate more frequently: 
• 
Cooperation Area: An area where users can ask or 
provide different kinds of knowledge to cooperate 
in Public transportation information; 
• 
Helping Area: An area where users can post 
questions and answers and some sort of help of any 
topic. This space could be accessed and viewed by 
any registered user. The system gives credits to 
users that provide good helping answers to posted 
questions, based on the following modules; 
• 
Abuses or Faults Reporting Area: An area provided 
to report abuses of different kinds, like comments 
or bad use of the System. The system manager can 
penalize the users for inappropriate behavior. The 
reason for providing this area is essentially for 
discouraging users to commit abuses or faults; 
• 
Request: An area where users can ask for specific 
questions. The system manager can use those 
requests to tune the community; 
• 
Reward: Created in order to promote and recognize 
outstanding behavior (for example, no changes in 
the profile). The awarded users increase their 
reputation; 
• 
Community Newsletter: The system Manager 
publishes a digital newsletter with Community 
information and Public transportation related 
information; 
• 
Users Reputation: User reputation represents the 
most valuable collaborators, see reputation system; 
• 
Alerts Subscription: Users can subscribe to different 
kinds of alerts: notifications, comments or other 
Public Transportation interactions. 
V. 
REPUTATION SYSTEM 
 A reputation system collects, distributes, and aggregates 
feedback about participants’ past behavior, helping users to 
decide whom to trust and encouraging trustworthy behavior 
[5]. There are many empirical studies reputation system, see 
Resnick et al. [6] for an overview. Various trust and 
reputation systems have been proposed or implemented in 
different areas. Some proposed classifications use their 
application areas [7], algorithms [5] or some combined 
characteristics [8] as criteria. These classifications allow 
looking at trust and reputation systems from different 
perspectives always from zero development phases. Since 
there are common modules and strategies among different 
systems, the idea is to build one based on a modular structure 
using a service approach.  
The Reputation system implements a model that is 
generally composed of the main functions: 
• 
AddPoints/SubPoints – Add or remove user points 
based on pre-definied criteria; 
• 
DemoteUser/PromoteUser – Change user reputation 
level based on points criteria;  
• 
GetReputationToLevel – input is the current user 
reputation and gives the points necessary to go to 
the next level;  
• 
Rate/Vote – user item evaluation for other user 
annotation and gives as output the new rate for that 
annotation item. 
Several reputation algorithms can be implemented. 
At this moment, we implemented binary rate and the start 
algorithm. 
A. Reputation Level 
The reputation levels system is inspired from videogames 
like World of Warcraft [9], which needs exponential 
requirements to level up. Equation 1 illustrates the adopted 
formula to generate reputation level requirements for the 
next level, supplying the current level.  



is the reputation for next user level 
NX is the reputation for current user level 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-270-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

So, from the first to the second level, the user needs 400 
points, from the second to the third  level, 880 points, from 
the third to the fourth  level, 1440 points, and from the fourth 
to the fifth level, 2080 points. The reputation level is an 
important issue in our reputation system, since it will define 
the weight of the user’s ratings, described below, as well as 
their role/privileges in Social Network. 
B.  Ratings 
Our system provides an input for users to express their 
opinion related to item’s information quality by rating it as 
being helpful or not helpful (+1, -1), as shown in Fig. 1. This 
range permits a less ambiguous evaluation, since it will 
influence the reputation of those who submitted the item. 
Using this schema, it is possible to filter and organize 
information by its quality and, at the same time, indirectly 
rate the user who submitted that information. This approach 
aims to decrease public reputation of those who submit poor 
information and, inversely, reward those who submit 
relevant information. Item’s information reputation is 
determined using the Equation 2, which consists on a 
summation of all positive and negative ratings weighted by 
rater’s reputation level. Rater’s reputation level is used to 
avoid unfair ratings [1], one of reputation systems known 
problem, in assumption that users with better reputation 
provide more reliable ratings. 
Ai = a * b - (c' * d') + c * d  
 
 
       
a – Item i current rating (in cache); 
b – Summation of item i raters reputation (in cache); 
c – New rating for item i of active user; 
d – Item i active user reputation level (in cache); 
Reevaluation factors: 
c' – Old rating for item i of active user; 
d' – Reputation level of active user when submitted the 
old evaluation (in cache); 
In order to calculate the mobility item’s quality itself 
(e.g., how good is a gate, operator, transport, etc.), our 
system also provides an input for users to express their 
mobility experience quality by a quantitative rating from 1 to 
5 stars, plus comment. 
The item’s quality reputation is calculated by the 
Equation 3 and it consists in a weighted average between 
evaluations and raters reputation. Rater’s reputation level is 
used to avoid unfair ratings as mentioned before. 
Ai = (a * b - ( c' * d') + c * d) / (b - d' + d)  
     (3) 
a – Item i current rating (in cache); 
b – Summation of item i raters reputation (in cache); 
c – New rating for item i of active user; 
d – Item i active user reputation level (in cache); 
Reevaluation factors: 
c' – Old rating for item i of active user; 
d' – Reputation level of active user when submitted the 
old evaluation (in cache); 
C. User’s reputation 
As mentioned before, users indirectly rate others by 
rating their submitted items as being helpful or not helpful, 
according to the Equation 4: 
R = - (a' * r') + a * r  
 
 
 
     (4) 
R – Reputation increment;  a – Rater reputation level; 
r – New rating (+1, -1); 
Reevaluation factors: 
a' – Old rater reputation level;  r' – Old rating; 
 
 
  
Figure 1. Evaluation example. 
 
For example, when a user A submits an item and a 
second user B on level 2 rates that item as useful (+1), the 
user A gets two points of reputation as presented in Fig. 1. 
D. Interaction Incentives 
Due to the lack of incentive for users to provide their 
mobility experiences and ratings, we included incentive 
mechanisms in our reputation system. Users are rewarded for 
data submission, where the importance of the submitted item 
defines the assigned reputation points. Table 1 shows the 
possible configuration values of rewarded points.  
 
TABLE 1: POSSIBLE CONFIGURATION FOR 
INCENTIVES. 
Action 
Reputation 
Binary rating 
+2 
Start rating 
+1 
Mobility item submission, 
except route 
+4 
Route submission 
+6 
Comment submission 
     +1 
Collaboration action 
    +3 
Reevaluation 
     0 
 
For example, someone that submits a new gate will be 
rewarded with 4 reputation points. 
We also adopted a badge reward system, used by systems 
like Stackoverflow [10] and Foursquare [11] with great 
acceptance by the community, where users are rewarded by 
reaching certain objectives. 
In our context, we reward the users when they reach, for 
example, a pre-defined number of done routes or rated items. 
E. Moderation 
In our approach, the information is strongly dependent on 
user’s collaborative interactions. Consequently, moderation 
actions are needed. To reduce the amount of necessary staff 
to keep the system, we included a role based moderation 
mechanism, inspired by Slashdot, which takes advantage of 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-270-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

user’s reputation to delegate them moderation actions.  This 
way, most reliable users are assigned to perform some 
moderation actions. Our mechanism has two moderation 
roles, where the first, called “collaborator”, are assigned to 
manage regular users by editing/hiding comments and item’s 
information. The second role, called “moderator”, was 
introduced to reduce the number of unfair collaborators, as 
described by Slashdot [5].  
VI. 
SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT 
The concept normalization in public transportation area is 
achieved by the introduction of domain ontology.  We use 
same recommender process to several problems in the 
transportation domain, such as a recommender engine for 
electric vehicle [1] and current proposal.  
Ontologies are very powerful in the sense that they are 
developed with the human understanding of the domain in 
mind, instead of taking a pure application-oriented approach, 
as it is mostly done with database schemas. Ontologies can 
help bridge the gap between human understanding and 
machine understanding of a domain. We developed a domain 
ontology based on Web Ontology Language (OWL) and 
UML2 profile and a mapping process between different 
database schemas to a central Information Model or to other 
database schemas, and in that way enable better 
understanding of this information by the users in the 
organization. Public Transportation ontology (PTO) can play 
an important role providing mechanisms to handle 
automatically data integration among different Public 
transportation data and all related data acquired with user 
participation. PTO is described in [2]. PTO is built on top of 
RDF, thus it inherits its concepts: resource, propriety, 
datatype and class: (1) resource is one of the bases of RDF, it 
represents all things described and is the root construction. It 
is an instance of MOF classes; (2) property, defines the 
relation between subjects and object resources and is used to 
represent relationships between concepts. Ontology class 
attributes or associations are represented through proprieties; 
(3) ontology is a concept that aggregates other concepts 
(classes, properties, etc). It groups instances of other 
concepts that represent similar or related knowledge; (4) 
classifier is the base class of concepts that are used for 
classification and is divided in: (i) datatype, a mechanism for 
grouping primitive data; (ii) abstract class; and (5) instance 
that is the base class and is divided in individuals and data 
values, for details see [2]. 
Taking into account a recommender system to be 
developed, in our approach, the system developer can use 
reputation service and chose the available reputation 
algorithms. To obtain that, it is necessary to use a Service-
Oriented Architecture (SOA) [12], which is a component-
based software architecture. This architecture defines the 
description of the services’ interface and implementation. 
The interface is defined in an unbiased way, independent of 
the hardware platform, operating system and programming 
language of the services implementation. For implementing 
service request software architecture, SOA changes the 
manner of the traditional software development. The usage 
of Web Services, the combination of the related technologies 
and the software architecture above are the basis for the 
implementation of the Web Services. This Web Services 
model is divided into three main parts: (1) Services Interface; 
(2) Services Mapping; and (3) Services Implementation. 
Services in SOA also include Services Contract, and Service 
Contract is the definition of the Services interface and 
Services Implementation. Services Interface in this model is 
realized by Web Services Definition Language (WSDL) 
[14], following the criterion of the WSDL. Services 
implementation follows the criterion of the special platform. 
Because of the universal property of WSDL, the services in 
this model own the universal property.  
Representational State Transfer (REST) [15], describes a 
series of architectural constraints that exemplify how the 
web's design emerged. Several implementations of these 
ideas have been created throughout time. As a set of design 
criteria, REST is very general. In particular, it is not tied to 
the Web. Nothing about REST depends on the mechanics of 
HTTP or the structure of URIs. So, Web Service is designed 
according to resource. Every Web Service represents a kind 
of resource, which is operated by the operations of Web 
Service. The Resource Oriented Architecture (ROA) is a way 
of turning a problem into a RESTful [16] web service: an 
arrangement of URIs, HTTP, and XML that works like the 
rest of the Web.  
A new, rational structure, high consistency, low 
connection of SOA-based application architecture is 
constructed, which also follows ROA, implements services 
by encapsulation of the entity object and its operations using 
Web Services, implements the business processes in the 
client PC. Compared with the traditional software 
architecture, the new services layer is added between the 
entity object layer and business logic layer. In the new layer, 
data and its operations are packaged to Web Services. The 
implementation of services is based on the “Interface-First” 
principle, for sharing the data fully and safely. In the entity 
object layer, based on the OOP (Object-Oriented Principle), 
the entity objects and their operations are delivered to three 
parts: (1) Entity Class; (2) Interface of Data Access; and (3) 
Data Access [17]. An overview of this process is illustrated 
in Fig. 2. 
According to ROA, Web Service is designed around the 
resource. To simplify the development, the extension of the 
resource’s definition is reduced, and the table of the database 
is a basic kind of resource. In the period of object oriented 
development, O/R mapping (Object/Relational mapping) is 
adopted to resolve the problem of Object-relational 
impedance mismatch [10]. This strategy combines business 
logic and data access for stripping. It increases the 
performance of the business logic for the persistence of the 
interaction between objects, instead of directly operating on 
the database tables and fields.  
Web Service is used to disjoin the business logic and the 
operation of persistent object. The simple operation of the 
persistent object is packaged to Web Service, to share the 
resource commonly and easily.   
According to the basic operations of the table, the 
operations of the Web Service are designed as list: (1) Add 
object to the database; (2) Delete object from the database; 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-270-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

(3) Edit the object, and save the result to the database; (4) 
Find object in the database; (5) Find a list of objects in the 
database. 
 
Figure 2. Software Architecture Based on SOA [16]. 
 
VII. SOCIAL MOBILITY ADVISOR 
Social Mobility Advisor (SMA), was our Public 
Transportation Recommender system developed for START 
project using a service oriented approach. The main services 
introduced are: (1) geo-location, based on HTML 5 – API, 
from the user IP address, is possible to know the 
approximate location; (2) historical navigation data based on 
Address.js [17]; (3) Public transportation data were imported 
based on a semantic approach developed [2]; (4) external 
information from Google Maps and Google Places (maps 
and points of interests [19]),  Brighter Planet for CO2 
calculation of carbon footprint taking into account trip start 
and end point [20], Wikipedia to get information not 
available in internal data base [21] and  Facebook to get 
information about users (name, friends, e-mail, photo); (5) 
user authentication LDAP; (6) user reputation; (7) matching 
algorithm; and (8) user profile. 
SMA main menu, illustrated in Fig. 3, is a collaborative 
solution that aims to assist travelers to share their 
experiences and find the best suitable mobility alternatives, 
bearing in mind the best sustainable options. Those actions 
are supported by the collaborative community interactions, in 
other words, under the social network concept. This 
approach leads to a credibility problem, which we took into 
account by assuring both users and information are cataloged 
by confidence levels. We also propose an automated 
moderation mechanism that tries to reduce the number of 
required staff to administer the system.  
The SMA project aims to contribute to a more accessible, 
social and sustainable mobility across the Europe, dealing 
with reputation and recommender systems in order to build a 
social network.  
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
The Integra social network, built from the experience of 
the SMA Project, has exceeded the testing phase, which 
counted with more than two hundred users. The present 
database includes more than ten thousand items (gates, 
transports, operators), covering mobility information in a 
worldwide context, and about one thousand rates and 
comments. 
This 
recommender 
system 
for 
public 
transportation was developed in a service based approach. 
Everyone can obtain more information using [22] and join 
the Integra social network accessing [23] and a full 
implementation description available at [24].  
REFERENCES  
 
[1] J. C. Ferreira, P. Pereira, P. Filipe, and J. Afonso. “Recommender 
System for Drivers of Electric Vehicles,” Proc. IEEE 3rd 
International Conference on Electronics Computer Technology 
(ICECT 2011), 8-10 April 2011, pp. 244-248, Kanyakumari, India. 
[2] J. C. Ferreira, P. Filipe, and A. Silva. “Multi-Modal Transportation 
Advisor System,” Proc. First IEEE FISTS Forum on June 2011, pp 
388-393 in Vienna Austria. 
[3] J. C. Ferreira, A. Silva, V. Monteiro, and J. L. Afonso. “Collaborative 
Broker 
for 
Distributed 
Energy 
Resources,” 
Computational 
Intelligence and Decision Making - Trends  and Applications, 
Springer, 2013, in press. 
[4] Integra 
Concept 
- 
http://www.start-project.eu/en/Integra.aspx,  
[retrieved: April, 2013]. 
[5] A. Jøsang, R. Ismail, and C. Boyd. “A Survey of Trust and 
Reputation Systems for Online Service Provision,” Decision Support 
Systems,  pp 618-644, Volume 43, Issue 2, March 2007, ISSN 0167-
9236. 
[6] P. Resnick, R. Zeckhauser, J. Swanson, and K. Lockwood. The Value 
of Reputation on eBay: A Controlled Experiment. Experimental 
Economics, 
2006, 
pp. 
79-101. 
Avaliable 
from 
http://www.si.umich.edu/~presnick/papers/postcards/PostcardsFinalPr
ePub.pdf, [retrieved: April, 2013]. 
[7] L. Mui, A. Halberstadt, and M. Mohtashemi. “Notions of reputation 
in multi-agents systems: A review,” Proc. Autonomous Agents & 
Multiagent Systems, 2002, pp. 280–287, Bologna, Italy. 
[8] J. Sabater. “Trust and Reputation for Agent Societies,” PhD thesis, 
Institute for Artificial Intelligence Research, Bellaterra, 2003. 
[9] World of Warcraft  - http://eu.battle.net, [retrieved: April, 2013]. 
[10] Starckoverflow 
web 
page 
- 
http://www.stackoverflow.com, 
[retrieved: April, 2013]. 
[11] Foursquare web page  - https://www.foursquare.com, [retrieved: 
April, 2013]. 
[12] D. Krafzig, K. Banke, and D. K. Slama. “Enterprise SOA: Service-
Oriented Architecture Best Practices,” PrenticeHall, America, 2006. 
[13] IBM DW. “Specification of the Architecture based on SOA,” , 
[retrieved: April, 2013]. 
[14] http://tech.ccidnet.com/pub/article/c322-a206969-p2.html, [retrieved: 
April, 2013]. 
[15] E. Christensen, F. Curbera, G. Meredith, and S. Weerawarana. “Web 
Services 
Description 
Language 
(WSDL) 
1.1,” 
http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl, 2001, [retrieved: April, 2013]. 
[16] R. T. Fielding. “Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-
based Software Architectures,” Doctoral Thesis, University of 
California, Irvine, America, 2000. 
[17] L. Richardson and S. Ruby. “RESTful Web Services,” O'Reilly 
Media Inc, America, 2007. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-270-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

[18] G. Xiao-Feng, Y. Shi-Jun, and Y. Zu-Wei. “Design and 
implementation of framework of web application based on .NET,” 
Computer Engineer and Design, Beijing, Vol. 29, No. 2, 2008. 
[19] http://www.asual.com/jquery/address, [retrieved: April, 2013]. 
[20] Google 
Maps 
API 
Family 
- 
http://code.google.com/intl/pt-
PT/apis/maps/index.html, [retrieved: April, 2013]. 
[21] Brighter Planet - http://brighterplanet.com, [retrieved: April, 2013]. 
[22] Media Wiki API - http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/API, [retrieved: 
April, 2013]. 
[23] http://start.isel.pt, [retrieved: April, 2013]. 
[24] http://integra.isel.pt, [retrieved: April, 2013]. 
[25] Social 
Mobility 
Advisor, 
available 
at 
http://start.isel.pt/publications.html, [retrieved: April, 2013]. 
 
Figure 3. SMA application screen (Integra Social Network). 
 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-270-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

