Learning as a Service – A Cloud-based Approach for SMEs 
 
Ileana Hamburg 
Institut Arbeit und Technik 
Westfälische Hochschule 
Gelsenkirchen, Germany 
hamburg@iat.eu 
Marius Marian 
Department of Computers and Information Technology 
University of Craiova 
Craiova, Romania 
marius.marian@cs.ucv.ro
 
 
Abstract: The paper deals with e-learning within small and 
medium enterprises (SME). Previous experience of authors 
within EU-funded projects showed that SMEs need to adopt 
some organizational and technological measures in order to 
improve e-learning readiness. In the same time, these measures 
correspond to the stages in building a lifelong learning (LLL) 
strategy by using the novel trans-theoretical model presented. 
The paper then proposes a new approach for LLL within 
European SMEs, based on cloud computing meant to both 
facilitate and reduce costs of accessing and management of e-
learning strategies, technologies and content. This is a work in 
progress related with our intent to develop a set of guidelines 
for SMEs willing to incorporate cloud computing services in 
correlation with the trans-theoretical model. 
Keywords-e-learning; cloud computing; SME. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 E-learning 
refers 
to 
the 
support 
of 
modern 
communications and computer-based applications for two 
fundamental human-development processes, learning and 
teaching. In our paper, we want to emphasize the benefits of 
e-learning within small and medium enterprises (SMEs) 
from the novel context of cloud computing. 
It is known [1] that due to the recent economic recession, 
many SMEs are facing the challenge of shortage in new 
skilled labor, and in combination with this the inability to 
realize innovative technological developments. SMEs can 
tackle this and gain competitive advantages by improving 
their performance through the use of new e-learning 
methods. The problem is that most e-learning technologies, 
methods and strategies have been developed for the needs of 
large companies, and are not flexible enough to be adapted 
for the specific learning needs of SMEs operating in diverse 
economic sectors. Limited capital and know-how resources 
in 
SMEs, 
difficulties 
to 
precisely 
delineate 
what 
competences are lacking, and the need for having flexible 
and efficient learning strategies hinder their employees to 
achieve a better qualification that helps them to cope with the 
increased marked competition and client requirements. What 
SMEs need are flexible learning models enhanced by 
technology to “reduce training costs per learner in order to be 
able to train a greater number of employees without 
increasing spending on training” [2], supporting the 
development of creativity, facilitating adaptive learning on 
the job, the deepening of linkage with other knowledge 
resources within company. The learning processes in SMEs 
differ from those in schools and higher education because 
they have to be integrated in working processes, and learning 
systems have to be implemented into the SME’s workflow. 
“Today companies are looking for services that provide 
what they need while giving them the convenience of and 
time to concentrate more on their business. Not only does 
cloud computing offer more flexibility than traditional 
methods, but also gives a business the luxury of letting their 
employees gain access to information while they are mobile 
as well as at their desks” said  Shuveb Hussain (Head of 
Cloud Computing and Virtualization Research at K7 
Computing Co.) [3]. Cloud computing will evolve from a 
futuristic technology into a viable alternative, not only for 
business but also for LLL strategies that have to be 
integrated with the business ones. 
This paper will present work in progress within a 
cooperation of the LLL study groups of the Institut Arbeit 
und Technik Gelsenkirchen and University of Craiova. 
Section two of the paper presents some learning 
strategies within European SMEs; section three describes 
benefits of cloud computing services in connection with 
social media to improve/substitute these strategies supporting 
personal, interactive and collaborative learning, and the last 
section enounces the future work steps.  
II. 
LEARNING STRATEGIES WITHIN EUROPEAN SMES 
E-learning within SMEs was the focus of two previous 
projects undertaken by the authors: ARIEL [4], [5] and 
SIMPEL (SMEs: Improving E-Learning Practices) [6]. 
ARIEL was an observatory EU e-learning project; it 
uncovered the widespread lack of successful take up of e-
learning by European SMEs. In SIMPEL, an “optimal 
model” for the introduction of e-learning in an SME was 
developed and guidelines for all involved published. The 
SIMPEL findings have been used for the development of a 
framework for an LLL strategy in SMEs.  
This framework suggests measures to improve LLL 
readiness and steps to develop LLL strategies. It uses a 
combination of the trans-theoretical model which is a model 
for behavior change, and recommendations from ARIEL, 
SIMPEL and eCASME (eCApture of SME's training needs 
and specification) [7] projects. It uses a top-down and 
bottom-up approach targeting both the individual and the 
organization. It aims first to raise awareness of the potential 
benefit of LLL to the individual and the organization. It aims 
to change the attitude and behavior of individuals and 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

companies towards LLL. Last but not least the framework 
should help companies to implement sustainable LLL 
strategies. 
All three projects mentioned earlier – ARIEL, SIMPEL, 
eCASME, required SMEs to adopt some organizational and 
technological measures. These measures correspond to the 
planning, action and maintenance stages in building a LLL 
strategy 
by 
using 
the 
trans-theoretical 
model 
for 
organizational behavior change. This is illustrated in Figure 
7.  At each stage we mention the electronic tools that may 
contribute to master the stage effectively. 
A. Company Situation and Necessary Qualifications 
The first step for an SME is to analyze its own business 
goals, the company situation, and also the difficulties 
encountered by the company in achieving these goals.  
Once the analysis has reached a conclusion, the SME will 
be able to determine what qualifications are needed by the 
staff to overpass the identified difficulties. Some methods 
used to achieve such qualifications include LLL strategy, e-
learning, short term qualifications, etc. 
The electronic tool useful for gathering documents in 
various versions and making them available throughout the 
company (either for everyone or in base of differentiated 
access rights) is a Wiki portal (either on its own or as part of 
a Learning Management System – LMS, such as the open-
source projects Moodle or Sakai). Additionally, a forum for 
discussions may found itself useful, again either stand-alone 
or as part of an LMS. 
B. Concept 
The next step is finding suitable offers and services for 
the qualification needs required by the work tasks. This 
implies determination of learning contents, forms and media 
used for the LLL strategy, and also identification of relevant 
knowledge and data flows.  
For the internal communication and gathering of 
information, the wiki and/or the forum mentioned previously 
may still be used. Feedback sheets and/or databases such as 
provided in LMS (e.g. Moodle, Sakai, etc.) help gather the 
information even more precisely.  
To find suitable offers, SMEs may use web searching, 
and particularly, social networks such as Xing, Facebook 
probably also being useful. 
C. Planning 
This step implies specifying LLL measures as well as the 
time, the actors, the technological and organizational 
infrastructure, and the tools needed for an efficient 
realization of these measures. This is followed by the 
preparation of a financial (business) part of the LLL model 
providing a framework for the economical dimension of the 
LLL strategy in the company, linking the planning with  
the process level of the implementation.  
Here, an excellent planning instrument for SMEs is for 
example MindManager, linking mind maps with basic 
project management features. For the financial planning it is 
necessary to draw on the data of business or enterprise 
management software (depending on the size of the 
company, this may range from simple spreadsheets up to 
very 
specific 
enterprise 
planning 
resource 
planning 
packages, which vary greatly according to size, branch and 
needs of the companies concerned. 
D. Implementation 
In this stage, LLL solutions that correspond to the 
learning culture of the company will be produced (or 
purchased and customized) and put in use. This may cover 
the whole range: from buying standard learning software 
packages to subscribing to podcasts and other web-based 
offerings, to running a CoP (community of practices), and 
using/running an LMS with self-developed learning contents. 
For SMEs, it may be useful to gang together or to make use 
of offerings through professional associations in order to 
minimize costs. 
A further step may involve tests and certifications. In all 
likelihood, SMEs will not go further than running online 
quizzes for testing knowledge. Certification will most likely 
be taken out of offerings by craft chambers and other 
officially recognized certification agencies (including 
universities). 
E. Evaluation and improvement 
SMEs will certainly want to estimate how effective and 
financially efficient the training was. A complete evaluation 
concerns human and financial resources, developed 
measures, participation, improved knowledge, behavior, 
competences and expectations of the participants to the LLL 
trainings, and the observable changes in the company.  
This raises the issues of quality control of e-learning and 
return on investment (ROI). Here it is not possible to point to 
one or two tools that do it all. Many different parameters 
may play a role into this [8]. It is important not to follow a 
narrow, purely economic frame in this evaluation. 
III. 
LLL STRATEGIES FOR SMES AND CLOUD 
COMPUTING 
In the following, we will briefly present some of the LLL 
strategies used for example by German SMEs ([9], [10], 
[11]), and we will then propose a new approach in which 
cloud computing can be employed by SMEs in their LLL 
processes. 
 
Vocational
education supplier
eLearning contributor
SME
contributor:
- provider
- developer
- projects
- consultants
eLearning
trad. learning
eLearning
trad. learning
 
Figure 1. Cooperation with vocational education suppliers 
In Figure 1, SMEs which are consumers of learning 
related products and services including e-learning, cooperate 
with vocational education suppliers to disseminate these, and 
to achieve their qualification needs.  
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

Figure 2 exemplifies another strategy in which 
distributors of learning programs offer their services as a 
subscription. The point to be emphasized here is the 
distribution manner. 
eLearning provider
SME
eLearning offer as a 
subscription based service
cost free learning / 
information offer
eLearning provider
SME
eLearning offer as a 
subscription based service
cost free learning / 
information offer
 
Figure 2. Subscription based services 
The distributor in this business model gives first a trial 
offer or a free of charge basic information or learning offer. 
So clients know the services or products and request the 
suitable services for a fee. 
vocational education
supplier
blended learning
offer
SME
eLearning contributor
vocational education
supplier
blended learning
offer
SME
eLearning contributor
 
Figure 3. Refining of face-to-face courses 
In Figure 3, the providers of learning services offer their 
services to the providers of traditional vocational education 
helping thus SMEs to build an integrated LLL strategy. 
 
common platform
SME
other
eLearning 
contributor
eLearning 
contributor
eLearning 
contributor
eLearning 
contributor
eLearning 
contributor
common platform
SME
other
SME
other
eLearning 
contributor
eLearning 
contributor
eLearning 
contributor
eLearning 
contributor
eLearning 
contributor
 
Figure 4. Content syndication model 
It is a common practice to have different e-learning 
distributors pooling their contents on a common platform as 
depicted in Figure 4. This enables a common marketing and 
common standards (for certifications for example). The 
common platform can be established as a brand, after a 
while. The clients SMEs have then the possibility to access 
one platform for all courses. The content syndication model 
is designed mainly for smaller and niche/topic-oriented 
providers of learning content.    
Another LLL strategy is that illustrated in Figure 5, 
where a franchisor offers a complete package of services to 
his franchisees.  
SMEs from one sector work together, in informal or 
formal ways, e.g. in associations, to develop and to use e-
learning applications, contents, platforms or courses together 
(as seen in Figure 6). 
 
clients
franchisor
platform with contents, eTutors and common
advertising concept and brand
education
offerer
education
offerer
education
offerer
clients
franchisor
platform with contents, eTutors and common
advertising concept and brand
education
offerer
education
offerer
education
offerer
 
Figure 5. Franchising of e-learning 
Among the LLL strategies presented so far, the two most 
used in the German SMEs community are subscription-
based services and content syndication model. 
 
SME
SME
SME
SME
eLearning 
content/application
eLearning developer
SME
SME
SME
SME
eLearning 
content/application
eLearning developer
 
Figure 6. Sector courses developed by collaboration between SME 
Cloud computing is a novel interpretation of sharing 
resources over Internet, on-demand and on a pay-per-use 
paradigm. These resources are diverse, ranging from 
software 
applications 
to 
data 
to 
computing 
and 
internetworking infrastructures. The cloud is seen as a 
natural evolution since it does not alter fundamentally the 
existing technologies; rather, it is growing on a successful 
collaboration/combination of them. Computing as a service 
and not as a product represents in fact the next public utility. 
SMEs could drastically reduce the costs pertaining to their 
LLL strategies and processes by adopting the cloud. 
A first application of cloud computing is in the trans-
theoretical model (see Figure 7). Some IT support or the 
entire IT infrastructure within the stages of the model can be 
moved into the cloud. Each stage as we have mentioned is 
using a certain number of software tools and these tools are 
better off in the cloud (due to reduced budget costs and 
delegated administration). In the traditional approach SMEs 
have to provide for the e-learning infrastructure with both 
hardware and software components. This means investing in 
the e-learning system: capital, human resources, etc. 
Traditionally, SMEs have developed their own intranets in 
which web-based e-learning systems were deployed. The 
economic crisis has redirected SMEs in finding alternatives 
to this paradigm. One of them is to shift towards 
incorporating cloud services in the e-learning process, and 
occasionally, aggregate in communities of sector-orientated 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

employers. This could be the case for SMEs playing in the 
same sector of activity, having a consolidated economic 
position on external markets that agree to participate into a 
win-win approach with similar co-national actors for 
improving their employees’ skills and qualifications. Similar 
actors are those that have interlocked business relationships 
and shareholdings. Common business interests and common 
needs could lead to a common e-learning strategy. 
Obviously, the main reason of moving the individual 
learning management system into the cloud remains the 
reduction of set-up, maintenance and evolution costs. One 
interesting consequence of this shift into the cloud is if we 
consider an association of employers and the planning step 
of the trans-theoretical model. The various companies’ 
statuses could drive a joint effort for establishing a common 
list of needs of qualifications for that business sector, and 
then in the successive steps of the model, to prepare, 
purchase or share knowledge and competence-building 
processes within a guild of SMEs. Additionally, migration of 
the traditional learning system into the cloud demands for a 
common set of good practices. SMEs, knowledge providers 
and CSPs all benefit if such an informative guide would be 
available. The NetKnowing project is intending to develop 
such a set of best practices for European SMEs willing to 
move their learning management systems into the cloud. 
The cloud is seen in literature in three major classes of 
services: infrastructure as a service (IaaS), platform as a 
service (PaaS), and software as a service (SaaS). IaaS is a 
complete virtual machine running a specific operating 
system, in most of the cases acting as a server. For an e-
learning environment, the cloud approach means that the 
cloud service provider (CSP) is in charge with delivering the 
infrastructure of the learning system and its operational 
management. The CSP is also in charge with the 
customization of the learning solution for the particular 
constraints of the individual SMEs. These may concern 
primarily scalability (variable volumes of managed data) and 
high-speed computing. In practice, large CSPs such as 
Google Cloud Platform, Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud, 
and Microsoft Azure are already offering support for hosting 
e-learning solutions. Top open-source learning / content 
management systems allow configuration and operation into 
the cloud (e.g. Moodle directly on Amazon Web Services via 
BitNami, Blackboard Moodlerooms solution, SCORM 
Cloud for Sakai). But these commercial solutions need to be 
compared and evaluated taking into account various 
budgeting and business constraints of SMEs. A guideline for 
either individual or community of SMEs seems thus 
necessary.  
 
 
Figure 7. The trans-theoretical model 
 
PaaS is is an extension of the IaaS to accommodate the 
middleware and to improve the performance in using it. It 
may be for example a web-based e-learning development 
platform 
containing 
the 
web/application 
server, 
the 
integrated development environment, the associated database 
and all additional utilities for development and testing. PaaS 
offers SMEs the possibility of acquiring on-demand usage-
time for different types of software services. This includes a 
wide range of applications: office tools, graphic utilities, data 
storage facilities, etc. SaaS is dynamically scalable, device 
independent, and most of the applications are collaborative, 
allowing thus multiple users to share documents and work on 
them concurrently. Adding social media services through 
SaaS can only enhance this collaboration. A trivial example 
here, concerning office tools for SMEs, is Google Docs.  
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

The deployment models into the cloud range from private 
cloud (an extension of the enterprise Intranet), to 
community-based cloud (the participants to this model are 
various organizations with a common mission or the same 
business goals), to public cloud (the CSP makes available its 
services to any customer via Internet), up to the hybrid cloud 
(actually an intersection between the previous deployment 
variants).  
For our investigation, it is clear that SaaS and PaaS are 
the most suited categories for SMEs since the supporting IT 
instruments are out-sourced and need no longer be managed 
in-house. Taking for example the financial aspect of the 
software licenses this is no longer the task of the SMEs 
(instead CSPs will install, configure, update, fix and 
administrate them).  
Security risks associated with the sensitive e-learning 
content and the related access control will be handled by the 
CSPs.  Having the data stored into the cloud is a 
disadvantage for attackers since sensitive data (such as 
evaluation tests, exam answers, quizzes, etc.) is not as easy 
to locate on a particular hardware resource as is in the 
traditional intranet approach. Also, disaster recovery is no 
longer a problem of the SMEs instead this is delegated to the 
CSP. When client hardware terminals fail, the CSP in 
conformity with the service level agreement will ensure that 
the restoring time will be minimal and whether data restoring 
will be complete. Correlated with this, the SME’s might get 
interested in aspects such as business continuity and data 
availability when moving the e-learning process into the 
cloud. Therefore, SMEs must establish and understand well 
the procedures necessary to have the data and the e-learning 
system available under any critical circumstance. Our current 
work concerns development of cloud adoption guidelines for 
SMEs addressing such sensitive topics. 
For the subscription-based services, SMEs and e-learning 
providers benefit financially by moving the learning offer 
into a SaaS-like cloud service instead of buying a product 
(such as for example, the supporting software applications 
that need to be hosted and administered on the SMEs 
hardware/network). The same applies for the shared platform 
within the content-syndication model.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper describes a work in progress related with our 
intent to incorporate cloud computing services for the 
referred two most used LLL strategies in two on-going 
projects, NetKnowing 2.0 [12] and ReadiSME [13]. This 
means changing the technological paradigm for the current 
e-learning platforms and LLL strategies used by SMEs. 
The goal is to investigate how much the cloud and social 
media are beneficial for both SMEs and e-learning providers, 
mainly in reducing costs and improving knowledge transfer. 
The next step is to describe and discuss scenarios with SMEs 
representatives about the proposed application in this paper, 
and to test them in 1 – 2 SMEs from project partner 
countries. 
A guideline will be developed referring LLL in SMEs 
and cloud computing with precise indication how to use the 
cloud in different stages of a LLL strategy. Related security 
and privacy risks will also be addressed.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the strategic grant 
POSDRU/89/1.5/S/61968, Project ID61968 (2009), co-
financed by the European Social Fund within the Sectorial 
Operational Program Human Resources Development 2007 
– 2013. 
The studies have been carried out within the innovation-
transfer projects ARIEL, SIMPEL and eCASME supported 
by the EU LLP Leonardo da Vinci sub-programme.  
REFERENCES 
[1] European Commission Report,  “Assessing the Performance 
of European SMEs”, September 2010, available on-line at 
http://ec.europa.eu/ 
enterprise/magazine/articles/smes-
entrepreneurship/ article_10581_en.htm 
[2] Steve Fiehl, Michel Diaz, and Antoine Solom, “The first e-
learning barometer in Europe”, October 2011, available on-
line 
at 
http://www.crossknowledge.com/en_GB/elearning/media-
center/publications.html?mictrl=cklgWhitepaper/show&sid=s
urvey-e-learning-europe 
[3] Michael  Byrne, “Planning Gowth”, January 2011, available 
on-line 
at 
http://www.smeadvisor.com/2011/01/planning-
growth/ 
[4] ARIEL 
project, 
“Analyzing 
and 
Reporting 
the 
Implementation of E-Learning in Europe”, March 2012, 
available on-line at http://www.ariel-eu.net. 
[5] D. Beer, T. Busse, I. Hamburg, U. Mill, and H. Paul (eds.), 
“eLearning in European SMEs: observations, analyses and 
forecasting”, 2006, pp. 2 – 6, Münster, Waxmann. 
[6] D. Beer, T. Busse, I. Hamburg, and C. Oehler (eds.), 
“Improving e-learning practices in SMEs”, Proceedings of the 
SIMPEL final conference, 2008, pp. 3 – 7, Brussels. 
[7] eCASME project, “eCApture of SME's Training Needs and 
Specification”, 
March 
2012, 
available 
on-line 
at 
http://ecasme.amt.ul.ie. 
[8] C. Porco, “Measuring the success of e-learning initiatives”, 
available at http://www.prescientdigital.com/articles/learning/ 
measuring-the-success-of-e-learning-initiatives/ 
[9] T. Hall and I. Hamburg, “Learning in social networks and 
Web 2.0 in SMEs’ continuing vocational education”, 
International Journal of Web Based Communities 5 (4), 2009, 
pp. 593-607. 
[10] St. Engert, I. Hamburg, and J. Terstriep, “Promoting online 
education for new working environments in companies”, in U. 
Demiray, S. Sever (eds.): Marketing online education 
programs: frameworks for promotion and communication. 
Hershey, 2011, PA: Information Science Reference, chapter 
23, pp. 337-358.  
[11] I. Hamburg, “Learning solutions and social media based 
environments for companies”, in Life long learning for 
competitiveness, 
employability 
and 
social 
inclusion, 
International conference, 11-13 November 2011, Craiova, 
Romania, Editura Universitaria, pp. 31-37. 
[12] NetKnowing 2.0 project, March 2012, webpage available on-
line at http://www.netknowing.com. 
[13] ReadiSME project, “Lifelong Learning readiness for SMEs”, 
March 
2012, 
webpage 
available 
on-line 
at 
http://www.readisme.com. 
 
 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

