 
 
A Novel Mobile Communication for the Future Internet 
Sung-Moon Shin, Min-Taig Kim and Dae-Sik Kim 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Korea 
smshin@etri.re.kr, mtkim@etri.re.kr, dskim@etri.re.kr, 
 
Abstract — In this paper, Organic Mobile Communication 
(OMC) is defined as a Mobile Communication (MC) system 
operating organically as a body. As smart phones, for 
example, the I-phone, become more popular, Internet 
services are  becoming more intelligent and diversified. 
Internet traffic is also expected to increase explosively, with 
much variation. In the future Internet, MC is expected to 
play a key role. Therefore, the future MC needs to have 
more capabilities in capacity, function, etc. Especially, 
considering traffic requirements and limited radio resources, 
flexible operation of MC will be more important. OMC is an 
alternative to meet these requirements. In this paper, the 
architecture of OMC is analyzed with the service 
requirements from the system design point of view. OMC 
consists of the handsets, Base Stations (BS’s) and the Core 
Networks (CN’s) of the present MC system. However, the 
routing in the air is quite different. In OMC, all the wireless 
equipment, such as handsets and the BS’s, are regarded as 
nodes, of which the states are ABLE or UNABLE. The 
routes among nodes are constituted by the ABLE nodes and 
are changed dynamically. An optimal route between two 
nodes is determined with aids of the Radio Routing Agent 
(RRA) of the CN. With OMC, we can increase the system 
capacity significantly and thus satisfy the future Internet 
requirements.  
Keywords – mobile; communication service; Internet; organic 
communication.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
As more convenient telecommunication services are 
required, the need for the Internet and  MC also increases.  
Particularly, ubiquitous and intelligent services including 
convergence are very important for the future of MC [1]. 
Mobile Internet (MI) services are main services in the 
future of MC. The MI services require various levels of 
Quality of Service (QoS). The MC systems supporting 
these MI services are also varied. A user in the future will 
adopt the various MC systems. Direct radio paths will be 
also 
needed 
to 
support 
MI 
services 
efficiently. 
Considering the increased traffic in the future due to the 
ever-rising popularity of intelligent phones, it is important 
to improve the radio resource efficiency. Although the 
Universal Access (UA) with cognitive radio is proposed 
to improve the radio resource efficiency [2]-[3], it is 
difficult for UA alone to meet future MI requirements.  
The Future MC System (FMCS) is expected to 
consist of several types of the MC systems, such as LTE, 
WiMax, WiFi, etc. The ad-hoc network [4] may also be a 
part of the FMCS. In the future, MC companies will serve 
their customers well with the required MI services, 
regardless of the supporting system. Also, as the smart 
phone becomes more intelligent, an MC system needs to 
be more intelligent. The FMCS needs to have the 
capability to support future MC users efficiently with MI 
services. 
In this paper, a novel FMCS is proposed as an 
alternative to meet future MI requirements. In the 
proposed FMCS, each piece of wireless equipment, such 
as a handset or BS, is regarded as a node. Every node is 
available or unavailable. The route between two nodes 
consists of available nodes. The RRA maintains the status 
data about all of the nodes and the handsets. If a call is 
attempted, the RRA determines the optimal route for the 
call and informs the caller. The assigned route is changed 
dynamically, like an organism. With the proposed 
Organic Mobile Communication (OMC), radio resource 
efficiency is significantly increased by the flexible use of 
the resources.   
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the 
life style of a future user and future MC services are 
discussed briefly. Section III presents an example of a 
part of the OMC architecture and its concept. A call 
processing procedure is also illustrated. Section IV is 
concerned with the wireless and mobile technologies 
required for the OMC. Finally, Section V concludes this 
paper. 
 
II. MOBILE COMMUNICATION SERVICES 
To extract the requirements for future MC services, , 
we briefly consider some aspects of life in the future . 
Compared to the present, the following kinds of people 
and other rising social phenomena are expected to be 
more common in the future.   
- 
Lonely single 
- 
Older women socializing with younger men  
- 
Mobile couples from the weekend couples.  
- 
Retired worker 
- 
Extreme commuter 
- 
Person who sleeps less 
- 
DIY (do-it-yourself) doctors  
- 
Learning requirements for teenagers 
- 
Knitting youngster 
- 
Adult video game 
- 
Home schooling 
- 
Easily and fast transportation 
Considering the above, future life will be more 
personalized and more intelligent. In future society, 
human’s existing problems will be solved. Such 
biological problems as illness, death, and pain will be 
relieved. Human and cyber space will be connected with 
special equipment to the human body. Artificial machines, 
such as artificial material, artificial software, artificial 
infra, and robot replace human’s brain work as well as 
6
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

 
 
human’s physical work. The care economy will rise 
jointly with the artificial society, since the care for human 
themselves in terms of mental and physical activity will 
be more important.  
In the future, the advent of super brains will open the 
Artificial Intelligent (AI) society and thus an ideal society 
will be come into being. Humans  will be able to reach 
self-realization through proxy experience, services, travel, 
games, leisure, stories, poems, novels, plays, movies, etc. 
Nano-technology will also be popularized and thus 
equipment will be minuscule. In addition, a large portion 
of human manual labor and mental work will be done by 
small robots and AI. In industry, humans will cooperate 
with robots. The trends of future life can be summarized 
by 
the 
terms 
‘carbon-reducer’, 
‘sweet-interlude’, 
‘communion-machine’ and ‘big-brain’.  
To cope with the trend, MC is expected to play a key 
role with MI. Considering future life styles and trends,  
future MC services will be ‘green-mobile’, ‘relaxation-
mobile’, ‘communion-mobile’, and ‘brain-mobile’. The 
All Things on Network (ATON) including the machine to 
machine (M2M) is also a key service for the FMCS, with 
location-based-service (LBS). Therefore, future MC 
services are summarized as group communication 
(conference-call), community services (cyber-society), 
multimedia-query (specific-conversation), value-added 
data goods (including sight, auditory, smell, touch, etc.), 
and green transportation. Fig.1 shows an example of 
future MC services. 
 
III. OMC ARCHITECTURE 
The major service of the FMCS is MI service with 
M2M service. Since MI service and M2M service are 
provided at the present time, the continuous support of 
MI service and M2M service provided by existing 
systems, such as LTE, WiMax, and WiFi, is very 
important. Therefore, the existing systems, including the 
Intelligent 
Transportation 
System 
(ITS) 
and 
the 
Ubiquitous Sensor Network (USN), need to be adopted 
efficiently. Considering these, the FMCS is expected to 
consist of the existing systems as well as the new FMCS 
components. Furthermore, considering limited radio 
resources, the FMCS is required to increase the 
frequency-use efficiency significantly.   
To meet the requirements, OMC is proposed. Fig. 2 
shows the concept of OMC. OMC is a novel FMCS 
characterized by key words like ‘informative’, ‘green’, 
‘cognitive’, ‘self-organized’, etc. Existing MC systems 
and the new FMCS components constitute the proposed 
OMC. In this OMC, all network components and radio 
resources are organically combined without any human 
control to provide the services optimally matched with 
the users’ needs. OMC evolves by itself to adapt 
dynamically to the varying environments. Hence, with 
OMC, we can support future MI services as well as  
conventional MC services efficiently and can relieve the 
limitations of radio resources.  
Fig. 3 shows an example of an MC part of OMC 
architecture. In Fig. 3, terminal A, base station A, and the 
core network A constitute the system A. System B 
consists of terminal B, base station B and, core network B. 
OMC may include other systems available in the 
operating company. In OMC, all wireless equipment, 
such as handsets and BSs, are regarded as nodes. The 
state of a node is described as either available (ABLE) or 
unavailable (UNABLE). Direct communication between 
any two nodes is possible, and the route consists of the 
ABLE nodes. The optimal route between two nodes is 
determined with the aid of the RRA of the CN A and is 
changed dynamically by the environment. In the figure, 
system A is assumed to be the main operating system. 
The RRA maintains all the status data about all the nodes 
of the handsets and the BSs. Hence, OMC is self-
organized and operates organically.  
  Fig. 4 shows an example of a call processsing flow. 
If subscriber A makes a call, this message is transferred to 
the call processsor (CP) A of the CN A. If the CP A 
receives the call attempt message, the CP A requests the 
optimal route to the RRA. The RRA determines the 
optimal route for the call and informs the CP A. The CP 
A transfers the call attempt message to the CP B of the 
called subscriber. If there is no problem in the received 
response, the CP A informs the caller of the optimal route. 
With the informed route, the caller communicates with 
the callee. During the call, the route may be changed by 
the RRA like a handoff.  
Fig. 5 shows the uplink channel architecture 
proposed for OMC. The basic channel architecture is the 
same as for LTE. In Fig. 5, a new channel, the Dedicated 
Access CHannel (DACH) is included to improve access 
efficiency. During the call processing procedure, the 
identification number for the DACH is informed by the 
network.  
 
IV. WIRELESS AND MOBILE TECHNOLOGIES 
OMC is proposed to efficiently support future MC 
services with MI services. Considering future MC 
requirements, radio resource efficiency is a key parameter 
for the system. Although a number of technologies are 
proposed to improve radio resource efficiency, it would 
be difficult to meet the requirements of MC in the future 
with 
the 
proposed 
technologies. 
However, 
the 
technologies could still utilized for OMC if they were 
improved, and here they are introduced.  
- Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO). MIMO 
shares the communication resources by means of 
distributed transmission and signal processsing. 
Neighboring infra-structure stations as BSs or Relay 
Stations (RSs) are for utilization. 
- CoOrdinated Multi-Point (COMP). COMP trans-
mission is used with coordinated scheduling/beam-
forming and joint transmission.  
- Cooperative Processing (CP). CP overcomes the 
limits on spectral efficiency imposed by inter-cell 
interference. Between BSs and RSs, as well as among 
RSs, it extends the coverage and capacity of point-to-
multi-point links.  
- Multi-Hop Relay (MHR). A relay path is a 
concatenation of consecutive relay links between the 
source and the designated access relay station. The 
7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

 
 
relay normally works in half-duplex mode. Three 
schemes, amplifying and forwarding (AF), the 
decoding and forwarding (DF), and estimating and 
forwarding (EF), are used.  
- Cooperative relaying is a source node multi-casting a 
message to a number of cooperative relays which in 
turn resend a processed version to the intended 
destination node. The destination node combines the 
signals received from the relays and recovers the 
source signal 
- Cognitive Radio (CR) allows universal access to the 
less-loaded-station. The traffic load is distributed 
among the MC systems available. 
- Femtocell is an MC system for a small area, such as a 
home or the SOHO. In a femtocell, a compact BS is 
connected to the operator’s network via the Internet. 
The operations of femtocells are controlled by the Self 
Organizing Network (SON). 
- SON is a set of use-cases covering all the fields of 
network 
operation 
from 
network 
planning 
to 
maintenance activities. The self-optimization is also 
done in the SON. Plug and play technology is applied 
to the compact BSs to achieve the SON functions in 
conjunction with the CN. 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
Future communication services are expected to be 
more intelligent and convenient. MI services are the main 
services of the FMCS. Hence, a large capacity, a number 
of functions, and various levels of QoS are required for 
the FMCS. Although many wireless/mobile technologies, 
such as the MIMO, the CR, etc. are proposed to overcome 
the limited radio resources, it is difficult to meet the 
FMCS requirements only with the technologies. The 
proposed OMC in this paper is an alternative to meet 
future MC requirements.  
OMC consists of handsets,  BSs, and  CNs. Unlike in 
current MC systems, direct communications among 
handsets are possible in OMC. In  OMC, the different 
types of wireless equipment are regarded as nodes. The 
optimal route between two nodes is constituted by 
available nodes and is assigned with the aid of the RRA 
of the CN. The RRA maintains the status data about all 
nodes. The assigned route is changed dynamically, as if it 
were an organism. With the proposed OMC, radio 
resource efficiency is significantly increased by flexible 
use of resources.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the KCC (Korea 
Communications Commission), Korea, under the ETRI 
R&D program 
supervised 
by 
the 
KCA 
(Korea 
Communications Agency)" (KCA-2011-08921-05001]. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Vekasalo, H. et al., “Analysis of users and non-users of 
smartphone applications,” Telematics and Informatics., vol. 
27, pp. 242-255, Aug. 2010. 
[2] Sherman, M, et al., “IEEE Standards Supporting Cognitive 
Radio and Networks, Dynamic Spectrum Access”, IEEE 
Comm. Magazine, vol.46, pp. 108-116, July 2008.  
[3] Prasad, R.V., et al., “Cognitive functionality in next 
generation wireless networks: standardization efforts”, IEEE 
Comm. Magazine, vol. 46, pp72-78, Apr. 2008. 
[4] Sommer, C. et al., “On the feasibility of UMTS-based 
Traffic Information Systems,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol 8, pp. 
506-517, July 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. An example of the future MC services 
8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. The concept for the organic mobile communication  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. An example of a MC part of the OMC architecture 
 
 
Terminal A  
(Handset) 
Base 
Ststion A 
Call processor 
A 
Radio Route 
Agent A 
Core Network A 
Terminal B  
(Handset) 
Base 
Ststion B 
Call processor 
B 
Core Network B 
9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. An example of a call processing flow of OMC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. The uplink channel architecture for the OMC. 
 
 
Call Attempt 
Optimal Route 
Route Request 
Response 
Call Transfer 
Optimal Route 
Communication 
RRA 
Call 
Processor A 
Caller A 
BS  A 
Callee B 
BS  B 
Call 
Processor B 
CCCH 
DTCH 
DCCH 
RACH 
UL-SCH 
PUSCH 
PUCCH 
PUSCH 
DACH 
PDACH 
10
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

