Impact of Network and Service Paradigm Shift
on Evolution of the QoE and QoS Concepts
Jacek Oko
Wrocław University of Science and Technology
Telecommunications and Teleinformatics Department
Wrocław, Poland
e-mail: jacek.oko@pwr.edu.pl
Marek Średniawa
Warsaw University of Technology
Institute of Telecommunications
Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: mareks@tele.pw.edu.pl
Abstract—We are witnessing a number of paradigm shifts in
many Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
areas. 5G, Future Internet and very high resolution digital TV
defined a new vision of services with novel approaches to their
implementation, deployment and operation based on concepts
of Software Defined Network (SDN) and Network Function
Virtualization (NFV). Increasing transmission capabilities in
both mobile and fixed networks became an enabler for a new
generation of multimedia services and applications. Evolution
of digital video technology and competition of operator
supported services with Over The Top (OTT) applications
caused change in understanding of Quality of Service (QoS)
and Quality of Experience (QoE) concepts. This paper surveys
the change of QoE approaches and interpretation in the
context of new services and applications.
Keywords-QoE; QoS; multimedia services.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Delivery of services of appropriate quality has always
been one of the key goals of telecom operators and service
providers. Evolution of services from fixed network plain
voice and data towards rich and complex mobile multimedia
and Internet based OTT (Over The Top) applications caused
a significant change in quality concepts and approaches to
their provision, measurement, monitoring and management.
For a long time, a network centric approach based on the
notion of QoS defined by strictly technical parameters
associated with data transmission among service access
points (ITU-T Rec. X.200) like: transmission delay, jitter,
throughput, bit error rate, probability of loss or duplication of
data,
has
dominated.
This
“engineering”
perspective
neglected users’ point of view. There is of course an intuitive
relationship between QoS and quality of service observed by
a user. On the one hand, meeting a set of QoS criteria might
not guarantee end-user satisfaction. On the other hand, a QoS
problem, e.g., higher level of delay or jitter may not affect
quality of voice or video to a level that causes users
complaints. However, a QoE problem, e.g., macroblocking
in a video stream, may be affected by QoS problems like e.g.
dropped IP packets leading to continuity count errors. In
order to represent also the users’ centric perspective, a
concept of QoE was introduced. It focuses on the perceptual
quality of services from the users’ point of view.
According to ITU-T Rec. G.100 [2], QoE is defined as
the overall acceptability of an application or service, as
perceived subjectively by the end-user. An alternative but
complementary definition was proposed by the Qualinet
“White Paper on Definitions of Quality of Experience” [14].
QoE is defined there as: the degree of delight or annoyance
of the user of an application or service. It results from the
fulfilment of his or her expectations with respect to the utility
and/or enjoyment of the application or service in the light of
the user’s personality and current state.
It is a metric of how well a network satisfies the end-
user's requirements and expectations. QoE establishes an
aggregated view by covering the complete end-to-end system
(client, terminal, network, services infrastructure, etc.) and
its effects. QoE is also influenced by user’s internal state
(e.g., expectations), the characteristics of the designed
system (e.g., capabilities) and the context or the environment
within which the interaction occurs. In research papers on
QoE, many classifications of the QoE Influencing Factors
(IF) were proposed. For example, in Qualinet project [14],
three categories of QoE influence factors were identified:
1.
human (e.g., gender, age, education);
2.
system (e.g., bandwidth, security, resolution);
3.
context (e.g., location, movements, costs).
Figure 1 summarizes QoE IF considered in twenty
selected publications described in [10].
Video content type
Video Quality
Coding parameters and components
Terminal device
QoS Mechanism
Home network characteristics
Environment
Human Factors
Time
Figure 1.
Factors influencing video QoE [10].
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-528-9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

It should be noted that QoE, in contrast to QoS, is
subjective in nature and involves context and potentially
specific user expectations of “soft” nature, which might not
be directly expressed as values of parameters.
In theory, the QoE for a given application is a function of
the network QoS parameters, but its discovery might be
difficult
due
to
complexity
of
a
service
delivery
environment. Such perspective makes QoE a challenging
issue and calls for individual treatment of each category of
service together with its delivery infrastructure. These new
areas emerged due to developments in networking: 5G,
Future Internet, media: High Definition (HD) voice, Ultra-
and Super Ultra HD (UHD/SUHD) video, services and
applications: IP TV, VoD, YouTube, Vimeo, Netflix, mobile
gaming, and paradigm shift taking advantage of new
concepts and approaches such as SDN, NFV, Cloud
Computing (CC) and Self Organizing Networks (SON).
The paper discusses the change of QoE approaches and
interpretations in context of new services and applications.
II.
QOS/QOE IN 4G
The evolution of mobile network architecture from 3G to
4G
featured
significant
change
in
QoS
mechanisms;
however, they were still a starting point for mapping to QoE.
One of the crucial changes is also common handling of voice
and data in an all IP packet network [3].
The UMTS 3G [12] defines four QoS classes differing by
traffic
delay
sensitivity:
Conversational,
Streaming,
Interactive and Background. Conversational and Streaming
classes were dedicated for real-time services like voice and
video streaming, while the other two Interactive and
Background were appropriate for best-effort services with
less stringent delay requirements (e.g. web browsing and
progressive download of video content). The UMTS High
Speed Downlink Packet Access (HSDPA) standard [20]
introduced an additional QoS control means - a Scheduling
Priority Indicator (SPI), a number from the 0-15 range,
which could be used by each nodeB for scheduling. Due to
their local character, SPIs priorities had limited applicability
from the core network perspective.
Development of 4G Long Term Evolution (LTE) standard
[21] assumed delivery of real-time, multimedia services with
support for appropriate levels of QoE [4]. It introduced a
QoS-aware mechanism for end-to-end service delivery based
on Evolved Packet System (EPS) bearers and Quality of
Service Class Identifiers (QCIs). The end-to-end QoS is
established from User Equipment (UE) to the Packet Data
Network Gateway (PDN-GW) in a core network using
bearer service which provides the QoS level of granularity
for different service flows. EPS bearer QoS profiles include
following
parameters:
QCI,
Allocation
and
Retention
Priority (ARP), Guaranteed Bit Rate (GBR), and Maximum
Bit Rate (MBR). The QCI is a number from the 1-8 range
used to control bearer level packet handling in scheduling
and admission control. Two categories of QCIs are defined:

Guaranteed Bit Rate (GBR) for applications such as
conversational
voice,
video
streaming,
buffered
streaming
and
real
time
gaming,
with
QoS
constraints to be observed;

Non-Guaranteed
Bit
Rate
(Non-GBR)
for
applications
such as voice, video, TCP based
applications and IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS)
signaling, with no QoS constraints.
The 4G LTE bearer centric QoS architecture has a
constraint. It is not able to differentiate traffic flows that are
served by the same EPS bearer unless dedicated EPS bearers
are used for different traffic flows. It means that different
traffic flows of the same service which needs better level of
QoE/QoS may not differ in 5-tuple (source IP address,
destination
IP
address,
source
port,
destination
port,
protocol), identifying packets associated with a related
unidirectional flow [12]. As a consequence, though there is
rich support for QoS LTE there still a need for extra
resources
to
deliver
an
intended
QoE
for
real-time
applications. In case of video services using GBR or QoS to
give priority for forwarding of video related packets will
improve QoE but at the same time will deteriorate quality of
best effort data traffic. Moreover, diverse user devices with
different screen sizes and resolutions, i.e., tablets and
smartphones, but in the same radio conditions, should be
treated individually.
III.
QOS/QOE IN 5G
Forthcoming 5G network makes a great step forward in
comparison to 4G, in terms of speed (1-10 Gbps), extremely
low latency (1 ms round trip time), base station capacity,
longer battery life, availability (99.999%) and perceived
quality of service (QoS). All these features will also
contribute to improvement of QoE. Dominating role of
multimedia traffic with growing share of HD and UHD video
[1] will broaden a list of factors to be considered in the
context of QoE. This in turn will make QoS to QoE mapping
even more complex. There is also another dimension of
complexity for QoS and QoE. Implementation of 5G
networks will be based on the concepts of SDN and NFV
and will employ cloud computing technology.
In 5G, services may use different allocation of network
functions in Radio Access Network (RAN) and Core
Network (CN) both for user (u-) and control (c-) plane
according to required QoS/QoE needs. This capability and
decoupling of control and data plane in SDN provides
flexibility alleviating improvement of QoE [15][16].
In 5G NORMA project [19], SDN technology is used to
implement a prototype of virtualized QoS/QoE mapping
functions using open interfaces and flexible selection of
functional blocks to integrate specific requirements for each
user. Such solution will provide network programmability
capabilities allowing third parties, e.g., virtual operators to
set-up their specific QoS/QoE control strategies. It will
enable support of fully dynamic, context aware QoE/QoS
management capable to dynamically set QoS/QoE target
based on detected application flows of the end users and
adapt the end-to-end resource allocation and the data plane
functions accordingly.
CC technology used for 5G architecture will also enable
applying of Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) concept to
implement QoE by making caching/replacement decisions
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-528-9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

based on both content context (e.g., segment popularity) and
network context (e.g., RAN downlink throughput).
IV.
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN QOS AND QOE
A generic relationship between QoS and QoE defines
three zones (Figure 2) and is described by (1). For QoS
disturbance
from
Zone
1,
QoE
has
a
high
value,
representing the fact that user’s appreciation is not affected.
When the QoS deteriorates and disturbance reaches Zone 2
the QoE decreases. Finally, when the QoS disturbance
grows and reaches Zone 3, the QoE may cause user
abandons a service because of its unsatisfactory quality.
Generally, when the QoS disturbance parameter increases,
the QoE metric and user’s perception of quality decrease
[6]. Getting insight into the nature of the relationship
between QoS and QoE, and understanding it to a level
enabling control over QoE is still a research topic.
Figure 2.
Generic mapping curve between QoS and QoE [6].
QoE = α exp (β – QoS) + γ 
(1)
where α, β, γ, x1 and x2 are configurable positive value
parameters. Usually QoS is calculated by taking into
consideration four generic criteria: availability, reliability,
delay and capacity. These four criteria are independent of
context and in practice are represented by parameters
relevant and specific for a case (e.g. round trip delay, jitter,
packet loss rate, bit error rate, throughput, bandwidth, etc.).
The above formula represents an objective approach to QoE
known as "IQX hypothesis" which is typically used to
estimate the QoE for VoIP services and web browsing [6]. It
expresses QoE as an exponential function of the QoS
degradation. Its weaknesses are:

Doubts concerning values of parameters which
might be relevant only for specific use cases;

Neglecting the actual end users’ opinions.
Their
perspective
is
taken
into
consideration
by
subjective
metrics
of
QoE,
which
are
based
on
psychoacoustic/visual
experiments
with
human
users.
Historically, the most important and the oldest metric for
assessment of perceived service quality or human perception
is the Mean Opinion Score (MOS) with a five quality levels
(from 5=excellent to 1=bad) Absolute Category Rating
(ACR) defined by ITU-T Rec. P.800. Despite criticism for
being too simplistic, it is still very popular not only for
voice but also for multimedia services (e.g., UHD TV) [5].
The drawbacks of MOS method are complexity and costs.
Evolution of video quality assessment methods and issues
of QoS/QoE mapping are discussed in detail in [4][8]. Table
I presents video QoE standards developed by ITU-T and
Video Quality Experts Group (VQEG) [22].
TABLE I.
VIDEO QOE STANDARDS [22][8]
Image
res..
Subjective
estimation
Full
reference
Non Reference
Reduced
Reference
SDTV
HDTV
ITU-R:
BT.500
ITU-T:
J.140,
J.245
ITU-T:
J.144
J.341
ITU-T:
P.1201,
P.1202,
G.1071
VQEG:
RRNR-TV,
HDTV
ITU-T:
J.147,
J.249
J.342
VGA
CIF
QCIF
ITU-T:
P.910,
P.911
ITU-T:
J.247
VQEG:
MM Project
ITU-T:
J.246
Subjective methods have been studied for many years and
have enabled researchers and operators to get better
understanding of the subjective aspects of QoE. Typically,
the results of subjective experiment are quality ratings
obtained from users during use of the service (in-service) or
after service use (out-of-service), which are then averaged
into MOSs and extended to other ITU standard-based
subjective assessment procedures classified by type of
application and media (Table I).
Several models were proposed for QoS/QoE mapping
[7]-[11]. A comprehensive discussion can be found in [13]
and [18].
V.
CONCLUSIONS
The relationship between QoS and QoE is a challenging
task and a moving target due to: evolution of services
towards collaborative multimedia, migration of mobile
network architecture to a new 5G networking paradigm
based on virtualization, and extension of the list of QoE
influencing factors. Managing and controlling QoE is still a
research topic.
CC technology applied in 5G architecture enables usage
of Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) concept to implement
QoE by making caching/replacement decisions based on
both content context (e.g., segment popularity) and network
context (e.g., RAN downlink throughput). For this case,
mobility can be used as context information for future
location and anticipated trajectory enabling pre-caching of
content-based on user location.
Ubiquity of smartphones and tablets together with
increasing performance of networks open an opportunity for
substantial reduction of costs of conducting MOS tests by
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-528-9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

using crowdsourcing for subjective assessments of QoE of
multimedia services and applications.
Possibly new performance metrics are needed for more
appropriate evaluation of QoE/QoS of mobile web services.
Diversity of terminals that differ with resolution of screens
and other features like power consumption or supported data
rates requires separate treatment in terms of QoE. Common
performance parameters like speed in bits per second should
be replaced by screen per second in order to express
webpage delivery and display. Tests conducted by operators
revealed that there is a gap between measured QoS indicators
and user perceived experience. Large difference in network
performance
might
result
in
thin
margins
of
users’
experience as a result of complex relationship between QoS
and QoE influencing factors.
For
video,
a
natural
challenge
will
be
providing
satisfactory QoE for UHD TV content up scaled from UHD
and HD formats.
Changing
communication
landscape
calls
also
for
redefinition of traditional Service Level Agreements (SLAs)
which are closely related to both QoS and QoE. Today, QoE
models could be used as guides for setting and negotiating
proper SLAs. By analogy to the mapping between QoS and
QoE, it is worthwhile to consider an idea of Experience
Level Agreement (ELA) as a special type of SLA which
establishes a common understanding of the quality levels
that the customer will experience through the use of the
service [17].
REFERENCES
[1]
“Cisco visual networking index: Forecast and methodology,
2015-20120, 2016”.
[2]
ITU-T P.10/G.100, “Vocabulary and Effects of Transmission
Parameters on Customer Opinion of Transmission Quality,”
2008.
[3]
D. Soldani, M. Li, R. Cuny, “QoS and QoE Management in
UMTS Cellular Systems”, Wiley, 2007.
[4]
C. Wen Chen, T. Dagiuklas, P. Chatzimisios, L. Atzori,
“Multimedia Quality of Experience (QoE): Current Status and
Future Requirements”, Wiley, 2016.
[5]
A. Takahashi, D. Hands and V. Barriac, “Standardization
activities in the ITU for a QoE assessment of IPTV,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 78-84, 2008.
[6]
M. Fiedler, T. Hossfeld and P. Tran-Gia, “A Generic
Quantitative Relationship between Quality of Experience and
Quality of Service,” IEEE Network Magazine, vol. 24, no. 2,
pp. 36-41, 2010.
[7]
P. Reichl, B. Tuffin and R. Schatz, “Logarithmic laws in
service quality perception: where microeconomics meets
psychophysics
and
quality
of
experience,”
Telecommunications Systems Journal, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 587-
600, 2011.
[8]
Y. Chen, K. Wu, Q. Zhang, “From QoS to QoE: A Tutorial on
Video Quality Assessment”, IEEE Communications Surveys
& Tutorials, Vol.17(2), pp.1126-1165, 2015.
[9]
H. J. Kim, S. G. Choi, "A study on a QoS/QoE correlation
model for QoE evaluation on IPTV service", Advanced
Communication Technology (ICACT), The 12th International
Conference on, vol. 2, pp. 1377-1382, 2010.
[10] M. Alreshoodi, J. Woods, “Survey on QoE/QoS Correlation
Models For Multimedia Services,” International Journal of
Distributed and Parallel Systems (IJDPS), vol. 4, no. 3, pp.
53-72, 2013.
[11] V. Chervenets, V. Romanchuk, H. Beshley, A. Khudyy,
“QoS/QoE correlation modified model for QoE evaluation on
video service”, 13th International Conference on Modern
Problems of Radio Engineering, Telecommunications and
Computer Science (TCSET), pp. 664-666, 2016.
[12] ETSI TS 123 107, Digital cellular telecommunications system
(Phase 2+); Universal Mobile Telecommunications System
(UMTS); LTE; “Quality of Service (QoS) concept and
architecture” (3GPP TS 23.107 version 11.0.0 Release 11),
ETSI Technical Specification, 2012.
[13] P. Brooks, B. Hestnes, “User measures of quality of
experience:
why
being
objective
and
quantitative
is
important”, IEEE Network, vol.24, Issue 2, pp. 8-13, 2010.
[14] P. Le Callet, S. Möller, A. Perkis, “Qualinet White Paper on
Definitions of Quality of Experience (2012)”, European
Network on Quality of Experience in Multimedia Systems
and
Services
(COST
Action
IC
1003),
Lausanne,
Switzerland, Version 1.2, 2013.
[15] M.S. Mushtaq, S. Fowler, B. Augustin, A. Mellouk, “QoE in
5G Cloud Networks using Multimedia Services”, IEEE
Wireless
Communication
and
Networking
Conference
(WCNC’16), 2016.
[16] E. Liotou, H. Elshaer, R. Schatz, R. Irmer, M.
Dohler, N.
Passas, L. Merakos, “Shaping QoE in the 5G ecosystem, 7th
International
Workshop
on
Quality
of
Multimedia
Experience, pp.1-6, 2015.
[17] P. Reichl, P. Zwickl, A. Passarella, A. Sackl, “Economics of
QoE in the Future Internet of People (IoP)”, ETSI STQ
Workshop Vienna, 2015.
[18] S. Baraković, L. Skorin-Kapov, “Survey and Challenges of
QoE Management Issues in Wireless Networks” Journal of
Computer Networks and Communications, special issue on
”Improving QoS and QoE for Mobile Communications”,
2013.
[19] “Deliverable D5.1. Definition of connectivity and QoE/QoS
management mechanisms – intermediate report”, 5G Novel
Radio
Multiservice
adaptive
network
Architecture
(5G
NORMA) Project, 2016.
[20] 3GPP TS 25.308 “UTRA High Speed Downlink Packet
Access (HSDPA); Overall description;Stage 2”, 2001.
[21] 3GPP, “Overview of 3GPP Release 8 V0.3.3”, 2014.
[22] VQEG, https://www.its.bldrdoc.gov/vqeg/vqeg-home.aspx.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-528-9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

