A Synergistic System of Institutional Repository and Researcher Database
Kensuke Baba
Research and Development Division
Kyushu University Library
Fukuoka, 812-8581, Japan
Email: baba@lib.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Masao Mori
Institutional Research Ofﬁce
Kyushu University
Fukuoka, 812-8581, Japan
Email: mori@ir.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Eisuke Ito
Research Institute for IT
Kyushu University
Fukuoka, 812-8581, Japan
Email: itou@cc.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Abstract—The paper introduces a practical Web system
which activates institutional repositories. Institutional repos-
itory is an important service of libraries in academic institu-
tions. The authors of the paper developed a linking system be-
tween the institutional repository and the researcher database
of their university. By the developed system papers registered
in the institutional repository are linked from lists of papers
in the researcher database, which improves the accessibility of
the institutional repository. Additionally, the system reuses the
metadata of the papers registered in the researcher database
for registrations to the institutional repository, which reduces
the efforts of researchers. As a result, this system is expected
to encourage the registration of papers to the institutional
repository. The paper describes the concepts and the details of
the system. The essential idea can be applied to other academic
institutions.
Keywords-institutional repository; Web database; Open Ac-
cess; scholarly paper; library
I. INTRODUCTION
The subscriptions for electronic journals occupy a large
proportion of the budget of university libraries, which forces
researchers to make funds for the price or restrict the number
of journals to read. This is a quite unacceptable situation
for academic societies. A solution of the problem is the
idea of “Open Access [3][4]”, which is to open free-access
information to the public. Publishing of scholarly papers on
an institutional repository (IR) is one of activities based on
the idea. An increase of the papers stored in IRs is expected
to solve the problem of journal prices indirectly.
IR has been receiving increasing attention; actually 129
universities in Japan have their own IR (Aug. 12, 2010).
However, the number of the papers in the IRs is small
compared with the number of the papers actually written
by the researchers in the universities. One of the obstacles
to increase the number of papers is the fact that researchers
are forced some efforts when they register their papers (and
usually this operation is repeated when they upload the
papers on their web-site, submit a list of the papers as
a report to their institute, and so on!). Additionally, it is
difﬁcult to prove the effectiveness of IR, hence researchers
do not think that registering papers to an IR is worth their
time.
The aim of our research is to increase the number of the
papers in IRs. Then, we set the following two purposes:
• To increase the number of accesses of papers on IRs,
• To reduce the efforts for registering papers.
The ﬁrst purpose is to make clear an effectiveness of IRs.
The number of citations to the registered papers from other
papers is a measure of the effectiveness of an IR, and the
number of the accesses of a paper can be considered as a
rough upper-bound of the number of citations to the paper.
The Ranking Web of World Repositories [11], which is
provided by the Spanish Cybernetics Lab. in the Consejo
Superior de Investigationes Cient´ıﬁcas (CSIC), takes account
of the “visibility” in addition to the number of the contents.
The visibility is the total number of links from external sites.
The number of accesses of papers is expected to be improved
by links from a reasonable list such as a database or a result
of a search. As to the second purpose, the practical efforts of
registration cannot be zero, therefore it seems to be effective
that the information of a registration is shared and reused
with other systems.
For the previous two purposes, we developed a linking
system between the IR and the database of researcher
activities of Kyushu University and are operating the system
from Apr, 2010. For the ﬁrst purpose, by the linking system,
some papers in the IR are linked from a list in the researcher
database, which improves the accessibility of the IR. For the
second purpose, the information of the registered papers are
shared between the IR and the researcher database by the
linking system. In Kyushu University, any researcher has a
duty to input his/her research and education results into the
researcher database, therefore some efforts of a researcher
can be reduced. It is not special for our university that
researchers are required to register their research activity to
a researcher database and an IR. For example, the National
Academic Research and Collaborations Information System
(NARCIS) [2] in the Netherlands has been developed in
2009 in order to run a central search engine of academic
information with linking function to IR. NARCIS can be
the one-stop national service by collecting all kind of
lump academic information in the Netherlands. Our linking
system help researchers to register their articles accurately
184
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

in researcher database and IR.
This paper introduces the linking system we developed.
First, the basic information of the IR and the researcher
database are described, which makes the problems clear.
Next, the two subsystems of the linking system are ex-
plained. The subsystems correspond to the previous two
purposes, respectively. By the developed system the accessi-
bility of the IR is improved and the effort of registration to
the IR is reduced, which yields an increase of the papers
stored in the IR. The essential idea of our system can
be applied to other institutions which have their IR and
researcher database.
The rest of this paper is constructed as follows. Section II
describes the basic information and the problems in the IR
and the researcher database in Kyushu University. Section III
explains the concepts and the concrete functions of the
developed system. Section IV concludes this paper and
introduces our future work.
II. PROBLEMS
This section describes the basic information of QIR
(Kyu(Q)shu University Institutional Repository) [10] and
DHJS (Academic Staff Educational and Research Activities
Database in Kyushu University, “Daigaku Hyoka Joho Sys-
tem” in Japanese) [8], and then makes clear the problems
we tackle.
A. QIR
QIR is an IR based on DSpace [9] and operated by
the Kyushu University Library since Apr, 2006. The total
number of the contents in QIR is 13,948 (Mar. 31, 2010),
which is extremely large compared with the IRs of the
other Universities in Japan. However, in the Ranking Web of
World Repositories [11], QIR is ranked at the 88th position
(Jul, 2010). Table I shows the number of the contents in
QIR. The largest content is “Departmental Bulletin Paper”
and its ratio is about 75%. Most of QIR contents are original
(that is, unpublished). Therefore, links on Web are expected
to be an effective factor to increase the number of accesses
to contents.
Generally IR stores the full-text of a paper in addition to
the metadata of the paper such as the title, the authors, the
name of the proceedings, and so on. Figure 1 is a web image
of QIR. The page is the proﬁle page of a researcher and the
list is the result of a search of the name in the author ﬁelds.
The third column is the title of each paper and linked to
the site of detailed information of the paper with the full-
text. The rightmost column is the number of the accesses to
each paper. In addition to the search of author, it is possible
to search by general keywords in the ﬁelds of the title, the
abstract, and so on.
For researchers (at least in Kyushu University), one of the
obstacles to register their papers to IR is the fact that the
effectiveness of the registration is not clear. Watson [7] and
Table I
THE NUMBER OF THE CONTENTS IN QIR (MAR. 31, 2010).
Type
Number of Contents
Journal Article
1,142
Thesis or Dissertation
95
Departmental Bulletin Paper
10,443
Conference Paper
731
Presentation
137
Book, Chapter
95
Technical Report
395
Research Paper
105
Article
164
Preprint
146
Learning Material
32
Others
463
Total
13,948
O’Leary [5] veriﬁed the validity of electronic journals by
analyzing the relation between download history of papers
and the citations in the papers. However, as to IRs in
Japanese universities, no signiﬁcant correlation is found as
the relation [6]. The reason is considered that the number
of the registered papers and the number of the accesses
to the papers are not enough as samples to estimate some
properties statistically.
B. DHJS
Kyushu University developed a researcher database in
2005, and “DHJS” is the abbreviated name in Japanese of the
database. DHJS has various kinds of data of any researcher
in Kyushu University, for example, posts, research interests,
and scholarly papers. The number of the researchers in
Kyushu University is 2,197 at Oct. 1, 2009. DHJS consists
of the two subsystems, the data-entry system and the viewer
system. The data-entry system is developed from scratch by
Kyushu University. The viewer system uses a commercial
high-speed engine on XML as the backend search system.
The main technology of the engine was developed in Kyushu
University.
The data-entry system supports researchers to register
their research activities to DHJS. In Kyushu University, any
researcher has to register their research interests, research
activities includes the metadata of scholarly papers, and
so on. The viewer system shows the research activities
registered in DHJS by the data-entry system. The data is
separated with respect to each researcher and the registered
metadata of scholarly papers of a researcher are described
as a list.
Any researcher in Kyushu University has a duty to input
his/her research and education results into DHJS. Therefore,
DHJS has the list of (most of) the paper titles that were
produced in Kyushu University in recent years. The number
of the unique paper titles in DHJS is over 70,000. However,
QIR has only 13,948 contents as mentioned in the previous
subsection, that is, more than 56,000 papers are not uploaded
185
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

Figure 1.
The web image of a list of papers stored in QIR. This example is the result of a search of “Kensuke Baba” in the author ﬁelds.
to QIR. Therefore, there is yet room for improvement of the
number of the contents in QIR.
III. SYNERGY OF QIR AND DHJS
We developed a linking system between QIR and DHJS,
and are operating the system from Apr, 2010. This section
explains the concepts of the system and concrete functions
of the system in the two points, that is, the connections with
the data-entry system and the viewer system in DHJS.
A. Overview of System
We implemented two concepts to encourage researchers to
register their papers to QIR. One is a support for registration
to QIR by reducing the efforts of the input of the metadata of
papers. The other is an improvement of the accessibility of
the papers in QIR by linking from lists of papers in DHJS.
Figure 2 is the outline of the systems. For the former
concept, researchers can register their paper to QIR by
submitting the full-text instead of the metadata and the full-
text. Additionally, researchers can know whether each paper
is stored in QIR. As to the latter concept, users can search the
full-text of a paper at the same time they search a researcher
in DHJS in addition to search in QIR. This function should
increase the number of the accesses to papers in QIR, which
encourages researchers to register their paper.
B. Connection with Data-entry System
The linking system realizes two functions on the data-
entry system. Figure 3 is a web image of the interface of
Figure 2.
The outline of QIR, DHJS, and the linking system.
the data-entry system, especially for registration of scholarly
papers.
Firstly, by a link to the registration form of QIR, re-
searchers can register their papers on the data-entry system.
Additionally, when a researcher wants to register a paper, the
metadata of the paper is used to ﬁll the registration form. In
Figure 3, one of the icons in the rightmost row is the link to
186
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

Figure 3.
The data-entry system of DHJS connected with QIR. This example is the interface for registration of (the metadata of) scholarly papers for the
user “Kensuke Baba”.
the registration form of QIR. The interface will be improved
by Nov, 2010 so that users can upload a full-text of their
paper directly in DHJS.
Secondly, the linking system obtains from QIR
• Whether the papers of the current user (researcher) are
registered to QIR, respectively and
• The number of the registered papers of the user in QIR
and describes them on the data-entry system. In Figure 3, the
column named “QIR” means whether the user want to link
to QIR for each paper, and the next column means whether
the paper is stored in QIR (“◦” if stored). The three numbers
(with some Japanese words) on the table are, respectively,
the number of the papers registered in DHJS, the number of
the papers checked at the “QIR” column, and the number
of the papers stored in QIR. This function is expected to
encourage researchers to register by showing the current
state of their registration.
C. Connection with Viewer System
The papers which checked on the “QIR” column at
the data-entry system are linked to the full-text of the
corresponding paper in QIR by icons on the viewer system.
There exist two kinds of icons which distinguishes whether
the paper is registered in QIR. Figure 4 is the list of the
papers registered in DHJS. For each paper in the list, a
dark-colored icon “fulltextQIR” is added, a light-colored
icon “searchQIR” is added, or there is no icon. The ﬁrst
case means that there is the full-text of the paper in QIR,
the second that there is no full-text (although the researcher
wants to register), and the other that the researcher does not
want to link. In the second case, the linking system returns
the result of the search by the author name in QIR.
The numbers indexing the papers in the table in Figure 4
are the numbers in Figure 3. (The paper 3 is written in
Japanese.) You can see that the situation of the “QIR”
column and the next column in the data-entry system is
reﬂected to the icons in the viewer system.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, the linking system between the IR and the
researcher database in Kyushu University were introduced.
The system provides links from the metadata of papers in the
researcher database to the corresponding full-text in the IR.
Additionally, the system reuses the metadata of the papers
in the researcher database for registrations to the IR. By
the previous functions, the linking system is expected to
enhance the registration of papers to the IR. The concepts of
the developed system were explained generally, which leads
the idea of the system to be applicable to other academic
institutions.
It is our future work to analyze the number of the accesses
to the papers in the IR. We already analyzed the access log
of the IR from Apr, 2009 to Mar, 2010 [1], and are taking
the access log from Apr, 2010. Also we are going to verify
187
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

Figure 4.
The viewer system of DHJS connected with QIR. This example is the list of the papers of “Kensuke Baba” in DHJS.
an effectiveness of the developed system by analyzing the
number of the registrations and the ratio of the registrations
by the system. Additionally, we are planning to develop an
“embargo” system in the IR, that is, a system to manage the
exhibition of the papers on the basis of the copyrights and
the policies of publishers. The embargo system can make
more efﬁcient the operations for registrations to IRs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the staff of the Kyushu University Library,
Naomi Yoshimatsu, Nami Hoshiko, and Eriko Kudo, for
their comments about QIR and general institutional reposito-
ries. We also thank the anonymous referees for their helpful
comments to improve this work.
REFERENCES
[1] Baba, K., Ito, E., Yoshimatsu, N., and Hoshiko, N.: “An
Analysis of Validity of Institutional Repository” (in Japanese),
Proc. The Second Forum on Data Engineering and Informa-
tion Management (DEIM 2010), F7-3, 2010.
[2] Dijk, E., Baars, C., Hogenaar, A., and van Meel, M.: “NAR-
CIS: The Gateway to Dutch Scientiﬁc Information”, Proc.
ELPUB2006 Conference on Electronic Publishing, 2006.
[3] Harnad, S.: “The Green Road to Open Access: A Leveraged
Transition”, The Culture of Periodicals from the Perspective
of the Electronic Age, L’Harmattan, pp. 99–105, 2007.
[4] Harnad, S., Brody, T., Vallieres, F., Carr, L., Hitchcock, S.,
Gingras, Y, Oppenheim, C., Stamerjohanns, H., and Hilf, E.:
“The Access/Impact Problem and the Green and Gold Roads
to Open Access”, Serials Review 30, 2004.
[5] O’Leary, D. E.: “The relationship between citations and num-
ber of downloads in Decision Support Systems”, Decision
Support Systems, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 972–980, 2008.
[6] Sato,
S.,
Tomimoto,
H.,
and
Itsumura,
H.:
“The
Relationship
between
Citations
and
Number
of
Downloads
in
Institutional
Repositories”
(in
Japanese),
http://www.tulips.tsukuba.ac.jp/dspace/handle/2241/104229
(Aug. 12, 2010).
[7] Watson, B. A.: “Comparing citations and downloads for indi-
vidual articles”, A Journal of scientiﬁc research on biological
vision, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1–4, 2009.
[8] DHJS:
Academic
Staff
Educational
and
Research
Ac-
tivities
Database
(“Daigaku
Hyoka
Joho
System”
in
Japanese) in Kyushu University, http://hyoka.ofc.kyushu-
u.ac.jp/search/index e.html (Aug. 12, 2010).
[9] DSpace, http://www.dspace.org/ (Aug. 12, 2010).
[10] QIR:
Kyu(Q)shu
University
Institutional
Repository,
https://qir.kyushu-u.ac.jp/dspace/ (Aug. 12, 2010).
[11] Ranking
Web
of
World
Repositories,
http://repositories.webometrics.info/ (Aug. 12, 2010).
188
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

