Integrated e-Services in Public Sector
Seppo J. Sirkemaa
28120 Pori, Finland
seppo.johan@gmail.com
Abstract— The use of Internet is increasing in all areas. It is
still noteworthy that development of electronic services in
public sector has not been as rapid as in the area of e-business.
From citizens point of view it would be important to allow
access to services and public decision making through the
Internet. Electronic services have significant potential, but they
may also transform structures in public organizations. Here,
we look at the development of electronic services in public
sector organizations. In the public sector these services are
called e-Services when they are made accessible to the users
through Internet. The development of e-Services face a
number of challenges – it is not an easy to realize the potential
of technology. Could experiences from e-business development
be used in public sector? The potential benefits are almost
identical, however in public sector there are administrative
and departmental barriers that need to be crossed in order to
create value to the user of electronic services.
Keywords- e-Services; Internet; development; public sector;
e-business
I.
INTRODUCTION
Internet makes it possible to provide services in a new
way, making it possible to create added value to the user. At
the same time organizations may re-organize and streamline
their processes. The idea in services that are built on top of
Internet is anywhere, anytime – but is this the case in
services provided by public sector?
In private sector information technology, Internet-based
applications and technologies are used widely in e-business
applications. In the public sector electronic services are
referred to as e-Services, which relate to services that public
organizations provide. The term e-Services is further defined
as interactive, content-centered services are accessed through
the Internet [19], [20].
It has been noted that public sector needs to move from
paper to electronic correspondence, and from this toward a
self-service model where citizens can get the answers and
make transactions through the Internet [1].
However, in
public sector the goal is not only to move forms and services
provided by different departments to Internet, it is more a
question of developing one-stop government solutions [13],
[8].
A.
Goals and structure of the paper
In this paper, we look at development of electronic
services to users of public information systems. The focus is
on the challenges facing development of electronic services
in public sector organizations face. It is an environment
which calls for cooperation of various departments and
functions, and interaction between service providers, experts
and other stakeholders. The question of interest is what
makes providing electronic services in public sector so
different from development of e-business applications in
private companies. Another goal is to better understand why
some development projects in the area of electronic services
are successful and others fail.
II.
ELECTRONIC SERVICES IN PRIVATE SECTOR
The development of electronic services in public sector
organizations has been relatively slow [9], [16]. This is
interesting, because it seems clear that also public sector
would benefit from electronic access to services [27]. It is
not surprising that there is pressure and an increasing
demand for development of e-Services in public sector. Let
us look closer at development of e-business applications
provided by companies in order to better understand the
existing potential.
Internet is changing the way products and services can be
marketed, delivered and purchased. With e-business small-
and medium sized companies can compete globally. From
the business owners perspective there are several targets
when moving activities to the Internet, serving customers on
a 24 / 7 –basis and global reach are the most significant
issues 
that 
prompt 
the 
development 
of 
e-business
applications [20].
The most significant benefits of e-business are connected
to transactions and communication [6]. Internet lowers
transaction-related costs for both buyers and sellers.
Companies can change prices on-line when raw-material
costs change, for example. At the same time buyers have
access to up-to-date prices directly from their terminals -
most online shoppers use comparison-shopping engines [17].
Through Internet we may as consumers gather background
information on competing products and services, compare
and purchase things without the need to leave home – safe
and easy.
In Internet, the concept of service is inextricably linked to
e-business applications and the types of services there are in
e-business environment [23]. Here, self service is typical;
users have learned to help themselves in finding information
and buying products. In e-business it is common that
customers who make the reservations over the Internet, for
example, receive a rebate or discount coupons that they can
use when shopping again in the future. The goal is to
develop lock-in, and push the customers to using services
that are available on the Internet. The customers can do e-
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2
p
g

shopping whenever it best suites them, they don’t need to
wait on phone, for example. At the same time self-service
frees staff from answering customer calls to more productive
work. The question here is that why could not public sector
organizations use similar techniques in order to promote e-
Services and ”locking” citizens.
One of the key drivers in e-business is that Internet
makes it possible to increase company’s efficiency and
effectiveness [20]. Internet allows restructuring of processes
which results better profitability - these are important issues
for all companies, and are motivators for development in the
public sector as well. Even though goals, ethics and values
may slightly differ business-like performance measurement
and orientation
has been evolving in public sector
organizations as well [18], [24].
III.
ELECTRONIC SERVICES IN PUBLIC SECTOR
There is an almost infinite potential in development of
electronic services in the public sector. Typically, services
that are provided through the Internet are connected to
sharing information. Public sector services are mostly
connected to information – and Internet is a very efficient
way to gather and share it. We argue here that developers of
public sector e-Services should do more than they have done
so far. Let us look at the situation in Finland.
A.
Case Study: Finland
There is a clear need to develop electronic services in
public sector, in municipalities and cities. This is the case in
Finnish cities and municipalities which were studied in
December 2009 [26]. In this study, altogether 304 key
persons from 191 cities and municipalities answered the
questionnaire (about 3/4 of all cities and municipalities in
Finland). Geographically the answers cover 62 % of the total
inhabitants of Finland, and so the results reveal the national
situation in the area of electronic services.
In Finland, it is expected that electronic services will
bring added value in the public organization in management
and increase efficiency in internal processes, and in specific
in core processes [26]. Persons who answered believe that
there will be more multi-channeled solutions, and integrated
services 
that 
cross 
internal 
organizational 
borders.
Furthermore, it is expected that the burden of administrative
work will decrease because of streamlined processes and
electronic services. From the citizens perspective electronic
services are expected to allow better access to public
services. It is likely that the number of available services will
increase as the demand is rising. On the other hand, citizens
are expected to use access and use electronic services so that
investments made in the development make sense.
The current situation in the area of electronic services
could be better [26]. It has been noted that there are
relatively few e-Services; they are not integrated across
administrative offices or even between departments within
one single office. There is no common interface, citizen’s
login or similar standards at the moment in Finland. Clearly,
there is work to be done here.
B.
Better integration and services needed
Public administration is full of administrative jargon and
official pseudonyms, which are likely to be transferred to
web when they have been digitized. The whole structure of
the web-sites is based on different agencies, departments and
units (stovepipe-structure) rather than integrated portals [1].
In addition, the sites are often relatively unfriendly and there
are no comprehensive search-engines that would make it
easier to find information from the site, for example. It is
often noticed that people send lot of email to public
administration. This is because it is easier to ask than try to
figure out what agency to contact and how to proceed. In this
way poorly designed Internet site can easily increase the
burden of the staff in public sector organizations when the
amount of incoming email queries go up. This should
indicate that existing service through the Internet needs to be
developed.
Electronic services should be integrated, enhance self-
service and trust so that users see the added value of
electronic services. Technologically, users should be able to
complete most of their transactions online. Here easy-to-use,
robust and trustworthy services are needed so that more users
start using e-Services in public sector.
Electronic services need to be developed around user
needs. Transferring existing papers, files and information
from different agencies into web, and placing some
hyperlinks between them is not enough. As Löfstedt [25]
noted
“..it is about reinventing the way in which
governments interact with citizens, governmental agencies,
businesses, employees, and other stakeholders.”
IV.
CHALLENGES IN DEVELOPMENT
Usually, the development involves cooperation of several
people. Especially in development of electronic services like
one-stop government services there is a need to combine
resources and expertise from different sources.  This means
that people from various functions, units and locations are
brought together, and also outside expertise is needed.
Hence, development can be seen as a partnership.
The definition of partnership ranges from working
relationships to active transactions and collaboration between
organizations. 
Different 
types 
of 
joint 
ventures,
subcontracting, alliances and acquisitions are included in
partnership arrangements. In a partnership actors learn to
know each other in the long run. Often relationships are
relatively intensive and even personal. In business
relationships competence and goodwill are needed for trust
to develop [4]. The important issue here is that partnerships
are based on commitment to cooperation. In this context the
term partnerships includes inter-organizational cooperation –
which is needed in development of e-Services [13].
In the public sector, initiatives where services cross
departmental boundaries organizational cooperation are a
challenge. In most projects there are often external
organizations, IT expertise and special skills that are needed.
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2
p
g

Cooperation of several partners, units and stakeholders can
become a barrier for projects that involve several
organizations. Development is often faced with the fact that
stakeholders act too independently, because projects tend to
be poorly coordinated [12].
The lack of alignment between organizational goals is
put forward as a major factor in the set of organizational and
managerial challenges. Furthermore, the size of project and
the diversity of users and different organizations involved
make the development work more demanding. Dawes and
Pardo [5] also address the existence of multiple and partially
conflicting goals in public sector projects involving several
stakeholders. In inter-organizational projects there is a built-
in delay as a result of inadequate organizational cooperation
[13].  They (ibid.) identify six areas which cause failures and
delays in development of electronic services. The first key
area is lack of organizational cooperation. The second key
area is missing legal regulations and the third is that
necessary pre-conditions in regard to technology are not met.
The fourth key area is human factors, skills and resources.
The last obstacles (or first) in development are result of
inadequate funding and political support.
Figure 1. Barriers in development of electronic services
Gil-García and Pardo [7] found that challenges to various
e-government initiatives are cross disciplinary and may be
grouped into five categories: (1) information and data, (2) IT,
(3) organizational and managerial, (4) legal and regulatory,
and (5) institutional and environmental. Information and data
(first category) covers the capturing, management, use,
dissemination, and sharing of information. In this category
the developers also need to address data quality and data
accuracy as well as dynamic, changing information needs.
Information technology (second category) refers to issues
like technological incompatibility and complexity, security,
usability, technical skills and experience, and technological
newness which all present challenges for development and
use of services. Organizational and managerial issues (third
category) are the main challenges to information systems
development [7].  It is clear that laws and regulations must
be taken into account when developing electronic services
(fourth category). The institutional and environmental
challenges (last category) are result of the institutional
framework in which public organizations. The framework
also includes the existing policy environment.
V.
FOCUSING ON SERVICES
We have looked at development of electronic services
and the challenges that this involves. The focus has been on
services in the public sector, and they have been mapped
against commercial e-business services. In this context
interplay of several units, functions and organizations is
needed
–
especially 
if the provided services
are
sophisticated, and providing users one-stop government e-
Services [1], [2], [25].
The development of electronic services - or information
technology in general - requires connecting technologies and
applications in order to provide solutions for users. There is a
variety 
of 
underlying 
information 
infrastructures,
applications and services that may be owned, maintained or
developed by organizations from private or public sector [2],
[22]. Similarly, development of e-Services is a combination
of expertise and effort from people in the organization and
from external environment.
The types of electronic services vary greatly in public
sector. It is natural to expect that services are integrated into
processes and information systems of the organization that
provides them. However, in public sector organizations it is
common that departments and units provide services to
citizens rather independently. Departments have different
processes and information systems, which are not connected.
In many cases information is stored in separate databases.
This may be enough when services are oriented to
information delivery between the public administration and
the 
citizens. 
For 
example, 
providing 
downloadable
documents and forms is simply offering documents in
electronic format and making them accessible through the
Internet.
Over time more services are developed, more features are
added to existing services, and more enhanced, transactional
services are developed [23], [1], [3]. This is challenging as
when services become more sophisticated the overall
complexity increases. It has been noted that moving to
services that are transactional is a big step
[10].
Transactional services require connectivity, information in
other systems and data-bases needs to be accessed, combined
and updated from users’ interface through the web. This is
challenging from the information systems viewpoint as the
situation calls for connecting originally separate systems
which may be based on different software and database
structures.
Cooperation is a challenge for management of the
development of electronic services. It is not uncommon that
managers 
find 
themselves 
making 
decisions 
about
Lack of organizational cooperation
Missing legal regulations
Technological incompatibilies
Staff resources and skills inadequate
Funding inadequate
No political support
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2
p
g

technology for which they are unprepared or even ill-
equipped [7]. Successful development of electronic services
calls also for top management commitment, linkage to
business, technical alignment, knowledgeable personnel and
involvement of users [28].
The success of electronic services depends on whether
users find them valuable and start using them.  In e-business
solutions it has been found that sites need to be both easy to
use and add value to the user, these are key attributes that
increase the use of services [11], [14], [15]. The added value
lies in properties as “time-saving”, “range of options” and
“ease of use” [23]. The web sites should also provide
enjoyable experiences; these kinds of sites will probably be
visited also in the future [21].
VI.
CONCLUSION
There is an almost infinite potential in development of
electronic services in the public sector. Typically, services
that are provided through the Internet are connected to
sharing information. Public sector services are mostly
connected to information – and Internet is a very efficient
way to gather and share it. Technologically, users should be
able to complete most of their transactions online. Here easy-
to-use, robust and trustworthy services are needed so that
more users start using e-Services in public sector. As long as
there are citizens that do not use electronic services
organizations must to provide services electronically and as a
traditional service – the result is increased costs instead of
cost savings [22].
The developers of e-Services need to better understand
users of public services. Clearly, the citizens should not have
to surf the Internet and try to find different services that are
spread all over. Better integrated, portal-type sites would
make it possible to find relevant information effortlessly.
This involves integration of services that are generated in
separate offices, departments and units [1], [2]. For example,
too often agencies provide information only from their
“own” services and activities. Instead, information should be
widely available so that users would not have to guess or
know what other related information and services there are
so that users could better have their problems solved.
Services should also include information, advice and links
that are not provided by the agency itself. There is a need
“…to approach the Web with a philosophy of helping users
solve problems, not merely delivering their same old services
through new medium” [1].
It is very important to look at services from user’s
perspective – whether they are connected to e-business or
public services. When compared to e-business applications
there are several shortcomings in e-Services [27]. The most
obvious is that services should be presented in an integrated
way so that they are easy to find, understand and use. Sites
should also be trustworthy which increases the use of
services. Services could enhance self-service which reduces
the workload in the public administration, and may be seen
positive from the user perspective. Citizens may have their
application filled anytime, anywhere; for example, it is an
added value of electronic services. If services are based on
existing 
departments, 
administrative 
procedures 
and
processes it may not be able to provide added value to the
user. There is a need to do things differently, cross
boundaries and redesign processes when designing e-
Services. 
The 
work 
of 
developing 
and 
rebuilding
government for the digital age is just beginning [1].
REFERENCES
[1]
R. D. Atkinson and A. Leigh, “Customer-oriented E-Government:
Can We Ever Get There?” Journal of Political Marketing, 2 (¾),
2003, pp. 159-181.
[2]
A. Ancarani, “Towards quality e-service in the public sector: The
evolution of web sites in the local public service sector.” Managing
Service Quality, Vol. 15, No. 1, 2005, pp. 6-23.
[3]
M.
Asgarkhani,
“The Effectiveness of e-Service in Local
Government: A Case Study”, The Electronic Journal of e-
Government, Vol.3, No 4, 2005, pp. 157-166.
[4]
K. Blomqvist, Partnering in the Dynamic Environment: The Role of
Trust in Asymmetric Technology Partnership Formation. Acta
Universitatis Lappeenrantaensis 122, 2002.
[5]
S. S., Dawes and T. A. Pardo, “Building collaborative digital
government systems”, In: McIver, W.J. & Elmagarmid, A.K. (Eds.)
Advances in digital government. Technology, human factors, and
policy. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, 2002.
[6]
A.
Dutta
and 
R.
Roy,
“Anticipating 
Internet 
diffusion.”
Communications of the ACM, (2), 2003, pp. 66-71.
[7]
J. R. Gil-García and T. A. Pardo, “E-government success factors:
Mapping practical tools to theoretical foundations.” Government
Information Quarterly (22), 2005, pp. 187-216.
[8]
D. Gouscos, M. Lambrou, G. Mentzas, and P. Georgiadis, “A
Methodological Approach for Defining One-Stop e-Government
Service Offerings.” Proceedings of Electronic Government, Second
International Conference, 2003, pp. 173-176.
[9]
H. Hasan and H. R. Tibbits, “Strategic management of electronic
commerce: an adaptation of the balanced scorecard,” Internet
research: Electronic Networking Applications and Policy, Vol. 10,
No. 5, 2000, pp. 439-450.
[10] M. Howard, “e-Government across the Globe: how Will ”e” Change
Government?” Government Finance Review, August, 2001.
[11] M. Igbaria, J. Iivari, and H. Maragahh, “Why do individuals use
computer technology?” Information and Management, 29(5), 1995,
pp. 227-238.
[12] Z. Irani, P. E. D. Love, and A. Montazemi, “E-government: past,
present and future.” European Journal of Information Systems. 16,
2007, pp. 103-105.
[13] H. Kubicek and M. Hagen, “One Stop Government in Europe: An
Overview.” In Hagen, M., Kubicek, H. (Eds. 2000). One Stop
Government in Europe. Results from 11 National Surveys. University
of Bremen, Bremen 2000, pp. 1- 36.
[14] M. K. Lee and E. Turban, E. “A Trust model of consumer Internet
shopping.” International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 6(1), 2001,
pp. 75-91.
[15] K-S. Lim, J-S. Lim, and J. H. Heinrichs, “Testing an Integrated
Model of E-Shopping Web Site Usage.” Journal of Internet
Commerce, Vol 7(3), 2008, pp. 291-312.
[16] R. McIvor, M. Mchugh, and C. Cadden, “Internet technologies
supporting transparency in the public sector.” The International
Journal of Public Sector Management, Vol. 15, No. 3, 2002, pp. 170-
187.
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2
p
g

[17] S. Mulpuru, “Topic overview: US online retail. Forrester Research.”
2007.
Available from
http://www.forrester.com/go?docid=41752
Accessed 26th August 2010.
[18] A. M. Parhizgari and G. R. Gilbert, “Measures of organizational
effectiveness: private and public sector performance.” Omega, 32(3),
2004.
[19] R. T. Rust, P. K. Kannan, and N. Peng, “The Customer Economics of
Internet Privacy.” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol
30, No 4, 2002, pp. 455-464.
[20] R. T. Rust and P. K. Kannan, “E-service: A New Paradigm for
Business in the Electronic Environment,” Communications of the
ACM, Vol 43, No. 6, 2003, pp. 37-42.
[21] R. A. Shang, Y. C. Chen, and L. Shen, “Extrinsic versus intrinsic
motivations for consumers to shop on-line.” Information and
Management, 42(3), 2005, pp. 401-413.
[22] B. Sundgren, “What is a Public Information System?” International
Journal of Public Information Systems, Vol 2005:1, 2005, pp. 81-99.
[23] K. de Ruyter, M. Wetzels, and M. Kleijnen, “Customer adoption of e-
service: an experimental study.” International Journal of Service
Industry Management, Vol 12, No 2, 2001, pp. 184-207.
[24] Z. Van Der Wal, L. Huberts, H. Van Den Heuvel, and E. Kolthoff,
“Central Values of Government and Business: Differences,
Similarities and Conflicts.” Public Administration Quarterly, 30(3),
2006.
[25] U. Löfstedt, “E-government – Assessment of currentr research and
some proposals for Future Directions.” International Journal of Public
Information Systems, vol 2005:1, 2005, pp. 39-52.
[26] KuntaIT, “National Survey of Electronic Services in Finland.”
Ministry 
of
the 
Interior, 
Finland, 
2009
(available 
from
http://www.kuntait.fi/Kuvat/KuntaIT_kysely_joulukuu 2009.pdf
).
Accessed 26th August 2010.
[27] M. A. Ward, “Information Systems Technologies: A Public-Private
Sector Comparison.” Journal of Computer Information Systems.
Spring, 2006, pp. 50-56.
[28] J. Ho and T. A. Pardo, “Toward the Success of eGovernment
Initiatives: Mapping Known Success Factors to the Design of
Practical Tools.” Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International
Conference on System Science, 2004. IEEE.
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2
p
g

