Community-Commerce Brokering Arena for Opportunistic Cloud Services 
Offerings 
Ethan Hadar 
CA Technologies, Inc. 
Herzelia, Israel 
ethan.hadar@ca.com 
Steven Greenspan 
CA Technologies, Inc. 
Ewing, New Jersey, USA 
steven.greenspan@ca.com
 
 
Abstract—Community clouds are formed when a cloud 
infrastructure is created to support the needs of multiple, 
independent service consumers that have shared concerns.  
Such infrastructures may allow member organizations to share 
resources on an opportunistic basis, i.e., one entity may 
provide services to the other members during off-peak times, 
and may in turn consume services from other members.  Thus 
each member provides permanent or transient services 
according to their competencies and excess. This paper sets 
forth a conceptual architecture, examines the opportunities 
offered by such systems, and initiates a conversation on the 
business 
implications. 
Community-commerce 
brokering 
expands the choices for business from “where can I buy/use a 
service” to “whom do I want to sell my excess services to”. 
Keywords 
- 
Cloud 
computing; 
community 
clouds; 
clearinghouse 
services; 
brokering 
services, 
community-
commerce; service-oriented business ecosystems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Cloud Computing (Specifically, Infrastructure-as-a-
Service and Software-as-a-Service) offers valuable delivery 
methods that allow large enterprises to provide specialized 
and non-specialized services to others. Specialized services 
might be: mortgages, human resources, healthcare and 
insurance, etc. Non-Specialized services might be – utility 
computing (storage and computing power), or commodity 
services such as e-mail.  In addition, many enterprises have 
engineered their internal networks to accommodate peaks in 
service consumption for particular Information Technology 
(IT) services.  Some of these companies have considered 
offering core competencies to other enterprises, for a fee, but 
they may also wish to provide, for a fee, underutilized 
storage and processing assets.  Moreover, some group of 
independent companies may wish to provide services that 
work in combination with one another, each company 
providing a service appropriate to their competencies, 
establishing a Community-Commerce brokering system or 
“c-commerce” [3][6]. 
However, these companies may not want to offer services 
to competitors or the general public, for competitive and 
security reasons.  Instead, they may wish to form consortia in 
which resources are shared on an opportunistic basis, within 
a community cloud framework.  Such consortia have been 
called Service-Oriented Business Ecosystems (SOBE) [4][7].  
For example, companies increasingly engage in open-
innovation networks that require secure sharing of data and 
computing resources. Other companies may require 
sophisticated supply chain integration or the sharing data and 
domain-specific, proprietary software under highly specific 
policy and regulatory regimes [7].  Companies in a region 
that has high bandwidth within then region might form a 
SOBE because they cannot depend on global connectivity. 
Or, noncompeting companies may wish to pool resources so 
that the net cost of additional resources (as might happen in 
cloud bursting) is very low. Tai et al. [7] illustrate the value 
of SOBEs using the pharmaceutical discovery process. 
This position paper discusses SOBEs that have agreed to 
share IT resources with appropriate constraints and Service 
Level Agreements (SLAs).  However, this type of inter-
enterprise or inter-agency cooperation has problems as well 
as benefits.  The key benefits over and above the public 
cloud are that it leverages current assets and continues many 
of the roles and responsibilities of the current enterprise IT 
organization. Within a SOBE, trust among providers and 
consumers can be expected to be higher than in the public 
marketplace of cloud services, however trust must still be 
sustained though appropriate incentives and heuristics such 
as those found in [7]. Many additional problems present 
themselves in an ecosystem of interlocking internal clouds.  
Although collaborating companies want to increase IT 
utilization when they are not using these resources, yet they 
also want to ensure that they have the resources they need for 
critical business processes and for their peak usage.  Many of 
the concepts developed for Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Grids are 
applicable here [1], except that they reformulated within a 
SOBE cloud with strong privacy guarantees, membership 
services, etc. Unlike [2], the ecosystem that we explore 
requires a brokering system; the incentives are not 
necessarily maximizing profits by providing more services 
within the SOBE to other SOBE members, but may also 
include the equitable sharing of resources to maximize 
profits from customers outside of the commerce-community.  
Hence, commerce-community members are exchanging 
services with one another, but are also selling services 
outside of the commerce-community. 
Our position paper presents a conceptual brokering 
approach to c-commerce, where the system enables and 
facilitates new ad-hoc possibilities for providing and 
consuming IT services. Participating in the c-commerce 
arena, service providers may offer services opportunistically, 
as they become available.  These services are not part of their 
core business, but shared among businesses within the c-
commerce consortia on an opportunistic basis.  For example,  
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

one company within a commerce-community might provide 
a payroll service they have developed, but consume the risk 
assessment 
service 
of 
another 
commerce-community 
member.  To motivate future research in this area, this paper 
first describes a conceptual model for supporting c-
commerce brokering, then discusses a prototypical usage 
pattern.  This is followed by an examination of the 
advantages of the proposed system, and concludes with a 
discussion of the community-commerce concept and future 
research directions. 
II. 
CONCEPTUAL ARCHITECTURE OF THE SYSTEM 
The conceptual brokering system displayed in Figure 1, 
conducts matchmaking between potential service providers 
and requestors, and facilitates the negotiations between the 
sides. 
The 
central 
system 
has 
several 
conceptual 
components: 
An Opportunistic Services Registration component 
enables IT service providers to offer active or dormant 
services, as well as acknowledge the provisioning of a 
specific service to a specific consumer.  The registration 
component can block consumers that do not act according to 
agreed-upon commitments, e.g., not paying fees on time. 
An Opportunistic Subscription Component allows 
consumers to view existing active services and inactive ones, 
as well as their underlying specifications and details. The 
component enables the requestors to register for the services, 
and even register for several alternative services according to 
preference and a set of subscription rules, such as time of 
day, signaling bandwidth, distance, etc.  The subscription 
component can block providers who routinely fail to meet 
SLAs and other agreed upon commitments. 
A Match-making Component balances the offered 
services and requests (requirements), and notifies providers 
about potential consumers (while collecting match-making 
fee). 
The Analytics Engine generates historical demand and 
offerings lists, and identifies, according to classifications, 
trends in potential services that the broker is involved with. 
The Demand Generation Engine is used in case the 
match-making component cannot accommodate a match 
according to the consumer’s criteria. This component notifies 
the providers of a need (new requirements that may be 
addressed with other services that they offer) 
The Billing and Account Payable Component bills 
both the providers and consumers, with the overall charges 
or revenue, in a monthly account. The costs of the services 
are collected by the broker, and transferred on a periodic 
basis from overall consumers to overall providers. If the 
provider is a consumer of other services as well, the broker 
will pay or collect the net difference. The payment schedule 
is determined by the contractual agreements between the 
broker and the subscribers (net-consumers or net-providers).   
Notably, a single broker may handle payment arrangements 
for many different consortia.  
In addition to the main brokering system, there are 
interaction modules for service providers and requestors: 
One 
interaction 
module 
is 
the 
Provider 
Side 
Opportunistic system that contains the IT provider’s 
Opportunistic Provisioning Adapter. This adapter enables 
the IT provider to publish the potential services offerings 
(what), as well as their provisioning date (when) to potential 
consumers. When a potential service is not publically 
available (even for a limited time), it is denoted as dormant 
(or inactive) service and can be published without any 
Figure 1: Conceptual architecture of a community-commerce brokering system 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

availability options. When a dormant service is allocated for 
a consumer, the provider will send a token that will indicate 
the identity of the requested service, its duration, its 
availability time, and the consumer’s identity. 
IT providers Opportunistic Notification Adapter 
enables the IT providers to be notified that a request may 
match a potential offering that is not “Active”. When the 
requestor of a service acknowledges the offering of a 
dormant service (tailored just for this specific consumer), the 
approval and handshake of the negotiated service is send via 
this adapter as well.  
A second interaction module is the Requestor 
(Consumer) Side opportunistic system. This system 
enables the requestor of services to subscribe to services 
registered in the brokering system. The requestors can define 
criteria for the services, and the component presents an 
acceptance approval for offered potential alternatives for 
final selections, if exists. 
The Services connectivity component is identical for 
both service providers and consumers. It provides activation 
codes to service requestors that indicate billing, or provides 
activation codes to providers that indicate payments. 
 
A. Prototypical usage pattern 
The service provider offers an active service (description, 
availability time, and cost, etc.), or offers a dormant one, and 
publishes the offering to the brokering system. The brokering 
system registers the offering in the match-making 
component. 
A requestor (potential consumer) browses the offered 
services in the Match-Making component (active or 
dormant), 
and 
subscribes 
to 
the 
services 
via 
the 
Opportunistic subscription component, including an order of 
prioritization (in case several similar services are available). 
The brokering Match-Making system locates a potential 
existing (active) offering, assigns an activation code, and 
informs the service provider and requestor via their 
respective connectivity components. The activities of the 
Match-Making component are logged in the Analytics 
component for trends analysis. 
In case no active service exists, the Match-Making 
component defers the request to the Demand engine that 
searches dormant services. When the Demand engine locates 
a potential offering, it connects to the provider’s IT providers 
opportunistic notification adapter, and reports the request. If 
the provider can provision such a service, the Demand 
Engine gets a commitment from the Services connectivity 
component of the requestor, and immediately notifies the 
provider via the IT providers opportunistic notification 
adapter to provision the service with the specific token 
issued by the Providers’ IT providers opportunistic 
provisioning adapter. 
The Demand Engine delegates monitoring of the service 
once it is provisioned to the Billing and Account Payable 
component for further monitoring. 
The Billing component reports to the Analytics engine for 
further analysis of trends. 
III. 
ADVANTAGES OF THE PROPOSED SYSTEM  
There are several advantages that are consequents of the 
conceptual brokering system, all parts of a cloud c-
commerce arena.  
Maximization of capacity utilization allows enterprise 
IT departments to offer excess of IT services on a transient 
base (limited duration). For example, such excess capability 
may be offered on a regular schedule (e.g., between 3 am 
and 6 am), or on an ad hoc basis. 
Proactive 
revenue 
generation 
notifies 
potential 
enterprise IT departments of an external need for IT service. 
As a result, a service provider may balance internal capacity 
and job scheduling, optionally accommodating the requests 
for an external service. 
Triggering negotiations and trade enables consumers 
to be engaged with potential IT service providers, request a 
service, and negotiate its availability date, timeframe, and 
associated costs.   
Business offering expansion enables service providers 
to examine a potential service. The offering can be a primary 
service that varies in scale, used as an alternative to existing 
service, or deployed when testing a brand new offering. 
Business opportunities detection enables a consumer of 
services to offer services as well, in an opportunistic way as 
well, whether or not they wrap services of other parties, 
composite services, or the consumer’s original services. 
Arbitrage transactions profit enables the brokering 
service to generate revenue based on advertisements of the 
providers, match-making fee, payment and billing processing 
fee, survey and analytics of trends of usage (requests), or 
trends of offerings (what is available).  Because the providers 
of these services are also consumers of other services, the 
brokering service can create a single bill that takes into 
account all of the negative and positive charges. 
Simplification of transactions complexity reduces the 
amount of funds and transactions transferred between 
providers or consumers, and facilitates trade-offs between 
providers and consumers, while reducing the brokering fee.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
This position paper presented a conceptual brokering 
arena, aimed at exploiting opportunistic service offerings 
within a Services-Oriented Business Ecosystem (SOBE).  
The presented paper triggers discussions around the 
applicability 
of 
such 
systems. 
Existing 
prototypical 
brokering and commerce arenas revolve around established 
service providers offerings, in which the broker acts as 
sophisticated IT service catalog. The notions presented in 
this paper are focusing on the interactions, registration, 
financial, and commerce potential aspects of such 
collaboration. In addition, the restriction based on 
competitive advantages is imperative, in which the provider 
can restrict several consumers, and deny service based on the 
end-users identify, all according to the provider internal 
business or compliance policy.  
The game change is not “where can I buy/use a service”, 
rather of “who do I want to sell my excess services to”.  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

This approach may form business alliances, without 
financial transactions, aimed at temporary treaty between 
prototypical competitors, in order to block a third one.  
Brokering may be extended to any type of intervention in 
the middle ground of C-commerce (service-commerce): 
permanent, transient, or opportunistic. Brokering and 
auditing may be operated through a third party or though a 
consortia of SOBE members.  Notably the agreements would 
not be peer to peer, but between the SOBE member and the 
broker. 
Such an approach for opportunistic brokering and 
marginal changes facilitates services demand and requests 
according to business changes, enabling consumers to 
become providers. Thus, the distinction between requestors 
and consumers is introduced, separating negotiating parties 
and contracted ones.  
“Service leverage” is introduced, tilting the balance 
between market forces.  The dynamic nature of the cloud is 
no longer the playground of the Managed Service Provider, 
but may also be influenced by Telco companies, large IT 
enterprises, and other large-scale commercial organizations.   
Cloud brokering concepts are just emerging, and have 
largely been the domain of Managed Service Providers 
(MSPs).  The present paper extends these brokering concepts 
to community cloud infrastructures.  Future research 
directions 
may 
include 
expansions 
into 
financial 
combinations and chains of brokering arenas. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank Debra Danielson, Donald Ferguson, Peter 
Matthews, Serge Mankovskii, and Gabriel Silberman for 
many discussions on cloud brokering and infrastructure. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Buyya, R, Yeo, C.S., Venugopal, S., Broberg,J., and Brandic, I. 
“Cloud Computing and Emerging IT Platforms: Vision, Hype, and 
Reality for Delivering Computing as the 5th Utility”, Future 
Generation Computer Systems, Vol. 25, Number 6, Elsevier Science, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, June 2009, pp. 599-616. 
[2] 
Coêlho, A. and Brasileiro, F. V. “Smarter Heuristics for Business-
Driven Services Selection in Multi-services P2P Grids”.  2010 IEEE 
International Conference on Services Computing, Miami, Florida, 
July 2010, pp. 417-424  . 
[3] 
Grivas, S.G., Uttam Kumar, T., and Wache, H. “Cloud Broker: 
Bringing Intelligence into the Cloud”, 2010 IEEE 3rd International 
Conference on Cloud Computing, Miami, FL, USA, July 2010, pp. 
544 – 545. 
[4] 
Lia. S., Fana, Y., and Lib, X. “A trust-based approach to selection of 
business services.” International Journal of Computer Integrated 
Manufacturing, Vol. 24, Issue 8, 2011, pp. 769-784. 
[5] 
Nair, S.K., Porwal, S., Dimitrakos, T., Ferrer, A.J., Tordsson, J.,  
Sharif, T., Sheridan, C., Rajarajan, M., and Khan, A.U.  “Towards 
Secure Cloud Bursting, Brokerage and Aggregation”, IEEE 8th 
European Conference on Web Services, Ayia Napa, Dec. 2010, pp. 
189 – 196. 
[6] 
Satsiou, A. and Tassiulas, L. “Trust-based exchange of services to 
motivate cooperation in P2P networks”, Peer-to-Peer Networking and 
Applications, April 2010, pp. 1-24. 
[7] 
Tai, S., Desai, N., and Mazzoleni, P. “Service communities: 
applications and middleware”. In Wohlstadter, E. (Ed.): Proceedings 
of the 6th International Workshop on Software Engineering and 
Middleware, SEM 2006, Portland, Oregon, USA, November 2006, 
pp. 17– 22. 
 
 
 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

