Critical Information Infrastructures Management System and Security Issues 
Focusing on the Public Administrative Sector 
 
Jun Heo 
Internet Service Protection Team 
Korea Internet & Security Agency 
Seoul, Korea 
herjune@kisa.or.kr 
Wan Suk Yi 
Internet Service Protection Team 
Korea Internet & Security Agency 
Seoul, Korea 
wsyi@kisa.or.kr 
 
 
Abstract— With Korea’s transition to an advanced IT nation, 
its 
key 
infrastructures, 
including 
administration, 
transportation, healthcare, finance and communications, 
have become absolutely reliant on IT systems. This research 
examines systems in place in Korea for defense against cyber 
hacking and electronic invasions, and internal and external 
threats to the critical information infrastructure of the 
administrative sector, in which critical administrative service 
is provided to Koreans through e-government, and technical, 
physical and managerial measures to combat such threats are 
discussed.   
Keyword - Security; threats; administrative sector. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The IT society is absolutely reliant on communications 
infrastructure. 
Social 
infrastructures, 
including 
administration, transportation, healthcare and education, rely 
on the communications infrastructure to function. A 
breakdown of the communications infrastructure due to 
destruction or malfunction will result in other social 
infrastructures malfunctioning. Thus it can be said that the 
information infrastructure is the core infrastructure of an IT 
society.  
The Korean government implemented the revised 
Communications Infrastructure Protection Act in 2001 to 
systematically 
protect 
critical 
communications 
infrastructures in the finance, communications and energy 
sectors. To combat the increasing losses occurring from a 
rapid advancement of techniques used in electronic invasion 
activities, including the distribution of malicious programs, 
the Communications Infrastructure Protection Act stipulates 
preventative measures, countermeasures and recovery 
measures for systematic designation and protection of critical 
information infrastructures [1]. 
The communications infrastructures are designated as 
critical information infrastructures in accordance with 
5 standards stipulated by the Communications Infrastructure 
Protection Act. Once designated as a critical information 
infrastructure, a risk assessment must be performed within 
6 months. Subsequently, risks assessments are carried out 
once every 2 years. Based on the outcome of the risk 
assessment, 
the 
manager 
of 
a 
critical 
information 
infrastructure must implement short or long-term measures 
as required. Such measures are incorporated in the protection 
policies for the following year to achieve effective protection 
of critical information infrastructures. Also, protection 
policies are reviewed in the following year to verify that 
various protective measures have been taken as planned. 
Through such a process, critical information infrastructures 
are systematically protected [2].   
As the social infrastructures in Korea, such as 
administration, transportation, healthcare and finance, are 
absolutely reliant on IT systems, efforts are being made to 
continuously expand the communications infrastructure. 
Since 2009, additional critical information infrastructures 
have been designated in the administrative sector.  
A wide range of civil services are being provided in the 
administrative sector with ongoing e-government support. As 
the administrative sector is closely linked to the 
administrative bodies of cities, counties and districts 
throughout Korea, security breach in the administrative 
sector is highly likely to escalate to a national scale.  
This research examines critical information infrastructure 
policies and their management systems. Also, threats to 
public service systems in the administrative sector being 
designated as critical information infrastructures, such as the 
e-government, and their protective measures are examined to 
provide reliable data for utilization in public administration. 
 
II. 
CRITICAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE POLICIES 
AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
Communications infrastructures are managed under the 
jurisdiction of central administrative agencies. In order to 
provide 
systematic 
and 
comprehensive 
governmental 
protection of critical information infrastructures from 
electronic invasions, the Communications Infrastructure 
Protection 
Act 
stipulates 
the 
operation 
of 
the 
Communications Infrastructure Protection Committee to 
oversee the formation and execution of communications 
infrastructure protection policies to achieve cooperation on 
prevention and management of security breaches by various 
central administrative agencies. 
 Duties of the Communications Infrastructure Protection 
Committee include mediation in critical information 
infrastructure protection policies; review of formation and 
execution of protection plans; and review of systemic 
179
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

improvements and policies related to the protection of 
critical information infrastructures. 
 The 
Communications 
Infrastructure 
Protection 
Activities Committee was established to support the 
operation of the Communications Infrastructure Protection 
Committee by reviewing 
matters presented to the 
Communications Infrastructure Protection Committee or as 
directed 
by 
the 
chairman 
of 
the 
Communications 
Infrastructure Protection Committee. 
 In the event of a serious security breach in a critical 
information 
infrastructure, 
the 
Communications 
Infrastructure Protection Activities Committee operates a 
temporary security breach management headquarters under 
the supervision of the Communications Infrastructure 
Protection Committee to implement recovery measures and 
provide technical support. 
 The central administrative agencies responsible for the 
management of critical information infrastructures designate 
critical information infrastructures in their field of 
administration 
and 
implement 
protective 
measures. 
Protection guidelines are established by the central 
administrative agencies for critical information infrastructure 
managers to follow. 
 Critical information infrastructure managers hold the 
primary responsibility for protection and must assess 
vulnerabilities of facilities under their jurisdiction to 
implement protective measures. In the event of a breakdown 
of a critical information infrastructure due to disturbance or 
destruction, the relevant organizations must be notified and 
measures required for the recovery and protection of the 
communications infrastructure must be taken [3]. 
 Organizations that support the protection of critical 
information infrastructures include the Ministry of Public 
Administration and Safety, National Intelligence Service, 
Ministry of National Defense, Public Prosecutor’s Office, 
National Police Agency and Korea Internet Security Agency. 
These organizations also establish critical information 
infrastructure protective measures and provide technical 
support for prevention and management of security breaches.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Critical Information Infrastructure Management System 
III. 
SECURITY THREATS TO CRITICAL INFORMATION 
INFRASTRUCTURES IN THE ADMINISTRATIVE SECTOR 
A. Attacks on Public Administrative Service Websites 
Websites that service the public through critical 
information infrastructures of the administrative sector, such 
as the websites of local governments, are currently 
understood to be relatively safe from external infiltrations in 
their servers. However, there are hazardous elements found 
on other websites operated by local governments, which can 
jeopardize the security of such websites if such elements are 
analyzed and taken advantage of maliciously. In general, the 
vulnerabilities of websites with menus that contain sub-
domains are cookie poisoning and cross website script 
vulnerabilities, which can be manipulated to gain access to 
some personal information of registered website users. File 
download vulnerabilities and factor modification can be 
incorporated into attacks to steal web application files and 
database access history and change posts made by other 
users. 
Taking the online notice board for example, after session 
authentication, application factor modification can be used to 
read, modify or delete non-public posts made by other users; 
file download vulnerabilities can be taken advantage of to 
expose application source files; or insufficient script tag 
restriction settings can be taken advantage of to steal other 
users’ session IDs to access their personal information. 
Because file extension verification for upload of image files 
on websites with inadequate security is insufficient, 
restricted extensions (ASPX, ASP) can be uploaded to 
generate certain files within the system. Such files then 
enable the upload of malicious programs, which are then 
used for remote execution of malicious commands to access 
databases, administrator accounts and personal information. 
 
B. Attacks on Internal Administrative Networks 
Development and management of critical information 
infrastructures of the administrative sector are frequently 
performed by a civilian business. In such a case, the critical 
information infrastructures may be insufficiently managed 
due to various reasons, such as the civilian business’ heavy 
workload 
or 
budget 
shortage. 
This 
can 
result 
in 
vulnerabilities in servers, networks or PCs that can be taken 
advantage of by a third party to execute a malicious attack. 
Some common internal system vulnerabilities are as follows. 
Server vulnerabilities can occur due to issues in account 
management, system/directory security settings, registry 
security settings and unnecessary services. Network 
vulnerabilities can occur due to issues in remote access 
control, log storage settings, anti-DDoS settings and 
unnecessary services. PCs can be vulnerable to unauthorized 
data access due to unnecessary services and non-use of a 
screen saver. 
By taking advantage of such vulnerabilities, even closed 
networks with no external connection can be infiltrated using 
social engineering techniques and USB worms to steal 
information, which is then taken away from the premises on 
a USB or through a third party and disclosed on the internet, 
180
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

setting the network from which the information was stolen a 
target for attack. 
Due to the nature of critical information infrastructures, 
system vulnerabilities must be removed by meticulously 
analyzing system stability and connection to other systems. 
Such security improvement may require substantial time and 
resources, so ongoing monitoring is required.  
 
IV. 
PROTECTION OF CRITICAL INFORMATION 
INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE ADMINISTRATIVE SECTOR 
 
For improved IT security in the operational environments 
of e-governments and local governments, various protective 
measures, such as the application of information protection 
processes, facility security upgrade and server/network 
security upgrade, can be implemented to achieve a 
consolidated information protection and reliability of the 
communications infrastructures. In particular, information 
protection for critical information infrastructures in the 
administrative sector is divided into technical, physical and 
managerial aspects and executed accordingly. 
TABLE I.  
PROTECTION OF CRITICAL INFORMATION 
INFRASTRUCTURE OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE SECTOR 
Security management  
Details 
Technic
al  
Website 
Mock 
hacking 
Performed on priority websites 
Internal 
administrat
ive 
network 
Application 
system 
Server 
network, 
etc. 
o Security control 
settings, service 
access control, 
security system 
operation  
o Inspection of 
security policies, user 
authentication, etc. 
Security 
system 
IDS, IPS 
Firewall, 
etc. 
Personal 
user system 
PC, etc. 
Physical 
Informatio
n 
protection 
assessment 
Physical 
aspect 
Data 
room 
access 
control, 
power-
supply 
control 
o Physical access 
control, restricted 
area setting, 
installation of 
physical security 
facilities 
o Designation of a 
physical security 
facility manager, 
inspection of 
backup files 
o Power-supply 
control, etc. 
Manage
rial 
o Utilization of the KISA Infrastructure 
Information Protection Assessment Chart, 
KISA Infrastructure Protection Activities 
Inspection Chart and other methods 
o Information protection assessment based on 
local governments' activities and conditions 
 
A. Technical Protection 
Based on an analysis of various security breaches that 
can affect the stable operation of critical information 
infrastructures and the confidentiality, integrity and 
availability 
of 
information 
stored 
therein, 
technical 
vulnerabilities of the infrastructures must be identified to 
gain an understanding of the consequences of a security 
breach and form preventative measures. As such, the servers, 
network equipment, security systems and PCs that are part of 
critical information infrastructures must be analyzed and a 
security breach test performed to analyze the ensuing web 
service stability and possible scenarios of external attacks. 
[4] 
 
 
Figure 2.  Vulnerability Assessment Methodology (KISA) 
In order to remove the vulnerabilities identified through the 
analysis, short (6 months) and long-term (1 year) plans must 
immediately be established to continuously remove 
vulnerabilities. The technical measures to be taken to 
remove such vulnerabilities are as follows. 
 
1) Prevention of security breaches and loss of key 
information through consolidation of server/network 
security settings  
a) Consolidated 
account 
management, 
including 
consolidated 
authentication 
management and regular 
account policy reviews, for prevention of database access by 
unauthorized parties and loss of information 
b) Consolidated access control, including consolidated 
remote access control and regular access control policy 
reviews, for prevention of access to key systems by 
unauthorized parties 
181
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

c) Consolidated operation management, including 
regular security patch application on servers/PCS and real-
time anti-virus updates, for prevention of security breaches 
 
2) Consolidated infrastructure security management, 
including 
the 
application 
of 
upgraded 
information 
protection solution, for prevention of exposure to potential 
threats 
a) Implementation of integrated log management 
solutions that manage and monitor logs generated between 
different devices for systematic identification and analysis 
of threats 
b) Implementation of anti-DDoS solutions and upgrade 
of 
existing 
information 
protection 
solutions 
for 
minimization of vulnerabilities in networking facilities used 
to service the public 
 
B. Managerial/Physical Protection 
Following a technical analysis of devices used in critical 
information infrastructures, the overall state of information 
protection by an infrastructure manager is analyzed to form 
customized information protection measures and plan their 
quantitative 
implementation. 
Information 
protection 
assessment methodologies established this way are presented 
to Korea Internet Security Agency annually. An information 
protection assessment assesses 12 areas of security control, 
which contain 89 sub-areas of security control. Each sub-
area of security control is assessed according to the standards 
shown in Table II. The maturity of an area of security control 
is determined according to the outcome of an assessment of 
its sub-areas of security control. 
TABLE II.  
VARIOUS LEVELS OF MATURITY OF INFORMATION 
PROTECTION ASSESSMENT   
Level 
Details of assessment 
1 
Sub-areas of security control are not being executed or are 
being executed without a set plan 
2 
An execution plan (procedures, schedules, budget) for 
some sub-areas of security control is set and documented 
3 
Sub-areas of security control are being executed according 
to a documented plan by the entire organization or have 
been executed 
4 
Assessment of sub-areas of security control continues to 
take place for a set period of time 
5 
Assessment of sub-areas of security control is completed 
and regular improvements are made according to the 
outcome of the assessment 
 
Table III below shows the areas and sub-areas of security 
control assessed in an information protection assessment. 
TABLE III.  
AREAS OF INFORMATION PROTECTION ASSESSMENT 
Area 
Sub-area 
1. Information protection 
policies 
1.1 Information protection policy 
organization 
1.2 Information protection plan
2. Risk assessment 
2.1 Asset classification 
2.2 Asset allocation/management
2.3 Security requirement review
2.4 Risk assessment 
2.5 Vulnerability assessment
3.Structural management 
3.1 Security structure modification 
control 
4. Maintenance 
4.1 Maintenance tools 
4.2 Remote maintenance 
5. Media protection 
5.1 Media display 
5.2 Media access management
5.3 Media viewing/transportation methods
5.4 Document management 
5.5 Media/record disposal 
6. Security 
awareness/training
6.1 Security awareness/training
6.2 Emergency training 
7. Work continuity 
management
7.1 Work continuity management
7.2 Information system backup/recovery
8. Physical/environmental 
protection 
8.1 Physical access control/monitoring
8.2 Electricity/communication cable 
protection 
8.3 Emergency electricity/lighting
8.4 Environmental control 
9. Personnel security 
9.1 Personnel management 
9.2 Internal personnel management
9.3 Third party security 
10. Accident management 
10.1 Accident management drill training
10.2 Accident monitoring 
10.3 Security breach processing
11. Audit and attribution of 
responsibility 
 
11.1 Auditable event generation
11.2 Audit information management
11.3 Audit monitoring/analysis/report
11.4 Denial prevention 
11.5 Attribution of responsibility
12. System access control 
and communications 
protection 
12.1 Account/password management
12.2 Setting management 
12.3 Access control 
12.4 Failed access attempt management
12.5 Notification of warnings during 
system operation 
12.6 Software faults/protection from 
malicious codes 
12.7 Service denial protection
12.8  Confidentiality management
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Korea is an advanced IT society and the majority of its 
key 
social 
infrastructures 
rely 
on 
communications 
infrastructures. Electronic invasions as well as natural 
disasters can result in the destruction and breakdown of such 
communications infrastructures, which can ultimately lead to 
the destruction or breakdown of social infrastructures that 
rely on the communications infrastructures. 
The 
Korean 
government 
has 
established 
the 
Communications 
Infrastructure 
Protection 
Act 
which 
stipulates 
the 
designation 
of 
the 
communications 
infrastructures recognized as requiring protection from 
electronic invasions as critical information infrastructures. In 
the administrative sector, technical, managerial and physical 
measures must be taken to achieve ongoing security as 
attacks on websites of the administrative sector or internal 
administrative networks can stop the provision of 
administrative service to the public. 
182
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

The 
number 
of 
designated 
critical 
information 
infrastructures is not high in comparison to the level of key 
social 
infrastructures’ 
reliance 
on 
communications 
infrastructures. As such, an increase in designated 
communications infrastructures is in the best interest of the 
nation. 
Therefore, critical information infrastructures must be 
continuously designated and accompanied by an efficient 
protection system in order to eliminate national and social 
vulnerabilities to acts of electronic invasion. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
National 
Assembly: 
Critical 
Information 
Communication 
Infrastructure Protection Act (www.law.go.kr) 
[2] 
Ministry of Public Administration & Safety, Korea Internet Security 
Agency: Communications Infrastructure Protection Guide.2009 
[3] 
J. Chul-ki “A Research on Cyber Security Threats to Critical 
information infrastructures and Their Countermeasures: With a 
Focus on the Broadcasting/Communications Sector.” vol. 9, pp. 34-
36,  August 2009 
[4] 
L. Bodin, L. Gordon, and M. Loeb, “Information security and risk 
management,Communications of the ACM”, vol. 51(4), pp. 64–68, 
2008. 
183
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

