Security Service for the Rollout of Security Credentials  
in Ubiquitous Industrial Automation Environments 
Rainer Falk, Steffen Fries 
Siemens AG 
Corporate Technology 
Germany 
{rainer.falk; steffen.fries}@siemens.com 
 
 
Abstract— Industrial control networks, e.g., for fac-
tory, process or energy automation and smart metering, 
are increasingly based on IT communication technologies 
like Ethernet, IP, and Web-Services. Security measures as 
authentication or cryptographic VPNs are used to protect 
communication links to supervising control stations and 
for remote service. While standard communication tech-
nologies have been used at the supervision level for some 
time, they will increasingly be used down to the field level 
comprising a huge number of field level control devices, 
sensors and actuators. These may be installed in largely 
distributed, uncontrolled areas. IT security measures are 
needed to protect the exchange of control commands and 
monitoring information between these field level devices 
and towards control stations. The efficient and secure 
distribution of required security credentials is challenging  
This paper describes a service for managing security 
credentials for ubiquitous field level devices (sensors, 
actuators) in an industrial automation environment.  
 
Keywords 
– 
Ubiquitous 
Security, 
Industrial 
Communication, Energy Automation, Sensor Actuator 
Network  
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Standard communication technologies as Ethernet, 
the IP protocol, and Web-Services are increasingly 
used in industrial environments such as automation 
systems for energy distribution, building, factory and 
process automation, or for smart metering. This trend 
will extend down the automation pyramid to field level 
devices including even individual sensors and actua-
tors. These numerous field level devices being widely 
distributed form an ubiquitous automation environ-
ment. Integrated security mechanisms have to be sup-
ported by a huge number of pervasive devices. Ex-
tremely easy commissioning and integrated security 
functionality are required to make the technology suit-
able for industrial applications. Automated Plug&Work 
mechanisms especially supporting security configura-
tion are needed also to support agile automation con-
cepts in which the production environment is flexibly 
adapted to changing needs. Moreover, security configu-
ration has to take into account that automation envi-
ronments may be geographically far-flung.  
This paper describes challenges, side conditions 
and approaches for a security service enabling the 
efficient rollout of security credentials in ubiquitous 
industrial automation environments. This service com-
prises technical as well as organizational means. It 
allows field level components to be configured with the 
required set of security parameters to protect the device 
itself and its communication. In particular the pre-
configuration of security credentials during the manu-
facturing process is considered as one way of support-
ing a secure configuration as part of device installation. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section II provides a motivation for security configura-
tion processes based on existing security applications 
in automation networks. Section III describes a security 
service for the rollout of security credentials covering 
the whole security parameter lifecycle, which is the 
discussed in the context of the product life cycle of 
ubiquitous industrial field devices. Section IV after-
wards describes different supported approaches for key 
distribution, applicable to industrial environments, 
while Section V describes an exemplary setup of the 
security service, where one service instantiation is used 
during device manufacturing, and a second one during 
device installation and operation. Section VI summa-
rizes the findings and gives an outlook to future work. 
II. AUTOMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY 
Typical automation systems are built in a hierarchi-
cal way as shown in Figure 1. It shows typical layers of 
an automation pyramid. On the lowest level there are 
sensors and actors that are connected to field devices. 
Specialized field buses are expected to be increasingly 
replaced by standard communication technology as 
Ethernet and IP. These field devices are actuated by 
controllers, e.g., a programmable logic controller PLC, 
which may be interconnected using industrial real-time 
104
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

Ethernet protocols as, e.g., ProfiNet (cf. [10]). On the 
top are interconnections to supervisory systems and 
enterprise resource planning systems.  
 
Human 
Supervision 
Controller 
Field devices 
Sensors / Actors 
 
Figure 1: Automation Pyramid 
Today, security in industrial automation is com-
monly applied by isolating cells on controller level 
using security gateways. Internally, the automation 
network is assumed to be closed and communication is 
not further cryptographically secured. In the future it is 
expected that devices down the automation pyramid 
including sensors and actors will feature integrated 
security functionality. This has already been discussed 
in the context of funded projects like the European 
funded project “Virtual Automation Networks – VAN” 
(cf. [1]) enabling secured communication between 
automation cells or devices in automation cells of dif-
ferent production lines. In contrast, energy automation 
already uses IP connectivity down to the field level.  
Security mechanisms to be supported in automation 
communication comprise well-known security services: 
− Authentication: The property that the claimed 
identity of an entity is correct. 
− Authorization: The process of giving someone 
permission to do or have something. 
− Integrity: The property that information has not 
been altered in an unauthorized manner. 
− Confidentiality: The property that information is 
not made available or disclosed to unauthorized in-
dividuals, entities or processes. 
− Availability: The degree to which a component is 
operable (non-cryptographically service).  
In contrast to office networks, automation networks 
have different requirements to security services as 
shown in the Figure 2. 
 
 
Confidentiality (Data) 
Integrity (Data) 
Availability / Reliability  
Non-Repudiation 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Low – Medium  
High 
High 
High 
Office 
Automation 
Component Lifetime 
Short - medium 
Long 
 
Figure 2: Comparison Office/Industrial Security Requirements 
The determination of security needs reveals the 
high importance of integrity and availability within 
automation networks. Also non-repudiation is often 
important so that e.g. reliable information about pro-
duction is available or to provide billing-relevant in-
formation that can be relied upon. These security needs 
are quite different to typical priorities in office net-
works, see Figure 2.. A particular design consideration 
is the long component life time (several decades, de-
pending on industry). All of the stated security ser-
vices, independent of the application area, have one in 
common. They all need some type of security creden-
tial (which may be symmetrical or asymmetrical), 
where they can build upon. Thus, the process to effi-
ciently install required security credentials on a huge 
number of devices will provide a big challenge. Its 
solution is a prerequisite to the successful adoption of 
integrated security mechanisms. 
To better motivate the need for security credentials 
or more generally security parameters, the following 
subsections outline concrete examples for security in 
automation communication. 
A. Example 1: Energy Automation 
IEC 61850 provides a standard for communication 
in the domain of energy automation. It addresses the 
data exchange on process level, field level, and station 
level. Today, IEC 61850 is mainly used for reporting 
status and sampled value information from Intelligent 
Electronic Devices (IED) to a substation automation 
controller as well as for command transport from a 
substation automation controller to IEDs. It also covers 
the communication between IEDs instead of dedicated 
wires.  
The following Figure 3 gives an example for a typi-
cal IEC 61850 communication scenario. 
 
 
Figure 3: Typical Energy Automation Scenario 
105
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

This scenario obviously requires security services 
to protect the communicated control data. For energy 
automation the necessary security services are defined 
in IEC 62351. It defines explicit measures for commu-
nication using TCP and also serial protocols which are 
used directly in substation automation as well as in 
adjacent communication supporting energy automation, 
e.g., inter-control center communication. IEC 62351 
addresses the general security requirements stated 
above. Currently the standard comprises eight parts that 
are in different state of completion.  
While part 1 and 2 are more general and provide in-
formation about considered threat scenarios and the 
definition of terms, part 3 to 6 are directly related to 
energy automation protocols like IEC 61850 (IEC 
62351 Part 6) and IEC 60870-5-x (IEC 62351 Part 5) 
and their mappings to protocols like TCP/IP (IEC 
62351 Part 3) and MMS (IEC 62351 Part 4). These 
parts utilize symmetric as well as asymmetric crypto-
graphic functions to secure the payload and the com-
munication link. Moreover, the existing security proto-
col Transport Layer Security (TLS), which has been 
successfully used in other technical areas and industrial 
applications, is directly applied. Here, IEC 62351 
specifies cipher suites (the allowed combination of 
authentication, integrity protection and encryption 
algorithms) and also states requirements to the certifi-
cates to be used with TLS.  
Besides TCP/IP, IEC 62351 Part 5 relates to the 
specialties of serial communication. Here security 
measures are defined to especially protect the integrity 
of the connections based on pre-shared keys. This part 
also specifies the key management necessary for the 
security measures. 
IEC 62351 Part 7 describes security related data 
objects for end-to-end network and system manage-
ment and also security problem detection. These data 
objects support the secure control of dedicated parts of 
the energy automation network. 
Part 8 of the standard is currently in definition and 
addresses the integration of role-based access control 
mechanisms into the whole domain of power systems 
based on ID-certificates, attribute certificates, or soft-
ware tokens. This is necessary as in protection systems 
and in control centers authorization as well as stringent 
traceability is required. One usage example is the veri-
fication of the authorization and accomplishment of a 
dedicated switching action.  
As it can be seen from the description above, IEC 
62351 utilizes security credentials, e.g., in the context 
of the transport layer (using TLS or serial communica-
tion) but also on application layer for role-based access 
control. Crucial to the application of security creden-
tials is the general credential handling comprising gen-
eration, provisioning, revocation, and especially the 
initial distribution to all participating entities. This is 
currently underspecified, but has been acknowledged 
by standardization as important. As the standard is 
extensible, it is expected that there will be a new part, 
describing credential handling in the context of IEC 
62351 services.  
B. Example: Wireless Sensor Networks 
Wireless sensor networks consist of sensors (and 
actors) that communicate using short range wireless 
communication based on 802.15.4, Bluetooth, ZigBee 
or wireless HART. Important industrial use cases are 
machine and plant monitoring, asset tracking, and me-
tering [8]. As the wireless communication can easily be 
intercepted and manipulated, a cryptographic protec-
tion is a must. Therefore, the sensors/actuator nodes 
have to be configured with a join key that allows to 
securely join a wireless network and to set-up required 
security associations. The join key is typically a secret 
key that is used to authenticate towards a security man-
ager. The security manager authenticates the nodes and 
provides required session keys. The join keys are con-
figured when the sensor network is installed, but it 
would also be possible to provide sensor nodes that 
have been pre-configured during manufacturing. 
C. Example: Product Authentication  
To identify products, in particular replacement 
parts, and to verify the claimed identity, electronic 
authentication mechanisms can be integrated directly 
into the components. This allows an automation system 
to automatically identify installed components and 
verify whether they are genuine (anti counterfeiting). 
Further information can be stored along the product life 
cycle [9]. An electronic authentication module being 
part of the product provides a cryptographic authentica-
tion function.  
III. SECURITY SERVICE FOR THE CREDENTIAL ROLLOUT  
The rollout of security credentials describes the 
process of the initial setup of security credentials (e.g., 
keys, certificates) and related configuration information 
(permissions, policies). The result is a trust anchor 
enabling the further deployment of configuration in-
formation, services and communication.  
The main functionalities of the security service for 
the credential roll-out for ubiquitous industrial field 
level devices are: 
− Credential generation, certification, and archival,  
− Credential distribution to field level devices, 
− Credential life cycle management. 
The security service can be adapted to different ap-
plication-scenario-specific requirements through con-
figurable policies. This ensures that the credential man-
agement is compliant with relevant requirements of the 
automation operator. The security service is exposed 
106
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

towards a user as for example a worker installing a 
field level or an employee in the field level device 
manufacture only in a way that ensures that the security 
service is used easily while ensuring compliance with 
defined security policies.  
Security credentials are, like other type of data or 
equipment, part of a lifecycle. They are created, ap-
plied, and destroyed and need to satisfy a certain secu-
rity policy. The typical life cycle of security credentials 
is depicted in Figure 4. 
 
 
 
Generation 
Certification 
Distribution 
Update 
Destruction 
Archiving 
Storage 
 
Figure 4: Security Parameter Life Cycle 
The following list explains the single stages in the 
life cycle that are realized by the credential rollout 
service: 
− Key Generation: Device keys can be created on 
the device itself. For example, in case of asymmet-
ric key pairs, the device may generate the key mate-
rial and a Certificate Signing Request (CSR), which 
is sent to a Certification Authority. Alternatively, 
keys may be created externally (e.g., a trust center, 
an engineering station, or an administrators laptop) 
and installed on the target device (off-device key 
generation). 
− Key Certification: Typically done for asymmetric 
keys through a certificate authority. Depending on 
the key generation, this can be part of the key gen-
eration in a trust center or may be done on informa-
tion sent in a CSR. 
− Key Distribution: In case of off-device key genera-
tion, the device key has to be installed on the target 
device. This can be performed offline, e.g. the key 
is installed to the target entity during a manufactur-
ing step, or online requiring communication with a 
security server (out-of band using a separate com-
munication channel or in-band as part of a service 
communication). 
− Key Storage: The private/secret device key can be 
stored in secured memory (e.g., flash) or in a sepa-
rate hardware module (e.g., smart card or a trusted 
platform module).  
− Key Update: Session key update does not belong 
to the describe process of security parameter rollout 
as it is typically performed by the security protocol 
used, based on a given security policy. Crypto-
graphic keys have a dedicated lifetime, e.g., user 
certificates typically have a lifetime of 2 years, 
while server certificates are limited to 1 year. 
− Key Archiving: Typically long term (secure or 
private) keys are archived to enable access to en-
crypted data. A use case is given by an employee 
leaving a company. While encryption keys are ar-
chived, signature/authentication keys need not to be 
archived as it is sufficient to archive corresponding 
public key / certificate.  
− Key Destruction: Session keys are destructed (de-
leted) as soon as the session has ended. Long term 
keys are deleted, after keys have been renewed. 
This can be the case after the lifetime of the key has 
ended regularly, or if the key has been compro-
mised. 
The security parameter lifecycle has to be aligned 
with the product lifecycle, whereas the product may be 
a single component or a complete automation system.  
 
Manufacturing 
Projection 
Installation  
Deployment 
Operation 
Decommis-
sioning 
Product  
Design 
Definition of necessary security 
functionality in base architecture  
Generation of vendor specific secu-
rity parameter supporting product 
individualization 
Projection of use case and/or cus-
tomer specific security parameter 
Deployment in customer infrastruc-
ture, comprises key generation, 
certification, distribution and storage 
Security parameter maintenance; 
may comprise key update or key 
archiving 
Secure deletion of security parame-
ter; may comprise key archiving, 
key destruction  
Bootstrapping 
Secure Plug & Work 
Security Parameter Rollout 
 
Figure 5: Security Parameter Rollout in the Product Life Cycle 
Figure 5 shows main phases along the product life 
cycle:  
− Manufacturing: This phase concerns the produc-
tion of the hardware, possibly including a dedicated 
hardware security module, and the programming of 
the flash memory by the manufacturer. The product 
is individualized during manufacturing by pro-
gramming a fixed device identifier (e.g. serial num-
ber).  
− Project Planning (Projection): During the project 
planning phase, a certain industrial installation is 
107
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

planned. The used components, their (security) con-
figuration and interconnection are defined.  
− Installation: During the installation phase, the 
equipment is physically installed, configured and 
tested according to the project plan. 
− Operation: During the operation phase, the devices 
are in regular operation mode. It is interrupted by 
maintenance and repair phases, which may com-
prise security parameter updates due to the normal 
key management lifecycle or complete device ex-
change.  
− Decommissioning: Finally, the devices are de-
commissioned, i.e., they are put out of operation. 
Installed security parameter need to be deleted be-
fore leaving the customer premises. 
As shown, security parameters are used in different 
phases of the product lifetime and are applied as: 
− short term or session parameter (e.g., for integrity 
or confidentiality protection of an administrative 
action) 
− long term or permanent parameter (e.g., for authen-
tication) 
Besides the pure key material, an efficient and se-
cure solution requires well defined organizational proc-
esses for the life-time management of security creden-
tials, standardized (and preferably certified) software 
and hardware components, a protected environment, 
etc.  
It is useful to distinguish different phases of the se-
curity rollout: 
− Bootstrapping concerns device-specific credentials 
installed as part of manufacturing. These are not 
bound to a specific usage environment of the prod-
uct but may be used as a trust anchor for the next 
phase.  
− Secure Plug&Work describes the process of in-
stalling a device in its intended usage environment. 
The installed credentials are specific to this usage 
as defined by the project plans.   
 
These different phases pose quite different require-
ments on the handling of security credentials: 
− During the bootstrapping phase, a manufacturer 
creates and installs credentials for a huge number of 
devices in a uniform way. The challenge is to define 
processes that allow handling the huge number of 
security credentials cost-efficiently, in a uniform 
way. This comprises the in-factory handling and 
also the distribution of the device connected pa-
rameter to the end customer. 
− 
During Plug&Work the installation personal has to 
be supported so that they can install and commis-
sion devices very easily according to the project 
planning documentation. Here an individual device 
has to be brought to operation. As a huge number 
of devices have to be installed in a typical indus-
trial plant, it is important to limit the effort to in-
stall a single device while configuring it according 
to its role in the project plans.   
IV. KEY GENERATION AND DISTRIBUTION 
The security service for the rollout of security cre-
dentials is an important functionality to create, distrib-
ute and manage credentials for ubiquitous industrial 
field level devices. The differences of different applica-
tion field require some flexibility concerning the de-
ployment and operation of the security service. This 
Section describes supported options to distribute cryp-
tographic keys to target field level devices.. 
Cryptographic keys may be generated by the secu-
rity service itself, e.g. within a trusted hardware secu-
rity module including a physical random generator. The 
created keys are then installed on the target device. 
This has to happen in a secure environment, e.g. a 
manufacturing plant. Alternatively, the secret/private 
keys are created on the field level device itself and the 
security service certifies the public key by a digital 
certificate. 
The rollout of security parameter may be distin-
guished based on the credential distribution methods 
into:  
— 
Offline parameter distribution 
— 
In-band parameter distribution 
— 
Out-of-band parameter distribution 
None of the stated methods does necessarily require 
a cryptographic key already in place to support the 
bootstrapping. Obviously, there are technical variations 
for each of the categories. The following list provides a 
short characterization of the method and also provides 
some examples for each category: 
− Offline parameter distribution: Performed using 
dedicated engineering tools directly connected to 
the device or via a separate network before the de-
vice is brought to operation (see Figure 6).  
This requires a (mobile or fixed) engineering sta-
tion in the offline network having all parameter sets 
for the devices to be bootstrapped available. Be-
sides the example given in Figure 6 another ap-
proach is the application of a token to transport the 
cryptographic parameter to the target device. This 
approach is supported for instance in the setup of 
common WLAN routers using Wi-Fi simple con-
figuration. A further example is given by applica-
108
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

tion of SIM (Subscriber Identity Modules) cards in 
mobile devices, were the SIM card, carrying all 
necessary security parameter, can be distributed in-
dependently of the actual mobile device. 
 
Offline Network for initial  
parameter distribution  
Offline Deployment Server 
DHCP Server 
Radius AAA 
Control Center 
Deployment / 
Management 
Access  
Switch  
Optional Network 
Access Control 
Function 
Service Network 
Synchronization between operational 
and bootstrapping DLS necessary 
Configuration 
Management  
Server (e.g., 
DHCP) 
Firewall 
may be  
colocated 
PDA 
Field Device 
Communication 
Processor 
Laptop 
Bootstrapping and 
Access Network 
 
Figure 6: Offline Key Distribution 
− Out-of-band parameter distribution: A separate 
logical or physical communication channel used to 
configure security parameter (see Figure 7). It basi-
cally resembles the offline distribution approach us-
ing an online connection instead of a separate 
physical network. As stated before, devices may al-
ready possess a cryptographic credential, which can 
be provided by the device manufacturer. 
 
Deployment / 
Management 
Directory 
Service, AAA 
Optional Network 
Access Control 
Function 
Bootstrapping and 
Access Network 
Firewall 
Service VLAN 
Quarantine VLAN 
DHCP  
Server 
Control  
Center 
Synchronization 
necessary if distinct 
systems used 
may be  
colocated 
Deployment / 
Management 
PDA 
Field Device 
Communication 
Processor 
Laptop 
 
Figure 7: Out-of-Band Key Distribution 
Figure 7 shows the application of a quarantine 
VLAN for the distribution of security credentials. This 
can be compared with today’s methods of Network 
Access Control (NAC) by putting the connecting de-
vice into a dedicated logical environment to check it’s 
compatibility to a local security policy before provid-
ing access to the Intranet. The security parameter boot-
strapping may even be combined with this functional-
ity.  
− In-band parameter distribution: Distribution 
using the same communication channels as used 
during regular operation (see Figure 8). This may 
be based on a pre-configured device identifier (like 
the MAC address), manufacturer installed security 
credentials or even a liaison device. 
 
DHCP Server 
Directory 
Service, AAA 
Control Center 
Deployment / 
Management 
Access  
Switch  
Optional 
Network Access 
Control Function 
Bootstrapping and 
Access Network 
Firewall 
Manufacturer installed 
certificates and corresponding 
private keys may be stored 
either in the device internal 
memory, in the firmware, or in 
a separate hardware token 
(trust module).  
Service Network 
Manufacturing 
Synchronization of 
certificate IDs 
necessary 
PDA 
Field Device 
Communication 
Processor 
Laptop 
 
Figure 8: In-Band Key Distribution 
Figure 8 shows an example using manufacturer in-
stalled security credentials to protect the distribution of 
customer specific key material. 
A further variant of in-band parameter distribution 
is supported by the application of a liaison device, 
which is already in possession of a service technician. 
Here, the security credentials on the liaison device can 
be “borrowed” for the bootstrapping of the target secu-
rity parameter by using near-field communication, an 
approach that is currently being standardized by 3GPP. 
V. USE CASE EXAMPLE 
The designed security service for the rollout of se-
curity credentials to ubiquitous industrial field level 
devices provides the flexibility to be adapted to differ-
109
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

ent requirements. This Section describes a preferred 
variant based on device authentication credentials pre-
installed during manufacturing. These allow the device 
to be identified and authenticated in its respective tar-
get environment. This secure device authentication is 
the trust basis for an automated bootstrapping of cre-
dentials within the target installation environment.  
The following requirements respectively. side con-
ditions of a typical industrial environment are re-
spected: 
− Before field level devices are installed, a detailed 
projection plan is defined. The projection plan de-
fines the configuration for each component of the 
automation system. This information is useful as in-
formation in the expected devices and their inter-
connection needs to be available before the actual 
installation is performed.  
− It should be possible that the installation is per-
formed by personal not having an IT or even a se-
curity background.  
− It must be possible that the correct installation ac-
cording to the projection documents is proven to 
support a security audit trail.  
The designed security service for the credential 
management for ubiquitous industrial field level de-
vices achieves these objectives by the following design: 
When a field level device establishes network connec-
tivity within the target environment for the first time, it 
authenticates towards a bootstrapping service using 
pre-installed device authentication credentials. The 
bootstrapping service checks whether the device is 
authorized and provides the target device configuration 
based on automation plant project planning data. 
Devices are pre-configured by the manufacturer 
with a unique device key. This key is certified by a 
digital certificate. It allows installation personal to 
work only with device types and serial numbers, while 
not being exposed to cryptographic keys or certificates. 
The device manufacturer uses a corresponding security 
service that issues and manages device authentication 
credentials during manufacture that are valid for the 
product life time, independently on where the device is 
installed. The private device keys are created in a batch 
process to be installed within the manufacturing envi-
ronment. The corresponding device certificate includ-
ing the public device key is archived.  
During installation, the device can be unambigu-
ously and securely identified using the pre-configured 
device key. Using this initial device key, an installa-
tion-specific (customer-specific) device key is de-
ployed in-band. The device and its configuration are 
registered in a configuration database. The automation 
system owner uses a second instantiation of the security 
service that issues and manages device credentials valid 
within the respective automation environment. The 
credentials are valid within the specific installation 
environment. The device keys can be, depending on 
respective policy, created on the field level device 
itself, or they are created during projection phase and 
installed on the respective target field level device 
during the setup. Optionally, after installation has been 
completed and the automation system is turned to op-
eration, an automatic key update can be performed, so 
that the keys used during operation are not known by 
the installation personal. This re-keying is supported by 
the second security service. Similarly, such a key up-
date can be performed as part of service, so that service 
personal does not get access to keys used during opera-
tion of the automation system. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
While the problem of key distribution is as old as 
IT security, the increasing introduction of security 
mechanisms in industrial environments requires solu-
tions that are adapted to the specific application field. 
This paper presented a security service for the rollout 
of security credentials to ubiquitous industrial field 
level devices. Both technical and organizational re-
quirements have been described.  
Currently, work is ongoing in the context of the 
European funded research project IoT@Work (Internet 
of Things at Work), service is worked out in more 
detail and is validated by prototypes.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Homepage EU Project Virtual Automation Networks, 
http://www.van-eu.eu/  
[2] 
RFC 5246: The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol, 
Version 1.2, T. Dierks, E Rescorla, August 2008 
[3] 
ISO-IEC 61850, Part 1: Introduction and Overview, May 
2003 
[4] 
ISO-IEC 61850, Part 8-1: Specific Communication Service 
Mapping (SCSM) – Mappings to MMS (ISO 9506-1 and ISO 
9506-2) and to ISO/IEC 8802-3, May 2004 
[5] 
ISO-IEC 62351, Part 4: Communication Network and System 
Security – Profiles Including MMS, October 2006 
[6] 
ISO-IEC 62351, Part 5: Security for IEC 60870 and Deriva-
tives, February 2007 
[7] 
ISO-IEC 62351, Part 6: Security for IEC 61850, October 2006 
[8] 
Rainer Falk, Hans-Joachim Hof, Ulrike Meyer, Christoph 
Niedermeier, Rudolf Sollacher, and Norbert Vicari: “From 
Academia to the Field: Wireless Sensor Networks for Indus-
trial Use”, 7th GI/ITG KuVS Fachgespräch „Drahtlose Sen-
sornetze“, Berlin, 25-26 Sep. 2008. 
[9] 
Rainer Falk, Andreas Koepf, Hermann Seuschek, and Ming-
Yuh Huang, Mingyan Li: Simulating a Multi-Domain RFID 
System for Replacement Part Tracking, Third International 
Conference on Emerging Security Information, Systems and 
Technologies SECURWARE 2009, Athens/Glyfada, Greece, 
18-23 June 2009.  
[10] Profinet, http://www.profibus.com/technology/profinet/  
110
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

