Switching IT Outsourcing Providers – a Conceptual Framework and Initial 
Assessment of Critical Success Factors 
 
Matthias Olzmann 
Business Solutions 
noventum consulting 
Muenster, Germany 
e-mail: Matthias.olzmann@noventum.de 
Martin Wynn 
Department of Computing 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
e-mail: MWynn@glos.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract—Although IT outsourcing is a growing industry and a 
common topic in the literature, there is limited research which 
critically analyses and assesses the switching of IT outsourcing 
providers – in particular the factors contributing to success are 
under-researched. This article explores this growing area of 
management and consultancy activity by analyzing the existing 
literature in the field. This allows the identification of critical 
success factors that are pertinent to the switching of providers 
and the development of a conceptual framework for further 
research.  
Keywords - service providers; outsourcing; IT outsourcing;  
ITO; switching providers; critical success factors. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
When companies outsource their IT for the first time, it 
can be assumed that the majority of IT experts will transfer 
from the client company to the IT outsourcing (ITO) 
provider. Together with the IT experts, the client specific 
knowledge is transitioned to the provider. This reduces the 
negative performance impact. In contrast, when providers are 
switched, it cannot be anticipated that the majority of IT 
experts (together with the client specific knowledge) will 
transition from the incumbent provider to the new provider. 
It can be assumed that the leaving provider has only 
marginal interest in actively supporting the incoming 
provider, for example with knowledge transition. This results 
in major challenges for the tripartite relationship (client, 
incumbent provider, new provider). 
 A main building block in switching ITO providers is the 
transition. Transition is a complex, risky, and challenging 
building block of strategic importance which begins after the 
contract is signed and ends with service delivery. Two thirds 
of all issues can be tracked to the transition [1] [2]. 
 Despite growing interest in topics such as sourcing the 
IT back in-house or switching providers [3] [4] [5], no 
studies have holistically focused on how successful ITO 
transitions are performed for clients switching service 
providers. 
The factors contributing to a successful transition from 
the incumbent provider to the new provider are not fully 
understood. Yet understanding the factors contributing to a 
successful transition is vitally important.  For the client, 
these factors determine on the one hand the success or the 
failure of the whole outsourcing endeavour; and on the other 
hand, ultimately the survival of the overall business as it is 
linked to the successful switch of the ITO providers. This 
article sets out to review available literature relating to this 
topic and draw conclusions regarding critical success factors 
for achieving the switching of service providers. In the 
following section, a wide range of literature relating to ITO 
is systematically reviewed. This leads to a discussion of 
critical success factors in section three, focusing on both the 
pre-delivery phase and the critical transition process. Section 
four then makes some concluding remarks relating to the 
analysis of existing literature, and highlights a conceptual 
framework for future work in this field. 
II. 
INITIAL LITERATURE REVIEW 
“Outsourcing can be defined as turning over all or part of 
an organizational activity to an outside vendor” [6]. In 
contrast to other types of outsourcing, ITO affects the 
complete organisation – IT “is pervasive throughout the 
organization” [7]. Reference [4] suggests that in an ITO deal, 
the IT is either partly or fully turned over to “…one or more 
external service providers”. 
A. ITO History and Market Development 
Even though large scale modern ITO began in 1989 with 
the Kodak outsourcing deal [4], some researchers argue that 
ITO “is still at the early stages of the profession itself” [8]. 
Kodak was not the first ITO deal in history although other 
deals had only received scarce attention. “It was not until 
Kathy Hudson, the Kodak CIO, announced to the world that 
Kodak had entered into a ‘strategic alliance’ with its IS 
partners, led by IBM but also including DEC and 
Businessland, did the world sit up and take notice” [7]. 
Many scholars and practitioners forecast further growth 
of the ITO market [8] [9] [10]. Reference [11] emphasises 
that: “on conservative estimates, looking across a range of 
reports and studies, global ITO revenues probably exceeded 
$270 billion in 2010; it is very clear that, with its 20-year 
history, outsourcing of IT and business services is moving 
into becoming an almost routine part of management, 
representing in many major corporations and government 
agencies the greater percentage of their IT expenditure”. All 
reports (Gartner, Everest, NASSCOM, and IDC) reviewed 
have indicated a global growth of ITO in the range of 5-8% 
per year [11].  
38
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

B. Reasons for ITO 
Research findings indicate that the main reasons for ITO 
are driven by the goal of cost reduction, the focus on core 
capabilities and a desire to access resources of the provider 
such as superior capabilities, expertise and technology [6] 
[11]. The primary reason for outsourcing in 90 % of the 
reviewed literature indicated the motivation of cost reduction 
[11]; but not all researchers agree that the goal of cost 
reduction and performance improvement will automatically 
be achieved - no matter how the outsourcing endeavour is 
managed. Reference [6] argues that “this overly optimistic 
view of outsourcing derives from the fact that most articles 
about outsourcing are written during the so called 
‘honeymoon’ period i.e., just before or after the contract is 
signed”. Outsourcing strategies therefore need to be 
deliberate to increase the companies’ overall performance.  
From the perspective of the ITO provider, long-term 
revenue is the primary reason to enter outsourcing 
arrangements. Reference [7] points out that “long-term 
outsourcing arrangements help stabilize vendor business 
volume and revenue, making planning more predictable, and 
increase shareholder’s comfort levels”.  
The typical length of ITO contracts is generally 5-10 
years and “thus, both client and vendor have come to expect 
that during the life of the contract, some form of 
renegotiations will be likely” [7]. The rapid growth and the 
complex nature of ITO have not been without impact. 
Recently a number of outsourcing deals have experienced 
both serious problems and the premature discontinuation of 
contracts [3] [4] [5] [7] [10]. This leads companies to re-
consider sourcing options and strategies. The discontinuation 
of contracts results in several strategic options. Regarding 
ITO contracts, “as much as 50%” of these are ended for 
other options such as switching the provider, or IT 
backsourcing [4]. Other researchers have found that most 
clients stay with the incumbent provider [8] [10]. Reference 
[10] estimates that 25% of contracts will be awarded to new 
providers and merely 10 % will be back-sourced. Reference 
[3] notes the reasons for changing ITO providers as follows: 
• 
“Dynamic changes in the customer landscape (e.g. 
the client organization may have outgrown the 
supplier) 
• 
A shift in management’s risk tolerance 
• 
Changes in the supply market (e.g., emergence of 
new or specialized players) 
• 
Supplier rationalization (e.g., consolidation to 
enhance bargaining power)”. 
C. Factors Influencing Sourcing Options 
What factors influence sourcing option decisions when 
contracts are re-evaluated?  Switching costs play a vital role 
in sourcing decisions – they are a good indicator for 
understanding and predicting clients’ outsourcing decisions 
after re-evaluating sourcing options [12]. Reference [4] 
argues that “the greater the information transfer/setup costs, 
the more likely that outsourcing continuation will be the 
strategic choice, vendor switching will be the intermediate 
choice, and backsourcing will be avoided”. The researchers 
warn that “high switching costs might entrap the customer 
organization into a ‘no change situation’, forcing it to 
continue outsourcing IT work to the same vendor”. Although 
customer entrapment has been noted - not much has been 
written in the academic literature about how to avoid or 
adequately address it.  
In contrast to high switching costs, if companies 
anticipate low switching costs and the option to choose from 
many vendors, there is “no real advantage in recontracting 
with the same vendor” [6]. Despite the significance of 
switching costs, the measurement of these costs remains 
unclear [12].  
A study analyzing the influencing factors of sourcing 
options found that firms which decided to switch providers 
or to backsource typically experienced high service quality 
and low relationship quality. They acknowledged that 
“relationship quality plays on important role in the decision 
to switch vendors. Of our three groups, those that switched 
vendors had the lowest perception of trust, commitment, 
culture, 
and 
communication 
in 
relation 
to 
their 
vendors…hence, the building of trust between an outsourcer 
and a firm is far more a socio-emotional condition than it is a 
matter of providing excellent product and/or service” [5]. 
The importance of relationship for staying with the 
current provider has been highlighted in a previous study [6], 
where the researchers found a high interest in staying with 
the same provider if relationship specific investments have 
been made. The risk of losing knowledge and the potential 
service operation distortions prevents companies from 
switching ITO providers. Reference [13] argues that the 
“switching of IT vendors is seen to impose too much short-
term operational risk to justify the financial savings and 
quality improvements that could accrue from a relationship 
with a new vendor”. 
D. ITO Success 
ITO success has not been extensively researched and 
there are contrasting conclusions on the contributing success 
factors. It is not clear if this is due to the lack of a generally 
accepted construct of a success definition or because “ITO 
success is so idiosyncratic that one must assess it against 
each organization’s own, different criteria” [14]. Reference 
[7], in a widely cited (more than 500 times according to 
Google scholar) literature survey and analysis, notes that 
“outsourcing success is usually viewed as the attainment of 
economic, 
technological 
or 
business-related 
benefits. 
Satisfaction with the benefits attained is often used as an 
indicator of outsourcing success”. 
Companies outsource their IT for different reasons, as 
previously noted. For example one company outsources to 
gain access to superior IT capabilities, another to focus on 
core competences, and another to reduce costs. This means 
that outsourcing success is dependent on the overall context. 
Thus, it is plausible that  “any attempt to assess ITO success 
in terms of more detailed criteria, such as cost savings or 
focusing on core business, requires identification of the 
different criteria relevant to each organization for each 
different contract at the time of the study”[14]. 
39
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

Therefore it appears to be important to define factors 
contributing to outsourcing success before the contract is 
signed [15].  Reference [14] argues that success should be 
assessed by: 
1. Defining most important outcomes before they 
actually materialise during the lifecycle of the 
contract 
2. Measuring the extent to which the outcomes have 
been achieved. 
Can outsourcing be considered as a standardised activity 
of everyday management with readily defined solutions? 
Reference [11] disputes this and concludes that “our review 
of 20 years of research establishes the common denominator 
that, for management and operational staff, outsourcing is far 
from easy”. Reference [16] found that even skilled 
organizations don’t work in a proactive mode and are hurt by 
slow organizational learning. Therefore, in order to reduce 
learning curves, it is important to understand how success 
can be defined and what the contributing factors are.  
Reference [15] suggests a more abstract description of 
success factor such as: 
• 
“Use ‘best outsourcing practices’ as major 
references for corporate outsourcing decision. 
• 
Clearly understand the goals, objective, scope, 
budget, and the duration of IS outsourcing 
project…. 
• 
Select a reputable vendor and then communicate 
well on the corporate outsourcing plan. 
• 
Realize the legal issues related to contract 
negotiations and signing. 
• 
Communicate 
well 
with 
employees 
and 
stakeholders about the outsourcing plan; this may 
reduce the severity of resistance.” 
Even though these factors are useful to get an overview 
about common success factors, they are of limited 
applicability for the specific issue of switching ITO 
providers. A review of 191 ITO articles relevant to practice 
from the early 1990s until 2009 found that “the three major 
categories of determinants of ITO success are ITO decisions, 
contractual governance, and relational governance” [17]. 
These determinants are depicted as direct relationships to 
ITO success in Fig. 1.  
Although organizational capabilities are also important as 
a success contributing factor, they are neither depicted in 
Fig. 1 nor are they described in the section about the 
determinants of success. Reference [17] recognises that “the 
most widely cited papers on this topic identify a mix of 
complementary capabilities that lead to ITO success”.  
Reference [18] develops this further into a list of nine 
pertinent organizational capabilities shown in Table I. 
 Reference [17] summarises research findings thus: 
“overall, we know ITO decisions that entailed selective use 
of outsourcing, the involvement of senior managers, and 
rigorous evaluation processes, were associated with higher 
levels of ITO success. Contractual governance also  
 
Figure 1.  Three main categories of determinants of ITO success [17] 
 
positively affected ITO success. In general, more contract 
detail, shorter-term contracts, and higher-dollar valued 
contracts were positively related to outsourcing success…. 
Relational governance positively affected ITO outcomes. 
Trust, norms, open communication, open sharing of 
information, mutual dependency and cooperation were 
always associated with higher levels of ITO success”.  The 
researchers found that top management commitment/support 
is the most critical success factor and that trust plays a vital 
role in the success of ITOs. Reference [7] adds that 
“Sabherwal also suggests that a ‘psychological contract’ 
exists in outsourcing relationships. This contract, which 
consists of unwritten and often unspoken expectations, is 
supported by the level of trust between the parties, and plays 
a role in resolving unanticipated problems or changes in the 
accomplishment of outsourced activities”. 
Based on these findings, it seems clear that trust and the 
management of relationships between the client and the 
outsourcing provider are important factors contributing to 
success. However, given that significant amounts of capital 
are often invested in outsourcing deals, clients should 
probably not solely rely on relational governance factors 
such as trust and relationship. Reference [6] endorses this 
view in asserting that it is not advisable to completely rely on 
partnership factors and neglect contract negotiation – “a  
TABLE I.  
ORGANISATIONAL CAPABILITIES RELEVANT TO ITO 
SUCCESS [18] 
 
Capability 
 
Capability 
1 
IS/IT leadership 
6 
Informed buying 
2 
Business systems 
thinking 
7 
Contract 
facilitation 
3 
Relationship 
building 
8 
Contract 
monitoring 
4 
Architecture 
planning 
9 
Vendor 
development 
5 
Making 
technology work 
 
 
40
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

good contract is essential to outsourcing success because the 
contract helps establish a balance of power between the 
client and the vendor”. 
Understanding the budget is of critical importance [15]. 
Reference [6] proposed the hiring of external experts as they 
know the hazards of outsourcing and how they can be 
managed. They argue that the additional costs may be 
justified in relation to the potential impact of the hidden 
costs. Other researchers found that “managing costs is less 
important than managing portfolio configuration, complexity 
and risk” [16]. This implies the importance of actively 
managing the outsourcing provider.  
Success itself can be considered an important factor 
contributing to success. “ITO success fuelled higher levels of 
trust (relational governance, built stronger client and supplier 
capabilities, and determined the kinds of ITO decisions and 
ITO contracts clients made moving….Conversely, ITO 
failure fuelled greater need for controls, monitoring 
mechanisms, tougher contracts, and determined the kinds of 
ITO decisions clients made” [17]. 
 
E. ITO Methodologies 
 
Reference [16] defines a detailed process model using nine 
building blocks with 54 activities. This model describes the 
complete ITO process lifecycle and appears to be the most 
comprehensive in the academic literature. Many ITO process 
models distinguish between activities before signing the 
contract (pre-delivery) and after signing the contract 
(delivery & re-evaluate) [3] [13] [16] [19]. The ITO process 
model for this research is depicted in Fig. 2. The six major 
building blocks are: investigation, provider selection, 
contract negotiation, transition, manage/service delivery, and 
options evaluation. The first three building blocks can be 
considered as pre-delivery phase, the next two can be 
considered as delivery-phase, and the last activity can be 
considered as the re-evaluation phase.  
Transition is a complex, risky, and challenging building 
block of strategic importance which begins after the contract 
is signed and ends with service delivery. Transition “sets the 
tone for the entire relationship and involves handover of 
outsourced services from either the client’s internal IT 
department or the incumbent service provider” [1]. 
Transition can be summarized as “a pre-requisite to 
implementing an outsourcing contract successfully” [1]. 
Reference [20] defines the transition stage as “implementing 
the new way of operating” and states that it is the goal of 
transition to ensure that the new way of working is realized.  
Transition includes the following activities: “conducting 
knowledge transfer, determining and implementing new 
governance structures, and applying the processes of the 
service provider” [1]. This demonstrates that many actions 
need to take place during transition before “an outsourcing 
project can be actually implemented” [15]. Reference [16] 
has identified the main transitional activities as shown in Fig. 
3. The cost the transitional building block can take a 
significant portion of the overall costs, with some researchers   
suggesting that the cost of transition ranges from 2 to 15% of 
 
 
Figure 2.  ITO process with the focus on transition  
 
the total cost of the first year of the outsourcing deal [1].  It is 
assumed that “over two-thirds of the problems in these 
unsuccessful engagements arise due to failed or poor 
transition” [1]. Due to the lack of statistical information 
regarding what percentage of switching ITO providers fail 
due to poor transition, it is assumed in this review that the 
percentage is at least as high as this.  
III. 
CRITICAL ISSUES IN SWITCHING PROVIDERS 
 
When companies outsource their IT the first time it can 
be assumed that the majority of IT experts will transfer from 
the client company to ITO provider. Together with the IT 
experts, the client specific knowledge is transitioned to the 
provider. This reduces the negative performance impact. In 
contrast, when providers are switched it cannot be 
anticipated that the majority of IT experts (together with the 
client specific knowledge) will transition from the incumbent 
provider to the new provider. Reference [13] concludes that 
“a long-term outsourcing relationship with a prior vendor 
means that much daily operational knowledge stays with the 
prior vendor. The client’s knowledge loss exacerbates the 
problem of knowledge transfer as the client no longer 
possesses the information that the new vendor critically 
needs to service the client”. The new provider requires close 
cooperation with the incumbent provider, who can pursue 
two different exit strategies. They can either actively co-
operate with the new provider or “pursue a hostile strategy of 
being uncooperative” [21].  
It can be assumed that the leaving provider has only 
marginal interest in actively supporting the incoming 
provider, for example with knowledge transition. This is 
41
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

particularly the case if the outgoing provider is not 
contractually obliged to support the incoming provider. 
Reference [21] named source code as an example of this, but 
the findings apply to all client specific knowledge.  
Reference [6] found that “many managers are reluctant to 
anticipate the end of an outsourcing contract. Therefore, they 
often fail to plan an exit strategy”. With the risk of loss of 
knowledge comes the risk of degraded service quality. 
Reference [13] found that switching often lead to “temporary 
service disruptions of operations, lowered service levels and 
frustrations and dissatisfaction among the client employees”. 
In addition this can lead to broken transition milestones, 
extended project duration and additional costs. Clients 
should take into consideration that once the contract of the 
incumbent provider has expired, the provider will leave 
regardless of whether the new provider is already prepared to 
deliver the service [21]. This can negatively impact service 
levels and even risk business continuity if the new provider 
is not completely ready. Alternatively, the client needs to be 
prepared to additionally pay the old provider for extending 
the contract until the new provider can adequately deliver the 
IT services. 
When providers are switched transitional activities can be 
extensively resource draining for client, who needs to 
manage (monitor and correct) the operations of both the 
incumbent and new provider and additionally the transition 
between the two. Even relatively simple transitions where 
the IT can be transferred directly from the client to the 
outsourcing provider can be a costly phase and “in some 
cases, they (the transition activities) halved or even cancelled 
out the company’s potential savings from outsourcing” [22]. 
It can be assumed that the transitional activities for switching 
providers are even more costly. As a general rule it can be 
stated that the more idiosyncratic the IT service to be 
outsourced, the more complex and costly the transition. 
If the perception is that ITO can be handled as a 
commodity, there is a risk that companies which have chosen 
to switch outsourcing providers underestimate the effort, 
complexities and risks involved. Reference [3] has disputed 
the common perception that “once part of a business process 
has been outsourced, it can, if necessary, easily be ‘un-
plugged’ from one supplier and ‘re-plugged’ into another”.  
 
A. Pre-delivery Phase – Factors Contributing to Switching 
Success 
The client should ensure that the new potential ITO 
provider conducts an extensive due diligence review. 
“Before the service providers make a final offer during 
contractual negotiations, a thorough due diligence activity is 
required to closely understand the actual outsourced work 
and its related dependencies.” [1]. Due diligence is even 
more important when providers are switched to ensure that 
the interdependencies between client and leaving provider 
are fully understood. Due diligence lays the baseline for the 
overall project management of the outsourced activity, 
encompassing scope, time and quality definition. Reference 
[3] has noted the importance of identifying essential specific 
knowledge before the actual transition phase to avoid 
disruptions during transition.  
However, it is questionable whether some clients have 
sufficient resources to successfully accomplish such 
preparations. Identifying knowledge gaps before the 
transition is likely to be only partly successful.  Reference 
[13] noted that “at the time of the contract negotiations, both 
parties (client & new provider) were still largely unaware of 
the gaps in the knowledge that would trouble the change-
over from the prior provider to the new provider”. Much of 
the operational knowledge is only visible to the people 
involved in everyday operations. This means that the client 
and the new provider can possible face unexpected 
knowledge gaps during transition. 
B. Building Block Transition - Factors Contributing to 
Switching Success 
Good project management and realistic time schedules 
are critical. “Unrealistic transition timetables are a frequent 
source of trouble. Both buyers and providers should look 
with a sceptical eye at the viability of their transition 
timeframes” [2].  It is also important to incorporate project 
buffers or contingencies into the project plan. “Any 
organization that explores a new sourcing option in terms of 
suppliers, new services, or new engagement models…must 
plan on false starts. Executives often manage learning by 
pilot testing new sourcing options” [17]. Although this is a 
good method of learning and getting the experience for some 
sourcing options in principle, it is not easy to pilot test 
switching ITO providers in practice.  
To effectively manage the transition the client needs to 
set up an overall transition governance structure. Reference 
[1] asserts that “both client and service providers need to 
develop and implement an appropriate governance model for 
efficiently 
conducting 
day-to-day 
activities 
and 
for 
monitoring it at a higher level”. The governance structure 
should define project roles and responsibilities such as the 
project joint steering committee. All parties (client, new 
provider and old provider) should be part of the joint steering 
committee. Part of the responsibilities of the joint steering 
committee is it to manage conflicts and to implement a joint 
transition program to plan, monitor, execute, and report on 
all transition switch deliverables and milestones.  
Managing the complex tripartite relationship is resource 
intensive. Reference [3] emphasises the importance of 
sufficient resources from the client to manage the transition 
and materializing risks. The authors call for the active 
involvement of the client management to ensure that the old 
provider supports the new provider as needed and therefore 
minimize service disruptions.  
Reference [13] found that: “switching required close 
collaboration and mutual adjustment among all parties”. 
Although the motivation of the old ITO provider to support 
the new provider might be low, it is a critical success factor 
for the overall transition success. “An uncooperative old 
supplier or an insensitive new supplier increases the risk of 
transition problems. Organisations must therefore carefully 
manage the delicate tripartite relationship tensions” [3]. 
Reference [13] also found that the old supplier is often 
42
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

needed to develop joint knowledge together with the new 
supplier to ensure that all parties meet their responsibilities - 
“critical to the success is the transfer of the knowledge of the 
client’s environment and processes. Poor knowledge transfer 
may result in disruptions of operations, lowered service 
levels, and frustrations and dissatisfaction among the client’s 
and the new vendor’s employees”. 
Reference 
[6] 
emphasises 
the 
importance 
of 
“commitment of employees transferred” to the provider and 
that the outsourcing success is related to it. “First, key 
employees must be retained and motivated. For most 
activities, outsourcing does not mean transferring all the 
employees to the vendor. When an activity has been 
performed in-house for a long period of time, firm-specific 
knowledge about how to run the activity smoothly has 
accumulated. Employees who possess this firm-specific 
knowledge must be identified”. 
What does this mean for switching providers? Clients 
need to identify employees from the incumbent provider who 
possess important firm specific knowledge and try either to 
reintegrate them into the client company or make sure that 
they move over to the new client or ensure adequate 
knowledge transfer. However, it is likely that the leaving 
provider will block the transfer of personal to stay 
competitive [21]. Transferring key employees early to the 
new provider could negatively impact the production 
capability of the incumbent provider. 
IV. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
Even though the modern form of ITO practice effectively 
started in the late 1980s, it still cannot be considered a 
standardized routine management practice. Companies 
outsource their IT for different reasons though the primary 
objective is cost reduction. Several studies indicate a further 
growth of the ITO market of 5-8% per year [11]. The typical 
length of ITO contracts is 5-10 years [7] - a time span over 
which it is neither possible to foresee the clients’ IT requests 
nor to estimate the impact of the overall economic 
environment. Various factors have led a number of clients to 
cancel their contracts prematurely.  
The options for clients are to continue with the 
incumbent provider, switch the provider, or IT backsource 
(i.e., in-source again). It is estimated that between 25% [10] 
and 50% [4] of clients do not continue the relationship with 
the same provider. Miscellaneous factors influence these 
three sourcing options, most importantly the anticipated 
switching costs, the relationship between client and provider, 
and the fear of losing knowledge.  
ITO success has not been extensively researched and 
there are contrasting conclusions regarding the contributing 
success factors [14]. Research has found that success needs 
to be considered in the context of the specific outsourcing 
arrangement. Several academics agree that the desirable 
outcomes need to be defined before the ITO starts, and that 
outcomes should be systematically assessed after it has been 
finalized and is underway. 
General ITO factors contributing to success can be 
grouped into the major categories of ITO decisions, 
contractual 
governance, 
relational 
governance, 
and 
organizational capabilities [17]. In the category of ITO 
decisions, top management commitment and support is the 
most important factor [17]. In the relational governance 
category, trust and relationship management play a vital role 
[17]. However, given that significant amounts of capital are 
often invested in ITO deals, clients should not completely 
rely on relational governance factors such as trust and 
relationship. Important capabilities are required for success 
such as cost control and provider management. In addition, 
success itself can be considered as an important factor 
contributing to success. 
The outsourcing process may be conceptualized as six 
major building blocks - investigation, provider selection, 
contract negotiation, transition, manage/service delivery, and 
options evaluation. The first three building blocks can be 
considered as the pre-delivery phase, the next two can be 
considered as the delivery phase, and the last activity can be 
considered as the re-evaluation phase. The transition building 
block is a complex, risky, and challenging process of 
strategic importance which begins after the contract is signed 
and ends with service delivery. It is assumed that “over two-
thirds of the problems in these unsuccessful engagements 
arise due to failed or poor transition” [1].  
When providers are switched, it cannot be assumed that 
the accumulated IT expertise (both in terms of personnel and 
client specific knowledge) will transition from the incumbent 
provider to the new provider. This results in several major 
issues, which are significantly impacted by the strategy of 
the incumbent provider. Their reaction can be grouped into 
two categories – a cooperative strategy or hostile strategy. 
Clients are well advised to prepare for both scenarios. 
Switching providers can be extensively resource draining for 
clients, as clients need to manage (monitor and correct) the 
operation of the incumbent provider, the operations of the 
new provider and additionally the transition from the old to 
the new one. This means clients should budget and plan for 
extra resources and associated contingencies. 
During the pre-delivery phase it is essential for a 
successful transition to identify specific knowledge that 
needs to be transferred.  A strategy should be developed to 
establish how this knowledge will be transferred and key 
knowledge experts need to be identified. Clients may reckon 
that major knowledge gaps will only be recognised during 
the actual transition. 
In the critical transition building block, several factors 
contributing to success have been identified. Conducting a 
stringent project management methodology with focus on 
realistic time schedules and incorporated buffers is an 
important ingredient for success. Implementing an effective 
governance structure plays a vital role for a successful 
transition when providers are switched. Ensuring early 
knowledge transfer and the transfer of key knowledge   
43
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

 
Figure 3.  Conceptual framework - Switching providers with the focus on 
transition 
 
experts from the incumbent provider are two of the most 
important factors for success. Finally, managing the complex  
tripartite relationship is resource intensive but an important 
factor for success. The conceptual framework depicted in 
Fig. 3 has been developed to guide further research. 
In conclusion, the switching of ITO providers is a 
complex, risky and resource intensive endeavour with the 
transition stage being the major building block in a wider 
process. However, not much is known about methods, 
processes and strategies for switching ITO providers as most 
research has focused on the initial outsourcing [15] [20] [23]. 
It is intended that this literature review and analysis will 
provide a useful starting point for subsequent research into 
these areas, and this is being pursued by the authors through 
primary research involving a wide range of practitioners 
from ITO clients and ITO providers. The scope of this 
research will be a) large ITO deals with total contract value 
of more than €150 million and b) at least 2 IT-services (e.g. 
network services and server production services) which have 
been outsourced and need to be switched. The scope of this 
research will not be limited to any specific industry. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] E. Beulen and V. Tiwari, “Parallel transitions in ITO: making 
it happen,” in Global Sourcing of Information Technology 
and Business Processes Vol. 55, I. Oshri & J. Kotlarsky 
(Eds.), Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 55-68. 
[2] M. Robinson and P. Iannone, “9 ways to avoid outsourcing 
failure, a three-part approach to maximizing the value of an 
ITO 
deal” 
 
retrieved 
30.01.2011, 
from 
http://www.cio.com.au/article/205186/9_ways_avoid_outsour
cing_failure/?pp=1&fp=4&fpid=15  2007. 
[3] K. Sia Siew, K. Lim Wee, and  K. P. Periasamy, “Switching 
ITO suppliers: enhancing transition readiness,” MIS Quarterly 
Executive,  9(1), 2010, pp. 23-33. 
[4] D. Whitten, S. Chakrabarty, S., and R. Wakefield, “The 
strategic choice to continue outsourcing, switch vendors, or 
backsource: do switching costs matter?” Information & 
Management, 
47(3), 
2010, 
pp. 
167-175. 
doi: 
DOI: 
10.1016/j.im.2010.01.006. 
[5] D. Whitten and D. Leidner,  “Bringing IT back: an analysis of 
the decision to backsource or switch vendors,” Decision 
Sciences, 37(4), 2006, pp. 605-621.  
[6] J. Barthélemy and D. Adsit, “The seven deadly sins of 
outsourcing (and executive commentary),” The Academy of 
Management Executive (1993-2005), 17(2), 2003, pp. 87-100.  
[7] J. Dibbern, T. Goles, R. Hirschheim, and B. Jayatilaka,  
“Information systems outsourcing: a survey and analysis of 
the literature,” Data Base for Advances in Information 
Systems, 35(4), 2004, pp. 6-98. 
 
44
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

[8] L. Willcocks, “Machiavelli, management and outsourcing: 
still on the learning curve,” Strategic Outsourcing: An 
International Journal, 4(1), 2011, p. 13. 
[9] M. Benaroch, Q. Dai, and R. Kauffman, “Should we go our 
own way? backsourcing flexibility in IT services contracts,” 
Journal of Management Information Systems, 26(4), 2010, 
pp. 317-358.  
[10] M. C. Lacity, L. Willcocks, and J. Rottman, “Global 
outsourcing of back office services: lessons, trends, and 
enduring challenges,” Strategic Outsourcing: An International 
Journal, 
1(1), 
2008, 
pp. 
13-34. 
doi: 
10.1108/17538290810857457. 
[11] M. C. Lacity, S. Khan, A. Yan, and L. P. Willcocks, “A 
review of the ITO empirical literature and future research 
directions,” Journal of Information Technology, 2010 doi: 
10.1057/jit.2010.21. 
[12] D. Whitten and R. L. Wakefield, “Measuring switching costs 
in ITO services,” The Journal of Strategic Information 
Systems, 
15(3), 
2006, 
pp. 
219-248. 
doi: 
DOI: 
10.1016/j.jsis.2005.11.002. 
[13] M. Alaranta, S. L. Jarvenpaa, “Changing IT providers in 
public sector outsourcing: managing the loss of experiential 
knowledge,” in 43rd Hawaii International Conference on 
System 
Science, 
Hawaii, 
 
2010, 
pp. 
1-10, 
doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/HICSS.2010.101. 
[14] S. Cullen, P. Seddon, and L. Willcocks, “ITO success: A 
multi-dimensional, contextual perspective of outsourcing 
outcomes,” in Second information Systems Workshop on 
global Sourcing: Service, Knowledge and Innovation, Val 
d’Isere, France, 2008, pp. 1-38. 
[15] D. C. Chou and A. Y. Chou, “Information systems 
outsourcing life cycle and risks analysis,” Computer 
Standards & Interfaces, 31(5), 2009, pp. 1036-1043. doi: 
DOI: 10.1016/j.csi.2008.09.032. 
[16] S. Cullen, P. Seddon, and L. Willcocks, “Managing 
outsourcing: the life cycle imperative,” MIS Quarterly 
Executive, 4(1), 2005, pp. 229-246. 
[17] M. C. Lacity, S. A. Khan, and L. P. Willcocks, “A review of 
the ITO literature: insights for practice,” The Journal of 
Strategic Information Systems, 18(3), 2009, pp. 130-146. doi: 
DOI: 10.1016/j.jsis.2009.06.002 . 
[18] D. Feeny and L. P. Willcocks, “Core IS capabilities for 
exploiting information technology,” Sloan Management 
Review, 39(3), 1998, pp. 9-21. 
[19] V. Tiwari, “Transition during offshore autsourcing: a process 
model,”  ICIS 2009 Proceedings, 33, 2009. 
[20] S. Cullen and L. P. Willcocks, “Intelligent ITO: eight building 
blocks to success,” Butterworth-Heinemann, 2003. 
[21] C Chua, W. Lim, S. Sia, and C. Soh, “Threat-Balancing in 
Vendor Transition,” in 3rd International Research Workshop 
on Information Technology Project Management, Paris, 
France  2008, pp. 19-26.  
[22] J. Barthelemy, “The hidden costs of ITO,” Sloan Management 
Review, 42(3), 2001, pp. 60-69.  
[23] D. Whitten, “Adaptability in IT sourcing: the impact of 
switching costs,” in Global Sourcing of Information 
Technology and Business Processes Vol. 55, I. Oshri & J. 
Kotlarsky (Eds.), Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 202-
216, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-15417-1_11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

