 
 
Design Process for Decision Support Services to Support Multiple Agencies 
 
Jari Leppäniemi 
Software engineering 
Tampere University of Technology, Pori unit 
Pori, Finland 
jari.leppaniemi@tut.fi 
 
Abstract—  In  this  paper,  we  describe  a  design  process  for  
developing deployable information services in service oriented 
emergency management systems that support multiple 
agencies.  These services aim to support decision-making based 
on situational awareness information. The service design 
process has been defined to support information needs in all 
phases of the lifecycle of emergency management. For this 
reason, we believe that the defined design process is general 
and thus it should be a useful base practice for similar tasks in 
many other operational environments. There are no type limits 
for the defined services; they could be independent services or 
compositions  of  other  services.   First,  we  give  a  short  
description of the stakeholders of the domain and our 
approach for useful emergency information. After that we 
describe the overall service defining process and give a 
supportive checklist for service designers and managers of 
different agencies. 
Keywords-emergency management;decision support;  service 
design.  
I. 
 THE STAKEHOLDERS OF THE ECOSYSTEM 
OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT KNOWLEDGE 
Many kinds of skills and a lot of knowledge are required 
by several kinds of participants in the management of major 
emergencies like natural and manmade disasters and 
catastrophes. These participants are thus vital organic parts 
of the ecosystem of emergency management knowledge and 
they are connected to the information and data networks 
either as consumers or producers – and in many cases as 
both. Some of the participants represent well-trained 
permanent solutions to frequent accidents but some of the 
parties are connected to a particular situation more 
occasionally. However, during the lifecycle of disaster 
management, the goals, overall picture and situational 
awareness must be maintained as well as possible [3]. So, 
who are the bodies interested in the knowledge of disaster 
management? Which groups are the stakeholders of the 
ecosystem? According to the Emergency Information 
Interoperability 
Framework 
workgroup 
[4], 
these 
stakeholders typically represent state-based authorities like 
rescue, firefighting, policing, health and emergency, safety, 
etc. 
Non-governmental 
organizations, 
international 
coordination agents, ICT solution providers, EM and NGO 
professional and academic communities may be in crucial 
positions during the emergency management lifecycle, as are 
often also the public and several types of volunteer 
organizations [4]. However, their list is not fully satisfactory. 
It may be completed by adding new groups like the general 
public, the victims of a disaster (people and industries), 
relatives of victims, the insurance and financial sector, and 
national airlines and other carriers. After some regrouping, 
refinement, and adding of these new parties, the list may be 
now defined as follows (examples are mainly US-based): 
 
1) 
State-based emergency management agencies, for 
example: 
x 
operative authorities: Police, Fire and Rescue, 
Ambulance service, FEMA, 
x 
expert authorities: Weather service, EPA,  
x 
co-operative agencies: DHS, Army.  
2) 
Domestic civil organizations, for example: 
x 
Red Cross, National Guard, Salvation Army, 
x 
Air National Guard. 
3) 
Large international organizations and agencies, for 
example: 
x 
UN organizations: OCHA, WHO, WFP, 
x 
ICRC, 
x 
NATO EADRCC. 
4) 
International  non-governmental organizations, for 
example: 
x 
MSF, OXFAM,  
x 
MapAction. 
5) 
International support services and projects, for 
example:  
x 
UNDAC, 
x 
EU MIC, 
x 
ReliefWeb, Sahana project.  
6) 
Research and education organizations of emergency 
management, for example: 
x 
Universities and colleges, 
x 
ISCRAM, IAEM, and NetHope. 
7) 
Information and communication solution providers, 
for example: EADS Ltd, Nokia Ltd. 
8) 
Public: Non-affected citizens, Media. 
9) 
Victims of the disaster, for example:  
x 
Peoples and their relatives, 
x 
Affected 
communities, 
companies, 
and 
industries. 
10) Finance and insurance companies. 
11) Airlines, carriers, energy companies, etc. needed for 
help during the incident. 
 
The needs, available resources, and readiness to 
contribute to management and communication tasks vary 
between different groups. Fig. 1 describes an abstract view 
of the growing interoperability approach.  
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

 
 
 
Figure 1. 
Interoperability 
services 
for 
Emergency 
Management 
Stakeholders. 
 
The ability to interoperate via information and 
communication services could be classified using a five-level 
scale, starting from no interoperability and going up to 
business process level interoperability. The intermediate 
levels are syntactic level, semantic level, and service level 
interoperability. Different types of stakeholders are in the 
outmost circle in Fig. 1. Their ability to create a common 
situational awareness is enhanced via special interoperability 
services that are used to connect different parties at the 
appropriate 
level. 
Thus, 
business 
process 
level 
interoperability could be reached using all of these different 
types of sub-services. The essences of these sub-services are: 
x 
Wrapper services for syntactic level interoperability,  
x 
Ontology services for semantic level interoperability 
and  
x 
Consistency 
services 
for 
service 
level 
interoperability.  
Process level interoperability is the deepest level of 
information exchange and availability to communicate with 
other operating agencies. Cataldo and Rinaldi gave an 
example of knowledge sharing using the P2P approach and 
semantic web services [2] and another example of a service-
based system meant to support medical information 
exchange in real time was given by Hauenstein et al. in [5]. 
In the next figure (Fig. 2), the different stakeholder 
groups 
are 
positioned 
based 
on 
their 
need 
for 
interoperability.  
Service level
interoperability
Process level
interoperability
1, (2-6),(11)
2-7, 10, 11
8, 9
 
Figure 2. Interoperability needs of the stakeholder groups of emergency 
management ecosystem.  
The key agencies like national authorities (group 1) are 
the focal point from the interoperability point of view. Their 
success  is  based  on  the  practical  suitability  of  the  process  
level 
interoperability. 
This 
could 
be 
achieved 
by 
orchestrating 
the 
common/shared business processes. 
Domestic civil organizations (2), large international 
organizations (3), international NGOs (4), international 
support services (5), international projects (5), and research 
and education communities (6) could in some incidents also 
be positioned at the central point of interoperability, or in 
other words, in process level interoperability. However, 
normally their interoperability needs are fulfilled by a service 
level interoperability. This is based on usage of single 
services independently as a part of their normal operations. 
Probably most parts of the process level operations might be 
modeled and orchestrated beforehand and supervised based 
on the current needs of the incident.    
     The providers of information and communication 
technology (7) and finance and insurance companies (10) are 
positioned to be ordinary service consumers and providers in 
this model in a traditional way. The public (8), victims and 
their relatives, affected companies and communities (9) are 
positioned outside the interoperability service architecture. 
Their information needs are mainly covered by the dedicated 
services offered by groups (1) and (2) and also in some cases 
by  groups  (3)  and  (5).  There  are  also  auxiliary  role  
stakeholders such as airline and carrier companies (11), 
whose fluent integration to support emergency management 
activities in different phases of the emergency lifecycle vary 
from critical to very important. 
 
II. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE FOR EMERGENCY 
MANAGEMENT KNOWLEDGE ECOSYSTEM 
Some of the stakeholders are interested in emergency 
information only at certain times or when certain conditions 
and limits are met and then only temporarily and/or in an 
extreme hurry. For this reason, it should be possible to offer 
open interfaces to stakeholders and organizations that do not 
take part / operate daily in emergency management. The 
same applies to the wider public and third parties who might 
want to implement “ad-hoc” type mash-ups for information 
sharing and independent communication. Fig. 3 presents an 
overview of the system architecture for a service-based 
emergency management knowledge ecosystem [6]. To cite 
[6] “The main access to the services, i.e., the interfaces of the 
system are EMI-A and EMI-P. The former is an authorized 
interface for emergency management services and the latter 
is a public interface for the general public and non-
authorized users of the system(s). Because the concept and 
function of a service bus is crucial for this ecosystem, there 
should not be a single point of failure in its functionality. 
Instead, it should be fault-tolerant and distributable. 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Service-oriented system architecture for Emergency 
Management Knowledge Ecosystem [6] 
 
The legacy systems (authorities, research organizations 
etc.) located at the bottom of Fig. 3 interoperate with a large 
service-based architecture via open standards. They can 
preserve their proprietary interfaces and they can open new 
standard interfaces implemented by means of an appropriate 
technology (WS-*, RESTful, http, etc.) [10]. Sporadic and 
temporary users can be connected as an information service 
provider or to a normal user via a public and open service 
interface like EMI-P in the Fig. 3. A more permanent 
connection to the ecosystem is established using either the 
common emergency service bus (EMI-P) or a more 
controlled interface for authorized users (EMI-A), which 
supports the coordination and supervision of shared business 
processes.” As mentioned above, an emergency management 
knowledge ecosystem consists of different types of 
stakeholders. Only some of them work in close relationship / 
interaction daily and have thus established routine ways of 
working 
and 
created 
shared 
concepts 
and 
mutual 
understanding. The coordination of the shared (and modeled) 
business processes could be based on the special control and 
service mediation layer described in Figure 4. Some of the 
services should be especially designed for supporting the 
modeled emergency management processes, in other words 
controlling the performance of the use cases, data and 
message translations, and routing messages to the correct 
endpoints. 
 
 
Figure 4. Shared business process supported by service bus and process 
control engine. 
 
According to Fig. 3 and 4, we have the main user 
interfaces (the “views” in MVC model) in the user plane, the 
task-centric supervision (“control” in the MVC model) in the 
process control and a service mediation plane implemented 
by a service bus. Finally, the core data access (“model” in 
the MVC model), which is a composition of different types 
of entity and utility services and legacy systems, is 
positioned in the infrastructure plane in order to achieve the 
interoperability between the different stakeholders, as 
described in Figs. 1 and 2. 
 
III. 
SERVICE DESIGN PROCESS FOR DECISION 
SUPPORT SERVICES 
 
In this section, we will give a proposal for a service 
design process that is based on process models of the 
collaboration in major emergencies and disasters. The given 
proposal is comprised of an identifying process and a 
detailed  checklist  due  to  the  various  needs  of  the  
stakeholders on the field. We also believe that our approach 
might be valuable complement to domain analysis methods 
like presented in [8]. The main concern for the intended 
stakeholders is now a proper situational awareness for a 
decision maker. The decision points are not limited only to 
the hectic response phase of the emergency lifecycle. 
Instead, we believe that our approach might have a much 
wider applicability during the other emergency management 
phases 
(prevention 
& 
mitigation, 
preparation 
and 
restoration). The decision points (or moments in time) in 
different lifecycle phases [1] can be identified from accident 
investigating reports, by interviewing people and reviewing 
guideline documents, current practices, plans and process 
models. All processes must be analyzed and modeled for 
collaboration from the viewpoint of interoperability. The 
service design process for decision support services we 
propose is currently the following: 
 
A. Identify the main decision points: 
 
1) 
Choose some known disaster type. 
2) 
Identify the main stakeholders, their tasks, and 
concerns. 
3) 
Identify the main decision situations and decision 
makers at different levels e.g. strategic/operational/tactical 
(defined in [7]) and in corresponding phases of the lifecycle 
e.g. preparation, response, recovery, prevention and 
mitigation (defined in [1]). 
4) 
Analyze whether it is possible for decisions to be 
also made by others (persons / roles) and/or at a different 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

 
 
moment of time – if the required information and decision-
making power were available to them. 
5) 
Document the options using B1 – B4.   
 
B. For each decision point (A3, A4) also try to discover: 
 
1) 
Which data, information and knowledge are most 
essential for this situation?  
2) 
Is it possible to support the analysts and decision 
makers merely by presenting only that information? 
3) 
Do the currently used decision data and information 
need prioritizing and/or reduction?  
4) 
Is it possible to enhance and/or accelerate the 
decision-making process by filtering, composing, or 
otherwise preprocessing the data before showing it to the 
analysts and decision makers at a tactical, operational, or 
strategic level? 
It should be crystal clear for the service designers that 
many of the earlier practices may have sub-optimal solutions 
that are caused by tight organizational limits and/or rigid 
information ownerships. In order to achieve optimal 
solutions, the design plans may need several iterations before 
the desired interoperability for enhanced collaboration and 
efficiency. Additionally, the cultural differences between the 
stakeholder groups, organizations, and agencies should be 
understood and elaborated in order to be able to introduce 
new services. The service design process could be further 
supported by detailed guidance and checklists. In the next 
section, we will give a preliminary checklist of issues that 
should be noted during the design and deployment processes 
of the services. 
 
C. Checklist for decision support service designers and 
managers: 
1) What sort of decision has to be made? (What sort of 
situation is to be followed or anticipated?) 
Is the decision to be made tactical, operational or 
strategic?  
Is the decision to be made a routine decision, kind of ad-
hoc or is it somehow special?   
Is the decision based on guidance or normal procedures 
or is it based on the experience or intuition of the decision 
maker? 
Is the decision to be made classified or is it public? 
Who has to be informed of that decision? 
Who has the authority to make this decision? 
 
2) What sort of data and information is needed for the 
decision? (Which data and information are useful, 
worthwhile, and wanted?) 
Where is that data and information? 
Who will have it now?  
Who else needs it? 
What are the types of that data and information? 
How this information could be brought from its origin? 
Is it time dependent? 
Is it location dependent? 
 
3) What information and data might be or need to be 
swapped between different agencies? 
Who are the peers of the information exchange and data 
swapping? 
Who has the authority to start the information exchange? 
What are the reasons for the information exchange? 
What are the specific impacts that are tried to be 
achieved? 
 
4) What are the exact situations and the moments in time 
when certain data and information are exchanged and 
needed? 
How often does it happen? 
Who will be the initiator? 
Who owns that data and information? 
Who will be responsible for the maintenance of the data 
sources? 
Who will be the overall coordinator of the data and 
information? 
Who will be responsible for the reliability of the data? 
Are the access rights of the different user groups to the 
data clearly defined?  
 
5) What are the main obstacles and barriers to each type 
of information? 
What languages and character sets are available? 
To what extent is the data and information confidential? 
What are the actual information packages and containers? 
What are the technical formats and protocols? 
What is the availability of the needed codecs and 
transformers? 
 
6) What are the types of messages are required for 
interoperability?  
Are the messages: 
• 
Alert messages? 
• 
Summons? 
• 
Request for more resources messages? 
• 
Letters of request? 
• 
Notification messages? 
• 
Announcement and information messages? 
• 
Bulletins and press releases? 
What is the confidentiality of the messages? 
 
7) What are the available information and data networks 
and communication protocols at the decision time?  
What are the alternatives for the primary networks 
(POTS, LA, SMS, CDMA, GSM, UMTS, etc.)? 
Are the available networks secure enough for each type 
of message? 
Is it possible to ensure that classified information is also 
secure on the end users’ desktop or handheld?  
 
The checklist is still preliminary and has not yet been 
tested in a practical situation. However, the list is composed 
based on the author’s experience and research on 
interoperability issues in emergency management. It is 
practically impossible to give any references to the items of 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

 
 
the list. The questions: What? (Data), How? (Function), 
Where? (Network), Who? (People), When? (Time) and 
Why? (Motivation) are elaborated from the different 
viewpoints that were presented in Zachman Framework by 
Sowa and Zachman [9]. The framework [9, 11 and 12] has 
been one of the inspiration sources when formulating the 
checklist. 
IV. 
SUMMARY 
The main stakeholders of the emergency management 
knowledge ecosystem were described as different groups in a 
service-based interoperability domain. The main types of 
subservices supporting different levels of interoperability 
between the various stakeholders were introduced. The 
service-based system architecture for decision support 
services aiming to enhance disaster and emergency 
management was also briefly presented. Finally, a proposal 
for a general service design process for emergency 
management decision support was described followed with a 
checklist for designers and managers. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. Alexander, “Principles of Emergency Planning and 
Management”. US: Terra Publishing, Oxford University 
Press, 2002. (ISBN 9780195218381) 
[2] A. Cataldo and A. Rinaldi, “Sharing Ontology in Complex 
Scenario using a Peer-To-Peer Approach”, International 
Journal of Computer Information Systems and Industrial 
Management Applications (IJCISIM), Vol. 1, pp. 92– 109, 
2009.   
[3] L. Carver and M. Turoff, “Human Computer Interaction: The 
Human and Computers as a Team in Emergency Management 
Information Systems”. Communications of ACM 50, 3, 2007, 
pp. 33–38. 
[4] EIIF (W3C) Incubator Group Report 6 August 2009. 
Retrieved 
15/02/2012. 
Word 
Wide 
Web, 
http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/eiif/XGR-EIIF-
20090806/. 
[5] L. Hauenstein, T. Gao, TW. Sze, D. Crawford, A. Alm and D. 
White, “A Cross-Functional Service-Oriented Architecture to 
Support Real-Time Information Exchange in Emergency 
Medical Response,” Proceedings of the 28th IEEE EMBS 
Annual International Conference New York City, USA, Aug 
30–Sept 3. 2006, pp. 6478–6481. 
[6] J. Leppäniemi, “Domain Specific Service Oriented Reference 
Architecture (Case: Distributed Disasters and Emergency 
Management),” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Computer 
Information Systems and Industrial Management Applications 
(IJCISIM), Vol. 4, 2012, pp. 043–054.  
[7] OASIS EU-Framework Project 6 (FP6). Retrieved 15/02/12, 
Word Wide Web, http://www.oasis-fp6.org/  
[8] I.  Pansa,  M.  Reichle,  C.  Leist  and  S.  Abeck,  “A  Domain  
Ontology for Designing Management Services,” Service 
Computation 2011: The Third International Conferences on 
Advanced Service Computing. September 25-30, 2011 - 
Rome, Italy  
[9] J.F. Sowa and J.A. Zachman, “Extending and formalizing the 
framework for information systems architecture,” IBM 
Systems Journal, 31, 3. 1992, pp. 590–616. 
[10] List of Web service specifications. In Wikipedia, The Free 
Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved 
09:31, 
04/05/2010, 
http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_Web_servi
ce_specifications&oldid=354335607 
[11] J.A. Zachman, “A framework for information systems  
architecture,” IBM Systems Journal, 26, 3. 1987, pp. 276–
292. 
[12] Zachman Framework. (2010, April 26). In Wikipedia, The 
Free 
Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved 
09:24, 
04/05/2010,   
http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zachman_Framewo
rk&oldid=358410820 
 
or 
http://www.zachmaninternational.com/index.php/the-
zachman-framework 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

