Towards Extending USEfUL-ness for Urban Logistics with Service-orientation
Richard Pump∗, Sophie Gohde†, Maik Trott‡, Marvin auf der Landwehr‡, Arne Koschel∗,
Volker Ahlers∗, Lars Gusig†, Christoph von Viebahn‡
University of Applied Sciences and Arts
Hannover, Germany
∗Department of Computer Science
†Department of Mechanical Engineering and Bio-Process Engineering
‡Department of Business Informatics
e-mail: {richard.pump | sophie.gohde | maik.trott | marvin.auf-der-landwehr |
arne.koschel | volker.ahlers | lars.gusig | christoph-von.viebahn}@hs-hannover.de
Abstract—In
this
paper
the
workﬂow
of
the
project
’Untersuchungs-, Simulations- und Evaluationstool für Urbane
Logistik‘ (USEfUL) is presented. Aiming to create a web-based
decision support tool for urban logistics, the project needed
to integrate multiple steps into a single workﬂow, which in
turn needed to be executed multiple times. While a service-
oriented system could not be created, the principles of service
orientation was utilized to increase workﬂow efﬁciency and
ﬂexibility, allowing the workﬂow to be easily adapted to new
concepts or research areas.
Index Terms—Service Orientation; Urban Logistics; Decision
Support Tool.
I. INTRODUCTION
Urban logistic processes are currently transformed in many
ways to reduce emissions, increase efﬁciency and follow new
political guidelines [1]. This creates a complex environment
for urban planners when making decisions, since many novel
concepts can be utilized to achieve different objectives within
the planning area, requiring new tools to support the decision
making process [2]. To support urban planners in their decision
making process, the project USEfUL created a web-based
decision support tool that provides important information in
an easy to comprehend way. One of the main goals of the
project was to create an application that can easily be used
while in discussion with other planners and decision makers.
A Workﬂow was devised to generate the data utilized in the
web-based decision support tool, as many different domains
had to be combined. First, data about the city Hannover was
collected to select representative areas that could be used for
the evaluation of novel logistic concepts. In the next step,
simulation models were built that utilized the data to simulate
the selected novel concepts within the representative areas,
producing new data about the populations behavior and trafﬁc.
The newly created data was then analyzed using purpose built
evaluation models, which derived simple tendencies that could
be presented to the end user. As the last step, data had to be
ingested into a web-based decision support tool.
The general workﬂow ﬁts well with the application of
a service-oriented software system, in which each domain
team develops their own services, connected by a common
service bus. Creating a complete service oriented system
was however not possible due to constraints to time, budget
and software development expertise. With service orientation
providing many beneﬁts within software development [3], the
application of service orientation to other kinds of processes
was considered. This leads to our research question: How can
the principles of service oriented software development be
applied to partially automated workﬂows?
In the following sections we will further implore the work-
ﬂow as well as the application of service-orientation in a
manual process. To this end Section II will discuss related
work, before Section III will present the utilized service
principles. The acquisition of data will be shown in Section
IV, while simulations are discussed in Section V. Analysis of
data and presentation within the web-based decision support
tool are shown in Sections VI and VII respectively. Results
are discussed in Section VIII and Section IX provides the
conclusion to this article.
II. RELATED WORK
Few other tools have been created to publicly present the
impacts of different logistic concepts on urban areas.
As one of the earlier projects, BestUFS [4] analyzed dif-
ferent urban logistic solutions in general, providing rough
advantages and disadvantages of concepts. The effects of
concepts were analyzed through living labs, implementing
pilot projects and evaluating impacts. While rough guidelines
are also provided by the web based decision tool developed in
USEfUL, no pilot projects were utilized in the project, relying
on simulations instead. Furthermore, BestUFS does not present
the results in the form of a web-based tool, but as simple
documents, reducing the user experience.
Another project of a decision support tool combined route
planning and the implementation of urban transport via PPGIS
data running on a tangible interface [5]. Using the statistical
data of three European capitals a support tool was created. In
addition, workshops have been executed to teach the partici-
pants. In the case of USEfUL, the generalization of the urban
area was further fostered as well as the easy utilization.
The most important tool is the urban-transport-road maps
shown by De Stasio et al. [6]. While the road maps show
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-844-0
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

similar key performance indicators to the user, the results are
simulated in real time. To achieve real time simulations, a
very rough grained simulation was utilized instead of concrete
agent based transport simulations as used in USEfUL. Further-
more the urban-transport-road maps-tool is a single system
integrating different modules instead of a workﬂow consisting
of multiple different tools.
Bozzo et al. [7] present a literature survey and a theoretical
ex-ante-framework for the evaluation of logistic concepts
created in the project SIPLUS. However, no simulations were
utilized and no concrete evaluation of logistical concepts are
presented in the paper. Furthermore, the authors remain with
a theoretical model, not implementing a concrete decision
support tool.
Overall, very little works concentrate on creating and man-
aging a workﬂow to evaluate novel logistic concepts and
presenting evaluation results to a user. Other works often focus
on single issues within a possible workﬂow, while holistic
views are uncommon.
III. PRINCIPLES OF SERVICE-ORIENTATION
Providing the web-based decision support tool with data
required a multi-step process that contained data collection,
simulation, analysis and data ingest. All these steps had to
be followed for many different logistic concepts that had to
be evaluated in different research areas in respect to multiple
key performance indicators. A fully automated approach was
therefor likely to reduce overall project run time and increase
productivity. Figure 1 shows the workﬂow as well as the
different models utilized in the project.
Unfortunately, due to budgetary constraints, the project team
consisted mostly of domain experts, ﬁrm enough in computer
science to develop and maintain domain speciﬁc models but
not ﬁrm enough to create an inter-domain system. Therefor,
a manual approach utilizing applicable principles of service-
orientation was developed.
In service-orientation, the following principles for service
design are often listed (e.g., by Rosen et al. [3] or Huns and
Singh [8]):
• Isolation of responsibilities - a service is responsible for
a speciﬁc task and is the only service responsible for that
task.
• Loose coupling - services are as independent as possible
of each other.
• Encapsulation - the interface of a service is strictly
decoupled from the implementation.
• Modularity - services are self-contained and can be
combined to create new workﬂows.
• Autonomy - a services lifecycle is independent of other
services.
• Statelessness - services are without state.
Following these principles allows for high ﬂexibility in
software architectures. By applying principles of service ori-
entation to a manual workﬂow, changes (which often are
necessary within a research context) to each step of the
workﬂow should be able without impacting the project at large.
In the following sections, it will be shown how the principles
were applied to the design of the different tasks needed to cre-
ate data for the decision support tool and evaluate whether the
application of the principles improved the workﬂow ﬂexibility.
IV. DATA ACQUISITION
The ﬁrst step in the workﬂow is the acquisition of data
necessary for simulations. To simulate inhabitant behavior,
and in turn trafﬁc resulting from the behavior, exhaustive
data about geography (i.e. roads, buildings, etc.), inhabitant
distribution, and other structural information (distribution of
living spaces vs. ofﬁce buildings/other industries, logistical
points of interest, etc.) was needed, as shown in Table I.
TABLE I. KEY DATA FOR SIMULATION OF URBAN LOGISTIC BEHAVIOR.
Categories
Key data
Trafﬁc
1. road maps, 2. velocity limits, 3. number of vehicles,
4. level of service, 5. modal split
Area usage
1. public, living, industrial, retail areas, 2. coordinates
Public trans-
port
1. network, 2. coordinates
Districts
1. Borders, 2. number of buildings, 3. number of inhab-
itants, 4. demographics
While most of the data were provided by the city admin-
istration of Hannover, further studies and statistics have been
analyzed to complete the necessary database. The database
provides the information to other parts of the workﬂow.
V. SIMULATION MODELS
The second step in the workﬂow is the simulation of novel
logistics concepts utilizing the previously described data as
inputs. Since multiple logistics concepts needed simulation
(the number of which was not pre-deﬁned), the simulations
were designed with common inputs and outputs as to ﬂexibly
interchange different models within the same workﬂow. The
models were created using AnyLogic, a proprietary, java-based
simulation tool, which provides extensive libraries and multi-
method-simulation. A combination of discrete event simulation
(DES) and Agent-Based Simulation (ABS) was chosen as the
development methodology [9]. The combination allows the
development of ﬂexible models, enabling the simulation of
different logistics concepts using the same base model.
In total, two base models were developed which can be
conﬁgured to simulate six logistics concepts. While breaking
with the principle of Isolation of responsibilities, since a single
model may simulate different concepts, this choice was made
due to software inﬂexibility within the simulation toolkit.
The ﬁrst model, CEP, simulates courier, express and parcel
delivery services and provides the base for four of the con-
cepts. The second model, E-Grocery, simulates food delivery
in the research area via food fulﬁllment centers (DCenter)
or traditional supermarket shopping. Both simulation models
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-844-0
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

Fig. 1. Workﬂow of the project USEfUL.
utilize the same database, containing information about roads,
buildings, inhabitants, etc. about the research areas.
TABLE II. SCENARIOS SIMULATED VIA ANYLOGIC MODELS.
Scenario
Description
Micro-Hub
The population is supplied by micro-hubs in the inner city
area. A supply chain is created across different logistics
levels.
White Label
The population of the CEP population is supplied by
bundling orders from several CEP service providers in
a common distribution center on the outskirts of the city.
City Hub
A stationary, inner-city transshipment point will be built,
which will be used by several CEP service providers for
last-mile distribution.
Parcel
Pickup
Locations
CEP service providers now only deliver via unattended
services, in which orders are delivered to customers
exclusively at stations/stores or via a drop-off location.
Online
Grocery
Shopping
Customers order consumer goods such as food and drug-
store items from a local supplier with a speciﬁc delivery
window to their desired location.
Neighborhood
Logistics
Neighborhoods organize their mobility-triggering activ-
ities by linking and optimizing their routes through
division of labor. Preferably, one neighbor does several
activities for another neighbor (e.g. shopping activities).
In the following section, the E-Grocery model will be
presented, which comprises the most comprehensive tool in
particular with regard to the logistical complexity (time win-
dow routing).
A. E-Grocery model
This simulation model is a consideration of the real world
problem of last mile grocery delivery. Within the e-grocery
base model, the basic logic of the food delivery process
(e-grocery) was mapped and contrasted with the classical
purchasing process. This delivery concept was chosen because
it is one of the most common in Germany and is used by
our partner company. The delivery module of the simulation
model shows accruing routes through grocery deliveries to the
pilot neighborhoods from a distribution center (DCenter). The
deliveries were route-optimized to achieve the highest possible
degree of realism.
The inputs for the simulation model utilize publicly avail-
able data such as OpenStreetMap locations or anonymized data
from the city of Hannover, municipalities or other external
partners. All simulation models utilize the same base model
of the research areas as well as the population living in the
research areas. The simulation of different logistic scenarios is
achieved by conﬁguring the simulation model via parameters
such as participation rate, consolidation of orders or delivery
locations. Important input parameters such as the size of the
delivery ﬂeet, the order volume, the type of purchase (bulk pur-
chase or small purchase), time window of the order (depending
on the customer type) as well as the shopping behavior, the
travel speed and the route guidance were parameterized in
order to be able to analyze the model ﬂexibly depending on
different behavior and circumstance scenarios and to produce
results that are as realistic as possible.
The classic shopping model is based on data on shopping
and mobility behavior from the MID study [10] and provides
reference values and logics for comparison between classic
shopping and grocery deliveries. A more detailed description
of our model can be found in [9]. In the publications [11] and
[12], supplementary, later extensions of our model are shown,
which consider the neighborhood types of the pilot area and
the downstream supply chain of the eGrocery scenario in more
depth.
Since inﬂuences of e-grocery on trafﬁc are mainly de-
termined by shopping behavior, different, behavior-oriented
comparison scenarios were deﬁned (see Figure 2).
Depending on their characteristics, these lead to different
kilometers driven, a different number of start/stop operations,
a different working time, and different emissions after interface
transfer.
The simulation output is realised trough the creation of
Excel-ﬁles which contain information common to all simula-
tion models as well as some scenario-speciﬁc information like
the success rate of delivering within speciﬁed time windows.
A wide variety of simulation experiments were conducted
for each scenario and over 1000 simulation iterations were
performed.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-844-0
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

Fig. 2. Comparison of CO2 emissions for e-grocery and normal grocery
shopping [9].
The ﬁnal Excel spreadsheet contains all iteration results for
each scenario, shown in Table III.
TABLE III. OUTPUT VALUES OF THE E-GROCERY MODEL.
Data
origin
Measured variable
Mileage
AnyLogic
Total kilometers driven per agent
type
Process times
AnyLogic
Duration tour / per vehicle type
Utilization of vehicles or buildings
Start/stop ratios
Number of tours
AnyLogic
Number of tours per vehicle type
Deliveries made Returns (false ac-
ceptances)
Scenarios Information
AnyLogic
Scenario no. Iteration run & Sim-
ulation timestamp
Within the simulation model loose coupling as well as
modularity is achieved through the deﬁnition of inputs and
outputs. While some modiﬁcations needed to be made to
accommodate each scenario, ﬁle structure is mostly identical
between the models. This allows some interchangeability of
simulation models in respect to data im-/export, reducing
development time of interfaces in the database or the follow-
ing evaluation models. In the context of the larger project,
deﬁning clear interfaces supported the parallel development
of multiple simulation models as well as the database and the
evaluation models, reducing overall communication workload.
After common interfaces were deﬁned only big changes had to
be coordinated between all project teams, while small changes
between two teams did not cause issues for other teams.
VI. ANALYSIS OF THE SIMULATION DATA
The next step within the workﬂow is the evaluation of the
effects of logistics concepts on key performance indicators
such as emissions, area use, costs and trafﬁc behavior. The
evaluation was done by comparison with the current trafﬁc
situation within the research areas, as logistics concepts inﬂu-
ence multiple key performance indicators at once (Allen et al.
[4]). For that a base case was deﬁned and simulated to give a
detailed overview about the actual situation.
Fig. 3. Evaluation procedure modiﬁed from Drews and Hildebrand [13].
Every evaluation comprised of multiple steps as shown in
Figure 3. Firstly, requirements have to be deﬁned to ﬁgure
out the main results of the analysis and the structure of the
evaluation model. With the knowledge and simulation base a
data base is created to collect speciﬁc data and structure them.
The results of the data base are one part of the deﬁnition of the
target ﬁgures. They are roughly deﬁned before the execution
of the AnyLogic simulation and speciﬁed with the knowledge
base. The other part of the data base is the input for the target
systems. The target systems are built to work up the simulation
input. Each target ﬁgure gets its own system. At last, all the
scenarios and models are summed up and scaled to make them
comparable.
Before the modeling of the evaluation system some goals
have to be set and deﬁned. In the following sections each step
is described in further detail.
A. Requirements
To model a signiﬁcant evaluation system some core require-
ments have been set. The aspects shall guarantee a structured
modeling process and an easy way to extend it once new
logistic concepts should be implemented. In addition, the
linking of the parameters and scenarios is desirable to release
a comparable output.
The following aspects have to be taken into account while
executing this evaluation modeling:
• transparent and replicable evaluation
• generalized assessment
• automation possible
• cross-district valuation based on the different criteria
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-844-0
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

B. Simulation and knowledge base
As seen in Figure 4 two different input types are used for the
evaluation model: the research input and the simulation input.
The research input provides information about the logistic
concepts and the variation of data needed to evaluate them. The
sources of the research input have been the data described in
Section IV. Also, data from logistic companies were taken into
account. The simulation output of the AnyLogic workﬂow and
the research have been combined to build the basic structure of
the target system. In addition, some of the research input also
inﬂuences the speciﬁc deﬁnition of the target ﬁgures. Some of
the most important inputs and outputs are listed in Figure 4.
Fig. 4. Simulation output analysis.
C. Target ﬁgures
As shown in Table IV, the target ﬁgures are categorized
into core targets and derivation targets. The core targets are
emissions, costs, trafﬁc and area savings.
TABLE IV. TARGET FIGURE CATEGORIES.
Core [unit]
Derivation
1st
[de-
pendence]
Derivation 2nd
[de-
pendence]
emissions
[CO2
equivalent]
ecologic BEP [CO2
equivalent per e]
implementation
potential
[{CO2/e;e;m2;∅
km/h}]
costs [e per day]
economic
efﬁciency
[proﬁt (e) per day]
acceptance
[{CO2/e;e;m2;∅
km/h}]
area savings [m2]
trafﬁc [∅ km/h]
Emissions Goal of the target ﬁgure is the reduction of CO2
emissions and noise.
Costs For the last mile delivery a cost model is created. The
balances are measured to the base case which provides
information about the economic effects.
Trafﬁc The overall intention is to reduce the trafﬁc activity
and congestion. One idea is to substitute individual trafﬁc
to commercial transport.
Area savings This target ﬁgure deals with the reduction of
exploited economically used areas in the urban surround-
ing.
Due to the mutual inﬂuences (proportional, neutral, re-
ciprocal) the core target values are connected. The derived
target ﬁgures are deduced out of the core targets. Whereas the
ecologic BEP (Break-even point) and the economic efﬁciency
are calculated out of the core target ﬁgures directly, the ac-
ceptance and the implementation potential needed qualitative
input which is challenging to evaluate.
1) Target system: Each target ﬁgure has got its’ own
analysis system. In this case the cost model is presented more
detailed:
Ktotal = kfleet + kDC + klog
The shown formula describes the three main modules of the
cost model. The parts “ﬂeet costs” (kfleet) and “distribution
center costs” (kDC) are essential for all presented concepts.
Due to changes in the supply chain in some concepts the third
part “logistic costs” (klog) is adapted, especially in the CEP
delivery services.
With the following formula of the distribution center costs
(kDC) the process and the handling of the data should be
emphasized:
kDC = ((nDC ∗ (kpbs + kst)) ∗ c) ∗ l
where nDC is the number of distribution centers-output of the
simulation, kpbs are the ﬁxed asset costs to run the distribution
center (deﬁned via research input), kst are staff costs (deﬁned
via research input), c is the factor to deﬁne the capacity of
the DCs-output of the simulation and l is a location factor
deﬁning cost changes based on ground values (deﬁned via
research input). The total costs of the last mile delivery are
all compared to the ﬁrmly deﬁned base case (BC). In case of
the different CEP concepts, all concepts are more expensive
compared to the base case. As seen in Figure 5 the White-
Label (WL) concept and the central pick-up stations (PS) are
slightly higher positioned while the Micro Hub concept (MH)
and the City-Hub concept (CH) doubled or rather tripled the
costs. In this project the costs are spread on four different
quarters of the city. This was clariﬁed by the ﬁxed numbers
of parcels per quarter. With this output of the target system
the overall scaling is possible.
Fig. 5. CEP cost comparison.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-844-0
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

Fig. 6. Scaling system.
2) Weighting and scaling of criteria: With the valuation
of the simulation all the concepts have to be comparable to
give a clear statement about the tendencies and the possible
changes. All values for a target ﬁgure have been collected to
scale the values. Another important point has been the possible
negotiation of some of the target ﬁgures like emissions,
costs, area savings, ecological BEP and acceptance. With the
categorization with limit values a tendency is shown as a result
of the analysis as shown in ﬁgure 6.
As the entire process of evaluation is inherently independent
of previous evaluations, the application of statelessness was
trivial. Furthermore, evaluations are modular, since the eval-
uation of a single key performance indicator is independent
form the evaluations of other KPIs Different KPI-Evaluations
can be easily combined to create a clearer picture about each
logistic concept, as each concept might affect different KPIs.
VII. WEB-BASED DECISION-SUPPORT-TOOL
Lastly, evaluation data was made available to users in
the form of a web-based decision support tool. The tool
presents evaluation results as well as information about logistic
concepts, research areas and the project itself. The main design
goal of the web-based decision support tools was ease of use.
A user should be able to utilize the tool quickly e.g. in a
meeting with other decision makers to discuss the impacts
of novel logistic concepts on a given area. Through expert
workshops the following requirements were reﬁned:
• Present Information about:
1) the project USEfUL
2) research areas (districts)
3) novel logistic concepts
Fig. 7. Rough design of the web-based decision support tool.
• Allow users to view and export the evaluations of the
concepts.
• Allow the modulation of concepts through the selection
of different parameters.
• Compare the evaluation results of multiple concepts
within a research area/across research areas.
The rough design of the web-based decision support tool
is shown in Figure 7. Based on the industry standard model-
view-controller-pattern, four different views present the user
the most important information. The start page, showing rough
overviews over logistics concepts, as well as research areas,
serves as a landing page. From this page, the user can navigate
to detail pages for concepts ans research areas (districts) or
the decision support tool. Detail pages show images and in-
depth information about concepts or districts and can be used
to thoroughly understand the presented evaluations. The tool-
page allows a user to select the combination of research area
and logistic concepts, conﬁgure the concept with the parame-
ters deﬁned for the simulation models. After the user makes
a selection, the evaluation results for the chosen combination
are presented to the user.
The application was built utilizing the Laravel Framework
which in turn required the use of php, javascript and a database
(e.g. mysql). Docker was utilized to decrease setup times and
increase productivity. Data import is handled by manually
converting Excel ﬁles from the evaluation into RFC-compliant
comma-separated-values, which in turn are imported into the
database of the tool. If the web-tool is viewed as a service, this
results in a violation of the statelessness of services. However,
as the workﬂow is not fully automated, storing the results in
the web-tool is necessary, as the results can not be recreated
on-the-ﬂy. Furthermore, execution of simulations takes a long
time, violating the design goal of quickly presenting a user
with the desired information.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-844-0
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

VIII. DISCUSSION
With the service principles originating from well structured
workﬂows within industry solutions [3], the reverse application
of the principles to a manual workﬂow as seen in this article
was expected to beneﬁt the project.
The principles of service design could easily be utilized as
guidelines for the steps of a non-digital workﬂow and provided
different beneﬁts. The loose coupling of the different steps
allowed each team to draw upon its expertise in the domain
of the step (e.g. trafﬁc analysis, simulation), while reducing
communication needs. By applying encapsulation and deﬁning
data exchange formats before implementation of the tools
used in the different steps, work could be parallelized within
the overall project. In combination with statelessness, the
encapsulation also supported the interchangeability of different
models, e.g. the model to simulate the e-grocery-concept could
be easily exchanged with the model for city hubs.
However, not all the service principles, which are usually
applied to services, could also be applied to all steps of the
workﬂow. While simulation and analysis were stateless steps,
producing outputs only dependent on the inputs, data collec-
tion and presentation of results could not be implemented in a
stateless manner, as the state of data is the main driving factor.
Furthermore applying service principles to a manual workﬂow
is inferior to a complete automation if the processes are to be
executed repeatedly. However, within the context of research,
where software is often a tool used a limited amount of times
to generate data, the reduced expertise in the computer science
domain necessary to create a partially automated workﬂow is
advantageous for budget constrained projects.
Overall, the project beneﬁted from aligning the workﬂow
with service orientation. Other projects, which do not utilize a
workﬂow that consists of multiple steps, each clearly conﬁned
to a different domain with own tools, might not beneﬁt from
the application of service orientation. E.g. a project that aims
to create a software according to a users needs might proﬁt
more from an agile workﬂow allowing for many feedback
loops.
IX. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The paper presented a novel application of service prin-
ciples by focusing on a partially manual workﬂow instead
of completely automated software solutions. The workﬂow
of the project USEfUL was presented, which aims to create
a web-based decision support tool for urban planners. To
create the web-based decision support tool a multi-domain
workﬂow was utilized to combine the expertise of different
research teams. With each step focusing on a single domain,
the application of the principles of service orientation was
chosen to reﬁne the workﬂow of the project. Through this
service oriented workﬂow a decision support tool for urban
planners was created to assist the evaluation and selection of
novel logistic concepts for the development of urban spaces.
Applying the principles of service oriented software design
to the partially automated workﬂow of the project, provided
multiple positive effects on the projects efﬁciency. Modular-
ity and encapsulation not only allowed interchangeability of
models but also increased development speed by reducing
communication needs. However the created solution is inferior
to a fully automated software when repeated process use is a
major goal.
In future work the construction of a fully automated service
oriented system is the next logical step for the project USE-
fUL, since a fully automated system is often faster and more
reliable than manual processes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Federal Ministry of Edu-
cation and Research of Germany (project USEfUL, grant no.
03SF0547). We would like to thank our colleagues from the
other institutions and the City of Hannover.
REFERENCES
[1] B. für Bildung und Forschung, “Future cities strategic research and in-
novation agenda (zukunftsstadt strategische forschungs- und innovation-
sagenda),” https://www.bmbf.de/upload_ﬁlestore/pub/Zukunftsstadt.pdf,
2015, accessed: 2021-04-01.
[2] A. Lagorio, R. Pinto, and R. Golini, “Research in urban logistics: a sys-
tematic literature review,” International Journal of Physical Distribution
& Logistics Management, 2016.
[3] M. Rosen, B. Lublinsky, K. T. Smith, and M. J. Balcer, Applied SOA:
service-oriented architecture and design strategies. John Wiley & Sons,
2012.
[4] J. Allen, G. Thorne, and M. Browne, “Bestufs good practice guide on
urban freight transport,” 2007.
[5] C. Guerlain, S. Cortina, and S. Renault, “Towards a collaborative
geographical
information
system
to
support
collective
decision
making
for
urban
logistics
initiative,”
Transportation
Research
Procedia, vol. 12, pp. 634–643, 2016. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.trpro.2016.02.017
[6] C. de Stasio, D. Fiorello, F. Fermi, A. Martino, G. Hitchcock, and
S. Kollamthodi, “On-line tool for the assessment of sustainable urban
transport policies,” Transportation Research Procedia, vol. 14, pp. 3189–
3198, 2016.
[7] R. Bozzo, A. Conca, and F. Marangon, “Decision support system for
city logistics: literature review, and guidelines for an ex-ante model,”
Transportation Research Procedia, vol. 3, pp. 518–527, 2014.
[8] M. N. Huhns and M. P. Singh, “Service-oriented computing: Key
concepts and principles,” IEEE Internet computing, vol. 9, no. 1, pp.
75–81, 2005.
[9] M. Trott, M. Auf der Landwehr, and C. von Viebahn, “E-grocery
of tomorrow - home delivery of food between proﬁtability, customer
acceptance and ecological footprint,” World Review of Intermodal Trans-
portation Research (in press), pp. 10–, 2020.
[10] infas Institut für angewandte Sozialwissenschaft, “Mobility in germany:
trafﬁc - structure - trends (Mobilität in Deutschland: Verkehrsaufkom-
men – Struktur – Trends),” Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt
e.V, IVT Research GmbH, infas 360 GmbH, Tech. Rep., September
2019, http://www.mobilitaet-in-deutschland.de/pdf/infas_Mobilitaet_in_
Deutschland_2017_Kurzreport.pdf, last visit: 17.07.2019.
[11] M. Auf der Landwehr, M. Trott, C. von Viebahn, M. Putz, and
A. Schlegel, “E-grocery in terms of sustainability-simulating the en-
vironmental impact of grocery shopping for an urban area in hanover,”
Simulation in Produktion und Logistik, pp. 87–96, 2019.
[12] M. Auf der Landwehr, M. Trott, and C. von Viebahn, “Simulation-
based assessment of grocery shopping in urban areas,” Simulation News
Europe, 30(4), pp. 145–158, 2020.
[13] G. Drews and N. Hillebrand, Encyclopedia of project management
methods (Lexikon der Projektmanagement-Methoden).
Haufe-Lexware,
2007.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-844-0
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

