Nontechnical SPAM Detection Paradigm
in Uniﬁed Communications Systems
Moritz Giesecke
School of Engineering, Pforzheim University of Applied Sciences
D-75175 Pforzheim, Germany
moritz.giesecke@hs-pforzheim.de
Abstract—The recognition and ﬁltering out of unwanted messages in
technical communications media presents an ever more difﬁcult challenge.
The best-known of these problems is with ubiquitous e-mail. Most e-
mail sent are unwanted spams. In order to protect the recipient the
most diverse applications must be used. Longer observations have shown
that spam is continually adapted and is able to overcome the most up-
to-date recognition programs. In the future the most widely different
communication methods are growing together such as e-mail, telephony
and others, so that soon we will be able to speak of uniﬁed communication.
There is a danger that these other communications media will increasingly
become the target of new types of spam. On the other hand this logical
union opens up new possibilities for spam recognition. In this paper, a
behaviour-based evaluation paradigm is introduced which works on a
uniform basis for all communications media. It uses an evaluation of the
three parameters of abstracted times of usage, distance of communication
partners and costs. All communication events between media using actors
create a social network whereby the actors are clustered according to
their social proximity. The evaluation of spam is a result of the actors
and cluster speciﬁc communication behaviour up to a point. In this way
a new non-technical level of analysis is created, which spammers can
only overcome with difﬁculty. Likewise the problem of limited focus in
network centred ﬁltering programs is dealt with. The presented ﬁltering
paradigm can be used unitary in all technical communications media and
works with the same three nontechnical parameters at a behavior-based
level.
Index Terms—spam, spit, uniﬁed communications and social networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
In modern communications media the proportion of unwanted
messages is continually growing. A classical example is e-mail spam,
which has appeared since the widespread use of e-mail services.
Normally, these are differentiated between unsolicited commercial
mail (UCE) and unsolicited bulk e-mail (UBE). Both forms are
normally characterized as spam [1]. The particular societal and
economic meaning of this amount, around 120 billion spam e-mails
per day, or calculated at up to 20 spams per day per person is fatal
[2]. Typical return rates are under 1 per thousand, depending upon
the quality of the spam [3]. By processing these spams economic
damages are incurred in the form of lost working time, server and
energy costs as well as the irritation of the users of the e-mail service.
By today, classical spam technologies are no longer used only for
advertising purposes; they are used for fraud, typically called phishing
[2].
Until now various classes of processes were used, based upon the
individual e-mail infrastructure or the users’ mail boxes to protect
against incoming spam. These differ according to granularity, effec-
tiveness as well as complexity of the ﬁltering. In a typical mail server,
these ﬁlters are arranged in a cascade, see Fig. 1. Starting with a
Firewall, all incoming connections from IP addresses recognized as
known spam senders are blocked. After this ﬁrst IP address based
list process, different black and white lists with known spam servers
and e-mail addresses are queried. These come from specialized
companies, which put a lot of effort into the ﬁnding of the most up
to date and correct data. Typically, the highest level of effectiveness
is achieved through recognition of spam e-mails and through the
avoidance of false positives. For this, three different lists are used
and then evaluated with a two out of three decision. Afterwards,
information in the e-mail header is checked to see if the address
name and server details are correct for the domain to send e-mails
by searching DNS records, which contains appropriate mail exchange
information [4]. After this, a speciﬁcation of the SMTP protocol is
exploited using the grey listing process [5]. In doing so, a temporary
problem in receiving the e-mail is simulated in the users own server.
Real mail servers wait a certain amount of time and try a new
delivery; typical spam senders on the other hand drop the repeated
delivery of the spam e-mail. A further recognition method, which
consists of comparing as many as possible of received e-mails is
the well known process called Distributed Checksum Clearinghouse
(DCC) with a distributed checksum ﬁlter [6]. This consists of cross
server boundary checking for the existence of the same or similar
e-mails. Following this, e-mails are evaluated according to content
based on the signalling process method. Typically, Bayes-ﬁlters are
used, which must ﬁrstly be trained with the typical appearance of
spam and reasonable e-mails [7]. Afterwards, on the basis of this
training, the e-mails were scanned for these patterns of learned words
and then weighed against each other. This results in a decission
about the current received e-mail, whether it contains spam or
not. In addition to these generally easily accessible procedures, as
they are reproducible from open source software, there are different
commercial service providers with proprietary procedures offering
the evaluation of incoming e-mails. An example named here is
Cisco SenderBase, which works off of a central database containing
reputation values of individual e-mail addresses and organisations [8].
The evaluation process uses more than a hundred different parameters
for the evaluation [9]. An important critical point is the central capture
of the e-mail trafﬁc occurs nearly in real time and the long term
storage of the same. Parallel to these technical ﬁltering processes,
the introduction of a global legal barrier for allowed e-mail marketing
Figure 1.
Spam ﬁlter cascade with cost-beneﬁt relation
34
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

Figure 2.
Uniﬁed Communications System in an abstract view
since at least the end of the 1990s took place, i.e., in the USA and
Germany USA and Germany [10] [11]. In spite of a few, but deterring
judgements there has been no visible reduction in spam. The leading
suspects are known in part by name and with a photograph [12].
A. Characteristics and transformation of spam
In order to be interesting for the spam-senders, a few characteristics
must be present in the communication media. Mainly, low cost, so
that an individual spam process can not incur any costs. Because of
the low rate of reply gigantic amounts of individual spams are sent.
Equally important is the possibility of sending a variable content.
In order to provoke a response from the recipient of the spam, the
spam appearance must be varied. Limited traceability meaning that
the spammer tries to conceal their true identity to avoid trouble with
the recipient of spam. There can be possible civil suits for damages
and ﬁnancial compensation and severe criminal consequences. Simple
completion; meaning that the recipient of the spam should easily be
able to respond to the spam. Typically, spam has a feedback link,
which logically lies as close as possible to the communication media
of the spam. For example, a successful spam e-mail pulls the user
who received it directly to a web page, which may instantly be opened
with one mouse click.
In spite of the laws against spam and other legal instruments available
there is little help on the way towards a more tightly ordered e-
mail framework. That is why new technological evolution must be
continuously developed and implemented in order to act against the
continuous ﬂood of spam. Communications media are the target of
spam as soon as the above mentioned characteristics are fulﬁlled.
In addition to the old e-mail spam problem, the spam over internet
telephony (SPIT) is growing recently, but is still not as intensive
as traditional e-mail spam. With a telephone call, the recipient is
provoked into giving a reaction which allows the spammer to make
a proﬁt. An example hit German customers that used a SIP-based
VoIP connection in the ﬁrst mass spamming in September 2008 [13]
[14].
B. The idea of Uniﬁed Communication
The users of modern communication technologies are taken in
more and more by the complexity of the technology and the operating
effort for the user of different communications media such as e-
mail, telephony (land lines, mobile or cell phones and voice mail
services) as well as multiple specialized services (Instant Messaging,
Pager, Groupware solutions). In addition to various user variations
Figure 3.
Social network as a graph with actor properties
and conﬁguration options on the part of the recipient’s end it is
also difﬁcult for the communications initiator to reach the desired
communications partner with the correct communications medium.
The origins lie in the asynchronous communications media such as
e-mail, for which here the term Uniﬁed Messaging is used. The
idea of Uniﬁed Communications (UC), is the managing of different
types of communications media bundled in one location with a
supporting function to relieve the user. It is not totally clear in the
general language usage as of when Uniﬁed Communication can be
spoken of or rather, which criteria must be completely fulﬁlled. For
the consideration of this paper it is assumed that in addition to
the other aspects of UC technology a central instance exists that
captures all communication procedures, manages all of the user’s
preferences and can appropriately inﬂuence the communication. As
an example calls can be rerouted to a voice mailbox and the message
can be sent by or as an e-mail. It is equally possible to think of
calling up e-mails by telephone and having them read aloud using
a text2speech system. The required settings would be in put by the
user themselves, and thereby be part of the user’s preferences. Such
an Uniﬁed Communication System (UCS) scheme is shown in Fig.
2. All communications media in the UCS, are connected to the
rest of the world by their different transport media in the network
layer. Typically, this is an IP-based network for e-mail and VoIP
or traditional phone networks often referred to as PSTN. Any other
communication media are of course also conceivable. The different
communications media resides, in the so-called service layer, where
they are considered as separately existent. The usual media speciﬁc
Spam test procedures (e.g. signalling and content evaluation), are
applied here. The uniﬁed layer is aware of all communication events
sent or received by the actor, indicated by the light-blue arrows.
Furthermore, this layer makes available also all the beneﬁt features
described with the idea of UC, once it gets conﬁgured by the actor.
This is the instance is the place, where the subsequent described
nontechnical Spam detection is carried out.
C. Information gain with social networks
With the idea of the social network connections between people
can be formally modelled, whereby the interactions of people can be
graphed. Fig. 3 depicts the connections E, shown as edges, between
the individual human actors M = {m1, m2, . . . }, shown as nodes.
The edges arise from the performed communication events within
the group of observed actors. This concept uses a communication
process, for example a delivered e-mail or a ﬁnished telephone
conversation or any other discrete event using any other possible
communications method. In this way any interaction between people
through the use of communications media can be represented. At ﬁrst
invisible information content is made up of exposing the relationship,
the organizational structures, work processes and the inﬂuences of
events. The sociological and mathematical formulated questions of
the social network analysis (SNA) have been researched enough
and have found practical applications in sociology, economics and
criminalistics. Further applicable methods such as data mining can
35
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

be derived from general sources [15] [16].
In large UC systems of telecom companies are I different human
actors present, who have access to K different communications
media. Between the system members and the system non-members
from outside user communications processes take place, which can
be transferred into a social network. At the observation starting
point there are already a number of communications processes
available so that an adequate connection density amongst the actors
of the social network exists. Because of the freedom of the modern
communications media, boundless interactions between them are
possible and the evaluation of the social proximity network follows
through the intensity of the incidences of communications events.
Therefore the choice of the communications medium K is irrelevant.
Important is the individual communications event E only. Thus a
ﬁrst approximation of the social proximity Nsoc between two actors is
given through the amount of events between them. Here is a summary
of reciprocally received events by recipients (received) where the
syntax E<acteur>,r(< partneracteur >) is used:
Nsoc(mi, mj) = Ei,r(mj) + Ej,r(mi)
A proposition with this ﬁrst assumption does not take into account
the relativity of the amount of communications events that the actors
or partner actors sent (indicated by s) to the other actors within
the observed social network. In order to be able to capture these
relatively important reciprocal events, both actors are introduced with
an additional proportionality factor
E<Acteur>,s<P artnerActor>
E<Actor>,s(M)
. In
the sum of all Es of an actor to a partner actor and the sum of
all Es from this actor to all other actors M, the attractiveness of
the respective partner actor is determined from the ratio between the
count Es to the respective partner actor and the count of Es to all
others actors in M. Because in a UCS the human actors continuously
communicate, the form of social network is seen as variable and
therefore also those with the equivalent (1), determined value for
Nsoc between two actors.
Nsoc(mi, mj) = Ei,r(mj)∗ Ei,s(mj)
Ei,s(M) +Ej,r(mi)∗ Ej,s(mi)
Ej,s(M) (1)
That is why it is recommended to deﬁne an observation interval ∆t,
within which a calculation of Nsoc (approximation) is seen as valid
and must be newly recalculated. These order of magnitudes of the
observation intervals result in the emergence of new E, the system
performance capability towards the eradication of ﬁltering cycles (see
Section II) as well as the volatility of the current spam in comparison
to the recognition capability of the ﬁlter systems.
For Nsoc the valid conditions are that the value of the result is
non-dimensional, Nsoc(mi, mj) = Nsoc(mj, mi) and Nsoc ≥ 0.
The clamping of such a social network can ﬁrst take place after a
initial observation time, meanwhile the actors have produced a certain
amount of communications events E. For the new evaluation process
of this paper the quality of the social network depends upon as many
as possible of the intended communications processes in the network
derived by means of the intended prototypical performance. Only a
few spams which were able to overcome the previous ﬁlters can be
tolerated as they will be detected as inappropriate.
D. Related works
Most spam recognition processes are based on the technical
signalling information of the various communications media, e.g.
within the transmission of e-mail typically on the level of Internet
Protocol and SMTP. A further class of processes work on the basis of
content, in the e-mail service as an example Bayes and Markov ﬁlters
or DCC as well as VoIP methods for the differentiation of humans
and machines. Furthermore there are ideas for the use of processes
out of the ﬁeld of social network analysis (SNA) for the recognition
of spam [17] [18].
Typically these approaches are used on ordinary e-Mail trafﬁc and use
the results of various metrics to scan for the characteristics of spam.
Here, primarily two general classes of procedures are widely used. On
the one hand it is attempted to assign each communication participant
a reputation value based on experience over a long period of time.
On the other hand, the behaviour of communication participants vis-
`a-vis other participants can conclude the likelihood of spam.
Nevertheless, in the technical reality there exists the problem of a
limited focus. Every ﬁlter instance of any such SNA based process
can only work with the information that runs through the commu-
nications system used. This leads to spammers from outside the
SNA based ﬁlter system, in certain instances, exhibiting no complete
characteristics of spam if they, for example, only send a small amount
of spam in the focus of the SNA ﬁlter systems [19]. Thereby the
spammers wouldn’t, in certain circumstances, be recognized as such.
From the main countries of origin spam is distributed globally and it
can be assumed that these will not be completely hit by the individual
SNA based ﬁlter systems.
The ﬁlter processes presented in this paper primarily observe only
individual system communication participants using all available
communications media. It evaluates, using the method of normal
user behaviour as though these successful incoming communications
processes are desired. In the following, a non-technical level of
analysis that circumvents the problem of limited SNA focus and
thereby presents a realistic scenario suitable for the communications
infrastructure of the telecom companies (development of design
technology for telecommunications service provider), is introduced.
II. FILTER METHODS
The UCS passes all data of the users to the ﬁltering processes.
These parameters are: communication partners and times, the commu-
nication media, resulting costs as well as possible proﬁle information.
If interaction occurs with a foreign actor from outside of the system
limits of the UCS, which involves a previously unknown actor, this
communication will be saved to the database as well. Doing so, all
available data of the communication events is captured.
In the literature there are countless methods describing how to search
available data bases according to problem oriented parameters. Most
of these procedures have their origins in the optimization of business
process in commercial ﬁelds. Others come from purely scientiﬁc
queries, for example the researching of questions in sociology. In
the UCS there exist the communication relationships of individual
actors of the UCS amongst themselves and beyond the UCS. This
data is spanned as a social network. In this way there is no
differentiation made about the type of communication media that
was used for a communications event that has taken place. In the
social network there are clusters in which the partial totals of the
actors are signiﬁcantly more densely bound together compared to
communications participants from other areas of the social network.
These clusters are detected using a k-Means-procedure and the actors
are appropriately assigned to them [17]. This class of procedure is a
simple and fast method of cluster identiﬁcation and is widely used in
SNA applications. The number of clusters Ccount is predetermined
because the k-Means-procedure is hard partitioned. As a distance
function of the k-Means-procedure the social proximity Nsoc between
36
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

TABLE I
EXAMPLE PARAMETERS OF DIFFERENT COMMUNICATION MEDIA TO FEATURE EXTRACTION
communication media
user identiﬁcation
location parameter
starting time
approx. expenses
eMail
MAIL FROM
initial MTA
delivery start time
amount of data
PSTN
phone number
preﬁx number
call start time
estimated charges
Cellular radio
phone number
home network
call start time
estimated charges
VoIP
SIP indentity
IP-Subnet
call start time
estimated charges
Figure 4.
Example of a usage scenario with an incoming event
individual actors is used from (1).
At this point, the theory of operation will be explained with of
a pithy example. In a ﬁctive situation company A is collaborating
with a company B during a product developement process. The two
companies are far away from each other, one of them for example
in China, see Fig. 4. The communication of the users in company A
are protected with the new ﬁlters residing in their UCS. The heads of
both development departments have a lively exchange over different
communication media with each other, these events are indicated by
the two black lines. Then an external developer hired by company B
gets a problem deﬁnition to solve, for which he has to communicate
with a developer of company A. So, both developers had not been
in contact before and with the fact of the external hiring, traditional
ﬁlters like (personal) listing procedures can not use common criterias
of company B, e.g. domains in e-mail adresses or transmitted phone
numbers. At the moment of receiving a communication event in
company A’s UCS, sent by the external developer, the ﬁlters know
about the social proximity between company A’s head of develope-
ment and company A’s developer (actuall receiving). By the former
communication behavior between the two developement heads in
A and B, the ﬁlter system is aware of the heads A parameters
in times of usage, distance of communication partners and costs
of communication. When deciding about this communication event
solely by tradional spam ﬁlters, the result could be unsure. And when
deciding with former personal behavior of the developer in company
A, the result could be unsure too. But now the corrective properties of
company A’s head of developement, which is detected to have a high
social proximity to his developers, could be applied to the ﬁltering
process of this incomming communication event.
A. Data pre-processing
Each actor shows connections in the social network through the
various communication processes with other actors from the range of
available communications media. Out of the communication relation-
ships of individual actors three characteristic relationship parameters
are able to be derived by every communication process in every
type of communications media available. Additionally, it is possible
through the communication behaviour of closely connected actors
to connect them to clusters and to in turn derive the three charac-
teristic behaviour parameters of the clusters. These three behaviour
parameters are the times h, at which communications procedures
take place, the distance d between the participating actors and
subsequently occurring costs c. The distance data are deduced from
the technical parameters of the appropriate communications medium
or communication system. Typically available communications media
example parameters are shown in table I. Afterwards this makes
procedures usable for position determination [20] [21]. The media
speciﬁc costs due to a communication process can be deduced
from telephone charges or the volume of transmitted data. In order
to get the abstract comparable costs of a communication process
from various communications media the cost parameters for these
considerations are standardized units and therefore comparable in the
sense used here.
Each actor is given a 3 tuple as parameter data for the three
characteristic behaviour parameter, see (2). The elements of this make
up the parameter and can be expressed through their index.
Tmi =

⃗h(mi)
d(mi)
c(mi)

(2)
Over a long period of time, a human actor displays time focal points
upon which multiple communications have taken place. Capturing
the time occurrences of the communication takes place in intervals
in order to capture phases of increased communications incidences.
This method is presented as a bar chart (see ﬁg 5). A class wide of
60 minutes is proposed. Thereby a compromise between cancellation
and complexity is given. Consequently a relationship is given between
the division of the communications events in the different intervals
and information about preferred communications points in time. As
indicated in (3), the communications events are assigned to the 24
elements of the time vector ⃗h.
⃗h(mi) =
 P1
k=0 Ek(m)
...
P24
k=23 Ek(m)

(3)
The captured position of the actors mi, at every communications
event, and his corresponding partner actor is processed to the distance
d. In this way a prototypical range of all communications can be
calculated out of the number of all communication processes. This
takes place through the mathematical mean, here the distance of all
communication processes totalled is divided by the set, see (4).
d(mi) =
PEm(Count)
k=1
Emk(Distance)
Em(Count)
(4)
Every communications instance has a cost c applied to it, in order
to be able to classify the value of a communications instance, see
37
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

(5). Typically, this value is generated from the sending actor or his
approximate surroundings. From the sum of all communication in-
stances a prototypical cost value of the communication is calculated.
This is represented through the mathematical mean, here the costs of
all communication instances are totalled and divided by the set (see
equation 4).
c(mi) =
PEm(Count)
k=1
Emk(Costs)
Em(Count)
(5)
Subsequently the actor speciﬁc ﬁrst part of the pre-processing
clusters are searched for in the social network. For this the k-
Means-procedure with the distance function given in equation 1 is
used. Thereby the actors are connected to clusters which appear,
through the communication behaviour, to be closely linked. After
the clustering is carried out, each cluster Ci is assigned with the
actors Ci,<acteurs>. According to the actors parameters three cluster
parameters ⃗h(Ci), d(Ci) and c(Ci) are represented. These result
from the arithmetic mean of the actor’s parameters in the cluster.
Thereby the parameter values of the actors in the cluster are added
and divided by the set of the actors in the appropriate cluster. In this
way the prototypical actor value for the cluster is generated. This 3
tuple is shown in (6).
TCi =

⃗h(Ci)
d(Ci)
c(Ci)

(6)
The captured values Tmi and TCi can have their lines addressed
through the index.
B. Evaluating the communications incidences
With the gathered and pre-processed data from the observed
user behaviour, a simple test for spam or ham can be carried out
upon the arrival of an external communication event Er, on an
actor in the UCS mi. Thus, the actors and the cluster speciﬁc
parameters are viewed as equal valued statements. With the linking
up of individual behaviours, the afﬁliated actors and through the
cluster analysis uncovered connection, the data basis for the decision
is considerably enlarged and possible evaluation errors can be
minimized. The cluster bound actors are socially afﬁliated and
display similar communications behaviour. In this way the cluster
speciﬁc statement conﬁrms or corrects the actor speciﬁc statement.
The ratio, between the new and individual communication event
current and the previously determined average value all, will be
calculated for each of the three parameters ⃗h, d and c. To evaluate a
single communication event a non-naive approach is chosen, which
means the result of the relationship comparison drives against the
value 1.0. This means the smaller the result’s absolut value of the
subtraction, the lower the probability of spam. This is represented
by a subtraction of the evidence of a relationship comparison of
one. In (7), the number of communication events in the class (time
slice) of the current communication process hcurrent is compared
against all other classes according to the number of Em contained.
hresult(Er(mi)) = 1.0 −
Tmi (1,current)
Tmi (1,all)
+
TCi (1,current)
TCi (1,all)
2
(7)
In (8) the mean distance value from the recipient actor and his
cluster are tested against the value of the received communication
events.
dresult(Er(mi)) = 1.0 −
Tmi (2,current)
Tmi (2,all)
+
TCi (2,current)
TCi (2,all)
2
(8)
In (9) the mean cost value of the previous communication of the
recipient actors and their clusters are tested against the value of
received communication processes.
cresult(Er(mi)) = 1.0 −
Tmi (3,current)
Tmi (3,all)
+
TCi (3,current)
TCi (3,all)
2
(9)
C. Summary of the ﬁlter results
In order to summarize the three different ﬁlter results into a result
value, a speciﬁc term must be used that allows it on the one hand
to contain the total result, and on the other hand takes into account
the characteristics of the individual ﬁlter levels. According to size,
or rather construction of the social network in a database, various
individual results can be achieved using evaluations metrics. A simple
scoring method is based on experience values existing above the
reliability of individual metrics in the usage context of the UCS.
If it is recognized that the participant results invalidate, the spam
level of a communication instance Ei,r, the weighting factors a, b
and c not equal to 1.0 can be chosen. The individual metric results
are multiplied with the scale factor and the product totalled.
Spamlevel(Ei,r) = a ∗ hresult + b ∗ dresult + c ∗ cresult
(10)
For making a decision about a current Ei,r, whether it is spam or not,
a threshold must be deﬁned. The value to be used here is an individual
nature, according to whichever risk of false positives appears to be
acceptable.
D. Filter Position within a total context
The results from the ﬁlters described here can not reliably decide
on a positive spam detection alone. Because of the multiplicity of
possible connections a result value is only an additional indicator
in the collection of all evaluation processes. Therefore a linking
with the other (media speciﬁc) ﬁlters of individual communications
media is allways necessary. Typically there are the hard criteria,
such as ﬁrewall or listing procedures, which without cooperation
with other ﬁlters reach a valid conclusion and soft criteria, such
as content evaluation processes. For the ﬁnal evaluation result of a
communications process the results from all ﬁlter processes in this
paper must be run together with the other processes. Typically a
weighting according to reliability as well as personal settings of the
associated communication participant will take place in the UCS.
III. FURTHER ASPECTS
A telephone system’s calculations data is taken and investigated
for the characteristics of the three parameters ⃗h, d and c. The data
contains only the call placed by internal participants to unknown
external numbers. The capture resulted originally for the purposes
of billing only, not for the new procedure presented here. According
to German data privacy law, the collection of unnecessary personal
data is not allowed without agreement of every affected participant.
There are no telephone calls between two or more known internal
participants available, so that no social network in the appropriate
sense can be spanned. The pure simulation of an artiﬁcial user group,
in which each user generates the three parameters (⃗h, d and c) by
random processes, would lead to results that are far away from reality.
The following results presented in Fig. 4 to 6 originate from October
2009 data, the resulting analysis was carried out with standard tool
boxes from Mathworks MatLab. There are 9298 communication
events from 408 different call numbers available, a total of 42,211
charge units were used with an average speaking length of 287.48
seconds. The Fig. 5 to 7 were created using all available data
thereby representing the total relationships of all participants. Clearly
38
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

recognizable are working hours and weekends, as during that time
little appreciable private call activity at the university takes place, see
Fig. 5.
Figure 5.
Call distribution over time of day and month
A large proportion of calls are shorter than ﬁve minutes and involve
minimal cost, based on the charging units, see Fig. 6.
Figure 6.
Call distribution over fee and time
The international calls are distributed over only a few target
countries. This characteristic could be derived to a criterion for
ﬁltering by distance values, see Fig. 7.
Figure 7.
Abroad destination networks over a month
Through the broad range of the appropriately investigated parame-
ters it is evident, that the procedure introduced here can give strongly
conclusive results.
In order that these methods do not have to only be used with external
databases an experimental UCS is being worked on at Pforzheim
University, which unites the communications media of telephony and
e-Mail and offers the possibility of the analysis introduced here. It
will therefore be possible to evaluate the described procedures in a
situation approximating reality and to variably test the parameters of
different evaluation processes.
IV. FINAL REMARK
Proof of the effectiveness of the presented methods can only, untill
now, be given from theoretical experiments as at the moment no
data fulﬁlling the assumed conditions (social network capable) for
this theory, is available. Because the decision procedures are based
using the three parameters in (7), (8) and (9) on hard limitations,
incorrect decisions on these limitation values are not unlikely. Real
enviroments impose to implement an imprecise decision threshold, for
example through the simple one-dimensional variance V AR(X) =
P
(X − E)2 of the appropriate parameter X, with the arithmetical
mean as expectation value E. The effectiveness of constant pur-
ported and thereby potentially suboptimal number of clusters through
purported quantities of hard partitioned k-Means-procedure is also
to be investigated using the available applicable data. Both input
values from position and cost estimates will show different exactitude
according to origin and communication instance. In combination with
several relationship parameters and their histories these parameter
input characteristics should be insigniﬁcant.
The procedure presented in this paper from three captured parameters
of all conceivable communication media (time use behaviour, distance
from communication partner and incurred - if only abstract - costs) in
combination with individual and sum total behaviour as a reciprocal
correction is a new type of idea in the battle against spam.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was made possible through Professor Dr.-Ing. Frank
Niemann (Engineering) and the Pforzheim University as well as the
Federal Ministry for Education and Research. The data represented in
this paper does not necessarily represent the opinion of the Pforzheim
University or the Federal Ministry for Education and Research.
REFERENCES
[1] The Spamhaus Project, The Deﬁnition of Spam, February 2010, Checked
September 2010 http://www.spamhaus.org/deﬁnition.html.
[2] Cisco IronPort, 2008 Internet Security Trends - A report on Emerging
Attack Platforms for Spam, Viruses and Malware, Checked September
2010 http://www.ironport.com/securitytrends/.
[3] C. Kanich, C. Kreibich, K. Levchenko, B. Enright, G. M. Voelker,
V. Paxson, and Stefan Savage, Proceedings of the 15th ACM CCS,
Spamalytics: An Empirical Analysis of Spam Marketing Conversion,
October 2008, Checked September 2010 http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/
pubs/networking/2008-ccs-spamalytics.pdf.
[4] J. Klensin, RFC 5321: Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), October
2008, Checked September 2010 http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5321.
[5] Wikipedia, Greylisting, 4th February 2010, Checked September 2010 http:
//en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Greylisting&oldid=341929685.
[6] Rhyolite Software LLC, Distributed Checksum Clearinghouses, Summer
2008, Checked September 2010 http://www.dcc-servers.net/dcc/.
[7] Dr. S. Ritterbusch, Die Mathematik des Bayes Spamﬁlters, Checked
September 2010 http://www.math.kit.edu/iag1/∼ritterbusch/seite/spam/de.
[8] Cisco Systems Inc., Description of the SenderBase Network, Checked
September 2010 http://www.senderbase.org/about.
[9] Cisco IronPort, The SenderBase Network - Overview, Checked September
2010 http://www.ironport.com/pdf/ironport senderbase overview.pdf.
[10] Federal Trade Commission, The CAN-SPAM Act: A Compliance Guide
for Business (Facts for Business), September 2009, Checked September
2010 http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/edu/pubs/business/ecommerce/bus61.shtm.
39
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

[11] The German Federal Ministry of Justice, Gesetz gegen den un-
lauteren
Wettbewerb,
2004,
Checked September
2010 http://www.
gesetze-im-internet.de/englisch uwg/index.html.
[12] The Spamhaus Project, TRegister of Known Spam Operations (ROKSO),
February 2010, Checked September 2010 www.spamhaus.org/rokso/.
[13] J. Rosenberg, et. al., RFC 3261: Session Initiation Protocol (SIP), June
2002, Checked September 2010 http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3261.
[14] Heise-Newsticker, Erste gr¨oßere Attacke gegen deutsche VoIP-Nutzer,
September 2008, Checked September 2010 http://www.heise.de/security/
meldung/Erste-groessere-Attacke-gegen-deutsche-VoIP-Nutzer-207400.
html.
[15] D. Jansen, Einfuehrung in die Netzwerkanalyse: Grundlagen, Methoden,
Forschungsbeispiele, August 2006 (3. Auﬂage), Vs Verlag,
ISBN-13: 978-3531150543.
[16] D. J. Hand, H. Mannila, and P. Smyth, Principles of Data Mining
(Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning), October 2001, The MIT
Press ISBN.
[17] H.-Y. Lam and D.-Y. Yeung, A Learning Approach to Spam Detec-
tion based on Social Networks, 2007, CEAS07 Fourth Conference on
Email and AntiSpam, September 2010 http://www.ceas.cc/2007/papers/
paper-81.pdf.
[18] P. O. Boykin and V. Roychowdhury, Personal Email Networks: An
Effective Anti-Spam Tool, April 2005, IEEE Computer, Vol. 38, No. 4,
pages 61-68.
[19] The Spamhaus Project, The World’s Worst Spam Producing Coun-
tries, March 2010, Checked September 2010 http://www.spamhaus.org/
statistics/countries.lasso.
[20] Wikipedia Encyclopedia, Signaling System 7, April 2010, Checked
September
2010
http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Signaling
System 7&oldid=346781094.
[21] J. A. Muir and P. C. van Oorschot (Carleton University, Technical Re-
port), Internet Geolocation and Evasion, April 2006, Checked September
2010 http://www.ccsl.carleton.ca/∼jamuir/papers/TR-06-05.pdf.
40
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

