Analysis and design in providing a robotised cleaning and validation system  
for hospital environment 
 
Alessandro Carlini, Giacomo Saibene, Valerio Turri, 
Giuseppina Gini  
ASP, Politecnico di Milano  
Milano, Italy  
alessandro.carlini@u-bourgogne.fr 
giacomo.saibene@asp-poli.it 
valerio.turri@asp-poli.it 
gini@elet.polimi.it 
Alessandro Barardi, Alessandra Lo Moro, Michael 
Boris Mandirola, Bartolomeo Montrucchio 
ASP, Politecnico di Torino  
Torino, Italy 
alessandro.barardi@asp-poli.it  
alessandra.lomoro@asp-poli.it 
michael.mandirola@asp-poli.it 
bartolomeo.montrucchio@polito.it
 
Abstract— Health care and hospitals services could greatly 
benefit from technological innovations in many fields beyond 
the disease treatment itself. For instance the cleaning process 
deserves a significant role among the services that a hospital 
must deliver. In this study we explore the fully automated and 
the traditional (human-based) cleaning protocol, we define its 
main components and discuss steps and benefits in the 
introduction of a partially automated solution based on a new 
robotic system. 
Keywords- 
Robotics, 
Cleaning 
services, 
Protocol 
Optimisation, Hospital 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Activities performed by humans have always been 
affected by innovations, such as the introduction of 
automation processes. Health care and hospitals greatly 
benefited  from all these innovations, leading to a far greater 
awareness of the medical possibilities in treating diseases. 
However, the quality of health services is definitely more 
than just the medical aspects and the cleaning process 
deserves a significant role among the services that a hospital 
must deliver. This service, being still mostly manual, shows 
some criticalities that could be overcome by introducing a 
system with a higher level of automation. 
Cleaning is a process composed by different tasks; 
essentially we identify two sub-processes: the cleaning 
activity itself and the verification of its effectiveness 
(cleanliness verification task). Given the current available 
technologies, introducing an automated cleaning system is 
still an uneconomical option; the inefficiency of the robots 
leads to a condition where costs are higher than benefits. On 
the other hand, designing and introducing an automated 
cleanliness verification system is a viable option. 
Therefore, we argue that the cleanliness verification 
system can be introduced in a short term perspective, while 
the cleaning system itself only in a long term one. 
Accordingly, we focused on two core issues: 
(i) the cleaning task in the long term, which focuses on 
the organisation and the sizing of a swarm group of robots; 
(ii) the verification task in the short term, which focuses 
on the issues related to navigation and measurement of the 
cleanliness. 
The cleaning task requires a system composed by simple 
automated units cooperating together, whose control system 
represents the critical issue. The cleanliness verification task 
may be performed by single automated units, through the 
adoption of simple positioning and moving methods and of 
basic sampling systems. 
In the following Section 2 we start exploring the cleaning 
problems in a hospital. This chapter is based on a scenario 
developed with the San Raffaele Hospital (HSR) in Milan. 
In Section 3 we recall the available automation and 
robotics technologies and propose our scenarios for 
solutions. Two solutions are devised: a short term one, where 
only the certification of cleaning is robotised and a long term 
one, where the cleaning itself is robotised. 
In Section 4 we technically devise methods that could 
exploit robots to ensure almost full, verified coverage and 
methods to verify the sanitisation condition and to support 
the periodic control of the cleanliness.  
In the Conclusion section we discuss about how to assess 
the sustainability of the solution and the consequent practical 
benefits. 
II. 
APPROACHING THE CLEANING PROBLEM IN A 
HOSPITAL 
The hospital is a complex institution. There are many 
problems and criticalities that are not exclusively related to 
medical aspects, such as the handling of objects (e.g. drugs 
and meals), the moving of patients, the transmission of data 
and the cleaning process. Among these, in accordance to the 
needs of our main stakeholders, we chose to innovate the 
cleaning process by studying the introduction of an 
automated 
system 
for 
the 
floor 
cleaning 
with 
a 
multidisciplinary approach. 
Every day many people (patients, relatives, doctors and 
other workers) enter and exit hospitals. Patients under 
medical treatment and often with weakened immunity or 
contagious diseases, could be prone to infections. Hence, 
cleanliness deserves a special attention in hospital 
environments and any discussion involving it must deal with 
many different dimensions: economical, environmental, 
social, health and quality of service. 
Most cleaning tools are driven by the operator who has 
complete control and is personally responsible for the result. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

The most common machines are the vacuum cleaner, the 
washer-drier, the applicator machine and the wet vacuum 
cleaner, usually all of them operated by humans. There is not 
a big difference between devices used in hospitals or in other 
contexts, besides the products that are chosen as detergents 
and disinfectants. 
There are many actions that could be taken to improve 
the situation from the points of view: 
- economical: saving on materials, chemicals and on 
working time required by humans; 
- environmental: optimising the dosage of chemicals, 
favouring green solutions; 
- social: making dangerous and low-qualification jobs 
unnecessary, such as the janitorial services, in order to 
promote the creation of high-qualification jobs; 
- quality: improving the cleaning system contributes to 
quality improvement.  
Our analysis in a real hospital was possible trough a 
project of Alta Scuola Politecnica and the HSR. HSR has a 
prominent position at national and international level and it is 
qualified as a high specialisation hospital for the most 
important diseases. Some issues about the problems of 
cleaning and the most interesting topics emerged from 
meetings with HSR. It was clear from them that the entire 
cleaning system (route, dispensing of detergents and 
disinfectants, cleaning frequency) depends on the staff who 
is also responsible for potentially neglected tasks. There is a 
detailed planning of the cleaning procedures that is the 
guideline for operators in order to reduce processing errors. 
The hospital has been subdivided into areas that correspond 
to different levels of criticality and each of these has its own 
colour. This feature reflects a different cleaning protocol and 
the frequency in which the task must be executed. The size 
and the complexity of the system make the testing and the 
control more difficult. Specific operators perform the quality 
control also by visual inspection to establish the 
effectiveness of cleaning.  
When considering automated systems, we observe that 
there are no examples of a completely automated cleaning 
system in structured environments, such as industrial 
buildings. Moreover we need to distinguish between two 
parts of the cleaning process; the cleaning task itself and the 
ex-post verification of its effectiveness. Accordingly, the 
implementation of an automated system involves two areas, 
in which significant improvements may be achieved: 
removing dirt and measure and localise the dirt. 
III. 
THE SOLUTION DEVISED 
Looking on the market, the cleaning machines fall in two 
categories: human operated or automatic. Today most of the 
machines for profound cleaning are industrial machines very 
heavy and manually driven. The automatic solutions are for 
small systems for home. Moreover, secondary functions as 
the removal of the dirt from the containers are still manual.  
The analysis outcome of the described situation lead us to 
conclude that an automatic cleaning system cannot be 
proposed today in a hospital environment, both for the high 
costs and for the unfulfilling effectiveness. Even the use of 
the available automatic systems to cooperate in floor 
cleaning is still unfeasible and can lead to costs higher than 
the benefits. 
On the other hand, the design and the introduction of a 
semi-automated cleanliness verification system is a viable 
option, since it needs a less complex technological platform. 
Therefore, we concluded that the introduction of the 
cleanliness verification system can be done in the short term, 
while the introduction of the full cleaning system is to be 
done in the long term. Accordingly, we analysed these two 
phases of the cleaning process from two complementary 
perspectives: the short-term and the long-term. Our long-
term solution focuses on the organisation and the sizing of a 
swarm of robots, while our short-term solution focuses on 
the issues related to navigation and measurement of the 
cleanliness. In devising a solution, we may say that part of 
the complexity and of the time of cleaning can be reduced if 
we exploit a team of robot for performing the floors' cleaning 
in hospitals. 
 Our vision regards an automated cleaning and validation 
system that is economically and socially sustainable within 
hospital environments that are commercially available. 
Hence, we do not analyse the co-building of an integrated 
hospital to such cleaning solutions, but we assume the 
feasibility constrains of current hospital structures as given 
and we analyse the case in which the cleaning system is 
introduced into an already existing building. 
IV. 
LONG TERM SOLUTION 
Our long-term solution can propose a team of robots that 
are able to clean and at the same time verify the effectiveness 
and efficiency of cleaning carried out.  
From this long-term perspective we developed an 
optimisation-based approach inspired by the work of 
Altshuler et al. [1], in which a multi-agent system, the swarm 
described by the authors, plays a central role. The swarm is 
defined as a decentralised group of multiple autonomous 
agents, that are simple and have limited capabilities. A key 
principle in the notion of swarms, or multi-agent robotics, is 
the simplicity of the agents in the aspects [3] of memory 
resources, sensing capabilities, computational resources. 
Each robot of the team does not know the global system.  
Regardless of the improvement in performance, such 
swarm systems are usually much more adaptive, scalable and 
robust than those based on a single, highly capable agent, if 
they are properly sized.  
The cleaning problem assumes a grid, partly dirt, where 
the dirty part is a connected region of the grid. On this dirty 
grid region several agents move, each having the ability to 
‘clean’ the place (‘tile’, ‘pixel’ or ‘square’) it is located in, 
while the goal of the agents is to clean all the dirty tiles in the 
shortest time possible. These agents work in a dynamic 
environment in which a deterministic contamination spread 
is simulated every d time steps.  
A. Defining the number of robots 
A way to decide whether k agents can successfully carry 
out their cleaning task is to provide a lower bound valid for 
each cleaning protocol [2]. We want to find the minimal 
number of agents necessary in order to carry out their task 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

with a specific initial dirty area and a certain contamination 
spread step d. Due to the dynamic nature of the problem, we 
introduce a shape factor which takes into account that the 
contaminated region can change during the cleaning process. 
Our analysis is carried out from a mathematical and analytic 
point of view, starting as in [2, 3, 15, 16] with agents moving 
in a dirty region, each having the ability to clean the place it 
is located in.  
The cooperative cleaners’ problem has been studied by 
Wagner et al. [16] assuming as world model a regular grid of 
connected rooms (pixels), a parts of which are dirty. The 
dirty pixels form a connected region within the grid (matrix). 
Agents are able to move on this region and to clean the “dirty 
pixels”. Due to the dynamic nature of the problem, a 
deterministic evolution of the environment is adopted. The 
goal of the agents is to clean the spreading contamination in 
as little time as possible. 
The identification of the contamination status of the tile 
where the agent is located is carried out through a sensor 
installed on the platform. Moreover each agent is able to 
know the condition of tiles of the 8-Neighbours.  
According to [16] we have developed a method to 
compute the lower bound depending on a number of 
parameters. This bound is plotted in Fig. 1 over the size of 
the contaminated region as a function of time, given an 
initial contaminated area (tiles), S0 = 3000, dirty 
contamination spreading latency d = 3; 4; 5; 6 and different 
various number of cleaning agents k.  
The lower bound over the cleaning time highlights the 
minimal time necessary for the team of robots to accomplish 
their job. The threshold, kT , on the number of the agents 
depends on d: it is the minimum k that allows the system to 
complete the task in a finite time. If k is higher than kT the 
objective can be reached. If k is lower than kT the result 
cannot be reached even the time is infinite.  
There is also an upper bound due to the fact that when the 
number of robots increases the probability of interference 
among them increases too, making it more difficult to reach 
the goal. 
B. Defining the spreading of dirt 
Those results are based on a deterministic approach 
regards to the contamination spread. It would be interesting 
to introduce a stochastic variant to enhance the dirt diffusion 
expression in order to make the model more realistic.  
C. Defining the control policy 
We can think about three different controllers for the 
robot cleaning system.  
Firstly, a system that is activated when a human 
responsible decides that the hospital needs to be cleaned; the 
system works until the whole area is cleaned and then stops.  
A second possibility is to integrate the probabilistic 
calculus of the diffusion of dirt into the cleaning plan. 
Namely, knowing when a spot has last been cleaned allows 
to calculate when it cannot be considered clean anymore, 
with a probability higher than a given threshold. In this 
approach we have a constantly active cleaning system and a 
guaranteed cleanliness level.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Evolution of the dirty region size (y axis) over the time (x 
axis) in function of the contamination spread step (d) and the number of 
cleaning agents (k). From top to bottom: given the same initial condition, 
each diagram presents the dynamic evolution respectively for d = 3, 4, 5 
and 6; as evident, different values of the number of cleaning agents (k), 
in each condition, lead to accomplish the task, or to diverge from it, with 
different velocities. Logically the number of agent cannot grow infinitely 
ignoring  the interference due to size and shape of the surface and agents. 
A third possible approach is the integration of the 
cleaning system and the verification system, with verification 
agents that would be active at the same time as cleaning 
agents and that would provide them with cleanliness 
information: when a section is found dirty, the information is 
changed in real time in all the agents.  
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

The implementation of those controllers is in the state of 
the art of robotics, not the construction of the real cleaning 
agents. 
V. 
SHORT TERM SOLUTION 
We outlined a solution for the verification system. We 
used a more practical approach, testing the positioning and 
navigation strategies as well as the methods for sampling, 
measuring and stocking the dirt on the floor.  
The input of the navigation system is a complete map of 
the room and the fixed obstacles. The navigation algorithm 
guarantees that the robot collects dust samples in points 
randomly and homogeneously spread over the environment. 
At the same time the positioning system ensures the 
correctness of the sample coordinates.  
A. Methods to measure cleanliness 
We can divide the cleanliness measurement methods in 
two categories: the direct methods, applied directly to the 
part we are examining and the indirect methods, that require 
an analysis of the collected contaminants. 
Different technologies support the dust investigation. The 
main traditional method is just visual inspection, that relies 
completely on human observation. Other methods measure 
the dirtiness in a scale using Bacharach scale (a paper that 
has different grey levels), or observe the movement of a drop 
of water (Water Break Test or Contact Angle test), or use 
UV spectroscopy. A simple method is the Scotch Tape Test: 
a strip of transparent tape is firmly pressed upon the surface, 
then it is displayed on an appropriate contrasting 
background.  
On the other side we have to mention some semi-precise 
or precise methods that are mostly based on optical or 
electrochemical processes and generally require more 
laboratory equipment, time and cost. They are not necessary 
in our intended task of measuring the cleanliness of a floor. 
What is important is understanding whether the floor needs 
to be cleaned again and whether the cleaning process is 
performed correctly or not.  
Therefore in the present work our choice is restricted to 
the gross verification methods. We consider the possibility to 
perform a deeper analysis for further certification needs. So 
our verification protocol is based on three main actions:  
(i) take a sample of the contaminants  
(ii) make the analysis  
(iii) store it into the robot for further analysis.  
The first analysis, more trivial but giving fast results is 
performed on the robot. In this case it is necessary to 
carefully consider the use of solvents, used in most of the 
indirect methods. A further problem lies in the fact that the 
floor should be still clean after the process. Other difficulties 
are related to the storage of liquids that would require a 
different recipient for each sample and more careful 
management if on board. Finally an important factor is the 
protocol proposed to the human resources to manage the 
system. Obviously one of the objectives of the proposed 
automation is to reduce the need of human labour compared 
to the current system (visual inspection, a simple method) 
while increasing the quality. So the automated method is 
expected to be more repeatable and robust than a method 
only dependent on human factors. 
The question whether to evolve an integrated device (as a 
moving base) or design it ex-novo is a secondary choice. 
Results of our analysis show that today does not exist a 
device totally fulfilling our requirements, so it would be 
preferable considering the design of a new dedicated system. 
B. Hardware equipment for the robot 
Between the existing dirt investigation methods, only the 
principles of the Bacharach scale and the tape test (applied in 
an automated way) seem to be the solutions that comply with 
all the identified necessities.   
Summarizing, the robot base has to carry an equipment 
composed of. 
- the sampling device for the acquisition of the dirt level 
- the measuring device to measure of the dirt level 
- the stocking device to preserve the samples 
- a battery 
- motors to roll the tape 
A small robot (about 50 cm in size) can move better near 
the obstacles. The robotic base should be equipped with 
sensors to detect obstacles (sonar, bumper) and encoders on 
the motors in order to use odometry. 
The measurement is based on the tape test. An adhesive 
tape is rolled on two supports: on one roll there is the unused 
part, on the other there is the tape sector that has already 
passed through the measurement part. Inside each roll, there 
is a motor that moves it provoking the rolling/unrolling of 
the tape. The sampling is done by the contact of the tape with 
the floor. The measurement system is composed by a 
photodiode and a laser light source. The output consists of a 
series of zeros and ones: a zero means that the laser light was 
not able to achieve the photodiode whilst a one represents 
that the tape was transparent enough to allow the light to 
polarise the photodiode. The number of “1s” is the 
cleanliness level.  
The sample, after the measurement, is stored, keeping a 
record of where the sample was taken. A tape of 
polytetrauoroethylene (commonly known as teflon) could be 
put aside the adhesive tape in the destination roll and the two 
tapes could be wound together. The robot keeps trace of its 
movement on the map and of the places where a sample has 
been collected.  
C. Positioning and navigation 
Now we focus on the choice of the positioning system. 
Most of the commercial robots used to clean the floor are not 
equipped of a positioning system, but typically use  heuristic 
algorithms. Unfortunately this approach cannot be applied to 
our project. The dirt detector robot should know where it 
picks up each sample. From the different technologies [5] to 
implement a positioning system, we take odometry, 
computed from encoders on the wheels and the recognition 
of visual markers.  
The navigation algorithm [5, 6] can be developed from a 
sequence of target points where the robot has to collect 
samples, using a modified version of the covering 
algorithms. The navigation algorithm of election for this 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

robot is map based. It is able to manage critical situations 
such as fixed and mobile obstacles using on board sensors.  
D. Experimental proof of concept 
We have developed a proof of concept of the complete 
navigation method using the iRobot Create [12] and the 
Matlab environment [14]. iRobot Create (see Fig.2) is the 
research-orientated version of the more popular iRobot 
Roomba: it has the same robotic base of it, but it is not 
equipped with the cleaning system. It is possible to control it 
with a PC using a serial communication and the Create 
Toolbox Interface that allows to use a Matlab real-time script 
to control it. There is a Simulator to test the algorithms. On 
the hardware side, it is equipped with different sensors 
(bumpers, encoders) and through the PC it is possible to 
connect additional external devices (as cameras).  
 
Figure 2.  Virtual rendering of the robot at Politecnico di Torino 
We have added a webcam pointing to the ceiling, where 
we put black and white markers. The images are analysed by 
RoboRealm [http://www.roborealm.com]. Given the position 
and orientation of the markers, the information coming from 
RoboRealm is used to compute the position of the robot 
using 
matrix 
calculus. 
This 
procedure 
theoretically 
guarantees a localization error < 1 cm; also small 
imperfections in the camera orientation could produce an 
error of 5 cm in positioning. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
The quality of health services is definitely more than just 
the medical aspects and the highest cleaning condition 
deserves an essential role among the services that a hospital 
must deliver. 
A preliminary analysis shows that cleaning condition is 
depending on many factors, both environmental and 
cleaning-task-related. The environmental factors are several 
in number and extremely variable; this condition emphasizes 
the impossibility for an optimization with a “time-scheduled” 
managing system and leads to consider an “on–condition” 
decision system to be the more appropriate to manage the 
cleaning activity. The cleaning-task-related factors are 
depending on the human factor in task accomplishment, on 
the protocol type and on the equipment management.  
The traditional cleaning process is still completely “human-
based” (i.e. manually performed by cleaning staff).  This 
solution implies relevant costs for the service and requires 
attention on protocols and verification of results to ensure 
health conditions both for the users and for the medical and 
cleaning staffs (not only dirt, but also detergents could be 
dangerous). The risk factors in the context of cleaning are 
present in all stages of the process. By the social point of 
view a robotised solution would improve the quality of the 
jobs making low-qualification ones unnecessary and 
improving the safety at work.  
Market analysis and available technology suggest that a 
completely robotic cleaning system still remains an 
uneconomical option: the inefficiency of the robots leads 
costs be higher than benefits. Although robotising cleaning 
tasks appears to be less efficient than the traditional process, 
our analysis shows the automation of the verification task 
shall both improve the whole traditional protocol and lay the 
foundation for new future solutions. 
A system based on a swarm of robotic agents was 
simulated and analysed, to reveal the most relevant 
characteristics and to evaluate possible novelties in cleaning 
protocol. Simulations show the existence of an optimised 
number of agents, depending on the surface characteristics 
and the accomplishment capabilities of each unit.  
Successively the system was enhanced introducing a 
verification robotic unit. 
This new element first implies a changing in the cleaning 
task management, now based on “on–condition” philosophy. 
Practically the availability of cleaning conditions data 
supports a new optimisation concept both for the intervention 
of the cleaning agents and in detergents handling and 
supplies. This reduced usage of the equipment leads 
important economic and ecological benefits. 
A subsequent analysis highlighted that we obtain the 
same benefits by introducing the verification robotic unit 
also in an existent traditional cleaning protocol.  
Today some cleaning protocols have been expressly 
developed to minimise the errors dues to the human factor 
(usually for the industrial field and somewhat dedicated to 
the hospital environment) but no optimisation is possible in 
this type of time-scheduled protocol.   
Practically speaking, the cleaning process is a stand-alone 
task, performed far from the controller’s watch. Generally a 
person is charged of the occasional verification task, 
introducing besides a further incertitude factor in the system; 
obviously this person isn’t a cleaning-staff and (generally) he 
is an employ or a company manager, with a hourly rate 
higher than the cleaning-staff (i.e. each time-units dedicated 
to the verification task is more expensive than each one 
dedicated to the cleaning action). 
In short, the introduction of the automated verification in 
the traditional process improves the system awareness and 
makes possible the “on-condition” optimisation. 
The increased simplicity and the task automation leads to 
carry out more frequents checks and therefore to have more 
accurate data and a better knowledge of the ambient system 
and its dynamical conditions. The awareness of the real and 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

detailed conditions allows a more incisive intervention and 
supports a better scheduling of the activities. The availability 
of new on-going data allows a continuing improvement of 
the protocol. 
Finally, the faster discovering of anomalies and 
inconveniences and the improved effectiveness related to the 
more precise intervention, bring not only economical and 
ecological benefits, but also a significant enhancement of the 
cleaning condition. 
We conclude this section with some economic 
considerations  and a challenge for the future developments. 
The main outcome from our economic analyses is about the 
ineffectiveness and the expensiveness of the solution 
composed by cleaning robot agents.  The immature present 
technology and the market conditions are the main limits 
preventing the success of a full-robotic cleaning stuff.  Some 
keywords to describe these limits are:  slowness in task 
performing, cost of energy, maintenance and productivity. 
Despite the estimated hourly costs are sensibly more 
favourable for the robotic solution (1,69 €/h) than the 
human-based solution (12.5 €/h), today the productivity 
represents an insurmountable obstacle (30 m2/h and 400 
m2/h, respectively) and limits the interest towards this 
innovative solution.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The present work was developed within the framework 
of the ASP - Alta Scuola Politecnica. We thank the ASP 
school and faculty for the guidance and the support in project 
developing.  
We also address a special thank to Alberto Sanna and the 
e-Service of HSR hospital, for the valuable introduction 
within the reality and the problems of the hospital 
environment. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Y. Altshuler, A.M. Bruckstein, and I.A. Wagner. “Swarm 
robotics for a dynamic cleaning problem”. IEEE Swarm 
Intelligence Symposium 2005 (SIS05), pages 209-216, 2005. 
[2] 
Y. Altshuler, A.M. Bruckstein, and I.A. Wagner. “Shape 
factor's e_ect on a dynamic cleaners swarm”. Second 
Workshop on Multi Agents Robotics Systems (MARS) at the 
Third International Conference on Informatics in Control, 
Automation and Robotics (ICINCO), pages 13-21, 2006. 
[3] 
Y. Altshuler, V. Yanovsky, I.A. Wagner, and A.M. Bruckstein. 
“Swarm 
Intelligence 
Systems” 
(Swarm 
Intelligence 
- 
Searchers, Cleaners and Hunters), volume 26 of Studies in 
Computational Intelligence, chapter II. Springer Verlag, 2006. 
[4] 
Melissa J Perry Anila Bello, Margaret M Quinn and Donald K 
Milton. “Characterization of occupational exposures to 
cleaning products used for common cleaning tasks-a pilot 
study of hospital cleaners”. Environmental Health, pages 8-11, 
2009. 
[5] 
J. Borenstein, H. R. Everett, L. Feng, and D. Wehe. ”Mobile 
robot positioning: Sensors and techniques”. Journal of Robotic 
Systems, 1997. 
[6] 
M. Hernando E. Gambao. “Control system for a semi-
automatic faade cleaning robot”. International Symposium on 
Automation and Robotics in Construction, 2006. 
[7] 
Joel M. Esposito, Owen Barton, Josh Koehler, and David Lim. 
“Matlab toolbox for the create robot”. 
www.usna.edu/Users/weapsys/esposito/roomba.matlab/, 2011. 
[8] 
European Agency for Safety and Health at Work. The 
occupational safety and health of cleaning workers. 2009. 
[9] 
J. Wang G. Beni. “Theoretical problems for the realization of 
distributed robotic systems”. IEEE Internal Conference on 
Robotics and Automation, 1991. 
[10] A.M. Bruckstein I.A. Wagner. “Cooperative cleaners: A case 
of distributed ant-robotics”. Communications, Computation, 
Control, and Signal Processing, pages 289-308, 1997. 
[11] A.M. Bruckstein I.A.Wagner, M. Lindenbaum. „Efficiently 
searching a graph by a smell-oriented vertex process”. Annals 
of Mathematics and Arti_cial Intelligence, 24: 221-223, 1998. 
[12] iRobot. Roomba owner's manual, 2006. 
[13] Lynne E Parker. Alliance: “An architecture for fault tolerant 
multirobot cooperation”. IEEE Transactions On Robotics And 
Automation, 14(2), April 1998. 
[14] Cameron Salzberger. MATLAB Simulator for the iRobot 
Create. 1990. 
[15] Israel A. Wagner, Yaniv Altshuler, Vladimir Yanovski, and 
Alfred M. Bruckstein. ”Cooperative cleaners: A study in ant 
robotics”. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 
27(1):127-151, 2008.  
[16] Israel A Wagner Yaniv Altshuler, Vladimir Yanovski and 
Alfred M Bruckstein. ”Multi-agent cooperative cleaning of 
expanding domains”. The International Journal of Robotics 
Research, 00(000):1-33, August 2010.  
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

