The Impact of Cyber Security on the Quality of Service in Optical Networks 
Michal Walkowski, Jacek Oko, Slawomir Sujecki 
Department of Telecommunications and Teleinformatics 
Wroclaw University of Science and Technology, 
Wroclaw, Poland 
Emails: michal.walkowski@pwr.edu.pl. 
jacek.oko@pwr.edu.pl 
slawomir.sujecki@pwr.edu.pl 
Stanislaw Kozdrowski 
Department of Telecommunications and Teleinformatics 
Wroclaw University of Science and Technology, 
Wroclaw, Poland 
Email: s.kozdrowski@tele.pw.edu.pl 
Abstract— We analyze the impact of novel solutions for cloud 
computing implementation on the operation of an optical 
network in the context of cloud computing structures applied 
within a large corporation networking environment. We focus 
particularly on various aspects of the quality of service that are 
related to an implementation of a particular solution to an 
improvement of various aspects of cyber security. We present 
the methods of improving the cyber security, the quality of 
service and compare them with those currently in use. 
Keywords-cloud-computing; network; containcers, security, 
qualyty of service. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
With an increase in the data flow volume, we observe an 
introduction of ever newer technologies needed to support 
the network traffic. In recent years the dominant technology 
for the handling of large data throughput is based on the use 
of optical fibers. The maximum currently achievable data 
transmission rates have been achieved in Wavelength 
Division Multiplexed (WDM) systems and hence WDM, is 
the key technology used now for the realization of the 
backbone networks [1][2]. Also, large data transmission rates 
in access networks are realized using optical fiber 
technology. Obviously, new technological solutions need to 
be accompanied by new solutions in the higher layers of the 
OSI model in order to insure the quality of service. Also a 
careful analysis of potential weaknesses of new technology 
with respect to cyber security is needed and potentially new 
solutions are required to handle all potential threats [3]. All 
this poses new challenges to the quality of service in modern 
telecom networks. The general purpose of this research is an 
analysis of the impact of various cyber security measures on 
the operation of an optical network in the context of cloud 
computing structures applied within a large corporation 
networking environment. We focus particularly on various 
aspects of the quality of service that are related to an 
implementation of a particular solution to an improvement of 
various aspects of cyber security. We present the discussion 
in the context of several possible attack scenarios and draw 
conclusions on this basis. In particular, we consider the cyber 
security solutions that are implemented in the optical layer 
and discuss also the cost and network maintenance 
implications of such solutions. We present the methods of 
improving the cyber security within the optical layer and 
compare them with those potentially applicable in the higher 
layers of the OSI model. We stress particularly the impact of 
the various measures on the quality of service but also 
discuss the issues related to the cost and network 
maintenance. A specific issue that we address in this 
contribution is a specific new solution in the area of the 
cloud computing recently being pursued in the context of the 
ever increasing data transmission rates and cyber security 
requirements, which relies on the implementation of Docker 
containerization. This solution is particularly attractive for an 
implementation in large scale enterprise network systems. 
II.
LARGE SCALE ENTERPRISE NETWORK SYSTEMS
Large scale enterprise (LSE) network systems serve both 
the employees of the enterprise and the external customers. 
Such networks can spread over large geographical areas thus 
implying large distances between the network nodes.  
A new trend of development in the large scale enterprise 
networks introduces concept of micro-services. The concept 
of micro-services means that each single service should 
provide only one solution for a particular problem as well as 
be stateless and independent at the same time. For the 
purpose of solving the requirements set by programmers, 
technology of Docker containerization has been created. The 
main difference when compared with the so far used virtual 
machine solution (Figure 1) [4] is that container does not 
need to run operating system stack for a new service. 
Additionally, it allows to run the same application without 
customizing the operating system on each side. This results 
in lesser overhead when delivering service to customer. The 
programmer gets exactly the same environment as the client, 
so potential problems with providing services should be this 
minimized. 
In the industrial research context there are two important 
orchestrators for managing Docker ecosystem, Swarm and 
Kompose. The second one is provided by OpenShift 
software developed by RedHat (RHEL) (Figure 3) [5]. 
Software supporting both solutions is currently available on  
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

Figure 1. Comparison between virtual machines and containers 
the internet and has already been implemented in many 
institutions (LSE) working on critical services from end 
users’ point of view. 
Technology consists of cloud computing, which is based 
on communication between machines serving services, 
divided into roles (master, node, load balancer, present 
master state storage, data storage). Currently the software 
supporting the Docker system allows achieving for one 
cluster up to 2 000 nodes and 120 000 containers.  
III.
SERVICE QUALITY
Container technology allows to measure and monitor 
services health (e.g., user CPU, system CPU usage) and thus 
provides for implementation of automatic vertical scaling 
when system is overloaded. This helps improving the service 
quality. Internal load balancer can successively control the 
external traffic coming from the clients of the network ( 
Figure 2). When more capabilities are needed, usage of other 
software or hardware tools is possible. For instance we can 
implement an in-house developed balancer. 
Figure 2. Load Balancer with automatic scaling 
An additional advantage is that the Docker system can 
detect problem with internal network, cluster or machine and 
respond appropriately, preserving this way high Disaster 
Recovery (DR) and High Availability (HA) (Figure 4). If 
vertical scaling is not sufficient, system administrator can 
add new nodes to the existing infrastructure. The related 
research is carried out at several laboratories, e.g., [5] and 
aims to  
Figure 3. Architecture of OpenShift 
Figure 4. High availability mechanism 
improve internal communication between the containers. 
Particular attention is devoted to the development of 
algorithms, which introduce priority for containers that speed 
up information exchange [6]. 
IV.
POSSIBILE ATTACKS
Next, we consider the problem of insuring cyber-security 
within a Docker ecosystem. Firstly, we need to identify 
possible threats. There are several ways in which a cyber-
attack can be performed on a Docker based system. Firstly 
we note that by default all Docker containers share the same 
network. Therefore, a specially prepared container can use 
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) poisoning to disrupt or 
capture communication between services, thus essentially to 
perform potentially a man in the middle attack. Another 
problem concerning cyber-security is that in a Docker 
system the daemon is able to use an administrator’s rights for 
proper operations. In this scenario an attacker can potentially 
escape from the container context and even attempt to 
overtake the control of all the system nodes. 
The third possible threat emerges when Docker images 
are downloaded from untrusted sources, which results in 
risks of information leakage or botnet creation [7]. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

There is also a problem with identifying the container, 
which was attacked. For instance, if hypervisor host OS is 
not fully proof to an attack, a container can be successfully 
attacked without the possibility for carrying out a 
comprehensive forensic analysis because an attacker can 
remove all the traces of the attack. This is because when a 
container is created it has its own ID rather than IP address. 
Hence, from outside IP addresses are the same for more than 
one container. Containers are created and send log to the 
SIEM in LSE so after creating more the one container we 
cannot track them using an IP address. Consequently, we 
cannot do comprehensive forensics because we are not able 
to identify the container which was attacked.
V.
PROTECTION MECHANISMS
The possible attack scenarios described in the previous 
section can be mitigated in several ways. First of all, it is 
worth to mention Center for Information Security (CIS) 
Security 
Benchmark 
documentation, 
which 
provides 
conditions needed to secure Docker configuration. This 
document gives general guidelines on how a Docker system 
security can be improved.  
In this contribution, we propose and give special 
attention to the following methods/guidelines of improving 
cyber-security within a Docker system: 
- application inside the container should not be run with 
an administrator rights 
- each system component should log to system of logs 
correlation e.g. Security Information and Event Monitoring 
(SIEM) 
- good practice is to run only one process inside the 
container. 
- all of the libraries needed in development time and not 
needed anymore in the production should be removed 
- running services for remote application configuration 
inside container is prohibited, e.g. ssh, telnet 
- hardcoring keys, passwords and other sensitive data 
needed for communication or encryption is prohibited 
We note however that all of the methods outlined above 
can only make it harder for an attacker to get into the system 
but they do not provide total security. In the future, we will 
continue research on how these measures improve the 
system stability and security and how they impact on the 
quality of service.  
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In the era of progressing computerization, the threat to 
IT systems is increasing. The paper discusses the security 
and service quality issues within a large scale enterprise 
network based on cloud computing which uses the Docker 
system. This discussion shows that there is a real need to 
control and monitor possible threats, which prompts further 
research into this field. 
Thus our future work will be focused on the 
development and implementation of an elastic solution for 
improving security in corporate networks based on cloud 
computing. Our main aim is to develop algorithms that will 
process the data compiled from the vulnerability and 
compliance scanners e.g., Qualys, Nessus or Inspect, in an 
optimal way. The algorithm should also provide useful 
information about the security level in the corporate assets 
(Figure 5). Further, the developed algorithm should be 
scalable to handle efficiently increasing amounts of data. 
Finally, the algorithm should communicate with the Docker 
orchestrator to dynamically respond to an increased demand 
by allocating more resources from the cloud server. 
Figure 5. Architecture of proposed system 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank anonymous reviewers for 
valuable comments and remarks and Wrocław University of 
Science and Technology (statutory activity) for financial 
support. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

REFERENCES
[1]
Y. Li, L. Gao, G. Shen, and L. Peng, “Impact of ROADM 
Colorless, Directionless, and Contentionless (CDC) Features 
on Optical Network”, J. Opt. Commun. Netw. B58-B67, 
2012. 
[2]
T. Zami, “Multiflow Application for WDM Networks With 
Multicarrier 
Transponders 
Serving 
Superchannels 
in 
Contentionless OXCs”, J. Opt. Commun. Netw. A114-A124, 
2017. 
[3]
K. Hashizume, D. G. Rosado, E Fernandez-Medina, and E. B. 
Fernandez, “An analysis of securit issues for cloud 
computing”, Journal of Internet Serices And Applications, 
London , 2013. 
[4]
URL:https://qafe.com/what-is-docker-why-en-how-use-it/ 
[accessed: 15.12.201]. 
[5]
URL:https://docs.openshift.com/container-
platform/3.7/architecture/index.html, [ accessed: 15.12.2017]. 
[6]
A. Dusia, Y. Yang, and M. Taufer, “Network Quality of 
Service in Docker Containers”, IEEE Conference on Cluster 
Computing, Chicago, USA, 2015. 
[7]
T. Bui, “Analysis of Docker Security”, Aalto University, 
Helsinki, Finland, 2015 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

