A New Process Model for Optimizing IT Outsourcing Operations in the German 
Automotive Industry  
 
Christine Brautsch  
Department of Car IT 
AUDI AG 
Ingolstadt, Germany 
christine.brautsch@audi.de 
Martin Wynn 
School of Computing and Technology, 
University of Gloucestershire, 
Cheltenham, UK 
mwynn@glos.ac.uk
 
Abstract - The outsourcing of IT services is a significant 
business activity for many companies and is a well-established 
element of services management worldwide. However, the 
process is neither well defined nor understood in many 
industries, including the automotive sector, where it is of 
growing importance. A review of existing literature reveals 
consideration of specific aspects of outsourcing in isolation, but 
relatively little material that provides a comprehensive 
framework for analysis. This paper thus identifies the main 
stages in IT outsourcing operations in the German automotive 
industry and seeks to establish the critical success factors that 
can help ensure quality outcomes. It suggests a clear definition 
of IT outsourcing and constructs a new conceptual process 
model, that provides the basis for a range of analytical 
materials to complement the existing literature, and which will 
also be of value to practitioners working in this field. 
Keywords - IT outsourcing; operations; success factor; 
service provider; process mode; CSFs 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Outsourcing as a business process or function is not new, 
especially in the field of information technology, systems 
and services, in which it has become increasingly important 
during the last few years [1]. In this context, when referring 
to ‘IT (information technology) outsourcing’, we assume the 
broader definition of IT that encompasses technologies, 
systems and services. “Information technology, in its narrow 
definition, refers to the technological side of an information 
system. It includes hardware, databases, software networks, 
and other devices. ... sometimes, the term IT is also used 
interchangeably with IS (information systems), or it may 
even be used as a broader concept that describes a collection 
of several information systems, users, and management for 
an entire organisation” [2]. 
The reasons for outsourcing are various, but potential 
cost savings and the transparency of costs are often to the 
fore [3]. The business case for IT outsourcing can contain a 
range of possible benefits, including economies of scale in 
the use of, for example, third party hardware and 
infrastructure, and the freeing up of ‘human capital’ to 
concentrate on core business activities or strategic IT issues. 
Nevertheless, many IT outsourcing operations fail or require 
renegotiation within the project life-cycle [4]. Groetschel [5] 
suggests that 30 % of all IT outsourcing projects fail or the 
expected results are not reached. Furthermore, it seems that 
IT outsourcing success is generally the expected outcome 
and the risks are often underestimated. 
The research centres on IT outsourcing in the German 
automotive industry, where the process of IT outsourcing is 
neither well documented nor researched. It is a dynamic 
technology environment with the life cycles for both 
software and hardware products continually shortening 
because of new developments [6]. In addition, the 
development of new technologies relating specifically to 
automobiles requires the integration of IT professionals and 
auto technology specialists. This has resulted in a rapid 
evolution of the IT function within the automobile industry 
to encompass technologies that are outside its traditional 
limits [7]. Technological and strategic decisions are taken 
within the organization, and a web of suppliers produces the 
components, which are often integrated within the car. The 
need for alignment of technology and business strategies is 
paramount.  
Inevitably, these developments influence sourcing 
strategy. The engagement of specialized companies as 
business partners may be viewed positively as these firms 
have developed efficient structures for planning and 
controlling the entire IT life-cycle [1] [5]. Furthermore an 
“effective knowledge-sharing process over organizational 
boundaries” can ensure the right flow of information 
between outsourcing partners [8]. 
Within this dynamic technological and business context, 
this paper addresses three research questions (RQs): 
RQ1. What are the main stages in the IT outsourcing 
process in the German automotive industry? 
RQ2. What are the critical success factors (CSFs) for IT 
outsourcing performance in the German automotive 
industry? 
RQ3. Can a new process model be constructed for IT 
outsourcing in the German automotive industry that helps 
ensure quality outcomes and deliverables? 
The paper first reviews existing literature to establish a 
theoretical framework for the initial research activity (section 
II). Research philosophy and methodology are then 
considered (section III), before the research questions are 
fully addressed, focusing particularly on a new process 
model for IT outsourcing in the German automotive industry 
(section IV). The concluding section (section V) puts 
forward a new definition for IT outsourcing and suggests a 
hierarchy of success factors that impact upon the outsourcing 
process, looking also at future research activity in this field. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-270-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

II. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK  
The analysis of the existing literature shows a paradigm 
shift in practice in the automobile sector as regards 
outsourcing: companies no longer ask themselves “Shall I 
outsource parts of my IT?” the question today is rather “How 
can I realize IT outsourcing in the best way for my 
company?” [9]. This has led to a more individual and more 
focused analysis of IT outsourcing options as measured 
against future business challenges.  
The literature review suggests that the persons 
responsible for IT outsourcing often underestimate the 
complexity of the entire process. There may be a 
concentration on particular aspects (e.g. based on their 
professional background) without an appreciation of the 
whole process [10]. An important aspect in this context 
seems to be the need for clear objective formulation within 
each IT outsourcing project. 
The review revealed two main trends in the automotive 
sector: first, a general increase in IT outsourcing as 
companies strive for improved cost-effectiveness; second, an 
increasing number of IT outsourcing projects fail or the 
expected results are not reached. The corollary to this second 
point is that many companies assume IT outsourcing will be 
successful and risks are often underestimated. 
The entire IT outsourcing life-cycle is not widely 
analysed in the academic literature but existing studies 
allowed the development of a provisional life cycle model or 
conceptual framework that has been tested out and refined 
through primary research. A conceptual framework can be 
seen as a type of intermediate theory that attempts to connect 
all aspects of inquiry, i.e. problem definition and literature 
review, as well as methodology development, data collection 
and interpretation. In general, conceptual framework 
development has often been linked to exploratory types of 
research [22]. The constructed framework consists of eight 
key-stages and has been visualized in the form of a life-cycle 
(based on the plan, build and run approach – Fig. 2). 
Analysis of the existing literature also allowed an 
identification of possible critical success factors (CSFs) that 
could be provisionally allocated to different stages in the 
life-cycle (Table I). In determining these factors, the 
different opportunities and risks within IT outsourcing were 
identified from the existing literature as well. These success 
factors suggested the potential measures that might be used 
to assess the degree of achievement in outsourcing projects. 
 
Table I. Possible Critical Success Factors identified from existing literature 
CSF1 
Transparency concerning: 
- strategic orientation,  
- internal IT performance, 
- customer requirements 
[11, 12, 13, 14, 
15] 
 
 
CSF2 
Economic point of view: value-for-money 
(management of costs) 
[11, 13, 15, 16] 
 
CSF3 
Transparency within the selection process of a 
provider (choosing the right service provider) 
[11, 13, 17] 
 
CSF4 
Proper communication and information  
[11, 13, 15, 18] 
CSF5 
Contract management and controlling 
[11, 13, 15, 17] 
CSF6 
Service control and lessons learned (e.g. 
define service level agreements) 
[11, 13, 15, 20, 
21] 
The literature review thus helped develop, but also 
provided some tentative answers to, the three main research 
questions for the primary research phase of the project. In 
general, the concept of IT outsourcing has been explored in a 
way that will generate a contribution to knowledge, i.e. 
advancing the understanding of the concept, and/or 
improving the outsourcing processes. This will be the basis 
for the development of a new process model for IT 
outsourcing in the automotive industry in Germany. 
III. 
RESEARCH PHILOSOPHY AND METHODOLOGY 
The research is based on linking practice and theory in a 
pragmatic way and is guided by practical experiences [23], 
[24], [25]. Indeed, the research will be based on the 
paradigm of pragmatism. “What?” and How?” become the 
main aspects of the research problem [26]. The research 
follows a step by step analysis for each RQ [27]. The 
research is a single in depth case-study based on qualitative 
research, which will be used to develop and justify a 
conceptual framework [28]. The information is being 
obtained through semi-structured interviews, which provide 
the 
opportunity 
to 
speak 
directly 
to 
stakeholders. 
Furthermore they allow different views to be examined very 
closely and in depth.  
The analytical techniques for qualitative data are not well 
developed, as this kind of data consists of interpretable 
words and observations, and not numbers [28]. According to 
Taylor and Renner [29], qualitative data analysis (of 
narrative data) requires creativity, discipline and a systematic 
approach. Thus there is no single solution - the results 
depend on the RQs and available resources [29]. 
Based on eight different stakeholder-groups (Fig. 1), 
interviews were held in a two-step approach reflecting the 
RQs. The first stage enquired about the different stages of 
outsourcing projects to build a basis for further discussions. 
At the end of each interview, the findings from the literature 
were presented and discussed with the participants. In  
 
 
IT Worker
Directly affected
P1 
Project Management 
Office
Project 
representative
P3 
Client
customer 
representatives
P5 
Service Provider
General Manager
P7 
Project manager
Project team leader
P2 
IT service 
executive
SUB-Project 
team leader
P4 
Procurement
Procurement 
manager
P6 
Head of business 
unit
Decision maker
P8 
 
 
Figure 1. The Eight Stakeholder Profiles (P1-P8) 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-270-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

addition, each interview was completed with a self-
allocation of the participants´ business activity in the 
outsourcing life-cycle. This ensured that all areas of the life-
cycle were covered and queried more than once. Deviations 
from the set agenda can be made in order to explore new 
and particularly interesting points raised in the course of 
each interview [32]. 
The second stage concentrates on the CSFs for 
outsourcing delivery. The interviews lasted about two hours 
each, one hour per stage. The first person interviewed was 
the IT worker to get a general overview and to validate the 
pertinence of the questions [32]. The last interview was with 
the most experienced person (head of the business 
department) to elucidate uncertainties (until data saturation 
is reached). Finally, in order to verify the results, the 
developed model was sent to all participants for comments 
and will be sent to the company for final approval [32]. The 
analysis of the gathered data is being fully incorporated in a 
refined conceptual framework. In summary, the systematic 
literature review indicated potential critical success factors; 
the interviews gave the chance to validate and test these 
initial findings in order to come up with a solid set of factors 
for success in IT outsourcing. 
IV. 
TOWARDS A NEW PROCESS MODEL FOR IT 
OUTSOURCING IN THE AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY 
The primary research phase of this project focuses on 
eight interviews that have been undertaken as sub-cases. All 
interviewees have been anonymised, using the acronym P1 – 
P8, but Fig. 1 provides job titles and functions in the overall 
process. Analysis of this interview material suggests the 
following answers to the research questions. 
A. Research Question 1: What are the main stages in the 
IT outsourcing process in the German automotive 
industry? 
Corporate Strategy
Preparation
Business Case / 
Tender
First selection / mini 
due diligence
Contract negotiation
Transition
Transfer of 
responsibilities / 
regular operation
Monitoring & control 
/ In-sourcing
CSF1
CSF4
CSF4
CSF4
CSF4
CSF4
CSF4
CSF4
CSF1
CSF2
CSF3
CSF5
CSF6
IT
Outsourcing
life-cycle
Plan
Build
Run
CSF6
CSF4
CSF
1-6
critical success factors
 
Figure 2. Initial Conceptual Model based on Plan-Build-Run Concepts 
Interviewees were asked for their personal understanding of 
IT outsourcing. In general, the poor definition suggested in 
the literature review was confirmed. Each participant gave a 
different definition of the term “IT outsourcing”. However, 
there was some common ground in all interviewees’ 
perceptions, notably that the concept involves a transfer of a 
defined set of tasks to an external service provider. The 
main stages of the life-cycle garnered from the literature 
review were generally confirmed as logical and realistic. 
There is a correlation between the field of activity of the 
interviewee and his understanding of the overall process. 
Based on his practical experience and field of activity, P1, 
for example, described IT outsourcing as starting after the 
end of the ‘build-stage’. For P1, IT outsourcing is a 
corporate strategic objective, which has to be realized. 
Consequently, P1 has no influence on the outsourcing 
decision itself. However, P1 is charged with determining 
‘how’ the new service will be delivered. This implies that 
P1 has, in the main, two dimensions of activity: 
 
Design of the operational service (e.g. meeting 
structure, communication channels, setting up an 
operational manual) 
 
Setting up and measurement of service level 
agreements (SLAs) with service providers. 
P4, however, has a very content-driven understanding of 
the life-cycle. For P4, IT outsourcing consists of twelve 
stages, starting with the analysis of the service providers’ 
offers and ending with the completion of the transition to the 
third party and associated knowledge transfer process. The 
influence of professional background can again be seen in 
P4’s perception of the overall process. Somewhat to the 
contrary, three interviewees (P2, P3, and P8) had a more top 
level or superficial view of the process. 
Overall, however, the conceptual framework and the 
provisional stages in the outsourcing process were generally 
confirmed in the first hand interviews, with the addition of 
three new concepts or developments, and one new stage.  
The first one new concept concerns the influence of 
mental models or preconceptions that each stakeholder may 
have regarding the outsourcing process. For example, P3 
stated that “…the specific understanding of circumstances 
that people have, has to be considered continuously during 
the entire process starting even before the strategy is 
agreed…” 
Second, some interviewees suggested that the transition 
stage could usefully be subdivided into two stages: transition 
and transformation, and this is reflected in the new model 
with transformation being a new stage 7 (Fig. 3). P8 
distinguishes between ‘transition’ - “…the switch of the 
responsibility of the service from the client to the service 
provider…”, and ‘transformation’ - that reflects the internal 
processes of the service provider to “…integrate the new 
process to the existing procedures and standards”. 
Third, the ‘mini due diligence’ stage could perhaps be 
relabelled. P8 noted that the investigated organization uses 
the term ‘due diligence’ as ‘mini’ may imply a short time 
phase or lack of significance (Fig. 3). 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-270-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

B. Research Question 2: What are the CSFs for IT 
outsourcing performance in the German automotive 
industry? 
As already noted, the systematic literature review 
indicated possible critical success factors for the outsourcing 
process (Table I). The interviews afforded the opportunity to 
test out and/or validate these initial findings, and also to 
explore and develop new CSFs. The interviews by and large 
confirmed the initially developed CSFs but also generated 
some new ones. The eight interviewees mentioned a total of 
79 CSFs.  
Interview analysis has also reinforced the linking of 
specific CSFs to particular stages in the emerging process 
model; and some CSFs were clearly viewed as more 
significant 
than others. 
‘Proper communication and 
information’ (CSF4), for example, was named by all 
participating persons. P2 suggested a development of this to 
introduce a transparent escalation structure, based on role 
and seniority, with the aim of protecting subordinate 
structures. New CSFs include the ‘culture of trust’ between 
the outsourcing partner and the outsourcer. In this context, 
P2 suggested team building activities to develop a feeling of 
solidarity and appreciation on both sides. 
C. Research Question 3: Can a new process model be 
constructed for IT outsourcing in the German 
automotive industry that helps ensure quality outcomes 
and deliverables? 
The main expected contribution of this research is to 
propose and develop a new conceptual process model for IT 
outsourcing in the German automotive industry. The 
contribution to knowledge builds on the exploration of the 
key steps and stages and their associated core activities, 
results and deliverables, and the relationship between them 
in IT outsourcing projects; and on an examination of the 
provisional CSFs and their development into a more concrete 
set of CFSs for maximizing IT outsourcing project quality 
outcomes. This is being achieved by studying the 
relationships between CSFs in different outsourcing stages, 
defining points of interconnection and establishing ways in 
which the process model can be used to improve quality 
outcomes and thereby reduce IT outsourcing project failure 
rates. 
Taking into account the specific needs of IT outsourcing, 
and building on the provisional conceptual model, a generic 
overall process model can be constructed comprising nine 
stages: 1. Corporate Strategy, 2. Preparation, 3. Business 
Case / Tender, 4. First selection / due diligence, 5. Contract 
negotiation, 6. Transition, 7. Transformation, 8. Transfer of 
responsibilities / regular operation & innovation, 9. 
Monitoring & Control / In-Sourcing.  
The mapping of the CSFs onto these stages in the process 
accommodates a significant number of new CSFs that were 
identified in the interviews (Fig 3). These are classified as 
"confirmation (c)" or "new (n)" CSFs in Table II, with 
provisional revised numbering shown in the right hand 
column. These have been applied to stages one and two in 
the process model as an example of the possible linkage  
 
CSF 
6,7,8,15,16,
19,20,23,24,
25,26,27
CSF 
7,9,15,17,
19,20,23,
24,25,26
CSF 
1,7,15,19
CSF 
1,10,11,12,1
3,14,18,21
CSF 
1,2,3,7,15
CSF 
1,3,8,10,
11,12,14,
18,21
CSF 
1,2,5,8,9,10,
11,15,16,17,
22,25,26
CSF 
1,2,6,8,9,
10,11,12,
14,18,21,
22,25,26
1. Corporate 
Strategy
2. Preparation
3. Business Case / 
Tender
4. First selection / 
due diligence
5. Contract 
negotiation
6. Transition
7. Transformation
8. Transfer of 
responsibilities / 
regular operation
9. Monitoring & 
control / In-sourcing
CSF1
CSF4
CSF4
CSF1
CSF2
CSF3
CSF5
CSF6
CSF6
CSF4
CSF4
CSF4
CSF4
CSF4
CSF4
CSF
1-27
New allocated (C)SF 
 
 
Figure 3. Nine-stage Process Model and (C)SFs 
 
between CSFs and project stages (Table II). 
Transparency was highlighted as a key factor. One 
respondent suggested that the existence of different mental 
models (mind sets) of stakeholders in IT outsourcing projects 
occurs out of a lack of transparency. Other major issues 
highlighted were proper communication and the availability 
of information regarding strategic alignments. Respondents 
indicated as many as 15 CSFs within the preparation stage. 
CSFs in this stage mostly concern the quality of the tender 
(e.g. by understanding the customer requirements) and the 
early definition of fall back scenarios if the outsourcing fails. 
Respondents 
identified 
the 
standardization 
of 
documentation and harmonization of services as one of the 
main factors that can improve the quality of the service in 
stage 3 (business case development and tendering). This is 
reflected in CSF 19, which proposes an evaluation matrix for 
a transparent and comprehensible selection process of the 
service provider. With regards to stage 4 (the first selection / 
due diligence), this CSF also has a major bearing as both 
sides (client and service provider) get to know each other’s 
views and positions for the first time. 
Contract negotiation (stage 5) is characterized primarily 
by two tendencies epitomized in specific CSFs: transparency 
of operations and clarity of understanding of the substance of 
the outsourcing detail and organizational conditions.  
Integration of the procurement function as part of the overall 
outsourcing process is seen to have significant administrative 
and synergetic benefits. 
For transition (stage 6), respondents highlighted CSFs 
with a strong human resource element e.g. “…encompass 
personal change processes of affected people…” and 
“culture of trust on both sides”. Participant responses 
suggested that interpersonal relationships constituted the 
largest risk of failure in this stage. The same applies to the 
new stage - transformation (stage 7): the service provider 
integrates the new processes in their work routine including 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-270-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

the definition of the interfaces with customer personnel (be 
they retained by the customer or acquired by the provider). 
Stage 8 focuses on the regular operation of, and 
innovation within, the new outsourced arrangement. Next to 
interpersonal factors, which play a critical role in this stage, 
the successful processing of new requirements and new 
technology developments during the contract period is a key 
contributor to deliver overall project success. The operation 
of the control model and the mapping of change requests into 
the tender/contract also surface as significant challenges. 
Stage 9 encompasses on-going monitoring and control 
activities as well as consideration of the option of in-
sourcing. Clarity and transparency concerning strategic 
orientation (CSF 1a) is key for all stakeholders; and the 
business case has to be periodically revisited and questioned 
(CSF2). New service options may arise (e.g. offshore 
options), which were not an alternative at the start of the 
contract, and these need to be assessed. Transparency and 
clarity of communication and information (CSF4) are 
perceived as critical in this final stage of the outsourcing life-
cycle.  
Table II. CSFs for Stages 1 & 2 in the Conceptual Model 
 
n/c 
Content 
CSF 
Stage 1 
c 
 Transparency concerning: 
o the strategic orientation 
o internal IT performance 
o customer requirements 
CSF 1 
CSF 1a 
CSF 1b 
CSF 1c 
c 
 Proper communication and information 
CSF 4 
Stage 2 Preparation 
c 
 Transparency concerning: 
o the strategic orientation 
o customer requirements 
CSF 1 
CSF 1a 
CSF 1c 
c 
 Economic point of view: value for money 
(management of costs) 
CSF2 
c 
 Proper communication and information 
CSF 4 
n 
 Service control and lessons learned (e.g. 
define service level agreements, 
documentation, etc.) 
CSF 6 
n 
 Include all knowledge carriers to improve 
the quality of the tender (e.g. controlling 
for the business case calculation) 
CSF 7 
n 
 Accompany the personal change processes 
of the affected people 
CSF 8 
n 
 Clear understanding concerning the 
support services of the procurement 
department (in scope / out of scope) 
CSF 15 
n 
 Early involvement of involved 
departments, e.g. the procurement 
department as a basis for bundling 
activities and achieve synergies 
CSF 16 
n 
 Development of a catalogue of criteria 
including qualitative and quantitative 
issues to evaluate the tenders and service 
providers 
CSF 19 
n 
 Tender documents comply with current 
standards, guidelines and criteria of the 
company. 
CSF 20 
n 
 Consideration of exit strategies  
CSF 23 
n 
 Definition of a fluctuation rate by the 
contracting authority 
CSF 24 
n 
 Clear definition of a control model and 
their mapping in the tender 
CSF 25 
n 
 Handling of new requirements and new 
technologies during the contract period 
CSF 26 
n 
 At the project level: definition of fall back 
scenarios, if the outsourcing fails 
CSF27 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The process model developed to date has built upon existing 
literature, and initial findings have been developed and 
verified through detailed interviews with outsourcing 
participants. This model is now viewed as a suitable basis for 
further analysis of each of its nine stages, in which sub-
processes can be identified, allied to further definition and 
development of CSFs. This allows the development of 
templates and guidance materials to aid practitioners in the 
IT outsourcing process in the automotive industry. 
Interviewee analysis has supported a new definition of IT 
outsourcing. Despite differences in perception of what the 
concept is, there is some common ground in all interviewees’ 
understanding, notably that the concept involves a transfer of 
a defined set of tasks to an external service provider. After a 
process of identification of key themes, and feeding back 
options to participants, the ‘best fit’ definition is that “IT 
outsourcing is the transitioning of IT services to an outside 
vendor with the aim of creating value for customers and 
providing services based on a previously defined sourcing 
strategy 
and 
clearly 
formulated 
core 
competencies, 
encompassing 
budget 
and 
headcount 
issues, 
risk 
management, future control and communication processes”. 
As regards the large number of CSFs that surfaced in the 
initial interviews, an onion model to validate the importance 
of named CSFs within the interviews was developed. This 
combines the frequency a single factor was named by the 
participants with the frequency of occurrence within the life-
cycle. This has allowed the development of hierarchical tiers 
of success factors, with tier 1 being most important and tier 5 
least important (Fig.4 and Table II), and only tiers 1 and 2 
being deemed critical as discussed by Delmour [33]. Tiers 3 
to 5 are seen as important influencing factors but not critical 
to project success, productivity and sustainability. 
As one of the visionaries of recent times in the IT and 
business field has noted, “there is no relationship between 
expenses for computers and business profitability…..You  
 
 
 
Figure 4. (C)SF Tier Model 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-270-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

will find that similar computer technologies can lead either 
to monumental success or to dismal failures.” 
Paul Strassmann [34] highlighted the importance of the 
management of the IT function and related processes in 
determining success or failure. This is particularly true of 
outsourcing operations, and the history of IT arguably 
evidences more outsourcing failures than successes. This 
research attempts to contribute to improving the outcome of 
IT outsourcing in the automobile industry. Results to date 
provide the platform for the future development of a range of 
learning materials to guide practitioners working in this field.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors acknowledge the support of AUDI AG in 
facilitating this research project and thank the participating 
interviewees for their contribution to the research findings.  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Schäfer, IT Outsourcing Leitfaden: Von der Idee bis zur 
Umsetzung. Mit Praxisbeispielen und umfangreichen Checklisten: 
Books on Demand, 2011. 
[2] E. Turban, E. McLean, and J. Wetherbe, Information Technology for 
Management 
Improving 
Quality 
and 
Productivity: 
Internet 
Supplement: John Wiley & Sons Canada, Limited, 1996. 
[3] J. Goo, R. Kishore, and H. R. Rao., "A content-analytic longitudinal 
study of the drivers for information technology and systems 
outsourcing," presented at the Proceedings of the twenty first 
international 
conference 
on 
Information 
systems, 
Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia, 2000. 
[4] F. Duhamel, I. Gutiérrez-Martínez, S. Picazo-Vela, and L.F. Luna-
Reyes (2012). The Key Role of Interfaces in IT Outsourcing 
Relationships. 5 (1), 37-56.  
[5] E. Groetschel. (2006, 2006 Jan 19th) Warum Outsourcing-Projekte 
scheitern. 
Computerwoche. 
Available: 
http://www.computerwoche.de/management/it-services/571060/ 
[6] J. R. Hofmann, J.H. Werner Schmidt, and W. Renninger, Masterkurs 
IT-Management: Grundlagen, Umsetzung Und Erfolgreiche Praxis F 
R Studenten Und Praktiker: Vieweg+teubner Verlag, 2010. 
[7] Z. Süddeutsche, "Audi bei IT angriffslustig " in Süddeutsche Zeitung, 
ed. Munich, 2012. 
[8] A. Gopal and S. Gosain, "Research Note—The Role of 
Organizational Controls and Boundary Spanning in Software 
Development Outsourcing: Implications for Project Performance," 
Information Systems Research, vol. 21, pp. 960-982, 2010. 
[9] D. Eschlbeck. (2009, March 15th, 2011). Die Auswirkungen von 
Outsourcing im IT-Bereich auf unternehmerische und räumliche 
Strukturen. 
Available: 
http://books.google.de/books?id=wNY8Y-
fg12gC&printsec=frontcover&dq=Die+Auswirkungen+von+Outsour
cing+im+ITBereich+auf+unternehmerische+und+r%C3%A4umliche
+Strukturen&source=bl&ots=0OWNNYdsKi&sig=AufHhgS51BrQJ
nJtnhScq3oFpIA&hl=de&ei=YweBTffrGs7Lsgb9pb3kBg&sa=X&oi
=book_result&ct=result&resnum=2&ved=0CDQQ6AEwAQ#v=onep
age&q&f=false 
[10] L. Schwarze and P. Müller, "IT-Outsourcing - Erfahrungen, Status 
und zukünftige Herausforderungen," HMD 245, vol.10 , 42. Jahrgang, 
2005, pp. 6-17. 
[11] S. Cullen, Seddon, P., and Willcocks L. (2005, March 10th, 2011). 
Managing outsourcing: The life cycle imperative. 4. Available: 
http://infosys.uncc.edu/mbas6320/Readings/managing%20outsourcin
g.pdf 
[12] R. Gonzalez, J.Gasco, and J. Llopis, "Information Systems 
outsourcing: An empirical study of success factors," Human Systems 
Management, vol. 29, 2010, pp. 139-151. 
[13] R. Gonzalez, J.Gasco, and J. Llopis, "Information systems 
outsourcing success factors: a review and some results," Information 
Management & Computer Security, vol. 13, 2005, pp. 399-418. 
[14] J. M. Callahan, "10 practical tips for successful outsourcing," hfm 
(Healthcare Financial Management), vol. 59, 2005, pp. 110-116. 
[15] G. Petter and S.-S. Hans, "Critical success factors from IT 
outsourcing theories: an empirical study," Industrial Management & 
Data Systems, vol. 1052005, pp. 685-702,. 
[16] M. C. Lacity, S. Khan, A.H. Yan, and L.P. Willcocks, "A review of 
the IT outsourcing empirical literature and future research directions," 
Journal of Information Technology, vol. 25, Dec. 2010, pp. 395-433. 
[17] O. J. Akomode, B. Lees, and C. Irgens, "Constructing customised 
models and providing information for IT outsourcing decisions. 
Logistics Information Management," vol. 11, 1998, pp. 114-127. 
[18] H. Solli-Saether and P. Gottschalk, "Maturity in IT outsourcing 
relationships: an exploratory study of client companies," Industrial 
Management & Data Systems, vol. 108, 2008, pp. 635-649. 
[19] G. Petter and S.-S. Hans, "Critical success factors from IT 
outsourcing theories: an empirical study," Industrial Management & 
Data Systems, vol. 105, 2005, pp. 685-702. 
[20] J. Goo, "Structure of service level agreements (SLA) in IT 
outsourcing: The construct and its measurement," Information 
Systems Frontiers, vol. 12, Apr. 2010, pp. 185-205. 
[21] J. Goo and C. D. Huang, "Facilitating relational governance through 
service level agreements in IT outsourcing: An application of the 
commitment-trust theory," Decision Support Systems, vol. 46, Dec. 
2008, pp. 216-232. 
[22] J. A. Maxwell, "Qualitative Research Design: A Interactive 
Approach,"  vol. 2nd Edition, C. S. P. Thousands Oaks, Inc., Ed., ed, 
2005. 
[23] R. Audi, The Cambridge dictionary of philosophy. Cambridge ; New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1995. 
[24] K. Nogeste, "Research Strategy Development for Dummies: Define a 
Framework for Research and than use it,," presented at the European 
Conference on Research Methodology for Business and Management 
Studies, Lisbon, Portugal, 2007. 
[25] M. Saunders, P. Lewis, and A. Thornhill, Research methods for 
business students, 5th ed. New York: Prentice Hall, 2009. 
[26] J. W. Creswell, Research design: qualitative, quantitative, and mixed 
method approaches: Sage Publications, 2003. 
[27] U. Flick, An introduction to qualitative research: SAGE, 2009. 
[28] R. K. Yin, Case Study Research - Design and Methods, 4 ed. 
Thousand Oaks: Sage, 2009. 
[29] E. Taylor-Powel and, M. Renner, Analyzing Qualitative Data: 
University of Wisconsin--Extension, Cooperative Extension, 2003. 
[30] A. Funk, T. Söbbing, S. Neuhaus, W. Fritzemeyer, J. Schrey, and R. 
Niedermeier, Handbuch IT-Outsourcing: Recht, Strategie, Prozesse, 
IT, Steuern samt Business Process Outsourcing: Müller Jur.Vlg.C.F., 
2006. 
[31] H. Smuts, A. van der Merwe, P. Kotzé, and M. Look, "Critical 
success factors for information systems outsourcing management: a 
software development lifecycle view," in SAICSIT '10 Proceedings of 
the 2010 Annual Research Conference of the South African Institute 
of Computer Scientists and Information Technologists, ed. Bela Bela, 
South Africa, 2010, pp. 304-313. 
[32] A. Ishizaka and R. Blakiston, "The 18C's model for a successful long-
term outsourcing arrangement," Industrial Marketing Management, 
vol. 41, 2012, pp. 1071-1080. 
[33] B. Dellmour, Critical success factors it-start-up companies: GRIN 
Verlag, 2011. 
[34] Paul A. Strassmann, The Business Value of Computers, The 
Information Economic Press, New Canaan, Conneticut, 1990. 
 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-270-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2013 : The Fifth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

