PROYEVA: System to Evaluate the Projects Quality in Contests 
System for the Technical Evaluation of Product Quality and Projects Participating in Invention Contests 
and Innovation Through the use of an External Metric and Quality in-use Plan  
         Laura Silvia Vargas-Pérez  
Agustín Francisco Gutiérrez-Tornés  
Edgardo Manuel Felipe-Riverón 
ITCM Instituto Tecnológico de          ITESM Instituto Tecnológico de Estudios  
Centro de Investigación en 
Ciudad  Madero, Tamaulipas, México 
Superiores de Monterrey-CCM, México 
Computación, CIC, IPN, México 
     laura_silvia_vargas@hotmail.com 
           agustin.tornes@itesm.mx 
              edgardo@cic.ipn.mx 
 
 
Abstract: PROYEVA is a system based upon international 
standards and Mexican models that allows for a comparative 
analysis of different projects and products involved in 
innovation, invention and creativity contests-based on the 
following characteristics: quality in-use, functionality and 
usability through an external metrics and quality in-use 
metrics plan in a visual environment. PROJEVA software is a 
practical application of the PROYEVA model. It allows a 
general quality evaluation of projects and products in technical 
competitions. It provides support for judges and facilitates a 
more objective and impartial evaluation. It also provides 
guidance 
on 
the 
ranking 
evaluation 
procedures 
and 
documentation. PROJEVA is directed to organizations, 
companies and end-users who need to easily select products or 
projects, with the highest quality among the contesters to be 
pronounced as winners. 
Keywords: contests; creativity; invention; innovation; system. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Currently, it is not easy for an evaluator to render a 
judgment on projects which are outside the evaluator’s field 
of expertise. In many cases, he or she has to make hasty 
decisions and determine the quality in-use of a project based 
on subjective criteria, which does not allow for objective 
evaluation of the different aspects comprised. 
There are several standard models that provide guidance 
for organizations in the measurement of the characteristics 
which give them access to a high quality level in their 
products and projects. In theory and in practice, it is 
necessary to adjust the models to obtain a qualimetric model 
with the aim of evaluating and measuring the quality 
characteristics. Often, these models are used for different 
purposes, such as buying, renting, using and adapting 
projects and products. 
A project can be defined in terms of its distinctive 
characteristics: it is a temporary endeavor undertaken to 
create a unique product or service, developed at all levels of 
the organization, and can involve one person or thousands. 
They may involve just a single unit of an organization or the 
combined efforts of several. Projects are often critical 
components of the business strategy of the organization that 
has developed them; their durations are finite. Projects are 
not successive efforts; they involve doing something that 
has not been done before. Therefore, they are unique.  
Because the product of each project is unique, the 
characteristics that distinguish the product or service should 
be developed progressively, which means "step-by-step 
procedures,” “continued progress by increments" while 
elaborated means "worked with attention to detail – “fully 
developed" [1].  
In these cases, a comparative analysis of various 
products and projects helps one decide which to select as the 
best as far as its quality in-use. 
As such, a methodology and quality in-use technical 
evaluation method for participating projects in creativity, 
invention 
and 
innovation 
contests 
through 
the 
implementation of Quality Metrics Models, external as well 
as quality in-use, and the use of supplementary software in 
support of the judges is proposed so said judges are able to 
issue a more accurate decision. 
Thus, the PROYEVA model is introduced, based on 
international standards IEEE610 [2], IEEE1061 [3], ISO 
9000-3 [4], ISO / IEC 9126 [5], ISO / IEC 14598 [6], ISO 
9001 [7], Project SQUARE (ISO 25000) [8], SUMI [9] as 
well as in other Mexican models (MECHDAV [11-14], [16-
18], MECRAD [19]). 
The paper is distributed in the following way: Section II 
includes a short background; Section III explains in a general 
way the characteristics of the contests where the proposed 
system have been used; Section IV details the system’s 
methodology; Section V describes through figures the 
operation of the system; Section VI explains the final 
evaluation report, and finally Section VII includes the 
results, conclusions and future works. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The first project competitions have been geared mostly 
toward ``Experiments and Devices'' projects organized year 
after year, for several decades by various academic bodies. 
These play a positive role by encouraging the contestants to 
demonstrate their ability and creative genius by submitting 
projects on the design of experiments, display or educational 
devices. In addition to inducing participants to research and 
learn, the presentation of projects helps in reaching practical 
objectives. It could be said that they are relevant to today's 
society which needs to motivate and stimulate the creative 
potential and capacity of professionals and students at all 
levels [10]. 
This type of event, on the other hand, also serves as a 
starting point to familiarize, the public, with the knowledge 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

of what science generates, and is therefore an element in 
making this an integral part of popular culture.  
To compete, the contestant must first make and take into 
account a systematic study on the feasibility of a particular 
project, and should take into consideration some of the 
following useful aspects. 
Due 
to 
the 
importance 
of 
having 
high-level 
professionals, teachers, developers and individuals capable 
of providing technical scientific benefit to society, events to 
motivate their creativity are organized.  
III. 
CONTESTS 
Anyone who has an innovative idea to be made into a 
development project may participate. The idea should 
preferably be supported or based on technology and may be 
the result of the ingenuity of a person or group. There must 
be a Technical Committee, which reserves the right to 
evaluate and support the ideas presented and must not 
accept ideas that are not aligned with the specific objectives 
and spirit of the initiative of the contest in question. There 
are no restrictions on the participation of a group or one of 
the members nor the number of ideas presented, i.e. there 
may be several innovative ideas for a group or by some 
members of the group. 
A. Current National Prototype Competitions 
The technological, scientific and technical prototype 
exposition has been booming since the nineties. Creativity 
competitions are very important both for the institutions that 
choose an award, as major companies and entrepreneurs are 
looking for new ideas and services that provide added value 
to their production management. 
B. State of the art 
We conducted a thorough investigation on the possibility 
of the existence of systems (software) for the evaluation of 
projects in terms of quality concerns, focusing on this 
important issue in quality competition contests such as 
creativity, innovation and invention, or when assessing a 
technological, scientific, social, cultural, environmental 
project to be approved by and for society. 
The investigation found that there is an issue about the 
contests, but the postulates are loosely based for example, 
there are degrees specializing in the field of project quality 
assessment, for determining the magnitude of the results of 
the evaluations, which are a fundamental element of cost-
benefit analysis and cost-effective, widely used in project 
evaluation [10]. 
There were no courses that prepare and certify judges to 
evaluate projects involved in creative competitions to 
channel the above benefits and better prepare people as 
project quality evaluators. 
Currently there is some software dedicated to the 
evaluation of projects. Among them are: evalAS [18] 
(Software for Investment Project Production Evaluation). 
The purpose of this software is to determine, in the best of 
cases, financial feasibility. It can also be used to determine 
profitability of industrial production projects, agriculture 
and forestry. In Intecplan [17], which only evaluates 
investment projects, both references have a totally different 
approach to evaluating projects in order to obtain a score to 
determine the best of its kind in creativity contests. The only 
previous software tool found, are the papers known as 
"Software for assessing quality in-use project with a plan for 
external quality metrics [15], which showed an initiation 
protocol of this investigation." 
Vargas-Pérez et al. [20] describes an intermediate step in 
the project, and refers to the completion of the first stage of 
the project. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
In order to evaluate projects - products participating in 
creativity, innovation and invention contests, the application 
of a metric plan within the framework of a methodology and 
a technical evaluation model of the quality of software 
products for visual environments, MECHDAV is required, 
which is derived from this proposal to evaluate products and 
projects participating in the contests mentioned in software 
in a visual environment. 
The metrics program is reflected in a new model, with 
its methodology and evaluation software, PROYEVA 
Model Methodology and Quality Technical Assessment 
Project participant’s creativity contests, which will guide the 
evaluation results obtained on quality in-use of a project, 
and propose actions to improve the process. In addition, it 
will control the process established for ensuring the quality 
of the evaluation of these projects to support the judges in 
the competitions for creativity, innovation and invention. 
A. Metric Oriented to Quality Products Projects 
It is important that product measurement (products) be 
done easily and economically, and that the measurement 
result is interpreted in the same way. The way in which 
quality characteristics have been defined does not permit 
them to be measured directly, so it is necessary to establish 
metrics that correlate these features in a product (project). 
Each internal and external quantifiable attribute interacts 
with its environment and is correlated with a feature that can 
be established as a metric. The basis on which the metrics 
are selected depends on the product, project priorities and 
needs of the evaluator.  
A set of product metrics that can be applied to the 
quantitative assessment of the quality of projects is 
examined. In all the cases, the metrics represent indirect 
measures, and never really measure quality, but a 
manifestation of it. The complicating factor is the exact 
relationship between the variable measured and the quality 
of the product, which can be measured based on the 
classification of quality in use metrics. Quality in-use is the 
user's view of the quality of a system (project or product) 
and is measured in terms of the result of using it, instead of 
the properties of the product itself.  
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

It is the combined effect of the characteristics of product 
quality as perceived by the user. 
B. Requirements analysis 
According to data collected by the potential users of 
products, different people involved, both as judges and 
competitors in creativity contests, have provided some of the 
requirements which when tested, refined and synthesized, 
provide components and parameters of the system to be 
implemented. 
C. Evaluation Process Applied 
To assess the quality of a product, the results of the 
evaluation of the different features need to be summarized. 
The evaluator must prepare a procedure for this which 
separates criteria for different quality characteristics, each of 
which may be in terms of individual sub-characteristics, or a 
combination of both. The procedure includes other aspects 
such as the specification's evaluation. In this part the scope 
of measurement is established, that is, the characteristics 
and sub-features set forth in the proposed quality model, 
which determine the starting point for the selection of 
attributes and metrics for evaluation.  
Evaluation Metrics are grouped according to the 
corresponding sub-characteristics and attributes, and will 
serve to carry out the assessment. 
Types of measurement are used to compare the quality 
in-use of the various products, and/or projects to be 
evaluated. They are represented by discrete evaluation 
variables of two types: binary discrete elemental evaluation 
variables and multilevel discrete evaluation variables. The 
numerical ranking scale for each of the metrics is presented 
in TablLe 1 [11-16], [20-26].  
TABLE I.  
METRIC LEVELS RANGES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
Translating the partial or total results of the evaluation of 
the quality of products projects is not an easy task, so a 
simple and understandable format to get a quick and reliable 
assessment of the quality of the different project 
representations should be selected. Checklists, control 
matrix and simple relationship tables are often chosen for 
this reason. Characteristic-Factor / Sub-Factor / Attribute / 
Metric. Figure 1 shows a documentation sample of one of the 
42 combinations listed [20]-[26] and Table 2 shows the 
model PROYEVA arrayed in its 42 combinations [20-[26] 
 
D. Metrics Proposed for this Model 
Each component of the model requirements and 
methodology employed are divided into sub-components 
and parameters, which are represented by a metric, 
according to the application of the MECHDAV assessment 
model, which refers to this process. To calculate the metrics 
of each component and subcomponent mentioned, apply 
each of the formulas with their respective parameters 
described below:  
1. Identify the area locating the project to be evaluated 
among the following four possibilities, corresponding to the 
most relevant project. The projects involved in creative 
competitions can be classified as follows: I. - Science - 
Technology. II. - Health and Environment. III. - Socio-
economic, administrative and educational. IV. - Craft and 
Cultural.  
2. Once the location of the project area is chosen, we 
suggest using the general procedure model proposed by 
PROYEVA (derived from MECHDAV) for 10 properties 
(factors), 26 sub-features (sub-factors), 42 attributes-
metrics, which is fully represented by type I, then 
(somewhat fewer metrics) by type II, III and finally IV, 
which lacks several components of the model elements 
(attributes, metrics and sub-factors), in four levels of 
quality.  
3. A score is assigned to each category or project type 
according to the PROYEVA compliance percentage for 
each combination of factors / sub-factors / attributes / 
metrics that apply, depending on the type of project.  
The first score assigned is the first metric that is calculated, 
which is given as follows for each of the types: I = 1.0, 
II = 0.9, III = 0.8, IV = 0.7. 
 
Characteristic:   Factor 9 (F9)  Documentation showed. 
Subcharacteristic: Subfactor 9.2 Report  
Attribute: 9.22  Complete final prototype. 
Metric: Determine the level of completeness of the final prototype  
                 required by the user of the product or project. 
Method: Analyze each part of the prototype to determine the 
                 Completeness of the final prototype to be 
                 considered complete and finished. 
Measure: C= Level of completeness of the final prototype 
Formula: X=C  (measure or metric) 
Evaluation: E(x)={(0,0), (0.4, 40), (0.6, 60), (0.8,80), (1, 100)} 
Interpretation: Level of completeness of all parts of the final prototype. 
                           0 <= X <=1 ; the closer to 1 the better 
Source of reference:  MECHDAV, ISO/IEC 9126 
 
Formula to calculate the score of the total Characteristic Factor F9. 
(A,B)= {(0.4, 40), (0.8, 80),(1,100)}   D={(0,0),  (1,100)} 
Formula: A*[C+D]*B metric 
 
 
Figure 1. Documentation about the 42 metrics used in PROYEVA 
 
 
In the final grade for a project participant for each judge 
in any category, PROYEVA calculated metrics (equations) 
of each of the specified points, depending on the type of 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

project that applies: the value assigned to each assessment, 
combined with the remaining fraction of each factor 
evaluated, 
accumulating 
the 
partial 
values, 
thereby 
calculating the result of each of the 10 factors. Finally, an 
equation is applied which represents the evaluation of all 
factors to be considered by the judges, for the project 
participant. The final score of a project is the combination of 
the recommendations given by all judges involved. 
Finally, an equation is applied which represents the 
evaluation of all factors, enabling the judges to submit their 
opinion to the project. The final score of a project is the 
combination of the recommendations given by all of the 
judges involved. 
TABLE II.  
MODEL PROYEVA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V. 
MAIN SCREENS OF THE PROTOTYPE 
PROYEVA 
Figures 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 show some of the main 
screens that describe the operation of the system [20-26].  
VI. 
FINAL EVALUATION REPORT 
When the respective values of the selected project 
evaluation as well as the rate of quality compliance are 
obtained, a final evaluation report is generated in which the 
final results and the compliance percentages are given.  
An outline is provided showing what the points are, 
where the product-producers stand out in quality as well as 
those which do not. It also dictates what level of quality is 
achieved according to the relevant points, and, if required, 
recommends changes so this draft is accepted as a draft-
quality product. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Welcome Screen and Start at the PROJEVA System. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. View of a screen with points for evaluating the 
troubleshooting rubric. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. View of evaluation results of a project. 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

VII. 
RESULTS, CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
The preliminary phase of the PROYEVA project has 
been completed, covering the complete model and 
methodology for the technical evaluation of the quality of 
the projects participating in creativity, invention and 
innovation contests through the application of quality in-use 
metrics. In it, the first prototype of this type of software was 
developed, which is the proposed tool for a panel of judges 
to efficiently evaluate the quality in-use of the project 
participants in a particular creativity contest, [Copyright SEP 
INDAUTOR 
03-2007-03201059300-01, 
and 
03-2007-
091813015000-01] (mathematical model and software) [23] 
[24] [25] [26] [27]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. View results of project evaluation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 Figure 6. Pproject list of participants in a contest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. List of projects evaluated by a jury in a contest. 
 
There is also an English version PROJEVA for 
presentations abroad. The software will permit a very 
generic technical assessment, based on the quality in-use, 
creativity and project implementation. The assessment is 
very general, so it may issue an opinion on any project in 
any discipline and any level of competition: local, regional, 
state and national level, giving a reliable decision as a judge 
in creativity contests.  
PROJEVA system is a service created for project quality 
in use evaluation, within innovation, invention and 
creativity contests, for different government agencies, 
industries and services that require an easy, fast and 
objective evaluation process which will help in the selection 
of a winning project in different categories. 
This prototype is proposed for the creative competitions 
that take place in the National System of Higher Education 
Technology, for the state competitions organized by 
different universities, and national competitions organized 
by the National Institute for Women, National competitions 
of thesis, National Contests and Exhibition Projects Linking 
the different government sectors, among others. Additional 
formats are provided for manual evaluation of these 
contests. PROJEVA system can be adapted to various 
contests, for different juries as required. Projects may be 
installed in a multiuser environment for several judges, for 
various academic levels: primary, secondary, high school, 
undergraduate and graduate, and in a WEB environment. It 
will have the mobility to interact virtually any mobile device 
having WI-FI and it is in the range of broadband network 
provided by the host institute of the competition. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors of this paper wish to thank the Center for 
Computing Research (CIC) and National Polytechnic 
Institute (IPN), ITESM-CCM, ITCM-Tamaulipas, Mexico, 
for their support to this work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Pressman, Ingeniería de Software. Un enfoque práctico, 
Mc.Graw Hill /Interamericana de España, S.A.U. 1998. 
[2] IEEE Software Engineering Standards Collection, Standard 
Glossary of Software Engineering Terminology. IEEE, 1994. 
Std. 610.12-190. 
[3] IEEE Std 1061, “IEEE Standard for a Software Quality 
Metrics Methodology”, IEEE Computer Society Press, 1992. 
[4] ISO 9000-3, 1991. ISO/IS 9000-3, “Quality Management 
and Quality Assurance”, 1990. 
[5] ISO/IEC 9126, Software Product Evaluation; Part 1: Quality, 
Characteristics and Guidelines for their Use; Part 2: External 
Metrics; Part 3: Internal Metrics. Part 4: Quality in Use. 
[6] ISO/IEC 14598. Information Technology, Software Product 
Evaluation. (Part 1, 2, 3, 4, 5). 1998. 
[7] ISO 9001, 1994, “Model for Quality Assurance in design, 
development, production, installation and servicing”. 1994. 
[8] ISO/IEC 
JTC 
C1/SC7 
N2246. 
Software 
Quality 
Requirements and Evaluation Configuration. SQUARE2000. 
May 2000. Replaced by ISO/IEC 25000: 2005 Software 
Engineering -- Software product Quality Requirements and 
Evaluation (SQuaRE). 
[9] SUMI: Software Usability Measurement Inventory. Human 
Factors Research Group, Ireland. European Directive on 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

Minimum Health and Safety Requirements for Work with 
Display Screen Equipment (90/270/EEC), 2000. 
[10] Main site of research and development projects. Revista 
Espacios Vol.15 (1)1994. José Luis Solleiro. Evaluación de 
proyectos de investigación y desarrollo ¿alguna solución a 
este 
viejo 
problema? 
http://www.revistaespacios.com 
/a94v15n01/70941501.html . Retrieved on June 2012  
[11] Laura S. Vargas-Pérez and Agustín F. Gutiérrez-Tornés. 
“Propuesta de un modelo de evaluación técnica de las 
herramientas de los ambientes visuales para el desarrollo de 
aplicaciones”, ISBN: 84-688-783-1, Avances en Gestión de 
Proyectos y Calidad del Software pp.247-53. Oct. 2004. 
Universidad de Salamanca, España.  
[12] Laura S. Vargas-Pérez and Agustín F. Gutiérrez-Tornés. 
“MECHDAV: a quality model for the technical evaluation of 
applications development tools in visual environments”. 2nd 
Software Measurement European Forum, March 2005, 
pp.147-156, 2005. Rome, Italy. 
[13] Laura S. Vargas-Pérez and Agustín F. Gutiérrez-Tornés. 
“MECHDAV: propuesta de un modelo sistematizado de 
evaluación técnica de la calidad del uso de las herramientas 
RAD para ambientes visuales”. Revista de Procesos y 
Métricas. Editorial AEMES [Asociación Española de 
Métricas de Software], ISSN: 1698-2029. Volumen 3 
Número 1, 2006. Madrid, España. 
[14] Laura S. Vargas-Pérez, Agustín F. Gutiérrez-Tornés, and 
Edgardo M. Felipe-Riverón. “Propuesta de un modelo 
sistematizado de evaluación técnica de la calidad del uso de 
las 
herramientas 
RAD 
para 
ambientes 
visuales”. 
ANDESCON2006 IEEE sección Andina. Noviembre 2006. 
Quito, Ecuador. CP126.  
[15] Laura S. Vargas-Pérez and Jorge Peralta-Escobar “Software 
para la evaluación de la calidad en uso de proyectos 
mediante un plan de métricas externas de calidad”. III 
Congreso Internacional Multidisciplinario de Investigación. 
Facultad de Comercio y Administración de Tampico 
Universidad Autónoma de Tamaulipas. Tampico, México. 
Noviembre 2006. ISBN: 968-9031-15-5.  
[16] Laura S. Vargas-Pérez, Agustín F. Gutiérrez-Tornés, and 
Edgardo M. Felipe-Riverón. “MECHDAV: propuesta de un 
modelo sistematizado de evaluación técnica de la calidad del 
uso de las herramientas RAD para ambientes visuales”. CSIC 
2007. e-Revist@s Plataforma Open Access de Revistas 
Científicas y Electrónicas Españolas y Latinoamericanas. 
Centro de Información y Documentación Científica, 2007 
www.fecyt..es, www.erevista.es. [January, 2008]. Retrieved 
on June 2012  
[17] Inteligencia Tecnológica en Software S. de R. L. Mi., 
“Introducción a los Proyectos de Inversión”. Intecplan® 
v1.0. 2004-2008. www.intecplan.com.mx. [March, 2009], 
Retrieved on June 2012  
[18] Software para Evaluación de Proyectos de Inversión 
Productivos. Copyright 2000-2006 - Todos los derechos 
reservados Registro de la Propiedad Intelectual Nº 506866. 
2000-2006, evalas@elsitioagricola.com. [December, 2009] 
[19] Laura S. Vargas-Pérez, Agustín F. Gutiérrez-Tornes, and 
Edgardo M. Felipe-Riverón, “MECRAD: Model and Tool 
for the Technical Quality Evaluation of Software Products in 
Visual 
Environment”. 
ICCGI-5.2 
4th 
International 
Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications 
(ICWMC 2008) and 3rd International Multi-Conference on 
Computing in the Global Information Technology (ICCGI 
2008). July 2008. Product Number E3275. BMS Part 
Number 
CFP0840B-CDR. 
ISBN 
978-0-7695-3275-2. 
Library of Congress Number 2008926137 pp. 107-112. IEEE 
Computer Society. IARIA. Athens, Greece, 2008. 
[20] Laura S. Vargas-Pérez, Agustín F. Gutiérrez-Tornés, and 
Edgardo M. Felipe-Riverón, “Metodología y Software para 
la Evaluación Técnica de la Calidad de los Proyectos 
participantes en Concursos de Creatividad mediante un Plan 
de 
Métricas 
Externas.” 
Congreso 
Iberoamericano 
ANDESCON2008 IEEE sección Andina. Octubre de 2008. 
CP 130. Cuzco, Perú. www.andescon.org/art_compu.htm. 
[21] Laura S. Vargas-Pérez, Agustín F. Gutiérrez-Tornés, and 
Edgardo M. Felipe-Riverón, “PROYEVA: Sistema para 
evaluar técnicamente la calidad de proyectos y productos 
participantes en concursos de innovación e invención 
mediante un programa de métricas externas y de calidad en 
uso.” VI Congreso Internacional de Innovación para la 
Competitividad. Consejo de Ciencia y Tecnología del Estado 
de Guanajuato. Universidad Iberoamericana SINNCO2011. 
León, Guanajuato. México. ISBN 978-607-8164-00-4. 
[22] Laura S. Vargas-Pérez, Agustín F. Gutiérrez-Tornés, 
Edgardo M. Felipe-Riverón, and Jorge Peralta-Escobar. 
“Metodología Cuantitativa y Análisis Comparativo de la 
Calidad de Proyectos en Concursos Académicos.” Memorias 
del XVI Congreso Internacional de Informática Educativa, 
TISE “Nuevas Ideas en Informática Educativa. Volumen 7, 
Universidad de Chile, Facultad de Ciencias Físicas y 
Matemáticas, Departamento de Ciencias de la Computación 
Edición Digital 2011. Santiago de Chile. Noviembre 2011. 
ISBN 978-956-345-770-5.  
[23] Metodología y Modelo de Evaluación Técnica de la Calidad 
de Proyectos participantes en concursos de creatividad 
mediante un Plan de métricas: PROYEVA. Registrado el 20 
de marzo de 2007 con número de registro público Copyright 
SEP INDAUTOR 03-2007-03201059300-01. 
[24] Software para Modelo de Evaluación Técnica de la Calidad 
de Proyectos participantes en Concursos de Creatividad 
mediante un Plan de métricas: PROYEVA. Registrado el 26 
de septiembre de 2007 con número de registro público 
Copyright SEP INDAUTOR 03-2007-091813015000-01. 
[25] Rediseño y adaptación de la metodología y modelo del 
sistema PROYEVA PLUS. Registrado el 6 de junio de 2011 
con número de registro público Copyright SEP INDAUTOR 
03-2011-060611393500-01. 
[26] Sistema de Evaluación Técnica de la Calidad de Proyectos 
participantes en concursos de innovación, invención y 
creatividad mediante y un plan de métricas. Registrado el 18 
de marzo de 2011 con número de registro público Copyright 
SEP INDAUTOR 03-2011-030711424100-01. 
[27] PROJEVA: Diseño y Modelado de Interfaces para la 
implementación del sistema PROJEVA. Registrado el 05 de 
junio de 2012 con número de registro público Copyright SEP 
INDAUTOR 03-2012-060511055000-01. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

