The Deployment of Service Management Systems in SMEs – Three Case Studies 
 
 
Martin Wynn  
Department of Computing 
University of Gloucestershire 
United Kingdom 
mwynn@glos.ac.uk 
Emma Tipton  
Department of Computing 
University of Gloucestershire 
United Kingdom 
e.tipton@muddyboots.com
 
 
Abstract—Service management is a new and emerging software 
niche, which is still relatively unexplored by many companies. 
This paper examines the service management process in three 
small to medium sized enterprises in the UK Midlands region, 
and the software systems that support the process. The paper 
provides a top-line analysis of the degree of fit between process 
and technology support, and concludes with some observations 
on service management as a process and systems concept.  
Keywords - service management, SMEs, information systems, 
process change, case studies 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Service management is a relatively new concept as 
regards business information systems. Only recently has it 
emerged as a separate software module, either as a specialist 
standalone offering (such as Solavista) or as a module in an 
integrated ERP package, such as SAP. Service management 
can be defined as “monitoring and optimizing a service to 
ensure that it meets the critical outcomes the customer 
values and stakeholders want to provide” [1].  Service 
management has also been seen as “comprised of software, 
services and knowledge that assist companies in efficiently 
delivering service commitments” [2]. Software vendors 
suggest that systems can cover a range of functions related 
to service scheduling, delivery and monitoring. One 
software provider asserts that service management systems 
are “designed for companies that market, sell, service and 
support equipment and/or assets or provide professional 
services. They start working from the point of initial 
lead/opportunity, 
through 
quotation/estimate, 
order 
processing, installation/ commissioning, servicing and 
maintenance 
to 
equipment/asset 
retirement 
and 
replacement” [3]. 
Before the advent of these software packages, systems 
users either had to adapt other packaged software to 
embrace the required functions as best they could, or 
bespoke in-house systems to cover these requirements. One 
such example of the latter was the Keg Information 
Management system (KIMS) developed at cider-maker HP 
Bulmer in the early 1990s. The company was migrating its 
systems to the Oracle ERP product, but this software, from 
one of the World‟s leading suppliers, did not provide the 
required functionality to support the scheduling and 
installation of bar top cider fonts and cider dispense 
equipment in the pubs and clubs around the country. This 
early example of a bespoke service management system 
exhibited many of the features of later packaged solutions. 
Bloor [4] noted in 1993: 
“The keg equipment installed in these outlets represents 
a major investment for Bulmer, and its installation and 
repair is the responsibility of some 40 field based 
technicians. Their movements are initiated by telephone 
calls from clients requiring service, followed by scheduling 
at a single, central point of service, and communication of 
the schedules to the technicians in the field by telephone 
from a central office. The technicians then record the 
equipment and its location at the site and provide other 
information for service reporting. As an added bonus, the 
technicians also note other information relating to the sites 
visited; qualitative information, such as type of pub and 
clientele, presence of a restaurant etc., which is all useful for 
formulating new marketing and business plans and planning 
new sales campaigns”. 
 In this early example of a service management system 
(SMS), we can see the main functional elements that are 
evident in today‟s SMS packaged software modules. In 
essence these are: 
 The scheduling of the delivery and/or installation of 
goods, services or contract work. 
 The scheduling of human resources to undertake 
tasks related to those goods or services (installation, 
repair, maintenance, product upgrades, contract staff, 
project management) 
 The processing of requests and inquiries from 
customers relating to the above mentioned goods and 
services. 
 The two way exchange of marketing, sales and 
operational information between the customer and 
company personnel (located either on the customer 
site or at head office). 
 Reporting 
of 
management 
and 
operational 
information on financial value of assets, call-out 
rates, problem resolution performance etc. 
149
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

It is these basic functions that constitute the core of 
today‟s SMS software, complemented by current data 
transfer and communications technology. It is worth making 
clear here that SMS as a concept in this paper is distinct 
from the concept of „service‟ as used in the context of 
service-oriented architecture (SOA), which is a technology 
design concept concerned with the way  in which new 
systems are developed and integrated. Brown, Johnston, and 
Kelly [5] have defined SOA as “a way of designing a 
software system to provide services to either end-user 
applications or other services through published and 
discoverable interfaces”.  There is, therefore, very little 
overlap with SMS as used in this paper, other than that SOA 
could be used as a design principle for developing SMS 
software. 
The three SMEs studied in this research are located in 
the Midlands counties of Hereford and Gloucestershire. 
They are all of approximately the same size, having 
turnover of between £2.5 and £4.5m and staff numbers of 35 
– 50.  They are in three distinct industry sectors, all of 
which embody significant service management activities. 
TPG DisableAids is a provider of equipment for the 
elderly and disabled and has grown steadily since its 
foundation in 1984 to employ 47 staff today. The company 
assembles and distributes a wide range of products from 
primary manufacturers, such as Stannah, who make a range 
of stair lift products.  The company currently has an annual 
turnover of £4.3m (2009/10), with stair lift products 
generating about one-third of turnover but over 50% of 
profits.  
TPG DisableAids‟ market can be divided into different 
segments (NHS, local authorities, district councils, 
residential & nursing homes, private individuals). Their 
business plan is to double their turnover within 5 years to 
£8.5m in 2014/15 which is dependent on the company 
having the systems capability to respond to the equipment 
and service requirements of the NHS and related bodies, as 
well as private individuals, at short notice as the elderly and 
disabled leave hospital and return to their homes. Service 
management processes and systems are key to achieving 
this turnover growth and increase in market share. 
Optimum Consultancy Ltd was formed in 2008 through 
the merger of two companies - Hama Ltd, a project 
management services business, and J Orchard Consulting 
Ltd, a surveying services business. In its first trading year 
(2008-9) it achieved a turnover of £2.4m and this was 
increased to £3.1m in 2009-10. The company has 35 staff 
and its core business remains project and cost management 
in the property, engineering and construction fields; its 
customer base includes major retailers, rail operators, major 
financial 
and 
banking 
corporations 
and 
sustainable 
developments. The merger of the two companies posed 
significant challenges to combine and upgrade two different 
IT/IS architectures and in particular to align and standardise 
the customer facing  processes and systems across three 
offices. In 2009-10, new integrated systems and customer 
facing 
processes 
were 
introduced 
to 
provide 
the 
infrastructure support needed for steady growth and 
improved margins, without the stop-start addition of 
administrative overheads. The systems strategy revolved 
around the Workspace integrated package (from Union 
Square software) and a major output was a new process and 
associated procedures for responding in a consistent and 
streamlined manner to customer enquiries, across the 
organization.  This encompassed a review and evaluation of 
how Optimum‟s services and products could best be 
combined and supported to meet varying customer needs 
and improve customer service.  
Muddy Boots Software Ltd (MBS) is a rapidly 
expanding software house and the company‟s business plan 
targets a trebling of turnover within 5 years from £1.6m in 
2009 to £6.0m in 2014. The company has three main 
software products that are the main drivers of revenue 
growth in the immediate future (Quickfire, Greenlight and 
CropWalker). A strategic component of this growth is the 
implementation of customer centric systems and processes 
to drive and support new sales both in the UK and in 
overseas markets. A recent IS project has attempted to 
embed a new sales and marketing culture within the 
company based on the Microsoft CRM package and re-
engineered supply chain and service management processes. 
MBS is moving from a mainly UK customer base to an 
international user base. This is supported by additional 
offices abroad and systems which can be accessible from 
multiple locations and time zones to enable a variety of 
services and support to be provided „anytime, anywhere, 
any place‟.  
The paper is divided into five main sections. Following 
this introduction, section two reviews  literature pertinent to 
the related themes of process change and alignment and the 
emergence of packaged software. The case study 
methodology is then briefly discussed in section three, 
followed by an overview of findings from the three case 
studies. Finally, in section five, some concluding remarks 
are made about the emergence of service management as a 
core business process and mainstream software package. 
 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
In this section, literature relating to the emergence of 
process thinking is discussed, leading to consideration of the 
parallel growth of business packaged software since the 
early 1990s. The concept of strategic alignment is then 
briefly examined in the context of process improvement and 
IS strategy development.    
A. Process versus Function 
Many companies want to organize themselves around 
processes but they do not have any clear idea which steps to 
follow and which initiatives need to be taken. Others are not 
sure how to structure a company around processes and 
sometimes turn to consultancy to help them decide what to 
150
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

do. There are also companies that are not sure whether their 
current organizational structure is adequate to engage 
process management. Earl [6] discusses how business 
processes can be improved by deploying new information 
systems. This paper focuses on in depth case studies at the 
three companies noted above, all of which have invested in 
information systems to support the service management 
process, in order to drive business expansion. 
Companies sometimes find it problematic to adequately 
embrace 
process 
management 
especially 
when 
the 
organization 
is 
dominated 
by 
traditional 
functional 
structures. Organizations structured by task and function 
need to be redesigned to work by process. Some companies 
tend to take a few steps and give up without knowing how 
to progress. The difficulties stem from a poor understanding 
of the concept of process. Ramaswamy [7] suggests that 
companies that provide services normally think that process 
is a sequence of activities needed to perform transactions 
that help to provide their services. 
To organize a company around business processes, it is 
necessary to focus on external customers because business 
processes usually start and end with them. Processes are a 
series of activities which begins with an exact understanding 
of what the external customer wishes and finishes with the 
external customer gaining what he/she needs and requests. 
The customer is always central within organizations 
structured by process and the final objective of these 
companies is to offer to the customer more value in less 
time and with less cost. Organizations are in a battle to 
achieve it and they are learning to think in new ways to 
structure the company accordingly.  
To define processes is a difficult task, which involves 
many complex factors like customers, human behavior and 
company structure. However, process modeling can provide 
a less detailed way to define process. It has been suggested 
that “the task of modeling, in general, aims to provide, an 
abstract description of one slice of reality by omitting details 
and thus reducing complexity which is usually inherent in 
real world situations” [8]. In practice, functional areas do 
not disappear when companies organize themselves around 
processes. 
When 
process 
owners 
assume 
their 
responsibilities for specific projects, with related structure 
and process roles, the functional area bosses are left to focus 
on staff training and resource planning and management. 
B. Business Packaged Software 
Packaged software for most mainstream business 
processes came to market in the 1990s as the spread of the 
UNIX operating system as a de facto standard for mini 
computers and the increasing dominance of the Intel chipset 
led to a massive surge in the packaged software market.  
Building on the earlier Materials Requirements Planning 
(MRP) packages, other packaged software systems provided 
modules for sales order processing, ledgers, payroll and 
personnel as well as MRP, sometimes combined into one 
integrated package from one vendor – for example, the ERP 
software suites of Oracle and SAP. The increased take-up of 
packaged software coincided with the spread of business 
process re-engineering (BPR) as a management concept 
employed by many companies to improve efficiencies and 
reduce overheads. The two became closely linked as BPR 
projects were frequently combined with the introduction of 
new software solutions.  
Only in recent years, however, has the concept of service 
management as a separate software module been clearly 
identified as a component of an integrated ERP solution or 
as a standalone solution as part of a „best of breed‟ IS 
strategy. There is an on-going debate regarding whether 
„best of breed‟ or „one integrated package‟ (ERP) is the 
optimum solution for SMEs. Robinson [9] questions “if a 
company has, for instance, a financial package they are 
happy  with, should they dump this and use the integrated 
package? The answer to this question is a definite „yes‟. If a 
fully integrated package is right for the company, the people 
using stand alone systems must be trained in the use of the 
integrated system so that all the stand alone systems, 
databases and spreadsheets can be dumped. Not only will 
islands of data reduce the advantages of the integrated 
system but it will also undermine its integrity”. 
C. Strategic Alignment and Process Improvement 
Many of the theories and models of information systems 
strategy development are based on a logical progression 
from business strategy to evaluation of information 
requirements, leading to an information system (IS) 
strategy. Process analysis, producing „current‟ and „new‟ 
process maps, also features in some IS strategy development 
models; and data analysis and data modeling can also play 
an important role in determining what systems are required. 
Robson [10] suggests an information strategy is also 
appropriate.  
Levy and Powell [11] have identified competitiveness 
and the importance of customer power in determining the 
way SMEs use IS, and they conclude that “a major barrier to 
the use of IS to support innovation is the leadership and 
technical knowledge of the owner and/or management 
team”. Alignment of IS Strategy with overall business 
strategy is key. Koopman [12] supports this perspective in 
asserting that “the real threat to most companies is not a 
strategic threat from outside. Instead it is their own failure to 
align their organization with their strategy and thus ensure 
good execution”. An organization must be able to align 
itself with the strategic plan and turn strategy into action. 
As noted above, BPR is often regarded as a route to 
gaining the combined benefits of new information systems 
and process redesign and improvement.  “BPR is the means 
by which an organization can achieve radical change in 
performance as measured by cost, cycle time, service, and 
quality, by the application of a variety of tools and 
techniques that focus on the business as a set of related 
customer-oriented core business processes rather than a set 
of organizational functions” [13]. Short and Venkatraman 
151
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

[14] suggest that BPR has in the past largely had an internal, 
operational focus. The objective has usually been the 
optimization of a single process rather than transformation 
of the enterprise itself. 
III. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND METHODOLOGY 
Service management is a key activity in all three SMEs 
studied in this paper, even though it is recognized as a core 
process in only one of the three (TPG DisableAids). This 
paper aims to answer three research questions:  
 
What is the service management process in these 
three SMEs? Are there major differences or is the 
process essentially the same in these companies 
that operate in three different industry sectors?  
 
What 
information 
systems 
and 
support 
technologies are used to support the service 
management process? 
 
How effective are these systems and are they well 
matched to the specific requirements of service 
management in each company? 
A. Research Method 
Saunders, Lewis, and Thornhill [15] highlight that 
qualitative and inductive research can be done in different 
ways encompassing case studies, grounded theory, and 
ethnography. Remenyi, Williams, Money, and Swartz [16] 
agree that case studies are likely to be used as part of an 
inductive research approach. Cassell and Symon [17] define 
case study research as a “detailed investigation … of one or 
more organizations, or groups within organizations, with a 
view to providing an analysis of the context and processes 
involved in the phenomenon under study”. The research 
method employed here is case study research of SMS 
systems implementations in three SMEs.  
The evaluation of results was done comparing the 
answers given in questionnaires with observations made by 
the authors. This was analyzed in conjunction with the 
findings of a literature review, allowing empirical 
generalizations and a series of clear statements to be 
developed. 
B. Data Collection Methods 
There are several ways to collect qualitative data that 
have a case study research focus. Examples include 
questionnaires, interviews and observation. After carefully 
analyzing data collection methods, questionnaires and 
observation, combined with first hand interviews, were 
elected as the most suitable approaches for data collection 
due to the presence of the authors as consultants to the 
companies over a period of years.  
 Wu, Mahajan, and Balasubramanian [18] suggest that 
subjects must be in a position to generalize about business 
behavior. 
Only 
employees 
at 
the 
level 
of 
manager/supervisor 
or 
higher 
were 
considered 
for 
participation in the study. All responses were complemented 
by face to face interviews. In addition, at least one year of  
TABLE 1. SERVICE MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES AT THE THREE CASE 
STUDY COMPANIES 
Five main service management 
activities 
Case Study Response 
1.Scheduling of goods and services 
TPG - YES 
OCL – YES 
MBS - YES 
2. Scheduling of human resources 
TPG - YES 
OCL – YES 
MBS - YES 
3. Processing of customer requests, 
enquiries, and cost estimates 
TPG - YES 
OCL – YES 
MBS - YES 
4. Exchange of sales, marketing and 
operational information 
TPG – LIMITED 
OCL – YES 
MBS - YES 
5. Management and operational 
reporting 
TPG - YES 
OCL – YES 
MBS - YES 
 
observations were also documented by the authors in each 
of the three companies, which helped the research by 
highlighting facts that were not gathered in the interviews. 
 
IV. 
FINDINGS 
 
This section reports on the detailed findings from the 
questionnaire responses, personal observation and follow-up 
interviews in each of the three companies studied, looking at 
processes, systems and then functionality and integration 
issues. 
A. The Service Management Process in the Case Study 
Companies 
Questionnaire responses revealed interesting differences 
in how the three companies perceived service management. 
At TPG, service management was seen as one of the 
company‟s main business processes, closely linked to route 
planning and scheduling (for the company‟s 20 field based 
service engineers) and marketing and selling (Fig. 1). At 
OCL, however, service management was not seen as a 
distinct process, but rather as part of three other processes - 
business development, people management and operations 
management 
(Fig. 
2). 
Similarly 
at 
MBS, 
service 
management is perceived as being a part of three main 
business processes – technical services, commercial services 
and sales and marketing (Fig. 3). 
Nevertheless, all three companies are involved in the five 
main activities or functions that are generally covered by 
SMS and the constituent parts of the overall service 
management process (Table 1). Perhaps not surprisingly, 
given that the TPG management recognizes service 
management as a core process, the activity descriptions 
contained in the questionnaire response is somewhat richer 
than in the other two cases. For example, for the scheduling 
of goods and services, the respondent noted that “there are 
three administrators/clerks in the service department with 
roughly one third each of the geographic area we cover. 
Each has a team of engineers to manage and arrange 
152
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

 
Figure 1. Business processes at TPG DisableAids. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Business processes at Optimum Consultancy. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Business processes at Muddy Boots Software. 
 
appointments for (a) scheduled installation of goods sold by 
the sales department (e.g., stair-lifts, hoists, etc.), (b) routine 
maintenance (e.g., 6 monthly service calls), (c) breakdowns 
(with response times being either same day, next day, 7 
days, 14 days). Each month 'VSM' (the service management 
system) produces a list of all items that need to be serviced 
in that month. These are printed, split and allocated to each 
clerk. Appointments are made by agreement with either (a) 
a private customer on the phone, (b) with equipment owners 
where public sector organisations own the equipment. For 
breakdowns, each clerk may 'borrow' an engineer from 
another area” [19]. 
This activity description illustrates the type of specialist 
functionality that an SMS requires, combining call 
scheduling, stock management, field communications, field-
based plant maintenance, customer management, and human 
resources scheduling.  Indeed, as regards this last point, the 
respondent at TPG notes “delivery of goods not requiring 
expert engineering/installation personnel is undertaken by 
stores/warehouse…VSM contains all pending work and 
each clerk manages their own work in VSM and their own 
engineers” [19]. 
This contrasts with the process analysis at OCL where 
service management is not recognized as a core process. 
Nevertheless, the breakdown of main processes to activity 
level shows a range of functions that collectively may be 
seen, in part at least, as constituting the service management 
process – sales enquiry and tenders management, personnel 
management, project management, contacts management 
and marketing (Fig. 4). A similar picture emerges at MBS, 
where the service process activities are split across several 
main processes areas. Technical services and commercial 
services undertake activities such as the scheduling of 
human resources, the processing of customer requests, 
enquiries, and cost estimates, the scheduling of goods and 
services and the management and operational reporting. In 
addition the exchange of marketing and sales information is 
an activity carried out by the sales and marketing 
department and operational and management reporting also 
covers activities undertaken by the sales, marketing and 
finance departments.  
B. Service Management Systems Deployed in the Case 
Study Companies 
In all three companies, packaged software is deployed to 
support the main activities that make up the service 
management process (Table 2). At TPG, Vision Service 
Manager (VSM), from software house Sybiz, supports all 
these activities to some degree, although the perception is 
that this is only done moderately well – and that replacement 
will likely be required in the short to mid-term. This is partly 
because of the old FoxPro database technology that 
underpins the version of Sybiz used at TPG. The 
questionnaire respondent notes that “the entire software 
architecture and key processes are under review” [19]. 
At OCL, where the Workspace software package has 
recently been implemented, all main service management 
activities are seen as being well supported. Lau, Wynn, and 
Maryszczak [20] note that the system “allows the senior 
management team to track and manage the new work 
pipeline more easily. When Optimum wins a job, it is 
migrated to a project record form which holds all relevant 
history. Previously, as a job flowed through the Optimum 
business from enquiry to completion, it was recorded and 
tracked using spread sheets held on the network server. Staff 
spent a lot of time each month searching for or collating 
information relevant to a particular job. With the previous 
system, there was no way of sitting at one‟s PC and getting a 
complete picture of any particular job across the various 
systems. A lot of manual processes were required to bind 
together project data from the various applications and, 
furthermore, there was a lack of version control on these 
documents.” This is interesting because Workspace is 
generally positioned as being in the „collaboration 
management‟ software niche rather than a „service 
management‟ package. 
At MBS, the picture is less clear. The Technical Services 
Manager at MBS noted that Microsoft CRM was the key 
153
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

 
Figure 4 OCL processes broken down to activity level. 
 
service management software in the company and is used 
alongside Microsoft Outlook with which it integrates. In 
addition, other departments that are involved in service 
management are using other packages (Microsoft TFS and a 
bespoke legacy system for timesheets), albeit in a lesser way 
to support this, with obvious disadvantages (no common 
point for service management or one-business view for 
reporting). “Microsoft CRM and Microsoft TFS have only 
recently been brought into use in this business and even 
though their capabilities are vast, they are not being fully 
utilised currently. Because service management is dispersed 
across several departments within the company and several 
systems are currently in use there are improvements to be 
made by integrating these systems more closely. Further 
work needs to be done to achieve this before the company 
grows further” [21].  
It was felt that this situation was partly due to the 
introduction of new systems which take time to bed in. Thus 
a legacy system (such as the bespoke timesheet system) will 
be decommissioned when the new systems - Microsoft TFS 
and CRM - take over this functionality. When that occurs, 
these new systems can be integrated to give a one-business 
view of service management. The reason for multiple system 
use in service management at MBS can be related to the fact 
that this company does not view service management as a 
key standalone process. Consequently it is spread over 
several functional departments, each of which also has other 
activities to perform, and therefore departments have opted 
for systems which support their overall role rather than just 
service management. Overarching this is a top-down drive 
for business wide systems that will draw the constituent parts 
together through integration.             
C. Functionality and Integration Issues 
Table 2 reveals a mix of „green‟ and „amber‟ ratings for 
service management systems in the three companies. 
Respondents were asked to assess two main aspects – 
functionality (against requirements) and technical and 
integration issues. Understandably, it is at OCL that 
management are most satisfied as they have just recently 
implemented the integrated Workspace solution which 
covers 
the 
company‟s 
main 
service 
management 
requirements.  At TPG, there are problems with all service 
management 
functions. 
As 
regards 
management 
information, the IT manager notes on the questionnaire that 
“report facilities within VSM are very poor. They are 
inaccurate and since the product does not have basic 
validation of data entered, most reports generate garbage. 
Additional software has had to be written to correct the data 
and report on that” [19]. 
However, he also highlights the benefits of integration: 
“Vision Service Manager (VSM) and Vision are written by 
the same supplier. The two products are 98% reliable in 
terms of integration but errors do occur and take a lot of 
time to correct”. In conclusion, he asserts that “the entire 
software architecture and key processes are under review. 
Current systems do not cover all requirements” [19].  
At MBS, as noted above, a number of different software 
products are used for service management activities due to 
service management being split across the main major 
business processes and therefore different activities are 
undertaken by different teams of staff. The majority of these 
are Microsoft products (TFS, Outlook and CRM) and it is 
thus possible to integrate them given enough resource. One 
additional package, a bespoke timesheet package, may not  
154
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

TABLE 2.  SYSTEMS DEPLOYED FOR SERVICE MANAGEMENT AT THE 
THREE CASE STUDY COMPANIES TABLE TYPE STYLES 
Activity 
Software 
package 
Function
ality 
match 
 (R A G) 
Technical/ 
Integration 
 suitability  
(R A G) 
The scheduling of 
the delivery, 
installation or 
maintenance of 
equipment, goods or 
contract work. 
TPG - VSM 
OCL –
Workspace 
MBS -  
Outlook, MS 
CRM,  MS TFS 
Amber 
Green 
 
Amber 
Amber 
Green 
 
Amber 
The scheduling of 
human resources to 
undertake service 
oriented tasks, 
relating to the 
installation, 
maintenance or 
delivery of products 
and services 
TPG – VSM 
 
OCL –
Workspace 
 
MBS -  Outlook 
and MS TFS 
Amber 
 
Green 
 
 
Amber 
Amber 
 
Green 
 
 
Amber 
The processing of 
requests and 
enquiries from 
customers relating 
to the above 
mentioned goods 
and services 
(including cost 
estimates, problem 
logging and 
resolution, call out 
requests) 
TPG – VSM 
 
 
OCL –
Workspace 
 
 
MBS – MS 
CRM and 
Outlook 
Amber 
 
 
Green 
 
 
 
Green 
Amber 
 
 
Green 
 
 
 
Amber 
The two way 
exchange of 
marketing, sales and 
operational 
information between 
the customer and 
company personnel 
(either on-site or at 
head office). 
TPG – VSM 
 
OCL –
Workspace 
 
MBS – MS 
CRM and 
Outlook  
Amber 
 
Green 
 
 
Green 
Amber 
 
Green 
 
 
Amber 
Reporting of 
management and 
operational 
information on 
financial value of 
assets, call-out rates, 
problem resolution 
performance etc. 
TPG - VSM 
OCL –
Workspace 
MBS -MS 
CRM, 
MS TFS, 
Bespoke 
timesheets 
Amber 
Green 
 
Amber 
Amber 
Green 
 
Amber 
 
integrate but is under review anyway as it is felt that this 
functionality can probably be gained through Microsoft 
CRM and TFS. The impression at MBS is that service 
management is not currently being supported as well as it 
could be by existing systems because of the absence of a 
holistic 
view 
and 
comprehensive 
analysis 
of 
the 
requirements of the service management process. This 
means that service management is reported on in 
components across varying departments. There is a lot of 
technically sound software in place, but it now needs to „bed 
in‟, and this may require additional analysis and a degree of 
re-implementation and will certainly require further 
development of the current systems for which there is the 
expertise within the company. 
V. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
A major software provider [22] asserts that “despite the 
increasing importance of service in driving business 
success, many companies operate with disconnected service 
processes, disparate data, and isolated point solutions, which 
result in inefficient, manual service processes, high 
maintenance costs, ineffective planning, and, eventually, 
growing customer attrition and lost revenue”. The case 
studies assessed in this paper suggest that „service 
management‟ is neither clearly defined nor universally 
recognized in the context of SME business operations, either 
as a process or as a software system. This is no doubt partly 
because of the plethora of new management and software 
concepts that have appeared in the past decade – customer 
relationship management, knowledge management, content 
management, collaboration management, workflow, supply 
chain management, demand chain management; there are 
only so many concepts that a management team can grapple 
with, particularly in SMEs where business success often 
derives from a hard-nosed, „seat of the pants‟ approach to 
management.  
Nevertheless, the main activities that we suggest make 
up the service management process are generally 
recognized at an operational level in all three case study 
companies, and this suggests that service management will 
increasingly be seen as a core business process. This will be 
engendered by the continued development and increased 
deployment of service management systems. At present, 
however, the matching of service management activity to 
software system is fragmented and not well co-ordinated, 
with resultant problems in customer servicing. It has been 
suggested that the “strategic alignment of IT exists when a 
business organisation‟s goals, activities and processes are in 
harmony with the information systems that support them” 
[23]. However, only at OCL is this arguably the current 
position; at TPG DisableAids, where they do have a service 
management process and system, additional technology is 
used to try to improve software performance, notably in the 
provision of management information, and a major IS 
strategy overhaul is likely soon.  
Market pressures are forcing companies to improve their 
efficiency and in particular the effectiveness to deliver 
customer satisfaction. Given the strong customer centric 
dimension to service management, it seems probable that – 
both as a process and business software package - the 
concept will grow in significance in the management and 
operation of SMEs. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Grateful acknowledgement is given to Phillip Turner, IT 
Manager at TPG DisableAids Ltd, and to Erin Lau, IS 
Projects Manager at Optimum Consultancy Limited, for 
providing information on service management in their 
respective companies. The university-industry partnerships 
at all three companies reported on in this article received 
155
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

financial support from the Knowledge Transfer Partnerships 
programme (KTP). KTP aims to help businesses to improve 
their competitiveness and productivity through the better use 
of knowledge, technology and skills that reside within the 
UK Knowledge Base. KTP is funded by the Technology 
Strategy Board along with the other government funding 
organisations.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  J. Hurwitz, R. Bloor, M. Kaufman, and F. Halper, Service 
Management for Dummies, Hurwitz Associates, 2009. 
[2]  Www.webopedia.com/.../strategic_service_management 
 
Html, accessed July 4th, 2011.  
[3]  Www. Solavista.com, accessed July 4th, 2011.  
[4]  R. Bloor, Corporate Computer Strategy, Butler Bloor Ltd, 
1993, pp159-160.   
[5] 
A. Brown, S. Johnston, and K. Kelly, Using Service-
Oriented Architecture and Component-Based Development 
to Build Web Service Applications, Rational Software 
Corporation, 2002. 
[6]  M. J. Earl, Information Management: The Strategic 
Dimension, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1988. 
[7]  R. Ramaswamy, Design and management of service 
processes, Addison Wesley, Reading, 1996. 
[8]  A. Tsalgatidou and S. Junginger, “Modeling in the Re-
engineering Process,” ACM SIGOIS Bulletin, 1995, pp. 17-
24. 
[9]  P. Robinson, “Best of Breed (BOB) v Fully Integrated 
(FIS),” BPIC consultancy, Hove, 2003; accessed on internet 
at URL: http://www.bpic.co.uk April 7th, 2011. 
[10]  W. Robson, Strategic Management of Information Systems, 
Pearson Education, Harlow, 1997. 
[11]  M. Levy and P. Powell, “SME Internet Adoption: Towards a 
Transporter Model,” International Journal of Electronic 
Commerce and Business Media, 13, 2003, pp. 173-181. 
[12]  J.C. Koopman, “Effective alignment: strategy cannot succeed 
without it,” Canadian Manager, 1999, pp. 14-5. 
[13]  H. Johansson, P. McHugh, A. Pendlebury, and W. Wheeler, 
Business Process Reengineering – Breakpoint Strategies for 
Market Dominance, Wiley, Chichester, 1993. 
[14]  J. Short and N. Venkatraman, “Beyond business process 
redesign: redefining Baxter‟s business network,” Sloan 
Management Review, 1992, pp. 7-21. 
[15]  M. Saunders, P. Lewis, and A. Thornhill, Research methods 
for business students, Prentice Hall, Harlow, 2003. 
[16]  D. Remenyi, B. Williams, A. Money, and E. Swartz, Doing 
research in business and management, an introduction to 
process and method, Sage Publications, London, 1998. 
[17]  C. Cassell and G. Symon, Qualitative Methods in 
Organizational 
Research: 
A 
Practical 
Guide, 
Sage 
Publications, London, 1994. 
[18]  F. Wu, V. Mahajan, and S. Balasubramanian, “An Analysis 
of E-business Adoption and its impact on business 
performance,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing 
Science, volume 31, no 4, 2003, pp. 425-447. 
[19]  P. Turner, Questionnaire on the service management 
processes, related activities and systems support at TPG 
DisableAids, May 10th, 2011 (unpublished). 
[20]  E. Lau, M. Wynn, and P. Maryszczak, “Enterprise 
application integration in a service industry SME: a case 
study of Optimum Consultancy Services,” in Computing in 
the Global Information Technology (ICCGI), 2010 Fifth 
International Multi-Conference, IEEE Explore, pp. 71-76, 
ISBN: 978-1-4244-8068-5. 
[21]  E. Tipton, Questionnaire on the service management 
processes, related activities and systems support at Muddy 
Boots Software, May 13th, 2011 (unpublished). 
[22] SAP, Business benefits of SAP service management, 
www.onestopsap.com/SAP-SM, accessed July 6th, 2011 
[23] S. Bleistein, K. Cox, J. Verner, and K. Phalp, “B-SCP: a 
requirements analysis framework for validating strategic 
alignment of organisational IT based on strategy, context and 
process,” Information and Software Technology, 2006, 
Elsevier, pp. 846-868. 
 
 
 
156
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-152-6

