Incorporating Virtuality in Ubiquitous Computing Services                                     
for Influencing Human Behavior 
Tatsuo Nakajima 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Waseda University 
Tokyo Japan 
e-mail: tatsuo@dcl.cs.waseda.ac.jp 
Kota Gushima 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Waseda University 
Tokyo Japan 
e-mail: gushi@dcl.cs.waseda.ac.jp
 
Abstract—The role of computing technologies has been 
expanding, and our lifestyles will be significantly influenced 
by these technologies. Refining the meaning of real space by 
incorporating 
virtuality 
through 
ubiquitous 
computing 
technologies is a very powerful concept because people’s 
senses are enhanced, making them potentially see something 
that may not exist in the real space. For example, human 
eyesight can be altered using head-mounted displays, which 
modify real-world views captured by video cameras with 
mixed reality technologies. These approaches are also useful 
in influencing human behaviors that make a variety of new 
types of digital services possible. The paper presents four case 
studies to enhance the meaning of the real space through 
incorporating virtuality and proposes a design guideline 
extracted from the experience with their development.  
Keywords-Ubiquitous Computing; Mixed Reality; Virtual 
Reality; Augmented Reality; Virtuality; Head-Mounted Display; 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Ubiquitous computing technologies allow us to refine 
the meaning of our real space through incorporating 
virtuality for influencing our behaviors [12][20][25]. For 
example, recent advanced technologies, such as a Magic 
Leap’s technology [9] and Microsoft HoloLens [10], can 
easily refine the meaning of our real space and offer new 
possibilities to change our daily lifestyle. For example, 
human eyesight can be altered using head-mounted displays 
(HMDs), which modify real-world views captured by video 
cameras with mixed reality technologies. For our daily life 
to become more sustainable and well-being, behavior 
changes are essential [12][24]. To alter our behaviors, the 
meaning of the real space must be refined through 
incorporating virtuality to make people believe that their 
changes have meaningful effects on our future and 
environments. However, there are very few researches on 
design strategies to refine the meaning of the real space 
through incorporating virtuality because such researches 
must take into account multiple different disciplines that are 
typically distinguished, and substantial effort is required to 
integrate them. For example, significant movie and 
animation content exploits virtuality to influence our daily 
behaviors; however, the discussions about design content 
would rather be isolated from the technology design of 
digital 
services, 
although 
ubiquitous 
computing 
technologies are essentially virtualizing our daily lives [3]. 
Therefore, although technology has sufficiently advanced, it 
is difficult to discuss how to guide the design of the refined 
real space valuably and meaningfully. 
In this paper, our focus is to investigate a design 
guideline to examine the quality of virtuality. Existing 
researches have shown some design guidelines for 
developing augmented reality and virtual reality services. 
However, their focuses are to offer design guidelines to 
develop augmented reality services or to examine the 
quality of virtuality in virtual spaces, and there are no good 
metrics to extract potential pitfalls of the quality of virtuality 
incorporated in real spaces. For extracting the guideline, we 
first present four case studies to enhance the meaning of the 
real space through incorporating virtuality. By incorporating 
virtuality that does not exist in the real space that we 
currently see, our behaviors can be influenced then altered 
[8][13][19][20][22][24][25]. The aims to develop these case 
studies have exploited to incorporate virtuality in our daily 
real life, and these case studies incorporate virtuality from 
diverse angles. Thus, they are appropriate to extract a 
guideline for designing virtuality embedded in real spaces. 
We then present a guideline extracted from the experience 
with their developments. Because the guideline focuses on 
the design of incorporated virtuality in real spaces, and finds 
potential pitfalls of the design; thus, it can complement 
other existing guidelines. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents 
some related work on this study. In Section III, we describe 
four case studies, and show a design guideline extracted 
from the experiences with building the case studies in 
Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Several existing services examine the use of augmented 
reality technologies to enhance the meaning of real space to 
influence people’s attitudes and behaviors. For example, in 
[5], the authors reported on the concept of Blended 
Virtuality, whereby people use HMDs while downhill skiing 
and snowboarding. The user experiences a visually 
enhanced real space through the HMD without losing the 
full sensation of real-world skiing. In [13], the authors 
propose a service that using augmented reality technologies 
to implicitly influence the satisfaction that people 
experience when drinking a beverage and to control 
beverage consumption by creating a volume perception 
illusion. The system proposed in [22] aims to use 
augmented reality technologies as a way of modifying 
perceptions of satiety to control nutritional intake by 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

changing the apparent size of food. In [25], several case 
studies to offer playful augmented reality applications that 
seamlessly integrate virtuality in real space are reported. 
There are several researches to propose guidelines to 
develop services incorporating virtuality. For example, in 
[16], the authors present a guideline for the development 
process of mobile augmented reality applications. Also, in 
[23], some useful guidelines to develop better augmented 
reality games are described. In [25], the authors present 
guidelines to make traditional games more enjoyable by 
incorporating virtuality. These guidelines focus on how to 
develop services and applications to incorporate virtuarity in 
them, and they do not focus on the effective ways to design 
the quality of virtuality.  Some other frameworks are also 
useful to help the design of virtuality from different angles. 
For example, the framework described in [18] shows some 
properties for designing meaningful virtuality. Also, in [20], 
the framework to categorize the type of virtuality is 
proposed. 
However, currently, there are no sufficient discussions 
how to maintain the quality of incorporated virtuality in the 
real space. Although the approach is promising, but there is 
no proper design guidelines for designing virtuality used in 
real spaces in terms of the quality. The quality of virtuality 
is essential because a user does not want to use services that 
he/she feels a sense of incongruity in the incorporated 
virtuality in real spaces.  
III. 
FOUR CASE STUDIES 
A. HoloMoL: Human Memory Augmentation with Mixed-
Reality Technologies  
HoloLens, Microsoft’s HMD, has recently attracted 
people to develop new services in a variety of fields. 
Microsoft HoloLens [10] is able to deliver a mixed reality  
user experience [1], allowing people to interact with virtual 
objects and entities within real world settings. Mixed reality 
technologies enable designers to develop new types of 
advanced services that incorporating virtuality into the real 
world. The software platform that accompanies the 
Microsoft HoloLens hardware enabled developing mixed 
reality applications easily without requiring advanced skills. 
Various visions of possible novel services have already been 
presented. We would like to investigate supporting 
memorization techniques as a new application domain for 
Microsoft HoloLens, where we adopt the method of loci 
which is an ancient Greek method that can be used to 
memorize different types of information [26]. The first case 
study is named HoloMoL (HoloLens’s Method of Loci). 
The main objective of HoloMoL is to support the 
method of loci for augmenting human memory with mixed 
reality technologies based on Microsoft HoloLens and to 
enable utilizing the method of loci with minimal training. 
The original method of loci enables people to memorize 
information by imagining a space in their mind and placing 
information in the such space. HoloMoL replaces the 
imaginary space with real world places that people also 
know well.  HoloMoL automatically lays out information, 
that people intend to memorize, as AR entities within a real 
space. Thus, they experience the method of loci by moving 
in the real space, where corresponding information is 
automatically displayed using HoloMoL, so they are able to 
memorize the information as they navigate through the 
space. 
 
Figure 1. A user places a fiducial marker in his preferred location in a real 
space for memorizing information  
 
Figure 2. A user places respective fiducial makers that correspond to 
information to be memorized in difference places 
HoloMoL 
provide 
the 
ability 
to 
display 
the 
corresponding information using mixed reality technologies 
when a person gazes at a specific position in a real space. 
When a person wears a Microsoft HoloLens device, the 
surroundings that are normally visible are the same as the 
actual view, but when he/she moves to a position specified 
by him/her in advance and recognizes a specific marker, the 
corresponding information is automatically displayed. 
Our implementation utilizes fiducial markers to lay out 
various information registered to the real space as shown in 
Figures 1 and 2. Since MoloMoL’s objective is to 
investigate how people would place information for 
memorization, we decided to use printed fiducial markers 
that people were able to physically move and place around 
the environment.  By placing a marker near any objects 
located in a real space, HoloMoL exploits associative 
memory to memorize a variety of information. 
The current version of HoloMoL is developed as an 
application of Microsoft HoloLens. Unity is used as a 
software platform to render 3D contents in the real space, 
and Vuforia is adopted to recognize fiducial markers. The 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

database implemented in HoloMoL associates the image of 
each marker to be recognized with the corresponding 
information to be displayed in the real space. When a 
marker is recognized, the database is referenced, and the 
corresponding information is displayed as a sequence of 
characters written on a plate-shaped object as shown in 
Figure 2. 
B. AmbientBot: Delivering Daily Casual Information               
through Eye Contact with an Intimate Virtual Creature 
Our daily life becomes increasingly rich through the 
progress of advanced digital technologies. In particular, our 
modern daily lifestyle has been dramatically changed 
because of smart phones that always connect us to the 
Internet, thus enabling access to various information sources 
anytime and anywhere. However, the current progress of 
information 
technologies 
significantly 
increases 
our 
cognitive overload. In our daily commute in Tokyo, for 
example, a tremendous amount of information is presented 
to us through public displays located in trains and stations. 
As shown in [15], various modern social media try to steal 
our available attention by using ubiquitous computing 
technologies. For making our daily life more comfortable 
and peaceful, information should be more ambiently and 
intimately delivered to us only when the information is 
really necessary. In addition, the information should be 
available to us without extra time and effort. 
 
Figure 3. Ambient Bot Concept 
The second case study, called Ambient Bot, presents an 
intimate virtual creature in the real space with augmented 
reality technologies. Ambient Bot arranges a virtual creature 
in a user’ view as shown in Figure 3, but the creature leaves 
the user’s scope when he/she does not want to receive any 
information from the creature. If some information wants to 
be received when becoming free, he/she tries to find the 
virtual creature in his/her current view.  
When focusing his/her attention on the creature, it 
speaks and visualizes information to him/her, but when 
turning his/her attention away from the creature, it stops 
speaking. Therefore, the creature always but ambiently 
exists in the user’s view, but does not disturb his/her current 
activities when not focusing his/her attention on the 
creature. Ambient Bot offers information in a social manner 
because the user feels an intimate relationship with the 
creature [17]; thus, the interaction with the creature will 
make his/her daily life richer [18], unlike traditional 
notification technologies that focus on only the efficiency 
through functionalism that sometimes offers tasteless 
interaction. Especially, for Japanese young adults who are 
very familiar with various anime and video game products, 
using intimate virtual creatures not highly functional 
inorganic products makes them feel more social and 
intimate 
relationship 
with 
advanced 
information 
technologies. 
Ambient Bot shown in Figure 4 currently displays a 
jellyfish as a virtual creature in a user’s surrounding space 
with augmented reality technologies, and the jellyfish 
speaks to the user when he makes eye contact with the 
jellyfish. He uses the prototype system by wearing an HMD; 
Oculus Rift is currently chosen as the HMD for Ambient 
Bot. As described in the previous section, we chose the 
latest news articles, weather forecast, or latest posts or 
trending words in a social media service were chosen as the 
content that the jellyfish speaks. In Figure 4, the left photo 
shows a user who wears an HMD for using Ambient Bot, 
and the center photo is a view that he actually sees the view 
through the HMD. When he makes eye contact with the 
jellyfish, the jellyfish turns to him, then speaks and presents 
appropriate contents to him. The content is retrieved from 
the Google News API, the LINE’s WeatherHacks API, and 
the Twitter API. The content is converted into voice data 
through the Hoya’s VoiceText Web API for the jellyfish to 
speak. The content is also shown on a user’s HMD in real 
time when the jellyfish speaks the content. 
C. Augmented Bike: Building a Platform Society towards 
Sustainability 
This section presents the third case study named 
Augmented Bike for designing a social platform towards 
environmental sustainability based on Internet-of-Things. 
The case study we investigate encourages low carbon 
communities [6][7], in particular, to aim for a car-free city. 
A car-free city promises to make our society more 
sustainable [4]; however, people must be guided to choose a 
desirable lifestyle. Augmented Bike is an Internet of Things 
(IoT)-enhanced bicycle for promoting bicycle-sharing 
within communities. Bicycle sharing can help to achieve a 
car-free city, and IoT-based daily artifacts can contribute to 
building an effective social platform.  
Augmented Bike is a digitally enhanced daily artifact that 
augments rental bicycles using VR and AR technologies. 
When a new wearable device such as Google Glass 
becomes popular and most people wear the device in the 
near future, the devices can be used for facilitating a car-free 
city by augmenting rental bicycles with the new wearable 
devices and motivating people to use a rental bicycle. Using 
an Augmented Bike, people can easily rent a bike by 
touching their IC cards or using a fingerprint or an 
implanted IC chip that contains their personal information. 
Let us imagine a situation in which people always use an 
HMD and the display does not impede their sight, unlike a 
current HMD such as Oculus Lift. Augmented Bike as 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

shown in Figure 5 enhances people’s view and shows 
additional information on the HMDs that they wear. In 
addition, traveling distance and trail information are 
recorded on their smartphones, and people can check the 
information anytime. Figure 5 presents an overview of the 
Augmented Bike prototype. 
When using the Augmented Bike, an application program 
displays the images that enhance a user’s current real view 
on an HMD and shows pop-up information regarding the 
images to provide the rider with additional information. We 
also developed an application program that records traveling 
distance and trail information, and we offer some 
gamification effects using graphical changes.  
 
Figure 5. Augmented Bike Concept 
The current Augmented Bike shown in Figure 6 uses 
Oculus Rift as an HMD. In a typical case, the video that is 
captured from the real world by a camera attached to Oculus 
Rift is shown to a user so that the user can use his eyes to 
see his surroundings and simultaneously see virtual scenes 
generated by virtual reality technology. The current 
prototype identifies a user by fingerprints taken before and 
after using the Augmented Bike. In addition, a smartphone 
application runs on Android OS, and we use Unity as a 
platform to execute our applications both for Oculus Lift 
and the smartphone. The programs are written in C# and use 
Node.js to communicate between two application programs. 
The smartphone application monitors the movement of the 
pedals of the Augmented Bike using an acceleration sensor 
and transmits the information to a PC. The program running 
on the PC generates images to Oculus Lift. Our current 
prototype must use a desktop PC now although the 
prototype will work on a more powerful smartphone in the 
near future.  
 
Figure 6. An Experiment Using the Augmented Bike  
D. Mindful Reminder: Increasing a User’s Empathy 
toward His/Her Surrounding Environment  
At present, various useful digital services already enrich 
people’s daily lives. For example, sharing economy services 
and social networking services have become popular. These 
services allow us communicate with other people in a new 
and different way, making human relationships more 
meaningful. These relationships make us more mindful of 
various aspects of our daily lives because these services 
exploit new opportunities to enhance serendipitous human 
relationships. However, our modern daily lives increasingly 
busy, and we sometimes forget to empathize with other 
people, even though emerging digital services facilitate 
human relationships. In particular, information technologies 
provide various notifications to keep the user mindful and 
calm, thereby reducing the overextension of human 
cognitive resources and using those resources more 
effectively [2]. However, current notification technologies 
 
Figure 4. An Ambient Bot System 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

exploit peripheral attention and make our daily lives 
inorganic because such notifications do not facilitate human 
relationships.  
Thus, the effect of these notification services is not 
strong enough to make people’s lives really flourish. Of 
course, many digital services already notify us about 
important issues in our daily lives; for example, a calendar 
service notifies a person about his/her schedule, and a 
reminder service tells him/her what he/she needs to do. 
However, the information is typically sent through 
smartphones or laptops; thus, although the services increase 
the richness of our daily lives in terms of efficiency, we 
flourish less in our daily lives and forget about people’s 
feelings and empathy, which is important to make our daily 
lives mindful and calm when the number of notifications 
increases. 
 
Figure 7. An Overview of Mindful Reminder 
By contrast, notifying a user about a particular issue 
through a narrative delivered by human, particularly a real 
human who is close to the user—not a device—makes our 
lives flourish more because the notification explores human 
relationships and makes us aware of people’s empathy. We 
call notifications that make the user empathize others and 
that increase the flourishing of his/her daily life mindful 
notifications, which may provide the user with an 
opportunity to feel grateful for someone else and to be 
aware of their hospitality. Mindful Reminder is the fourth 
case study that offers mindful notifications to the user. 
Mindful Reminder aims to help the user overcome many 
problems in his/her daily life. For instance, it reminds the 
user of his/her schedule, displays information or prevents 
the user from forgetting objects. These mindful notifications 
are provided by a virtual human; they are not inorganic 
notifications from peripheral environments. Of course, the 
use of mindful and calm notifications entails a tradeoff with 
regard to human cognitive overload. As shown in [14], this 
balance is important to effectively increase the influence on 
the user’s daily behavior through notifications via the 
tradeoff between his/her cognitive overload and the 
promotion of human relationships.  
With Mindful Reminder, a virtual human who represents 
a real acquaintance of the user delivers mindful 
notifications. Notifications are virtualized based on the 
Alternative Reality concept [8]; thus, a user does not notice 
that the real acquaintance is not the virtual human; thus, the 
user believes that the notification is delivered from the real 
acquaintance who notifies him/her. When using Mindful 
Reminder, the user wears an HMD and the virtualized 
acquaintances are displayed in real space (see Figure 7). The 
Alternative Reality concept makes it possible to seamlessly 
blend virtuality into the real world. The virtualized 
acquaintance and the contents of the notification are chosen 
according to the current real location and situation of the 
user. Figure 8 (a) shows a typical situation in Mindful 
Reminder, where a virtualized acquaintance talks about a 
user’s umbrella, which he/she brings with him/her on the 
train that he/she is riding on. Figure 8 (b) shows another 
example in which a shop assistant informs the user about 
how to stay in the café, and Figure 8 c) depicts when a 
user’s friend talks about the class that he/she is taking in 
his/her school. 
Two key issues are essential when designing Mindful 
Reminder. The first issue concerns the appropriate 
virtualized acquaintance delivering the correct information 
based on the user’s current situation. The context awareness 
of the service allows us to naturally integrate a mindful 
notification into the real world. The second issue relates to 
when a user cannot recognize the difference between the 
real acquaintance and the virtualized acquaintance. If the 
user knows that the notification is delivered by a system 
instead of a human, the notification will not trigger an 
empathetic reaction from the user. The user needs to believe 
that the virtualized acquaintance is a real acquaintance and 
to be aware of the acquaintance’s hospitality; the user will 
thus become aware of other people’s hospitality toward 
him/her. 
IV. 
EXPLORING DESIGN SPACE FOR DESIGNING REALITY 
The guideline that we propose in this section 
complements the potential pitfall to incorporate virtuality in 
the real space based on the concept of the magic circle [11]. 
This concept has been developed to discuss the boundaries 
between the real space and the virtual space in video games. 
An expert who have designed and developed the case 
studies mainly charged a process to derive the guideline 
because he was also involved into the design and the 
evaluation of all case studies. The expert analysis is 
promising to derive abstract design knowledge. In the 
compiling process to extract the guideline, he generalizes 
and structures the ad-hoc design process to develop the case 
studies based on his observations. The development of the 
guideline was evolved in an iterated way until he had 
confidence that the guideline become sufficiently mature.  
The proposed guideline considers that the following 
three levels of the magic circle are classified. The first one is 
the individual magic circle, where only one person who is a 
stakeholder of a service can feel the reality of an 
incorporated virtual value in a dimension. The second one is 
the community magic circle, where people who are 
members of a community as stakeholders of a service can 
feel the reality of an incorporated virtual value in the real 
space, but other people who are not the members of the 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

community may not feel this reality. Finally, the third magic 
circle is the universal magic circle, where all people as 
stakeholders of a service feel the reality of an incorporated 
virtual value in the real space; thus, the magic circle 
disappears for them. These levels are crucial when 
considering the stakeholders in a ubiquitous computing 
service that incorporates virtuality, e.g., those who can sense 
the reality of an element in each dimension. For example, 
the point is frequently used in typical video games, and it 
can be used to strengthen a player’s abilities in the game 
within the individual magic circle. However, the point can 
be usually exchanged within the game in the community 
magic circle, and the effect of the point is extended to most 
players in the game. Finally, the point can be exchanged for 
real money within the universal magic circle, and the effect 
of the point can be extended to all people.  
When designing or analyzing a digital service, the levels 
of the magic circle become an important criterion for 
defining the boundaries between the real and the virtual. In 
particular, analyzing the levels of the service is critical when 
discussing the quality of the virtuality because the 
boundaries between the real and the virtual should be 
consistent among the stakeholders in the service. If a 
stakeholder involved in the service does not sense the reality 
of some of the incorporated virtual values in a dimension, 
incorporated virtuality has failed to affect them because the 
consistency among stakeholders is broken and the 
misunderstanding caused by the inconsistency significantly 
reduces the quality of the service. However, the universal 
magic circle is difficult to achieve because people who may 
not be involved in the service need to believe in the reality 
of some incorporated virtual values. Thus, the three levels 
proposed in the guideline are useful when analyzing the 
balance of the reality of incorporated virtuality in the digital 
service and the tradeoff in choosing the level. 
For example, when HoloMoL is used by multiple users, 
they should see the same augmented information on the 
same real space if they are collaborating together. Also, in 
Ambient Bot, when a user looks at a virtual creature, other 
people should be aware what the user is looking at. In 
Augmented Bike, a user needs to see other bikes and 
pedestrians because even the user drives his/her bike in the 
virtual space to maintain the safety. In Mindful Reminder, a 
user’s friend should be aware of the existence of the virtual 
persons who gives the user notifications.  
From our experiences with building the four case studies 
described in Section III, we found that designers typically 
consider only individual magic circles based on their own 
past experiences. Therefore, in their user studies, their 
participants failed to understand the meaning of virtuality 
intended by the designers. One of important insights 
extracted from the discussions is that participatory design 
[21] is a useful tool to overcome the potential pitfalls to 
offer community magic circle or universal magic circle. If 
users who have various backgrounds are involved in the 
design of virtuality, the meaning of the virtuality can 
become understandable by them. The guideline presented in 
the section lets designers who develop ubiquitous 
computing services that incorporate virtuality to consider 
who are stakeholders of the services and how virtuality 
should be seen by these stakeholders.  
Different from other guidelines and frameworks 
described in Section II, our framework offers design frames 
that allow service designers to focus on the plausibility of 
incorporated virtuality in the services that they develop. 
Especially, one important aspect of the proposed guideline 
is to allow service designers to explicitly take into account 
multiple stakeholders appeared in the services.  Then, the 
framework is useful to find some potential pitfalls that are 
not easy to be extracted by other existing guidelines and 
frameworks. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTION 
The paper presented four case studies that refine the 
meaning of the real space through incorporated virtuality. 
The case studies use HMDs to refine a user’ view to include 
 
Figure 8. Illustrations of the scenarios in Mindful Reminder 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

virtuality in the real space. Since the refined view 
significantly influences a user’s behavior, the approach 
offers promising possibilities to develop various new 
services. However, as shown in Section IV, the reality needs 
to be properly designed in terms of who are stakeholders of 
the services. In particular, the services may lose the 
usefulness if some of stakeholders are not aware of the 
meaning of incorporated virtuality in an adequate manner. 
The aim of this paper is to extract an effective guideline 
to design virtuaity from the case studies that we have 
developed. We hope that the guideline is useful to extract 
some potential pitfalls that existing guidelines and 
frameworks could not find easily. However, we still need to 
validate the proposed guideline in developing new case 
studies. In particular, we will plan to report actual potential 
pitfalls when designing the new case studies through 
participatory design with the proposed guideline. In the 
participatory design, participants will play roles of 
respective stakeholders in them, and discuss the meaning of 
incorporated virtuality from each stakeholder’s angle. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Accenture Technology, “Mixed reality brings real benefits to 
enterprises”, 
https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insight-real-
benefits-mixed-reality-brings-enterprise, 
 [retrieved: 
December 2017] 
[2] S. Bakker and K. Niemantsverdriet, “The Interaction-
Attention Continuum: Considering Various Levels of Human 
Attention in Interaction Design”, International Journal of 
Design, Vol. 10, No. 2, 2016, pp.1-14. 
[3] J. Baudrillard, “The Consumer Society: Myths and 
Structures”, Sage Publications Ltd., 1998 
[4] J.H. Crawford, “Carfree Cities”, Intl Books, 2000 
[5] A. Colley, J. Väyrynen, and J. Häkkilä, “Skiing in a blended 
virtuality: an in-the-wild experiment”, In Proceeding of the 
19th International Academic Mindtrek Conference, 2005, 
pp.89-91. 
[6] H. 
Fraker, 
“The 
Hidden 
Potential 
of 
Sustainable 
Neighborhoods: Lessons from Low-Carbon Communities”, 
Island Press, 2013 
[7] N. Foletta and J. Henderson, Low Car(bon) Communities: 
Inspiring Car-free and Car-lite Urban Futures, Routledge, 
2016 
[8] F. Ishizawa and T. Nakajima, “Alternative Reality: An 
Augmented Daily Urban World Inserting Virtual Scenes 
Temporally”, In Proceeding of the 10th International 
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, 2016, pp.353-364. 
[9] Magic Leap, https://www.magicleap.com/  [retrieved: 
December 2017]  
[10]  Microsoft HoloLens, https://www.microsoft.com/microsoft-
hololens/  [retrieved: December 2017] 
[11] M. Montola, J. Stemros, and A. Waern, “Pervasive Games - 
Theory and Design”, Morgan Kaufmann, 2009. 
[12] T. Nakajima and V. Lehdonvirta, “Designing Motivation in 
Persuasive Ambient Mirrors”, Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing, Vol. 17, No.1, Springer Verlag, 2013, pp.107-
126.  
[13] T. Narumi, Y. Ban, T. Kajinami, T. Tanikawa, and M. Hirose, 
“Augmented Perception of Satiety: Controlling Food 
Consumption by Changing Apparent Size of Food with 
Augmented Reality”, In Proceedings of the Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2012, pp.109-118. 
[14] K. Niedderer, et al., “Design for Behaviour Change as a 
Driver 
for 
Sustainable 
Innovation: 
Challenges 
and 
Opportunities for Implementation in the Private and Public 
Sectors”, International Journal of Design, Vol. 10, No. 2, 
2016, pp.67-85 
[15] T. Okoshi, K. Tsubouchi, M. Taji, T. Ichikawa, and H. 
Tokuda, “Attention and Engagement-Awareness in the Wild: 
A Large-Scale Study with Adaptive Notifications”, In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Pervasive 
Computing and Communications, IEEE, 2017, pp.100-110. 
[16] M. de Sá and E. Churchill, ”Mobile augmented reality: 
exploring 
design 
and 
prototyping 
techniques”, 
In Proceedings of the 14th international conference on 
Human-computer interaction with mobile devices and 
services, 2012, pp.221-230. 
[17] M. 
Sakamoto, 
T. 
Alexandrova, 
and 
T. 
Nakajima, 
“Introducing virtuality to enhance game-related physical 
artifacts”, International Journal of Smart Home, Vol. 8, No. 
2, 2014, pp.137-152. 
[18] M. Sakamoto, T. Nakajima, and T. Alexandrova, “Enhancing 
Values through Virtuality for Intelligent Artifacts that 
Influence Human Attitude and Behavior”, Multimedia Tools 
and Applications, Springer, Vol. 74, No. 24, Springer Verlag, 
2015, pp. 11537–11568 
[19] M. Sakamoto and T. Nakajima, “Making Citizens’ Activities 
Flourish 
through 
a 
Crowdsourcing-based 
Social 
Infrastructure”, In Konomi. S., Rousso, G., (eds.) Enriching 
Urban Spaces with Ambient Computing, the Internet of 
Things, and Smart City Design, IGI Global, 2016, pp.232-
255. 
[20] M. Sakamoto, T. Nakajima, and S. Akioka, “Gamifying 
Collective Human Behavior with Gameful Digital Rhetoric", 
Multimedia Tools and Applications, Vol.76, No.10, Springer 
Verlag, 2017, pp.12539–12581 
[21] D. Schuler and A. Namioka, “Participatory Design: 
Principles and Practices”, CRC Press, 1993. 
[22] E. Suzuki, T. Narumi, S. Sakurai, T. Tanikawa, and M. 
Hirose, “Illusion Cup: Interactive Controlling of Beverage 
Consumption Based on an Illusion of Volume Perception”, In 
Proceedings of the 5th Augmented Human International 
Conference, 2014, Article No.41. 
[23] R. Wetzel, R. McCall, A-K. Braun, and W. Broll, “Guidelines 
for designing augmented reality games”, In Proceedings of 
the 2008 Conference on Future Play: Research, Play, Share, 
2008. 
[24]  A.K. Wolfe, E.L. Malone, J.  Heerwagen, and J. Dion, 
“Behavioral Change and Building Performance: Strategies 
for Significant, Persistent, and Measurable Institutional 
Change”, US Department of Energy, 2014 
[25] T. Yamabe and T. Nakajima, “Playful Training with 
Augmented Reality Games: Case Studies Toward Reality-
oriented System Design”. Multimedia Tools and Application, 
Vol.62, No.1, Springer Verlag, 2013, pp.259–286. 
[26] F.A. Yates, “The Art of Memory”, Bodley Head, 2014. 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

