Home Lighting System Managed by Practical Reasoning Agents Society
Dami´an Gonz´alez
and Gustavo Torres
Department of Postgraduate in Computer Science
Autonomous University of Guadalajara
Zapopan, Jalisco. Mexico
e-mail: dam.gonz01@gmail.com
e-mail: gustavo.blanco@edu.uag.mx
Abstract—The Agent-based Home Lighting Systems have shown
good results decreasing electricity consumption and enhancing
user comfort. However, there are certain characteristics of agent
theory that have not been implemented, or even so, they are done
in an inappropriate way. The main goal is to embed intelligent
agents on this systems, so that they are capable of automatically
decide over household resources use. The collaborative and
cooperative decision-making behaviors are aspects of agent theory
that may deal with the system management. Unlike regular
lighting control systems, agents go beyond inputs reﬁnement
and output procurement. Agents have autonomous behavior,
which, in the near future, will bring about what is called a
Home Automation System as a Multi-Agent System. Previous
approaches have designed solutions that divide the control of a
lighting system into functional stages and thus assign specialized
agents to perform each of them. These approaches distribute
the solution but does not apply agent’s society approach. This
paper describes the functionality and composition of a Home
Lighting System Managed by Practical Reasoning Agents and
how it improves the weaknesses of other approaches. It does not
present implementation results as it is just the architecture, and
the implementation is let as future work phase.
Keywords–agent; decision-making; energy use rate; home light-
ing system; user preferences.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, an inefﬁcient use of resources in a house is
typical. Electricity, water, LP gas and more, are used in an
inappropriate way by home appliances, equipment, infrastruc-
ture and residents themselves. Some examples include usage
of home appliances and entertainment systems for long periods
of time, excessive use of water by garden irrigation systems,
and improper use of air conditioning systems, among others.
Home lighting is not the exception for this kind of waste, as
an inappropriate distribution and selection of lighting sources
(bulbs, lamps, luminaries, etc.), as well as, the misuse of them
can be found.
In the recent years, agent-based home lighting systems
have been developed with the purpose to optimize energy
usage. The intelligent agents in those approaches, monitor,
control and take decisions upon the system’s state, mostly
based in user preferences [1]–[5]. Also, these approaches
distribute the management of the home lighting system into
functional stages. Through this, they assign specialized agents
to perform over each one of the stages. In general, those stages
can be categorized mainly in perception, action and decision
layers. The perception layer provides the current state of the
system by means of agents administration of different sensors
types. Actuation layer is quite similar to perception, but the
intelligent agents control actuators to change the system state.
Finally, in the last layer, decisions are performed through the
implementation of algorithms or control mechanisms in agents,
using the system’s state obtained from perception layer as input
and sending an action to action layer as output.
The scope of this document is to detail the proposal
of a new agent-based home lighting system architecture, in
which state-of-the-art implementations advantages, disadvan-
tages, and main characteristics were taken into account for
its design. The proposed model is based on the interaction
of an agent society directly with the environment, something
that other architectures do not have. Also, the agent society
is in charge of managing the state of the system according
to user preferences, plus energy consumption. Therefore, the
environment is used to provide a representation of the physical
world to the agents.
This document is structured as follows. In Section II,
a comparison between agent-based home lighting systems
is presented in terms of how perceptions and actions are
performed, what decision-making algorithms have been used,
and how these approaches manage user preferences and energy
consumption rate. In Section III, the proposed architecture is
described in terms of how the system’s state is represented,
shared and changed, the organization of the agent society, the
process to reach a decision and how it performs an action plan.
Section IV discusses how the weaknesses of previous designs
can be improved by the proposal here presented, as well as,
it describes the differences between approaches. Finally, the
conclusions of the proposal and future work are discussed in
Section V.
II.
INCLUSION OF AGENTS IN HOME LIGHTING SYSTEMS:
A COMPARISON BETWEEN APPROACHES
Because of the agent’s paradigm nature, many of the sys-
tems that implement these approaches for lighting management
can be described, in general, in a three-layer basis: perception,
action and decision [1]–[6]. Some of these approaches are
clearly divided in three layers [5]. In others, these layers can
be merged in different combinations [1]–[4]. The purpose of
the following comparison between approaches is to identify
their main characteristics, and take them as a basis to develop
a potentially improved architecture. Such comparison is sum-
marized in Table I, and is described in following paragraphs.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-459-6
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

TABLE I. AGENT-BASED HOME LIGHTING SYSTEMS FUNCTIONALITY DISTRIBUTION.
Author
Sandhu, et al. [1]
Bielskis, et al. [3]
Mady, et al. [2]
Wang, et al. [4]
Paulauskaite-
Taraseviciene, et al.
[5]
Dami´an A.
Gonz´alez N., et al.
Perception layer
What does the
system sense?
-Light
-Occupancy
-User preferences
-Temperature
(indoor/outdoor)
-Carbon dioxide
-Light level
-Users’
ElectroDermal
Activity (EDA)
-User’s
electrocardiogram
(ECG)
-User’s skin
temperature signals
-Luminance
-Occupancy
-Light intensity
-User luminance
preferences
-Light intensity
-Solar radiation
-Infrared camera data
-PIR data
-User preferences
-Energy data
-Luminance
-Occupancy
-Light intensity
-User luminance
preferences
-Residents occupancy
-Residents
preferences
-Energy consumption
-Light intensity
-Light ignition
Who is/are in charge
of system perception?
-Supervised learner
agent
-Reinforcement
learner agent
-Thermo measurer
agent
-CO2 measurer agent
-Light measurer
agent
-AV FIA agent
-Person Movements
agent
-Daylight Intensity
agent
-Window Blinding
Occlusion agent
Sensor agent
-Lighting Sensor
agent
-Resident Location
Sensor agent
Environment
How do sensations
are gotten?
-Occupancy sensor
-Photosensor
Embedded system
administrators of
digital thermometers,
carbon dioxide
sensors, light level
sensor and
instrumentation
ampliﬁers
-RFID detector
-Light sensor
Multi-sensors
-Lighting Sensor
-Hybrid Ultrasound
and Radio Frequency
(RF) technology
-Occupancy sensor
-Light intensity
sensor
-Power meter
-User Interface
What does/do it/they
do to achieve system
perception?
NIA
Analysis, storage and
propagation of sensor
measurements
Analysis and
propagation of sensor
measurements
Analysis and
propagation of sensor
measurements
Analysis,
interpretation and
propagation of sensor
measurements
Analysis, storage and
propagation of sensor
measurements
Decision layer
Who is/are in charge
of system decision?
-Supervised learner
agent
-Reinforcement
learner agent
Radial Basis Neural
Network component
Control agents
Local Lighting Agent
via a Data Fusion
Center
Decision agent
Agent society
How does/do it/they
do to achieve system
decision?
Via supervised and/or
reinforcement
learning
Radial Basis Neural
Network
PI-Controllers
ANFIS
ANN, Fuzzy Logic
and Bayesian
approaches
Worth-Oriented
Negotiation process
How does the system
obtain decision data?
Sensors
-Thermo measurer
agent
-CO2 measurer agent
-Light measurer
agent
-AV FIA agent
-Person Movements
agent
-Daylight Intensity
agent
-Window Blinding
Occlusion agent
Sensor agent
-Lighting Sensor
agent
-Resident Location
Sensor agent
Perceiving
environment
Who performs
decision deliberation?
-Supervised learner
agent
-Reinforcement
learner agent
EnvironmentCon-
troller
agent
-Daylight Intensity
agent
-Window Blinding
Occlusion agent
Local Lighting agent
Control agents
Agent society via
Environment
Actuation layer
What does the
system actuate?
Lighting ballasts
-Fans
-Lamps
-Air-conditioners
-Sunblinds
-Bulbs
-Lamp
-Sunblind
Bulbs
-Dimmer
-Switches
Who is/are in charge
of system actuation?
-Supervised learner
agent
-Reinforcement
learner agent
EnvironmentCon-
troller
agent
-Daylight Intensity
agent
-Window Blinding
Occlusion agent
Local Lighting agent
Control agents
Environment
Where do actions are
gotten from?
-Supervised learner
agent
-Reinforcement
learner agent
AmbiantComfort
agent
Control gents
Local Lighting Agent
via a Data Fusion
Center
Decision agent
Agent society
A. Perception Layer
The perception layer, as its name indicates, is where the
state of the system is sensed, and is made up of a set of
descriptive parameters. From ”Perception layer” column in
Table I, it can be observed that all the approaches differ in
the type of measurement units in which the system state is
sensed. These measurements are obtained by different types of
sensors, from physical states to user physiological sensations.
For readings of physical states, lighting and occupancy sensors
are mainly used. In the case of user sensations, instrumentation
ampliﬁers are used to obtain occupant’s bio-signals in order to
compute them. The installation of all these sensors in the house
infrastructure brings minor inconveniences, because there exist
diverse network protocols to interconnect several types of
devices [7]–[9]. However, when users are required to wear
sensors, it may become an issue, because of inherent human
behavior misconception or fear to changes. In particular, for
an ofﬁce area, described by Sandhu et al. [1], two approaches
of sensors installation are suggested, the workspace-based and
the user-based conﬁgurations. The ﬁrst of them uses static
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-459-6
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

occupancy sensors located at strategic places where users sit,
and the second require that users wear badges in order to
locate them and identify their preferences. Workspace-based
approach is appropriate for spaces such as ofﬁces where
employees have speciﬁc places to sit. Otherwise, for a house
environment, the user-based approach is more feasible but
limited by some considerations. Residents may tolerate to carry
a wearable sensor or even its own smart device but always
taking into account comfort and personal information security
and privacy.
Actually, in all approaches, the perception functionality is
accomplished by one or multiple agents that, by means of
sensors measurement, analyze, interpret and propagate sensor’s
readings to those other agents who may require them. Authors
such as Paulauskaite-Taraseviciene et al. [5] emphasize the fact
that agents responsible of perception layer, must only share
data when there exists a request or when a signiﬁcant and
useful change occurs.
B. Action Layer
This layer interacts with the environment in order to change
the perceived state of it. As shown in Table I, actuators are
the instruments used to change the quantity of light provided
by natural or artiﬁcial light sources (sunblinds, bulbs, lamps,
etc.). The tasks of agents in this layer are quite similar to
those performed in perception layer, they include analysis,
interpretation and propagation of actuators measurements. But,
these agents are able to change the state of affairs on the
environment. All actions made by agents in this layer come
from the decision layer.
It is noteworthy that not only agents manipulate actuator
devices, but also its occupants. Their actions are taken as a
feedback to measure the performance of the system. Thus,
they are used by the decision layer in order to improve system’s
response, either with an energy decrement or with the proﬁling
of user preferences.
C. Decision Layer
The decision layer determines the actions to be performed,
based on user preferences and/or energy consumption. Thus,
if a change is required, an action is to be decided by this
layer. For this, one or a variety of algorithms are performed
by specialized intelligent agents.
Other approaches differ in the selection of algorithms used
in the decision layer. The decision-making of Paulauskaite-
Taraseviciene et al. [5] has a “Decision Agent”, that is capable
to operate in two modalities: decision-making and learning
or re-learning. In the ﬁrst, a ”Decision Agent” executes an
algorithm based on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, Fuzzy Logic
and Bayesian approaches to make a decision. It uses data
received by sensor agents, establishing actions to be sent to
”Control Agents”. The learning or relearning takes place when
a resident adjusts an already computed solution, in order to set
up the next status of the actuator. This adjustment is taken as
user’s feedback for later learning purposes.
Sandhu et al. [1] describe two approaches when the system
needs to execute an action: supervised and reinforced learning.
In the ﬁrst, training data are obtained from sensors and
recorded actions, where sensor readings are the inputs and user
actions are the target values. Then, a mapping between sensor
and target values is made, in order to perform an appropriate
control of lights. Thus, the task of a supervised learner is to
minimize the difference between its action and user’s action.
A reinforced learner merges user location and lighting
reading to represent the environment’s state, in order to gen-
erate actions that lead to an appropriate illumination setting.
Reinforcement is based on how agent’s actions approximate
to those of the user. The absolute value of the difference
between the illumination reading after an agent’s action, and
the illumination reading after the user action in the same state,
is used as negative reinforcement, or punishment. In contrast,
when an action performed by the agent and the user does not
change anything (i.e., user is pleased with illumination setting),
the agent receives a positive reinforcement, or reward.
The system developed by Bielskis et al. [3] is based on a
index called Ambient Lighting Affect Reward (ALAR), which
expresses human comfort. The system predicts the indoor RGB
LED illumination conditions by measuring the ALAR index
that reﬂects the sense of comfort of the resident.
Mady et al. [2] describe a ”Control Model” that is com-
prised by a ”Centralized Controller” that takes as inputs
the user’s illumination preferences, user’s location and light
intensity readings. The outputs are the illumination level and
blinding position. The ”Centralized Controller” is integrated
of an ”Optimization Engine” and a ”Reﬁnement Controller”;
PI-Controllers sub-compose the ”Reﬁnement Controller”. For
the representation of the ”Control Model”, two types of agents
were used: control and environment agents.
The proposal of Wang et al. [4] is a multi-agent system
applied to the control of household illumination. The system
focuses on the user and communicates to him/her through a
wireless network and a system terminal, that can be a personal
computer, smarthphone, wearable device, etcetera. The system
takes into consideration different variables, such as ambient
illumination, occupancy, energy limitations, user preferences
among other information, in order make a decision. By using
an Adaptive Neuro Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS), they
estimate environment’s visualization and occupancy of users,
which are used by the control host in conjuction with user
preferences and energy data for the decision-making process.
The multi-agent system consists of three types of agents:
central agent, local light agent, sensor agent and person agent.
From above implementations, common patterns of agent
societies can be detected and described as follows. Agents
have speciﬁc tasks that contribute to the main goal of the
whole system. A communication is established to exchange
information and/or goals. The decision-making task takes place
in a dedicated part of the system. Algorithms used to select
actions can be seen as processes that ingest several inputs to
accomplish a goal. Also, another point to note is the impor-
tance of home residents preferences and energy consumption.
User preferences can be considered very important, almost as
a “law” [1], for others they are only one parameter to make
a decision [2] [4] [5] and even some others do not take them
into account, they focus on user physiological senses [3]. In
the case of energy consumption, implementations consider it as
an important parameter without leaving aside user preferences
[4].
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-459-6
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

Figure 1. Home Lighting System Managed by Practical Reasoning Agents architecture.
III.
HOME LIGHTING SYSTEM MANAGED BY PRACTICAL
REASONING AGENTS
As mentioned above, the base of our model of a Home
Lighting System (HLS) managed by Practical Reasoning (PR)
agents is the interaction between the environment (an abstrac-
tion of the physical world) and a contoured society of agents
(agents with guidance to energy saving and satisfaction of
preferences). The structural distribution of the system consists
of the environment, made of three layers, and the society of
agents. Functionally, the environment is responsible for per-
ception and action, and agents carry out the decision process.
Overall system’s architecture is shown in Figure 1.
A. Physical representation
In the proposed model, the administration of the entire
system is divided into workspaces that correspond to every
room of a house. Each workspace has an occupancy sensor, a
light intensity sensor, a power meter, a switch and a dimmer.
These are used to monitor the location of residents, measure
the consumption of power, and to control the intensity of the
light. Also, they are connected over a network. In the case
of resident preferences, they are established by means of an
User Interface (UI) and indicate the desired brightness in a
particular workspace.
B. Environment
The environment is the component that abstracts the phys-
ical environment, allowing to obtain and modify the state of
the system. This environment is made up of each workspace
and controls all the sensors and actuators within the house.
1) Structure: The environment is composed of three layers:
Control, Server and Gateway. The Control layer is responsible
for the management of sensors and actuators and its divided
into Control components. The Server layer has Resources and
Services to consistently obtain the state of the environment and
assign actions from and to Control layer. And, Gateway layer
is the interface between the agent society and the environment
itself (see Figure 1.)
2) Functionality: The Control layer of the environment
manages different types of sensors and actuators. Control
components assigned to sensors constantly monitor the state of
power consumption, the location of the residents, the luminous
intensity. Also, when required, the components share these
signals to an speciﬁc resource belonging to the Server layer.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-459-6
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

The Control components dedicated to handle actuators carry
out almost the same tasks, but also they are capable of change
the states of the switches and intensity regulators. States of
actuators and sensors are updated on-demand by the Server
layer or when a substantial change is detected.
The Server layer is divided into two types of components,
Services and Resources. Resources aim to record the state
of the environment through constant requests to the Control
layer, and to translate it to perceptions for agents. Services
component performs the same type of tasks, but its also capable
to assign actions to modify the state of the environment to
the Control layer. Figure 2 represents the interaction between
Control and Server layer, when an update of the system’s state
happens.
Figure 2. Control and Server layers interaction.
The Gateway layer is the interface between the agent
society and the environment. The Gateway receives requests
to get the status of the system and sends actions to modify
it, both signals come from agent’s society. Perceptions and
actions are exchanged on-demand only. The message passing
between Gateway layer, Server layer and a proﬁled agent is
pictured in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Agent, Gateway and Service layers interaction.
C. Proﬁled agent society
The approach allocates PR agents to the management of a
HLS. The PR agent’s Beliefs, Desires and Intentions determine
the way it behaves [6].
•
Beliefs, represent the current state of the environment.
•
Desires, reﬂect an agent motivational state. They
represent the objectives that an agent would like to
accomplish or bring about.
•
Intentions, are something that an agent wants to
achieve or a state of affairs that the agent wants to
maintain or avoid.
The society is composed of a number of agents with two
types of tendencies: to save energy and to the fulﬁll the
preferences of residents. These behaviors are observed in the
desires of each type of agent, and they determine the way
in which the management of the state of the environment is
done. Agents which want to satisfy the user’s preferences,
tend to change the state of the environment according to
the resident’s desired light intensity. Similarly, agents devoted
to the decrease of energy consumption prefer to modify the
environment with the aim of reducing electricity consumption.
Regarding to the distribution of the agents, in every workspace
two agents are placed for the achievement of activities of
decision, one of every category. For the stage of problem
solving, the distribution in the workspaces is not a limitation,
all the agents are capable of modify and of perceive the
complete state of the environment.
1) Perception: Agents are able to perceive the current state
of the system (a compilation of percepts) by means of the envi-
ronment. Each type of percept corresponds to a property of the
system: resident’s occupancy, energy consumption rate, light
intensity level, light ignition state and resident’s preferences.
The environment’s state is only shared on-demand and can
include one, many or all types of these percepts, depending on
the request of a agent. Figure 3 shows the interaction between
a proﬁled agent and the environment to share the system’s
state.
2) Reaching Agreement: The proposed approach for the
decision mechanism is to have a Worth-Oriented Negotiation
Domain (WOD) [6].
“...the goals of an agent are speciﬁed by deﬁning
a worth function for the possible states of the en-
vironment. The goal of the agent is thus implicitly
to bring about the state of the environment with
the greatest value. Reaching agreement involves the
agents negotiating not over a distribution of tasks
to agents, as in task-oriented domains, but over the
collection of joint plans. It is in an agent’s interest
to reach agreement on the plan that brings about the
environment state with the greatest worth.”
When a change in the state of the environment is de-
tected by the agents belonging to a workspace, a process
for construction of a joint plan begins. This type of plan
is intended to change the environment to a better value and
goes in accordance with the desires of the agents. Joint plans
include from doing nothing (no plan change the environment
to a better value), to a series of actions that require several
agents. Once a joint plan is identiﬁed, a negotiation process
begins. When two agents negotiate, they exchange proposals
in series of rounds where the only way to continue is giving a
joint plan that brings the environment to a higher value than
received. Otherwise, negotiation stops and the latest proposal
is accepted. Figure 4, shows an interaction diagram of the
negotiation process.
3) Problem solving: The problem solving phase is con-
ducted by a Cooperative Distributed Problem Solving (CDPS)
process [6].
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-459-6
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

Figure 4. Worth-Oriented Negotiation process.
The CDPS process has three stages, which are sum-
marized as follows.
1)
Problem decomposition stage decomposes
the
overall
problem
into
smaller
sub-
problems.
2)
Sub-problem
solution
stage
solves
sub-
problems individually.
3)
Solutions to individual sub-problems are
synthesized into an overall solution.
Speciﬁcally, ContracNet protocol was selected to perform
CDPS process. This protocol requires an initiator and a sort
of participants. In a ﬁrst phase, the initiator requests agent’s
proposals by issuing a ”call for proposals”, where initiator
speciﬁes a task and conditions upon the execution of it.
Subsequently, participants reply with a refusal or a proposal.
Then, initiator selects the participants to perform the offered
task and rejects the remaining agents. The selected participants
acquire a commitment to perform the task. Once participants
complete the task, they reply result to the initiator, this message
can be a failure, task done or a result. ContractNet protocol
is shown in Figure 5 [10]. In our approach, the initiator is
an agent that previously have won a negotiation process in
a workspace domain, and the participants are the rest of the
agents in the system that are not performing any activity.
IV.
DISCUSSION
Section II described how different lighting systems treat the
coming energy problem of improper use of lighting resource,
guiding their behavior towards the preferences of users. Such
description denoted the structure, operation and the role of
agents in each of the systems. Section III described the
Initiator
Participant
cfp
m
i<=n
refuse
propose
j=n-i
reject-proposal
accept-proposal
k<=j
l=j-k
failure
inform-done : inform
inform-result : inform
n
dead-
line
Figure 5. FIPA-ContractNet-Protocol. Adaptation of image found in FIPA
Contract Net Interaction Protocol Speciﬁcation [10]
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-459-6
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

proposal of this research work in terms of the structure and the
interaction between components. Where the novel approach
is the representation of the physical world’s sensing and
modiﬁcation, by means of the environment. Also, it presents
the way in which the agent society manage the condition of
the system. By comparing the previous approaches, certain
patterns were identiﬁed with respect to their operation and
structure:
•
Every agent fulﬁlls, in a specialized manner, a speciﬁc
function of the system.
•
The communication that is established between agents
is performed in order to exchange information and/or
to assign tasks.
•
The decision-making in order to change the state of
the system is centralized.
•
The design of the systems is very speciﬁc to the
management of illumination.
•
A major emphasis exists for the satisfaction of the
preferences of the users, versus the decrease of elec-
tricity consumption.
The fact of splitting the functionality of the system into
pieces is naturally more like a distributed system, than a MAS.
As shown in Figure 6, an agent is abstractly modeled in two
internal subsystems: perception and action. Where perception
aims to provide the ability to observe its environment, and
action, represents the decision process [6]. For the sake of the
previous argument, the fact of to assign an speciﬁc task to an
agent limits the essence of its deﬁnition, so the agents have
speciﬁc capabilities, which cannot be to sense, decide and act,
but only one of them. The agents who manage the sensors
are just capable of perceiving a property of the environment,
and to communicate such property. The agents dedicated
to act, perceive and modify a property of the environment,
nevertheless, they are not capable of determining the action
that the actuator realizes. Finally, the decision-making agents,
establish the actions to execute to modify the environment but,
perceiving and acting are done by other agents.
AGENT
Perception
Action
ENVIRONMENT
Figure 6. Perception and action subsystems. Adapted from [6]
In a MAS, the social ability goes beyond the binary
exchange of information [6]. It involves the understanding and
reasoning on the goals of others. Also, the accomplishment
of actions to cooperate in order to reach own and other
goals. For this, the agents must be capable of negotiate and
cooperate. Nevertheless, in the discussed approaches this is not
the case, the interaction between agents is merely to exchange
perceptions and actions across a predeﬁned protocolm and with
a slightly clear sense of conscience of the goals of other agents.
Likewise, the execution of an algorithm must be a part of the
decision-making of the system, but not the whole process.
In a MAS, the action must be agreed between the agents
and established by means of a joint plan instead of the pure
implementation of an algorithm.
Morganti et al. [11] say that a HAS is the collection of
devices and appliances connected to a network, and its aim is
to manage the resources in a house. The design of the previous
approaches denote a high speciality in the management of
home illumination. The agents are dedicated to a speciﬁc task,
so these systems expose little or few scalability in terms of
different services. In other words, the management of other
types of resources would need the implementation of another
different system.
Most of the approaches are based on the preferences and
actions of the residents for the learning process of the agents,
relying that information coming from them is trustworthy. This
behavior may be not the best for decision-making process.For
example, the residents can change their preferences and actions
depending on emotional states, which not always complies
with energy saving, thus in consequence this may lead to
system’s “corruption.”
The architecture was designed to solve the issues stated
above. First, each type of agent in the system shares the
same capabilities for perception and action. Thus, every agent
perceives an abstraction of the physical world and performs
actions to modify it by means of the environment layer. Also,
the decision-making process is a worth-oriented negotiation
between agents in the society. So, social ability of the proﬁled
agents is observed when reaching-agreement and problem-
solving processes are done by agents interaction. Also, simple
negotiation for a joint plan demonstrates that agents believe
in other’s goals. Therefore, when a decision is made, the
agreement of a general task for system’s state improvement and
the distribution of the problem solving process are achieved by
cooperation.
On the other hand, the architecture was designed with
the aim of allowing scalability, regarding the structure of the
system. As other agent-based HLS, this proposal takes as a
principal goal the management of illumination of the house,
but unlike them, it has the ability to extend the number of
properties to sense. Thus, the three-stages structure of the en-
vironment allows the increase of the number of resources that
can be managed in the house. Which is done by the increase
on Services and Resources in the Server layer, and the variety
of devices controlled in the Control layer. Also, the agent’s
architecture must be modiﬁed just in the type of tendencies
(desires) and perceptions (beliefs). Finally, Negotiation and
ContractNet protocols would be kept in essence, they would
only change in the type of joint plans and their execution.
Another thing to note is that the agent society manages
illumination over two types of proﬁles. As explained before,
the energy saving is favored in a great manner. It is noteworthy
that agents are conscious of the preferences of the users and
direct their actions to fulﬁll them, to a certain extent. But, as
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-459-6
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

the appropriate administration of the energy is the main goal,
it has more importance on the proposal presented here.
Finally, some considerations must be taken when trying
to implement a HLS. For example, the electrical, electronic
and mechanical aspects of this type of systems inﬂuence
the compatibility with others that exist in a house. Leaving
aside the administrative aspect of the system, the selection
and placement of light sources and luminaries in a home
is an important issue when it comes to energy savings. A
large part of the electrical waste comes from an inadequate
placement of light sources. In many cases, with only replacing
the light sources with those that consume less energy and
taking advantage of the natural light resolves the excessive
use of electricity. Another thing to consider is the compatibility
between the rest of an existing HAS in the house, because there
are many communication protocols to interconnect devices,
which ones differ in the manner they perform connections.
Some examples include: X10 [7], ZigBee [8] and Z-Wave [9].
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper presents how agent-based HLS energy waste
is caused by inappropriate light management, by giving blind
conﬁdence over preferences of the user. Their design, strengths
and weaknesses were exposed. As said before, previous ap-
proaches take advantage of some properties of agent paradigm,
such as collaborative behavior and task distribution. How-
ever, not all agent’s characteristics have been fully applied.
The approach proposed in this paper attempts to implement
the correct agent’s society paradigm over HLS requeriments.
Therefore, it gives all importance to energy saving, without
neglecting on user preferences, which seems to be a difﬁcult
task.
As future work, two goals have been identiﬁed. In the short
term, the proposal will be implemented in collaboration with
the Department of Renewable Energies of the Autonomous
University of Guadalajara. The prototype will include the
deployment of the agent society, the abstraction of the physical
environment, and the electrical and mechanical aspects of a
HLS. This prototype will be subject to a set of use cases to
demonstrate its functionality, which will include scenarios to
observe its energy saving performance and its behavior towards
the user. A fact that it is expected to see, is that even when
the user preferences are not fulﬁlled, partially or completely,
He/She will appreciate an increasing performance in energy
saving. Finally in the medium term, the house resources that
the system can manage will be scaled with the purpose to
achieve a prototype of a HAS as a fully MAS, for the sake of
energy saving.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank to the National Council of
Science and Technology (CONACyT), for the scholarship No.
362650 given to Dami´an, in order to obtain Master’s degree.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. S. Sandhu, “Wireless sensor networks for commercial lighting con-
trol: Decision making with multi-agent systems,” in In AAAI Workshop
on Sensor Networks, 2004, pp. 131–140.
[2]
A.-D. Mady, M. Boubekeur, G. Provan, C. Ryan, and K. Brown,
“Intelligent hybrid control model for lighting systems using constraint-
based optimisation,” in Soft Computing Models in Industrial and Envi-
ronmental Applications, 5th International Workshop (SOCO 2010), ser.
Advances in Intelligent and Soft Computing, E. Corchado, P. Novais,
C. Analide, and J. Sedano, Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010,
vol. 73, pp. 249–259.
[3]
A. A. Bielskis, E. Guseinoviene, D. Dzemydiene, D. Drungilas,
and G. Gricius, “Ambient Lighting Controller Based on Reinforce-
ment Learning Components of Multi-Agents,” RESEARCH JOURNAL
ELEKTRONIKA IR ELEKTROTECHNIKA, vol. 121, 2012, pp. 79–
84, Print ISSN: 1392-1215, Online ISSN: 2029-5731.
[4]
W. Liangzhou, Y. Weihong, and H. Jony, “Multi-agent system with
information fusion for intelligent lighting control,” in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Automatic Control Theory and Application
(ACTA 2014).
Atlantis Press, May 2014, pp. 124–128, ISBN: 978-
94-6252-011-0, ISSN: 2352-5398, DOI: doi:10.2991/acta-14.2014.30.
[5]
A.
Paulauskaite-Taraseviciene,
N.
Morkevicius,
V.
Jukavicius,
L.
Kizauskiene,
and
E.
Kazanavicius,
“Agent-Based
System
Architecture for Intelligent Lighting Control Based on Resident’s
Behavior,” International Journal of Modeling and Optimization, vol. 5,
2015, pp. 48–54, ISSN: 2010-3697.
[6]
M. Wooldridge, Ed., An Introduction to MultiAgent Systems.
John
Wiley & Sons, May 2009, ISBN-10: 0470519460, ISBN-13: 978-
0470519462.
[7]
“X10 HOME GADGETS SINCE 1978,” 2015, URL: www.x10.com
[accessed: 2015-09-27].
[8]
“Z ZigBee Alliance,” 2015, URL: http://www.zigbee.org [accessed:
2015-09-27].
[9]
“Z WAVE,” 2015, URL: http://www.z-wave.com [accessed: 2015-09-
27].
[10]
“FOUNDATION FOR INTELLIGENT PHYSICAL AGENTS, “FIPA
Contract
Net
Interaction
Protocol
Speciﬁcation,”
2015,
URL:
http://www.ﬁpa.org/specs/ﬁpa00029/SC00029H.html [accessed: 2015-
11-26].
[11]
G. Morganti, A. M. Perdon, G. Conte, and D. Scaradozzi, Bio-
Inspired Systems: Computational and Ambient Intelligence: 10th In-
ternational Work-Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, IWANN
2009, Salamanca, Spain, June 10-12, 2009. Proceedings, Part I. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, ch. Multi-Agent System
Theory for Modelling a Home Automation System, pp. 585–593, ISBN:
978-3-642-02478-8, DOI: 978-0470519462,.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-459-6
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2016 : The Eighth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

