Underground Facility Monitoring Services for Detecting Road Subsidence
Kwangsoo Kim, Dong-Hwan Park, Jaeheum Lee, and Inwhan Lee
UGS Convergence Research Division
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 34129
Email: {enoch, dhpark, ljh, ihlee}@etri.re.kr
Abstract—This paper presents underground facility monitoring
services to detect road subsidence. Each service includes a wireless
sensor network, middleware, an analyzer, and a visualizer. The
network, equipped with many sensor nodes and an underground
safety-access point (UGS-AP), acquires sensing values on the
physical condition of underground facilities and transmits them.
The middleware manages, stores, and provides the values to the
analyzer and the visualizer. The analyzer evaluates the status
of the facilities by using the sensing values and generates a
subsidence risk index (SRI) in a certain area, which indicates
the risk level. The SRI is the result of the aggregation of the
statuses generated from all underground facilities included in
the area. Each SRI is classiﬁed in a category (low, medium, and
high risk level). The visualizer displays the SRI with geometric
objects and imagery data. This service will enhance the ability
to increase public safety by monitoring the underground space
and help explain the causes of the road subsidence by analyzing
the sensing values.
Keywords–Underground safety; Subsidence risk index; Under-
ground facility.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The industrial revolution brought about many changes in
the social life of people. One of the most important things
was an excessive population shift from rural to urban areas.
Rapid population movement changed a rural society where
most people lived on farms to an urban society where most
people lived in cities. According to a report published by the
Economist, about 64 % of the developing regions and 86 %
of the developed regions will be urban areas by 2050 [1].
Consequently, 66 % of the world’s population will dwell in
urbanized areas by 2050. The rapid growth of urban population
developed infrastructure to increase health and to support
a comfortable life for the city dwellers. The infrastructure
contained everything from water supply and sewer systems
to road, power, and rail networks. Many different types of
infrastructures were installed underground. Water pipes and
sewer pipes are primarily underground and out of sight.
There are several reasons that human beings use and develop
underground space.
•
The lack of surface place leads to use the underground
space.
•
Underground space is used not to spoil the aesthetic
feature of city.
•
Underground space is used to provide natural protec-
tion for whatever is placed in it.
•
Underground space is used to protect the surface
environment.
However, it is no doubt that the infrastructure of many
big cities around the world is aging and failing. The current
outdated and aging infrastructure is creating many problems.
Each year, many water pipes broke and sewer pipes cracked
in big cities. For example, water pipes of New York City
were constructed more than 100 years ago [2]. The aged
pipes resulted in frequent and disruptive breaks. Since 1998,
more than 400 water pipe breaks all over the city have hap-
pened every year. Also, road subsidence caused by the breaks
and cracks of underground infrastructures has emerged in
downtown areas in Korean cities. This situation is considered
as a very serious social problem because some people fell
into the holes created by the subsidence. According to a
report published by Seoul, road subsidence appeared in 3,328
locations from 2010 to 2014 [3]. Its occurrence trend is shown
in Figure 1. We can clearly see that road subsidence had
happened more than 400 times every year. Figure 2 shows the
heatmap that highlights the occurrence of the road subsidence
in a certain region. We can clearly see that road subsidence
occurs across Seoul. The heatmap is based on dividing the
entire area into 50m × 50m grids. The metric is the sum of the
number of road subsidence occurrences in each grid. The red
indicates that many road subsidence occurred in the grid. By
several investigation reports on the road subsidence, the road
subsidence in downtown areas is formed by empty space in the
underground. Breaks in water supply pipes, cracks in sewer
pipes, and poor backﬁlling are identiﬁed as the main causes
of the empty space. In addition, the subsidence appeared in
other cities such as Busan, Incheon, Daejeon, Gwangju, Jeonju,
Suwon, Suncheon, Yongin, Andong, etc.
Unfortunately, the failures of the underground infrastruc-
tures are not predictable as well as the failure detection is
very difﬁcult. There are several reasons that make the failure
detection difﬁcult.
Figure 1. Number of road subsidence by year in Seoul (Source: Seoul City).
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-528-9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

Figure 2. Road subsidence in Seoul shown as heatmap on Google map (Data
source: Seoul City).
•
The underground space and infrastructure in it are
invisible.
•
The failures suddenly happen without early warning
signs.
•
We do not even know where the infrastructure is below
ground.
•
It is not easy to explain what exactly leads to the
failures.
Although the road subsidence raises the public safety
concerns in Korea, investigators are struggling to ﬁnd out
the cause of the failures because there is no evidence to
explain the process of the failures. We have developed an
underground monitoring system to recognize when a risk
suddenly happens in the underground area and to provide
the evidence. To achieve this goal, this system collects and
monitors the state changes of various kinds of underground
facilities and utilities including water pipes, sewer pipes, metro
lines, metro stations, ground, and groundwater levels [3],
[4]. The monitoring system monitors the current state of the
underground infrastructure and also records the history of its
state change. The development of novel methods for non-
destructive evaluation of underground infrastructure is one of
the interesting research areas. Figure 3 shows the architecture
of the underground facility monitoring service which consists
of underground facilities, wireless networks, UGS-AP (Access
Point), UGS (Underground Safety) middleware, database, and
visualizer [3]. To acquire sensing data related to the state
changes, various types of sensing devices are attached to those
underground facilities and their sensing values are sent to the
visualizer through the UGS-AP and the UGS middleware. The
UGS-AP provides various communication methods including
Ethernet, long term evolution (LTE), and WiFi. The UGS
middleware is responsible for collecting, storing, and manag-
ing sensing data. The visualizer displays the sensing values,
sensor nodes, and appearances of all underground facilities.
This module uses GIS technology to similarly represent the
appearance of the individual facility based on the actual shape.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II
introduces wireless sensor networks that capture the states of
each facility and transmit them. Section III introduces the UGS
middleware that collects, stores, and manages sensed data and
GIS data. Section IV introduces the analyzer which evaluates
the status of each underground facility. Section V introduces
the visualizer which displays risk indexes, sensing data, and
geographic data. Finally, Section VI concludes this paper.
Figure 3. Architecture of underground facility monitoring service.
II.
WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORKS
A wireless sensor network (WSN) is used to collect the
state changes of underground infrastructures. The network
includes two kinds of devices: an UGS-AP and sensor nodes.
These devices communicate with each other wirelessly and
form a star topology to transfer data fast without collisions.
This data transmission scheme gives the network better per-
formance. An UGS-AP interconnecting a WSN and an IP-
based network includes various communication schemes such
as Ethernet, WiFi, and long term evolution (LTE). A sensor
node involves one or more sensors which collect the states of
underground utilities. Sensor nodes are attached to water pipes,
sewer pipes, and subway lines and installed in tube wells. Each
sensor node transmits its sensing values to the UGS-AP which
it connects to.
Underground facilities produce various types of sensing
values according to their properties. A sewer pipe produces
still images and videos which show its internal state like
a crack. Those values are captured by a sewer inspection
camera attached to a sewer robot. A water pipe produces leak
noise and motion changes such as pitch (lateral axis) and
roll (longitudinal). The noise and motion are captured by a
acoustic sensor and a gyroscope, respectively. A subway line
and station produce videos, still images, stress, acceleration,
and the amount of inﬂuent water. Videos and still images are
captured by a tunnel inspection camera. The acceleration and
stress are captured by a strain gage and an optical ﬁber-based
sensor. The amount of water is captured by a ﬂowmeter. A
tube well produces water level, water temperature, water con-
ductivity, water turbidity, soil temperature, soil conductivity,
and soil moisture. The water level is captured by a water level
sensor. The temperatures are captured by temperature sensors.
The conductivities are captured by conductivity sensors. The
moisture is captured by a moisture sensor. All sensors are
installed in one sensor node. Most of the sensing values are
sent to the database through the UGS middleware and the
WSN; however, still images and videos are uploaded into the
storage through the Internet.
III.
UGS MIDDLEWARE
UGS Middleware (UGS-M) is located between some ap-
plications including the visualizer and the UGS-AP which
receives sensing values from a large number of sensor nodes.
UGS-M plays a role in collecting data from the UGS-AP,
validating them, transmitting them to the applications, storing
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-528-9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

them to the database, providing access control to sensing de-
vices, and providing an abstraction on various speciﬁcations of
communication protocols and sensing devices. The abstraction
enables an application to reduce the heterogeneity of different
devices and to use them effortlessly. UGS-M provides two data
formats, binary and XML, to exchange data with the UGS-
AP. To achieve this goal, we classify the required functions of
UGS-M in six functional components. They are a communi-
cation manager, resource manager, monitoring manager, data
translator, sensing data manager, and a service interface [3].
UGS-M uses a RESTful interface as a service interface for
applications.
We use Kairos [5] as a data storage and manager. Kairos
is a spatial database management system (DBMS) which
manages geometry data types as well as typical data types
such as various numeric and character types at the same
time. As Kairos is a main memory based DBMS, it shows
high performance on spatial and typical query processing.
It provides the typical database functions such as storage
management, indexing, query processor, user management, etc.
It also provides GIS engine including spatial data types, spatial
operations,spatial indexing, spatial analysis, etc. Kairos stores
geometric objects such as water pipes and sewer pipes, their
attributes such as diameters and materials, and sensing values.
IV.
ANALYZER
An analyzer evaluates the status of the facilities by using
the sensing values and generates a SRI in a certain area,
which indicates the risk level. The SRI is the result of the
aggregation of the statuses generated from all underground
facilities included in the area. The SRI is represented as a
numerical value as well as graded in a category (low, medium,
high risk level). A lot of properties of each underground utility
are used to estimate its status value. We use four status values
generated from water pipes, sewer pipes, subway lines, and
ground, one value from one utility. The evaluation of the status
values related to underground utilities must be performed with
different methods, according to their properties.
V.
VISUALIZER
A visualizer is implemented as a client-server application
for a Web-based service. In this model, graphical user interface
(GUI), forms, and business logics are included in a client
application and GIS engine for 2D/3D objects, data query
and processing, and user management are included in a server
application. Figure 4 shows the data ﬂow in the visualization
service. The Web server is accessed with a Web browser on a
client and can be used by a lot of clients. The client application
is running on both a personal computer and a mobile device
based on Android. Each client requests 3D geometry objects,
their attributes, and sensing data to the Web server. The Web
server separates the requests into two groups. One is for a
3D geometry and its attribute; the other is for sensing data,
2D geometry, and its attribute. The former is processed in the
Web server; the later is sent to UGS-M.
A. Architecture of Visualizer
The visualizer is designed and implemented to provide a
Web-based service using Java technologies. Its architecture
is shown in Figure 5. This visualizer is implemented based
on e-government framework. The visualizer consists of the
Figure 4. Data ﬂow among components in visualizer.
Figure 5. Architecture of visualizer.
presentation, business, data, and base layer which has its own
functionality. Each layer is implemented by Java technologies
to ensure portability and ﬂexibility of the service.
1) e-Government Framework: The e-Government frame-
work provides a standard operating environment for developing
Java-based information systems. The Korean government has
developed this framework to increase the quality of gov-
ernmental services. As it also is open to the public sector,
the framework is widely used to increase the efﬁciency of
the development of information systems in the sector and to
shorten the development period. The framework has several
advantages such as reuse common features, increase interop-
erability, standardization, and openness. Its core technology is
the integration of Spring and iBatis. Spring is a framework
of various frameworks; iBatis provides automatic connectivity
between databases and Java objects. We used this framework
in the business layer and data layer to increase the efﬁciency
of the data connection and the data processing ﬂow.
2) Presentation Layer: The presentation layer displays
2D/3D geometry objects, their attributes, SRI values, and
sensing data. To display this data, this layer provides the GUI
of this application and involves a series of forms for client
interaction.
3) Business Layer: The business layer implements the
business logics and policies of this application. This layer rep-
resents the business rules that control the data ﬂow concerned
with the retrieval, processing, transformation, and management
of application data. This layer also ensures data consistency
and validity.
4) Data Layer: The data layer provides access to 3D
feature ﬁles and spatial databases. This layer consists of the
deﬁnitions of database schemata, tables, and columns. This
layer also includes the program logic which is needed to
navigate the database. This layer enforces rules regarding the
database and access of data. The Java Database Connectivity
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-528-9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

Figure 6. SRI grids.
(JDBC) is used as a data access object.
5) Base Layer: The base layer provides the runtime envi-
ronment to create this Web application. The Apache Tomcat
is used as a Web application server which exposes business
logic to client applications through HTTP.
B. Implementation Result
One of the most important objectives of the visualizer is to
show the subsidence risk index (SRI) which represents the risk
level of a certain region. The risk index is expressed with GIS
data and imagery data provided by Daejeon Metropolitan City
and V-World. Figure 6 shows the SRI grids in Seo-gu, Dajeon
City where our testbed is installed. We divide the monitoring
area into a lot of grid cells with 50m × 50m size. Each
grid cell is colored in red, yellow, and green which indicate
low, medium, and high risk, respectively. The SRI of a grid
cell represents the highest risk value among the statuses of
underground facilities in the grid. A risk values in Figure 6
is assigned to each grid cell by evaluating the state of each
underground facility. Figure 7 shows the SRI value and the
status values of a grid cell marked in red because the sewer
pipe has the red state. These state values are displayed to check
the cause of the risk level. The SRI value is rated from 0 to 1
and each status value is rated from 0 to Maximum. The SRI
value is calculated as SRI = MAX(Sw, Ss, Sm, Sg), where
Sw, Ss, Sm, and Sg indicate the status of water pipes, sewer
pipes, subway lines, and ground, respectively. The MAX
function can be replaced by another such as MIN or SUM.
Figure 8 shows the sewer pipes and their states in the grid cell.
This space includes the dangerous sewer pipes that are depicted
in red. The green object represents the subway station and
line. The visualizer handles both two-dimensional geographic
objects and three-dimensional objects.
VI.
CONCLUSION
As many big cities have experienced serious social prob-
lems such as road subsidence and sinkholes, the evaluation and
visualization of the underground facilities is very important to
recognize the risk which suddenly occurs underground. This
paper describes the characteristics of an underground facility
monitoring service to detect the road subsidence. To detect the
risk, this system attaches some sensor nodes to underground
facilities such as sewer pipes, water pipes, and subway lines.
It senses the states of facilities, collects the sensing values,
generates risk values based on the statuses of facilities, and
visualizes risk values and facilities represented by geographic
objects. The risk values are displayed in a SRI grid cell to
identify easily the risky areas.
Figure 7. A grid cell and its status values.
Figure 8. Representation of sewer pipes.
We are planning to design and develop several analysis
methods that evaluate the status of each facility and detect its
state changes from the sensing values. We will also work to
determine an optimal function and model to calculate the SRI
value from the statuses of underground facilities. Furthermore,
additional underground facilities and structures which affect
the road subsidence will be considered to improve the relia-
bility of the evaluation results. In addition, more research is
needed because the exact expectation of the road subsidence
is very difﬁcult.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Research Council
of Science & Technology (NST) grant by the Korea govern-
ment (MSIP) (No. CRC-14-02-ETRI).
REFERENCES
[1]
Economist, “Urban life: Open-air computers,” Special reports: Technol-
ogy and geography, 2012.
[2]
A. Forman, “Caution Ahead,” Report published by the Center for an
Urban Future, Mar. 2014.
[3]
K. Kim, D. H. Park, J. Lee, and S. I. Jin, “UGS Middleware for
Monitoring State of Underground Utilities,” in Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Information and Communications Technology
Convergence (ICTC) Oct. 28–30, 2015, Jeju, Rep. of Korea. The Korean
Institute of Communcations and Information Sciences, Oct. 2015, pp.
1186–1188.
[4]
K. Kim, D. H. Park, J. Lee, and I. Lee, “Underground Monitoring
Systems using 3D GIS for Public Safety,” in Proceedings of the Eighth
International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems,
Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing) Apr. 24–28, 2016, Venice,
Italy.
IARIA, Apr. 2016, pp. 24–28.
[5]
H. Han and S. I. Jin, “A main memory based spatial DBMS: kairos,” in
Proceedings of the 17th international conference on Database Systems for
Advanced Applications - Volume Part II (DASFAA) Apr. 15–18, 2012,
Busan, Rep. of Korea, Apr. 2016, pp. 15–18.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-528-9
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2017 : The Ninth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

