Service Quality Modeling 
 
Janusz H. Klink 
Telecommunications and Teleinformatics Department 
Wroclaw University of Science and Technology 
Wroclaw, Poland 
e-mail: janusz.klink @ pwr.edu. pl 
 
 
Abstract— The paper presents the selected issues of service 
quality modeling. The author presents a classification of the 
main phenomena connected with quality from both the 
provider’s and the user’s point of view. It is underlined that 
service quality will be one of the main issues of next generation 
networks, like 5G, where the user’s perspective will be of a 
great importance. The main contribution of the paper is the 
presentation of the method of building the Quality of 
Experience (QoE) models, based on two popular services, i.e., 
messaging and web browsing. The author emphasizes that 
some existing QoE models based on average values do not 
reflect users’ expectations and there is a need for building new, 
more sophisticated models, which take into account more 
parameters and also their transient behaviors. 
Keywords-Service quality; QoS; QoE; quality model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The rapid development of current Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT) applies not only to the 
improving of the telecommunication networks infrastructure, 
but also to the service provision process. 
For the last several years, service quality has become 
more and more important. 
The term ‘quality’, as defined in an International 
Standards Organization (ISO) document [1], means ‘the 
totality of characteristics of an entity that bear on its ability 
to satisfy stated and implied needs’. Based on this, the 
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) formulated 
the definition of Quality of Service (QoS), as ‘the collective 
effect of service performances that determine the degree of 
satisfaction of a user of the service’ [2]. 
For many years, a major effort was concentrated on 
ensuring a high level of network performance parameters. 
Thus, the operator was perceived as the main subject 
responsible for the quality of services provided to the users. 
Such an approach was often justified, because the network 
operator (NO) played the role of the service provider (SP), 
and was therefore the main actor in the service delivery 
chain. 
Nowadays, in most cases, these two roles are separated. 
Moreover, users connect to the services via networks, which 
are managed by many different NOs. 
Figure 1 presents different viewpoints on service quality, 
taking into account the relationships between the end-user 
(customer) and the service provider; it is based on a  
QoS 
requirements of 
the customer
QoS offered
by the provider
QoS achieved
by the provider
QoS perceived
by the user
USER
SERVICE
PROVIDER
 
Figure 1.  Different viewpoints of QoS [3]. 
QoS 
framework 
presented 
by 
ITU-T 
in 
G.1000 
Recommendation [3]. A very similar approach can be found 
in [4]. 
The upper part of the Figure 1 presents the user’s point of 
view on the QoS, while the bottom part shows the problem 
from the provider’s perspective. Every user has his own 
requirements concerning the specific service. These 
requirements are manifested to the provider and may be 
expressed in non-technical language. The customers are not 
usually familiar with the technical specifications of the 
service and they are not concerned with how the services are 
provided. Instead of the technical aspects of the design of the 
network, users are concerned with the final result, i.e., end-
to-end (e2e) service quality. Service quality, as seen by the 
user, focuses on user-perceived effects and does not take any 
assumptions about the internal design of the network or 
performance indicators. The user’s needs are described in 
network-independent terms using a common language, 
which is understandable by both the user and the service 
provider. The QoS offered by the SP is a statement of the 
level of quality that is expected to be offered to the customer 
[3]. It is expressed by the values assigned to QoS parameters. 
Each service should be described by its own set of 
parameters. The principal use of such a form of QoS is for 
network and Service Level Agreements (SLAs) planning. It 
is often defined in a statistical manner where the average, 
minimum and maximum values of the parameters play an 
important role. 
It is also very important for the service provider to 
achieve the same level of quality that was previously offered. 
Moreover, the most important is the QoS perceived by the 
users. The quality here is often expressed in terms of degrees 
of satisfaction, which are usually not technical terms. It is 
assessed by customer surveys and from their own comments 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

on levels of service. Perceived QoS can be used by the 
service provider to determine the customer satisfaction of 
service quality. A high level of the quality perceived by the 
user influences his expectations for the future. It usually 
causes an increase in user demands addressed to the SP. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
2, the author presents a more detailed classification of the 
service quality approaches and also the main objective and 
subjective factors which influence the quality experienced by 
users. Section 3, presents the main factors that really concern 
users in the scope of QoE. It shows which factors are the 
most important for the average user and they are then taken 
into account during the quality assessment. It gives 
information about the important parameters that should be 
primarily measured and controlled. Section 4, discusses the 
problem of building the QoE models and presents some 
results. At the end, in Section 5, the author summarizes the 
whole work and presents some challenging problems that 
should be solved in order to improve the service QoE 
modeling process. 
II. 
QUALITY 
In [5], a general model of the QoS was presented. The 
author distinguishes three dimensions of quality. The first 
one is called ‘Intrinsic QoS’, which relates to its technical 
characteristics and is determined by the design of the 
transport network design and the provisioning of network 
access, terminations and connections. The required quality 
can be achieved by, among others, the appropriate selection 
of transport protocols and QoS assurance mechanisms. The 
intrinsic QoS rating cannot be influenced by user perception. 
The second dimension of the quality is that of perceived 
QoS, which reflects the user’s (customer’s) experience of 
using a service. It is influenced by his expectations when 
compared 
to 
observed 
service 
performance. 
These 
expectations are usually affected by the user’s experience 
with a similar telecommunications service, and also other 
customers’ opinions. It can be seen that different users may 
have their own expectations of the service and the same 
intrinsic quality may not guarantee the same level of user 
satisfaction [6]. 
Figure 2 shows the general QoS model according to 
ITU/ETSI and IETF approaches [6]. 
 
QoS 
requirements of 
the customer
QoS offered
by the provider
General model
QoS perceived 
by the 
customer
QoS achieved
by the provider
Network performance (NP)
Assessed QoS
Perceived QoS
Intrinsic QoS
Quality of service
ITU/ETSI approach
IETF approach
 
Figure 2.  The general quality model - ITU-T/ETSI and IETF approaches. 
General Quality Model
Network performance (NP)
Assessed 
QoS
Perceived 
QoS
Intrinsic 
QoS
QoS 
requirements of 
the customer
QoS offered
by the provider
QoS perceived 
by the 
customer
QoS achieved
by the provider
Quality of Perception
(QoP)
Quality
of Service
(QoS)
Quality of Experience
(QoE)
 
Figure 3.  An amendment to the general quality model. 
The provider must also take into consideration 
nontechnical parameters that are meaningful to the users in 
order to ensure a high level of assessed QoS, which is 
exposed when a user decides whether to continue using a 
service [5]. Sometimes ‘intrinsic QoS’, according to the 
ETSI approach, is called QoS and instead of ‘perceived QoS’ 
the term ‘Quality of Perception’ (QoP) is used. The ‘assessed 
QoS’, in turn, evolves towards the so-called Quality of 
Experience (QoE) and may be treated as a resultant of all the 
technical and nontechnical parameters influencing the 
service quality experienced by the user (Figure 3). 
The approach presented in Figure 3, especially with 
regards to the intrinsic QoS, is not complete because it only 
shows 
the 
influence 
of 
transport 
factors 
(network 
performance) on the quality perceived by the end user. These 
factors are in the scope of the NO’s responsibility.  
The fact is that other factors also have an impact on QoP. 
These are service and application factors. The first one is in 
the scope of the SP’s liability, while the second one depends 
on the user’s equipment. Therefore, there is a need to 
strengthen efforts in all three of these areas, i.e., service 
provision, 
network 
performance 
and 
the 
end-user’s 
application capability, in order to achieve a warm 
appreciation of the service quality perceived by the users. 
As mentioned above (see Figure 3), the final user’s 
decision in terms of using a specific service in the future is 
QoE. The problem is, that end-users themselves are not 
really uniform with respect to their QoE requirements, which 
 
Quality of Experience
(QoE)
Human factors
Experience
Service billing
Emotions
Quality of Service
Service 
factors
Transport 
factors
Application 
factors
Objective
Subjective
 
Figure 4.  Quality of Experience components. 
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

may be affected by their prior knowledge and expectations, 
along with the current usage context. All these factors have a 
strong influence on their QoE needs [7]. Figure 4 presents 
key subjective (human) factors that, together with objective 
ones, form the whole picture of QoE. 
III. 
WHAT MATTERS IN QUALITY ASSESSMENT 
Service quality will become more and more important, 
not only for existing services, but also for new emerging 
technologies 
and 
services 
on 
the 
Information 
and 
Communications Technology (ICT) market. One of the most 
awaited solutions is a fifth-generation mobile network (5G), 
which is expected to be operational by 2020 [8]. It is 
assumed that it will integrate new applications and services 
as well as evolved versions of existing ones [9]. 
5G is a system both for things and for human-centric 
devices and services. It is envisioned as a system to serve 
both the user and society. What makes 5G different from 
previous generations of communication networks is that it 
will not be designed to offer fixed values of data rates 
anywhere, anytime and to anyone, but to perform more 
meaningful, flexible and personalized network management 
based on the understanding of the end-user’s and service’s 
needs [8]. Therefore defining the quality requirements for all 
users in terms of latency, data rate, coverage, reliability, 
security, etc. is important, however, more attention should be 
paid to individual user QoE. Thus, satisfying the users’ 
requirements implies the necessity to move from a system-
centric to a more user- (or human-) centric design. In order to 
do this we first have to understand what users really want. 
Future 5G networks will be characterized by high 
bandwidth with speeds in excess of 10 Gb/s, various 
mobility levels, and energy and cost-efficient solutions with 
the augmentation of the wireless world’s intelligence, but 
they should also meet the satisfaction of users. The main 
challenges for 5G technology are the greatly increased 
amount of data generated by evolved applications, a massive 
number of devices to connect to different radio-access 
technologies, and the need for high quality services [22]. The 
5G will be a heterogeneous network architecture consisting 
of a mixed use of infrastructure elements such as macro-
cells, 
micro-cells, 
and 
pico-femto-cells 
based 
on 
interworking different cellular and wireless local area 
network 
standards. 
Emerging 
monitor 
and 
control 
applications with very low wireless data rates combined with 
very low energy consumption and with ultra-low latency 
(<1 ms) are expected to be components of 5G systems. 
A new problem with QoE arises from the fact that 
different users, services and applications have different 
requirements [10]. Thus, customer personalization and 
services differentiation mechanisms should be implemented 
in emerging technologies (e.g., 5G) to ensure high level of 
QoE. 
As was mentioned in the previous section, QoE may be 
affected by a lot of factors. It is valuable to know which of 
them really concern users in terms of service quality. In a 
recent study [11], the most important were the following: 
reliability (47%), coverage (36%), data speed (9%) or other 
(5%). It means that users, first of all, care about reliability, 
i.e., consistency in their perceived experience. Consistency 
refers to the uninterrupted, seamless and nearly invariable 
excellent 
service quality. 
It 
spans 
across 
different 
dimensions, like time, space, network infrastructure, 
operator, service provider and end-user equipment (hardware 
and application software) [8]. 
The second important factor describing the quality 
experienced by users is coverage, i.e., availability of the 
service. Data speed is located in third place. A relatively low 
number of respondents mentioning it among meaningful 
parameters indicates that this factor is far less important than 
the previous ones. This is information for SPs and NOs on 
what kind of factors should be recognized as the Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs) that influence users’ QoE. As 
a consequence, these indicators should be first and foremost 
measured. 
IV. 
QOE MODELS - CASE STUDIES 
When it comes to a specific service, it is important to 
recognize what kind of KPIs really matter to the customers 
who use the service, and how these KPIs influence the 
service quality experienced by them. In other words, it is a 
problem of building proper QoE models for the individual 
services. Now, we are witnessing a rapid development of so-
called OTT services (Over-The-Top-service), in which 
customers use applications such as iMessage, WhatsApp, 
Facebook Messenger, SnapChat etc. and generate a high 
volume of data traffic where information should be delivered 
as quickly as possible. Moreover, these applications are not 
treated as uni- but as bidirectional means of communication 
(e.g., for chatting), where message delivery time plays a 
crucial role. One of the applications examined by the author 
was messaging service [12]. The tests were done in a 
laboratory network, where 40 selected users were sending 
and receiving messages (1200 in total) between each other. 
A special tool was used to control the network delay. The 
users were not informed about the delay set-up, but 
experienced the effects of these activities, i.e., they perceived 
the occurrence of service interactivity disturbances. After 
each session, the users were asked to assess the quality of the 
service based on their recent perception and to give a grade 
form 1 (the lowest) to 5 (the highest). Each e2e message 
delivery time was captured and stored in a database. Figure 5 
presents the relation between the message delivery time and 
the users’ grades, representing their QoE, in the MOS scale. 
The single dashed column represents the average value of the 
users’ grades of all the messages that were delivered in a 
specific time period. The whiskers represent a 95% level of 
confidence. Statistical analysis showed a significant (~80%) 
correlation  between message delivery times and the users’ 
evaluation grades. Next, regression analysis was performed 
and, using ordinary least squares (OLS) estimation, the 
approximate relation between message delivery time and the 
users’ grades (in the MOS scale) was determined as follows: 

MOS =  0.1 T + 4.9 
(1) 
where T  message delivery time. 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [s]
1
2
3
4
5
Mean Opinion Score
 
Figure 5.  Message delivery time vs. MOS for Messaging service. 
We made a validation of the model, using the Mann–
Whitney–Wilcoxon (MWW) test [13], which showed a good 
estimation of the users’ quality perception under the 
assumption of a 95% confidence interval (significance level 
p<0.05). 
Similar research on the QoE model was carried out by 
the author for the WWW service. In this case, delay also 
plays a crucial role in the service delivery process [14]. 
There were 70 users taking part in the test and more than 
1500 
test 
measurements 
were 
conducted. 
Network 
transmission delays were controlled by a special emulator in 
the laboratory test-bed, where group of testers tried to use the 
WWW service. Two static web pages were launched on the 
test server and the contents of these pages were different. 
One of them was prepared according to ETSI reference page 
requirements [15] while the second was a photo gallery. The 
time that elapsed between the initiation of the call-up and the 
actual appearance of the page on the screen was measured 
and stored into the database. End users appraised quality 
subjectively (QoE) and expressed their experience in the 
MOS scale. The results showed that people taking part in the 
evaluation test were quite critical with regards to the service 
under analysis. A rapid decrease in the quality was observed 
for the web page opening times covered in the first few 
seconds. The longer web opening times are, the lower the 
grade users give, and for longer delays, especially exceeding 
10 s, users’ grades tend to be lower but more stable.  
The obtained relation between objectively measured page 
response times and subjective users’ grades (in the MOS 
scale) is presented in Figure 6. Thorough analysis of the 
WWW service quality as a function of the page opening time 
(for longer times) indicates logarithmic relationship between 
these values, as follows: 

MOS =  2.6 log10T + 4.8 
(2) 
where T  web page opening time. 
 
The models presented by (1) and (2) are valid for the 
emulated times between 1 s and 30 s. 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Time [s]
1
2
3
4
5
Mean Opinion Score
 
Figure 6.  Page response time vs. MOS for WWW. 
For the times shorter than 1 s, the MOS value is 5. The 
author did not take into account the times longer than 30 s. 
These values were unacceptable for both the interactive 
messaging communication and WWW service. 
The logarithmic line in Figure 6 represents the MOS 
value as a function of web opening times with 80 % 
correlation. 
Statistical analysis proved that the model fits the data 
very well, with coefficient of determination (R2) above 0,9. 
It means that obtained outcomes are replicated by the model 
at a level of at least 90%. Confirmation of such user quality 
of experience distribution can be found in the analysis results 
presented by ITU-T in Rec. G.1030 [14].  
Based on these two examples, it cannot only be seen that 
objective parameters describing the quality of service are 
important, but subjective as well. It concerns all services 
offered by SPs. Moreover, taking into account the users’ 
perspective during the quality assessment process is also 
valuable from a business point of view. For example, for 
customers who want to watch a You Tube video, information 
regarding the number of stallings will be more important 
than, among others, the downlink data rate and latency. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Many scientific papers show the relationship between 
QoS and QoE using metrics based on the average values of 
measured parameters (e.g., mean throughput, mean Round-
Trip Time, etc.). It makes QoE models easier to define and 
understand. However, such an approach has some 
limitations, because it assumes that QoE is determined by the 
averaged stimulus.  
More detailed analysis shows that transient behavior has 
a more significant influence on a user’s perception than 
average values [16][17][18][19][20]. This conclusion was 
derived from the results of research on the quality of the 
WWW service, where the authors examined the influence of 
network bandwidth on the quality perceived by users during 
a Web browsing session [17]. 
Two scenarios were analysed: first - with a constant, and 
second - with a variable bandwidth. The average bandwidth 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

in the second scenario had the same value as the constant 
bandwidth of the previous one (i.e., 2 Mbps). In spite of this, 
a significant difference in the quality experienced by the 
users was noted. 
The QoE value, expressed in a the MOS scale, in the first 
case was around 4, while in the second case it dropped to 3. 
The characteristics of network performance, presented in 
some papers, indicates that taking into account the variability 
of transmission parameters, e.g., duration and intensity of 
throughput drops, leads to better QoE prediction than models 
based only on average throughput [21]. Another problem is 
how to identify a proper set of KPIs, which in turn should be 
measured and controlled in order to derive more precise QoE 
models. Currently, many of these models take into account 
the small number of parameters that influence the quality of 
services. Further work will be devoted to broadening the list 
of parameters that may influence the experience of users, 
which will help us to build more precise QoE models. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author would like to thank Pawel Bardowski for his 
contribution to the test-bed set-up and to Zbigniew 
Sałamacha for his help during the editorial process. 
REFERENCES 
[1] ISO. ISO 8402: Quality Management and Quality Assurance 
– Vocabulary, 1994. 
[2] ITU-T. Rec. E.800: Quality of telecommunication services: 
concepts, models, objectives and dependability planning – 
Terms 
and 
definitions 
related 
to 
the 
quality 
of 
telecommunication services. Definitions of terms related to 
quality of service, Geneva/Switzerland, 09/2008. [Online]. 
Available from: 
http://www.itu.int/itu-t/recommendations/rec.aspx?rec=9524, 
[retrieved: 12, 2017]. 
[3] ITU-T. Rec. G.1000: Quality of service and performance. 
Communications quality of service: A framework and 
definitions, 
Geneva/Switzerland 
11/2001. 
[Online]. 
Available from: 
http://www.itu.int/itu-t/recommendations/rec.aspx?rec=5597, 
[retrieved: 12, 2017]. 
[4] ETSI. ETR003: Network Aspects. General aspects of Quality 
of Service (QoS) and Network Performance (NP), 1994. 
[Online]. Available from: www.etsi.org, [retrieved: 12, 2017]. 
[5] W. C. Hardy, QoS Measurement and Evaluation of 
Telecommunications Quality of Service, Wiley, 2001. 
[6] J. Gozdecki, A. Jajszczyk, and Rafał Stankiewicz, “Quality of 
Service Terminology in IP Networks,” IEEE Communications 
Magazine, March 2003, pp. 153-159. 
[7] A. Sackl and R. Schatz, “Evaluating the impact of 
expectations on end-user quality perception,” in Proceedings 
of International Workshop Perceptual Quality of Systems 
(PQS), pp. 122–128, Vienna, Sep. 2013. 
[8] E. Liotou, et al., “Shaping QoE in the 5G Ecosystem,” 2015 
Seventh International Workshop on Quality of Multimedia 
Experience (QoMEX), Greece, 2015, pp. 1-6. DOI: 
10.1109/QoMEX.2015.7148089. 
[9] J. Monserrat, et al., “Metis research advances towards the 5G 
mobile and wireless system definition,” EURASIP Journal on 
Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 2015, no. 1, 
p. 53, Mar. 2015. 
[10] R. Schatz, T. Hoßfeld, L. Janowski, and S. Egger, “From 
packets to people: Quality of Experience as a new 
measurement challenge,” in Data Traffic Monitoring and 
Analysis, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, vol. 7754, pp. 219–263, 2013. 
[11] Enders Analysis/TNS RI-Survey, May 2014. 
[12] J. Klink and P. Bardowski, “Subjective quality measurements 
of SMS”, in 22nd International Conference on Software 
Telecommunications & Computer Networks SoftCOM 2014, 
pp. 1-6, Split, Croatia, September 2014. 
[13] M. P. Fay and M. A. Proschan, "Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney or 
t-test? On assumptions for hypothesis tests and multiple 
interpretations of decision rules," Statistics Surveys 4: pp. 1–
39, 2010. DOI:10.1214/09-SS051. 
[14] ITU-T. G.1030: Quality of service and performance – 
Generic and user-related Aspects. Estimating end-to-end 
performance 
in 
IP 
networks 
for 
data 
applications, 
Geneva/Switzerland, 11/2005. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.itu.int/itu-
t/recommendations/rec.aspx?rec=12122, [retrieved: 12, 2017]. 
[15] ETSI. ETSI reference page requirements. [Online]. Available: 
http 
://docbox.etsi.org/STQ/Open/Kepler, 
[retrieved: 
12, 
2017]. 
[16] A. Sackl, S. Egger, and R. Schatz, “The influence of network 
quality fluctuations on web QoE”, in International Workshop 
on Quality of Multimedia Experience (IEEE QoMEX), 
Singapore, Sept. 2014, pp. 123-128. 
[17] P. Casas, et al., “On the quest for new KPIs in mobile 
networks: The impact of throughput-fluctuations on QoE,” in 
IEEE ICC 2015 - Workshop on Quality of Experience-based 
Management for Future Internet Applications and Services 
(QoE-FI), London, June 2015, pp. 1705-1710. 
[18] K. Lee, J. Park, S. Lee, and A. Bovik, “Temporal Pooling of 
Video Quality Estimates using Perceptual Motion Models,” in 
IEEE ICIP, 2010, pp. 2493-2496. 
[19] B. Lewcio, B. Belmudez, A. Mehmood, M. Wältermann, and 
S. Möller, “Video Quality in Next Generation Mobile 
Networks – Perception of Time-Varying Transmission,” in 
IEEE CQR, 2011, pp. 1-6. 
[20] M. Seufert, M. Slanina, S. Egger, and M. Kottkamp, “To Pool 
or not to Pool: A Comparison of Temporal Pooling Methods 
for HTTP Adaptive Video Streaming,” in QoMEX, 2013, pp. 
52-57. 
[21] A. Sackl, P. Casas, R. Schatz, L. Janowski, and R Irmer, 
“Quantifying the impact of network bandwidth fluctuations 
and outages on web QoE,” in International Workshop on 
Quality of Multimedia Experience (IEEE QoMEX), Greece, 
May 2015, pp. 1-6. 
[22] L. Pierucci, “The Quality of Experience Perspective Toward 
5G Technology,” IEEE Wireless Communications, August 
2015, pp. 10-16. 
 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-606-4
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Service Computing

