An Ontology for User Proﬁle Modelling in the Field of Ambient Assisted Living
Carina Fredrich, Hendrik Kuijs, Christoph Reich
Faculty of Computer Science
Furtwangen University of Applied Science
Furtwangen, Germany
Email: {Carina.Fredrich, Hendrik.Kuijs, Christoph.Reich}@hs-furtwangen.de
Abstract—The lack of social integration of elderly people, es-
pecially with impairments like restricted mobility, is a huge
problem. Often, these people become isolated and social contacts
become impoverished. Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) IT systems
should support elderly people to stay in contact with their social
environment and should be adaptable exactly to their personal
needs. In this paper, we present a platform offering assistance in
communication, information acquisition and learning for elderly
people to allow them to stay longer at their own familiar homes.
The services of this platform are context aware and personal-
izable. Many AAL systems are context aware, but often focus
on the environmental context and not on the users themselves
and their personal characteristics, like health condition, interests,
needs, etc. In this work, the context is modelled as an ontology,
where the user is the central concept of the platform, in order
to realize personalization of services and a better assistance
by the system. The ontology developed by the project Person
Centered Environment for Information, Communication and
Learning (PCEICL) offers a historical view of the user’s changing
characteristics and environment, is simply expandable and is used
within the platform by software agents to communicate between
single services to adapt to the users needs.
Keywords–Ontology, Context, User Centric Ontology, AAL,
PaaS, OSGi, JADE, software agents
I.
INTRODUCTION
Many solutions in the ﬁeld of Ambient Assisted Living
(AAL) solve problems of home automation, freedom of bar-
riers and emergency diagnosis, as stated in [1], [2] or [3],
to allow elderly people to stay longer at home. But when
they need, for example, every day assistance, when they are
suddenly mobility-disabled, there is the problem of social
contact depletion. Especially in rural regions, it is not that
simple for older people to keep up their social contacts if
they are physically limited. Ordinary things like meetings
with friends, family members, or club members or going
shopping aren’t possible any more. This leads to loneliness,
isolation and often mental health problems. To counteract this,
personalizable systems, which help them stay informed or
assist them in their communication, are needed, especially
if they are adaptable to the needs of the elderly people, as
discussed by S. Lauriks et. al. [4].
For the personalization of a system and its services, it is
necessary to integrate context awareness. The system must
have knowledge about the user’s interests, preferences, im-
pairments, capabilities, etc. Most of the actual AAL systems
consider only the user’s environment (e.g., temperature, loca-
tion, smoke, etc.), but do not see the user as a central element.
A step towards this, the person’s needs are taken into account
and bear in mind the environmental information of the user to
get a personalizable AAL platform.
The research project Person Centered Environment for
Information, Communication and Learning (PCEICL) targets
the development of an age-appropriate platform, which as-
sists the users in their daily tasks of information acquisition,
communication and learning in order to live at home as long
as possible and at the same time stay socially integrated.
Because of the impairments emerging in advanced age, it is
absolutely necessary to adapt the user interface but also the
service functionality to the needs of each single user. The per-
sonalization is important because of the different combinations
of impairments and capabilities. The PCEICL platform offers
personalized services, which use context information about the
user and the environment to adapt according to the needs of
the user.
In this paper, context is used as deﬁned in A. Dey and G.
Abowd in [5]:
Context is any information that can be used to
characterize the situation of an entity. An entity is
a person, place, or object that is considered relevant
to the interaction between a user and an application,
including the user and applications themselves.
There are other deﬁnitions only considering the environment
of the user, e.g., the location, other people and resources
nearby like Schilit et al. in [6]. But for reaching personalized
assistance, it is essential to centralize the user’s needs and
include the actual user’s environment. Because A. Dey and
G. Abowd determine context as both, i.e., the user and his
environment, the deﬁnition above is chosen as a basis for this
paper.
Section II presents related work showing the different
notions of context and context awareness. The use cases of the
AAL platform described in Section IV, are shown in Section
III. The platform for personalized services uses an ontology
for context modelling (see Section V), which is demonstrated
in action in Section VI. In Section VIII, conclusions are drawn
and future work is shown.
II.
RELATED WORK
Due to the relevance of the AAL topic, there are many
projects, which develop assistance systems for elderly people
helping them to stay longer at home. Most of them use
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

some kind of context information to make their systems more
intelligent and adaptable. Often in these projects, context is
used to deﬁne the environment of the user and not the user
himself. This is because the majority of the projects develop
home automation systems or emergency detection systems.
But only a few aim to offer an assistance in staying socially
integrated.
The SOPRANO (Service Oriented PRogrammable smArt
enviroNments for Older Europeans) project [1], for example,
developed an open middleware for AAL solutions. The SO-
PRANO Ambient Middleware (SAM) receives user commands
or sensor data, enriches them semantically and determines an
adequate system response, which is then performed by the
connected actors installed in the living environment. If, for
example, SAM receives the information that a window is open,
it analyses the remaining context information and can inform
the user about the open window, before he is leaving the house.
The components communicate over semantic contracts and
are based on a common domain ontology. This ontology is
designed state-driven, that means that every concept (device,
person, location, etc.) of the ontology is represented by its
actual state. The PCEICL platform, on the other hand, focuses
on the user. The most important is to describe the user, since
for information retrieval the user’s condition is essential. So it
is not useful to apply the SOPRANO ontology, which focuses
on the sensors and actors, i.e., the environment of the user.
Another example considering the environment of the user
is PersonisAD presented by M. Assad et al. in [7]. Some
information about the user like his preferences are also part
of the consideration of the PersonisAD framework, but aren’t
detailed enough to reach a good personalization for older
people, like the PCEICL ontology.
The UNIVERsal open platform and reference Speciﬁcation
for Ambient Assisted Living) (universAAL) project [8] aims
to join different approaches from lots of projects to a unique
AAL solution. One of this included projects is SOPRANO [1].
The goal of universAAL is a platform, that makes it viable to
develop AAL services. For this, there will be developer tools, a
store for distributing AAL services and a runtime environment.
So all of the stakeholders will be supported. The universAAL
platform is based on OSGi [9] and ontologies are used as
a common language for the components, too. Because of its
goal to create a standardized AAL solution, it is possible that
the universAAL platform and its ontologies will be building a
solid base for future work in the PCEICL project. But, at the
moment, the universAAL project is still in progress.
MobileSage aims to develop a smart phone based help-
on-demand service [10][11]. It means that the smart phone
offers context aware, personalized and location aware services
supporting the independence of elderly people. Such services
could support the navigation, the handling of devices like ticket
vending machines or household appliances or other daily tasks.
The personalization and context awareness is realized by an
ontology, which considers not only the environment of the user
but also the user and his characteristics. It is one of the few
ontologies in the ﬁeld of AAL, which models a user proﬁle
and the environment of the user. The central concept of the
ontology is the user, who is described by his proﬁle. The
user proﬁle therefore is divided in subproﬁles like a preference
proﬁle, a health proﬁle or an interest proﬁle. But for the help-
on-demand services the focus is still on the environment of the
user to offer, for example, services depending on the location
of the user. The PCEICL project places greater emphasis on
the user, who has to stay at home and isn’t mobile any more.
For this, the user must be described more in detail in his health
condition to provide him optimal assistance with the daily
tasks. Overall, both ontologies describe a user proﬁle and so
there are many similar concepts but PCEICL concentrates on
information retrieval, communication and learning.
Another ontology that models a user proﬁle for ambient
assisted living services is AALUMO, which is presented by P.A.
Moreno, M.E. Hernando and E.J. Gómez in [12]. AALUMO
extends the General User Model Ontology (GUMO), which
is an ontology for general use in many domains and scopes.
So it is not adapted to the special characteristics of elderly
users. GUMO is shown by D. Heckmann et al. in [13] and
describes the user in detail from the heart beat or the emotional
state to the interests or the personal information. AALUMO
added concepts like chronic diseases, which is a composition
of GUMO concepts (disease, physical and psychological limi-
tations, medication, etc.) for better adaptation to the properties
of the elderly users. In the PCEICL ontology, only the infor-
mation that is really necessary to customize the services in
an optimal way will be saved. Additional information about
the user, which is not yet covered by the ontology but will be
required in the future, could be added easily.
There is also a user proﬁle ontology presented by M.
Sutterer in [14], but it is not adapted to the special needs
of elderly people. The personalization of service is situation-
dependent and therefore the user needs to indicate special
preferences for each situation, which are considered when the
situation occurs. It is assumed that this is hard to be realized
by elderly people and is therefore not the aim of the PCEICL
project.
To summarize, the PCEICL ontology is based on concepts
of the ontology of MobileSage and there will be future devel-
opments based on the results of universAAL.
III.
USE CASE
In this section, the use cases are described to show the
usage of the context aware PCEICL platform and show the
usefulness of the PCEICL ontology in the evaluation section
(see Section VI). First, a brief description of the user is given
showing his current situation.
User description: Mr. F. is a 73 years old widower, has
two children and lives alone on a big farm outside a small
rural town. One of his children lives abroad, the other in a
city far away, so they rarely can visit their father. Mr. F. is a
member of a model railway club in the city about 30 km away.
Once a week, he used to attend the club meetings. Recently, he
broke his leg after he slipped on an icy surface and therefore
has mobility limitations and cannot leave the house very often.
His children are worried, because his friends and also his club
mates from the model railway club don’t have much time to
visit Mr. F. personally.
To support Mr. F. in his daily tasks, the PCEICL platform
assists him in communication, information acquisition and
learning. With this platform, he is able to stay socially inte-
grated. Especially his children can feel more comfortable, by
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

contacting him more easily during this convalescence period.
Next, the use cases for each of the three main support areas
are described.
A. Use Case (Communication Assistance)
Each contact in Mr. F.’s address list has speciﬁed several
communication channels, like telephone, email, video chat,
SMS, etc. Additionally, each contact has deﬁned information
about the availability of the different communication channels
based on the contact person’s daily habits or appointments. It
is assumed that there is always at least one communication
channel, where the contact can be reached in an urgent
situation. Suppose Mr. F. wants to communicate with one of
his children. All he has to do, is to select the name of his
children from his address list. After this, the PCEICL platform
automatically selects the communication channel based on
the aforementioned schedule and preferred communication
channel (e.g., SMS because his son is busy).
B. Use Case (Information Acquisition Assistance)
Another application on the platform helps Mr. F. ﬁnd
assistance from other people in the countryside. Although he
stopped active farming, there are many things to be done on his
farm. He has to feed his hare, do lawn mowing, do shopping,
repair things once in a while, clean the house, etc. All this is
very difﬁcult or impossible for a mobile restricted person. If
he needs help, he should be supported by a PCEICL service.
Because the platform knows the user’s health condition, it
offers an “search-and-offer” service automatically. This could
be used to search assistance in the aforementioned daily or
weekly tasks, but also for special occasions. For instance, if
there is a social meeting with the model railway club, he
would like to participate in, the system will automatically
help him to get a lift or special transportation. If his health
condition gets worse and he cannot attend the meeting, the
lift will be canceled by the system. Because the system also
knows about the environment, e.g., the weather condition, it
can automatically organize help, for example, to clear the
snow.
C. Use Case (Learning Assistance)
Every day Mr. F. uses the PCEICL platform’s ﬁtness
service. The ﬁtness service guides Mr. F. through his every-
day exercises like arm circles, arm curls or leg straightening.
Because of the new change in health condition the service
automatically skips exercises which are not suitable for a
broken leg and adds some arm movement exercises to reach the
same ﬁtness level. As he recovers slowly from his leg fracture,
the system can include speciﬁc exercises for his legs to restore
his mobility.
The use cases described above are basis for the evaluation
section (see Section VI) to show the beneﬁts of the newly
developed PCEICL platform and ontology.
IV.
THE PCEICL PLATFORM
Figure 1 shows the PCEICL platform realized as an OSGi
Platform as a Service (OSGi-PaaS) inside a cloud infrastruc-
ture to beneﬁt of the PaaS scalability and the simple exten-
sibility through the OSGi bundle mechanism. The scalability
Figure 1: The PCEICL platform
is needed for CPU intensive functionalities, like image and
speech recognition. More and more OSGi bundles in the ﬁeld
of home automation and health care are appearing and can
be easily integrated [15]. A speciﬁc OSGi bundle of the
PCEICL platform is a software agent OSGi bundle, which
facilitates the development of intelligent behavior and realizes
standardized communication between agents by using Agent
Communication Language (ACL) [16]. ACL deﬁnes the use of
ontologies, which we realized with the PCEICL ontology (as
shown in Figure 1). For the software agents, the Java Agent
DEvelopment Framework (JADE) [17] has been chosen. JADE
is widely used and already provided as an OSGi bundle, which
makes an integration of the agents in the OSGi environment
straightforward.
Agents are well known, when developing intelligent sys-
tems, for their support for standard communication between
them, and for helping the integration of external services. Ex-
ternal services could be existing services like nursing services,
communication services to contact a doctor, weather services,
etc. For example, the user personalized platform could use
the user information to exchange data between the PCEICL
platform and the nursing service’s system to indicate the
necessity of a visit to the elderly person.
The distribution, installation and deployment of the PCE-
ICL services is realized by an OSGi bundle store (PCEICL
Store, see Figure 1) equivalent to modern app stores for smart
phones or operating systems. These services can be selected
by the elderly users, by a personal assistant, by a relative or by
the system itself, to automatically update services or suggest
new services to be installed to satisfy the needs (interests,
impairments, etc.) of the user.
The proﬁle and environment of the user is modelled by the
PCEICL ontology. This ontology includes all the information
about the person and its personal relevant environment to
adapt the PCEICL services and applications (e.g., impairments,
interests, hobbies, etc.). The stored proﬁle of the user is
managed by the PCEICL platform in the form of a Context
Management Agent (see Figure 1), deciding which service
is getting what kind of information about the user. Because
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

of the privacy data minimization principle, not every service
should get all information. For example, the communication
service providing audio and video telephone calls should not
get information about the health condition of the user. It
gets access to information about the volume, the contacts and
possible colours or font sizes for the user interface.
The needs, interests, health condition, etc. are gathered in
several ways. On the one hand, there is a manual acquisition
of user data during the initialization of the system by the
user or a personal assistant and on the other hand there is
a continuous analysis of context data through, e.g., sensors
resulting in the adaption of user and environment data. The
environment context is managed by the Context Management
Agent.
In Figure 1, there are special agent OSGi bundles for the
three support areas of the PCEICL platform: communication,
information and learning. These agents realize an assistance
of the user with the context information given by the context
management agent.
V.
THE PCEICL CONTEXT ONTOLOGY
For an optimal personalization of the PCEICL system, the
user context must be modelled, a semantically underpinned
agent communication is needed, the information should be
semantically connected to each other and there should be
rules describing the usage of the single information. As a
result, the context information and the ACL ontology part is
modelled in the form of the PCEICL ontology, which enables
the description of information relationships and the deduction
of new data out of existing information. For example, if the
system knows about the health condition of a user, capabilities
and impairments could be deduced from it. This ontology is
used in the Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents-Agent
Communication Languages (FIPA-ACL) [18] and is managed
by the context manager agent of the PCEICL platform.
The procedure of the ontology design for the PCEICL plat-
form is based on the approach of N. Noy und D. McGuinness
[19]. The ontology is developed iteratively and, for this reason,
there will be adjustments of the ontology in the whole lifecycle
of the PCEICL project. Automatic updates of the concepts or
just the individual elements of the ontology must be possible.
The PCEICL ontology is the base for saving and interpret-
ing context information. It speciﬁes the way of describing the
user, his properties and his environment for all components
of the PCEICL platform, particularly for the personalized
services. The ontology describes primarily the user and his
properties but additionally the user’s environment like weather,
time, date, devices/sensors, etc. Figure 2 shows an overview of
the basic concepts of the ontology. A more detailed description
can be found in [20].
In addition to the mandatory user data, like the personal
information (name, address, date of birth, contact information,
etc.), there are some more speciﬁc and more complex concepts,
like the interests, preferences, capabilities, or the health con-
dition. Many of the ontology classes are ﬁxed deﬁned classes,
deﬁning the properties an individual of this class must have.
This leads to a better consistency of data.
Figure 2: Overview of the basic concepts of the PCEICL ontology
The central role of the user is reﬂected in the class User,
as shown in Figure 2. It is connected via properties to almost
every other main class of the ontology. The User class is
derived from the deﬁned class Person, shown in Figure 3. For
all instances of this class it is necessary to have exactly one
id and exactly one personal information. So, every person is
deﬁned uniquely in the system.
Figure 3: Class Person
For the PCEICL communication services of the platform,
it is necessary to have a contact list. Every Person in this list
is represented by an instance of the class Contact, which is
also derived from class Person. Additionally to an ID and
the personal information, there is a categorization of each
contact to give the system knowledge about the relationship
of the contact to the user. So, the system could distinguish
between family members and, for example, doctors. For each
contact, photos could also be saved. The information about
the communication channels of the persons are saved in the
concept PersonalInformation.
The class Education contains only information about the
user’s academic status, e.g., foreign languages the user speaks.
This class can also be used to save data about learning
progresses of the user. More information about the education
of the user is at the moment not relevant for the platform and
therefore, this information should not be saved. If it will be
relevant in future to save more information, the ontology could
easily be extended by other attributes.
The interests are represented by the class Interest. To
differentiate between interests, like sports watching on TV
and actively exercised interests, like actively playing a sport,
the class Activity is also part of the ontology. Figure 4 shows
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

the concept of the class Interest, which is almost the same
as for the class Activity. In addition to the name and the
type of the interest or activity, it is possible to store more
speciﬁc information, like pictures, websites, or descriptions
(class AdditionalInformation). The class Interest should also
have a property hasLevel, which describes how much the user
is interested in something.
Figure 4: Class Interest
In the class Preference, distinction is made between Per-
sonal Preference, which is structured like the class Interest and
System Preference. Personal preferences could be, for example,
the favorite color or the taste of music. In the class System
Preference settings of services or the platform itself could be
saved. This settings could be derived from other information.
For example, there could be a user who cannot differentiate
between red and green. As a result, the system should not use
red and green for the user interface. In such cases, the system
should automatically derive the system preferences from the
health condition or other information, which are given about
the user. In the system preferences, account information is also
stored, which can be username and password, a certiﬁcate, etc.
The class Capability is divided into CognitiveCapability
and PhysicalCapability and is also structured like the class
Interest. The capabilities and limitations stored in this class
should also be derived from the health information of the user.
Figure 5: Class HealthCondition
The most important information is the health condition
of the user. A lot of other information could be generated
knowing about the impairments of the user. Therefore, a class
HealthCondition exists, which is presented in Figure 5. Every
single instance describes the impairments and diseases of the
user. So, information can be saved about the medication of
the disease or the physician treating the disease, who is saved
as a contact in the list. Each impairment or disease can be
rated by the property hasLevel by saving information such as
the dioptre numbers or the status of disease. For the correct
medical description of the disease, you can save an ICD-Code
for each instance of the class HealthCondition. ICD means
International Statistical Classiﬁcation of Diseases and Related
Health Problems Code [21] and is a worldwide used coding of
diagnoses. So, a uniform and correct description of the health
condition of the assisted person can be reached.
Figure 6: Class History
The PCEICL ontology also offers a concept to consider
the context historically. So, you can observe the changes of
the learning behaviour or of the capabilities and impairments,
for example. Therefore, a class History is designed taking an
expired instance of one of the classes shown in Figure 6 and
combining it with an actual timestamp. For example, if the user
has a cold, this information will be saved as HealthCondition
instance. If the cold is overcome, the instance will be combined
with a timestamp and will be saved as a history object.
A. PCEICL Ontology Example
Figure 7 shows an example of the user proﬁle information
covered by the concepts of the ontology. It represents the user
proﬁle of Mr. F., who has been introduced in the use cases of
Section III.
VI.
PCEICL ONTOLOGY IN USE
In this section, the introduced use cases of Section III
are called into play to show the platform services using the
concepts of the ontology. The development of some parts of
the PCEICL platform is still in progress. When the prototyping
phase is completed, there will be a socio-scientiﬁc accompa-
nying evaluation of the services by a group of persons aged
60 and older.
A. Use Case (Communication Assistance):
The communication app itself is just a simple client ser-
vice getting only the information needed to interact with the
user. Therefore, the main context information is about the
contacts saved as individuals of the class Contact. For the
communication app, information about the system preferences
of the user are used to adapt the GUI. Most of the settings
can automatically be derived from the health condition of the
user (ontology class: HealthCondition). For example, if the
user has a red-green colour blindness, these colours should
be excluded from possible system settings or if the user has
a hearing deﬁciency, the volume should not be set under a
minimum level. These pieces of information could be saved
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

Figure 7: PCEICL ontology example
in the class SystemPreferences. Other information must be
collected manually, like information about existing accounts.
For the organization of club meetings, information about
the other club members is needed. This is also realized by
the Contact class, which offers the possibility to order the
contacts in a category club members, so the app can show
only the relevant club persons. When the elderly person wants
to organize a meeting at his home or when the system searches
for a ride to an external meeting or event, this grouping
functionality gives great support.
B. Use Case (Information Acquisition Assistance):
For the application which assists the user in organizing
information acquisition, primarily knowledge about the health
condition (ontology class: HealthCondition) and environment
(ontology class: Environment) of the user is helpful. The main
advantage of this app is, that it asks if it should organize
assistance in something depending on the actual context.
Context could be for example the condition of the user, his
impairments, the weather, the time, the sensory in the house,
etc. Due to the information given by the concepts of the
ontology, the system can decide if there is a need for a special
service or not. The user is always asked if help by the system
is needed without being patronizing.
Due to the acquisition of the interests, activities and per-
sonal preferences of the user, it is possible to offer the user
the “search-and-offer” service assistance of ﬁnding all kinds
of support. Since the user in our use cases has a broken leg, he
could get a snow shoveling offer automatically, during winter
time. The model railway passion of Mr. F. can be supported
by helping him to get a lift for the weekly meetings by the
“search-and-offer” service. It uses the information saved in
the instances of the classes Interest and Activity for providing
personalized functions.
C. Use Case (Learning Assistance):
The ﬁtness status of Mr. F. can be gathered by the Educa-
tion class. If he reaches a new level of ﬁtness by doing all the
required exercises, the level can be saved in this class. Through
the History class, it is possible to consider the whole progress
of ﬁtness condition. If there are steps backwards, the exercises
could be adapted accordingly. The health condition information
makes it possible to automatically offer only the exercises that
are feasible for the user with his current impairment.
VII.
PCEICL ONTOLOGY SUMMARY
There are several advantages of the newly introduced
PCEICL ontology: (1) centralized user view, (2) services
adaptable to user’s needs, (3) historical view, (4) usage of the
ontology for ACL, (5) expandability. These advantages may
be summarised as follows:
(1) Context awareness is a mandatory requirement for an
optimal assistance for elderly people. It is also important
not to consider only the environment of assisted persons, but
especially the assisted persons themselves and their needs. The
PCEICL ontology offers a centralized user view. Therefore,
useful information about the user can be applied to offer
personalized services.
(2) All services are adaptable to the user’s needs.
They can use information about the capabilities, impairments,
interests, etc. of the person and can tailor their user interface
and also their functionality to the abilities of the user. For
example, they can control the volume, the font size or the
colours, depending on the condition of the ears or the eyes of
the user.
(3) Due to the historical view integrated into the ontology,
it is also possible to react to changes of the user proﬁle. The
services can, for example, repeat helpful information if the
user begins to suffer from dementia.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

(4) The ontology is used within the PCEICL platform as
a common understanding of the user proﬁle data. It is used
to semantically interpret the user context in the different use
cases and during the communication between the agents of
the PCEICL platform.
(5) Another beneﬁt of the ontology is its facilitated ex-
pandability. This is because of the centralized concept User,
where it is easy to add new properties to expand the user
proﬁle. Other reasons are the hierarchical structure and the
reuse of concepts by many classes. Only currently useful
information is saved in the ontology for a better data privacy.
Concepts, which turn out to be relevant in the future, can be
easily integrated into the ontology.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented an ontology, which constitutes
the base of a context aware platform as a service. The PCEICL
platform itself is based on OSGi with the opinion to use JADE
agents for the integration of semantic intelligence in form of
an ontology. The presented PCEICL ontology is the base for
ACL communication of the agents. In the future, there will
be an OSGi store, where the OSGi bundles can be distributed.
Due to the use of cloud technologies, the platform is ﬂexible
and scales as needed.
The use of ontologies in the ﬁeld of AAL is not new, but
the centralized role of the user in context modelling is not
widespread. In the PCEICL ontology, the user is the central
concept. The user is described by his properties like health
condition, capabilities, preferences, his social environment, etc.
For the exact and correct description of the user’s health con-
dition, the ICD-Code ICD-Code is used, which is a worldwide
applied classiﬁcation system for diagnoses. With the concepts
of the ontology it is also possible to have a historical view
on the user and his environment. So, it is possible to analyse
the user’s development of learning or the development of the
health condition to permanently adapt the system to the needs
of the user. Due to the centralized user view, also a better
expandability of the ontology is reached.
Future work will be a dynamic adaption of the ontology
during runtime. Some context information will be captured
and analysed automatically and the result could lead to a
modiﬁcation of the ontology. For example, the system could
monitor the behaviour and the search requests of the user
and could conclude that the interests of the user changed. In
this case an adaption of the interest instance in the ontology
should occur. Some other information shouldn’t be captured
automatically. Such an information is, for example, the healing
of a disease and should be detected by a doctor. After this
detection, the ontology should adapt accordingly.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The
project
ZAFH-AAL
(“Zentrum
für
Angewandte
Forschung an Hochschulen für Ambient Assisted Living”) is
funded by the Ministry of Science, Research and the Arts of
Baden-Württemberg, Germany. The funding program for the
universities of applied science is called: Zukunftsoffensive IV
“Innovation und Exzellenz” (ZO IV). The PCEICL project is
a sub-project of the project ZAFH-AAL.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Klein, A. Schmidt, and R. Lauer, “Ontology-Centred Design of an
Ambient Middleware for Assisted Living: The Case of SOPRANO,” in
In: Towards Ambient Intelligence: Methods for Cooperating Ensembles
in Ubiquitous Environments (AIM-CU), 30th Annual German Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (KI 2007), 2007.
[2]
L. Litz and M. Gross, “Covering Assisted Living Key Areas based on
Home Automation Sensors,” in Networking, Sensing and Control, 2007
IEEE International Conference on, 2007, pp. 639–643.
[3]
J. A. Botia, A. Villa, and J. Palma, “Ambient Assisted Living system
for in-home monitoring of healthy independent elders,” Expert Systems
with Applications, vol. 39, no. 9, 2012, pp. 8136 – 8148.
[4]
S. Lauriks et al., “Review of ICT-Based Services for Identiﬁed Unmet
Needs in People with Dementia,” in Supporting People with Dementia
Using Pervasive Health Technologies, ser. Advanced Information and
Knowledge Processing.
Springer London, 2010, pp. 37–61.
[5]
A. K. Dey and G. D. Abowd, “Towards a better understanding of
context and context-awareness,” in HUC ’99: Proceedings of the 1st
international symposium on Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing.
Springer-Verlag, 1999, pp. 304–307.
[6]
B. Schilit, N. Adams, and R. Want, “Context-Aware Computing Ap-
plications,” in Proceedings of the 1994 First Workshop on Mobile
Computing Systems and Applications, ser. WMCSA ’94.
Washington,
DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 1994, pp. 85–90.
[7]
M. Assad, D. Carmichael, J. Kay, and B. Kummerfeld, “PersonisAD:
Distributed, Active, Scrutable Model Framework for Context-Aware
Services,” in Pervasive Computing, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007, vol. 4480, pp. 55–72.
[8]
R. Ram et al., “universAAL: Provisioning Platform for AAL Services,”
in Ambient Intelligence - Software and Applications, ser. Advances in
Intelligent Systems and Computing. Springer International Publishing,
2013, vol. 219, pp. 105–112.
[9]
“OSGi
Alliance,”
[retrieved:
March,
2014].
[Online].
Available:
http://www.osgi.org/
[10]
K. Skillen, L. Chen, C. Nugent, M. Donnelly, and I. Solheim, “A user
proﬁle ontology based approach for assisting people with dementia in
mobile environments,” in Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society
(EMBC), 2012 Annual International Conference of the IEEE, 2012, pp.
6390–6393.
[11]
K.-L. Skillen et al., “Ontological User Proﬁle Modeling for Context-
Aware Application Personalization,” in Ubiquitous Computing and Am-
bient Intelligence, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, vol. 7656, pp. 261–268.
[12]
P. Moreno, M. Hernando, and E. Gómez, “AALUMO: A User Model
Ontology for Ambient Assisted Living Services Supported in Next-
Generation Networks,” in XIII Mediterranean Conference on Medical
and Biological Engineering and Computing 2013, ser. IFMBE Proceed-
ings, L. M. Roa Romero, Ed.
Springer International Publishing, 2014,
vol. 41, pp. 1217–1220.
[13]
D.
Heckmann,
T.
Schwartz,
B.
Brandherm,
M.
Schmitz,
and
M. Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, “Gumo - The General User Model
Ontology,” in User Modeling 2005, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, L. Ardissono, P. Brna, and A. Mitrovic, Eds.
Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2005, vol. 3538, pp. 428–432.
[14]
M. Sutterer, O. Droegehorn, and K. David, “UPOS: User Proﬁle
Ontology with Situation-Dependent Preferences Support,” in Advances
in Computer-Human Interaction, 2008 First International Conference
on, 2008, pp. 230–235.
[15]
“eHealth / AAL,” [retrieved: March, 2014]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.prosyst.com/what-we-do/ehealth-aal/products/
[16]
“Agent Communication Language Speciﬁcations,” [retrieved: March,
2014]. [Online]. Available: http://www.ﬁpa.org/repository/aclspecs.html
[17]
“Java Agent DEvelopment Framework,” [retrieved: March, 2014].
[Online]. Available: http://jade.tilab.com/
[18]
“The Foundation of Intelligent Physical Agents,” [retrieved: March,
2014]. [Online]. Available: http://www.ﬁpa.org/
[19]
N. F. Noy and D. L. McGuinness, “Ontology Development 101: A
Guide to Creating Your First Ontology,” Online, 2001, [retrieved:
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

March, 2014]. [Online]. Available: http://www.ksl.stanford.edu/people/
dlm/papers/ontology101/ontology101-noy-mcguinness.html
[20]
C.
Fredrich,
“Kontextgetriebene
"Software
as
a
Service"
im
Bereich "Ambient Assisted Living",” Master’s thesis, Hochschule
Furtwangen University, 2013, [retrieved: March, 2014]. [Online]. Avail-
able:
http://www.wolke.hs-furtwangen.de/assets/ﬁles/Theses/2013_
SS13_Carina_Fredrich_Kontextgetriebene_SaaS_im_Bereich_AAL.pdf
[21]
“World
Health
Organization
(WHO):
International
Classiﬁcation
of Diseases (ICD),” [retrieved: March, 2014]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.who.int/classiﬁcations/icd/en/
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

