Why are Reputation Systems Absent from Cloud Services: Reason and Solution  
 
Lianyong Qi, Jiancheng Ni, Chao Yan, Xiaona Xia, Chunmei Ma 
Computer Science College 
Qufu Normal University 
Rizhao, 276826, China  
Email: {lianyongqi@gmail.com, nijch@163.com, yanchao@qfnu.edu.cn, xiaxn@sina.com, rsmcm@163.com} 
 
 
Abstract—Feedback rating-based reputation system is 
usually considered as an effective approach to build the trust 
between cloud users and cloud providers. However, 
unfortunately, such a reputation system is absent from the 
present major cloud providers, e.g., Amazon, Google and 
Microsoft, which embarrasses a cloud user from selecting a 
trusted cloud service from a cloud provider. In view of this 
challenge, in this paper, we first analyze the cloud 
characteristics, and study why reputation systems are absent 
from cloud providers, from perspectives of cloud provider 
and cloud user respectively. Afterwards, two reputation 
systems of popular e-Commerce service platforms, i.e., 
Amazon.com and eBay.com, are investigated respectively. 
Finally, a reputation system tailored to cloud services, i.e., 
Cloud Reputation System (CRS) is brought forth. CRS not 
only considers the advantages of e-Commerce reputation 
systems, but also adapts to the cloud characteristics. We 
believe that the proposed CRS is helpful, for building the 
trust between cloud users and cloud providers in the future. 
Keywords-Cloud user; Cloud provider; Trust; Feedback 
rating; Reputation system; Service quality 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
As a natural evolution of Services Computing, Cloud 
Computing has recently gained more and more attentions, 
from both academic and industry domains [1][2]. By 
delivering various computing resources in a pay-as-you-
go manner, Cloud Computing is helping human to realize 
the long-held dream of computing-as-a-utility. In the 
cloud environment, a cloud provider could share its idle 
computing resources for additional income. While on the 
other hand, a cloud user can also benefit from moving 
his/her business applications towards cloud, so as to enjoy 
an easy-to-deploy, maintenance-free and cost-effective 
business competitive advantage [3]. 
However, due to the open and dynamic nature of cloud 
environment, the Quality of Service (QoS) of a cloud 
service is not always as good as advertised; even a 
Service Level Agreement (SLA) contract is made 
beforehand between a cloud user and a cloud provider [4]. 
We analyzed the reasons as follows. First, inside the 
cloud provider, we cannot expect the availability of a 
cloud service is always 100% in a billing cycle (e.g., 
numerous reported outage incidents [5]). Besides, inside 
attacks and damages are also possible (for example, 
Google has to fire the employees for their illegitimate 
operation on user data [6]). Second, outside the cloud 
provider, we cannot precisely predict the actual execution 
context (e.g., network delay), when a cloud user requests 
a cloud service from a cloud provider. Besides, malicious 
attacks from competitors are also inevitable in cloud 
environment [2]. Therefore, the delivered service quality 
of a cloud provider is fluctuant, and sometimes may not 
meet the quality expectation of the cloud user. In other 
words, cloud provider (or the service delivered by a cloud 
provider) is not always ‘trusted’ as promised. Therefore, it 
is of great significance to build trust between cloud users 
and cloud providers. 
Feedback rating and review are regarded as an 
effective manner to build trust between service providers 
and service users, and now widely adopted in present 
popular e-Commerce service platforms [7]. For example, 
if one buys a smartphone from an e-Commerce platform, 
he/she can leave a negative or positive rating (1-star to 5-
stars, and 5-star is the best) or review, according to his/her 
satisfaction towards the smartphone quality and shipping 
service. However, compared with e-Commerce, present 
major cloud providers, e.g., Amazon, Google and 
Microsoft lack such a reputation system. In this situation, 
if one requests a cloud service from a cloud provider, e.g., 
Amazon, he/she has no way to evaluate and predict the 
cloud service quality before the service is delivered and 
executed. Therefore, the absence of reputation system 
makes it a challenge for cloud users to select a trusted 
cloud service from cloud providers.   
In view of this challenge, in this paper, we study the 
reasons that reputation systems are absent from cloud 
providers, and put forward a reputation system tailored to 
cloud service delivery. The remainder of this paper is 
organized as below. In Section 2, we analyze the cloud 
characteristics and study why reputation systems are 
absent from the present cloud providers. Afterwards, in 
Section 3, two reputation systems of e-Commerce (i.e., 
Amazon.com and eBay.com) are investigated respectively. 
In Section 4, a reputation system for cloud services, i.e., 
CRS (Cloud Reputation System, CRS) is put forward, by 
considering the cloud characteristics analyzed in Section 
2 and the e-Commerce reputation systems investigated in 
Section 3. Related work and comparison analyses are 
introduced in Section 5, and finally, conclusions are 
drawn in Section 6. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

II. 
 ABSENCE OF REPUTATION SYSTEM FROM CLOUD 
PROVIDERS:  THE REASONS 
Rating-based reputation system is a good supplement 
for calculating the trustworthiness of a cloud service 
before its delivery. However, as far as we know, the 
present major cloud providers (e.g., Amazon, IBM and 
Microsoft) do not support such a reputation system. In this 
section, we analyze the reasons from the perspectives of 
cloud provider and cloud user, which are listed briefly in 
Table 1. 
TABLE I.  ABSENCE REASONS OF REPUTATION SYSTEM FROM CLOUD 
Perspectiv
e 
Id 
Reason 
Cloud 
provider 
1 
Lack of incentive 
2 
Have confidence in delivering high service quality 
3 
Fear for malicious ratings 
Cloud 
user 
1 
Hard to rate a cloud service with a long running period 
2 
Hard to rate a cloud service in service combination  
3 
Hard to observe the necessary QoS data for rating 
A. Reasons From the Perspective of Cloud Provider  
In this subsection, we study the reasons that reputation 
systems are absent from cloud, from the perspective of 
cloud provider. 
(1) Lack of incentive 
At present, the big and competitive companies 
constitute the majority of cloud providers. For example, 
Amazon occupies 80%-90% market share of IaaS [8]. In 
this situation, a cloud user has few choices when he/she 
requests a cloud service; hence, the big cloud provider, 
e.g., Amazon lacks incentive to build its reputation system. 
Besides, no competition exists inside a cloud provider. 
For example, if a cloud user requests elastic computing 
resources from Amazon, he/she has no other choice but to 
select EC2 service, because only EC2 service is able to 
provide the elastic computing functionality inside Amazon. 
In this situation, EC2 faces no competition inside Amazon. 
Therefore, from the perspective of Amazon, it is regarded 
as unnecessary to measure and publish the reputation of 
EC2, even if different cloud users may experience 
different service quality from EC2.  
(2) Have confidence in delivering high service quality 
The big cloud providers, such as Amazon, deliver rich 
cloud services and have advanced techniques to ensure 
that a high quality service is provided. Therefore, the big 
cloud providers often have confidence in their delivered 
service quality, and regard it unnecessary to build a 
reputation system for their cloud services. For example, as 
Fig.1 shows, Amazon declares 99.99% service availability 
in its SaaS SLA contract, and different compensation 
rates are available if the agreed availability is violated [3].  
However, as analyzed in Section 1, the service quality 
delivered by cloud providers is not always as high as 
promised, due to the malicious attacks from outside, or 
dynamic change of network environment. Besides, the 
simple compensation mechanism is not suitable for all 
cloud users, when SLA agreement is violated. For 
example, if a critical task is failed due to the poor quality 
of a cloud service, the user may prefer to leave a lowest 
rating (e.g., 1-star) to the cloud service, rather than 
receive a compensation of $100. 
 
Service Level Agreement 
Availability 
·99.99% uptime 
Compensation 
·Percentage of total charges paid by cloud user 
UPTIME (PER 15 MIN) 
COMPENSATION 
99.99% - 100% 
0% 
98.00% - 99.98% 
5% 
97.00% - 97.99% 
10% 
95.00% - 96.99% 
20% 
< 95.00% 
50% 
 
Figure1. An example of SLA contract 
 
(3) Fear for malicious ratings 
After a user invoked a service, he/she can give the 
service a feedback rating, based on the perceived service 
quality and his/her quality preference. Therefore, the 
feedback rating is rather subjective, and the feedback 
rating-based reputation system is vulnerable to the 
malicious attacks. For example, a malicious user may give 
a 1-star rating to a 5-star delivered service, or give a 5-star 
rating to a 1-star delivered service, for commerce or 
competition reasons. Similar fears are also existent for the 
cloud providers, because a good reputation accumulated 
within a long period could be easily damaged by a 
malicious user rating. Therefore, from the perspective of 
cloud provider, it prefers to leave the reputation system 
empty, rather than have its service reputation attacked by 
potential malicious cloud users. 
B. Reasons From the Perspective of Cloud user  
Different from the traditional web service, cloud 
services have some particular characteristics. Next, we 
will introduce these characteristics, and analyze the 
reasons that reputation systems are absent from cloud, 
from the perspective of cloud provider. 
(1) Hard to rate a cloud service with a long running 
period 
Different from the traditional web services whose 
running period is short, the running period of a cloud 
service is usually long, e.g., one year, during which the 
cloud provider will deliver its cloud services continuously. 
In this situation, it is hard for a cloud user to rate a cloud 
service during its long running period. First, a cloud user 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

cannot wait to give his/her final rating until the cloud 
service’s delivery ends, because the waiting time is too 
long (e.g., a cloud user has to wait for one year, in order 
to rate his/her requested one-year-period Email service 
from Google). Second, the service quality of a cloud 
service may change constantly, during the service’s long 
running period. Hence, a cloud user cannot give a fair and 
accurate rating, towards the dynamically changed service 
quality of a cloud service.  
(2) Hard to rate a cloud service in service combination 
Generally, a cloud provider delivers its cloud services 
in the form of service combination. For example, Table 2 
lists four cloud service combinations advertised by 
Amazon EC2 [9], i.e., {Small instance, Middle instance, 
Large instance and Extra-large instance}, where each 
instance is a combination of four categories of cloud 
services {Memory, EC2 Computing Unit, Local Storage, 
Platform}.  
TABLE II. AN INSTANCE OF CLOUD SERVICE COMBINATION 
 
Memory 
(GiB) 
EC2 
Computing 
Unit 
Local 
Storage 
(GB) 
Platform 
(bit) 
Small 
1.7 
1 
160 
32 or 64 
Middle 
3.75 
2 
410 
32 or 64 
Large 
7.5 
4 
850 
64 
Extra-large 
15 
8 
1690 
64 
 
In this situation, a cloud user can only give an global 
rating towards the whole service combination instance. 
For example, a cloud user gives a ‘4-star’ rating to service 
combination ‘Middle instance’ in Table 2. Obviously, this 
rating is a global rating towards the quality performance 
of combination (e.g., ‘Middle instance’), not a local rating 
for a single cloud service (e.g., ‘410 GB Local storage’ in 
‘Middle instance’). In this situation, the global rating has 
little effect in evaluating the service quality of a single 
cloud service; even if a global rating is given by a cloud 
user. For example, if a cloud user gives a lowest ‘1-star’ 
rating to ‘Middle instance’, we cannot determine whether 
the bad rating is caused by the poor quality of ‘3.75 GiB 
Memory’ or ‘2 EC2 computing unit’ or ‘410 GB Local 
Storage’ or ’32 or 64 Platform’. 
(3) Hard to observe the necessary QoS data for rating 
    In cloud environment, business applications of users 
are deployed and executed on the remote servers of cloud 
providers, not locally. Therefore, a cloud user has little 
control on its business execution, and thereby cannot 
observe the detailed QoS data associated with cloud 
service delivery, e.g., the actually delivered disk I/O, 
response time of storage service. Although several 
toolkits have been developed to monitor the QoS data of 
cloud service delivery, e.g., Amazon CloudWatch [10], the 
monitoring range is limited and the monitoring accuracy 
is doubtable. For example, if a cloud user utilizes 
CloudWatch to monitor EC2 service, the authenticity of 
monitored QoS data is doubtable, as both CloudWatch 
and EC2 are developed by Amazon. Therefore, it is hard 
for a cloud user to rate a cloud service, based on the little 
observed QoS data. 
Based on the above reason analyses, we have identified 
the obstacles that lead to the absence of reputation system 
from cloud, from perspectives of cloud provider and 
cloud user. Next, two reputation systems in e-Commerce, 
e.g., on-line Amazon.com and eBay.com will be 
investigated respectively, which could be regarded as 
beneficial references for building a reputation system for 
cloud services in the future. 
III. 
 INVESTIGATION OF REPUTATION SYSTEMS IN E-
COMMERCE 
Although few cloud providers also build their 
reputation systems, e.g., Rackspace Inc. [11], the 
reputation 
system 
is 
rather 
simple 
and 
cannot 
accommodate the cloud service delivery very well. In this 
section, the reputation systems of on-line Amazon.com 
and eBay.com will be investigated respectively, which are 
beneficial references for building a reputation system for 
cloud services, as e-Commerce and cloud provider both 
deliver their ‘services’ to the public. 
A. Reputation system of Amazon.com 
As a successful on-line mall that delivers thousands of 
products to people all over the world, Amazon.com [12] is 
famous for its delivered high-quality products and 
objective reputation system. For each product in 
Amazon.com, a reputation is built, which mainly consists 
of the following two components: user rating and user 
review. 
(1) User rating 
    For each product, a user can leave a feedback rating 
from ‘1-star’ to ‘5-star’ (‘5-star’ is the best), to indicate 
his/her satisfaction degree towards the product quality or 
service quality. Then according to the ratings from all 
users, an average rating is assigned to a product. For 
example, for ‘Kindle Fire HD’ product, totally 824 users 
give their ratings, where there are 34 ‘1-star’ ratings, 37 
‘2-star’ ratings, 115 ‘3-star’ ratings, 232 ‘4-star’ ratings 
and 406 ‘5-star’ ratings. Therefore, the average rating for 
‘Kindle Fire HD’ is ‘4.1-star’. This average rating could 
reflect the user-perceived product quality approximately. 
Besides, the user rating is not fixed, but variable. For 
example, if ‘Kindle Fire HD’ cannot work after one 
month use, the user may revise the pre-assigned ‘5-star’ 
rating to ‘1-star’ rating, so as to express his/her extreme 
anger. This kind of variable user rating is really suitable 
for rating the quality of long-lifecycle products. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

(2) User review 
Besides user rating, Amazon.com allows users to give 
their reviews about a product. Considering the above 
example, 824 reviews are available for ‘Kindle Fire HD’ 
product. In a review, a user could describe his/her 
satisfaction or dissatisfaction, as well as the reasons. 
Moreover, user B can rate a review from user A (‘helpful’ 
or ‘not helpful’), which can reflect whether user A’s 
review is helpful to user B. For example, if 100 users read 
a review from user A, and 98 users consider the review 
helpful, then a ratio ‘98/100’ is assigned to the review 
from user A. In this way, Amazon.com can avoid some 
malicious user ratings and reviews. 
Despite of the above advantages, the reputation system 
of Amazon.com still has some limitations. For example, 
anyone can rate a product; even if he/she did not buy this 
product from Amazon.com. In this situation, the reputation 
system could be easily attacked by malicious users, e.g., 
by Sybil attacks [3]. 
B. Reputation system of eBay.com 
Compared with Amazon.com, the reputation system of 
eBay.com [13] is more complicated, which mainly 
consists of three components: mutual rating, user 
review and Quantity sold. 
(1) Mutual rating 
Different from Amazon.com, the ratings of eBay.com 
are mutual: buyer rating and seller rating. 
Buyer rating: A buyer can rate the service quality of a 
seller by buyer rating. If buyer A buys a product from 
seller B, A can give an overall rating to B, i.e., ‘Positive’ 
or ‘Neutral’ or ‘Negative’. Moreover, more detailed 
ratings could be given, according to the four criteria {Item 
as described, Communication, Shipping time, Shipping 
and handling charges} of B, each of which could be rated 
from 1-star to 5-star by A. Therefore, A can give one 
overall rating and four detailed ratings towards B. For 
example, buyer A’s overall rating towards B is ‘Positive’, 
and detailed ratings are respectively {5-star, 4-star, 5-star, 
4-star} corresponding to the above four criteria. Besides, 
according to overall ratings from all buyers, seller B is 
assigned an overall ‘99.95% Positive’ rating (excluding 
the repeated ratings from the same buyer in one week) by 
eBay.com. Likewise, according to detailed ratings from all 
buyers, seller B is assigned a detailed {4.9-star, 4.7-star, 
5-star, 4.8-star} rating by eBay.com. 
Seller rating: A seller can also rate the hehavior of a 
buyer by seller rating. After the buyer rates the seller, the 
seller can also rate the buyer as ‘Positive’ or ‘Neutral’ or 
‘Negative’. According to the seller ratings from all sellers, 
a buyer (e.g., A) is assigned an overall seller rating, e.g., 
‘98.5% Positive’ by eBay.com. 
Time factor is also considered in eBay.com. For 
example, both the buyer rating and seller rating should be 
given in 60 days since a deal is agreed, and could be 
revised only once in 10 days since the rating is given. Of 
course, a buyer can also view the past buyer ratings of a 
seller, e.g., buyer ratings in recent one month, in recent 
six months or in recent one year. 
(2) User review 
The user review of eBay.com is similar with that of 
Amazon.com, so it will not be discussed repeatedly. The 
minor difference between them is that: in eBay.com, a 
review should be given in 60 days since a purchase 
behavior occurs, and can only be revised once in 10 days 
after its birth. 
(3) Quantity sold  
For each product, a ‘quantity sold’ number is assigned 
by eBay.com, to indicate the popularity of the product in a 
recent period. For example, ‘1000 sold last month’ shows 
a great confidence of buyers towards a product recently. 
Although ‘quantity sold’ is not a direct component of 
reputation in e-Commerce, it is still regarded as an 
important factor when evaluating the reputation of a 
product. 
Next, based on the above analyses, we compare the 
reputation systems of Amazon.com and  eBay.com, from 
different angles. The comparison results are listed in 
Table 3, where better reputation strategies are stressed 
with a darker background color. Here, for some reputation 
strategies employed, we cannot determine whether it is 
good or not, such as the last criterion in Table 3, i.e., 
‘quantity sold’. According to  eBay.com, ‘quantity sold’ is 
a good indicator towards the popularity and quality of a 
product; however, according to Amazon.com, ‘quantity 
sold’ is bad because it distracts users’ attention from 
focusing on the product quality itself. As in Table 3, 
neither of the two reputation systems can outperform the 
other. 
TABLE III. REPUTATION SYSTEM COMPARISONS: AMAZON.COM VS 
EBAY.COM 
 
 
Amazon.com 
eBay.com 
User 
rating 
Overall rating 
Yes 
/1-star to 5-star 
Yes 
/Positive or Neutral or 
Negative 
Detailed rating 
No 
Yes 
Mutual rating 
No 
Yes 
Non-user rating 
Yes 
No 
Revisable 
Yes/anytime 
Yes/once in 10 days 
Timely rating 
Yes/not must 
Yes/in 60 days 
Repeated rating 
Yes 
No 
Malicious rating 
Yes/easy 
Yes/difficult 
Mandatory rating 
No 
No 
User 
review 
Timely review 
Yes/not must 
Yes/in 60 days 
Revisable 
Yes/anytime 
Yes/once in 10 days 
Rating for review 
Yes 
Yes 
Malicious review 
Yes/easy 
Yes/difficult 
Quantity sold 
No 
Yes 
e-Commerce  
Feedback  
type 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

IV. 
A REPUTATION SYSTEM FOR CLOUD SERVICES 
In this section, a reputation system for cloud services, 
i.e., CRS is put forward. Here, CRS does not discuss the 
concrete reputation calculation process of cloud services, 
instead, CRS provides detailed solutions for solving the 
obstacles and difficulties introduced in Section 2, when 
building a reputation system for cloud services. The 
details of CRS are listed in Table 4. Next, we explain why 
the proposed solutions can solve the present obstacles. 
TABLE IV. CLOUD REPUTATION SYSTEM CRS: OBSTACLE & SOLUTION 
ID 
Obstacle 
Solution 
1 
Lack of incentive 
Number of invocations 
2 
Have confidence in delivering 
high service quality 
Overall rating 
Detailed rating 
3 
Fear for malicious ratings 
Mutual rating 
NO Non-user rating 
NO Non-user review 
NO repeated rating 
4 
Hard to rate a cloud service with 
a long running period 
Revisable rating 
Revisable review 
Timely rating(alternative) 
Timely review(alternative) 
Period rating 
5 
Hard to rate a cloud service in 
service combination 
Detailed rating 
6 
Hard to observe the necessary 
QoS data for rating 
Detailed rating 
NO Mandatory rating 
 
Obstacle1: Lack of incentive. According to the 
Bandwagon Effect [14], the more frequently a cloud 
service is invoked, the more attractive it is for cloud users. 
Therefore, ‘Number of invocations’ is of positive 
significance, for promoting cloud providers to build their 
respective reputation systems. 
Obstacle2: Have confidence in delivering high 
service quality. The low ‘Overall rating’ and ‘Detailed 
rating’ data can reminder the cloud providers to improve 
their poor service quality, so as to avoid cloud providers’ 
overconfidence in their delivered service quality. 
Obstacle3: Fear for malicious ratings. The proposed 
‘Mutual rating’ can increase the risk of a cloud user, if 
he/she gives a malicious rating. Besides, the Non-users 
are not allowed to give a rating or review, by which we 
can reduce the malicious ratings or reviews from the Non-
users. Furthermore, repeated ratings are not allowed, 
which can increase the cost of a cloud user when he/she 
gives a malicious rating. 
Obstacle4: Hard to rate a cloud service with a long 
running period. For the cloud services with a long 
running period, a cloud user can give his/her timely rating 
or review after he/she invokes the service. Besides, a user 
can report the latest service quality rating every other 
period, which is called ‘Period rating’.  In order to cope 
with the dynamic changes of service quality during the 
long running period, users’ rating or review towards a 
cloud service are revisable. 
Obstacle5: Hard to rate a cloud service in service 
combination. Actually, it is difficult to rate a single cloud 
service in service combination. However, we can make 
some attempt under some reasonable assumptions. For 
example, as Table 2 shows, we assume that Response time 
is affected greatly by the single service ‘EC2 computing 
unit’ and likewise, Throughput is affected greatly by the 
single service ‘Memory’. Under these two assumptions, 
we can rate single services ‘EC2 computing unit’ and 
‘Memory’ approximately, through the ‘Detailed rating’ 
towards QoS criteria Response time and Throughput. 
Obstacle6: Hard to observe the necessary QoS data 
for rating. With the limited QoS data that is observed, a 
cloud user can give its detailed ratings towards few or 
partial QoS criteria, which is still of positive significance 
for future cloud service selection. Besides, mandatory 
rating is not allowed so as to ensure the authenticity. 
V. 
RELATED WORK AND COMPARISON ANALYSES 
Cloud computing has exhibited its great advantages in 
delivering use-on-demand and pay-per-use computing 
services [1][2][15]. More and more users are moving their 
business or personal applications towards cloud. However, 
due to the dynamic and open nature of cloud environment, 
a cloud service may not deliver a satisfactory quality level 
as promised in its SLA contract.  In other words, from 
perspective of a cloud user, a cloud service is not always 
‘trusted’ during its delivery period. Many researchers 
have observed and studied this trust problem.  
Academic area. SLA is considered as a feasible 
manner to build trust between a cloud user and a cloud 
provider [2]. A cloud provider is regarded as trusted, if its 
service is delivered with SLA-agreed quality. Sheikh 
Mahbub Habib, et al. [15] introduces a set of attributes, 
e.g., security, performance and compliance, to monitor 
and measure the SLA violation. However, some quality 
performance declared in SLA is hard to monitor directly. 
Therefore, as an indirect manner, Monoj Kumar 
Muchahari, et al. [16] proposes a feedback rating-based 
trust calculation method, i.e., TrustCalculator, to estimate 
the future quality of a cloud service, based on its past 
feedback ratings from cloud users. However, the assumed 
user rating is of a rather simple form, i.e., from 0 to 5, 
which cannot accommodate the complicated cloud service 
delivery very well. As malicious rating is possible, S. 
Wang, et al. [17] proposes a detection method of 
malicious rating, by comparing the monitored service 
quality and the expected service quality in SLA. The 
object of this proposal is to ensure that all the user ratings 
are real and trusted, not malicious, which has the same 
function as our proposed ‘Mutual rating’ and ‘Rating for 
review’ in R3. Talal H. Noor, et al. [18] proposes a Trust 
Feedback Collector to collect user feedbacks from cloud 
service delivery. This collector provides an essential 
foundation, for building our proposed R3 reputation 
system in cloud. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

Industry area. Compared with the enthusiasm in 
academic area, few progresses in industry area could be 
found in building a cloud reputation system. Concretely, 
only few cloud providers offer their reputation systems, 
e.g., Rackspace Inc. [11]. And the effect is not as good as 
expected, for example, only 45 user reviews are left in 
Rackspace reputation systems since 2009. In contrast, 
most major cloud providers, e.g., Amazon, Google and 
Microsoft don’t offer sufficient reputation systems to 
support the trust evaluation of their cloud services, which 
is the major motivation of our paper. In view of the 
disappointed industry status, we analyze the reasons that 
reputation system is absent from cloud industry, and 
introduce a R3 reputation system tailored for cloud 
service delivery, by using reputation systems in e-
Commerce for reference. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Feedback 
rating-based 
reputation 
system 
is 
a 
promising way, to build trust between cloud users and 
cloud providers. However, nowadays, major cloud 
providers, e.g., Amazon, Google and Microsoft do not 
support such a reputation system, which hampers a cloud 
user from selecting a trusted cloud service before the 
service is executed. In view of this challenge, in this paper, 
we first study why reputation systems are absent from 
cloud providers. Afterwards, we put forward a novel 
reputation system CRS tailored to cloud service delivery. 
In the future, we will refine the proposed CRS reputation 
system by introducing more detailed and quantified 
reputation calculation formulas. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This paper is supported by the Open Project of State 
Key Lab. for Novel Software Technology (No. 
KFKT2012B31), Innovational Education Project for 
Postgraduate in Shandong Province (No. SDYY11138), 
Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province of 
China (No.ZR2012FQ011, ZR2012FM023), Soft Science 
Research 
Project 
of 
Shandong 
Province 
(No. 
2013RKB01040), 
DRF 
and 
UF 
(BSQD20110123, 
XJ201227) of QFNU. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Menzel and R. Ranjan, “CloudGenius: Decision 
Support for Web Server Cloud Migration”, Proceedings of 
21th International Conference on World Wide Web 
(WWW 12), ACM Press, Apr. 2012, pp. 979-988, doi 
10.1145/2187836.2187967. 
[2] V. Mareeswari and E. Sathiyamoorthy, “A Survey on Trust 
in Semantic Web Services”, International Journal of 
Scientific & Engineering Research, vol. 3, Feb. 2012, pp. 1-5.  
[3] N. Limam and R. Boutaba, “Assessing Software Service 
Quality and Trustworthiness at Selection Time”, IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 36, Jul. 2010, 
pp. 559-574, doi: 10.1109/TSE.2010.2. 
[4] C. Rong, S. T. Nguyen, and M. G. Jaatun, “Beyond 
lightning: A survey on security challenges in cloud 
computing”, Computers and Electrical Engineering, vol. 39, 
Jan. 
2013, 
pp. 
47–54, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.compeleceng.2012.04.015. 
[5] M. Armbrust, et al., “Above the clouds: A Berkeley view of 
cloud computing”, Technical Report No. UCB/EECS-
2009-28, University of California, 2009.  
[6] M. D. Ryan, “Cloud computing security: The scientific 
challenge, and a survey of solutions”, Journal of Systems 
and Software, vol. 86, Sep. 2013, pp. 2263– 2268, doi: 
10.1016/j.jss.2012.12.025.   
[7] J. Witkowski, “Incentive-Compatible Trust Mechanisms”, 
Proceedings of the 25th AAAI Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (AAAI 11), AAAI Press, Aug. 2011, pp. 1865-
1866, doi: 10.1.1.222.1760. 
[8] C. Fershtman and N. Gandal, “Migration to the Cloud 
Ecosystem: Ushering in a New Generation of Platform 
Competition”, Communications & Strategies, vol. 85, Jan. 
2012, pp. 109-124. 
[9] EC2. http://aws.amazon.com/cn/ec2/ (accessed on 2013-9-9). 
[10] CloudWatch. aws.amazon.com/cloudwatch/‎ (accessed on 
2013-9-1). 
[11] Rackspace review. http://www.rackspacecloudreview.com. 
(accessed on 2013-9-1). 
[12] Amazon. http://www.amazon.com/(accessed on 2013-9-10). 
[13] eBay. http://www.ebay.com/(accessed on 2013-9-10). 
[14] R. Nadeau, E. Cloutier, and J.-H. Guay, “New Evidence 
About the Existence of a Bandwagon Effect in the Opinion 
Formation Process”, International Political Science Review, 
vol. 
14, 
Jun. 
1993, 
pp. 
203-213, 
doi: 
10.1177/019251219301400204. 
[15] S. M. Habib, S. Ries, and M. Mühlhäuser, “Towards a 
Trust Management System for Cloud Computing”, 
Proceedings of 10th International Conference on Trust, 
Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications 
(TrustCom 11), IEEE Press, Nov. 2011, pp. 933-939, doi: 
10.1109/TrustCom.2011.129. 
[16] M. K. Muchahari and S. K. Sinha, “A New Trust 
Management 
Architecture 
for 
Cloud 
Computing 
Environment” Proceedings of  International Symposium on 
Cloud and Services Computing (ISCOS 12), Dec. 2012, pp. 
136-140, doi: 10.1109/ISCOS.2012.30. 
[17] S. Wang, Q. Sun, H. Zou, and F. Yang, “Reputation 
measure approach of web service for service selection”, 
IET Software, vol. 5, Oct. 2011, pp. 466–473, doi: 
10.1049/iet-sen.2010.0077. 
[18] T. H. Noor, Q. Z. Sheng, S. Zeadally, and J. Yu, “Trust 
Management of Services in Cloud Environments: Obstacles 
and Solutions”, ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 46, Oct. 
2013, 
pp. 
1-35, 
doi: 
10.1145/2522968.2522980.
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-337-7
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2014 : The Sixth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

