Information and Knowledge Sharing: Involving Customers in Developing Services
Seppo J. Sirkemaa
28120 Pori, Finland
seppo.johan@gmail.com
Abstract— Understanding customer needs is a critical success
factor in development of products and services. In most
enterprises there are several people interfacing with customers,
throughout the organization in different units and functions.
The result is that information on customer needs and
requirements exists, but it remains scattered and unorganized.
Another issue is that those who are interacting with customers
are not necessarily involved with development of products and
services. Here the challenge is to integrate information and
knowledge from customer needs to the R&D process.
Theoretically, there are mechanisms for sharing information
and 
knowledge. 
Using 
different 
knowledge 
sharing
mechanisms 
becomes 
especially 
important 
in 
large
organizations which operate in multiple locations. These call
for infrastructures, rules and procedures so that sharing of
information would be possible. In this research, we study
mechanisms that empower the sharing of knowledge and
information on customer requirements, so that it could be
effectively used in the R&D process
Keywords-
knowledge sharing, R&D, customer needs,
customer requirements, absorptive capacity, development
I.
INTRODUCTION
Information and knowledge sharing is important in all
types of organizations. This means that there is a need to
access and capture information, and shared it between units,
teams and individuals throughout the organization. Zahra
and George [17] use in this context the term absorptive
capacity. It is defined as organizational processes and
routines that are used in capturing, integrating and using
information in developing dynamic capabilities in the
organization. Absorptive capacity is here connected to the
challenge of understanding customer, which involves sharing
information and knowledge on customer needs.
Information and knowledge sharing is facing challenges
which depend on the type of information that is intended to
be shared. In operative activities knowing what, why and
when is needed in order to have things done. This type of
information is often numeric and manageable, in a way that
it can be captured, stored or generated from processes. In
contrast, information that is needed in business processes and
strategic management of the enterprise calls for information
which is not as straightforward to express in written form,
and thus managing and sharing of this type of information is
more challenging.
In this research we look at challenges in understanding
customer information, in capturing and sharing knowledge
on customer needs. The research is based on frameworks of
absorptive 
capacity 
and 
classification 
of 
different
knowledge-sharing mechanisms which will be used in
studying different knowledge sharing practices found in case
organizations. The empirical part of the research relies on
interviews with selected persons in R&D and marketing
departments. We also gave key customers a questionnaire so
that the information sharing interfaces and mechanisms
could be mapped. We approached altogether 9 large case
organizations which all share an interest in developing
services based on customer needs. Most of the case
organizations operate in the industry, have manufacturing
sites and units in different countries and customers
worldwide.
The structure of the paper is following: first we look at
different types of information and knowledge. Depending on
the type of information the mechanisms and methods of
sharing it vary; this is an issue that is being discussed in next
chapter. Involving technology and information systems is a
delicate issue, in some cases personal approach is more
appropriate. In the conclusion we argue that there are several
methods in listening, engaging and empowering people who
are involved in sharing information on customer needs.
II.
MANAGING INFORMATION AND KNOWLEDGE
Information and knowledge is a multifaceted concept.
Polanyi [14] differentiates between tacit and explicit types of
knowledge. The taxonomy is based on the ease of
articulating and communicating knowledge to others.
Another viewpoint is whether information and knowledge is
individual or collective, or the extent to which knowledge is
being held by one individual or embedded in the interaction
of a group of people [3], [12].
In this research information and knowledge are studied in
business context. Shortly, successful companies understand
customer needs. This involves focusing on customers and
working together with the clients in order to integrate
customer-related information in to the development process.
Customers have experience-based knowledge of products
and services, therefore it would be important to better
connect customers to development process
[16], [4].
Managing customer related information includes capturing
and sharing external customer information available from the
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2
p
g

customer himself or herself, for example ideas from a
meeting with the customer. It also involves internal
information; capturing and managing information on
customer purchases, profitability etc. which are result of
operations and obtainable from within the enterprise that is
dealing with the customer.
Information management is here connected to the
concept of absorptive capacity. It is a combination of
processes and routines that are used in the organization in
capturing, integrating and using information in developing
dynamic 
capabilities. 
These 
capabilities 
give 
the
organization potential to develop competitive advantage in
the market [10]. Methods, processes and practices vary from
organization to another, they may not be easily copied from
one setting to another. The role of contextual elements – fit
of people, information sharing methods and platforms to a
certain situation – is what makes managing customer related
information effective.
Managing information and knowledge is here defined as
management of information, and sharing this information
with others so that it adds value. This requires understanding
what information is about, contextual factors are important
so that information can be used wisely. Knowing what to do
with information, how it has been generated etc. are
examples of context-related issues. It is understanding the
contextual 
factors 
that 
separates 
knowledge 
from
information [1].
In this paper we look at information and knowledge that
is needed in developing business further. Understanding the
needs of the customer is cornerstone of business operations,
therefore we study customer-related information. As noted
by Hou [10] besides customers are other sources of external
information as well which should be managed – like
information from competitors and what they are doing,
information on technological advancements. In addition,
political and economical changes need to be taken into
account.
III.
INFORMATION AND KNOWLEDGE SHARING
The term knowledge-sharing mechanism refers to formal
and informal mechanisms which are used in organizations
for sharing information and knowledge. The focus is on
sharing information and knowledge that is embedded in
individuals or groups so that it can be used in work-related
processes and activities [2], [3], [12].
Information and knowledge that should be shared may
not always be easily shareable. Information sharing involves
mapping the persons who are sharing information, defining
the information itself and passing it on in an understandable
format. When the information is complex this is not easy,
sharing it with others may require prior knowledge of the
subject area, and call for further clarification. If there is
person-to-person interaction between humans the interaction
itself is one component in the process. Here for example how
information is presented and how reliable the source of
information is considered affect the knowledge sharing
process.
Aggregation of knowledge is a key concept in
understanding information and knowledge sharing [3], [13].
It refers to the degree of aggregation which varies from
personal and individual to collective knowledge. Personal
knowledge is by definition individual, collected and stored
for private use whereas collective knowledge is – ideally –
generated, gathered and stored in a way that it is shareable
and available for colleagues. Collective information and
knowledge may be seen as integrated, embedded and
institutionalized part of structures and routines of the
organization. It must be noted that in organizations there is
also “personal” information which is intended for personal
use. Often this type of information is stored in the memory
aids that people create for themselves. For example, notes
that people write with their portable devices in a meeting.
However, this knowledge and information might also be
shareable and accessible to others, and it might be valuable
to colleagues when shared. This highlights the fact that
people are in the core of all knowledge sharing mechanisms
– sharing information and knowledge is not technology alone
even though there are all kinds of technical solutions
available.
The degree of articulation is another key concept in this
context. Degree of articulation is classified into explicit and
tacit knowledge [14]. Typically, some information is
relatively straightforward, easy to convert into oral or written
format and thus can be made known – explicit - to others.
Tacit knowledge cannot be shared as easily: tacit knowledge
is often based on expertise and experience, and may not be
explained or expressed in words [12].
Typically, in organizations there is plenty of data which
is generated through organizational processes and directly
stored into digital format. This type of information can easily
be accessed, combined and transferred from one location to
another. As an example, data on production and sales
volumes is typically stored to information systems which are
used in these functions. The related question could be
“How many units of product A have been manufactured
in line X on last Tuesday?”
This kind of information is result of the manufacturing
process, and data can be retrieved from the manufacturing
information system so that the question can be answered.
The answer is a number, straightforward to understand and
can be easily shared with others. However, all questions may
not be answered by retrieving the correct answer from the
database. Many answers contain knowledge which is more
difficult to articulate, often because it deals with issues
which are not clear. Consider following question
“Why have the manufacturing volumes of line X been
dropping?”
These manufacturing-related questions indicate the
challenges of articulation. The first question can be answered
by 
simply 
checking 
the 
production 
numbers. 
The
prerequisite is that the company has a system for storing,
browsing and retrieving manufacturing information. Usually
this is the case so there is no problem here. The second
question– why have manufacturing volumes been dropping -
can be connected to several “issues” which have their roots
either inside the company or in its environment. The
volumes may have gone down because of problems with
raw-material delivery, or there is not enough demand on
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2
p
g

products, for example. The explanation may require
combining different facts and issues. Answering the question
calls for understanding the overall setting, taking into
account several factors that affect manufacturing is needed in
order to answer the question thoroughly. This kind of
expertise is referred to as tacit knowledge [12].
A.
Mechanisms in information and knowledge sharing
Information and knowledge sharing is based on two main
mechanisms (Table 1): knowledge may be shared from
person-to-person which is referred to as personalization, or
using technology and information systems to store, manage
and share information that is codified to a format that allows
this. When knowledge and information can be expressed in
words and numbers it can be codified and shared, transmitted
and stored in electronic format which allows browsing,
retrieving and combining information. On the other hand,
mechanisms for sharing experience-based, unclear, intuition-
based or non-verbal information with others
-
tacit
knowledge - cannot take advantage of technology and
computers, not at least as directly as in the case where
information is originally alphabetical, created and managed
with information systems.
TABLE 1. MECHANISMS FOR SHARING KNOWLEDGE
The mechanisms for sharing knowledge (Table 1)
combine the two dimensions of information and knowledge.
As a result, sharing knowledge and information is classified
into individual-explicit, individual tacit, collective-explicit
and collective-tacit classes. The degree of articulation is
shown on the vertical axis explicit – tacit, and the level of
aggregation - individualization and collectivism - is on the
horizontal 
level. 
Depending 
on 
the 
degree 
of
individualization and collectivism and the type of knowledge
are the knowledge sharing mechanisms more person-to-
person oriented or rely on sharing codified information, often
using information technology. Classifying information and
knowledge into one of the four segments helps in
understanding mechanisms and methods in collecting,
storing and sharing information, and the roles of information
technology vs. person-to-person interaction. For example,
when information is explicit, and/or collective by nature
storing, retrieving and transferring it is relatively easy by
using information technology (down-right corner in Table 1).
[3], [7].
Information technology has an increasingly important
role in knowledge sharing, but it is not the only thing that is
needed here. Information that is individual and tacit is
considerably more challenging to share (the opposite corner
in Table 1). Boh [2] argues that when the complexity of
information increases more personal interaction is needed in
understanding it. Often sharing information calls for
discussion and clarification so that there will become mutual
understanding of phenomena. This highlights the importance
of personal interaction, especially when the information is
tacit.
In real life there are several practices for sharing
information and knowledge in organizations. Factors like
organizational size, geographical distances and industry
explain the variety of different knowledge sharing methods.
Typically, when the organizational size increases the
challenges in managing dispersed locations, units and teams
require more integration than in a smaller company. The
challenging issue of interest is finding the best methods in
sharing 
information 
and 
knowledge 
throughout 
the
organization. Practices in one organization may not fit other,
and even between units in one enterprise there are
differences in the way information sharing among people is
done. Typically, there is a built-in process of adjusting and
developing process to address the needs of the people
involved [2].
Figure 1. Methods in sharing information with customers
In this context understanding customer needs and sharing
customer-originated requirements is of special interest. The
taxonomy of methods in sharing information with customers
(Figure 1) is a summary of results from a research which
included over 160 companies. In this research Cooper and
Edgett [6] studied the methods of capturing and sharing
customer information on customer needs, in connection with
Individual
Collective
Tacit
-
Personalization
Social
Networking
Facilititating
person-to-
person
knowledge
sharing
Explicit
- Codification
Sharing
personal
memos,
working
papers etc.
Knowledge
management
applica-
tions
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2
p
g

idea generation and R&D development. Here the objective is
to determine how extensively each method is used
(popularity), and to gauge management’s perception of the
value of the method (effectiveness on the vertical axis) in
generating high-value new product ideas.
The findings of Cooper and Edgett [6] indicate that most
effective results can be achieved by working together with
customer (methods above the horizontal middle line).
Examples of these methods are customer visit teams, focus
groups and lead user analysis. Also describing the relation
from an ethnographic viewpoint and involving the customer
in helping to design products, brainstorming, customer
advisory board and building a community of enthusiasts
were considered effective.
The most popular methods include internal idea capturing
system, which usually involves staff soliciting new product
ideas (often using internal Web pages), and then screening
and managing these ideas with a structured process.
Peripheral vision and patent mining were also very popular,
and like internal idea capturing system these are methods
that are based on organizations internal ideas, and do not
directly involve customers in idea generation. Peripheral
vision refers to assessing the external world to identify trends
and threats and, through this process define potential new
products. Patent mining involves mapping or mining others’
patents and seeking technical and competitive ideas.
However, this method does not directly generate new
product ideas as such. The common element of these
methods is that they do not involve customer in idea
generation.
Discussions and changing ideas with the customer is a
key issue. Relying on ideas submitted to competitions is not
very effective (lower left-corner). It is still possible to take
advantage of technology also in this context. Making notes
with computers and PDA’s, sharing memos with email,
using CRM-systems to record ideas are examples on how
technology can support capturing and sharing information
and knowledge – once it has been codified to written format.
How is information being shared with the above
methods? The mechanisms for sharing information and
knowledge are mostly person-to-person, there are few
exceptions like external submission of ideas that rely directly
on technology in capturing ideas. The information in product
and service development is mostly complex, unclear and
tacit. When new innovations are being developed sharing
ideas, discussing and brainstorming together rely heavily on
personal interaction with others. In most cases ideas,
comments and advice from the customer come through
discussions, meetings, workshops and alike.
B.
Personal interaction or information technology
Let us look at knowledge codification. It refers to a
knowledge-sharing mechanism which aims to capture
knowledge into systems that are accessible to others in the
company. Usually knowledge-sharing mechanisms that rely
on codification take advantage of information technology,
computer 
networks 
and 
knowledge 
management
applications. The mechanism should capture knowledge that
is individual or collective in nature and make it wider
property of the organization [8]. Hence, there should be an
underlying technical infrastructure for sharing codified
knowledge which has to be implemented, in operation and
continuously developed in order to create a robust platform
for sharing codified knowledge.
Information that is tacit cannot take advantage of
information 
technology 
as 
directly: 
experience-based
knowledge may need to be interpreted in order to be
understood. Also in this case organizations have to develop
platforms for sharing knowledge and information, there is a
need for facilitating person-to-person knowledge-sharing –
personalization - which is the primary mechanism for
sharing tacit information. Here social networking is
important [9].
It is argued that knowledge sharing mechanisms that are
based on personalization are rather ‘ad hoc’ and informal
because they are result of interaction between humans. On
the other hand, the advantage of personal interaction is
flexibility and the possibility to transmit and share tacit
knowledge. In contrast, sharing codified information is
assumed to be more formal and incorporate electronic
databases in knowledge sharing [5].
Information technology allows connecting to information
anywhere and at any time. However, this is not the case with
person-to-person knowledge sharing.  It has relatively poor
geographical reach and also the number of people who can
share information in this way is limited [18]. Whereas
codified information can be coded, stored, browsed and
retrieved with computer technology, requires personalization
a more ‘personal’ approach. The knowledge seeker has to get
into touch with the potential knowledge provider, and the
knowledge provider should be willing to share information
and knowledge with the knowledge seeker. Knowledge
sharing via personalization means that the person who seeks
knowledge is aware of what information others have, and
knows where to find memos, working papers etc. Asking
from colleagues may also lead to other concerns; seeking
information from others in the company may be considered
as a weakness or ignorance on a given issue [11].
The most significant benefit of personalization is
flexibility in sharing information as personal interaction
allows clarifications, argumentation and discussion, thus
making it possible to share ideas and get feedback, build
“consensus” in a way that it becomes clear that both the
sender and receiver of information understand the issues and
phenomena that are being shared. Furthermore, discussions
and sharing different viewpoints can also generate new
knowledge
[15].
Promoting personal interaction and
personalization should therefore be emphasized throughout
the organization.
IV.
DISCUSSION
It is important to notice that some knowledge and
information is created as result of cooperative action while
other is result of personal reflection, intuition and
understanding. In both cases the importance of human
element in sharing knowledge is significant. Dealing with
individual and/or tacit information is more challenging than
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2
p
g

sharing straightforward data [2], [7], [12]. Furthermore, the
greater the complexity of the information the more is
personal interaction needed in understanding it [2]. Often
both technological solutions and person-to-person interaction
mechanisms are used as these tend to complement each
others in knowledge sharing [2].  This notion gives us an
additional dimension to the framework for sharing
knowledge.
The use of different knowledge sharing mechanisms in
product and service development was studied empirically in
a group of case organizations. The goal was to identify and
evaluate methods in capturing customer requirements in
product and service development. Here we study the
mechanisms that have been developed and are being used in
gathering, storing and sharing information on customer
needs, and then integrating this information into product and
service development process. As a result, the question of
interest was how customers are connected into the
development of products and services. We also studied how
information technology is being used here, and what is the
role of person-to-person information sharing.
The case companies were relative product-oriented, but
they share a need for developing integrated services to the
customers. This involves integrating existing products and
services together, and moving from time-based pricing
towards new pricing methods. Here issues like smooth
operations, maintaining quality and avoiding interruptions
are key issues, not the price of service-staff making a visit.
In developing products and services, a key issue is
understanding customer needs. This research shows that
there are several possible methods in listening to users,
engaging and empowering the developers involved. Sharing
information on customer needs, and making this more widely
known among the co-workers is usually challenging. In the
case organizations this issue was acknowledged and there
were practices for sharing information on customer needs.
These range from methods like working together with
customers in development to internal infrastructures (such as
workgroup and team-meetings, unit and company-level
meetings gathering periodically or when needed). Clearly,
the range of methods is an organization-dependent issue.
These methods may also be extended beyond sharing
customer information to a variety of other information
sharing needs within the organization.
It seems that the more customer is involved in the
development the better the solutions meet customer needs. It
is still noteworthy that high customer involvement is only
part of the formula; it is equally important to develop
platforms and infrastructures for teams, units and functions
that so that sharing customer-related information throughout
the organization would become possible. Ultimately,
knowledge sharing depends on human motivation and
dedication - these should be empowered in this context.
REFERENCES
[1]
Blair, D.C. “Knowledge management: Hype, hope, or help?” Journal
of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
53(12), 2002, pp. 1019-1028.
[2]
Boh, W. F., “Reuse of knowledge assets from repositories: A mixed
methods study.”. Information & Management, 45, 2008, pp. 365-375.
[3]
Cabrera, A. and Cabrera, E. F. “Knowledge-sharing dilemmas.”
Organization Studies, 23(5), 2002, pp. 687–710.
[4]
Chesbrough, H. “Open Innovation. The New imperative for Creating
and Profiting from Technology.” Boston, Massachusetts. Harvard
Business School Press, 2003.
[5]
Choi, B. and Lee, H., “An empirical investigation of KM styles and
their effect on corporate performance.” Information & Management,
40(5), 2003, pp. 403–417.
[6]
Cooper, R. and Edgett, S. “Ideation for product innovation: What are
the best methods?” PDMA Visions Magazine, March 2008.
[7]
Crossan, M. M., Lane, H. W., and White, R. E., “An organizational
learning framework: From intuition to institution.” Academy of
Management Review, 24(3), 1999, pp. 522–537.
[8]
Earl, M., “Knowledge management strategies: toward a taxonomy.”
Journal of Management Information Systems, 18(1), 2001, pp. 215–
233.
[9]
Hansen, M. T., “The search-transfer problem: the role of weak ties in
sharing knowledge across organization subunits.2 Administrative
Science Quarterly, 44(1), 1999, pp. 82–111.
[10] Hou, Jia-Jeng. “Toward a Research Model of Market Orientation and
Dynamic Capabilities.” Social Behavior and Personality, Vol. 36, No:
9, 2008, pp.1251-1268.
[11] Menon, T. and Pfeffer, J., “Valuing internal vs. external knowledge:
explaining the preference for outsiders.” Management Science, 49(4),
2003, pp. 497–513.
[12] Nonaka, I.,
“A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge
creation.” Organization Science, 5(1), 1994, pp. 14–37.
[13] Olivera, F., “Memory systems in organizations: an empirical
investigation of mechanisms for knowledge collection, storage and
access.” Journal of Management Studies, 37(6), 2000, pp. 811–832.
[14] Polanyi, 
M.,
“Personal 
knowledge: 
Toward 
a 
post-critical
philosophy.” New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1962.
[15] Prencipe, A. and Tell, F., “Inter-project learning: processes and
outcomes of knowledge codification in project-based firms.”
Research Policy, 30(9), 2001, pp. 1373–1394.
[16] von Hippel, E. “Democratizing Innovation.” MIT Press. Cambridge,
MA. 2005 (available http://web.mit.edu) Accessed 26th August 2010.
[17] Zahra, S. and George, G. “Absorptive Capacity: A Review,
Reconceptualization, and Extension.” Academy of Management
Review, 27:2, 2002, pp.185-203.
[18] Evans, P. and Wurster, T. “Strategy and the new economics of
information.” Harvard Business Review, 75(5), 1997, pp. 71–82.
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2
p
g

