 
 
 
 Estimation of Telecommunication Technologies, Services and 
Costs to Support Public Transport Information System 
Requirements  
Tapio Väärämäki (tapiov@jyu.fi)1, Timo Korhonen (timo.korhonen@tkk.fi)2, Vesa Riihimäki 
(vesa.riihimaki@tkk.fi), Reijo Salminen (reijo.salminen@m-oas.fi), and Arto Karila 
(arto.karila@karila.com) 
1University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland 2 Aalto University, Helsinki, Finland  
  
Abstract—Unified vision of Helsinki Metropolitan Area 
Council (YTV) aims systematically develop ITS services and 
associated networking technologies to follow the very latest 
global ITS trends. In this study, Intelligent Transport Systems 
(ITS) telecommunication technology, service and economical 
scenarios for YTV area are inspected up to 2014. Our goal set 
by YTV is to research and validate YTV suggested ITS services 
and to investigate viable telecommunication networking 
alternatives in an evolution timeline. At the moment, most ITS 
services of YTV do not require broadband connection or real-
time operation, as traffic light priority and RFID-based ticking. 
On the other hand, there are timely broadband networking 
needs as supplying Internet connection to passengers. 
Generally, ITS service data rates are increasing and real-time 
operation is getting important as indicated by efforts of car 
manufactures to develop WLAN solutions. Also, integrated 
real-time ITS operation and management systems require high 
data rates. Generally, Quality of Service (QoS) requirements of 
ITS services form a base in our evaluation. Our results, 
compressed to technology-service scenarios, indicate that YTV 
has the following paths for successful ITS development: (1) 
They can buy the networking services/technologies from a 
telecommunication operator, (2) They can build own network 
or (3) They can realize a hybrid solution. Our results in 
telecommunication networking alternatives are compressed 
into investment sensitivity estimations that can be used to 
support decision making. 
 
Keywords – Intelligent Transport System, Networking services, 
Networking technologies, Investment estimation, Networking 
Scenarios 
I. OVERVIEW 
In this study, ITS telecommunication scenarios for 
Helsinki Municipality area are inspected up to 2014. Our 
study analyzes various networking technology scenarios 
intended to support existing and planned ITS services for 
busses and trams. Also, we comment relating business 
aspects and competition environment. 
Generally, QoS requirements of user services form a base 
in this evaluation. Typical technical QoS parameters include 
data rate, delay, error rate, packet loss and coverage. Service 
associated performance qualifiers come from pricing 
models, purchasing, operation and maintenance as well as 
service arrangements and user interface design and 
operation. 
Currently, city of Helsinki applies Radio Frequency 
Identification (RFID) – based ticketing solution, traffic light 
priority switching for some of the most important crossing 
and the city has tested broadband communications in busses 
using Flash-OFDM technology [1]. Internet, mobile phone 
and real-time displays at busses, trams and commuter train 
stops, terminals and other central locations facilitate 
convenient travelling and assist in travelling planning. 
Tickets can be paid also by travel cards or purchased even 
by mobile phones. Unified vision of YTV is to 
systematically 
develop 
ITS 
services 
and 
associated 
networking technologies to follow the very latest global ITS 
trends. 
At the moment, most of the ITS services do not require 
broadband connection or real-time operation with few 
exceptions as supplying Internet connection directly to 
passengers that is also part of the ITS development strategy 
of Finland [2]. However, the services will inevitably develop 
further and respective capacity and delay requirements will 
stringent with services such as passenger internet and video 
surveillance (Table I); [3]. YTV’s vision is that networking 
solutions should have open interfaces whenever possible for 
scalability and device manufacturer independence.  Also, 
they should be modular and cost effective thus enabling easy 
system development. 
Our results to be discussed further in this paper indicate 
that based on inspected networking technology alternatives 
and respective evolution pathways, YTV has in principle 
three strategies for ITS development: (1) YTV can buy the 
networking services/technologies from a telecommunication 
operator, (2) build own network or (3) to realize a hybrid 
solution. 
The paper is organized as follows. In section I the 
overview of the study was introduced. Section II presents 
the backgrounds of the search in more detail. Section III 
discusses about the service development in the study 
environment. Section IV introduces available networking 
development scenarios for YTV. Section V presents the cost 
analysis of chosen scenarios. Finally, Section VI concludes 
the paper.  
II. BACKGROUND 
ITS services set technical, geographical and economical 
requirements for networking technology as illustrated in 
189
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

 
 
 
Figure 1. We have divided ITS services into real-
time/buffered and basic/supplementary service in order to 
support flexible and modular networking technology 
development in the time span of the system evaluation up to 
2014. Division to real-time/buffered services is linked to 
telecommunication networking QoS parameters. This means 
that the networking technology must satisfy technical 
service requirements. Division to basic/supplementary 
services is linked to economical constrains and flexible 
system realization. We assume that the basic services 
following definitions of Table I, carry a greater degree of 
importance in economical sense than the supplementary 
services. Also, the supplementary services can be realized 
without a joint telecommunication networking solution 
though their common management (requiring transmission 
of a larger amount of data) can also bring up some 
significant benefits. For example, remotely controlled 
uploading of advertisements could allow them to be updated 
several times per day if required, and on-time realized 
system diagnostics and software updates could increase 
system operation/maintenance efficiency.  
Geographical quality requirements affect especially 
overall system costs constrained to service quality. For 
instance, it is not necessarily required for the networking 
solutions to cover geographical areas that the busses do not 
run. However, if this is realized, passengers can be offered 
end-to-end telecommunication services leading to a greater 
degree on service engagement and potentially to some novel, 
more usable and/or profitable services. This can be realized 
especially by using heterogeneous networking concepts 
linking ITS networking structures to the existing networks, 
as GSM/UMTS, Wi-Fi or femtocells. The role of 
networking alternatives of Figure 1 is elementary because 
they form the bases to inspect the respective ITS service 
solutions for YTV.  In summary, in Networking we research 
applicable technologies and interfaces. This inspects partly 
overlapping solutions. For instance, WiMAX and 802.11 
mesh- networks can support about the same technical 
service quality though their costs and technological 
maturity/coverage differs. In Finland, WiMAX is operated 
in licensed bands and these bands are interference and 
congestion free. In Economics we strive to inspect network 
costs and suggest realization alternatives. In Service 
requirements we introduce classification of ITS services 
suitable to YTV, discuss the respective service requirements 
set to the telecommunication infra, and inspect future 
development. 
III. SERVICE DEVELOPMENT 
The project of YTV [14, 15] that we refer in this study, 
strives to develop cost efficient and user-friendly ITS for the 
expanding Helsinki Metropolitan commuting area (note that 
YTV has changed its name in 2010 to HSL [16]). The 
system includes payment of fares, real time passenger 
information and online data communication from and to the 
vehicles (Table 1). The system enables to collect fares from 
passengers based on agreed tariffs. The first stage of the 
project is realization of updated RFID-ticketing system in 
2009-2011 that is already now practically completed. The 
system is planned to serve over its 15-year life cycle cost- 
effectively and YTV expects it to be designed such that it 
can be easily updated to follow technology and customer 
needs [4; 5]. 
Table I summarizes service QoS requirements based on 
device manufacturer’s data sheets and estimated service 
statistics. Service profiles are constrained to the assumed, 
required service quality. For instance, data storage 
requirement for video surveillance depends on video quality 
and channel delay. Top priority services, as listed by YTV, 
are as follows:  
 
Figure 1. Study Framework 
190
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

 
 
 
Ticketing system is intended for selling tickets and for 
ticketing system follow-ups. It enables paying fares by travel 
card, in cash or by mobile phones. 
Traveller information system produces location, route, 
and buss stop information for passengers. In addition, this 
information is applied for reporting and for route analysis 
(congestion follow-ups and real-time timetable updates).  
Traffic light priority targets to make crossings faster for 
public transportation in rush hours. 
 
System upgrades should be modular to follow technology 
/ service development. Also, open interfaces to other fare, 
ticketing and information systems are required. System 
components are tracked in the duration of the project for 
applicable 
updates 
from 
device 
manufacturers 
and 
outsourced service providers. Open interfaces are therefore 
important. 
 
TABLE I  
OVERVIEW OF QOS REQUIREMENTS FOR THE EXPECTED ITS SERVICES IN 
THE FRAMEWORK OF THIS STUDY. 
 
Service 
Basic Supp. Real-
time 
Buff. Note 
Emergency /Fault 
notifications 
 
 
 
 
few kbit/s 
On-board 
ticketing 
 
 
 
 
slow, real-time 
traffic 
Passenger 
information 
 
 
 
 
100 kb/s / 
vehicle 
Conductor (in a 
train) 
communications 
 
 
 
 
GSM/UMTS, 
slow, real-time 
traffic 
Traffic light 
priorities 
 
 
 
 
slow, real-time 
traffic 
Passenger 
Internet 
 
 
 
 
1 Mb/s / 
vehicle 
GPS 
 
 
 
 
downlink GPS, 
uplink slow, 
real-time traffic
Equipment 
diagnostics 
 
 
 
 
slow, real-time 
traffic 
Remote control 
 
 
 
 
10-100 kb/s / 
vehicle 
Fleet 
management 
 
 
 
 
downlink GPS, 
uplink slow, 
real-time traffic
Ticket control 
 
 
 
 
slow, real-time 
traffic 
Forecasts 
 
 
 
 
below 100 kb / 
vehicle / 24h 
Ticketing records  
 
 
 
app. 1Mb / 
vehicle / 24h 
Parameters 
 
 
 
 
below 100 kb 
/ vehicle / 24h
Route 
information 
 
 
 
 
few Mb / 
vehicle / 24h 
Realized location 
information 
 
 
 
 
below 100 kb / 
vehicle / 24h 
Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
few 
download 
10b/vehicle/24
h 
Software updates 
 
 
 
 
max 10 Mb / 
vehicle/24 h 
Video 
surveillance 
 
 
 
 
max 1 Gb / 
vehicle / 24h 
 
IV. NETWORKING DEVELOPMENT SCENARIOS FOR YTV 
Let us now consider various networking alternatives by 
following Figure 2. The thick lines represent main evolution 
pathways and the dashed lines supplementary pathways that 
relate to networking technologies that can be used in some 
special circumstances as for instance to support geographic 
high telecommunication traffic density areas. Universal 
Mobile Access (UMA) of 3GPP refers to development of 
seamless handover in multimode 2G+/3G/Wi-Fi handsets. 
The femtocell technology can increase short range (up to 50 
meters) 3G coverage and provide new operator based 
service and pricing models. Digital Video Broadcasting 
(DVB) technologies (terrestrial (T) and handheld (H)) 
support video reception especially for special receivers.  For 
further information regarding these scenarios, see [6], where 
they are explained and argued in more detail. 
 
 
Figure 2. Networking technology development alternatives for YTV- area 
 
Evaluation 
of 
network 
technologies 
and 
service 
environment 
leads 
us 
to 
inspect 
two 
alternative 
implementation scenarios. The first scenario relays on 
traditional subscriber-operator business model, where YTV 
as a transport operator orders all telecommunication services 
from a mobile network operator. Our second model suggests 
building of own network. Both options can be supported by 
Wi-Fi and Flash-OFDM technology. 
A. Being a subscriber in operator’s network 
Currently a technically simple solution is to acquire 
telecommunication services from mobile network operators. 
191
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

 
 
 
Their 
network 
coverage 
for 
2G 
is 
country-wide, 
subscriptions are cheap and there is a wide variety of 
terminals available. 3G network capacity and performance 
seems to improve rapidly and recent HSPA upgrades 
increase download rates up to 3.6 and 5 Mbps. Also, 
femtocell solutions can enable new interesting business 
models for both YTV and public transportation operators 
[7]. 
YTV presents a big customer for operators with 
approximately 1700 vehicles. Number of subscriptions is 
not, however, so large that YTV could necessarily control 
development of operator’s networks to a desired direction. 
Anyhow, the current technology level should be adequate 
enough to start implementing the planned real-time services 
by the operator based model. 
Hardware investments should be quite straightforward 
until 2014. To start with, HSPA-compatible 3G modems 
could be purchased and later upgraded to LTE-compatible 
modems. In this scenario, we estimate that operators would 
start to use LTE widely at latest in 2014, and thus also the 
migration to LTE-compatible modems would happen at this 
time. This is in-line with a rule-of-thumb that typical life 
span for a telecommunication devices, such as core network 
switches, is about 5-8 years. (We do note that life span for 
some telecommunication devices such as mobile phones and 
other related consumer electronics can be substantially 
shorter.) We assume that in 2014 LTE technology should be 
well-established. 
WLANs and femtocells can be used together with mobile 
networks. This is due to the fact that operation of mobile 
phone networks as such may not be cost-effective or 
convenient for large data transfers such as video surveillance 
data. WLAN access points can be used in smaller areas such 
as depots to enable buffered data transfers and relating 
WLAN based services. Costs for building the WLAN 
coverage to these small areas should also be relatively 
modest. Co-operation in femtocells with telecommunication 
operators can open up new business models [8]. Flash-
OFDM networking could be used in parallel with the mobile 
phone subscriptions for reliability. Mobile subscriptions and 
terminals can be purchased from multiple operators that 
should compensate operator dependency. Data streams from 
different subscriptions could also be combined by multi-
homing to enhance networking performance and reliability.  
In overall, subscribing services from mobile operators 
should be easy and reliable. Current service fees are also 
very reasonable in Finland due to healthy competition 
environment and there is no reason to expect them to rise 
significantly. However, YTV should get itself operator 
based guarantees of the planned QoS before making the 
final investment decision. This is important due to the 
development of overall networking loading that is affected 
by other network users too. An important feature of the 
operator based model is that the network would be basically 
owned by the operator potentially excluding the WLAN hot 
spots. This restricts the way how major part of the network 
would be developed from YTV point of view. 
B. Building own network 
Operating area of YTV reaches 12 municipalities (in 
traffic and waste services) in Helsinki capital area which all 
could utilize the same network. If an own network would be 
build, it could support a wide variety of municipal services, 
also other actors than just YTV. This strengthens financial 
bases of this scenario. 
A base of large capacity wireless network is a fast and 
reliable fibre core network. In YTV case we have estimated 
that the fibre network would consists of 1000 route 
kilometres, 500 node points, and 12 000 device ports costing 
28 k€ / month (fibre) + 12,5 k€ /  month (active devices) + 
22,5 k€ / month (network) maintenance, yielding 63 k€ / 
month or 756 k€ / year. In this estimation we assume the 
devices would be placed in existing server rooms and power 
consumption would not be a significant cost factor in the 
overall budget. Prices are based on the manufacturers’ data. 
In the network, own fibres and/or Ethernet-layer virtual 
networks (VLANs) could be separated for served parties 
without trading their QoS requirements. If the own network 
would be build and marketed wisely, YTV could charge 
other users as referred earlier (cities, hospital districts, fire 
and rescue services, operators etc.) so that YTV’s own 
service cost could be subsidizes. If compared to annual costs 
municipalities need to pay for operators, the 756 k€ annual 
cost feels a relatively small amount. 
Implementing own network would require building a 
wireless access network between the vehicles and the core 
fibre network. The access network could be implemented by 
various technologies: YTV could build cheap Wi-Fi 
coverage by placing access points especially to those places 
where capacity demand is high. Wi-Fi is now and probably 
also at least until year 2014 the most cost-efficient ITS 
related hot-spot wireless technology.  
In the city of Helsinki, there are 450 traffic light 
controlled crossroads and 3000 bus or tram stops. This 
makes in total 3500 areas where access points should be 
placed. Some 7000 WLAN access points would give fairly 
adequate coverage to bus traffic roads in Helsinki. The 
forthcoming 802.11p technology supports especially well 
ITS needs and will spread along Wi-Fi. On the other hand, 
WiMAX technology can be used to provide larger area 
coverage for sparsely populated areas and to supply Wi-Fi 
access points by fixed wireless access (RF-links). By using 
YTV’s fibre core network telecommunication operators 
could setup high-speed wireless coverage areas to support 
other network technologies too. For example, Flash-OFDM 
and 3G-LTE networks could thus be extended. Relating cost 
saving would benefit both the network operators and YTV. 
Own network can be developed more independently and 
starting from own needs. Established fibre core network can 
be expected to have lifespan extending up to 2014 and even 
192
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

 
 
 
later. After the payback period, the network would be totally 
owned and controlled by YTV. In this point, the most 
significant network expenditures would be up keeping and 
maintenance fees. Own network could be easily tailored to 
serve specific service areas and needs. Cooperation with 
telecom operators would be mutually scaled as own network 
and services develop. 
V. COSTS ANALYSIS FOR THE NETWORKING OPTIONS 
To be able to compare the two networking options in 
terms of telecommunication network investment costs and 
especially investment sensitivities, we now discuss cost 
structures.  
Being a subscriber in operator’s network is more 
straightforward to analyze, because operators list publicly 
subscription fees. We can even expect that some volume 
discounts could be negotiated by YTV. 
Option of building own network carries more insecurities. 
Especially, estimation of route kilometres, the number of 
required Wi-Fi access points and costs required for cable 
digging carries insecurities.  In rural areas, building a fibre 
network would cost some 5-6 €/meter including work and 
the cable [9]. Expenses can be divided approximately fifty-
fifty to work and the cable. In city areas cable digging is 
significantly more expensive especially due to opening and 
restoring asphalt and revetments. Also, existing cables and 
pipelines make work demanding and difficult. Thus an 
opportunistic network building utilizing existing cables, 
tunnels, and other infrastructure should be applied always 
when possible.  Let us estimate, based on comparable 
projects as referred in [10], that setup expenses would be 5 
million Euros for the fibre network covering the assumed 
1000 route kilometres. Thus, for the network, it would cost 
5000 €/km to dig the cable. (This relatively low level cost 
estimate is based on using existing underground cable pits 
and channels. Without them the cost would be substantially 
higher, eg in the order of $40/ meter [11].) If the investment 
would be funded with a 5 M€ bank loan, the total expenses 
for 7 years annuity loan with 4.5% interest rate would be 5,8 
M€ with a 25 years payback period yielding 8,3 M€. 
(Expenditures for the active devices were listed in the 
previous chapter.)  Also in the case of own network, 
wireless access network is required to connect the vehicles. 
YTV estimates that at least 7000 access points are needed to 
provide adequate coverage. 
If the price for an access point, antenna and outdoor-box 
would be 200€, the resulting cost would be 7000 x 200 € = 
1,4 M€. Network maintenance and operation could be 
outsourced as with the fibre network. However, in this case 
the price per access point should be much lower, e.g., 5 
€/access point making 7000 x 5 € = 35 000 € in total per 
month.  
Wi-Fi is not the only technology which can be utilized to 
build the access network, and e.g., WiMAX could be an 
alluring option in the future. Currently, however, due to 
equipment prices, frequency allocation issues, and terminal 
availability, Wi-Fi might still be the most viable option.  
Own wireless access network can also be supported by 
3G subscription. For example, one 3G subscription in each 
vehicle would increase service reliability especially at the 
beginning when wireless coverage is not optimized and 
there is no longer term experience how it works. Costs of 
various wireless networking options are listed in Table 2. 
 
TABLE II 
OPERATOR SUBSCRIPTION FEES 
Access technology 
Monthly Fee 
Terminal Price 
GPRS / 3G 
10€ 
100€ 
Wi-Fi Access 
Point 
5€ 
200€ 
Wi-Fi Terminal 
0€ 
50€ 
FLASH-OFDM 
40€ 
200€ 
In-Vehicle 
Equipment 
0€ 
4000€ 
 
Total costs for fixed and wireless networking are shown 
in Figures 3 and 4. Calculations are done for 7 year bank 
loan and the monthly costs are shown on y-axis. Calculation 
parameter sensitivities are shown on the x-axis. The 
parameter change refers to a price change of a single 
acquisition unit. For example, in the case of the fibre, an 
increase of 10% could mean either an increase in the digging 
costs or fibre price so that it results 10% increase in the total 
fibre costs. The price of the fibre itself is, however, a 
relatively small factor in the overall costs (and also easier to 
predict), and it would therefore be useful to estimate 
especially the digging costs. However, this requires precise 
understanding of the current installation infrastructure in the 
YTV area such as access to a municipal tunnelling, piping, 
and electricity maps and plans. At the time of this study, the 
actual implementation alternatives were not yet available 
that results great cost sensitivities in this respect.  
In Figure 3, sensitivity analysis indicates that the costs of 
fibre network are somewhat critical. Costs of other 
components are easier to estimate due to existing market 
information. If the fibre network would be paid in the first 7 
years, it is “free” to use as long it has enough capacity to 
serve the users. We may estimate that the capacity of a 
metropolitan wide, high speed fibre core network would be 
enough even for the next 30 years demand [12]. 
 
193
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

 
 
 
40 000
50 000
60 000
70 000
80 000
90 000
100 000
-50 %
-30 %
-10 %
10 %
30 %
50 %
70 %
90 %
Parameter change
Monthly costs, €
Fibre price
Active devices
Management per month
Interest rate
 
Figure 3. Sensitivities for monthly costs of fixed network 
 
In Figure 4, we note that Flash-OFDM subscriptions are 
quite expensive. On the other hand, they can support high 
overall QoS provided that the number of subscribers remains 
in system limits set by the applied 450 MHz bandwidth in 
Finland. In-vehicle equipment for 1700 vehicles including 
on-board servers, Wi-Fi terminals and connections to 
peripherals are the most sensitive for price fluctuations. For 
example, if the price of in-vehicle equipment increases by 
20%, it becomes more expensive than the Flash-OFDM 
offered by current price. In-vehicle equipment CAPEX 
depends on device and installation costs (including network 
installations) that depend on vehicle type, contractor etc. 
Based on earlier studies, the installation environment can 
vary greatly in vehicles and carriages [13]. Building and 
maintaining the Wi-Fi network of 7000 access points seems 
currently reasonable priced. However, some cost margin can 
be obtained using mobile subscriptions as a backup to start 
with. 
100 000
120 000
140 000
160 000
180 000
200 000
220 000
240 000
-50 %
-30 %
-10 %
10 %
30 %
50 %
70 %
90 %
Parameter change
Montly costs, €
Mobile per month
Wi-Fi Network
Wi-Fi management per month
Flash-OFDM per month
In-Vehicle Equipment (Wi-Fi costs)
 
In summary, cost structure and sensitivity analysis should 
always be used to support ITS investment decision making 
and to find appropriate pricing models for services. 
Application of ITS in any city area faces similar problem 
framework as we have discussed in this paper and therefore 
scenarios of YTV should also be applicable in a more 
general level. We have provided examples of various 
aspects that should be considered when establishing city-
wide ITS networking solutions. If establishment of own 
optical core network is seriously considered even in some 
extent by YTV, investment economics can be improved if 
part of the network capacity is rented to third parties, as 
telecom operators, companies or officials in the YTV area of 
municipalities. 
Generally, 
cooperation 
with 
telecommunication operators can be useful. For instance, 
there are services that interest both YTV and network 
operators as femtocell technology. Therefore, searching and 
Figure 4. Sensitivities for monthly costs of wireless network 
 
Sensitivity analysis indicates that there are certain cost 
parameters, where price fluctuations result major changes in 
overall costs. In the case of building own network, the fibre 
price has a significant role in the total costs. Especially the 
in-vehicle 
equipment 
costs 
and 
the 
Flash-OFDM 
subscriptions contain significant uncertainties. Fibre and in-
vehicle equipment price uncertainty could be reduced 
substantially with a detailed implementation plan and by 
carrying out more detailed studies. By introducing new 
revenue components into the case of building own network, 
the cost structure could be improved and make the business 
case more solid. Especially, use of femtocells to supply 
common services for operators and YTV should be further 
investigated. In summary, a separate service mapping and 
related investment analysis is recommended for rigorous 
project risk management. 
VI.  CONCLUSIONS 
We have inspected telecommunication networking, 
services and economics for YTV ITS solutions. In summary, 
we started by listing the required and optional buffered and 
real-time ITS services. When telecommunication networks 
get faster, need for buffered services will reduce. Core 
networking can be basically based on buying 3G/LTE 
service from telecommunication operators or to build own 
optical network. 3G/LTE can naturally support access 
networking too. If the optical network solution would be 
selected it carries significant initial costs and greatest 
investment sensitivities relate to fibre network setup costs. 
In this scenario, YTV could even rent extra optical network 
capacity to telecommunication operators. The second option, 
buying capacity from a telecommunication operator, would 
carry costs more in OPEX. Common services should be 
decided and negotiated with the network operator. Core 
networking solutions should be supplemented by Wi-Fi base 
stations. Usage of femtocells could support new business 
models with the network operators. ITS solutions require 
investments also to vehicles where Wi-Fi equipment 
(routers) and installation costs are important. If prices of Wi-
Fi equipment develop positively, as it seems now, all 
applications of Wi-Fi technology will come more 
favourable. Installation costs will reduce due to vehicle 
manufacturers incorporating telecommunication infra to new 
vehicles. 
194
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

 
 
 
supporting common services should be used to support 
mutually beneficial business solutions. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank Helsinki Metropolitan Area 
Council YTV for funding the research that resulted among 
others, this article. Also, the audition of the original research 
done by external opponents, professors Olli Martikainen 
(The Research Institute of Finnish Economy) and Hannu H. 
Kari (National Defence University) is highly appreciated. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
 Digita Ltd.: @ 450 Wireless Broadband:  Available at: 
http://www.450laajakaista.fi/9019/9039/9847/9081, Accessed August 
2010 
[2] 
Antti Rainio: “Development strategy for the intelligent transport in 
year 2005-2010”, ITS Finland publication 5/2005. 
[3] 
K. Sharma, H. Sharma and A. K. Ramani: “Towards In-Car Ad Hoc 
Network for Pervasive Multimedia Services”, International Journal of 
Computer and Network Security, Vol. 2, No. 3, March 2010. 
[4] 
Anderson, A.: Ticketing and Information System 2014. Helsinki: 
YTV, 2008 
[5] 
Seminar by Tallinn Training and Development Center: “Tallinn-
Turku-Helsinki-Riga interoperable ticketing cooperation”, Available 
at: http://www.takk.ee/index.php?id=14 . Särgava allee 4, Tallinn 
(Pirita), October 22nd -23rd 2009 
[6] 
Arto Karila, Timo Korhonen, Reijo Salminen, Tapio Väärämäki: 
“Laajakaista joukkoliikennevälineissä verkkoteknologiaselvitys”. 
ÄLLI publications 1/2008, The Ministry of Transport and 
Communications of Finland, 2008, Available at: 
http://alliohjelma.info/?action=file&id=19&file=19.pdf, Accessed 
June 2010 
[7] 
D. N. Knisely, T. Yoshizawa, and F. Favichia: “Standardization of 
Femtocells in 3GPP”, IEEE Communications Magazine, September 
2009 
[8] 
Motorola: “Navigating Operator Business Model Concerns for 
Femtocells”, White Paper, Available at: 
http://www.motorola.com/staticfiles/Business/Solutions/Technologies/
Femtocells/_Documents/Static%20files/Navigating_Operator_Bus_M
odel_Femtocell_558186-001-a.pdf, Accessed June 2010 
[9] 
H. Äyväri and M. Kääriäinen: ”Fiber to Home (FTTH)”, Publications 
of the Ministry of Transport and Communications 33/2005. 
[10] Raffaele Bruno, Marco Conti, and Enrico Gregori: “Mesh Networks: 
Commodity Multihop Ad Hoc Networks”, IEEE Communications 
Magazine , March 2005 
[11] Ars Technica: Fiber-to-the-X: the economics of last-mile fiber. 
Available at http://arstechnica.com/telecom/news/2010/03/fiber-its-
not-all-created-equal.ars, Accessed June 2010. 
[12] Bigo, S.: "Multiterabit/s DWDM terrestrial transmission with 
bandwidth-limiting optical filtering," Selected Topics in Quantum 
Electronics, IEEE Journal of , vol.10, no.2, pp. 329-340, March-April 
2004 
[13] Väärämäki, T.; Hämäläinen, T.: On-board broadband in trains: Proof-
of-concept phase and New business models, Publication 41/2006 by 
Ministry of Transport and Communications of Finland, 2006 
[14] HSL: “Ticketing and Information System 2014”, Available at: 
http://www.hsl.fi/EN/planning/TIS2014/Pages/default.aspx, Accessed 
5.8.2010 
[15] HSL: “Mobility management aims at influencing people’s choice of 
mode of transport”, Available at:  
http://www.hsl.fi/EN/planning/mobilitymanagement/Pages/default.asp
, Accessed 5.8.2010 
[16] HSL: “Helsinki Region Transport”, Available at: 
http://www.hsl.fi/EN/Pages/default.aspx, Accessed 5.8.2010 
 
195
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

