Context Sensitive Web Service Engineering Environment for Product Extensions in 
Manufacturing Industry 
Dragan Stokic, Ana Teresa Correia 
 
Institute for Applied System Technology, ATB-Bremen,  
Bremen, Germany 
e-mail: dragan@atb-bremen.de, correia@atb-bremen.de 
 
 
Abstract— Modern industrial companies aim to extend their 
products with services as fundamental value-added activities 
and reduce the product to be just a part of the offering. Web 
based services offer excellent opportunities for such product 
extensions. To build such services and to meet requirements of 
mass customization, the manufacturers of machines and 
equipment for production of mass customized products need 
powerful service engineering environments to allow for multi-
directional exchange of knowledge between product design, 
service design and manufacturing, as well as customers and 
other relevant organizations across the value chain, distributed 
all over the globe. Specifically, they need feedback from their 
business customers to whom they sell their equipment, as well 
as from the final-product customers. The objective of this 
research is to create a new context sensitive, product-
(web)service engineering environment based on a combination 
of Cloud Manufacturing, Product Data Management system 
and social software solutions, as well as a set of tools to support 
real time sharing of knowledge among various actors, from the 
designer up to the customer, aimed at companies producing 
machines for mass product manufacturers. The application of 
the environment in a shoe machine producer is presented. 
Keywords-product extension services; web services; service 
engineering; context sensitivity; cloud manufacturing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
To support dynamic building of new web based services 
around products, i.e., to build Product Extension Services, 
there is a need for strong collaboration among various actors 
across the value chain [1][2]. In today’s rapidly changing and 
globalizing markets, with new emerging technologies to 
support the mass production for manufacturing and service 
industries, the new paradigm, called “Mass Customization”, 
represents the trend towards the production of highly 
customized products/services. Providing customers with the 
ability to co-design products/services based on their own 
preferences has been considered one of the most distinctive 
features of mass customization. However, to meet 
requirements of building Product Service Systems (PSS) for 
mass customization, the manufacturers of machines and 
equipment for production of mass customized products need 
feedback from their business customers to whom they sell 
their equipment and services, as well as from the final-
product users/customers. Real time exchange of knowledge 
between the web service designers, product manufacturers, 
maintenance experts, as well product-service users, is 
unavoidable for the modern PSS design. This includes 
automatic data gathering and exchange along the value chain 
(e.g. data on energy consumption), but also tacit knowledge 
from various actors (e.g., experience of the maintenance 
staff), relevant for building services.  
The classical product engineering systems do not meet 
their requirements concerning neither effective support of 
concurrent web service design, nor facilitating acquisition 
and re-use of the tacit knowledge. The industrial companies 
require a structured approach offered by such classical 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technology 
(ICT) 
solutions, but, on the other hand, they need high flexibility 
from tools to allow capturing of dynamically changing 
requirements and experience of various actors [3]. Cloud 
Manufacturing (CMfg) provides new possibilities for 
collaborative design of PSS within such distributed 
enterprise, easily adaptable to highly dynamically changing 
conditions under which enterprises are developing and 
manufacturing their product-services [4]. On the other hand, 
tremendous experiences in social SoftWare (SW) solutions 
offer new opportunities for enterprises to capture and share 
experienced based knowledge among all actors across the 
value chain, highly relevant for design of web services for 
product extension. Such social SW solutions include social 
networks allowing for mass customers’ feedback (through 
opinion mining) on a global market and wiki-like solutions 
allowing for flexible organization of knowledge/experience 
capturing/documenting by non-IT experts in companies [5], 
but such solutions have not been systematically used in a 
combination to classical engineering for PSS engineering.  
The objective of the research presented, is to build a new 
web 
Service 
engineering 
environment 
for 
Product 
Extensions as a combination of classical product engineering 
tools, CMfg and social SW solutions, as such combination is 
likely to meet the requirements of distributed enterprises to 
allow for utilizing manufacturing intelligence and experience 
of all actors in the value chain, including both business 
customers / companies and product / service consumers.  
The structure of the paper is as follows: In Section II a 
brief analysis of the state-of-the-art is provided. In Section 
III, the basic proposed concept is described, while in Section 
IV the application in industry is indicated. Section V 
describes the expected innovations and benefits, as well as 
future work.  
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Product Service Systems (PSS). Based on the analysis of 
the research dealing with PSS, it can be concluded that there 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-387-2
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

are no tools to develop SW for designing and managing PSS 
appropriate for machine vendors acting at the global market 
faced with mass customization requirements, even though 
some academic SW has been making breakthroughs, 
potentially in relation to collaborative engineering of PSS, in 
e.g. the capability to address integration of SW and hardware 
[6], or dynamic simulation [7]. Existing commercial SW 
mostly addresses the designing of physical products. Some 
SW solutions do support some single phases in development  
of PSS, but no engineering environment for PSS is provided. 
In other words, interchangeability between product and 
service has yet to be realized in commercial SW. However, 
this is exactly where a new type of SW is required in order to 
provide more opportunity to create an offering with higher 
value or an innovative solution. 
Context sensitivity. With the recent advance of context-
aware computing, an increasing need arises for developing 
formal context modelling and reasoning techniques. The 
basis for context-aware applications is a well-designed 
Context Model (CM). A CM enables applications to 
understand the user’s activities in relation to situational 
conditions. Typical context modelling techniques include 
key-value models, object-oriented models, and ontological 
methods [8]. By context modelling, the problem of how to 
represent the context information is solved. However, how to 
extract context from the knowledge process and how to 
manipulate the in-formation to meet the requirement of 
knowledge enrichment remains to be solved. Since it is 
planned to model context with ontology, context extraction 
mainly is issue of context reasoning and context 
provisioning: 
how 
to 
inference 
high 
level 
context 
information from low level raw context data [9]. The 
application of context sensitivity for web service engineering 
in manufacturing industry has not been explored. 
Analysis of big data volumes as customer feedback. The 
rise of social media has enabled citizens to express their 
opinions online about everything. Companies want to tap this 
source of information to understand reviews, ratings, 
recommendations, in order to identify new marketing 
opportunities, and manage their reputations. As businesses 
look to automate the process of filtering out the noise, 
understanding the conversations, and identifying the relevant 
content, many are now looking to the field of sentiment 
analysis (also known as opinion mining). Sentiment analysis 
can be separated in two categories: manual or human 
sentiment analysis and automated sentiment analysis. Many 
companies will need a combination of these methods to 
combine the capabilities of human interpretation witch 
computational capability of automatic search and analysis. 
Automated sentiment analysis of digital texts can be 
performed combining elements from machine learning, e.g. 
support vector machines, and semantic orientation, e.g. 
ontology. This research is interested in understanding the 
polarity of a given text or document, i.e. if the author has a 
positive, negative or neutral opinion [10]. The use of such 
technique for web service engineering in manufacturing 
industry has not been sufficiently examined. 
III. 
OBJECTIVE AND BASIC CONCEPT 
The objectives of the research are to develop:  
• 
New Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) - based 
engineering environment for design of web services around 
products based on real time sharing of knowledge among 
product design, service design and manufacturing within 
distributed enterprises based on a combination of CMfg and 
Social SW solutions, allowing for involvement of customers 
on the global market, both business and final-product, where 
a novel PSS ontology is a key bonding element.  
• 
Set of SW services to support context sensitive 
capturing and searching of knowledge for service design 
functionality and reusability, as well as for context sensitive 
analysis of big volumes of data gathered over the globally 
distributed customers, design, manufacturing and suppliers. 
Concretely, the envisioned developments include: a) an 
open and extensible environment built on the foundations of 
Product Data Management/Product Lifecycle Management 
(PDM/PLM), and b) a methodology and accompanying tools 
to support the collaborative product-service design. The 
environment is specifically focusing on conceptual product-
service design, but, to a large extent, it will be applicable for 
detailed web services design.  
A new engineering environment for real time sharing of 
knowledge among various actors involved in service design 
within distributed enterprises is under development. The 
conceptual architecture of the environment is presented in 
Fig. 1. For many manufacturing companies services 
development starts to be or will be in a near future a core, 
value-generating process. To satisfy the need to differentiate 
them in the market place, nearly every company’s 
development processes have unique properties. The diversity 
and spectrum of methods and skills required to perform web 
service development processes is huge. Engineers from 
different disciplines and specialists with various backgrounds 
have to address a part or an aspect of PSS by having a partial 
model and collaborating with other experts. It is necessary to 
define common concepts and language used to interface 
between these models. However, it is not reasonable to 
totally integrate those models into a complete, holistic view 
of PSS, covering each and every aspect of all the methods 
used to define PSS. Furthermore, it is sensible that every 
discipline uses the best available tools to perform their tasks. 
The new engineering environment is therefore built as an 
open solution with loose coupling of different tools. The 
requirements of several industrial companies in different 
sectors (all proving equipment for the manufacturing of mass 
customized products) concerning PSS development have 
been analyzed and serve as a basis for the definition of new 
engineering environments and set of tools. The aim is to 
provide an environment for supporting web services 
development with ICT solution that embraces the diversity 
of users, methods, tools in use. The backbone of the environ-
ment are (PDM/PLM) solutions (e.g. open enterprise ARAS 
[11]) and social SW solutions. The advantages of the 
PDM/PLM systems are well defined structures of data 
corresponding to the well-organized industrial processes 
[12]. However, such systems, due to their often “rigid” 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-387-2
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

structures, may restrict possibilities to collect experience 
from various actors in the value chain, especially in 
dynamically 
changing conditions in highly 
flexible 
manufacturing. Especially experience from shop-floor (e.g., 
in adding sensors), and customers, is very difficult to be 
captured using classical PDM/PLM systems. Social SW 
allows for flexible capturing and presentation of experience 
of different actors, but often suffers from missing structures 
limiting reuse of these experiences.  
 
Fig.1. Concept of web service engineering environment 
 
These solutions allow non-IT experts to provide their 
experiences in any form it fits them, e.g. problems in 
manufacturing of parts or assembly can be documented by 
the shop floor in a form which best suits specific 
manufacturing line/machine (each group can define its own 
‘form’). The feedback from customers on the PSS use can be 
also provided in any form which suits specific customer 
and/or service experts (maintenance staff, etc.). On the other 
hand, social media networks such as LinkedIn, Facebook, 
Twitter, 
Pinterest, 
Instagram, 
etc. 
allow 
gathering 
experiences of mass customers in very “free” forms.  
The environment is a SOA-based open environment 
which combines open PDM/PLM and engineering systems 
and social SW, both wiki based solution for knowledge 
capturing 
of 
knowledge/experience 
of 
experts 
from 
manufacturing area, maintenance / service providers and 
business customers, and social networks/multimedia. The 
experience - based knowledge capturing via social SW is 
directly interrelated with the structured knowledge, collected 
within classical tools and by automatic monitoring of 
manufacturing processes, the product itself (e.g., sensors at 
machines) and usage (e.g., manufacturing processes where 
machines are used). The environment includes powerful 
visualization of knowledge, as well as a middleware to 
interface to various systems for automatic data gathering 
(e.g. Manufacturing Execution Systems - MES, Supervisory 
Control and Data Acquisition - SCADA, equipment, etc.) 
and Security, Trust & Privacy framework (for the sake of 
simplicity, middleware and security framework are not 
depicted in Fig. 1).  
The objective is to allow engineers/designers, when using 
various engineering tools and/or PDM/PLM solutions to re-
design/document/reconfigure product parts and service 
components, to have direct access to the experience from 
manufacturing area and business customers related to the 
corresponding part/service, but also to opinion/feedback of 
customers of final-product (e.g., features of shoes produced 
by the machine /component); see Fig. 2. The collaborative 
features allowing for real time sharing of knowledge 
between design teams and other actors are included.
 
Fig. 2. Mockup of new engineering environment  
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-387-2
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

The whole environment is made in CMfg, i.e., in order to 
allow for product–service co-design, the manufacturing 
environment (both manufacturing of machines/equipment 
and use of machines/equipment at the business customers) is 
virtually represented [4][13]. This PDM/PLM system is 
embedded in a cloud where all the actors in the value chain 
plus the machines and processes are able to provide 
data/knowledge and access the knowledge that is both saved 
in the PDM/PLM systems, as well as in the social SW 
solutions in the cloud. By this, dynamic feedback among 
various actors can be established, as well as life cycle aspects 
can be efficiently taken into account. The social SW is 
extended with a number of plugs-ins and additional function-
ality to allow for effective capturing of the unstructured 
knowledge. Security aspects, especially critical for CMfg, 
are analyzed, and appropriate mechanisms will be integrated. 
As explained above, the bonding element between the 
classical engineering tools, PDM/PLM and social SW is a 
common ontology for product-service. Research on product-
service has been carried out for many years and in various 
disciplines; 
however, 
even 
a 
consolidated 
set 
of 
terminologies has not been established [14]. A common 
ontology has not been released in industrial practice. Thus, 
one of the goals of the research lies in developing flexible, 
open engineering environment and ontology to realize the 
environment and interconnect various SW approaches and 
tools. An overall ontology will be built starting from [14].  
In order to support designers to easily obtain 
information/knowledge relevant for her/his current task 
within the enormous amount of data gathered by automatic 
data collection, knowledge within PDM/PLM and different 
engineering tools, knowledge /experience collected within 
social SW from manufacturing end customers, etc., a context 
sensitive search functionality is developed to support all 
other tools in the environment. Therefore, the whole solution 
is context sensitive. The context sensitivity includes four key 
elements: CM, context monitoring services, context 
extraction services and search [9]. CM represents an abstract 
description of collaborative work relevant for PSS design 
activities in general. To enable its direct use by context-
sensitive services, CM is formally expressed as ontology. Its 
concepts, attributes and relations are directly derived from 
the collaborative situations in building web services in 
dynamic industrial settings. CM is based on the collaboration 
patterns, i.e., typically occurring forms of collaborative work 
relevant for PSS and extended with scenario specific 
concepts (processes, products, technology).   
A set of generic context monitoring services provide 
basic monitoring functionalities to monitor processes in 
which 
data/knowledge 
is 
acquired 
(e.g. 
design, 
manufacturing area both were machines are produced and 
where they are used), needed to identify/extract context. The 
Context Extraction Services observe activities within the 
new environment using Monitoring services. Context 
Extraction Services analyze structured and unstructured data 
to determine the context of the current situation and to 
identify what activity the users are currently involved in. The 
Context Extractor uses Context Association Network and 
Context Hierarchy Tree approaches. By using an appropriate 
CM and unstructured information provided by users or 
devices, the context extraction services process this 
unstructured information, to automatically annotate it.   
Tools for analysis of stakeholder feedback enable context 
sensitive analysis of the knowledge gathered in wiki, social 
media networks and classical engineering tools. Specifically, 
the feedback from final-product customers, where mass 
customization plays central role, needs to be analyzed and 
provided to machine/equipment vendors in order that they 
can improve design of their services to accommodate mass 
customization requirements. Information sources on social 
networks are continuously mined to identify opinions about 
products, services and specific features. Using opinion 
mining, keywords identify products and features and 
associate the opinion expressed by customers. 
IV. 
APPLICATION 
The new environment is aimed at manufacturing 
companies producing equipment and delivering them at the 
global market in various mass production sectors (shoe, food 
packaging, etc.), which require new solutions for effective 
collaboration among various actors, as a most critical aspect 
of the PSS design process.  
The environment is currently tested and applied at a 
German company producing machines for the shoe industry, 
which needs to combine feedback from their business partner 
(shoe manufacturers) and feedback from the shoe buyers in 
order to improve their machines and various services around 
these machines and allow for mass customization of shoes, 
which is one of the key requirement in today’s global shoe 
market. They intend to improve the design of their machines 
and web services around their products (e.g. maintenance 
and monitoring of their machines/systems). They also intend 
to use these web services (e.g., service for remote 
diagnostics) to automatically collect, 
in real time, 
data/knowledge on performance of their machines at their 
business customers, aiming to further enhance design of the 
machines and services. In order to allow for effective 
building of services by adding sensors at their machines, they 
need to establish feedback from their manufacturing area of 
their machines to design processes. Besides data which can 
be collected by automatic measuring in processes and over 
services, it is important to gather experience of people 
involved in these processes. Of special importance is to 
collect knowledge/experience of their service teams and 
business customers (shoe manufacturers) distributed all over 
the world. Therefore, they need to allow different actors to 
easily document their experience using web services, taking 
into account cultural differences in different world regions 
and highly variable conditions under which the machines are 
used (e.g., low education levels of the machine operators, 
etc.). The social SW solution proposed will allow collecting 
experience from maintenance, while the stakeholder 
feedback tool will analyze feedback from shoe buyers. Both 
types of knowledge will be correlated with the PDM/PLM 
solution and support building of various web services, i.e. the 
proposed combination of CMfg and social SW allows 
collecting of the experience of actors in an easy and less 
formalized way but structured enough to be re-usable for 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-387-2
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

improved web services around machines (e.g., for improved 
diagnostics). By this, they will build a unique system where 
knowledge from both machine manufacturers and customers 
are collected to be re-used for optimization of service design.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The main innovation lies in solving the crucial problem 
of how to support PSS design process at machine/equipment 
vendors, faced with the challenge of mass customization of 
final-products produced by their machines/equipment, by 
provision of appropriate knowledge, both formalized and 
experience based knowledge, based on combination of 
classical engineering tools, PDM/PLM systems and social 
SW solutions. This includes data mining of high volume of 
data provided by the shop-floor experts (manufacturers of the 
machines), business customers and final-product customers, 
as well as the context extraction from the content 
created/used within dynamic collaborative work and 
manufacturing processes and/or the data provided by 
different services. In order to achieve such a solution, the 
research provides several innovations: (a) It brings a step 
towards development of an engineering environment 
supporting development of PSS. As indicated in Section II, 
to date, there have been insufficient attempts to provide such 
an environment. However, the research in recent years has 
created a number of methods and SW useful for the 
development of such PSS engineering environment [15]. The 
research will focus on the development of ontology for PSS 
[12]. (b) This is one of the first attempts to combine classical 
engineering tools, PDM/PLM solutions with CMfg and 
social SW to efficiently provide experience and knowledge 
from shop-floor and user feedback from the global market to 
the web service designers’ desks. (c) The new solutions are 
context sensitive, in order to support the user to cope with 
enormous amount of knowledge to be managed and allow for 
higher re-usability of components and services [16]. (d) The 
research contributes to bringing data mining algorithms to 
higher maturity level applicable in (manufacturing) industry 
by enhancing existing and developing novel ones to meet the 
application requirements. The proposed combination of 
advanced technological solutions will bring considerable 
benefits to the manufacturing companies in terms of re-
ducing time to market in building new and/or upgrading 
existing machines with web services as different manufactur-
ability, environmental and final-product mass customization 
aspects will be effectively taken into account already in 
conceptual service design. The approach will allow for 
improvements in knowledge sharing across product-service 
lifecycle, as well as better product-service offerings 
addressing customer needs. It will also allow for better 
addressing sustainability across the entire service lifecycle.  
The new environment and tools are currently under 
development and first testing trials by the users are going on. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is partly supported by the DIVERSITY (Cloud 
Manufacturing and Social Software Based Context Sensitive 
Product-Service Engineering Environment for Globally 
Distributed Enterprise) project of EU’s H2020 framework, 
under the grant agreement no. 636692. This document does 
not represent the opinion of the European Community, and 
the Community is not responsible for any use that might be 
made of its content. 
REFERENCES 
[1] F. H. Beuren, M. G. Gomes Ferreira, and P. A. Cauchick 
Miguel, “Product-service systems: a literature review on 
integrated products and services,” J. Clean. Prod., vol. 47, 
May 2013, pp. 222–231. 
[2] M. Boehm and O. Thomas, “Looking beyond the rim of one’s 
teacup: a multidisciplinary literature review of Product-
Service Systems in Information Systems, Business Manage-
ment, and Engineering & Design,” J. Clean. Prod., vol. 51, , 
Jul. 2013, pp. 245–260. 
[3] M.P. Sorli, and D. M. Stokic, Innovating in Product/Process 
Development, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 2009. 
[4] X. V. Wang and X. W. Xu, “ICMS: A Cloud-Based 
Manufacturing System,” in Cloud Manufacturing, W. Li and 
J. Mehnen, Eds. Springer London, 2013, pp. 1–22. 
[5] D. Ortiz-arroyo, “Chapter 2: Discovering Sets of Key Players 
in Social Networks,” in Computational Social Network 
Analysis, A. Abraham, A.-E. Hassanien, and V. Snágel, Eds. 
London: Springer London, 2010. 
[6] H. Meier, R. Roy, G. Seliger , Industrial Product-Service 
Systems - IPS2. In: CIRP Annals - Manufacturing 
Technology 59 (2), 2010, pp. 607–627. 
[7]   L. Pesonen, S. J. Salminen, J-P Ylén, P. Riihimäki, Dynamic 
simulation of product process, in Journal Simulation Model-
ling Practice and Theory Vol. 16 No. 8., 2008, pp. 1091-1102. 
[8] Strang, T. and C. Linnhoff-Popien. A Context Modeling 
Survey. in Workshop on Advanced Context Modelling, Rea-
soning and Management as part of the Conference on 
Ubiquitous Computing - The Sixth International Conference 
on Ubiquitous Computing. 2004. Nottingham, England. 
[9]   D. M. Stokic, S. Scholze, and O. Kotte, “Generic Self-Learn-
ing Context Sensitive Solution for Adaptive Manufacturing 
and Decision Making Systems”, ICONS 2014, Nice, 2014. 
[10] B. Snyder, R. Barzilay. "Multiple Aspect Ranking using the 
Good Grief Algorithm". Proceedings of the Joint Human 
Language Technology/North American Chapter of the ACL 
Conference (HLT-NAACL), 2007, pp. 300–307. 
[11] 
ARAS 
PDM 
Software 
[Online], 
Available 
from: 
http://www.aras.com/standards/standard.aspx?name=PDM-
Software, last accessed on 19.02.2015 
[12] A. Saaksvuori, and A. Immonen, Product Lifecycle 
Management, 2nd ed., Springer, Berlin, 2008. 
[13] A. Weiss, Computing in the clouds, Networker, vol. 11, 2007, 
pp. 16-25. 
[14] G. Annamalai, et.al. An Ontoloogy for PSS, Chapter in 
Functional Thinking for Value Creation, Springer-Verlag, 
2010, pp. 231-236. 
[15] J. Lee, and M. AbuAli, “Innovative Product Advanced 
Service Systems (I-PASS): meth-odology, tools, and 
applications for dominant service design,” Int. J. Adv. Manuf. 
Technol., vol. 52, no. 9–12, , Feb. 2011, pp. 1161–1173 . 
[16] Y. Geum and Y. Park, “Development of technology roadmap 
for Product-Service System (TRPSS),” in 2010 IEEE 
International Conference on Industrial Engineering and 
Engineering Management (IEEM), 2010, pp. 410–414.  
          
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-387-2
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2015 : The Seventh International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

