Studying in Web 2.0 – Virtual University as Virtual Community 
 
Birgit Feldmann 
Department of Information Systems and Databases 
University of Hagen 
Hagen, Germany 
birgit.feldmann@fernuni-hagen.de 
 
 
Abstract— Our experience and research on technology-
supported learning and teaching have clearly confirmed the 
general understanding that students working collaboratively 
are more successful than students working alone. Therefore, it 
should be a logical consequence to integrate communication 
and collaboration as a key factor into a distance study 
environment. However, this is not a trivial task from various 
points of view. For instance, for public universities in Germany 
studies have to be free of charge – which then raises the 
question, how to finance highly interactive small classes? 
Another problem is the professional restrictions of working 
distance students: their time budget is very limited. The 
consequence is that students typically have very limited contact 
to their peers and their tutors until the final examinations. The 
drop-out rates have been extremely high. A lot of students 
study more than six years to reach a first degree. E-learning 
improved the situation substantially (even though poorly used 
by the teachers in many environments), but by far not enough. 
This paper shows how Web 2.0 opens up new possibilities to 
approach these challenges, and how it can be used to improve 
the situation substantially. 
Keywords - group types; e-learning; Web 2.0; collaborative 
learning; Virtual University. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Distance study systems face fundamental problems like 
isolation of students and finding a compromise between 
requirements of private and professional life and studying 
[13]. To improve the situation the University of Hagen 
(FernUniversitaet), a distance teaching university with about 
60.000 students, started to develop a Virtual University 
(VU) in 1996 [19]. The new form of teaching and learning 
through the Virtual University eased the situation of the 
distance students remarkably, but there remained a lack of 
social interaction and group-awareness. Various research 
projects as well as our own experience clearly show that 
being part of a group and having suitable communication 
partners lead to higher and more consistent motivation and 
therefore to more successful and faster studies [1, 2, 6, 7, 
13]. An additional effect is that organizational support by 
the university gets less critical as students can easily, and 
very directly assist each other. This, in turn, reduces 
overhead at the university. A survey at our university also 
showed that most students are convinced that contact to 
fellow students, especially through different types of groups, 
is of utmost importance for successful learning [3]. They are 
not satisfied with the existing system and call for new and 
better communication and group support [3].  
The obvious conclusion of these observations is that a 
new learning environment is necessary. The kernel concept 
of the vision developed here is to start out from the 
students’ view and research results as described above – 
which is completely different from the classical approach to 
deliver content and to have group elements and 
communication as an add-on. To build this platform the 
integration of Web 2.0 technologies is essential. To provide 
such a new and community oriented environment we have 
to look closer into the various fields of groups and their 
mechanisms with the goal to support these groups with the 
necessary technical and organizational features. The 
necessary first step is to investigate the different group types 
and their meaning in a distance teaching setting. The paper 
exemplifies some group types through already existing or 
forming groups in the e-learning environment at the 
University of Hagen. These group concepts, their properties, 
the way they are used by students, their overall potential are 
the main topics of this paper. A detailed discussion of a 
complete e-learning system centered on social and 
community aspects cannot be given here due to space-
limitations; further research is going on about how to build 
this kind of system.  
The paper is structured as follows: Section II contains the 
state of the art, The following section III investigates the 
various group types relevant in a distance teaching 
environment and the consequences for a new type of learning 
system. Section IV describes the current situation and 
developments for group support at the University of Hagen. 
The paper concludes with a short summary of the findings 
and an outline for further necessary research. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Schulmeister [16] not only evaluated 23 existing studies 
about learning management systems but also undertook his 
own research about more than 62 learning management 
systems. He concludes that existing learning management 
systems typically focus on delivering content; they do not 
support building and establishing long-lasting student 
groups, or – if at all – they do it very poorly [16]. This 
correlates with our own results as only 19% of our students 
140
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

use the integrated communication features and only 2% the 
groupware functionalities [3]. If group oriented features are 
available, they are provided only for advanced students in the 
context of the provided content. These results are confirmed 
by research of Kerres [7].  
Today, the importance of collaborative learning and 
working is without controversy in the research community 
[6-11, 17]. But the group processes and the various 
categories of group types in a more general meaning are still 
not well understood as will be investigated in section four of 
this paper, [6, 15, 17, 18]. Some valuable insights can be 
found in the field of community oriented learning [5, 8, 9, 
12. 14]. However, the community types discussed in this 
field, like learning community or community of practice, do 
not sufficiently cover the needs of distance learning students 
as they are either too strictly structured (e.g. restricted to an 
exactly defined group of students like in classes) or just the 
opposite, they have no structure at all. Some essential group 
types are not considered. 
Many different definitions of “group” exist in different 
disciplines (computer science, psychology, sociology etc.), 
but none of them clearly describes the different existing 
group types in distance education from a practical point of 
view [5, 6, 12, 17].  
III. 
THE VIRTUAL UNIVERSITY 
The University of Hagen has extensive experience in 
distance education since more than 30 years. Therefore, it 
was a logical consequence to start using the Internet for 
learning and teaching purposes at a time when not many 
universities saw the opportunities. The benefits of distance 
education, time- and location independence, and the 
advantages 
of 
the 
Internet 
(fast 
information, 
easy 
communication 
and 
cooperation 
possibilities) 
were 
combined in the project Virtual University, Germany's first 
university to offer all its services in the Internet beginning in 
1995.  
When the project started a suitable software platform was 
not available in the market, so a platform was built based on 
Internet technologies and a commercial database system. The 
virtual university system now integrates all functions of a 
university into a complete, homogeneous, extensible system 
with an easy to use and intuitive student-centred user-
interface. Currently, about 60.000 students are using the 
Virtual University of Hagen. The ongoing project includes 
experimenting with and evaluating different forms of 
teaching and learning in the Internet. 
It turns out that the most popular teaching events are 
highly interactive events like virtual seminars, practical 
training and online exercises. Our experience shows that 
teaching methods with a high rate of group activity using 
electronic communication have the quality to break down the 
students' isolation. Students using electronic communication 
within the virtual university are much more motivated than 
before; the dropout rate is decreasing and the feedback is 
entirely positive [1, 2, 10, 13].  
We also learned that some of the groups students took 
part in during a teaching event lived and were active long 
after the event itself. In some cases the relationship between 
the group members established during a teaching event in the 
internet was stable long after the students finished their 
studies [1, 2, 10]. Others researchers, i.e., Leh [8], Palloff 
and Pratt [12] also state the importance of communication 
and cooperation. 
The expectations of students regarding the teaching and 
learning environment have dramatically changed over the 
last years. In a study with more than 2000 participants we 
found that about 43% of our students want more Web 2.0 
functionality in the university learning environment [3]. This 
includes communities, blogs, wikis and especially social 
networking. Related research is consistent with these 
findings, e. g., Kerres [7] and Peters [13].  
Motivated by these results we have been looking into the 
various types of groups and their mechanisms with the goal 
to support the initializing of groups and to secure their 
stability and liveliness. 
As a first step we investigate the different group types 
already existing in e-learning environments. As an example 
we use the University of Hagen. 
IV. 
GROUP TYPES  
The importance of collaborative learning and working is 
meanwhile without controversy in the research community 
[611]. But the description of group processes and group 
types in a more general meaning is still open. A discussion of 
the definition of “group” itself would definitely exceed the 
length of this paper, as there are many different definitions. 
In this paper, we will use the expression “group” in the 
sociological sense of “social group”, which essentially means 
a group is defined as a collection of humans who share 
certain characteristics, interact with one another, accept 
expectations and obligations as members of the group, and 
share a common identity [17].  
In contrast to a psychological definition, where clearly a 
face-to face contact is required [15], we concentrate on 
mainly “virtual” groups, which mean groups where face-to-
face contact is not given or is given only via electronic 
channels. These “virtual” groups are essential for students in 
e-learning environments.  
Out of the context of e-learning situations we define three 
group types: 
 
Study group  
 
Working group and  
 
Learning group. 
A. Study Group 
The study group, as the most complex of the three group 
concepts, consists of students of one or more than one 
university. The affiliation to a certain faculty, discipline or 
the participation in a certain teaching event is not important. 
Normally, study groups do not span more than one 
university, but it is possible and also desirable. Study groups 
are also a chance for interdisciplinary exchange. Organized 
interdisciplinary networks can be highly successful as is 
demonstrated by some open knowledge communities in the 
Internet. An example is http://www.wer-weiss-was.de, the 
largest German speaking knowledge community. 
141
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

The study group is an informal group, meaning it is not 
formally initialized by an institution as is the case with the 
working group. The main issue of the study group is to 
create a social network.  
The group members find each other spontaneously, e.g., 
in events for new students, via voluntary work, through the 
student council, in discussion groups concerning students’ 
issues like finding jobs and so on.  
The size of such a group varies between small (starting 
with three) to very large with open end.  
Study groups often continue throughout the complete 
study time; sometimes they turn into social networks that 
live long after the studies are finished.  
Since the American sociologist Granovetter published 
“The Strength of Weak Ties” [5] in 1973 the positive effects 
of social networks have been well known [9, 12, 14]. For 
example, access to relevant information concerning the 
private and professional life is highly facilitated for members 
of such a group. An interdisciplinary study group elegantly 
supports the following situations, and may smoothly lead to 
a network with obvious benefits for its members far beyond 
the original idea of a “learning network”: 
 
A construction engineer urgently needs legal 
information. In case he knows a lawyer, he will gain 
the information a lot faster than in case he knows 
none. 
 
Job vacancies are first known to the members of the 
study group; professional support for your children 
at school is best given through a known teacher, and 
advice in medical questions can be given by doctors. 
Our evaluations and a study of the HIS Company very 
clearly show that students are aware of the advantages of 
study groups, especially interdisciplinary ones, and - this is 
important - they expressly wish that the university supports 
them. The reason is that they want a homogenous social 
environment, closely linked to and compatible with their 
learning environment [3, 4].  
However, this type of group has virtually no support by 
universities [3, 4, 7]. So far, most distance teaching 
universities do not understand that this is a central concept 
leading to a closer relationship with the university, a feeling 
of “being part”, which then leads to a decreasing number of 
dropouts and finally a supporting community of alumni.  
Currently, the members can only use the given electronic 
communication 
channels 
like 
chat, 
email, 
different 
groupware tools, forums, etc. Mostly, they use the university 
newsgroups. The problem is that newsgroups are very large, 
it is difficult to follow certain topics, the members are more 
or less anonymous, there is high fluctuation, and there is 
definitely no socially binding element to stabilize the 
community. Conference systems are only useful for small 
groups of users, so they are not adequate, either. Learning 
management systems are hardly applicable for the purpose of 
social networking, as they are focused on courses and 
learning events. Tools like wiki webs and weblogs would 
make sense for the use in study groups, but they have to be 
integrated into a homogenous environment, and be organized 
in a meaningful way for students.  
Students have the possibility to use existing free student 
interest communities, one of which is the German 
community study-board [http://www.study-board.de] or the 
community NASPA [http://www.naspa.org/about/index.cfm] 
for US students. Both provide services for all students, 
irrespective of faculty, number of terms and grade. As these 
communities are very widespread and their purpose is to 
offer services for mainly on-campus students, the provided 
contents and contacts are mostly too general for distance 
teaching students. Some of the most important topics in a 
distance teaching environment are not addressed and hard to 
address in such a general environment, such as the question 
about the best strategies to organize work life, private life 
and studies. Furthermore, the use of these services is 
completely outside of the student’s learning space. 
By far the most efficient solution for distance teaching 
universities is to provide a community platform, tailored to 
the students’ needs, and integrated with the e-learning space. 
Apart from the fact that this solution simplifies the life of 
distance learning students substantially, this is a central 
feature to create the long-term bond and the “I belong” 
feeling for students – an effect that a distance teaching 
university has a much harder time to achieve than traditional 
universities. 
B. Learning Group 
Learning groups are related to study groups, as they are 
also informal groups with varying members and no formal 
enrollment. The members are usually students of one 
university and the same field of study, but in principal 
students of other universities with similar studies could also 
take part in the learning group. In contrast to working 
groups, learning groups are not limited to just one learning 
event; usually they stay together throughout the duration of 
the study and some even longer [1, 2, 10]. The members find 
each other in related learning events, like introductory 
meetings or basic instruction lessons. The size of a learning 
group varies between two or three members up to a 
maximum of ten. Experience shows that the average number 
is about four members. The main intention of learning 
groups is not, or at least not in the first place, social 
networking as is the case with the study group, but 
collaborative learning for the preparation of exams and for 
motivating each other to keep up with the studies . Also, all 
forms of organizational advice related to the studies are 
given by the learning group (which courses should be taken, 
how to prepare best for an exam, where to find good 
information resources, etc.).  
The reliability of the group members is more important 
than in the study group, as undependable members could 
disturb the whole group. The average lifespan of such a 
learning group is to the end of the studies of its members, 
even if some members stay in contact beyond that time. As 
these groups are informal groups, fluctuation of members is a 
known phenomenon (members move, terminate their studies, 
new members join in, etc.). Learning groups are highly 
suitable for large teaching events with a high contingent of 
self-study, 
such 
as introductory 
courses, beginners’ 
142
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

seminaries etc. Tutors should encourage the building of 
learning groups. 
Good suitable components for the technical support of 
these groups are groupware tools to communicate and to 
share files. Also wiki webs, weblogs and e-portfolios are 
interesting options for a learning group. An increasing 
number of students are also using audio conference tools like 
Groupspeak or Skype, which are very convenient for small 
groups. Learning management systems are partly suitable for 
the purpose of collaborative learning, if they provide 
groupware functionalities. 
C. Working Groups 
Working groups are the most common and widely-used 
form of groups in e-learning, and also the best investigated 
type of group [6, 12, 14, 15]. The main difference to the 
other two group types is that their purpose is very clearly 
defined by the issue of the learning event this group belongs 
to. Another difference is the guidance by the tutor, which is 
essential for the groups’ success [1, 2, 6, 15]. This type of 
group is clearly an institutionalized formal group. Working 
groups are ideally appropriate for small teaching events, such 
as seminars, colloquies or practical trainings; they are closely 
related to project groups in companies.  
The building of working groups depends on the 
organization of the learning event itself. Some tutors prefer 
to arrange the group themselves, according to their specific 
didactic preferences. Other tutors leave the building of the 
group to the students themselves. For both methods, the 
moderation of the group is very important, as the failing of 
one member could cause a drawback for the whole group, 
which in turn may lead to the failure of the whole group. 
Experience shows that a restriction to the number of up to 
five students is useful. Otherwise, the group is difficult to 
organize and the risk of disappearing members is high [1, 6, 
10]. Normally, a working group lives only as long as the 
learning event itself. In some cases working groups alter to 
long lasting learning groups. For this type of group various 
tools can be used: 
 
Collaborative Work Software  
 
Conferencing tools (audio and/or video) 
 
Learning Management System 
 
Wiki webs and social networking tools 
Which tool to choose depends on the didactic issues of 
the tutor, the number of students, the availability and 
accessibility and also the personal likings of the tutor and the 
students. A typical example for university working groups is 
the virtual seminar: 
A total number of fifteen up to twenty students divided 
into small groups of a minimum of two and a maximum of 
four students together create contributions about aspects of a 
specific 
topic, 
e.g., 
knowledge 
management. 
The 
contributions cover up to twenty pages of text per person. To 
prepare these contributions, students use a groupware 
system. In intervals each group presents its results via audio 
or video conference, followed by a discussion with their 
fellow students and the teacher. The whole seminar runs 
throughout one term (about three months).  
D. The current situation of group types in Hagen 
The University of Hagen is the typical distance teaching 
institution with fully employed students, students with small 
children, students with handicaps. Participation in ongoing 
groups and group work is only possible for most of them if 
that is possible from a distance, i.e., if these groups are 
Internet-based. 
Nevertheless, it is still difficult for the students to start 
groups and to participate in existing ones: there remains the 
challenge to find each other and then to keep the group 
running.  
A few students started study groups on external 
platforms, but – for the reasons given earlier (no integration 
into the e-learning space, diversity, not visible in the 
university information space etc.) – these are not very well 
known. However, the fact that these groups exist in spite of 
the described difficulties proves how useful this kind of 
group is considered by students. 
One of the central problems for students to start study 
groups on external platforms is to gain access to the 
necessary data of their fellow students. The only possibility 
so far is the general newsgroup for distance students with 
more than 80 threads a day. A start has been made with 
electronic contact lists, provided by the students’ council 
(called ASTA), but these lists often don’t contain the 
necessary data like faculty, degree, interests, etc.  
A community in the sense of social networking is not 
available, but it is absolutely necessary. A technical reason is 
the wide variety of tools which students have to use if they 
have to start study groups on “foreign” platforms. The 
essential point, however, is that these functions need to be 
kernel features of the university e-learning and information 
space, well integrated and easy to use. It is important for 
students to be part of a group from the very beginning [3, 4]. 
So, instead of just adding some social software tools to the 
university infrastructure, a concept is required which 
integrates social software as a fundamental feature and thus 
creates the added value mentioned earlier for students and 
the university alike. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Three types of groups have been identified in this paper. 
These groups have different characteristics, and technical 
and organizational requirements. The support of these groups 
leads to essential improvements for distance teaching 
organizations. Some of the benefits are:  
 
The social binding of the students to their university 
will 
be 
strengthened; 
students 
will 
identify 
themselves with their organization. 
 
Students with a strong bond to their university 
embedded in a well-working community are 
supposed to be more successful as students without 
this support [4]. 
 
A working infrastructure for group support helps to 
decrease the costs for small learning and teaching 
events as students are able to organize themselves 
and to support each other before they apply to the 
responsible teacher [3, 4, 13]. 
143
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

 
Well-organized group support possibilities help to 
decrease the organizational support load (e.g., less 
questions of the type “What course should I take?," 
if adequate study groups are available with collegues 
to discuss this issue). Decreasing work load also 
means decreasing costs and additionally a satisfied 
customer. 
 
Students are able to organize their time budget 
effectively by using spare time and unplanned free 
hours with easy access to a well organized 
communication and collaboration space. 
Note that the support of groups requires not only the 
appropriate technical infrastructure, but first of all an 
integrated social and organizational concept. A possible 
solution is the implementation of a personal learning and 
community environment (PLCE) as suggested by 
students themselves [3, 4]. This PLCE should fulfill the 
following requirements: 
 
 
 
The students’ needs are clearly identified [3, 4, 10, 13] by 
now and the task of the university is to improve the 
current situation according to the given suggestions. It is 
of utmost importance to restructure the current learning 
environment with a strong focus on the support of 
communication and interaction processes by installing 
community oriented features as described above. Not 
content and organizational functionalities are central, but 
finding adequate communication partners and being part 
of a group as early as possible and as long as possible. 
Becoming part of a group is useful even before 
enrolment. Students, teachers and staff should form a 
virtual community for learning and teaching, supported 
through adequate technology. This platform must provide 
easy to use functionality for  
- 
organizing, discussing and publishing content 
collaboratively  
- 
discussing and solving specific problems together  
- 
creating different types of groups.  
To achieve this goal, it is necessary to develop a new 
learning portal according to the students’ needs. The 
detailed 
description 
of 
this 
new 
environment 
(architecture, features, interface, necessary restructuring) 
of this University as Community is part of the doctoral 
thesis of the author. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Feldmann-Pempe, B. and Schlageter, G. (1999) Internet-based 
Seminars at the Virtual University: A Breakthrough in Open 
and Distance Education. Proceedings of the ED-Media 99, 
Seattle, AACE, pp. 887-892 
[2] Feldmann, B. and Schlageter, G. (2001). Five Years Virtual 
University – Review and Preview. Proceedings of the 
WebNet01, Orlando: AACE, pp. 355-361. 
[3] Feldmann, B. (2010). Fernstudium n.0 – Fernuniversität als 
Gemeinschaft [Distance Study n.0 – Distance Study as 
Community]. To be published: Proceedings of GeNeMe 2010, 
Dresden. 
[4] Kleimann, B.; Özkilic, M. and Göcks, M. (2008] Studieren im 
Web 2.0 [Studying in the Web 2.0], HIS Projektbericht. 
https://hisbus.his.de/hisbus/docs/hisbus21.pdf.  
[5] Granovetter, M. (1976). The Strength of Weak Ties. 
American Journal of Sociology, 78 (May), pp. 1360-1380. 
[6] Haake, J., Schwabe, G. and Wessner, M. (2004). CSCL-
Kompendium. Oldenburg.  
[7] Kerres, M. and Nübel, I. (2005). The Status of E-learning at German 
Higher Education Institutions. In: Dittler, U,, Kahler, H., Kindt, M. 
and Schwarz, C. (Eds.), E-learning in Europe – Learning Europe. 
How have new media contributed to the development of higher 
education? (Vol. 36, pp. 29-50). Waxmann.. 
[8] Leh, A. S. C. (2001). Computer-Mediated Communication 
and Social Presence in a Distance Learning Environment. 
International Journal of Educational Telecommunication 7 
(2), pp 109-128. 
[9] Mason, R. (1994). Using Communications Media in Open and 
Flexible Learning. Kogan Page. 
[10] Mittrach, S. (1999). Lehren und Lernen in der Virtuellen 
Universität: Konzepte, Erfahrungen, Evaluation. [Teaching 
and 
Learning 
in 
the 
Virtual 
University: 
Concepts, 
Experiences, Evaluation]. Shaker Verlag. 
[11] Ogata, H. and Yano, Y. (1998): Supporting awareness for 
augmenting 
participation 
in 
collaborative 
learning. 
Proceedings of the WebNet98, Charlottesville: AACE. 
[12] Palloff, R. M. and Pratt K. (1999) Building Learning 
Communities in Cyberspace. Effective Strategies for the 
Online Classroom. Jossey-Brass, San Francisco. 
[13] Peters, O. (2004). Distance Education in Transsition. New 
Trends and Challenges. Arbeitsstelle Fernstudienforschung. 
Oldenburg. 
http://www.c3l.uni-
oldenburg.de/publikationen/vol5.pdf. 
Last 
access: 
08/18/2010. 
[14] Preece, J. (2000). Online Communities. Designing Usability, 
Supporting Sociability. 
[15] Rechtien, 
W. 
(1999). 
Angewandte 
Gruppendynamik. 
[Practical Group Dynamics] Beltz.  
[16] Schulmeister, R (2005). Lernplattformen für das virtuelle 
lernen: Evaluation und Didaktik [Learning Management 
Systems for Virtual Learning: Evaluation and Didactic.].  
1. Easy access, intuitive to use 
2. Professionell information management 
3. Awareness-function 
4. Integrated communication and interaction 
possibilities like: 
a. Interdisciplinary communication and interaction, 
e.g., by integrating popular social networking 
sites like Facebook 
b. Infrastructural support to set up and to support 
different group types 
c. An Alumni network 
d. Private rooms without access for teaching staff. 
5. High security measures 
6. Integrated linkage to existing Web 2.0 tools 
(Messaging tools, Social Networking Sites, blogs, 
social bookmarks etc) for instance via the Open 
Social API 
7. Personalized information learning and knowledge 
management 
8. Intelligent search engine 
144
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

[17] Tajfel, H. and Turner, J.C. (1986). The Social Identity Theory 
of Intergroup Behaviour. In: Worschel, S. and Austin, W.G. 
(Eds.). Psyschology of Intergroup Relations (pp. 7-24). 
Nelson-Hall. 
[18] December, J. (1996) Units of Analysis for Internet 
Communication. Journal of Communication 46 (1) Winter, 
pp. 0021-9916. 
[19] The Virtual University of Hagen: http://vu.fernuni-hagen.de, 
Last access: 08/18/2010. 
 
 
145
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010 : The Second International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-105-2

