Towards an Integrated Service Rating and Ranking Methodology
for Quality Based Service Selection in Automatic Service Composition
Alexander Jungmann and Bernd Kleinjohann
Cooperative Computing & Communication Laboratory (C-LAB)
University of Paderborn, Germany
global@c-lab.de, bernd@c-lab.de
Abstract—The paradigm shift from purchasing monolithic
software solutions to a dynamic composition of individual
solutions entails many new possibilities yet great challenges,
too. In order to satisfy user requirements, complex services
have to be automatically composed of elementary services.
Multiple possibilities of composing a complex service inevitably
emerge. The problem of selecting the most appropriate services
has to be solved by comparing the different service candidates
with respect to their quality in terms of inherent non-functional
properties while simultaneously taking the user requirements
into account. We are aiming for an integrated service rating and
ranking methodology in order to support the automation of the
underlying decision-making process. The main contribution of
this paper is a ﬁrst decomposition of the quality-based service
selection process, while emphasizing major issues and chal-
lenges, which we are addressing in the On-The-Fly Computing
project.
Keywords-Service Composition; Service Selection; Quality of
Service (QoS); On-The-Fly Computing
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, software engineers have to increasingly face
up to the paradigm shift from the 40 years old principle
of purchasing software as monolithic and closed standard
solutions to the principles of Service Oriented Architectures
(SOA) and Service Oriented Computing (SOC) [1], which
shall enable purchase and execution of services on demand.
Individually requested services may have to be composed
of elementary services in order to fulﬁll the demanded
requirements [2]. In this context, the problem of automatic
service composition is a major challenge, since appropriate
services have to be identiﬁed and correctly interconnected.
Dependent on the amount of services, different possibilities
to compose a complex service inevitably emerge. For that
reason, a convenient methodology for choosing between
services and composite services, respectively, which provide
the same functionality but may differ in their non-functional
properties, is required. We refer to this process as quality-
based service selection.
Different approaches for determining the quality of a
service or composite service in order to select the ”best” one
out of a set of alternatives can be found in literature (e.g.,
[3] and [4]). In this context, a wide range of different non-
functional properties is considered under the general term
of Quality of Service (QoS) by which service candidates are
compared with each other in order to identify and select the
most appropriate one.
In contrast, we are aiming for an integrated service rating
and ranking methodology, which facilitates the automation
of quality based service selection by providing an overall
taxonomy that reﬂects signiﬁcant sections of the entire
process. Each of these sections is investigated on service
property level in order to identify and classify the essential
challenges. Based on this taxonomy, generic solutions shall
be determined and provided in order to enable the automa-
tion of the entire process. By doing so, our methodology
shall enable the incorporation of arbitrary properties such
as non-functional service properties or user requirements.
However, we do not want to develop the one and only solu-
tion for quality based service selection in automatic service
composition. In fact, we want to drive the generalization of
this problem forward by developing a holistic representation,
instead of providing just another solution for a speciﬁc
problem setup. For that reason, we ﬁrst of all identiﬁed
some major issues that have to be taken into account during
our work. Furthermore, a basic taxonomy of the selection
process was already determined.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II encapsulates the problem from our point of view.
Section III lists the relevant major issues we identiﬁed so
far. Section IV depicts our very basic taxonomy of the
entire selection process. Section V describes some existing
approaches, which are brieﬂy discussed in Section VI.
Finally, the paper concludes with Section VII.
II. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION FROM THE
ON-THE-FLY COMPUTING POINT OF VIEW
A major vision of the On-The-Fly (OTF) Computing
project is the automated composition of individual services
based on services that are freely traded on global markets
and that can be ﬂexibly interconnected with each other. In
this context, users may formulate a request, which contains
information such as user information, preferences, domain-
speciﬁc information and constraints. A so-called OTF ser-
vice provider has the task to automatically compose an
appropriate complex service, which matches the requested
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

functional as well as non-functional properties. Depending
on the size and granularity of the available service pool,
multiple alternatives will inevitably emerge. Consider, e.g.,
the following scenario:
A traveling user has to wait at a train station of a large
city for changing to another train. Since there is still plenty
of time left (e.g. 3 hours), he spontaneously decides to do
some sightseeing. He is only interested in speciﬁc classes
of points of interests. Furthermore, he may walk or use the
public means of transport. He uses his mobile device to put
a request to an OTF service provider to compose a service,
that in turn produces a convenient sightseeing tour by taking
all the available information into account. The generation
of his personal tour, hence the execution of the composite
service, should be as cheap as possible.
The requested composite service could, e.g., consist of a
basic trip planning service that in turn requires additional
information such as cartographic materials, local points of
interest and local public means of transport. Regarding
global markets, services that provide the same required
information are usually offered by more then one provider.
In order to select the most appropriate service out of the set
of service candidates, non-functional properties such as per-
formance and cost as well as the speciﬁc user requirements
have to be incorporated.
III. ISSUES IN QUALITY BASED SERVICE SELECTION
Until now, we have identiﬁed the following major issues
with respect to quality based service selection. The list,
however, is not exhaustive, since our work is still at the
very beginning. It may be modiﬁed and extended during
our future research.
Implicit and explicit properties: Properties that have to
be considered during the selection process can be implicitly
given, e.g., in terms of non-functional service properties or
explicitly, e.g., in terms of context-sensitive properties such
as user preferences or user information.
Level of information: In many of the current approaches
(cf. Section V), service properties are assumed to inherit the
same level of information (e.g. quantitative values). How-
ever, different service provider may describe the same non-
functional properties based on different levels of measure-
ment (different scales). Furthermore, service properties may
not be only described on different levels of measurement,
but can also be non-existent for particular services.
Different hierarchical levels: Considering a global market,
composite services and elementary services may match the
same functional properties. In order to decide for the most
suitable one, services have to be compared on different levels
of hierarchy. The topmost level corresponds to the individual
service that has to be composed, while the lowest level
is deﬁned by the granularity of the available elementary
services in the service pool. In general, the number of levels
in between cannot be deﬁned in advance.
Local selection vs. global selection: While local selection
of service candidates may not appropriately consider the
overall quality of the ﬁnal composite service, it is compu-
tational very efﬁcient. On the other hand, global selection
may identify the best overall solution, but ends up in a
combinational problem, which is proven to be NP-hard.
Either way, the point of time of decision-making has to be
taken into account, since it essentially affects the rating and
ranking strategy.
IV. SIGNIFICANT SECTIONS OF THE
QUALITY BASED SERVICE SELECTION PROCESS
The intended methodology for quality based service
selection has to provide generic solutions for the issues
mentioned in Section III. The very ﬁrst step towards such
a methodology is the investigation of the entire service
selection process on service property level by systematically
disassembling the entire process in order to identify sections
that depend on inherent service properties as well as scenario
speciﬁc user requirements. In this context, we identiﬁed
the following taxonomy, which reﬂects signiﬁcant sections
during the selection process.
A. Acquisition:
For the acquisition of property values, different techniques
can be used. Single values may be accurately acquired by
measuring. Other property values in turn have to be acquired
from a series of measurements, in which the measured values
vary from each other. Still others are not based on any metric
at all, but have to be estimated from previous observations
or are arbitrarily deﬁned. Independently, service properties
may also change over time.
B. Representation:
After acquisition, a property value has to be appropriately
represented, while the representation in turn depends on the
type of acquisition. In this context, descriptive statistics pro-
vide convenient methods for describing data. Single values
can be classiﬁed with respect to their level of measurement
(qualitative vs. quantitative values) or with respect to their
scale, namely nominal, ordinal and metrical scale. Series of
measurements are usually accumulated and represented as a
distribution, which in turn can be approximated by means of
statistical quantities (e.g., measure of central tendency and
measure of dispersion) or fuzzy sets. Furthermore, methods
of multivariate statistics such as cluster analysis enable a
reduction of acquired data by means of abstraction and
generalization, respectively, if required.
C. Utility Functions:
A utility function usually assigns a single value to an
elementary or composite service. This value expresses the
service’s quality with respect to the explicitly and implicitly
given properties. Service candidates can be compared with
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

each other and consequently ranked in order to support
the decision-making process. However, utility functions may
be based on different sets of service properties (e.g., due
to incomplete service descriptions) or have to incorporate
different hierarchical layers.
D. Aggregation and Decomposition:
In order to rate and rank a composite service, the property
values of the underlying elementary services have to be
aggregated, e.g. by means of addition or multiplication,
while the aggregation functions generally depend on the
composition structure (parallel, sequence, loop etc.). On the
other hand, a decomposition of property values is also of
interest, when breaking down the global selection problem
to a set of local ones or when services have to be compared
on different hierarchy levels. However, aggregation may not
only take place on service property level, but also on utility
value level.
E. Objective Functions and Optimization Objectives:
Service rating heavily depends on the particular optimiza-
tion problems, that are usually deﬁned in advance. User
preferences preset objective functions such as costs and
availability and a speciﬁc optimization objective like mini-
mizing and maximizing, respectively. Apart from this, a user
may also desire a speciﬁc range of satisfaction by deﬁning
relative boundaries. In this context, homeostatic approaches
provide convenient methods to deal with these types of
optimization goals. However, service properties may also
depend on each other. For that reason, multiple goals have
to be simultaneously considered since they can negatively
affect each other, leading to multi-objective optimization.
V. RELATED WORK
Zeng et al. [5] introduced an approach that bases on
a multi-dimensional quality model for elementary services
as well as composite services. In their work, ﬁve generic
quality criteria (service attributes) are considered: execution
price and duration, reputation, reliability and availability.
Each attribute is assigned a speciﬁc aggregation function in
order to determine the quality vector of a composite service.
Based on this quality model, the selection of services is then
formulated as a global optimization problem, which is solved
by means of linear programming methods.
Alrifai and Risse [6] proposed a combination of global
optimization and local selection in order to increase the
efﬁciency of quality driven service composition. To combine
local decision making strategies with global optimization,
global QoS constraints are ﬁrstly decomposed into local
ones. These local constraints are then used as upper bounds
for the quality values of elementary services, so that services
that violate the constraints can directly be discarded. The
quality values of composite services are computed by means
of pre-deﬁned aggregation functions. A utility function ﬁ-
nally maps the quality values of an elementary or composite
service onto a single real value.
In [7], not only non-functional service properties (QoS at-
tributes) but also behavioral service properties (transactional
attributes) are considered. A local optimization with respect
to common QoS attributes is combined with a global con-
sideration of transactional attributes (e.g., compensability) in
order to ensure a reliable execution of composite services.
A set of non-functional properties such as execution price
or execution duration is deﬁned for elementary services and
transfered to composite services by means of pre-deﬁned
aggregation functions. Furthermore, user preferences are
expressed as weights over the non-functional attributes.
Ben Mabrouk [8] proposed an efﬁcient service selection
algorithm which is formed as a guided heuristic. First of all,
a set of service candidates for each activity in a composite
service is identiﬁed based on advertised QoS of services in
order to perform a preliminary ﬁltering. In a second step,
a selection phase reﬁnes this ﬁrst ﬁltering and ensures the
global compliance of user preferences. Services are grouped
with respect to their QoS values into a set of so-called QoS
levels, which in turn are used to determine the utility of the
service candidates. Dependent on the type of composition
(i.e. sequence, AND, XOR and loop) aggregation functions
determine the quality of a composite service.
In [9], attributes (QoS properties) such as cost or response
time of elementary as well as composite services are consid-
ered. In order to calculate the values for composite services,
aggregation functions for each QoS property are deﬁned
in advance, dependent on user QoS constraints and the
type of composition (parallel, sequence and combinations
of both). Furthermore, a utility value models the user’s
priority with respect to QoS criteria. The utility value of an
elementary service property is created from normalized QoS
values and from weights, which reﬂect the priority of a QoS
property. The overall utility value of an elementary service
is obtained by summarizing the values of all particular
QoS properties, while the overall utility value of composite
services correspond to the sum of the utility values of all
contained elementary services.
In many cases, the value of a service attribute may be
difﬁcult to be precisely deﬁned. To overcome this problem,
fuzzy sets and fuzzy logic [10] can be integrated to allow
the representation of imprecise and vague information, re-
spectively. Fuzzy sets can be interpreted as a generalization
of crisp sets. The characteristic function of a crisp set
assigns a value of either 1 or 0 to each element in the
universal set, meaning nothing but an element either belongs
to the crisp set under consideration or not. By generalizing
this characteristic function such that the values assigned to
an element fall within a speciﬁc interval, e.g. [0, 1], the
membership of these elements can be indicated in a more
ﬁne-grained way.
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

In [11], the selection of a single service is formulated
as constraint satisfaction problem in the fuzzy domain. The
user’s preference to a speciﬁc service attribute (QoS crite-
rion) is denoted by a fuzzy expression, which is composed of
a group of fuzzy sets connected by the logical and operator.
The user’s overall preference to a service is subsequently
formulated by connecting the fuzzy expressions of all service
attributes with the logical or operator. After mapping the ser-
vice composition problem into a fuzzy constraint satisfaction
problem (FCSP), a depth-ﬁrst branch-and-bound method is
applied in order to ﬁnd a solution.
Another approach that makes use of fuzzy logic was
introduced in [12]. In comparison to [11], not only attributes
of elementary services are considered, but also those of
composite ones. For this purpose, the same non-functional
properties of composite services (e.g., price or security) are
aggregated according to the type of the composition. In this
context, four different types of compositions are differenti-
ated: sequence, parallel, choice and loop. Each combination
of non-functional property and composition type is assigned
a speciﬁc aggregation function. Furthermore, the user’s pref-
erences are modeled in the fuzzy domain in terms of fuzzy
IF-THEN rules, which facilitates an efﬁcient evaluation of
good approximations of service attribute values [13]. The
quantitative ranking of candidate services is ﬁnally achieved
by an inferencing step for all n rules and a subsequent
aggregation step of all inferred n values.
Pfeffer et al. [14] also proposed a fuzzy based approach
for representing and evaluating service attributes. In their
work, the values of service attributes may additionally
change over time based on monitoring data of executed ser-
vices. For that purpose, the monitored values for a particular
service attribute are accumulated over time. The resulting
distribution is approximated by fuzzy triangle functions
and modiﬁed, whenever a new value was acquired. User
preferences are likewise formulated in the fuzzy domain for
each particular service attribute and superimposed with the
associated service attribute value by multiplication. The ratio
between the multiplication area and the original area is then
interpreted as a service’s ﬁtness.
VI. DISCUSSION
Apart from the inconsistent terminology, each of the
approaches in Section V deals with some of the identiﬁed
issues of ours mentioned in Section III, while covering parts
of the taxonomy brieﬂy described in Section IV.
All approaches are assuming a pre-deﬁned set of non-
functional properties, which are either precisely represented
in terms of quantitative values or imprecisely represented
in terms of fuzzy sets. However, none of the described
approaches attends to the acquisition of property values
and the resultant inﬂuences, except for Pfeffer et al. [14],
who additionally consider monitored data for elementary
services. Composite services, in turn, are not covered by
the work of Pfeffer et al., while all other mentioned ap-
proaches incorporate at least an aggregation mechanism for
determining non-functional attributes of composite services.
Furthermore, although not explicitly mentioned as such,
different objective functions (e.g., costs or availability)
are minimized or maximized with respect to speciﬁc user
constraints. In this context, only single and independent
optimization goals are considered, while the optimization
problem itself is either solved locally, globally or by some
sophisticated combination of both. However, neither ranges
of satisfaction (homeostatic methods) nor dependencies be-
tween non-functional properties are currently considered in
any of these approaches.
The application of utility functions (utility values, ﬁtness
values) is indeed a common principle. It can be found in
all described papers, except for the work of Lin et al. [11].
However, the usage of utility functions differ among the ap-
proaches. For that reason, a clear deﬁnition and classiﬁcation
within the service composition context is still missing.
VII. OUTLOOK
Our next step will be to assemble a detailed survey of
important existing approaches with respect to the issues
pointed out in Section III and to the taxonomy brieﬂy
sketched in Section IV. In this context, the taxonomy itself
will be elaborated in more detail, and extended, if necessary.
Finally, a concrete example for demonstrating our approach
will be developed. By doing so, we want to establish a basis
for investigating quality based service selection algorithms
based on our rating and ranking methodology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by the German Re-
search Foundation (DFG) within the Collaborative Research
Center ”On-The-Fly Computing” (SFB 901).
REFERENCES
[1] W.
Tsai,
“Service-oriented
system
engineering:
a
new
paradigm,” in IEEE International Workshop Service-Oriented
System Engineering (SOSE), 2005, pp. 3 – 6.
[2] N. Milanovic and M. Malek, “Current solutions for web
service composition,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 8, no. 6,
pp. 51 – 59, 2004.
[3] J. M. Ko, C. O. Kim, and I.-H. Kwon, “Quality-of-service
oriented web service composition algorithm and planning ar-
chitecture,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 81, no. 11,
pp. 2079 – 2090, 2008.
[4] H. Chang and K. Lee, “Quality-driven web service composi-
tion for ubiquitous computing environment,” in International
Conference on New Trends in Information and Service Sci-
ence (NISS), 2009, pp. 156 –161.
[5] L. Zeng, B. Benatallah, M. Dumas, J. Kalagnanam, and
Q. Z. Sheng, “Quality driven web services composition,”
in Proceedings of the 12th International World Wide Web
Conference (WWW).
ACM, 2003, pp. 411–421.
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

[6] M. Alrifai and T. Risse, “Combining global optimization with
local selection for efﬁcient QoS-aware service composition,”
in Proceedings of the 18th International World Wide Web
Conference (WWW).
ACM, 2009, pp. 881–890.
[7] J. El Hadad, M. Manouvrier, and M. Rukoz, “TQoS: Trans-
actional and QoS-aware selection algorithm for automatic
web service composition,” IEEE Transactions on Services
Computing, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 73–85, 2010.
[8] N. Ben Mabrouk, S. Beauche, E. Kuznetsova, N. Georgantas,
and V. Issarny, “QoS-aware service composition in dynamic
service oriented environments,” in Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Middleware.
Springer, 2009,
pp. 123–142.
[9] N. Hiratsuka, F. Ishikawa, and S. Honiden, “Service selection
with combinational use of functionally-equivalent services,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Web
Services (ICWS), 2011, pp. 97 –104.
[10] L. Zadeh, “Fuzzy sets,” Information and Control, vol. 8, no. 3,
pp. 338 –353, 1965.
[11] M. Lin, J. Xie, H. Guo, and H. Wang, “Solving QoS-driven
web service dynamic composition as fuzzy constraint satisfac-
tion,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on E-Technology, E-Commerce and E-Service (EEE), 2005,
pp. 9–14.
[12] S. Agarwal and S. Lamparter, “User preference based auto-
mated selection of web service compositions,” in Proceedings
of the International Workshop in Dynamic Web Processes
(DWP).
IBM, 2005, pp. 1–12.
[13] G. J. Klir and B. Yuan, Fuzzy sets and fuzzy logic: Theory
and applications.
Prentice Hall, 1995.
[14] H. Pfeffer, S. Kr¨ussel, and S. Steglich, “A fuzzy logic based
model for representing and evaluating service composition
properties,” in Proceedings of the Third International Con-
ference on Systems and Networks Communications (ICSNC),
2008, pp. 335–342.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-215-8
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2012 : The Fourth International Conferences on Advanced Service Computing

