Chaos-Based Communication Systems Based on the Sprott D Attractor
Carlos E. C. Souza
Federal University of Pernambuco
Recife, Brazil 50740-550
Email: carlos.ecsouza@ufpe.br
Daniel P. B. Chaves
Federal University of Pernambuco
Recife, Brazil 50740-550
Email: daniel.chaves@ufpe.br
Cecilio Pimentel
Federal University of Pernambuco
Recife, Brazil 50740-550
Email: cecilio@ufpe.br
Abstract—We propose a chaos-based communication system em-
ploying the symbolic dynamics of the Sprott D chaotic attractor.
The chaotic dynamics is modeled by a graph representing the
evolution of the chaotic trajectories. Finite-state encoders are
employed to map unrestricted binary sequences in the restricted
sequences generated by the discretization of the chaotic ﬂow.
Finally, the performance of the proposed system is analyzed.
Keywords–Chaos communication; Symbolic dynamics; Topology
of three-dimensional chaotic attractors.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Chaos-based communication systems are suitable alter-
natives in modern communications due to some inherent
characteristics of the chaotic behavior such as decorrelation,
non-periodic behavior, broadband spectrum, energetic efﬁ-
ciency [1]. The use of chaotic dynamical systems has been
considered in several different scenarios [2]. In particular,
three-dimensional chaotic attractors have been successfully
employed in the design of digital communication systems [3].
The chaotic trajectories within three-dimensional chaotic
attractors can be discretized by a labeled partition of a Poincar´e
section. This deﬁnes a map between the continuous ﬂow and
the symbolic representation of the chaotic system. The sym-
bolic sequences generated by a chaotic attractor are restricted
due to the dynamical constraints imposed by the chaotic ﬂow,
and these restrictions can be exploited in the design of chaos-
based communication systems. The dynamical mechanism of a
chaotic attractor is represented by a set F that represents words
(or sequences) that never occur in the symbolic representation
of the attractor dynamics. The forbidden set F is used to
construct a graph that represents the discrete dynamics of the
system and is employed in the design of Finite-State Encoders
(FSE), used to map unrestricted into restricted sequences.
Moreover, the FSE are used in the decoder to estimate the
information sequence.
II.
MAIN RESULTS
To illustrate the proposed methodology, we detail the
design of a communication system based on the Sprott D
system, deﬁned by



˙x(t)
=
−y(t)
˙y(t)
=
x(t) + z(t)
˙z(t)
=
x(t)z(t) + ay2(t)
(1)
where a = 2.3 is the control parameter [4]. The Poincar´e
section for the Sprott D system is a plane perpendicular to the
xy plane with y = 0. Figure 1 shows the Sprott D attractor
A
B
y
x
b
Figure 1. Sprott D attractor and its Poincar´e section with a labeled binary
partition in projection on the xy plane.
in projection on the xy plane and its Poincar´e section with a
labeled binary partition over the alphabet A2 = {A, B}. The
threshold of the partition is deﬁned by the minimum of the
Poincar´e return map. When a chaotic trajectory crosses the
Poincar´e section, we assign the label of the region where the
crossing occurs in the symbolic evolution of the system. The
continuous ﬂow is mapped into symbolic sequences SN =
s0s1s2 . . . sN−1, where si ∈ A2 is the label of the visited
region in the Poincar´e section in the ith crossing. Therefore,
SN records the order of visitation in the regions of the Poincar´e
section in N consecutive crossings.
The ﬁrst step in the proposed methodology is to ﬁnd the
set F for the Sprott D system. We search in SN for words
with length n that never occur as sub-sequences of SN. In
this work, we consider n ≤ 10 and in this case the set F is
F = {BB, BAAB, BAAAAB}.
(2)
Applying the procedures described in [5], we construct a graph
that represents the dynamics of a restricted system according
to the speciﬁcation of the set F. Then, we construct the
FSE for the Sprott D system employing the method described
in [6], which is illustrated in Figure 2. The FSE maps one
information bit into two symbols s1s2. The next step to design
the communication system is to associate the chaotic signals
with the state transitions of the FSE.
The states transitions s1s2 of the FSE in Figure 2 cor-
respond to two successive crossings in the Poincar´e section
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-716-0
SIGNAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

A
B
1/AA
1/AB
0/AA
0/AB
Figure 2. Finite-state encoder for the Sprott D attractor.
y(θ)
θ/2π
0
1
0
1
yAAA(θ) yAAB(θ) yBAB(θ) yBAA(θ)
Figure 3. Chaotic signals generated by the Sprott D attractor versus the
angle θ to encode the information sequence 0101.
illustrated in Figure 1. The chaotic signals associated with
the transitions are deﬁned as the segments of the chaotic
trajectories generated by the variables of the system connecting
the corresponding regions of the Poincar´e section. Any variable
can be used and in this work we employ the variable y. We
deﬁne the angle θ as the angle between the vector obtained by
connecting the center of the attractor to a point of a chaotic
trajectory in projection on the xy plane and the Poincar´e
section [3]. Parameterizing the chaotic signals as y(θ), the
crossings are periodic with angular period 2π. For example,
the chaotic signal associated with the transition from state A to
state B in the FSE is the segment of trajectory y(θ) connecting
the regions A to A and subsequently connecting the regions
A to B, denoted yAAB(θ), with angular period 4π. Fig. 3
illustrates a chaotic trajectory versus the angle θ that encodes
the information sequence 0101 starting at state A.
The proposed communication system is represented in
Figure 4. The state transitions are induced by chaos control [7]
according to the information bits b0b1b2 . . .. The chaotic wave-
forms y(θ) are inverted (multiplied by −1) in the bipolar
modulator when the information bit is 0 [3]. At each signaling
interval T , the signal y(θ) is mapped into the transmitted signal
s(t) with duration T . The signal s(t) is transmitted over an
AWGN channel and the received signal is r(t) = s(t) + n(t),
where the noise n(t) has uniform power spectral density
N0/2. The decoder uses the Viterbi algorithm to estimate the
information sequence.
We performed numerical simulations to evaluate the Bit
Error Rate (BER) of the proposed communication system. The
Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) is deﬁned as SNR = ¯Es/N0,
where ¯Es is the average energy of the transition curves. Fig-
ure 5 shows the performance of the proposed system and the
uncoded BPSK system for reference purposes. The proposed
system outperforms the BPSK system by approximately 1.8
Sprott D
Attractor
Bipolar
Modulator
Channel
Decoder
s(t)
r(t)
ˆbk
bk
y(θ)
Figure 4. Block diagram of the communication system based on the Sprott
D chaotic attractor.
SNR (dB)
BER
Figure 5. BER for the Sprott D communication system over an AWGN
channel. The BER for an uncoded BPSK is also shown.
dB for a BER = 10−5 .
III.
CONCLUSIONS
We proposed a methodology to design chaos-based com-
munication systems using a discretization of the chaotic ﬂow
generated by the Sprott D chaotic attractor. The discrete
chaotic dynamics was used to design an FSE to transmit
information when the dynamics is restricted, resulting in
better robustness against the channel noise. Therefore, the
proposed system is an interesting alternative in chaos-based
communications, yielding enhanced performance at the cost
of a relatively simple encoding scheme.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank CNPq and FACEPE for
the ﬁnancial support.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Strogatz, Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos with Applications to Physics,
Biology, Chemistry, and Engineering, ser. Studies in Nonlinearity Series.
Westview Press, 2001.
[2]
G. Kaddoum, “Wireless chaos-based communication systems: A com-
prehensive survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, May 2016, pp. 2621–2648.
[3]
C. E. C. Souza, D. P. B. Chaves, and C. Pimentel, “Digital commu-
nication systems based on three-dimensional chaotic attractors,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, Jan. 2019, pp. 10 523–10 532.
[4]
J. C. Sprott, “Some simple chaotic ﬂows,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 50, Aug.
1994, pp. R647–R650.
[5]
M. Crochemore, F. Mignosi, and A. Restivo, “Automata and forbidden
words,” Information Processing Letters, vol. 67, no. 3, Aug. 1998, pp.
111 – 117.
[6]
D. Lind and B. Marcus, An Introduction to Symbolic Dynamics and
Coding.
Cambridge University Press, 1995.
[7]
S. Hayes, C. Grebogi, and E. Ott, “Communicating with chaos,” Phys.
Rev. Lett., vol. 70, May 1993, pp. 3031–3034.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-716-0
SIGNAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

