A Low Cost Technology-based Device for Breath Analysis and Self-monitoring
Danila Germanese
Institute of Information Science and Technology,
ISTI-CNR, Pisa, Italy
mail: danila.germanese@isti.cnr.it
Mario D’Acunto
Institute of Matter Science
ISM-CNR, Rome, Italy
mail: mario.dacunto@ism.cnr.it
Massimo Magrini
and Marco Righi
Institute of Information Science and Technology,
ISTI-CNR, Pisa, Italy
mail: name.surname@isti.cnr.it
Ovidio Salvetti
Institute of Information Science and Technology,
ISTI-CNR, Pisa, Italy
mail: ovidio.salvetti@isti.cnr.it
Abstract—Here, we describe the development of a portable device,
based on low cost technology, able to collect and analyze in real
time the composition of the breath. Despite its great potential,
breath analysis is not widely used in clinical practice: high costs
for standard analytical instrumentation (i.e., gas chromatograph-
mass spectrometer), the need for specialized personnel able to
read the results and the lack of standardized protocols to collect
breath samples, set limits to its exploitation. The presented device,
named Wize Sniffer, is based on commercial gas sensors and
a widely employed open-source controller; in addition, it is
very easy to use also for non-specialized personnel. The Wize
Sniffer is composed of three modules: signal measurement, signal
conditioning and signal processing. The idea was born in the
framework of the European SEMEiotic Oriented Technology
for Individual’s CardiOmetabolic risk self-assessmeNt and Self-
monitoring (SEMEOTICONS) Project, in order to monitor indi-
vidual’s lifestyle by detecting in the breath those molecules related
to the noxious habits for cardio-metabolic risk. Nonetheless, the
modular conﬁguration of the Wize Sniffer makes it usable also
for other applications by changing the type of the gas sensors
according to the molecules to be detected.
Keywords–Bio-signals; Breath analysis; Signal processing; E-
noses; Semiconductor gas sensors.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Breath analysis is a technique as new as promising. On
one hand, it enables the monitoring of biochemical processes:
the volatile organic compounds (VOCs) from the metabolic
processes are generated within the body, travel via the blood,
participate to the alveolar exchanges and appear in exhaled
breath; on the other hand, breath is easily and non-invasively
accessible [1], [2], [3]. Many studies aim for assessing the
clinical potential of breath analysis: exhaled pentane and
ethane were investigated as lipid per-oxygenation product in
case of oxidative stress [4]; breath ammonia can be a useful
biomarkers both for the evaluation of clinical treatments in
case of renal diseases [5], [6] and for monitoring the level
of severity in case of liver diseases [7]. Nonetheless, despite
its great potential, the use of breath analysis in clinical di-
agnostic is limited because of the high costs of the speciﬁc,
high accurate instrumentation (i.e., gas chromatograph, mass
spectrometer) and the need of expert personnel to perform the
analysis, which also are very time consuming [5].
Recently, e-noses are gaining the attention of the scientiﬁc
community. Formerly designed for broader applications (en-
vironmental gases monitoring, for instance), in recent years
the idea of exploiting e-noses also for clinical applications
has been arisen [8]. E-noses allow for performing breath
analysis in a very short time, being quicker than a gas
chromatograph. Since they are able to follow the trend in
time of breath molecules, in many studies they have been
employed in different ﬁelds of medicine: in oncology, for
instance, to monitor volatile biomarkers related to cancer [9],
in infectiology [10], in respiratory medicine to evaluate asthma
[11]. Nevertheless, the majority of such e-noses exploit very
expensive technology [12], [13] or requires complex circuitry
[14], [15]. By developing the Wize Sniffer (WS), presented in
this paper, we aimed to overcome this limitations:
•
it is a portable device for the monitoring of a number
of breath molecules in real time;
•
it is entirely based on low cost technology: the em-
ployed gas sensors are commercial, semiconductor-
based and easily embeddable in the circuitry; breath
signals are analyzed by a widely employed open
source controller: Arduino Mega2560;
•
the WS is very easy to use, also for non-specialized
personnel. However, it is programmed in order to send
breath analysis results also to a remote care center.
The
WS
was
conceived
in
the
framework
of
SEMEOTICONS
European
Project
[16].
It
aimed
to
develop the Wize Mirror, a multi-sensory platform having the
appearance of a mirror, able to assess individual’s well-being
state by detecting in the human face all those signs related
to cardio-metabolic risk [17]. The WS was designed to be
integrated in Wize Mirror’s hardware platform in order to
detect in human breath the molecules related to those noxious
habits for cardio-metabolic risk: alcohol intake, wrong diet,
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-559-3
SIGNAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

smoke. Not only: we aimed to develop a device, which could
be also used in a stand-alone conﬁguration and for broader
applications, thanks to its modular conﬁguration [18], [19].
In the paper, Section II lists the molecules detected by the
WS and describes the device’s general architecture; Section
III explains the WS functionality tests and the experimental
results, later discussed in Section IV.
II.
THE WIZE SNIFFER, HOW IT WORKS
A. Breath compounds detected by the WS
The WS is composed of an array of semiconductor-based
gas sensors able to detect those breath VOCs considered as
indices of noxious habits for cardio-metabolic risk:
•
Carbon monoxide (CO): it is the major compound
of cigarette smoke and it is very dangerous, even
in minimal part. Its baseline value for a non-smoker
subject is round about 3.5ppm, and it reaches 14-
30ppm in smokers;
•
Oxygen and carbon dioxide (O2 and CO2): their
variations can be considered as a measure of the
metabolism, that means, how much O2 is retained in
the body, and how much CO2 is produced as a by-
product of cellular metabolism. Their baseline values
are respectively 40000ppm and 13-15%;
•
Hydrogen (H2): it is related to the carbohydrates
breakdown in the intestine and in the oral cavity by
anaerobic bacteria. Its baseline value is round about
9.1ppm, but it may vary from an individual to another,
especially in case of lactose intolerance;
•
Ethanol (C2H6O): it derives from alcoholic drinks.
Ethanol breakdown leads to an accumulation of free
radicals into the cells, causing oxidative stress. Its
baseline value is round about 0.62ppm;
•
Hydrogen sulﬁde (H2S): it is a vascular relax agent;
for instance, it has a therapeutic effect in hypertension.
Its baseline value is round about 0.33ppm.
B. Wize Sniffer, hardware and software
In Figure 1, WS’ hardware is shown. The user blows once
into a disposable mouthpiece, placed at the beginning of a
corrugated tube. A ﬂowmeter allows for assessing the exhaled
gases volume. A heat and moisture exchanger (HME) ﬁlter
absorbs the water vapor present in exhaled breath, reducing
the humidity which affects gas sensors’ behavior. The gases
reach the sampling box (whose capacity is 600ml according to
the tidal volume [20]), which can be considered as the signal
measurement module. Indeed, within the sampling box, made
up of ABS and Delrin, six semiconductor-based gas sensors are
placed. Other two gas sensors work in ﬂowing regime by means
of a sampling pump, which inject the gases from the sampling
box at a ﬁxed rate (120ml/sec). Within the gas sampling box
also a sensor for temperature and humidity (Sensirion SHT11)
is placed. Sensors’ output are pre-processed by a signal condi-
tioning module. A series of voltage buffer ampliﬁers is used to
transfer sensors’ signal from the measurement module to the
micro-controller board: an Arduino Mega2560 with Ethernet
module (which is low cost, widely employed and has an open
source integrated development environment). At the end of
a breath test, a ﬂushing pump ”purges” the sampling box to
Figure 1. Wize Sniffer’s hardware. a) external conﬁguration; b) internal
conﬁguration.
recovery the sensors’ steady state.
In Table I, all the gas sensors are listed. Our choice was
to employ MOS-based gas sensors, manufactured by Figaro
Engineering, because of their long life, strong sensitivity, rapid
recovery; in addition, they are low cost (20-30Euro on average)
and easy to be integrated in the circuitry. As mentioned before,
humidity strongly affects their behavior, as well as cross-
sensitivity [21], which makes these sensors be non-selective.
TABLE I. MOS-BASED GAS SENSORS INTEGRATED IN THE WIZE
SNIFFER’S MEASUREMENT MODULE.
Detected molecule
Sensor
Best detection range
Carbon monoxide
TGS2442
50-1000ppm
MQ7
20-200ppm
TGS2620
50-5000ppm
Ethanol
TGS2602
1-10ppm
TGS2620
50-5000ppm
Carbon dioxide
TGS4161
0-40000ppm
Oxygen
MOX20
0-16%
Hydrogen sulﬁde
TGS2602
1-10ppm
Hydrogen
TGS821
10-5000ppm
TGS2602
1-10ppm
TGS2620
50-5000ppm
MQ7
20-200ppm
Ammonia
TGS2444
1-100ppm
TGS2602
1-50ppm
The aim of developing a device which could be used also
in a stand-alone conﬁguration, and which could be useful
for user self-monitoring and self-surveillance, also in home
environment, is evident about software implementation. We
implemented a client-server architecture (Figure 2) in order to
send breath data also to a remote personal computer. It means
that, after performing a test and processing the results, the
device, thanks to an internet connection and a communication
protocol, can send the results to the family doctor, for instance.
For this purpose, Arduino is programmed to process sensors’
raw data and to execute a daemon on port 23. By implementing
a Telnet server, it waits a command line from the remote
personal computer and provides the data.
Finally, in Figure 3, WS’ operation modes are shown. In the
smaller picture, the WS is working as a Wize Mirror’s tool. In
the other picture, the WS is working as a stand-alone device.
III.
WIZE SNIFFER FUNCTIONALITY TESTS AND DATA
ANALYSIS
Breath analysis performed by low-cost technology based
gas
sensors
is
a
great
challenge.
If,
on
one
hand,
semiconductor-based gas sensors are low cost, robust and very
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-559-3
SIGNAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

Figure 2. Wize Sniffer’s client-server architecture including Arduino
Mega2560 with Ethernet module
Figure 3. The two Wize Sniffer’s conﬁgurations.
simple to integrate in the circuitry, on the other hand, their
behavior is strongly affected by humidity and cross-sensitivity.
It means that there is not a single sensor for each compound,
but each sensor may be sensitive to many VOCs. As a conse-
quence, the estimation of the breath molecules’ concentration
is an arduous challenge. Nevertheless, we tried to do a step
toward this direction: we investigated gas sensors’ sensitivity
in our measurement conditions (30C+/-7%, 70%RH+/-5%, that
are the ones that occur in the sampling box during a breath
test). Not only, we also investigated how the several breath
molecules inﬂuence each other in the chemical interaction with
the sensors’ sensing element.
Moreover, breath gases are something extremely variable:
breath composition may vary according to heart rate, breath
ﬂow rate [22], posture [23], ambient air [24], lung volume
[25], breath sampling mode [26]. Exhaled breath is affected by
a strong inter-variability (among different subjects), and also
by a marked intra-variability (relative to the same subject).
As summarized in Figure 4, we have to face ﬁrst with an
uncertainty of measure relative to those factors that affect
the gas sensors’ behavior; then, we have also un uncertainty
due to all the physiological conditions that inﬂuence breath
composition. For instance, in our case, also factors such as
BMI [27], sex, age may inﬂuence ethanol’s concentration in
breath.
Figure 4. All the inﬂuencing factor (in the circles) related to breath analysis
performed by semiconductor-based gas sensors.
A. Sensitivity tests on gas sensors with well-known gases
concentrations
These experimental tests aimed to reproduce our mea-
surement conditions when a breath analysis is performed: in
particular, the temperature in the gas sampling box increases
up to 30C+/-7% and the humidity reaches 70%RH+/-5%.
We investigated sensors’ response to a well-known gases
concentrations, as well as their cross sensitivity.
Figure 5 shows how the humidity strongly affects such type of
gas sensors (in this case, MQ7 sensor, sensitive to CO). The
relationship between humidity and sensors’ output generally
can be modeled by means of a power law:
Vout = f(hum) = a ∗ (humb) + c
(1)
where a and c are constant. Understanding such a behavior
is useful to calculate humidity sensors’ drift and then compen-
sate it. We considered the entire range of humidity variation
(for instance, 50%-55%RH in the case of MQ7, as shown in
Figure 5) and then we calculated the slope of the curves. Based
on the slope, drift coefﬁcients were assessed as the decrease
in sensors’ output (Volt) per unit decrease in humidity (eq. 2):
Sd = ∆V/∆hum
(2)
Also the gas ﬂow rate indirectly inﬂuences gas sensors’
behavior: a high ﬂow-rate leads to a decrease in humidity,
which causes (as shown in Figure 5), a decrease in sensor’s
output. By keeping the humidity constant, sensor’s output will
depend on the gas concentration only. Indeed, by means of
the experimental set-up that is shown in Figure 6, we kept the
humidity at 70%RH+/-5% by means of a saturated solution of
NaCl placed on the bottom of the vial; then, we injected in the
vial well-known gases concentrations. In Figure 7, we can see
TGS2620 output when well-known concentrations of carbon
monoxide, ethanol and hydrogen were separately injected into
the vial. Also in this case, the relationship between sensor’s
output and gases contraction can be modeled by means of an
equation similar to eq.1.
In order to assess TGS2620 cross sensitivity, well-known
mixed concentrations of the three gases were injected into
the vial at the same time. In this way, how the different
VOCs add together and inﬂuence gas sensors’ output can
be understood. In Figure 8, the results are shown. Each gas
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-559-3
SIGNAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

Figure 5. The relationship between MQ7 sensor and humidity is plotted. A
power model is used for ﬁtting curve.
Figure 6. a) and b) Experimental setup. c) The data stream from sensors is
read by an Arduino Mega2560 board via serial port.
contribution can be modeled by a power law (see eq. 1). By
investigating such behavior of semiconductor gas sensors, the
”weight” of each compound on the output can be addressed.
A simple model to describe this phenomenon can be based
on a linear regression.
B. WS functionality test: the clinical validation
The WS underwent a clinical validation in three research
centers: CNR in Pisa and Milan, CRNH (Centre de Recherche
en Nutrition Humaine) in Lyon. The validation campaign
involved 77 volunteers overall. The population was composed
of individuals with different habits and lifestyle, as shown in
Figure 9. People had to answer some questionnaires about
their lifestyle, among which Audit test and Fagerstrom test,
which respectively assess the alcohol and smoke dependence.
35% of them was no-risk subjects (that means, subject which
never smoke, and with no-or-very low risk drinking); 6% of
them was light smokers (low nicotine dependence); 19% of
them was heavy smokers (high nicotine dependence); 17% of
Figure 7. The curves show the relationship between TGS2620 output and
well-known concentrations of CO, (ﬁrst plot), C2H6O (second plot) and
H2 (third plot).
them was social drinker (low risk drinking); there were not
people with high or increasing risk drinking (heavy drinkers);
23% of them was a combination of the previous classes.
A measuring protocol was draft, which took into account the
methodological issues about breath sampling procedure [26]
that, as shown in Figure 4, may strongly inﬂuence the breath
composition. Actually, there is no standardized procedures to
sample the breath. The most common methods of sampling
are three: ”alveolar sampling” (that is used if only the VOCs
participating to the alveolar exchanges are to be assessed),
”mixed expiratory air sampling” (which corresponds to a
whole breath sample), ”time-controlled sampling” (which
corresponds to the exhaled air sampled after the start of
expiration). For our purposes, mixed expiratory air sampling
method was chosen, since our interest was focused on
both endogenous and exogenous biomarkers. The subjects
took a deep breath in, held the breath for 10sec., and then
exhaled once into the corrugated tube trying to keep the
expiratory ﬂow constant and to completely empty their
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-559-3
SIGNAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

Figure 8. The curves show the relationship between TGS2620 output and
well-known concentrations of CO, (blu plot), C2H6O (green plot) and H2
(red plot).
Figure 9. The population involved in SEMEOTICONS clinical validation.
lungs. The study was approved by the Ethical Committee
of the Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Pisana, protocol
n.213/2014 approved on September 25th, 2014; all patients
provided a signed informed consent before enrollment.
The aim was to assess if the WS was able to monitor and
evaluate the individuals’ noxious habits for cardio-metabolic
risk (smoke and alcohol intake in particular). In Subsection
III-A we have conﬁrmed, by means of experimental tests, the
cross-selectivity of the sensors, which make their responses
ambiguous. As a consequence, because of the difﬁculty
of
making
an
accurate
quantitative
analysis
of
VOCs’
concentrations,
we
exploited
another
approach
for
data
analysis, more classical, based on multivariate methods of
pattern recognition. Pattern recognition, by exploiting the
cross-correlation, extracts informations contained in sensors’
outputs ensemble.
Sensors’ raw data ﬁrst were zero-centered and normalized,
thus putting in evidence the qualitative aspects of the data.
Then, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed,
in order to provide a representation of the data in a space
of dimensions lower than the original sensors space. In
particular, the ﬁrst two components were extracted, exploiting
89% of variance. By the PCA we also removed the noise of
the sensors. In Figure 10 and 11 the biplots of PCA scores
are shown. In the 3D-plot, in particular, several cluster can
be identiﬁed. Furthermore, in 2D-plot, we can see that the
two ﬁrst principal components seem to arrange according
to the two ﬁrst noxious habits for cardio-metabolic risk:
Component 1 seems to be representative of smoking (MQ7
vector is aligned with it), as well as Component 2 seems to
be representative of alcohol intake and wrong diet (TGS2602,
TGS2620, TGS821 vectors are aligned with it).
After assessing the presence of clusters, the data were
Figure 10. First two Principal Components.
Figure 11. First three Principal Components.
processed with a K-nearest neighbor (KNN) classiﬁcation
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-559-3
SIGNAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

algorithm, previously trained with the data coming from
another acquisition campaign. The aim was to classify
the
subjects
according
to
their
habits:
”Healthy”
(that
means, no cardio-metabolic risk), ”Light Smoker”, ”Heavy
Smoker”, ”Social Drinker”, ”Heavy Drinker”, ”LsSd” (Light
smokers, Social drinker), ”LsHd” (tLight smokers, Heavy
drinkers), ”HsSd” (Heavy smokers, Social drinker), ”HsHd”
(Heavy smokers, Heavy drinker). The Audit and Fagerstrom
questionnaires were our ground truth. It is important to
highlight that while an alcohol consumption up to 1-2
Alcohol unit/ day is often considered not dangerous (in
healthy subjects), smoking is considered very noxious in any
case. The KNN classiﬁer was able to correctly classify in
89,61% of cases. Errors are due to TGS2602 and TGS2620
cross-sensitivity for hydrogen. In fact, for instance, three
”no-risk” subjects were classiﬁed as ”social drinker” because
of high hydrogen contribution which caused a rise in these
sensors voltage output.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we described the development of a portable,
very easy-to-use, low cost technology-based device for real-
time breath analysis. The Wize Sniffer is based on an array
of low cost, semiconductor-based gas sensors. Such type of
gas sensors are, of course, very sensitive and easy to be
integrated in the circuitry. On the other hand, they require
a very robust data post-processing because of the difﬁculty
of discriminating the molecules’ contribution due to sensors’
cross sensitivity. Pattern recognition algorithms turn out the
best way to overcome such problem. Nevertheless, our aim will
be to develop a model in order to calculate, as accurately as
possible, the concentration of breath molecules to be detected
by the WS, in order to compare such concentrations with the
reference ones (see Subsection II-A). This model should be
based on the data regarding the gas sensors’ behavior (see
Subsection III-A), but it also has to take into account other
parameters (Figure 4) that can inﬂuence breath composition.
In addition, the fact that the WS is able to detect a large
number of VOCs, allows for using such device in broader
applications: for instance, TGS2444, selective to ammonia,
could be exploited to monitor patients with acute liver diseases.
In addition, its modular conﬁguration allows for changing the
type of the sensors according to the molecules to be detected.
Therefore, we retain that a big effort should be devoted in order
to foster breath analysis in clinical practice. Not only, having
a portable device for real-time breath analysis, easy to use,
affordable to maintain, may allow for a daily self-monitoring
also in home environment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was funded in the framework of the Collabora-
tive European Project SEMEOTICONS (SEMEiotic Oriented
Technology for Individuals CardiOmetabolic risk selfassess-
meNt and Self- monitoring), grant N. 611516.
Paolo Paradisi, Massimo Martinelli, Massimo Guidi and
COSMED s.r.l. are warmly acknowledged for useful support.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Lourenco and C. Turner, “Breath analysis in disease diagnosis:
methodological considerations and applications,” Metabolites, vol. 4,
2014, pp. 465–498.
[2]
F. DiFrancesco, R. Fuoco, M. Trivella, and A. Ceccarini, “Breath
analysis: trends in techniques and clinical applications,” Microchemical
Journal, vol. 79, 2005, pp. 405–10.
[3]
W. Miekisch, J. Schubert, and G. Noeldge-Schomburg, “Diagnostic
potential of breath analysis- focus on volatile organic compounds,”
Clinica Chimica Acta, vol. 347, 2004, pp. 25–39.
[4]
M. Phillips, R. Cataneo, J. Greenberg, R. Grodman, and M. Salasar,
“Breath markers in oxidative stress in patients with unstable angina,”
Heart Disease, vol. 5, 2003, pp. 95–99.
[5]
D. Guo, a. L. Z. D. Zhang, N. Li, and J. Yang, “A novel breath analysis
system based on electronic olfaction,” IEEE Transaction on Biomedical
Engineering, 2010, pp. 2753 – 2763.
[6]
I. Essiet, “Diagnosis of kidney failure by analysis of the concentration of
ammonia in exhaled breath,” Jo. of Emerg. Trends Eng. Appl., Science,
vol. 6, 2013, pp. 859–862.
[7]
R. Adrover and al., “Breath-Ammonia Testing of Healthy Subjects and
Patients with Cirrhosis,” Digestive Diseases and Sciences, vol. 57, 2012,
pp. 189–195.
[8]
A. Wilson, “Recent progress in the design and clinical development
of electronic-nose technologies,” Nanobiosensors in Disease Diagnosis,
2016, pp. 15–27.
[9]
T. de Meij and al., “Electronic nose can discriminate colorectal car-
cinoma and advanced adenomas by fecal volatile biomarker analysis:
proof of principle study,” Int. J. Cancer, 2014, pp. 1132–1138.
[10]
N. Yusuf and al., “In-vitro diagnosis of single and poly microbial
species targeted for diabetic foot infection using e-nose technology,”
BMC Bionformatics, 2015, pp. 158–169.
[11]
P. Montuschi, N. Mores, A. Trov, C. Mondino, and P. Barnes, “The
electronic nose in respiratory medicine,” Respiration, 2013, pp. 72–84.
[12]
URL: http://www.bedfont.com/.
[13]
D. Walt and al., “Optical sensor array for odor recognition,” Biosens.
Bioelectron., 1998, pp. 697–699.
[14]
F. Lai and H. Huang, “Fabrication of high frequency and low-cost
surface-acustic wave ﬁlters using near ﬁeld phase shift photolitography,”
Microelectronic Engineering, 2006, pp. 1407–1409.
[15]
L. Fan, H. Ge, S. Zhang, H. Zhang, and J. Zhu, “Optimization of
sensitivity induced by surface conductivity and adsorbed mass in surface
acoustic wave gas sensors,” Sensor Act. B-Chem, 2012, pp. 114–123.
[16]
URL: http://www.semeoticons.eu/.
[17]
S. Colantonio and al., “A smart mirror to promote a healthy lifestyle,”
Biosystems Engineering,Special Issue: Innovations in Medicine and
Healthcare. Elsevier, vol. 138, 2015, pp. 33–43.
[18]
D. Germanese and al., A low cost, portable device for breath analysis
and self-monitoring, the Wize Sniffer.
Springer International Publish-
ing, 2017, pp. 51–57.
[19]
M. D’Acunto and al., “Wize sniffer - a new portable device designed for
selective olfaction,” in International Conference on Health Informatics,
2014, pp. 577–582.
[20]
D. Shier, J. Butler, and R. Lewis, Hole’s Human Anatomy and Physi-
ology.
McGraw-Hill 11th Ed, 2007.
[21]
P. Clifford and D. Tuma, “Characteristics of semiconductors gas sensors
i. steady state gas response,” Sensors and Actuators, vol. 3, 1983, pp.
233–254.
[22]
J. Jones and S. Clarke, “Effect of expiratory ﬂow rate on regional lung
emptying,” Clin. Sci., 1969, pp. 343–56.
[23]
N. Anthonisen, P. Robertson, and W. Ross, “Gravity-dependent sequen-
tial emptying of lung regions,” J. of Appl. Physiol., 1970, pp. 589–95.
[24]
F. DiFrancesco and al., “Implementation of fowler’s method for end-
tidal air sampling,” Journal of Breath Research, 2008, p. 037009 (10pp).
[25]
J. Jones, “The effect of pre-inspiratory lung volumes on the result of
the single breath o2 test,” Respiratory Physiology, 1967, pp. 375–85.
[26]
W. Miekisch and al., “Impact of sampling procedures on the result of
breath analysis,” 2008, p. 026007 (7pp).
[27]
K. E. Maudens, L. Patteet, A. L. N. van Nuijs, C. V. Broekhoven,
A. Covaci, and H. Neels, “The inﬂuence of the body mass index
(bmi) on the volume of distribution of ethanol,” Forensic Science
International, Elsevier, 2014, pp. 74–78.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-559-3
SIGNAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

