Requirements for Piano Lesson Support System 
Developing “Piano Lesson Whole Visualization System” 
 
Naoki Morita 
School of Information Telecommunication Engineering 
Tokai University 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: morita@tokai.ac.jp 
Kenta Morita 
Faculty of Medical Engineering 
Suzuka University of Medical Science 
 Mie, Japan 
e-mail: morita@suzuka-u.ac.jp 
Chiharu Nakanishi, Chiaki Sawada 
 
Kunitachi College of Music 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: {nakanishi.chiharu, sawada.chiaki}@kunitachi.ac.jp 
Kazue Kawai 
 
Miyagi University 
Miyagi, Japan 
e-mail: kawaik@myu.ac.jp 
 
 
 
Abstract—The authors aim to pass on the tradition of classical 
music to the next generation by greatly reforming and evolving 
the traditional pedagogy of piano education using Information 
and Communication Technology. Specifically, we aim to shift 
the paradigm from conventional subjective performance 
learning that rely on sensitivity and memory of lessons to 
objective, independent and autonomous performance learning 
through the sharing of objective performance video data. This 
presentation is a part of research of the “Whole Visualization 
of Piano Lesson.” This presentation reports on the necessary 
functions of the system and its implementation method, based 
on a questionnaire survey conducted to investigate current 
needs in preparation for the development of the “Piano Lesson 
Whole Visualization System.” 
Keywords- piano; support; system; visualization; connections. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This report is part of a study being conducted at a music 
college in Japan to pass on the classical piano tradition to the 
next generation. The Ideas, Connections, and Extensions 
model (ICE model) [1] is a framework that describes phases 
of learning. In the ICE model for piano, there is the Ideas 
phase in which students play the score with rhythmic and 
percussive accuracy, the Connections phase in which the 
learning elements of Ideas are applied to music with 
expression, empathy, and technical connections, and the 
Extensions phase in which the music resonates with the 
audience. With regard to these ICE models, previous studies 
of piano lesson in Japan [2]-[18] have focused on the Ideas 
phase for beginners using electronic keyboards. In these 
studies, the goal is for students to be able to read music and 
hit the keyboard in a precise rhythm without mistakes. This 
study will focus on piano lessons during the Connections 
phase. 
The purpose of this study is to summarize the 
requirements for a piano lesson support system in the 
Connections phase and how to achieve them. Specifically, 
we will analyze the problems in looking back at the lesson 
video archive. Then, we will examine what kind of support 
or functionality can be realized to make the most of the 
lessons, enhance students’ awareness, and link this to their 
improvement in piano playing. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the flow of piano lessons in the Connections phase. 
In Section III, we conduct a survey on looking back piano 
lesson videos, and in Section IV, we present two key points 
for looking back piano lesson videos necessary for the 
development of the “Piano Lesson Whole Visualization 
System” and Section V provides our conclusions. 
II. 
PIANO LESSON 
In the Connections phase of the ICE model, 
expressiveness, empathy, and technical connections are 
important. The goal is for students to immerse themselves in 
the music and acquire the technical (physical) and sensory 
skills to perform a certain piece of music as they wish, even 
under pressure, in a practical exam, competition, or other 
performance. 
The lessons leading up to a concert, competition, or other 
performance are given once a week for three to four months, 
as a standard practice. 
A. Before the lesson begins: Preparation 
Student: A student (1) reads score, (2) researches the piece, 
(3) listens to recordings by performers for reference, etc., 
and practices and studies on his /her own to get the piece 
in shape for the day of the lesson.  
B. Every Lesson (beginning) 
Student: The student performs through a piece of music. 
Instructor: The instructor gives a critique (guide) of the 
student's performance. The instructor will discuss any 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-057-5
SIGNAL 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

musical or technical problems the student may have, and 
will give the student the necessary tasks to complete the 
performance. The instructor will share the image of the 
piece with the student by mentioning the background of 
the piece, episodes, traditional (common) performance 
techniques, etc. 
Student: After listening to the instructor’s critique (guide), 
the student understands the task at hand. The student 
writes down the assignment in the score (the student is 
encouraged to memorize the critique heard from the 
instructor, not during the lesson, and to make a summary 
note after the end of the lesson). The student should also 
communicate to the instructor any problems or questions 
that emerge from the independent practice, and exchange 
opinions. 
C. During the lesson 
Instructor: The instructor asks the student to resume playing, 
stopping the performance at various points, and 
instructing the student to improve on the issues pointed 
out in B. 
Student: The student immediately improves on the 
instructor’s tasks based on the instructor’s instructions. If 
the student cannot do so on the spot, the student shall 
make it an assignment until the next lesson. 
D. Review at home 
Student: At home, the student should try to overcome the 
tasks given by an instructor, relying on the experience 
and memory of the lesson and the writing on the sheet 
music, and connect them to the next week. 
III. 
QUESTIONNAIRE SURVEY 
Between April and May 2022, a survey on video review 
of performances was conducted on Google Forms [19]-[21]. 
The subjects were 20 piano instructors and 24 students at a 
music college, with 10 and 9 questions, respectively. 
There are four main things that can be said from the 
instructors’ and students’ questionnaires. 
1. Not a few of the students record their lessons. However, 
students rarely review all of their previously recorded 
lesson videos. Students do not have the time or 
motivation to watch a long lesson recording from 
beginning to end.  
2. Students are dissatisfied with the content of the videos 
when they watch them. e.g. “I can't see how I touch the 
keyboard.” “I can't see my own face and tone.” 
3. Students were dissatisfied with the video viewing. e.g. “It 
takes too much time to find the video I want to watch 
from the video archive,” “It is difficult to pinpoint the 
part I am interested in,” “It is difficult to go back in time 
to watch.” 
4. Students and instructors are dissatisfied with the device 
itself and the application when handling the device. e.g. 
“It is complicated to connect,” “I don't know how to 
operate the application.” 
IV. 
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE SYSTEM 
Based on the analysis of the needs of the questionnaires, 
the following two things are required to the system. 
(1) The system can instantly locate and view the part of the 
performance that the student wants to see. 
(2) The system can instantly locate videos of certain parts of 
the lesson at different recording times. 
The “Piano Lesson Whole Visualization System” which 
we are developing this time, can be used to connect a score 
and video will locate:    
(1) a certain part of the lesson. 
(2) a certain part of the lesson at a different time for 
comparison of previous performance and current one.  
The connection between the score and the video is made 
by comparing and associating the scale recognized from the 
score and the pitch recognized from the video. This allows 
the user to click on a section of the target score to bring up 
the playback position of the video. Furthermore, the score 
and the video taken at that time are automatically associated 
with the calendar with the date and time of the practice. This 
makes it easy to select videos for comparing one’s own 
previous and current performances, or for comparing one's 
own performance with an instructor’s model performance. 
For students comparing previous and current performances 
will be a great opportunity to improve their piano. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The purpose of this study is to summarize the 
requirements for a piano lesson support system in the 
Connections phase and how to achieve them. Specifically, 
we will analyze the problems in looking back at the lesson 
video archive. Then, we will examine what kind of support 
or functionality can be realized to make the most of the 
lessons, enhance students' awareness, and link this to their 
improvement in piano playing. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Japan Society for the 
Promotion of Science (JSPS) KAKENHI Grant Number 
21K18528. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] F. S. Young, and R. J. Wilson, Assessment and learning: The 
ICE approach. Winnipeg, MB: Portage and Main Press., 2000. 
[2] C. Oshima, K. Nishimoto, and M. Suzuki, “A Piano Duo 
Performance Support System to Motivate Children’s Practice 
at Home,” IPSJ Journal, Vol. 46, No. 1, pp.157-171, 2005. 
[3] K. Nakahira, M. Akabane and Y. Hukami, “Faculty 
Development for Playing and Singing Education with 
Blended 
Learning,” 
Japan 
Society 
for 
Educational 
Technology, Vol.34, pp.45-48, 2010. 
[4] Y. Yokoyama and K. Nishimoto, “A piano practice support 
system for preventing performance cessation caused by 
performance errors,” IPSJ Interaction, pp.118-127, 2010. 
[5] K. Yamada and K. T. Nakahira, “Development of Training 
Support System for Learners to Acquire Piano Rudimental 
Techniques,” Proceedings of the 73th National Convention of 
IPSJ, Vol.2, pp.303-304, 2011. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-057-5
SIGNAL 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

[6] E. Nakamura, H. Takeda, R. Yamamoto, S. Sako, and S 
Sagayam Proceedings of the 81th National Convention of 
IPSJ, Vol.2, pp.337-338, 2019.a, “Score Following Handling 
Performances with Arbitrary Repeats and Skips and 
Automatic Accompaniment,” IPSJ Journal, Vol. 54, No. 4, 
pp.1338-1349, 2013. 
[7] Y. Takegawa, T. Terada, and M. Tsukamoto, “Design and 
Implementation of a Piano Learning Support System 
Considering Rhythm Learning,” IPSJ Journal, Vol. 54, No. 4, 
pp.1383-1392, 2013. 
[8] H. Kato, N. Emura and M. Miura, “Support system for 
practicing piano-scale performances,” Acoustical Society of 
Japan, Vol.70, No.6, pp.273-276, 2014. 
[9] F. Yuto, T. Yoshinari and Y. Hidekatsu, “Design and 
Implementation of a Piano Learning Support System 
Considering Motivation,” IPSJ Interaction, pp.118-127, 2015. 
[10] K. Yamada, K. Yamamoto and T. Noma, “A Piano Learning 
System with Visual Correspondence Between Musical Scale 
and Keyboard,” IPSJ EC, pp.378-385, 2015. 
[11] K. Ueda, Y. Takegawa, and K. Hirata, “Design and 
Implementation of a Piano Learning Support System 
Focusing on Visualization of Keying Information and 
Annotation,” IPSJ Journal, Vol. 57, No. 12, pp.2617-2025, 
2016. 
[12] Y. Takegawa, K. Hirata, E. Tayanagi, and M. Tsubakimoto, 
“Evaluation Analysis of a Piano Learning Aupport System 
Fpcusing on the Learning Process,”  IPSJ Journal, Vol. 58, No. 
5, pp.1093-1100, 2017. 
[13] T. Ishigami and T. Hamamoto, “A Piano Practice Support 
System Visualizing Correspondence Between Music Scores 
and Key Positions,” ITE Technical Report, Vol.41, No.14, 
pp.71-76,  2017. 
[14] A. Shimada, H. Matsumura, Y. Morijiri and T. Kitahara, “A 
Prototype of Musical Score Display System for Piano Practice 
Support,” Proceedings of the 79th National Convention of 
IPSJ, Vol.2, pp.105-106, 2017. 
[15] N. Takaya, S. Nakahira and M. Kitajima, “Analysis of the 
relationships between the proficiency levels of piano playing 
and the changes in visual behaviors while reading score and 
performing piano,” IPSJ SIG Technical Report, pp.1-7, 2017. 
[16] T. Suzuki, K. Tanaka, R. Ogura and Y. Tsuji, “Practice of 
Beginners’ Piano Skill Training Support Using ‘Visualization 
System for Piano Performance (VSPP)’,” IPSJ SIG Technical 
Report, Vol.2018-MUS-119 No.16, pp.1-6, 2018. 
[17] M. Hori, C. M. Wilk and S. Sagayama, “Visualizing deviations form 
examplary performances for piano practice assistance (including retry 
detection),” Proceedings of the 81th National Convention of 
IPSJ, Vol.2, pp.337-338, 2019. 
[18] R. Matsui, A. Hasegawa, Y. Takegawa, K. Hirata and Y. 
Yanagawa, “Design, Implementation and Assessment of a 
Support System to Find Bad Fingering Habits for Piano 
Teachers,” IPSJ Journal, Vol. 61, No. 4, pp.789-797, 2020. 
[19] Questionnaires for instructors. [Online]. Available from: 
https://forms.gle/PNBTPsgxQ1VoDDTJA 2023.02.01 
[20] Questionnaires for students. [Online]. Available from: 
https://docs.google.com/forms/u/1/d/10p3-
Azsv4wMQ22FymDGnGFmDdhvB-1sozlPjRsgVE_Y/edit 
2023.02.01 
[21] C. Nakanishi, C. Sawada, K.Kawai, K.Morita, and N. Morita, 
“An Analysis of Needs for Developing a Tool for Piano 
Learning,” Proceedings of the 2022th National Convention 
of Society for Educational Technology, pp.35-36, 2022. 
 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-057-5
SIGNAL 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

