Discovering Causality in Event Time-Series
Pavel Loskot
ZJU-UIUC Institute
Haining, China
e-mail: pavelloskot@intl.zju.edu.cn
Abstract—The event time-series can accurately describe the
behavior of many dynamic systems. The challenge is that the
events are categorical variables, so they cannot be analyzed by
the existing statistical methods developed for numerical time-
series. In order to infer the causally related events, in this paper,
it is proposed to assume the empirical conditional probabilities of
nearly certain and nearly uncertain events. Moreover, since the
event ordering is usually locally irrelevant, the event sequences
can be transformed into the event sets or multi-sets with ap-
propriately deﬁned distance metrics. The event sequences having
a zero distance can be then assumed to be causally equivalent.
The distance metrics are also used in matrix proﬁle analysis of
event time-series. Numerical examples are studied for chemical
reaction events generated in stochastic simulations of biochemical
molecular systems. Even though the proposed framework for
discovering the causally related event sequences can be readily
fully automated, they still need to be properly interpreted in the
context of relevant domain knowledge.
Keywords—causal; dynamic system; event; matrix proﬁle; state-
space; time-series
I. INTRODUCTION
Traditional signal processing and machine learning mainly
exploit statistical associations within data. However, it is
well known that a strong association is neither necessary nor
sufﬁcient for causality, for example, due to confounding. At
the same time, a weak association cannot rule out the causality.
Recently, there has been a great interest in developing data
models and processing methods, which are interpretable [1].
The cause and effect are central to scientiﬁc hypotheses
testing, experiment design, and to generate the prescriptive
analytics of engineering systems. It is possible to only consider
whether the cause-effect exists without determining its direc-
tion or strength. The causal relationships can be represented as
Structural Causal Models (SCM) [2]. The SCM can be created
from a prior knowledge, or inferred by performing statistical
independence tests on the data. An important question is
whether the SCM can be determined from the observed data,
and whether such a SCM is unique. The SCM can be converted
into a Bayesian network using do-calculus [2].
Different approaches were adopted in the literature to obtain
causal models of time-series data [3]–[11]. Granger causality
decides whether the past values of a time-series can improve
the prediction of future values of another time-series. However,
this type of causality cannot be used for time-series with
instantaneous effects, or when sub-sampling of time-series
may mask the causal relationships. The intervention causality
enforces a change in the time-series value at a particular time
instant, and then the change can be evaluated as an Average
Causal Effect (ACE). In supervised and semi-supervised ma-
chine learning, the labels of data can be assumed to be a cause
of data features (i.e., the effects). It enables to automatically
label data as well as to repair incorrect labels. However, all
these methods normally assume numerical data.
In [12], the causality is induced by changes in the interaction
covariances. The methods for evaluating causal intervention of
non-randomized, small-size treatments are surveyed in [13].
A state-space SCM for causal inference in time-series data
was studied in [14]. A causal graph discovery over multiple
related datasets was proposed in [15]. The limitations of
convergent cross-mapping in performing the causal inference
were investigated in [16]. The temporal trends in data need
to be identiﬁed before performing the causal inference as
shown in [17]. The causal analysis of small sample sizes was
performed in [18] by studying state-space attractors of non-
linear dynamical systems. However, none of these works seem
to have considered the causal inference for categorical data.
In this paper, our goal is to discover causal relationships
within categorical time-series. Such series may represent the
events occurring in control and monitoring of dynamic sys-
tems. The events cannot be often directly detected, but must be
indirectly inferred except in computer simulations of dynamic
systems. The events usually incur changes in the system
internal states. It is extremely useful to understand what caused
these changes, and to make more robust predictions about
the anticipated future changes (effects). Moreover, the event
time-series can be partitioned into shorter sequences. The task
is then to determine the causality between the pairs of the
event sequences. In addition, since the event ordering is locally
irrelevant, it is proposed to transform the event sequences into
the event sets or multi-sets.
More importantly, the cause-effect relationship is newly de-
ﬁned here assuming the conditional probability of nearly cer-
tain and nearly uncertain events. This probability is estimated
empirically as a relative frequency of occurrence of particular
event sequences. Even though such a notion of causality is
incomplete, as many event sequences are conditionally neither
certain nor uncertain, this approach has the advantage of
its implementation simplicity, and it can be fully automated.
Moreover, various distance measures [19]–[22] can be used
to deﬁne equivalences among the event sequences, which can
increase the number of these sequences classiﬁed as being
causally related by our deﬁnition of causality. The distance
metrics also enable the matrix proﬁle analysis, a versatile
framework used for the pattern discovery in time-series data.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-970-6
SIGNAL 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

Numerical examples are obtained for a biochemical reaction
network, where the events represent chemical reactions. The
history of chemical reactions are recorded by modifying the
downloaded open-source simulation. The event time-series
processing and visualization pipeline is implemented using a
C++ code and the custom scripts in Python and Bash.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes a common model of dynamic systems with event-
driven changes of observations and internal states. The pro-
posed causal framework for analyzing the event time-series
is introduced in Section III. Numerical examples are brieﬂy
presented in Section IV. The limitations of our work are
discussed and the paper is concluded in Section V.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
Consider a dynamic system described by transitions be-
tween the consecutive stationary states zzzt−1 ∈ Z and zzzt ∈ Z
due to periodically occurring events et ∈ E, i.e.,
zzzt = et(zzzt−1,zzzt−2,...)
where t denotes a discrete time index. The system observations
are deﬁned by a generally non-linear function,
yyyt = O(zzzt,zzzt−1,...)
of the current and the previous system states including any
intrinsic and extrinsic noises (the latter not shown explicitly).
The values yyyt may not be available for all indexes t due to
practical measurement constraints; this corresponds to uniform
or non-uniform sub-sampling of the observations yyyt.
In this paper, it is assumed that, (1) the system model is
memoryless, i.e., zzzt+1 = et(zzzt), and, yyyt = O(zzzt), and, (2) the
observations are perfect, i.e., yyyt = zzzt, and available for all
t. Such Markovian and noise-free observation assumptions
greatly simplify our reasoning, and they are satisﬁed for
the system studied in Section IV. Furthermore, the events
et are represented as categorical variables, such that, et ∈
{0,1,2,...}. Under these assumptions, the transitions between
the observations yyyt and the events eeet are depicted in Figure 1.
In particular, Figure 1 indicates that different events affect
different components in the observed vector, yyyt. However, the
practical constraints on the observations yyyt, for example, to
ensure that, yyyt ≥ 0 for ∀t, may enforce a dependency (i.e., a
memory) among the successive events et. Note also that both
the events and the observations are normally dependent on a
number of other parameters, which is not explicitly considered
in our model description.
The memoryless assumption implies the following property
of the event-based modeling of dynamic systems.
Theorem 1: Given the observation yyyt at time t, the ordering
of (m+1) > 0 events in the sequence, (et,et+1,...,et+m), does
not affect the observation yyyt+m at time (t +m).
Theorem 1 asserts that the same observation yyyt+m is produced
for any arbitrary ordering of a particular sequence of events.
However, this does not guarantee that all the event orderings
satisfy all the observation constraints; for instance, the natural
t
t +1
t
yt,1
yt,2
yt,i
yt,1
yt,2
yt,i
et
et
et
yt,1
yt,i
i
0
0
i
i
0
Figure 1.
The changes in different components of observations yyyt affected
by different events et ∈ E.
eeet 7→ ssst
eeet+2 7→ ssst+2
et+2
et+1
et
eeet+1 7→ ssst+1
et+m+1 et+m+2
Figure 2. The sequences eeet of (m+1) events mapped to (multi-) sets ssst.
constraints that the observations are always non-negative, or
do not exceed a certain value, may be temporarily violated.
Consequently,
the
sequences
of
events,
eeet
=
(et,et+1,...,et+m), can be assumed to be multi-sets (i.e., the
same events can appear multiple times, but their ordering
is irrelevant), or ordinary sets (the repeated elements are
removed). The corresponding (multi-) sets are denoted as, ssst,
and they can be created by sliding-window partitioning of the
original event time-series as shown in Figure 2.
III. ANALYSIS OF EVENT TIME-SERIES
Recall that the events et are categorical variables, which can
be mapped to non-negative integers E. Since such a mapping
is rather arbitrary, and assumed purely for a representation
convenience, it cannot be used for evaluating statistical prop-
erties of the time-series, {et}t. Assuming instead the sequence
of (multi-) sets, ssst ∈ S, where S ⊆ E ×···×E = Em+1, we can
examine the probability mass function as well as deﬁne various
distance measures involving ssst. The former approach will be
used to identify the causal relationships between pairs of event
sequences. The latter approach enables a ﬂexible matrix proﬁle
analysis of the event time-series.
A. Causality Between Event Sequences
Our objective is to determine a possible causal relationship
between pairs of consecutive but non-overlapping event se-
quences. Thus, given eeei and eeej, j = i+m+1, i.e., eeei ∩eeej = /0
(empty set), decide, whether the event sequence eeei causes
the event sequence eeej (causal learning), or whether the event
sequence eeej is an effect of the event sequence eeei (anti-causal
learning). One plausible and commonly used strategy is to
construct a SCM, and ﬁt it to the data (the event sequences).
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-970-6
SIGNAL 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

The SCM analysis can be combined with interventions and
do-calculus to ﬁnd the causes and effects of speciﬁc event
sequences. In this paper, we instead propose the following
strategy to identify some, but not all pairs of causally related
event sequences.
Deﬁnition 1: The event sequences eeei and eeej, j > i, have
a cause-effect relationship, provided that their conditional
probability,
Pr(eeej|eeei) → 1.
(1)
In such a case, the event sequence eeei is said to be a cause of
eeej. Equivalently, the event sequence eeej is an effect of eeei.
The conditional probability (1) represents the likelihood of
the event sequence eeei, given the event sequence eeej. Thus, the
prior distribution of eeei is ignored in Deﬁnition 1, and so is
the joint distribution Pr(eeei,eeej). This can be justiﬁed by noting
that a cause-effect relationship is generally asymmetric. Even
though there are also cases where eeei causes eeej, and at the same
time, eeej causes eeei, in general, Pr(eeej|eeei) ̸= Pr(eeei|eeej).
The reason for assuming the conditional probability in
Deﬁnition 1 to be nearly but not exactly equal to 1 is that
the equality is too restrictive and almost never achievable in
practice. Moreover, the conditional probability Pr(eeej|eeei) close
to 1 indicates that, given eeei, there are only a few possible event
sequences eeej following eeei (i.e., the number of such sequences
eeej is signiﬁcantly smaller than the number of all possible event
sequences observed).
More importantly, the size of the event space, E, expressed
as the cardinality, |E|(m+1), is often much smaller than the
volume of the corresponding observations yyy in a (m + 1)-
dimensional Euclidean or some other space. This is the key
reason for analyzing the sequences of events for inferring
the causality rather than directly processing the sequences of
observations. Although in most practical scenarios, it is the
observations that are available, whereas the internal events can
only be inferred from these observations, which is prone to
decision errors. However, computer simulations are a notable
exception, and they will be utilized in Section IV.
The conditional probability of the event sequences in Deﬁ-
nition 1 close to 1 is only one signiﬁcant case, which can be
readily causally interpreted. The other such signiﬁcant case
is represented by the conditional probability being close to 0.
This leads to the following deﬁnition of causality between two
event sequences.
Deﬁnition 2: The event sequences eeei and eeej, j > i, have
no cause-effect relationship, provided that their conditional
probability,
Pr(eeej|eeei) → 0
and
Pr(eeei|eeej) → 0.
(2)
The sequences eeei and eeej are then said to be causally unrelated.
Assuming both conditional probabilities in Deﬁnition 2 is
necessary in order to ensure that neither eeei nor eeej can be a
cause of the other. Moreover, unlike Deﬁnition 1, it is much
more likely to ﬁnd the pairs of event sequences having very
small or even exactly zero conditional probabilities.
The conditional probabilities of event sequences may some-
times be available from the analysis of a Bayesian model
derived from the SCM. However, in many practical scenarios,
these probabilities must be empirically estimated from the
event time-series data. In such a case, the event sequences
eeet of N = (m+1) events are ﬁrst created by a sliding-window
partitioning of the original event time-series. In order to enable
Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 of causality, the sequences eeet are further
subdivided into two disjoint sub-sequences (omitting the time
index for brevity), eeei and eeej of N1 and N2 events, respectively,
so that,
eeet = eeei ∪eeej,
eeei ∩eeej = /0
and N = N1 + N2, N1 = |eeei|, N2 = |eeej|, and importantly, all
the events in eeei precede the events in eeej. The corresponding
(multi-) sets are denoted as sssi and sssj, and they are referred to
as the left and the right event (multi-) sets, respectively.
Deﬁne a 2D counter (matrix), Ci,j, of the number of the
unique left and right sub-sequences, eeei and eeej, composing the
event sequences, eeet. The conditional probabilities (1) and (2)
can be then estimated as,
Pr(eeej|eeei) ≈ Ci,j/Ki
(3)
where Ki denotes the number of times a speciﬁc event sub-
sequence eeei was observed, i.e., Ki = ∑jCi,j.
There are, however, two issues with the causality in Deﬁ-
nitions 1 and 2. The ﬁrst problem is that the number of sub-
sequences eeei and eeej satisfying (2) and especially (1) can be
rather small in comparison to the total number of all observed
event sub-sequences. This leaves out most other pairs of event
sub-sequences eeei and eeej, for which their causal relationship
cannot be determined using Deﬁnitions 1 and 2, since their
conditional probability, 0 < Pr(eeej|eeei) < 1. The second problem
is that identifying the rarely occurring, causally related sub-
sequences using the estimator (3) becomes less accurate,
unless sufﬁciently long event time-series are available.
In order to overcome these issues, we can exploit the
mapping of event sequences to event (multi-) sets, as discussed
in Section II. It allows us to deﬁne various notions of distances
between the event sequences eeei and eeej as follows. Let d0 be
the Hamming distance between eeei and eeej. Then, any of the
following expressions can be assumed as a distance metric
between the event sequences eeei and eeej.
d(eeei,eeej)
=
d0 −|sssi ∪sssj|
(4a)
d(eeei,eeej)
=
d0 −|sssi ∩sssj|
(4b)
d(eeei,eeej)
=
d0 −(|sssi|+|sssj|)
(4c)
d(eeei,eeej)
=
d0 −max(|sssi|,|sss j|)
(4d)
d(eeei,eeej)
=
max(|sssi|,|sssj|)−min(|sssi|,|sssj|)
(4e)
d(eeei,eeej)
=
min(|sssi \ sssj|,|sssj \ sssi|).
(4f)
Thus, always, d(eeei,eeej) ≥ 0, d(eeei,eeej) = d(eeej,eeei), and |sssi| ≤ |eeei|.
Furthermore, in order to increase the number of occurrences
of event sequences which are either causally related by Deﬁ-
nition 1, or causally unrelated by Deﬁnition 2, we can assume
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-970-6
SIGNAL 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

any of the distance metrics (4a)-(4f) to introduce the following
notion of equivalent event sequences.
Deﬁnition 3: The event (sub-) sequences eeei and eeej are said
to be equivalent, provided that their distance, d(eeei,eeej) = 0.
It is clear that by discarding the event ordering and keeping
only the unique events in event sets as assumed in the
distance metrics (4a)-(4f), the number of equivalent event sub-
sequences can grow substantially, and so does the number
of event sub-sequence pairs satisfying either Deﬁnition 1 or
Deﬁnition 2.
The effect of assuming the equivalent event sub-sequence is
illustrated in Figure 3. In the ﬁrst step, the unique event sub-
sequence pairs eeei and eeej are identiﬁed, and their multiplicities,
Ci,j, are counted. Using Deﬁnition 3, the equivalent event
sub-sequences can be identiﬁed among the right or the left
sub-sequences representing either the potential event causes,
potential event effects, or both. The equivalent event sub-
sequences are then merged (blue boxes in Figure 3), and the
counters Ci,j used in (3) are updated accordingly.
More speciﬁcally, let Iu, u = 1,2,..., be the sets of indices of
the equivalent left event sub-sequences eeei representing possible
causes, and Jv, v = 1,2,..., are similar such index sets for the
right event sub-sequences eeej, representing the possible effects.
The event sub-sequence counters in (3) are updated due to the
left and the right merges as,
C′
i,j = ∑
i∈Iu
Ci,j,
C′
i,j = ∑
j∈Jv
Ci,j.
Consequently, it then becomes much more likely that some
pairs of the equivalent event sub-sequences have their con-
ditional probability close to 1 (as estimated by their relative
occurrences), so they can be assumed to be causally related by
Deﬁnition 1. On the other hand, merging the equivalent event
sub-sequences and aggregating the counters make it somewhat
less likely that the condition of non-causal relationship in
Deﬁnition 2 would be satisﬁed. These causal decisions are also
greatly affected by a speciﬁc choice of the distance metric.
B. Matrix Proﬁle Analysis of Event Time-Series
The canonical matrix proﬁle effectively shows the minimum
distances between constant length sequences, which are cre-
ated by a sliding-window partitioning of the original time-
series data. The distance calculations in the matrix proﬁle are
greatly optimized to allow processing of very long sequences
of data. These calculations can be readily parallelized, for
example, using a MapReduce algorithm. The matrix proﬁle
is mainly used to identify common patterns (motifs) as well
as rare patterns (discords), and also to identify time instances
when the distance-based sequence statistics have changed.
Even though the events are represented as categorical rather
than numerical variables, the distance metrics (4a)-(4f) can
be directly used in calculating the matrix proﬁle of the event
time-series. The choice of the actual distance metric strongly
affects the resulting matrix proﬁle, although less than one
might expect. However, it is still useful to compare the matrix
proﬁles for different values of the sequence lengths.
ei
ej
ei
ei
ei
ei
ei
ei
ei
ei
ei
ei
ei
ei
ei
ei
ei
ei
ei
ei
ei
ei
ej
ej
ej
ej
ej
ej
ej
ej
ej
ej
ej
ej
ej
ej
ej
ej
ej
ej
ej
ej
A
B
C
Left-merges
Right-merges
Figure 3. A: Original pairs of the unique event sub-sequences. B: Left-mergers
of event sub-sequences as potential causes. C: Right-mergers of event sub-
sequences as potential effects.
More importantly, the original matrix proﬁle only displays
the minimum distance values for each sliding-window sub-
sequence. However, other statistics may also be useful. For
example, the distribution of sub-sequence mutual distances
provides a more global view, whereas the multiplicity of the
smallest distances for each sub-sequence may be as informa-
tive in some applications as the actual smallest distance values.
IV. CASE STUDY: BIOCHEMICAL REACTION NETWORKS
Biochemical reaction networks represent dynamic systems
that undergo changes in copy counts (or, equivalently, concen-
trations) of chemical species due to chemical reaction events
[23]. The number of chemical reactions is often much larger
than the number of chemical species. The corresponding chem-
ical kinetics can be stochastically described using a Chemical
Master Equation (CME) [24]. The CME is usually solved by a
Monte Carlo simulation [25], which tracks the time-evolution
of the chemical species counts. More importantly, we assume
a so-called well-stirred system, i.e., the spatial distribution and
the diffusion of chemical molecules are ignored.
The models of chemical reaction systems may involve
chemical species containing multiple binding sites [26]. Enu-
merating all chemical reactions for every binding site is
impractical due to the combinatorial complexity of the result-
ing chemical reaction network. The network-free algorithms
exploit the reaction (meta-) rules to effectively describe the
groups of reactions without a need to enumerate all the
reactions explicitly [27].
A. Numerical Experiments
Numerical experiments were obtained for an antigen re-
ceptor signaling regulating the activity and fate of the B-
cells [28]. The corresponding model (referred to as BCR
model) consists of 32 molecule types, 158 reaction rules,
and 129 model parameters. The extracted full model contains
1,124 chemical species and 24,390 chemical reactions. The
model was simulated in BioNetGen software [29], [30].
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-970-6
SIGNAL 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

Figure 4.
The estimated conditional probabilities Pj,i of N = (1 + 2) event
sub-sequences. Black: Pj,i < 0.1, Red: Pj,i < 0.9, Blue: Pj,i ≥ 0.9.
BioNetGen is an open source software offering its own model
description language to specify chemical reaction systems.
The model description ﬁle is processed by a Perl script in
order to generate the more complete system model given in
System Biology Markup Language (SBML). The SBML ﬁle
is then simulated in NFSim [31]; an open source software
written in C++ [32]. We have modiﬁed NFSim to enable
recording of the history of all reaction events in the course
of the simulations. The trajectories of chemical species counts
were simply discarded. The generated event time-series were
processed, and visualized by the custom-made scripts written
in Python. The overall process of performing the simulations,
processing the event time-series, and generating the plots was
fully automated mainly using the Bash scripts.
Simulating the BCR model over 100 simulation seconds
resulted in 3,634,390 reaction events involving 35 reaction
types. The reaction events can be naturally divided into 100
blocks over one second intervals. The sliding-window event
sub-sequences were then formed and processed. The distinct
frequencies of occurrence of the event N-tuples were observed,
and they allow their clustering into multiple distinct classes.
Due to space limitations, only the following three plots are
shown. Figure 4 visualizes the estimated reverse conditional
probabilities, Pr(eeei|eeej) for the ﬁrst ﬁve blocks (i.e., for the
events eeei occurring before eeej), assuming |eeej| = 2 and |eeei| = 1,
i.e., N = 3. The reactions in each column in Figure 4 have
the same ordering to indicate that some event patterns can
be considered causal (according to our Deﬁnitions 1 and 2) in
some blocks, but not in other blocks. Furthermore, in Figure 4,
the right event sub-sequences were combined assuming the
sub-sequence equivalences with the distance metric (4a). The
line coloring is described in the caption of Figure 4.
Figure 5. A canonical matrix proﬁle assuming the minimum distances (4a),
for sub-sequences of 4, 10 and 20 reaction events.
Figure 6.
The matrix proﬁle of the maximum distances (4f) (top-row) and
their multiplicity (bottom-row) for sub-sequences of 4, 10 and 20 events.
Figure 5 depicts a canonical matrix proﬁle assuming sub-
sequences of 4, 10 and 20 events. The proﬁle was calculated
using the Python module stumpy [33]. It can be seen that the
proﬁle becomes more dense, and its mean moves away from
zero with the increasing sub-sequence length. Finally, Figure 6
shows the matrix proﬁle assuming the maximum (instead of
minimum) values of the distance metric (4f) between any pair
of sub-sequences of 4, 10 and 20 events, respectively (top-
row), and the multiplicity of these maximum distance values
(bottom-row). This illustrates how the choice of the distance
metric greatly affects the shape of the matrix proﬁle.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-970-6
SIGNAL 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The sliding-window event sequences were split into the
left and the right event sub-sequences. The causality has
been deﬁned here as the pairs of nearly certain or nearly
uncertain event sequences. The level of certainty can be eval-
uated empirically by measuring the corresponding conditional
probabilities. Since ordering of events is locally irrelevant, it is
useful to transform the event sub-sequences into event (multi-)
sets, for which various distance metrics can be deﬁned.
The distance metrics can be utilized to obtain the ma-
trix proﬁles of event time-series. Our numerical experiments
demonstrate that matrix proﬁle is a rather general and ﬂexible
framework for analyzing numerical as well as categorical time-
series, and conveniently visualizing their statistics.
Even though this paper focuses on analyzing the short
sequences of consecutive events, the events neither have to
be consecutive, nor short. However, assuming non-consecutive
events make the pattern space to be combinatorially much
larger, and the longer the event sequences, the less likely it is to
identify those that can be considered to be statistically certain
or uncertain. The causality analysis may also involve both
the events and the observations. This can lead to explainable
Monte Carlo simulations, provided that causally related (or un-
related) sub-sequences are identiﬁed and properly interpreted
in a given domain [34], which can be challenging.
The simulation software adopted and the programming
scripts produced to analyze state-space models of biochem-
ical reaction networks allow fully automated processing of
the recorded event time-series. It allows generating a large
number of diverse plots for different models across different
numerical experiments, although automated interpretation of
the identiﬁed causal events may again be rather challenging.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was funded by a start-up research grant
provided by Zhejiang University.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Pearl, “The seven tools of causal inference, with reﬂections on
machine learning,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 62, no. 3, pp.
54–60, Mar. 2019.
[2] ——, “Causal inference in statistics: An overview,” Statistics Surveys,
vol. 3, pp. 96–146, 2009.
[3] K. Hlav´aˇckov´a-Schindlera, M. Paluˇs, M. Vejmelka, and J. Bhattacharya,
“Causality detection based on information-theoretic approaches in time
series analysis,” Physics Reports, vol. 441, pp. 1–46, 2007.
[4] M. Eichler, Causal Inference in Time Series Analysis.
Wiley, 2012, ch.
In Causality (eds W.A. Shewhart et al.).
[5] A. Papana, C. Kyrtsou, D. Kugiumtzis, and C. Diks, “Simulation study
of direct causality measures in multivariate time series,” Entropy, vol. 15,
pp. 2635–2661, 2013.
[6] D. Lopez-Paz, K. Muandet, B. Sch¨olkopf, and I. Tolstikhin, “Towards
a learning theory of cause-effect inference,” in ICML’15, vol. 37, 2015,
pp. 1452–1461.
[7] Y. Chikahara and A. Fujino, “Causal inference in time series via
supervised learning,” in IJCAI’18, 2018, pp. 2042–2048.
[8] R. M. et al., “Causal inference for time series analysis: problems,
methods and evaluation,” Knowledge and Information Systems, vol. 63,
no. 12, pp. 3041–3085, Dec. 2021.
[9] Y. Hmamouche, A. Casali, and L. Lakhal, “A causality based feature
selection approach for multivariate time series forecasting,” in DBKDA,
2017, pp. 1–6.
[10] Y. Huang and S. Kleinberg, “Fast and accurate causal inference from
time series data,” in Int. Florida AI Research Soc. Conf., 2015, pp. 1–6.
[11] J. R. at al., “Inferring causation from time series in Earth system
sciences,” Nature Communications, vol. 10, no. 2553, pp. 1–13, Jun.
2019.
[12] R. J. Prill, R. Vogel, G. A. Cecchi, G. Altan-Bonnet, and G. Stolovitzky,
“Noise-driven causal inference in biomolecular networks,” PLoS ONE,
vol. 10, no. 6, e0125777, pp. 1–16, Jun. 2015.
[13] P. Samartsidis, S. R. Seaman, A. M. Presanis, M. Hickman, and D. D.
Angelis, “Assessing the causal effect of binary interventions from
observational panel data with few treated units,” Statistical Science,
vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 486–503, Aug. 2019.
[14] K. H. Brodersen, F. Gallusser, J. Koehler, N. Remy, and S. L. Scott,
“Inferring causal impact using Bayesian structural time-series models,”
The Annals of Applied Statistics, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 247–274, 2015.
[15] S. L¨owe, D. Madras, R. Zemel, and M. Welling, “Amortized causal
discovery: Learning to infer causal graphs from time-series data,” Feb.
2022, arXiv:2006.10833 [cs.LG].
[16] D. Mønster, R. Fusaroli, K. Tyl´en, A. Roepstorff, and J. F. Sherson,
“Causal inference from noisy time-series data – testing the convergent
cross-mapping algorithm in the presence of noise and external inﬂu-
ence,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 73, pp. 52–62, Aug.
2017.
[17] K. W. Soo and B. M. Rottman, “Causal strength induction from time
series data,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, vol. 147,
no. 4, pp. 485–513, 2018.
[18] B. gong Zhang, W. Li, Y. Shi, X. Liu, and L. Chen, “Detecting
causality from short time-series data based on prediction of topologically
equivalent attractors,” BMC Systems Biology, vol. 11, no. 128, pp. 141–
150, 2017.
[19] M. Vlachos, M. Hadjieleftheriou, D. Gunopulos, and E. Keogh, “In-
dexing multi-dimensional time-series with support for multiple distance
measures,” in KDD’03, 2003, pp. 216–225.
[20] C. Cassisi, P. Montalto, M. Aliotta, A. Cannata, and A. Pulvirenti,
Similarity Measures and Dimensionality Reduction Techniques for Time
Series Data Mining.
IntechOpen, London, UK, 2012, pp. 71–96.
[21] G. E. Batista, E. J. Keogh, O. M. Tataw, and V. M. Souza, “CID: an
efﬁcient complexity-invariant distance for time series,” Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 634–669, May 2014.
[22] A. Zielezinski, S. Vinga, J. Almeida, and W. M. Karlowski, “Alignment-
free sequence comparison: beneﬁts, applications, and tools,” Genome
Biology, vol. 18, no. 186, pp. 1–17, 2017.
[23] P. Loskot, K. Atitey, and L. Mihaylova, “Comprehensive review of
models and methods for inferences in bio-chemical reaction networks,”
Frontiers in Genetics, vol. 10, no. 549, pp. 1–29, 2019.
[24] V. Wolf, R. Goel, M. Mateescu, and T. A. Henzinger, “Solving research
article the chemical master equation using sliding windows,” BMC
Systems Biology, vol. 4, no. 42, pp. 1–19, 2010.
[25] D. T. Gillespie, “Stochastic simulation of chemical kinetics,” Annual
Review of Physical Chemistry, vol. 58, pp. 35–55, 2007.
[26] D. J. Klinke II and S. D. Finley, “Timescale analysis of rule-based
biochemical reaction networks,” Biotechnology Prog., vol. 28, no. 1,
pp. 33–44, 2012.
[27] A. Gupta and P. Mendes, “An overview of network-based and -free
approaches for stochastic simulation of biochemical systems,” Compu-
tation, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–20, 2018.
[28] D. Barua, W. S. Hlavacek, and T. Lipniacki, “A computational model
for early events in b cell antigen receptor signaling: analysis of the roles
of lyn and fyn,” J. Immunology, vol. 189, no. 2, pp. 646–658, Jul. 2012.
[29] L. A. H. et al., “Bionetgen 2.2: advances in rule-based modeling,”
Bioinformatics, vol. 32, no. 21, pp. 3366–3368, Nov. 2016.
[30] “BioNetGen source code,” https://github.com/RuleWorld/bionetgen, ac-
cessed: January 2022.
[31] M. W. Sneddon, J. R. Faeder, and T. Emonet, “Efﬁcient modeling,
simulation and coarse-graining of biological complexity with NFsim,”
Nature Methods, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 177–183, Feb. 2011.
[32] “NFsim source code,” https://github.com/msneddon/nfsim, accessed:
January 2022.
[33] “Stumpy python library,” https://stumpy.readthedocs.io/, accessed: Jan-
uary 2022.
[34] Y. P. Park and M. Kellis, “CoCoA-diff: counterfactual inference for
single-cell gene expression,” Genome Biology, vol. 22, no. 228, pp. 1–
23, 2021.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-970-6
SIGNAL 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

