Comparison of Corneal Pulse Entropy to Distinguish Healthy Eyes 
from Those with Primary Open-Angle Glaucoma 
Michał M. Placek, Patryk M. Ząbkiewicz, and Monika E. Danielewska 
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Fundamental Problems of Technology, 
Wrocław University of Science and Technology, Wrocław, Poland 
Emails: michal.placek@pwr.edu.pl, 221394@student.pwr.edu.pl, monika.danielewska@pwr.edu.pl 
 
 
Abstract—Corneal Pulsation (CP), as one of the manifestations 
of eye dynamics, has shown a great potential in the glaucoma 
diagnosis. The morphology of the CP signal, acquired noninva-
sively with a non-contact ultrasonic technique, has been found 
to alter in glaucoma patients. The aim of this preliminary study 
was to ascertain whether complexity of the CP signal may be a 
useful parameter to differentiate glaucoma patients from 
healthy individuals. Refined Composite Multiscale Fuzzy Entro-
py (RCMFE) was considered as a complexity measure. 
RCMFE of the CP signal was calculated in 25 glaucoma pa-
tients and 25 healthy subjects. Statistical analysis showed that, 
on average, glaucomatous eyes were characterized by higher 
entropy of the CP signal than healthy ones. This result suggests 
that RCMFE of the CP signal may support ophthalmologists in 
glaucoma diagnosis in its early stages. 
Keywords–multiscale entropy; corneal pulsation; glaucoma 
diagnosis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Corneal Pulsation (CP) reflects temporal corneal expan-
sion related to ocular dynamics [1] and cardiovascular 
activity [2]. It has been shown that morphology of the nonin-
vasively acquired CP signal changes with advancing age [3]. 
These specific changes, in the form of a double-peak wave in 
the CP signal during one heart cycle, have been named the 
Ocular Dicrotic Pulse (ODP) [4]. ODP has been detected 
more frequently in glaucoma patients than in healthy indi-
viduals, which has been explained by higher ocular rigidity 
of glaucomatous eyes [4][5]. 
Detection of ODP signal from the CP signal alone is not 
straightforward, since the CP signal is often noisy, irregular, 
and non-stationary. To overcome this problem, it has been 
proposed to synchronously measure reference cardiovascular 
signals—such as blood pulse or ECG, which, in contrast to 
the CP signal, exhibit clearly defined peaks—and to use, e.g., 
Dynamic Time Warping to synchronize these two classes of 
signals [3] and the wavelet transform to analyze the CP 
signal without the synchronization [6]. However, there is still 
a need to find such a feature of the CP signal, which would 
enable differentiating glaucoma patients from healthy sub-
jects, without the necessity of explicit identification of the 
ODP signal or measurements of any auxiliary cardiovascular 
signal. To address this need, we propose to use the multiscale 
entropy algorithm to evaluate signal complexity. 
Many previous studies have already shown that entropy 
of various physiological signals is altered in a wide range of 
pathological states [7][8]. To the best of our knowledge, en-
tropy of the CP signal has never been considered so far. The 
aim of this preliminary study was to ascertain whether this 
entropy based approach applied to the CP signal is sufficient 
to differentiate Primary Open-Angle Glaucoma (POAG) 
patients from healthy individuals. The paper is organized as 
follows: Section 2 describes material and methods, Section 3 
contains results, Section 4 discusses and concludes the study. 
II. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
The study sample consisted of 25 patients (8 males and 
17 females) with POAG, aged from 59 to 79 (69.1 ± 6.0 
years, mean ± SD), and a control, age-matched group of 25 
healthy subjects (8 males and 17 females; 65.2 ± 6.4 years). 
Exclusion criteria were: systemic diseases, any previous 
ocular surgical procedure, conjunctival or intraocular in-
flammation, and corneal abnormalities such as edema or 
scars. Before the measurements, the purpose of the study and 
the protocol were explained to the participants. Afterwards, 
signed informed consent form was obtained from all patients 
and controls. The study had been approved by the Bioethics 
Committee of the Military Institute of Medicine in Warsaw 
(decision No. 67/WIM/2015) and adhered to the tenets of the 
Declaration of Helsinki. 
Measurements of the CP signal of the glaucomatous eye 
in POAG patients and randomly selected eye in healthy 
subjects were performed using a non-contact ultrasonic 
distance sensor. The sensor allowed 10-second continuous 
data acquisition with the sampling frequency set to 400 Hz 
and in-vivo measurement of the CP amplitude with an accu-
racy below 1 µm [9]. For each eye, CP measurements were 
repeated five times and then three good-quality recordings, 
not affected by eye blink artifacts, as evaluated by an expert, 
were chosen for further analysis. 
After preprocessing, including filtering in the range of 
0.5–20 Hz and removing linear trend, signal entropy was 
estimated using the Refined Composite Multiscale Fuzzy 
Entropy (RCMFEµ) [8] up to scale factor No. 50. RCMFEµ is 
defined as a sequence of fuzzy entropies computed for se-
lected scale factors, where consecutive scales correspond to 
decreasing granularity of the analyzed time series. The aver-
age value of RCMFEµ was calculated from three repeated 
measurements for each participant and scale factor. Since the 
null hypothesis of normality of RCMFEµ was not rejected by 
the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, the values obtained for each 
scale were compared between the two groups using the 
unpaired t-test. In the range of scales where p-values were 
below a significance level α = 0.05, scale-averaged entropies 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-716-0
SIGNAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

were computed for each participant and finally compared 
between the two groups using the unpaired t-test. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Figure 1a shows group-averaged values of RCMFEµ rep-
resented as a function of scale factor in the two groups, 
whereas Figure 1b presents results of statistical comparison 
between the groups for each scale factor. It can be seen that 
mean values of RCMFEµ are significantly different between 
the groups for scales in the range of 25–34. Results of the 
unpaired t-test applied for entropies averaged over the 
abovementioned scale range are shown in Figure 2. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
According to the decomplexification theory of illness, a 
loss in complexity is usually associated with pathological 
states [10]. Hence, it could be expected that a glaucomatous 
eye should be characterized by lower entropy of the CP 
signal than a healthy one. Our results, however, reveal the 
opposite tendency, which can be related to higher ocular 
stiffness (higher mechanical resistance of cornea) in glauco-
matous eyes caused by the elevation of intraocular pressure 
[11]. Nevertheless, RCMFEµ applied in this study satisfied 
our goal, as the measure was sensitive enough to differentiate 
between glaucoma patients and healthy subjects without the 
need for detecting the ocular dicrotism. To obtain results 
with higher degree of confidence, the analysis should be 
repeated on a larger study sample. More male participants 
need to be recruited if gender-specific differences are to be 
investigated. Ten-second measurements of the CP signal 
appear to be sufficiently long to reliably estimate entropy 
using RCMFEµ. The proposed RCMFEμ of a CP signal may, 
in the future, constitute a sensitive indicator of changes in 
ocular stiffness and support ophthalmologists in glaucoma 
diagnosis in its early stages. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the National Centre for 
Research and Development, Poland (grant No. LIDER/074/ 
L-6/14/NCBR/2015). 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. A. Kowalska, H. T. Kasprzak, D. R. Iskander, M. E. 
Danielewska, and D. Mas, “Ultrasonic in vivo measurement of 
ocular surface expansion,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical 
Engineering, vol. 58, pp. 674–680, 2011. 
[2] H. T. Kasprzak and D. R. Iskander, “Spectral characteristics of 
longitudinal corneal apex velocities and their relation to the 
cardiopulmonary system,” Eye, vol. 21, pp. 1212–1219, 2007. 
[3] M. E. Danielewska, D. R. Iskander, and P. Krzyzanowska-
Berkowska, “Age-related changes in corneal pulsation: ocular 
dicrotism,” Optometry and Vision Science, vol. 91, pp. 54–59, 
2014. 
[4] M. E. Danielewska, P. Krzyżanowska-Berkowska, and D. R. 
Iskander, “Glaucomatous and age-related changes in corneal 
pulsation shape. The ocular dicrotism,” PLOS ONE, vol. 9, p. 
e102814, 2014. 
[5] A. Hommer et al., “Estimation of ocular rigidity based on 
measurement of pulse amplitude using pneumotonometry and 
fundus pulse using laser interferometry in glaucoma,” 
Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science, vol. 49, pp. 
4046–4050, 2008. 
[6] T. Melcer, M. E. Danielewska, and D. R. Iskander, “Wavelet 
representation of the corneal pulse for detecting ocular 
dicrotism,” PLOS ONE, vol. 10, p. e0124721, 2015. 
[7] M. D. Costa and A. L. Goldberger, “Generalized multiscale 
entropy analysis: application to quantifying the complex 
volatility of human heartbeat time series,” Entropy, vol. 17, pp. 
1197–1203, 2015. 
[8] H. Azami, A. Fernández, and J. Escudero, “Refined multiscale 
fuzzy entropy based on standard deviation for biomedical 
signal analysis,” Medical & Biological Engineering & 
Computing, vol. 55, pp. 2037–2052, 2017. 
[9] T. J. Licznerski, J. Jaroński, and D. Kosz, “Ultrasonic system 
for accurate distance measurement in the air,” Ultrasonics, vol. 
51, pp. 960–965, 2011. 
[10] A. L. Goldberger, C.-K. Peng, and L. A. Lipsitz, “What is 
physiologic complexity and how does it change with aging and 
disease?,” Neurobiology of aging, vol. 23, pp. 23–26, 2002. 
[11] A. I. Dastiridou, H. S. Ginis, D. De Brouwere, M. K. 
Tsilimbaris, and I. G. Pallikaris, “Ocular rigidity, ocular pulse 
amplitude, and pulsatile ocular blood flow: the effect of 
intraocular pressure,” Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual 
Science, vol. 50, pp. 5718–5722, 2009. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Refined composite multiscale fuzzy entropy (RCMFEµ) of the 
corneal pulse (CP) signal. (a) Means of grouped data ± 1.96 standard error 
of means. For better visibility, only even numbers of scale factor are 
shown. (b) p-values resulting from the comparison between the two groups 
using unpaired t-test. 
 
Figure 2.  Mean values of scale-averaged entropies ± 1.96 standard error 
of means. Entropies were averaged in the scale range 25–34. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-716-0
SIGNAL 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

