Technology for Overcoming the Global Tetralemma 
Nobutaka Ito 
Faculty of Engineering 
Khon Kaen University 
Khon Kaen 40002 Thailand 
e-mail: nobuito@kku.ac.th 
 
 
Abstract—We humans are now facing the four global issues 
(Global Tetralemma) related to Population, Food, Energy and 
Environment. The key issue is how to find out the cause of these 
problems and what are the possible solutions. Simply put, most 
of the problems are caused by human activities prioritizing 
economic promotion. It can be, however, noted that agriculture 
has a higher potentiality to play an important role in solving 
most of the problems in question. In this paper, the technologies 
being applied or to be applied to agriculture and its related 
sector are introduced focusing on the sustainable development 
of future society building, which means establishing and 
maintaining a harmonic balance between ecology and economy.  
Keywords - global tetralemma; space era high-tech 
agriculture; agricultural mechanization; policy and technology. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Earth is the only planet on which humans can live a normal 
life. The global tetralemma refers to the four global issues 
consisting of population, food, energy and environment. 
Figure 1 shows this ecological concept. When the population 
increases, the food production must be increased. To increase 
the food production, more energy is needed. Energy 
consumption increases CO2 production, which jeopardizes the 
environment. This creates a situation in which we, humans are 
facing three problems related to food, energy and the 
environment. 
                  
GLOBAL TETRALEMMA
Population
Food
Energy
Environment
Ecology
Yellow arrows 
make up the 
ecosystem
  
           Figure 1.  Schematic concept of global tetralemma 
 
Figure 2 shows how economy breaks ecology and 
produces all the other problems. How to tackle and find the 
solutions for those problems is one of the main objectives of 
this paper. 
 
ECONOMY BREAKS ECOLOGY
Population
increase
Food
Production increase
Food security  2QSL
Traceability
Food mileage
Virtual water
Energy
Energy resource shift
Alternative energy
Bio-fuel (Bio-ethanol,  
Biomass, Bio-gas)
New energy resources
Renewable energy
EV, FCV  
Environment
CO2 production
Climate change /
Global warming
Waste treatment
Carbon footprint, SDGs
Economy
                      
      Figure 2. Economy breaks ecology and contributes to other problems 
 
Currently, the world population is 7.8 billion and 
increasing by 80 million per year. Considering this figure 
carefully, about 140 million people are born and 60 million 
are dying each year. The difference of 80 million is the 
population increase. As the population grows, more food 
production is needed. It is said that the population engaged 
with food production is around 20% of the world population. 
This simply means that one farmer produces food for 5 
persons, including himself. 
  
WHAT TECHNOLOGY IS  
NEEDED?
Food
Security
Quality Control 
& Management
Safety
Energy
Eco-friendly
No CO2
Environ-
Ment
CO2 absorption
Material
Human 
survival
under 
ASIA
Sustai-
nability
Agriculture
Medicine
(Health)
Environ-
ment
Industry sector
Issues to solve
Others
     
                      Figure 3. What technology is needed for. 
 
      Figure 3 shows the relationship between the issues we are 
facing and the industry sector. We are already facing two 
emerging global issues related to energy and the environment 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-858-7
SIGNAL 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

that we need to solve immediately, however, the final and 
optimum solution has not been found yet, in spite of many 
efforts being done by various scientists, researchers and 
engineers. This is really a competition of the production cost 
and price of petroleum with the other energy resources in 
which most of them are eco-friendly or environment friendly 
ones. Recently, petroleum price has been drastically coming 
down almost 1/3 compared to ten years ago, due to the new 
energy resource discovery of shale gas, in which the 
production cost is very much lower and more competitive. 
Methane hydrate is another possibility. Japan successfully 
developed the technology to take it out of the seabed in 2014, 
however, it is still not cost competitive. It will take a little bit 
more time to make it for the commercial base production. It 
may be guessed that the decrease in price of the petroleum 
may slow down the speed of technology development due to 
enough production to supply the market. On the other hand, 
the mitigation control of CO2 gas may be delayed, and the 
global warming issue cannot be improved if this situation is 
continued. Which one should be chosen, energy or the 
environment, is one of the good examples to think about the 
real meaning of sustainable development or low carbon 
society building from the viewpoint of how the harmonic 
balance can be well maintained under this condition in 
promoting economy without jeopardizing the environment. 
The economy always makes us hesitate easily in making a 
choice. We, humans, already know that the fossil energy 
should not be chosen due to the cause of the global warming, 
however, the lower prices of oil entice us. 
     The author delivered a lecture entitled “Asian Agriculture 
Growth Strategy” in Prime Minister ABE's doctrine 
"ABEnomics” as one of the invited keynote speakers at the 
Agricultural Mechanization Session, JSAMFE (Japanese 
Society of Agricultural Machinery & Food Engineers) annual 
meeting held at Ryukyu University, Okinawa, Japan, May 17, 
2014 [1][2]. Figure 4 is a schematic diagram showing 
ASEAN Economic Community should pick up the industrial 
sector for promoting the economy and how it should be done. 
It is already known that the ASEAN Economic Community 
was officially established in December 2015, however, it 
looks a little bit difficult to know what sector should be set as 
the main framework of the body to meet and achieve the final 
goal of the community. In the author's understanding, the 
goals should be 1) To make ASIA the world food pantry, 
enough to supply safe food on demand and 2) To stabilize the 
economy and maintain peace based on agriculture. The 
following shows the concept outline of ASEAN Economic 
Community proposed by the author and how it should be 
promoted step by step towards the final goal achievement. 
     Most Asian countries are more or less still relying on the 
economy of the agricultural production. ASEAN member 
countries are also in similar situation, except some of them. 
It is already well known that, as already mentioned above, the 
human population is still rapidly increasing at the rate of 80 
million per year. It can obviously be guessed that, sooner or  
 
ASIA 
GROWTH 
STRATEGY
PROJECT
SCHEME 
in 
Agriculture
Technology
Oriented 
countries
Dispatching 
Experts to 
deliver a series 
of lecture
Resource
oriented 
countries 
Offering unique 
program for 
staff & student 
mobility
Research Project on 
Smart Agriculture
Precision Agriculture
Green Factory 
Food Safety 
Quality management
Based on Robotics
To make Asia 
World Food Giant
Create Asia Brand
of Food
Mutual Benefit & 
Prosperity for both 
Technology oriented &
Resource oriented 
countries
Final goal 
Economy 
Vitalization & 
Regional stability in
Peace keeping
Asia Brand Food
market
More increase of 
Food Production 
Research & 
Education  
collaboration project
Priority level to achieve
3
2
1
 
 Figure 4. Asian Agriculture Growth Strategy    
    
Later, the food issue will become a serious problem. 
Fortunately, Asia is producing a huge number of bio-
resources, especially food resources, however the quality is 
not well controlled and managed. As far as food production is 
concerned, the priority should be to secure the safety. It should 
be noted that there are two kinds of countries in Asia: one kind 
is resource-oriented countries, and the other kind is 
technology-oriented countries, called ASEAN, plus three like 
China, Japan and South Korea. To secure the quality, 
especially food safety, higher technology is needed and 
applied. The author's proposal is based on the collaboration 
and mutual competition among these two types of countries. 
One needs the resources and the other needs the technology. 
Both need them mutually and interactively. The best way is to 
collaborate and compete to promote a stable economy in Asia. 
In addition, two things should be done on the process of final 
goal achievement. They are: 1) Technology transfer and 2) 
Human Resources Development. Both should be desirably 
promoted in parallel, however, due to some inconvenience of 
laws and regulations, it is hard to achieve in practice. Which 
one should be started first? That is the human resources 
development, especially for universities. The extension must 
be followed through the process of technology development 
and its validation; therefore, it takes time for final technology 
transfer to extension. Even for the human resources 
development, it takes time until the effective result could be 
found, therefore, the academic mobility program should be 
started earlier and promoted in the regional area. It is required 
that highly educated human resources will be absolutely 
needed by the mature global society. Two stages of goal 
achievement are shown towards the final one. The first step is 
to make Asia one of the world food pantry in huge amount of 
food resources production. Secondly, the most reliable Asian 
brands of foods should be created enough to guarantee both 
quality and safety. Following the process based on this 
proposed concept, the Asian economy can be developed and 
promoted stably, and regional peace can also be kept. Both 
resource-oriented and technology-oriented countries can get 
mutual prosperity to survive together contributing a lot in safe 
food production and supply all over the world (Figure 4). 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-858-7
SIGNAL 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

II. 
SMART AGRICULTURE 
 
   The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries of The 
Government of Japan defines smart agriculture as "new 
agriculture that enables hyper labor saving and high-quality 
products production by utilizing cutting-edge technologies 
such as robotic technology and ICT". According to the 
Ministry, the materialization of smart agriculture can achieve 
hyper labor saving and large-scale farming production by 
automatic control of agricultural machinery, high-yield, high-
quality products production that makes full use of sensing 
technology and large data, and heavy labor by using robot 
technology. It can be expected to have more merits such as 
CO2 mitigation and labor saving, simplification of 
agricultural operation by combining know-how with data and 
assisting operating function and providing important and 
necessary information to consumers by providing final 
products information (traceability) [6]. 
A. Precision Agriculture    
    Precision Agriculture has variable rate control function for 
reducing loss and saving materials and energy. The concept 
of this farming system is similar to the TOYOTA car 
manufacturing system named “Kanban (or Kaizen)" system 
mainly consisting of the three conditions listed below. In the 
car manufacturing industry, the parts must be prepared in 
advance and supplied timely based on the production plan 
and schedule.  
  1) The required parts must be prepared in advance  
       based on the production schedule  
  2) Provide just enough amount required  
  3) Provide them timely when required  
In actual farming, three conditions of “What”, “How many or 
How much” and “When” must be decided from time to time 
knowing the data provided by GIS is specifically matched 
with site by site. 
B. Robotics 
    There are two kinds of robots. One is something like an 
industrial robot set and used to complete the work for the 
post-harvest products, such as selection, weighing, grading, 
sorting, packaging etc. in a specially prepared building or 
facility. The other is a mobile vehicle type, such as tractor, 
combine and transplanter doing the original operation while 
moving things, such as tillage, fertilizer application etc. The 
location of the robotic machine is autonomously guided by 
the GPS signal provided from the satellite. The optimal 
operation can be done under the variable rate control based 
on the final decision derived from the data collected and 
provided by GIS continuously from time to time while 
moving.  A laser scanner is mounted in front of the vehicle 
(tractor, in this case) to detect the obstacle and it functions to 
stop the machine immediately. The other direct contact type 
sensor is also mounted for a double check in safety. Three-
way sway of the vehicle, namely pitching, yawing, and 
rolling, reduces accuracy. It is also possible to control the 
automatic guidance operation of a group of vehicles 
consisting of multiple vehicles while maintaining a master-
slave relationship. Figure 5 compares agricultural and 
industrial robots. 
 
 
Difference between Industrial 
and Agricultural Robots
No.
Item
Agricultural robot
Industrial robot
1
Robot 
motion
Move to work
Search, Find,
Identify, Off road
Stay and wait for
the work
2
Objective 
work
Non standardized
Size, Color, Shape, 
Maturity
Hardness, Location
Standardized
Designated set 
position
3
Operation Autonomous
Program based
4
Function
Learning
Teaching
5
Structure
More complicated
Comparatively simple
        
         Figure 5. Difference between agricultural & industrial robots       
           
C. Green Factory 
    This type of farming is different from the conventional one 
mainly focusing on the mass production of fresh market crops 
such as lettuce, mini tomatoes etc., which is similar to the 
industrial crop cultivation under completely controlled 
conditions of the environment. This is basically managed on 
hydroponic system, therefore, water is normally used for 
fertilizing and circulated for saving. Disease infection is 
tightly controlled. Workers are strictly forced to wear special 
work clothes, masks and caps, in addition to special work 
boots and gloves. The environment is similar to the clean 
room of semi-conductor industry plants. They are also strictly 
forced to take air showers when getting in and out of the 
facility. 
 
GREEN
FACTORY
Huge area, 
No season
No disease, Safe, 
Value added
High productivity
RFID Reader terminal
Personal / Community use
Completely closed system
DRIVE GREEN 
HIGHWAY
Completely closed system
     
                   Figure 6.   Various types of Green Factory. 
 
Figure 7 shows the advantages of green factories in terms of 
materials and costs, including future business prospects. 
  
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-858-7
SIGNAL 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

CONCLUSION
ASIA 
GROWTH 
STRATEGY
in 
Agriculture
Technology
Oriented 
countries
Dispatching 
Experts to 
deliver a series 
of lecture
Resource
oriented 
countries 
Offering 
unique 
program for 
staff & 
student 
mobility
Research 
Project on 
Smart 
Agriculture
Precision 
Agriculture
Green Factory 
Food Safety 
Quality 
management
Based on 
Robotics
To make 
Asia 
World 
Food 
Giant
Create Asia 
Brand
of Food
Mutual Benefit & 
Prosperity for both 
Technology oriented &
Resource oriented 
countries
Final goal 
Economy 
Vitalizayion & 
Regional stability in
Peace keeping
More 
increase of 
Food 
Production 
Priority level to 
achieve
3
Yield / Unit Area
1
100
Growing speed
1
2.5
Water use 
1
1/10
0
Electricity 
consumption
1
- 40%
Yield /Unit area
1
1.5
Closed Green 
Factory system
System comparison
Open
Closed
Fluorescent
LED
GREEN FACTORY
Hydroponic 
Commercial
Product for sale in 
Thailand 
FUTURE ASPECT OF 
GREEN FACTORY MARKET
Aspect
2015
2013
2018
2020
2025
Unit: million yen
Completely Closed System based Green Factory
Source: YANO RESEARCH INSTITUTE OF ECONOMY
We are here
1/100
     
                    Figure 7.   Green Factory, present and future. 
D. Drone     
    Recently, the number of possibilities of drone application 
to the agricultural sector have grown rapidly. One of the most 
important merits of applying drone is to get a wide bird eye 
view photo which enables to find how the crops are growing. 
Farmers can find what and how they can do from the image 
sent to their device, such as a smart phone They can make 
decision regarding how much fertilizer should be applied 
from the green color image (NDVI, Normalized Difference 
Vegetation Index). 
 
                   NDVI = (NIR - RED) / (NIR + RED)      
 
where NIR – reflection in the near-infrared spectrum 
               RED – reflection in the red range of the spectrum 
According to this formula, the density of vegetation (NDVI) 
at a certain point of the image is equal to the difference in the 
intensities of reflected light in the red and infrared range 
divided by the sum of these intensities. This index defines 
values from -1.0 to 1.0, basically representing greens, where 
negative values are mainly formed from clouds, water and 
snow, and values close to zero are primarily formed from 
rocks and bare soil. Very small values (0.1 or less) of the 
NDVI function correspond to empty areas of rocks, sand or 
snow. Moderate values (from 0.2 to 0.3) represent shrubs and 
meadows, while large values (from 0.6 to 0.8) indicate 
temperate and tropical forests. Crop Monitoring successfully 
utilizes this scale to show farmers which parts of their fields 
have dense, moderate, or sparse vegetation at any given 
moment. Simply put, NDVI is a measure of the state of plant 
health based on how the plant reflects light at certain 
frequencies (some waves are absorbed, and others are 
reflected). Chlorophyll (a health indicator) strongly absorbs 
visible light, and the cellular structure of the leaves strongly 
reflect near-infrared light. When the plant becomes 
dehydrated, sick, afflicted with disease, etc., the spongy layer 
deteriorates, and the plant absorbs more of the near-infrared 
light, rather than reflecting it. Thus, observing NIR changes 
compared to red light provides an accurate indication of the 
presence of chlorophyll, which correlates with plant health. 
Drone can be used for many other ways, such as seed 
broadcasting, fertilizer and chemicals application. In these 
cases, the payload is the problem, namely, how much it can 
carry and fly. More applications are under consideration; 
however, the challenges are security, privacy, various 
regulation and the standards. Hackers can break into 
seemingly safe remote-controlled engines and networks that 
control brakes and steering. 
III. 
TECHNOLOGY APPLICATION IN AGRICULTURE 
A. Nano Technology 
Carbon Nano Fiber is famous and well know for its light 
weight and strength. It is already used for the aircraft and car 
industry. Recently, the bio-based Cellulose Nano Fiber is 
attracting a lot of interest. It is a newly developed material by 
Professor Hiroyuki Yano, Humanosphere Research Institute, 
Kyoto University, Japan from bio-resources equipped with 
unique physical properties, namely, 5 times stronger and 1/5 
lighter than metal, in addition to higher heat resistance. The 
Cellulose Nano Fiber may take the application area and 
replace CNF (Carbon Nano Fiber) in the future. In addition, it 
costs 1/6 of the cost of carbon nano fiber. Cellulose Nano 
Fiber can be produced not only from trees, but also from 
various popularly known cellulose materials such as wood, 
rice straw, cassava and potato.  
Various Nano Bubble water provides other hopeful 
possibilities, such as 
・Oxygen Nano Bubbles 
・Ozone Nano Bubbles 
・Nitrogen Nano Bubbles 
The applied industrial sector is shown below. 
  ・Food safety – Vegetable sterilization 
  ・Aquaculture (Fishery) – Oyster sterilization 
  ・Dentistry – Periodontology / Periodontics   
  ・Medical science - Cancer cell control 
Oxygen nano bubble water has higher effect of promoting 
plant growth and shortening the total growth period. Ozone 
nano bubble water functions effectively for sterilization for 
various bacteria and fungi. In case of washing out the 
chemicals attached to agricultural products, 80% are removed 
by using ozone nano bubble water, whereas only 20% can be 
removed at one time with ordinary water. Toothpaste water 
using ozone nano bubble water has been commercialized. 
Periodontal bacteria in the mouth can be sterilized just by 
gargling without brushing your teeth. 
B. Plasma Technology 
    Plasma technology can be used to treat waste and change 
to energy because under high temperature treatment 
hydrogen can be produced. On the other hand, if the plasma 
treatment was done under low temperature, waste oil can be 
changed into fuel. According to the news currently televised, 
it is said that around 4,000 workers are working everyday at 
Fukusima nuclear power plant, however it will take 40 years 
more to remove the debris left in the reactor. The use of 
plasma is promising for treating highly radioactive debris. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-858-7
SIGNAL 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

C. Pattern / Face Recognition  
The combined technology of image processing, pattern 
recognition and Artificial Intelligence (AI) is getting 
popularly applied to recognize and identify the individual 
person quickly. This technology can be used even for the 
individual livestock management. Two kinds of memory can 
be found and considered: one is a tag attached to a part of the 
body like a ear, and the other is the chip type to be embedded 
in the body. The pedometer, the route traveled, the distance, 
etc. are automatically recorded and sent to the data center for 
recording. These data can be used for observing the health 
status of individual livestock and managing the amount of 
food to feed.   
The net pattern of melons is unique and original to each 
individual and resembles a human fingerprint. By recording 
and memorizing this net pattern as an image, the historical 
background of the melon can be known such as the place and 
when it was harvested and how it came from the production 
site. This is one of the areas called Agribiometrics or 
Bioinformatics. 
IV. 
PROJECTS AND BUSINESS 
 
In this section, we list some of the ongoing projects and 
businesses. 
A. Blue fin tuna, Kinki University 
Blue fin tuna is one of the most popular big thick fishes 
served at higher class restaurants in Japan. However, to meet 
the customers demand, fishermen must live away from home 
for months in remote pelagic fisheries. Sometimes the weather 
is unseasonable, and they sometimes encounter storms and 
typhoons. Some of them will also encounter a fatal accident. 
If they do not have to live away from home for fishing, it will 
make them more relaxed and even their family will feel more 
at ease. Fisheries should be changed from going away and fish 
for months to keeping put and growing fish. The Kinki 
University succeeded in the cultivation of blue fin tuna to 
grow from the stage of egg up to the final stage for shipment. 
Currently, blue fin tuna cultivated in this way is delivered to 
large cities and rural areas and is also served in the cafeteria 
on the university campus [4]. 
B. Osaka Prefectural University 
     Osaka Prefectural University is one of the first universities 
in Japan to succeed in researching and commercializing a 
Green (plant) factory. Just like Kinki University mentioned 
above, it can be said that this university has demonstrated the 
industrialization of agricultural products production. The 
cultivation shelves lined up in an environmentally controlled 
building are fully covered with LEDs of various colors, and 
the workers working inside seem to be working in the clean 
room of a semiconductor manufacturing plant, and they are 
nervous about bringing in pathogens from the outside. 
Harvested lettuce and other fresh vegetables are delivered not 
only to university cafeterias, but also to large cities and 
regions on order. One of the important factors to keep in mind 
is that producers have a clear and reliable relationship with 
consumers [3]. 
C. EUGLENA Project 
     This is a joint venture project already launched few years 
ago. The author does not know how much they have been 
successful up to now unfortunately, however, this business 
model is one of the few successfully launched examples the 
author knows about. The main product is an alga. Euglena 
has many characteristic features, but it is noteworthy that it 
absorbs a large amount of carbon dioxide. Electric power 
plants discharge a large amount of carbon dioxide, which can 
be absorbed by Euglena to promote its own growth. The 
produced Euglena can be sold as a raw material or resource 
for food, feed and fertilizer, while also contributing to aircraft 
jet fuel as bio-fuel. The problem with business operations is 
that they need technology to produce a large amount of 
Euglena in a short period of time, and the company founders 
have also proven this technology. Since it is a bio-based fuel, 
it contributes a lot to a low carbon society and 
decarbonization from the viewpoint of carbon neutral 
concept [5]. 
D. Good Harvest Plan  
     This is also a business model proposed by Toyota. It is a 
contractor-type business model for small-scale farmers or 
farmers who have no successor, but own farmland. The 
farmer will contact the contracted center and request the 
dispatch of machine together with driver to carry out the 
necessary operations timely. The center will respond to the 
request by dispatching an appropriate driver according to the 
type of farming operation. The main operation is tilling, 
transplanting and harvesting, but the farmer is the owner of 
the farmland, however, does not physically work directly. 
The number of such contractor-type farmers is increasing in 
Japan due to no successor. Agriculture in the high-tech and 
information era has the potential to significantly increase the 
entry of industries from completely different sectors that are 
not closely related to agriculture [7]. 
E. Animal Factory 
      This is an animal version factory of a plant factory. The 
target livestock are dairy, beef cattle, pig farming, and poultry 
farming, but unlike growing in a limited space, this is a 
project to give time to walk around freely in a wide space and 
to carry out breeding management of livestock with high 
quality meat. Individual management using small device and 
equipment incorporating information and communication 
technology is extremely needed. The necessary information 
is sent as data from sensors attached to dairy cows and beef 
cattle grazing in the pasture to the central center and used for 
individual health management. 
F. Beef  Traceability 
     It was already mentioned above how important the mutual 
liability between producer and consumer. Food security has 
four important keywords such as 2QSL consisting of 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-858-7
SIGNAL 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

Quantity, Quality, Safety and Liability. One of the most 
important problems, but difficult one to negotiate, is the 
mutual liability issue. No matter how famous and well-
known companies are, if they do not manage well, they will 
disperse false information. They can cheat the place of 
production, fake the contents of the product, rewrite the 
expiration date, and do embarrassing acts without hesitation. 
The other three conditions except mutual liability are 
relatively easy to clear and satisfy. This is because there is no 
problem as far as the standard code level is cleared. 
G. International Collaborations 
      Asia can be qualified as a world food pantry in production 
and supply, however, farmers are still working in poor 
conditions due to various problems such as family labor and 
low income mainly caused by small scale farming. The 
ASEAN community based international collaboration is 
really needed in technology transfer and human resources 
development. Technology oriented countries should join and 
actively invest in Asia for further economic promotion and 
regional peace keeping. The author is making a proposal 
named FFA (Future Farmers of Asia).  
 
V.    CONCLUSION 
 
   Global tetralemma is a common issue not only in Asia, but 
also in the world, and these issues must be resolved urgently. 
     Asia is qualified as a world food pantry capable of 
producing and supplying huge amounts of food. However, 
although the production is large, the quality of the products 
is not constantly controlled. From the perspective viewpoint 
of food security due to the rapid increase in the world 
population, technology-oriented nations should actively 
invest in Asia through technology transfer and human 
resource development. A collaboration system in which 
technology-oriented countries provide technology and 
resource-oriented countries provide resources is effective in 
solving mutually common problems. In other words, 
avoidance of food crisis, escape from hunger and poverty, 
and promotion of regional economy bring regional peace 
keeping and its stability. Agricultural policy is not about 
providing farmers with financial support to increase their 
income. It is more important to have a policy to strengthen 
the agriculture industry rather than supporting farmers. If 
such a policy is continued, there can be no promotion of 
agriculture. In Japan, a rice production control policy was 
implemented for half a century, but, as a result of that, 
agriculture has declined significantly rather than being 
promoted. Although the aging of farmers will come sooner or 
later, looking down on the agriculture industry has brought 
about a serious situation where young successors are not 
interested in continuing in that sector. Given that industry is 
production-based, production control is not an option. Rather, 
the basic principle is to focus on developing new markets and 
increasing consumption. 
      Food is an indispensable resource for human survival, 
and the prosperity of agriculture-based Asia is important and 
necessary not only for Asia, but also for the world. The IT 
based high-tech agriculture provids the opportunity for many 
kinds of industries to join and invest in agriculture. 
 
ACKNOWLWDGEMENT 
 
   The author would like to express sincere appreciation to the 
organizing committee for providing invaluable opportunity to 
deliver the keynote lecture related to his academic research 
activity in Asia sustainability at SIGNAL 2021. Thank you to 
Dr. Ratchatphon Suntivarakorn, Dean of Faculty of 
Engineering, Khon Kaen University, Thailand for his strong 
back-up support and encouragement. Thank you to Dr. 
Chanoknun Sookkumnerd, Associate Professor, Faculty of 
Engineering, Khon Kaen University, Thailand for his 
further assistance and help in the paper processing. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] N. Ito, Asian Agriculture Growth Strategy, Journal of JSAMFE, 
Japanese Society   of Agricultural Machinery & Food Engineers, Vol. 
77, No. 4, p. 226~231, 2015 
[2] N. Ito, Keynote speech: Mechanization and Automation in Fresh 
Technologies, Book of Abstract, The 3rd Asia Pacific Symposium on 
Postharvest Research, Education and Extension, pp 19,   Victory Hotel, 
Hochiminh city, Vietnam, December 8 – 11, 2014 
[3] Osaka Prefectural University,  Plant Factory home page 
https://www.plant-factory.osakafu-u.ac.jp/    [accessed May 2021] 
[4] Kinki 
University 
Fisheries 
Laboratory 
home 
page: 
http://www.flku.jp/english/index.html 
[5] EUGLENA 
- 
ISUZU 
project:     
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-06-25/japan-s-isuzu-
euglena-to-begin-biodiesel-development-with-algae 
[6] Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Research Center, 
Smart Agriculture homepage, https://www.maff.go.jp/j/kanbo/smart/ 
[7] Toyota 
Motor 
Corporation, 
Ltd., 
Good 
Harvest 
Plan:  
https://www.toyota.co.jp/housaku/plan.html   [accessed May 2021] 
 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-858-7
SIGNAL 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

