Principal Fiber Bundles and Geometry of Color Spaces
Edoardo Provenzi
Laboratoire MAP5 (UMR CNRS 8145)
Universit´e Paris Descartes
45 rue des Saints P`eres, 75006, Paris, France
Email: edoardo.provenzi@parisdescartes.fr
Abstract—In 1974, H.L.Resnkikoff published an inspiring paper
about the use of differential geometry to study, among others,
the intrinsic shape of the space of perceived colors and the
Riemannian metrics on it. The mathematical techniques that he
used is shared with modern theories of theoretical physics, which
are far from being a common background for scientists in color
vision and processing. Due to this, Resnikoff’s paper remained
unnoticed for decades. In this brief contribution, some insights
about how to update Resnikoff’s ideas will be given and discussed
in relationship with a moder theory of color spaces and to the
mathematical concept of principal ﬁber bundle.
Keywords–Geometry of Color Spaces; Principal Fiber Bundles;
Human Perception; Applications to Perceived Color Distances.
I.
RESNIKOFF’S FRAMEWORK FOR THE SPACE OF
PERCEIVED COLORS
In the 1974 paper [1], H.L. Resnikoff analyzed the geo-
metrical and topological properties of the space of perceived
colors P with a high level mathematical rigor. He decided to
start from Schr¨odinger’s axioms [2] for P: Axiom 1 (Newton
1704): if x ∈ P and α ∈ R+, then αx ∈ P. Axiom 2: if x ∈ P
then it does not exist any y ∈ P such that x + y = 0. Axiom
3 (Grassmann 1853, Helmholtz 1866): for every x, y ∈ P and
for every α ∈ [0, 1], αx + (1 − α)y ∈ P. Axiom 4 (Grassmann
1853): every collection of more than three perceived colors is
a linear dependent family in the vector space V spanned by
the elements of P. Note, in particular, that Axiom 3 implies
that P is closed under convex linear combinations, i.e., every
two colors in P can be joined by a line segment, i.e., P is
convex.
Resnikoff added another axiom, that of local homogeneity
of P with respect to changes of background illumination of
the visual scene. If X is a topological space and G is a
group of transformations that acts on X, then X is called a
homogeneous space with respect to G if, for any two points
x, y ∈ X, there exists a transformation g ∈ G such that
g(x) = y, i.e., any two points of X can be joined by an
opportune transformation g induced by G. X is only locally
homogeneous with respect to G if this property holds only
locally, i.e., if for every x ∈ X there is an open neighborhood
Ux containing it and such that every x′ ∈ Ux can be written as
x′ = g(x) for a certain g ∈ G. The reason for introducing this
further axiom is that it is possible to modify a color to reach
a ‘very similar’ color with a change of illumination and this
means that P should be locally homogeneous with respect to
the group of transformations of illuminations.
Resnikoff claimed that this group can be assumed as the
following:
GL(P) := {g ∈ GL(V ) | g(x) ∈ P ∀x ∈ P},
where GL(V ) is the group of orientation-preserving invertible
linear operators on V , or, equivalently, the group of real
n × n matrices with determinant greater than zero, where
n = dim(V ) ≤ 3 thanks to Axiom 4. He justiﬁes this
choice from the consideration that Axiom 1 implies that P
is a cone embedded in V and so a general transformation of
illumination must preserve the orientation of the cone and it
must also be invertible, since it is possible to turn back to the
initial conditions of illuminations. The condition g(x) ∈ P is
perfectly natural because after the change of illumination we
can still perceive the colors.
The observation that a change of illumination slightly
modiﬁes the perception of colors of a visual scene can thus
be stated in this mathematical formalism by saying that P
is locally homogeneous with respect to GL(P). But, thanks
to Axiom 3, for every couple of perceived colors x, y ∈ P
there exists the line segment that join x to y. This segment
is compact, hence it can be covered by a ﬁnite partition of
open neighborhoods U1, . . . , Un and the color x can be moved
along this line segment passing from a neighborhood to the
next one with the transformations g1, . . . , gn. Thus, the global
transformation that enables us to pass from x to y is the
composition of the single transformations, i.e., y = g(x),
g = gn ◦ · · · ◦ g1 and so local homogeneity for the convex
P implies its global homogeneity.
For this reason, Resnikoff postulates a ﬁfth axiom on
the structure of the color space: Axiom 5 (Resnikoff 1974):
P is globally homogeneous with respect to the group of
transformations of illumination GL(P).
Starting from the set of axioms 1-5 and by using Lie groups
and algebras representation theory [3], Resnikoff managed
showed that the only two geometrical structures compatible
with these axioms are:
P ≃ R+ × R+ × R+,
or
P ≃ R+ × SL(2, R)/SO(2),
where SL(2, R) is the group of 2×2 matrices with real entries
and determinant +1 and SO(2) is the group of matrices that
perform rotations in the plane R2.
The ﬁrst geometrical structure agrees with the usual trichro-
matic space, such as RGB, XYZ, and so on. The Cartesian
product, which represents the second one, is totally new.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-559-3
SIGNAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

Moreover, he found out that the only color constancy metric
compatible with the homogeneous structure of the RGB-like
model is precisely the metric found by Stiles, i.e.,
ds2 = α1
dx1
x1
2
+ α2
dx2
x2
2
+ α3
dx3
x3
2
,
where xj ∈ R+ and αj are positive real constants for j =
1, 2, 3. This metric agrees with the one found by Stiles with
totally different methods.
The distinction of perception between the color x and the
color y is calculated with the integral
d(x, y) =
Z
γ
ds
γ(0) = x, γ(1) = y,
where γ is the unique geodesic arc (i.e the arc of minimal
length) between x and y. For more information, the interested
reader is referred to [4].
II.
UPDATING RESNIKOFF’S MODEL: PRINCIPAL FIBER
BUNDLES
Resnikoff’s model is one of the most elegant treatises on
color perception and it paved the road to the introduction of
some advanced mathematical techniques used in theoretical
physics, e.g., differential geometry, Lie groups and algebras
representation theory and Jordan algebras, to the theory of
color perception. In this section, it is discussed the idea that
another fundamental mathematical object commonly used in
classical and quantum ﬁeld theory of mathematical physics, the
principal ﬁber bundle, can be a fundamental (missing) piece
in the Resnikoff framework.
First of all, note that Axiom 1 fails for α ≃ 0 and α ≫ 1.
In fact, as α approaches zero, the retinal cones responsible
for color vision do not work anymore and retinal rods are
activated, allowing only black and white vision, which can
be identiﬁed with achromatic colors in P. However, rods
sensitivity is ﬁnite, so that under a certain threshold ¯α, vision
ceases and with it the geometric structure of P. The same can
be said when α overcomes an upper limit, after which retinal
cones saturate and sight is lost.
A second issue is that, in Resnikoff’s model, only inde-
pendent light stimuli over a uniform background are consid-
ered; however, color vision in real world conditions is much
more complex. In fact, color perception of natural scenes is
intrinsically local: hue, saturation and brightness of a patch
strongly depend on the surrounding patches, a phenomenon
called ‘induction’. This is the reason why one must distinguish
between spectral colors of light sources isolated from the rest
of the visual ﬁeld, and color in context. Induction analysis is
an active research ﬁeld both in image processing and cognitive
psychology, see e.g., [5]–[9].
When induction phenomena are taken into account, it is
clear that if we want to represent color differences a spatially
variant Riemannian metric on P must be considered, instead
of a global one. This is where the framework of principal ﬁber
bundles [10] [11] can be helpful.
Without entering in the very complicated matter of ﬁeld
theory, it is nevertheless possible to give an idea of what
ﬁber bundles are by considering a ﬁeld as an entity which
assigns to every point x of a manifold M a point f of another
manifold F, representing the value taken by the ﬁeld in x. A
conﬁguration of a ﬁeld on an open subset U of M is a map
ϕ : U ⊂ M → F completely deﬁned by its graph, i.e., by the
set Graph(ϕ) := {(x, f) ∈ U × F | f = ϕ(x)}.
It is quite natural to think at U × F as the local model of
a more complicated geometric structure obtained by ‘gluing
together’ these Cartesian products (in a suitable way). This
structure is precisely what is called a ﬁber bundle over M with
standard ﬁber F. Hence, naively, a ﬁber bundle can be seen
as a generalization of the concept of a manifold, now modeled
on a Cartesian product instead of an Euclidean space. A ﬁber
bundle is a principal bundle if the standard ﬁber is a Lie group
G.
The importance of considering Lie groups has been dis-
cussed in the previous section, thus it seems necessary to
consider, among all ﬁber bundles, principal ﬁber bundles as
the candidates to provide the rich geometrical structure needed
to introduce in Resnikoff’s framework the phenomenon of
local induction. A formalization of this idea can lead to new,
context-dependent, color metrics rigorously obtained from ﬁrst
principles and not by ad-hoc procedures.
III.
CONCLUSION
The Resnikoff’s model of perceived color space has been
recalled and some critics about its assumptions have been
pointed out. These observations can be the staring point for
a new analysis of color spaces, based on the mathematical
concept of principal ﬁber bundles, which it has been motivated
to seem the most adequate framework to further develop
Resnikoff’s analysis.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Resnikoff, “Differential geometry and color perception,” Journal of
Mathematical Biology, vol. 1, 1974, pp. 97–131.
[2]
E. Schr¨odinger, “Grundlinien einer theorie der farbenmetrik im tagesse-
hen (outline of a theory of colour measurement for daylight vision).
available in english in sources of colour science, ed. david l. macadam,
the mit press (1970), 13482.” Annalen der Physik, vol. 63, no. 4, 1920,
pp. 397–456; 481–520.
[3]
A. W. Knapp, Representation Theory of Semisimple Groups: An
Overview Based on Examples (PMS-36).
Princeton university press,
2016.
[4]
E. Provenzi, “A differential geometry model for the perceived colors
space,” International Journal of Geometric Methods in Modern Physics,
vol. 13, no. 08, 2016, p. 1630008.
[5]
H. Wallach, “Brightness constancy and the nature of achromatic colors,”
Journal of Experimental Psychology, vol. 38, no. 3, 1948, pp. 310–324.
[6]
M. Rudd and I. Zemach, “Quantitive properties of achromatic color
induction: An edge integration analysis,” Vision Research, vol. 44, 2004,
pp. 971–981.
[7]
E. Provenzi, L. De Carli, A. Rizzi, and D. Marini, “Mathematical
deﬁnition and analysis of the retinex algorithm,” Journal of the Optical
Society of America A, vol. 22, no. 12, December 2005, pp. 2613–2621.
[8]
R. Palma-Amestoy, E. Provenzi, M. Bertalm´ıo, and V. Caselles, “A per-
ceptually inspired variational framework for color enhancement,” IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 31,
no. 3, 2009, pp. 458–474.
[9]
G. Gronchi and E. Provenzi, “A variational model for context-driven ef-
fects in perception and cognition,” Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
vol. 77, 2017, pp. 124–141.
[10]
J. Baez and J. Muniain, Gauge ﬁelds, knots and gravity.
World
Scientiﬁc Publishing Co Inc, 1994, vol. 4.
[11]
L. Fatibene and M. Francaviglia, Natural and gauge natural formalism
for classical ﬁeld theorie: a geometric perspective including spinors and
gauge theories.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2003.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-559-3
SIGNAL 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Signal, Image and Video Processing

