Energy Simulation Supporting the Building Design Process 
A Case Study at the Early Design Stage 
 
Marco Massetti  
ARC, Enginyeria i Arquitectura La Salle 
Universitat Ramon Llull 
Barcelona, Spain 
massetmar@yahoo.it 
Stefano Paolo Corgnati 
TEBE, Department of Energetics 
Politecnico di Torino 
Torino, Italy 
stefano.corgnati@polito.it
 
 
Abstract—This paper shows a case study proposed in a 
doctoral thesis currently in progress. The thesis investigates 
the application of energy calculations to support the design 
process, ranging from simple energy calculation methods to 
detailed simulations. In the case study, the design process of an 
apartment building block in Spain is proposed. Different 
energy calculation tools are applied at each stage of the 
project. This paper focuses on the early stages of the design 
process, in which a simple modelling and calculation approach 
is adopted. The paper shows, by means of the discussion of the 
case study, the importance of key factors identified by the 
authors for the choice of a suitable energy calculation method 
during the design process.  
Keywords-building design process; energy calculation; 
energy simulation; key factors; multiple design problems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Research and professional experiences of architects and 
energy specialists [1] reveal that ordinary professional 
activity rarely involves deep energy analysis and calculations 
to support the building design process, despite the expected 
potentials of these tools [1][2][3]. In the field of building 
energy simulation, McElroy [1] and Clarke [2] proposed to 
integrate energy simulation with a specific design 
methodology, but from their experiences they recognized 
that several barriers still exist. In order to address this issue, 
it is fundamental to understand which factors must be 
considered to integrate effectively calculation tools at the 
different phases of the design process. Few indications are 
provided by previous investigations in this field [4][5][6]: to 
face this issue, a doctoral thesis is on going on this topic. The 
thesis analyses this issue considering energy calculation in 
the specific context of the building design process: attention 
is paid to the evolution of the process through different 
stages, the integration of different competences and the 
interaction of multiple design problems, not merely 
quantifiable. In fact, it is fundamental to understand the 
complexity of the design process: extensive studies exist on 
the architecture design process and the application of design 
methodologies [7]. 
To illustrate this complex problem and to support the 
investigations, a case study is proposed in this paper.  
In particular, in Section II, the design process of an 
apartment building block in Spain is presented. Different 
phases are identified: Conceptual and Development Design 
phases, followed by the Operational phase. In each design 
phase a suitable calculation tool is adopted - from simple 
calculation to detailed simulation tools.  
In Section III, the paper focuses on Concept design 
phase. The software Archisun 3.0 [10] is adopted to evaluate 
building energy and indoor environmental performances. In 
Section III.A, the project constrains are identified including 
the constraints imposed by the indoor environmental 
requirements, by the regulation, by the building program, 
etc.. In Section III.B, the main decisions at stake in this 
project at Concept design phase are also identified. In 
Section III.C, with reference to the defined constraints and 
decisions, specific hypotheses for energy modelling are 
established, fixing the boundary conditions and letting the 
other variable free in order to represent design possibilities to 
be explored. Section III.D describes how different design 
alternatives are developed and modelled by the design team, 
and the corresponding energy performances are obtained by 
the tool. The obtained performances are considered together 
with other design aspect, to assess the design solution and 
take more conscious decisions about the solution to be 
further developed. 
In Section IV, several factors influencing the choice of 
the suitable tools to support the building design process are 
identified: these factors are specifically discussed with 
reference to the case study.  
In Section V, conclusion and future perspectives are 
presented. 
II. 
CASE STUDY OF A SOCIAL HOUSING DESIGN PROCESS 
A social housing apartment building block recently 
completed in Spain is considered. In this paper, the authors 
wish to replicate retrospectively a possible design process 
that the design team could have followed using energy 
calculation to support the design decisions, see Madrazo et 
al. [8]. The case study intends to exemplify as far as possible 
an ordinary project, in terms of building use, size and budget. 
For this reason, at the concept design stage, a small design 
team working in close cooperation is considered. 
A. The existing building 
The building is a recently completed 24 apartment social 
housing block, in Cerdanyola del Vallès, Barcelona, Spain, 
which has been built by the public housing institute Incasol. 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

The rectangular block is aligned to the street, with the main 
expositions facing South and North. It is 64 meters long and 
12 meters wide. It occupies the maximum surface permitted 
by the building codes and it has four stories, plus the 
underground parking. Lobbies and commercial areas are 
located in the ground floor. The first, second and third floors 
are addressed to residential use. The typical floor is 
organized around two cores serving four dwellings each one 
(Figure 1).   
 
Figure 1.  Cerdanyola residential building, typical floor. In red, solar wall 
in south/east/west façades. 
The building design process has been recreated by means 
of a hypothetical scenario assuming that different energy 
calculation tools are used according to each specific design 
stage.  
B. Scope and strategy of the case study  
The case study, referring to one specific building design 
process, can support but not demonstrate the validity of 
theoretical hypotheses about the use of energy calculations in 
the design process. However, the case study can provide a 
useful example aimed at discussing the key factors 
influencing the choice of energy calculation method (see 
Section IV). Therefore, the research focuses on the 
application of energy calculation through the process more 
then analysing in depth energy performances of different 
solutions. 
Moreover, the case study doesn’t provide an exhaustive 
replication of the whole design process. In fact, (a) it focuses 
on the energy performance of the building, stressing only 
some (of the innumerable) relations with other design 
aspects. (b) At each design stage, only some representative 
solutions (among many ones) are taken into account from 
more extended design scenarios. (c) Only some specific 
moments through the different stages of the building life 
cycle are described.  
In line with the arguments of different authors [7][9], it is 
here assumed that the design team methodology is flexible to 
the specificity of the project and to the evolution of the 
design circumstances. This methodology is not necessarily 
totally explicit and predefined, but it can be partially implicit 
and embedded in the design team experience, and at some 
extent improvised according to the project evolution. The 
main references used to reproduce a realistic design process 
based on different design stages are INTEND [9] and 
McElroy [1].  
C. Design process overview  
Different stages of building life are considered: the 
building Design – Conceptual Design and Design 
Development – and the building Operation stage. Energy 
calculation tools, which support the building Design, are 
considered for the investigation. Each Design stage is 
characterized by specific decisions associated with specific 
project constrains. Both influence the specific hypotheses for 
energy calculation at each design stage. For the analysed 
case study, at each design stage, different calculation tools 
are used to predict building energy performances:  
• 
Archisun, based on a simple energy calculation 
method  
• 
EnergyPlus (DesignBuilder interface), based on a 
detailed energy simulation. 
At the conceptual design stage, two design alternatives 
(C1 and C2) are investigated among different solutions, 
where the second one is a variant of the first one. Archisun  
is used to predict energy performances. 
At the next design stage, a solution from concept design 
is developed. Two design alternatives (D1 and D2) are 
considered, as in the previous stage, and EnergyPlus is used 
to predict energy performances. 
Design Concept
O
Design Development
Operation
C1
D1
C2
D2
Design 
Alternative  
Tool
Archisun
EnergyPlus/
DesignBuilder
Factors of choice of energy calculation methods
(ActualData)
 
Figure 2.  At each phases of design process a specific tool is used: two 
design solutions (C1-C2 and D1-D2, respectively) are generated through 
the process and modelled with the corresponding tool. 
At the operational stage, the data obtained (by means of 
measurements, surveys and energy bills) from the real 
building are considered to verify the mach between predicted 
and actual energy performance [9]. 
III. 
FOCUS ON THE CONCEPT DESIGN STAGE 
This section describes the specific constraints of the 
project at the concept stage, the decisions to take, and then 
how they are translated in modelling hypotheses for energy 
calculation. Finally concept design solution(s) is described. 
The section structure doesn’t correspond to a predefined 
sequence of steps as it is assumed that different design tasks 
within 
the 
design 
process 
are 
strictly 
interrelated: 
consequently, they may occur simultaneously or in aleatory 
order [7]. 
A. Project constrains at concept design stage 
The following conditions are mostly identified by the 
design team since the beginning of the concept design phase 
including: building program (description of the general 
requirements for the building), budget and specific goals, 
which are defined by the design team and the client, site 
conditions and applicable regulation, which depend on the 
context.  
The building program consists of the following points: 
• 
24 social housing apartments for rent (one of 
them must be adaptable). 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

• 
2 independent staircases and roofs 
• 
4 apartments at each floor for each staircase, 
with maximum useful floor area of 70m2 
• 
3 rooms for each apartment, with all rooms 
visitable  
• 
5 people for each apartment 
• 
Commercial areas at the ground floor 
• 
1 underground floor for the garage. 
The client budget is 3.170.000 euro.  
The main applicable regulation constraints are identified 
from the technical regulations about construction [11] and 
systems [12] and the urban regulation [13].  
Site 
conditions 
are 
also 
considered, 
such 
as: 
environmental conditions (thermal, acoustic, lighting, etc.), 
social conditions (social composition, population density, 
etc.) and perceptive conditions (as surroundings’ views). 
Finally, the design team agrees specific project goals 
with the client, referred to different design aspects, including 
among the others energy performance goals: 
1. Indoor environmental comfort indicators 
2. Energy Demand for Heating, Cooling and 
Domestic Hot Water 
3. Primary Energy Consumption  
4. Energy Cost 
5. Embedded Energy 
Energy calculation with Archisun is used at this stage to 
assess the points 1 and 2, in order to highlight the trend of 
the performance indicators with the variation of design 
solutions and to support design decisions (as exemplified in 
Section D). The aim of the analysis is to compare the effect 
of different solutions on energy indicators. 
B. Object of design decision at conceptual design stage 
At conceptual design stage, the main decisions regard 
Building and Systems, while the building Use related factors 
are not yet considered. In particular the design team explores 
different options about:  
• 
Building orientation  
• 
Building shape 
• 
Building envelope opening ratios  
• 
Building envelope components performances 
• 
Systems types 
• 
Systems - in situ renewable generation 
Section D provides an example of the different Building 
envelope opening ratios explored during the design process. 
C. Hypotheses for energy calculation at conceptual design 
stage 
Building program, site conditions and applicable 
regulation (Section A) are translated to hypotheses for 
energy calculation. These hypotheses apply to the conceptual 
design stage and are initially common to any building design 
alternative (including C1, C2), as they do not initially depend 
on the design solution.  
The parameters affecting energy performances (Figure 3) 
may be design variables (e.g., U value of the envelope) or 
they may be design given inputs imposed by the context of 
the project (e.g., outdoor temperature of the site or input 
imposed by the regulations, etc.).  
The design team defines the same energy calculation 
boundary conditions for all the building design alternatives. 
Boundary conditions include all design given inputs imposed 
by the context and those design variables the team decides to 
fix as boundary conditions. In fact, some design variables are 
fixed by the design team as they do not influence the design 
decisions taken at this stage (see Section B). In Figure 3, the 
main Building (E) and System (S) characteristics are open to 
design decisions. Instead, the building Use related factors 
(User behaviour - U, Indoor environmental quality - I, 
Operation - O) which are not object of decisions are fixed. 
Exterior environment data (C) on climate and building 
surroundings are also fixed, being given inputs imposed by 
the context. 
 
c
Fixed
(y design 
intention & 
by context)
Open 
(by design 
intention)
C Exterior environment
U User behaviour
 I Indoor environment quality
O Operation
E Building
S Systems
C
U
I
O
E
S
Design Concept
Operation
Design 
Development
Imposed by context
Design variables
C
U
I
O
Edet
Sdet
Eglob
Sglob
E
S
 
Figure 3.  At the concept design stage, the design team fixes some to 
energy performances variables - red field. While they let main Building (E) 
and System (S) characteristics open to design decisions - green field. 
The calculation tool as well imposes boundary conditions 
for some energy performance variables which can mach with 
the boundary conditions assigned by the designer. At this 
point, it is fundamental the choice of a suitable tool. The 
design team chooses Archisun (the choice is discussed in 
Section IV) in a way that the boundary conditions imposed 
by the tool are coherent, as far as possible, with the boundary 
conditions they want to define. This logic (outlined in Figure 
3) applies to the specific modelling hypotheses of the design 
alternatives (C1, C2) simulated with Archisun, which are 
considered hereafter. Input data are summarized in Table I.  
 
Archisun input deta Value 
Comments 
Exterior environment (C) 
limited options constrainted by the tool 
Map position                         
imposed by project context 
Height over sea level 
105 
m 
imposed by project context 
Urban density 
0.9 
- 
imposed by project context 
…climate data                       
 
imposed by context, taken from tool library 
Bulding geometry and construction (E) 
Conditioned volume* 
4536 m3 depending on program  
…envelope data  
 
 
System (S)  
  
…system efficiency data      
 
User related factors (U, I, O) 
limited options constrainted by the tool 
Maximum occupancy 
120 
p 
depending on program (=5people*24flets) 
Building use 
perm.nt 
depending on program  
temperature set point 
f(t) 
ºC 
imposed by the tool Archisun 
...ventilation settings data     
imposed by the tool Archisun 
...other building use data       
imposed by the tool Archisun 
*: it includes only appartments (1680 m2 useful floor, 2.7m useful internal height) 
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF ARCHISUN INPUT FOR CONCEPT 
DESIGN OF THE CASE STUDY. CONSTRAINED INPUT ARE  IN RED, UN-
CONSTRAINED INPUT ARE IN BLACK 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Archisun allows to model one single zone, accordingly 
with design team intentions. The building is modelled as a 
single zone representing all apartments, excluding the 
building areas with different uses and common spaces. The 
tool imposes the indoor environmental conditions of the 
adjacent spaces. The values are between the conditioned 
space and outdoor conditions. The modeller assigns the 
useful volume value (4536 m3), deduced from the building 
program, to the “volume” input. The other building data are 
not fixed as they depend on the explored design possibilities. 
Tool inputs data like map position, altitude and urban 
density are fixed by the context. Inputs, as urban density, not 
directly available from any source, must be assessed in 
advance by the modeller. After map position, altitude, sea 
distance and urban density are given by the modeller, the 
tool assigns default climate data for four seasonal sequences 
of typical reference days [10]. Mean external temperature is 
9.6ºC in winter (7.5ºC daily variation) and 28.1ºC in summer 
(8.8ºC variation). 
Input data related to building use, imposed by the 
building program (Section A), are translated to specific 
values by the modeller: building use is set as “permanent”. 
Then the tool, based on this single input value, assigns a set 
of default values for each day of a representative week. The 
tool constraints on detailed use parameters are coherent with 
the design team intention to constrain building control 
strategy. At this stage in fact, control strategy is not object of 
design decisions. 
D. Generation and evaluation of concept design 
alternatives 
After the definition of the input parameters (Section A), 
alternative conceptual solutions are outlined. A large number 
of alternatives of the design solution are admitted to be 
explored by the team during concept design. Among them, 
we describe here only one design solution, C1, and its further 
modification in another solution, C2, already identified in 
Figure 2. 
The design solution (C1) is generated from multiple 
initial considerations about the urban regulation constraints, 
the access from the public space and the climatic aspects.  
The design conditions and some initial concept solutions 
are progressively represented through an evolving sketch. 
The urban plan is the starting point for the concept 
formalization. Given the floor surface of the building, urban 
plan 
influences 
significantly 
Building 
Orientation 
(North/South) and Building Shape (4 floors compact block), 
and the design team has no much possibility to decide about 
these issues. Therefore, the form of the building rough 
volume in the project site can be defined very early in the 
process. Moreover, the building program requires two 
independents staircases to give access to the apartments. 
With the typical solution of this region with the stairs 
internal to the building fabric, some apartments would have 
only one external façade. This suggested the designer to 
adopt an external access system to assure two external 
façades for each apartment. 
The solution (narrow layout / double exposition for each 
apartment) addresses multiple aspects of the design problem. 
The uniform linear configuration entails uniformity of 
solution for all apartments under different aspects, including 
environmental conditions (in relation with solar radiation and 
ventilation) as well as internal distribution, views, etc. It also 
fosters uniform constructive solutions, having implications 
on construction cost. Meanwhile, the external balcony 
proposed to solve the access to apartments raises privacy and 
security issues. 
In this moment, the design team decides to deepen some 
of these aspects: energy demand and indoor environmental 
conditions. The generated concept solution requires special 
attention to the façades (with large south and north surfaces), 
to explore and evaluate appropriate relations between 
transparent and opaque surfaces of envelope. Energy 
calculation can inform the designer on the trend of variation 
of energy demand with the variation of opening ratio. 
This is the moment when concept solution is modelled in 
order to calculate its performances with Archisun. First, the 
boundary-conditions specified in Table I are modelled. Later, 
the description of the design solution is completed with the 
other modelling data initially unconstrained ( in Figure 3).  
Building envelope is characterized by 15% windows 
opening ratio in the South façade (C1) and then the ratio is 
increased to 45% (C2) to explore the effect on the energy 
demand. The calculation informs the design team on the 
appreciable reduction of heating demand produced by the 
variation (Table II). The design team deduces that heat lost 
through the South façade is compensated by increasing the 
solar gains (see Section C).  
 
Demand kWh/m3·y 
 
Opening ratio 
Heating 
Cooling 
C1 
15% 
9.43 
3.42 
C2 
45% 
8.63 
3.65 
TABLE II.  
OPENING RATIO EFFECT ON HEATING/COOLING 
DEMAND 
Meanwhile, calculation informs the design team that C1 
and C2 show no significant difference in terms of cooling 
demand, due to the permanent shading elements on the 
transparent envelope. Finally, the simple and rapid modelling 
process and performance visualization facilitate the 
evaluation of energy performances results together with 
other aspects of the design problem affected by the opening 
ratio, such as lighting, privacy and external views.  
The simplicity of compared alternative in this scenario 
permits to focus on the integration of energy calculation 
through the design process, accordingly with the aim of the 
research. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION - FACTORS OF CHOICE OF ENERGY 
CALCULATION METHODS 
ASHRAE defined few key factors for the choice of the 
energy calculation methods and tools [4]. Although, 
specificity of the different design stages are not stressed. In 
this paper, different factors are discussed, carefully 
considering the complexity of the building design process: 
attention is paid to the transition through different process 
stages, the convergence of different competences and the 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

interaction of multiple design problems, not merely 
quantifiable. The factors influencing the choice assume 
different importance and priority at each design stage.  
In the presented case study, each design stage is 
characterized by specific conditions and decisions at stake, 
thus specific hypotheses apply for energy calculation, as 
Section III illustrates for the Concept design stage. 
Therefore, at each stage a suitable software tool for energy 
calculations is chosen. The Factors influencing the choice of 
the energy calculation method are here identified and they 
are discussed to evaluate Archisun suitability to this design 
scenario at concept design stage.  
• 
Level of discretization (detail) of Archisun 
building model is quite low. The building is 
modelled as one single entity with a limited set of 
attributes. It corresponds to a single zone. Dynamic 
data are defined on daily basis for few typical days 
[10]. The limited detail required for modelling input 
responds to the general decisions considered in 
concept design stage. It helps to keep under control 
the design problem/solution and to understand the 
problem/solution which at this stage is not 
completely clear. It also limits the time and 
resources consuming demands of modelling. 
Modelling detail is limited to the essential for the 
fulfilment of an acceptable accuracy, cf., McElroy 
[1]. In the example (Section III-D), only a single 
input of transparent surface ratio is necessary for 
each façade to model solution C1-C2. 
• 
Level of complexity of calculation algorithm of 
Archisun 
is 
relatively 
low 
for 
automated 
calculation, thus limiting Accuracy but enhancing 
Feedback immediacy – a priority at this stage. The 
limited Level of complexity of the calculation 
algorithm is expected to enhance the understanding 
of input variables effect on energy performances.  
• 
Responsiveness to design decisions of Archisun is 
appropriate for the project. The tool inputs 
correspond to the few main overall variables of 
Building and Systems, that the designer needs to 
explore in order to face the typical decisions of this 
stage, e.g., transparent surface ratio of C1 and C2. 
In fact, Archisun shell not constraint any project 
variable explored at this stage (cf., Section III-C). 
Inputs respond to the specific decisions considered 
for this stage, made at global level of the building 
(e.g., global U of the envelope), and do not force to 
anticipate further decisions (e.g., on detailed 
components characteristics). Moreover, Archisun 
outputs provide the performance indicators for the 
whole building conditioned space, which are useful 
at this stage to take decisions. 
• 
Feedback immediacy of Archisun is high, as its 
calculation method is relatively simple (cf., Level of 
discretization 
and 
Level 
of 
complexity 
of 
calculation algorithm). High Feedback immediacy 
is a priority at this design stage in order to explore 
rapidly a large number of alternative solutions that 
are highly uncertain and open (note that C1 and C1 
are just a small sample of a more complex 
scenario). The small design team works in close 
cooperation and real-time calculations offered by 
the tool make much easier for the architect to obtain 
the specialist feedback before moving forward, 
having immediate communication with the energy 
specialist, cf., INTEND [9]. 
• 
Flexibility to design modification of Archisun is 
adequate to the project concept stage. Modeller can 
quickly explore modifications of the solution under 
analysis. A radical concept reformulation, e.g., of 
the building shape, can be represented with a 
moderate effort, manipulating a few parameters 
without a deep re-modelling. This characteristic is 
strictly related to the Level of discretization and 
with the Responsiveness to design decisions of the 
tool (as Flexibility is important specifically for the 
key parameters for design decisions). Archisun also 
allows, throughout the concept design, to adjust 
with a moderate effort the hypotheses for energy 
calculation boundary conditions initially set down 
(e.g., Conditioned volume), manipulating few 
parameters without a deep re-modelling. Flexibility 
is lost in case design modifications impose to skip 
from a higher to a lower level of input complexity: 
in this case several data must be re-introduced. 
• 
Flexibility to solution representation indicates 
that Archisun model is able to suitably represent the 
conceived alternative solutions at this design stage. 
The model input, envelope opening ratio, represents 
directly the solution (C1/C2) conceived by the 
designer, 
without 
any 
stretching. 
The 
low 
Flexibility of this tool in the representation of 
building Use related factors does not limit the 
design solution exploration, as the design team 
decided that Use related factors are not object of 
design decisions at this stage. 
• 
Accuracy of Archisun is expected to be acceptable 
for a residential building project (with simple 
HVAC system) at this design stage (cf., Level of 
discretization). At this stage, high Accuracy in 
energy performance prediction is not the first 
priority. But a minimum Accuracy is necessary to 
correctly point out and compare the different 
performance of design alternatives C1 and C2. The 
approach of Archisun versus the uncertainty of 
some parameters is of fixing to default values some 
quantities (in particular, building Use related 
factors), instead of entrusting them to the concept 
designer discretionality (see constrained variables in 
Section III-C) in order to avoid arbitrary modelling 
assumptions. Archisun sensitivity analyses are 
provided by Palme [14]. 
• 
Integrability in multiple design problem of 
Archisun is facilitated by its low Discretization, 
which limits the design team resources dedicated to 
energy analysis and subtracted to other design 
aspects. Archisun is characterized by a high 
Feedback immediacy, which allows a rapid shift 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

from one problem domain to another, and by a wide 
range of multiple performances that can be 
calculated (thermal, lighting, acoustic comfort and 
energy). 
Integrability 
facilitates 
a 
better 
understanding and control of the overall problem: 
this is crucial when energy and environmental 
performances are considered together with all the 
other aspects of the design problem.  
• 
Data 
coherence 
preservation 
capability 
is 
facilitated by the double level of complexity of 
Archisun input model which intends initially to 
handle overall solutions and later to refine them. 
Thus, in the later refinement the initial data are 
preserved. Nevertheless, in this scenario different 
tools are used at each design stages, in order to 
fulfil with their different requirements. Therefore, 
Data coherence preservation does not depend only 
on Archisun. Data coherence passing from one 
stage/tool to the next is actually not easy to solve. In 
particular, the transition of energy calculation input 
from one tool to the other is demanding, but it 
cannot be simplified as a matter of tools limitation. 
In fact, driving the solution from some generic 
model to more specific one (e.g., from one single U 
for façade to specific components properties) is 
right the role of designers. A limitation of Archisun 
is its lack of transparency about the building use 
related data, that consequently can hardly be 
reproduced coherently with Energy Plus in the next 
design stage. 
According to most of the considered factors, Archisun 
seems appropriate for concept design stage. Nevertheless, 
many of these factors are strictly interrelated, controversial 
and in some cases one is conflicting with another. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The case study highlights the role of several factors 
identified in this paper as predominant for the choice of 
suitable energy calculation method to support the design 
process. The proposed key factors pretend to make a step 
forward in the line of precedent literature indications 
[4][5][6], as their discussion in the case study intends to 
explain. In fact, existing energy calculation tools and the 
underlying methods are many and very different, and a good 
choice, based on their specific characteristics, is fundamental 
to foster the exploitation of energy calculation potentials 
through the entire design process. In particular, the factors 
for the choice of suitable energy calculation methods are 
specific for each design stage, as shown in the case study. 
Finally, the priority and the evaluation (favourable or not to 
the choice) of these factors vary according to the specificity 
of the individual project and of the design process evolution 
– not totally predictable a priori.  
Therefore, it is suggested that the factors of choice should 
provide solid applicable principles, which are flexible to the 
specificity of the project. In fact, their purpose is not to 
impose rigid and deterministic rules, universally applicable 
in advance to any project. With this regard, a remark is 
addressed to the fact that most of these factors are strictly 
interrelated, someone is controversial and in some cases one 
is conflicting with another, therefore this procedure does not 
provide an absolute judgment. 
Within the future work, authors intend to 
• 
extend the analysis to the whole design process, 
including the design development phase  
• 
improve and provide more specific definitions and 
discussions about the key factors identified in this 
paper. 
• 
corroborate the hypothetical scenario with the 
feedback from direct experiences of different 
practitioners in Europe. 
VI. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was developed within the research line of the 
group ARC, related with the projects IntUBE (7th Framework 
Programme, 2008-2011) and REPENER (Spanish National 
RDI plan, 2009-2012), on ICT and energy assessment 
through the entire building life-cycle. M. Massetti thanks M. 
Palme for contributing to the initial ideas of investigating 
key characteristics of energy calculation tools. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. B. McElroy, Embedding integrated building performance 
assessment in design practice, PhD Thesis, University of 
Strathclyde, 2009. 
[2] J. A. Clarke, Energy simulation in building design, Oxford: 
Butterworth-Heinemann, 2001. 
[3] C. J. Hopfe, C. Struck, G. Ulukavak Harputlugil, J. Hensen 
and P. Wilde, "Exploration of using building performance 
simulation tools for conceptual building design", in Proc. 
IBPSA-NVL conference, 2005, p8 
[4] ASHRAE, ASHRAE handbook: fundamentals. Atlanta, 2009 
[5] ISO 13790, Energy performance of buildings - Calculation of 
energy use for space heating and cooling, 2008  
[6] J. P. Waltz, Computerized building energy simulation 
handbook, Monticello, N.Y.: Marcel Dekker, 2000. 
[7] B. Lawson, How designers think: the design process 
demystified, 4th ed., Oxford: Architectural Press, 2006. 
[8] L. Madrazo, M. Massetti, G. Font and I. Alomar, “Integrating 
energy simulation in the early stage of building design,” Proc. 
IBPSA-Germany Conference on Building Performance 
Simulation in a Changing Environment (BauSIM 2010), 
BPSA-Germany, 2010, pp. 175-182 
[9] INTEND, Integrated Energy Design. IED, 2009, 03.06.2011: 
www.intendesign.com  
[10] R. Serra, J. Roset, “Energy Conscious Design,” Proc. World 
Renewable energy Congress VI (WREC VI), July 2000, pp. 
494-499. 
[11] Código Técnico de la Edificación. Madrid: Ministerio de la 
Vivienda, 2006. 
[12] Real Decreto 1027/2007, “Reglamento de Instalaciones 
Térmicas en los Edificios” BOE, nº 207, pp. 35931-35984, 
Agoust 2007.  
[13] Modificació del pla parcial centre direccional de Cerdanyola 
del Vallès, Unitat de planejament de l’àrea de sòl, October 
2005. 
[14] M. Palme, La Sensibilidad energética de los edificios, PhD 
Thesis, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, 2010.  
 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

