Emergence of a Multiple-Sourcing Strategy in a
Buyer-Supplier Network: Effects of different
Quantity-Quality and Quantity-Price Trade-Offs
Kristian Strmenik, Christian Mitsch, Friederike Wall, Gernot M¨odritscher
Department of Management Control and Strategic Management
University of Klagenfurt, Klagenfurt, Austria
Email: {ﬁrst.last}@aau.at
Abstract—In this paper, a buyer-supplier network is consid-
ered, which consists of a buyer and several suppliers who differ
from each other in terms of quality and price. A buyer who
puts its focus solely on quality pursues a different strategy than
a price sensitive buyer, and, hence, allocates the procurement
volume of a product in a different way among the suppliers,
which in turn affects the supplier structure. Besides the buyer’s
strategic considerations, the suppliers also try to act strategically
to maintain their competitiveness. We apply an agent-based sim-
ulation to analyze how different procurement volumes and levels
of precision of the buyer’s quality measurement system affect the
supplier structure when (1) the suppliers’ qualities and prices are
modeled by generalized logistic functions and log-linear models,
respectively, (2) the buyer uses a proportional volume allocation
rule to allocate its procurement volume among the suppliers, and
(3) the buyer learns its own quality-price preference via temporal
difference learning. In order to express the buyer’s quality-price
preference, we apply an additive weighted sum model. The results
show that, for low (high) procurement volumes, the buyer learns
that sourcing from suppliers who pursue a high-quality (low-
cost) leadership strategy leads to a more proﬁtable supplier
structure. But if the buyer’s precision of quality measurement
system decreases, these suppliers are not able to continue their
position in the market and, therefore, lose market shares to
suppliers who focus on a different competitive strategy.
Keywords—Multiple-sourcing strategy; Buyer-supplier network;
Volume allocation; Temporal difference learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
It is not uncommon for a ﬁrm to source goods and services
from two or more suppliers at the same time. The sourcing
strategy of a ﬁrm can be described by three essential criteria
[3]: (1) a criterion for establishing a supplier base, (2) a
criterion for selecting suppliers who receive an order from
the ﬁrm, and (3) a criterion for allocating the quantity of
goods among the suppliers. In this paper, we assume that a
ﬁrm (hereafter referred to as the buyer) pursues a multiple-
sourcing strategy, which is characterized by a proportional
volume allocation rule. This means that each supplier receives
at least a part of the total procurement volume. In addition,
we assume that the criterion for allocating the procurement
volume is only based on the supplier’s product quality and the
price that the supplier charges for the product. Moreover, the
procurement volume needs to be allocated in a trustful way, so
that the buyer’s expectations and preferences regarding quality
and price are met [2]. Within that, the preference whether
quality or price is more important depends on different factors
like, for example, the buyer’s industry, the buyer’s strategic
positioning and business model, and the importance of the
purchased product.
On the other hand, also the suppliers try to act strategically
and position themselves well in the market to earn high rates of
return, even if the industry structure is unfavourable. Following
[10], the basis for this in the long-term is a competitive advan-
tage of the supplier, which may either stem from differentiation
or low cost. Both strategies require a fundamentally particular
path, including the choice about the type of competitive
advantage and the scope of the strategic target in which
the supplier wants to achieve a competitive advantage. In a
multiple-sourcing strategy the employed suppliers may differ
from each other in terms of their objectives and competitive
strategy, and, hence, the quality and price they are able to offer
for a certain procurement volume.
The paper focuses on a possible quantity-quality trade-
off, which might exist between the supplier’s quality and the
requested quantity. This trade-off indicates the responsiveness
of quality to changes in volume and implies that with an
increased volume the supplier is not able to maintain its level
of quality, which will subsequently drop to a lower level. A
quantity-quality trade-off might stem from technological rea-
sons, for example, increasing the operating speed to produce
more pieces or using less-skilled workers to meet the higher
demand. Ultimately, this may result in a lower quality. Besides
this trade-off, we assume that depending on the allocated
procurement volume, suppliers may offer the buyer different
price reductions.
The main objective of this paper is to investigate how differ-
ent procurement volumes affect the buyer’s supplier structure
when (1) the suppliers are heterogeneous with respect to the
above-mentioned quantity-quality and quantity-price trade-
offs, (2) the buyer pursues a multiple-sourcing strategy, and
(3) the buyer learns its own quality-price preference based on
its supplier environment.
In certain situations, the observed quality of a product may
not match the agreed quality because, for example, it might
result from an imperfect buyer quality perception. Therefore,
we extend our research question to how the model reacts
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

when imperfect quality is imperfectly measured by the buyer’s
quality measurement system.
To answer our research questions, an agent-based simulation
is set up, which captures a buyer and three heterogeneous
(in terms of quality and price) suppliers. In particular, we
describe the suppliers’ qualities and prices by generalized
logistic functions and log-linear models, respectively. To ex-
press the buyer’s preference regarding quality and price, we
apply an additive weighted sum model and, in order to model
the buyer’s multiple-sourcing strategy, a proportional volume
allocation rule is used. Last but not least, we model the buyer’s
learning process via temporal difference learning.
The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we review the literature regarding to sourcing
strategies and volume allocations. In Section 3, we introduce
our agent-based model, explain the model speciﬁcations, and
introduce the buyer’s learning method for learning its quality-
price preference. The parameter settings for our simulation
experiments are explained in Section 4. In Section 5, we
present and discuss our results. Section 6 contains concluding
remarks and suggests possible directions for future research.
II. RELATED RESEARCH
Several studies have been conducted on the topic of volume
allocation discussing the beneﬁts of certain sourcing strategies
and suggesting using different criteria in case of a multiple-
sourcing strategy. [12] presents a model to optimize the
allocation of volumes among suppliers by considering different
cost factors. The authors conclude that, if the reliability of
the suppliers is low, the buyer should consider a multiple-
sourcing strategy. [3] proposes a supplier selection and volume
allocation model where minimum order quantities and supplier
capacities are considered. The authors ﬁnd out that, if suppliers
are incapacitated, the preferred strategy of the buyer is to
source the product from multiple suppliers. However, the
largest part of the required volume should be allocated to the
least cost supplier and only marginal quantities to all other
suppliers. [8] introduces a model of quality selection in an
imperfectly competitive market considering quantity-quality
trade-offs with constant values and studies its implications.In
his ﬁndings, the author shows that the stronger the relationship
between these two factors is, the more sales are shifted from
the high to the low quality supplier [8]. [13] set up an agent-
based simulation and take the assumption of [8] work to
extend the literature on volume allocation, taking into account
the impact of a non-linear trade-off between quantity and
quality on the buyer’s supplier structure. With their simulation
experiment, they ﬁnd out that, in cases where the buyer has
to allocate large procurement volumes, a proportional volume
allocation mechanism that only considers the suppliers’ qual-
ities leads to stronger oscillations of the supplier volumes. To
mitigate this phenomenon, the buyer should form its expecta-
tions not only based on short-term perception, but on a more
sophisticated method by allowing adaptive expectations. In
addition, the authors are also considering additional indicators
such as prices in order to stabilize the behaviour of the buyer’s
volume allocation.
III. THE MODEL
A. Overview
We consider a buyer-supplier network, which is character-
ized by a buyer who is ordering the same procurement volume
of a certain product in every time period and different suppliers
who are offering the demanded product. Each supplier is char-
acterized by a non-linear quantity-quality and quantity-price
trade-off. Table I gives an overview of the before-mentioned
trade-off relationships of suppliers, which we investigate in
our model.
TABLE I
TRADE-OFF RELATIONSHIPS OF DIFFERENT SUPPLIER TYPES.
competitive
quantity-quality
quantity-price
strategy
trade-off
trade-off
quality leadership
high
low
’stuck in the middle’
medium
medium
cost leadership
low
high
Moreover, we take into account the possibility that the
buyer puts more emphasis either on quality or on price, or
to consider both as equally important while allocating the
procurement volume among the suppliers. To get a relation
between quantity and quality, we apply a generalized logistic
function, which has an S-shaped form. This function type
corresponds to our before-mentioned assumption that with an
increase of the quantity, the supplier is not able to maintain
its level of quality, which will subsequently drop to a lower
quality level. S-shaped functions are very ﬂexible and have
essential properties so that they are often used, e.g., in neutral
network learning methods as an activation function [9] or in
biological growth models for animal sciences and forestry [6].
In our paper, we model the correlation between quantity and
price with a log-linear model. A log-linear model can be used
to describe, for example, the cost reduction in manufacturing,
speciﬁcally, in areas with repetitive procedures such as produc-
tion plants (e.g., [1]). Further we incorporate price reductions
depending on the allocated procurement volume.
Finally, to express the buyer’s preference regarding quality
and price, we apply an additive weighted sum model, which
is commonly used in multi-attribute decision making [4][15].
This type of model easily allows the buyer to put more weight
either on quality or on price, or to consider both as equally
important. The weight parameter in the additive weighted
sum model is determined via temporal difference learning,
a progressive learning process that comes from the area of
reinforcement learning. With this type of learning, the buyer
tries a variety of actions to ﬁnd out, which of them seem to
be the best. The big challenge of this learning approach is that
the buyer has to exploit what it has already learned in order
to receive high rewards, but it also has to explore in order to
ﬁnd better actions that may earn higher rewards in the future.
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

B. Model speciﬁcations
We suppose that the buyer initially, without placing an order,
requests each supplier to submit an offer stating the quality
and the price for the requested quantity. After receiving this
initial information, the buyer allocates the procurement volume
according to its quality-price preference among the suppliers.
Following the delivery of the supplier volumes, the buyer
imperfectly observes the quality of the suppliers and captures
the price. In order to update the supplier volumes for the next
order period, the buyer weights the observed quality and the
captured price according to its quality-price preference. The
sequence of events is sketched in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Sequence of events.
Buyer’s procurement volume
We consider a buyer (abbreviated to B in formulas) who
plans to allocate a constant procurement volume X ∈ R+
of a certain product among multiple suppliers in each period
t ∈ {1, ..., T} ⊂ N of the entire observation time T. The buyer
selects m ∈ N suppliers (abbreviated to S in formulas) for
the delivery of the product, whereby the sum of the individual
supplier volumes xS
i,t ∈ R+ of m suppliers deﬁnes the buyer’s
procurement volume
X =
m
X
i=1
xS
i,t .
(1)
Supplier quality
Each supplier is characterized by a quality function, which
is described by a generalized logistic function, sometimes
called Richards [11] curve. This S-shaped curve characteristic
matches with our assumption that an increase in volume leads
to a loss of quality and vice versa. Hence, each supplier’s
quality function is determined by
qS
i,t(xS
i,t) = Hi −
Hi − Gi
1 + Ci · e−ki·xS
i,t
(2)
where qS
i,t ∈ (0, 1) denotes the quality of the i’th supplier
at time t. The quality parameters (Hi, Gi, Ci, ki) ∈ R4
are set exogenously for each supplier at the very beginning
of a simulation run. The parameter Gi (Hi) refers to the
lower (upper) asymptote of the quality curve, while Ci is
related to the quality in point xS
i,t = 0, and ki represents
the logistic growth rate (or, in a negative sense, the logistic
shrinkage factor). The quality parameters Hi, Gi, Ci, and ki
are purposefully designed so that the suppliers represent our
’typology’ of suppliers. For the sake of simplicity, we suppose
that all four parameters do not change over time.
Supplier price
We consider that each supplier sets a price pS
i,t ∈ R+
for the quantity xS
i,t allocated by the buyer. Based on the
aforementioned quantity-price trade-off, a monotonically de-
creasing price function is considered. Since we assume that
doubling the quantity leads to a price reduction of a certain
value, we use Wright’s [16] log-linear model to describe the
supplier price
pS
i,t(xi,t) = pM · (xS
i,t + 1)
log(1−Li)
log(2)
.
(3)
While pM ∈ R+ corresponds to the market price of one unit,
Li ∈ (0, 1) denotes the supplier’s relative price reduction. In
regard to the experience curve effect, L reﬂects the proportion
reduction in the unit cost with each doubling in the cumulative
procurement volume (see, e.g., [1]). This means that with a
doubling of the supplier volume, the supplier price deceases
by Li·100%. Similar to the quality parameters, we also set the
price parameters (pM, Li) exogenously at the very beginning
of a simulation run.
Buyer’s quality measurement
After the ordered supplier volumes are delivered, the buyer
imperfectly observes the quality qB
i,t ∈ (0, 1) of the suppliers
according to
qB
i,t = qS
i,t + Qi,t
with Qi,t
i.i.d.
∼ N(0, σ2) .
(4)
We assume that there is a discrepancy between the actual
quality qS
i,t and the observed quality qB
i,t , since the observed
quality is noise-afﬂicted captured in a normally distributed
random variable Qi,t with mean 0 and standard deviation
σ ∈ R+, which reﬂects the buyer’s precision of quality
measurement.
Buyer’s quality-price preference
To express the buyer’s preference regarding quality and
price, we use the following additive weighted sum model
wi,t = αt · qB
i,t + (1 − αt) · pM − pS
i,t
pM
(5)
where the individual weight of the i’th supplier is denoted by
wi,t ∈ (0, 1). The term (pM − pS
i,t)/pM can be interpreted as
a relative price saving on the part of the buyer. αt ∈ [0, 1]
and (1 − αt) indicate the buyer’s quality weight and buyer’s
price weight, respectively. Note, in our agent-based model, the
parameter αt is learned by the buyer using temporal difference
learning (see Section III-C). A high (low) αt indicates that
the buyer puts more emphasis on quality (price) rather than
on price (quality). Ultimately, a high individual weight wi,t
implies that the buyer is generally content with the quality
and price of the supplier.
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Volume allocation
The procurement volume is allocated proportionately to all
m suppliers depending on their individual weights. Thus, the
buyer’s volume allocation rule is given by
xS
i,t+1 =
wi,t
Pm
i=1 wi,t
X .
(6)
Since the buyer might pursue different objectives regarding
quality and price, a bigger share of the total procurement
volume may be allocated to suppliers with a high individual
weight.
Offer submission
At the beginning of a simulation run (hereafter abbreviated
to t1), we assume that the buyer splits the procurement volume
in equal shares among the suppliers.
xS
i,t1 = X
m
(7)
The suppliers are requested to submit an offer, stating quality
qS
i,t1 and price pS
i,t1 for the requested supplier volume xS
i,t1.
After the initial submission, the buyer orders its ﬁrst delivery
in consideration of (5) and (6). Whenever the supplier volumes
are delivered (apart from t1), the buyer observes the quality of
each supplier according to (4). After the observe quality and
the captured price have been determined, the buyer allocates
the next procurement volume in accordance with (5) and (6).
This procedure continues until t > T.
C. Learning method
In our agent-based model, the buyer has to specify the
quality weight αt in the additive weighted sum model (5). For
this purpose, we use a temporal difference learning approach,
which was invented by Sutton [14] because we suppose that
the buyer does not have enough resources and, especially,
no prior knowledge of its suppliers’ structure to provide an
adequate model of its multiple-sourcing environment.
Action-value function
The simplest temporal difference learning approach is given
by the following update rule
Vt+1[αt] = (1 − βt) ∗ Vt[αt] + βt ∗ (πt + γ ∗ Vt[αt+1]) (8)
where Vt[αt] ∈ R denotes the action-value function of action
αt ∈ A ⊂ [0, 1] with reward πt ∈ R, learning rate βt ∈ [0, 1],
and discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1). In the TD(0) method, the action
αt is a value from the discrete action space A that corresponds
to all possible buyer’s quality-price preferences and, besides
that, the values of the action-value function are stored in a
lookup table (labelled with square brackets) initialized to be
zero for all actions, i.e., there is no information about the
buyer’s preference for quality and price when the simulation
is started. Further, the action-value function can also be read
as a long-term memory vector of length |A| accumulating the
discounted rewards over the time of a simulation run and,
in the TD(0) algorithm, only one value of the action-value
function is updated in each time step, while all other V-values
remain unchanged.
Buyer’s proﬁt
The reward in the update rule (8) corresponds to the buyer’s
proﬁt
πt =
m
X
i=1
xS
i,t · min(qB
i,t, qS
i,t) · pR − xS
i,t · pS
i,t
(9)
with retail price pR ∈ R+. The buyer’s proﬁt, which is revenue
minus costs depends only on how much the buyer produces
in its ﬁrm because quality and price are functions of the
delivered quantity xS
i,t. For the sake of simplicity, we suppose
that products of poor quality are sorted out.
Learning rate and learning time
A very key part in temporal difference learning is the speed
of learning things. At the beginning of a simulation run, the
learning rate βt should be so high that any initial random
ﬂuctuations have only a minor impact and, on the other hand,
βt should decrease with time to assure that the buyer ﬁnds
a local optimum of its action-value function [14]. Therefore,
we use a variable learning rate βt that decreases over time.
The time or, more precisely, the number of time steps during
which the buyer learns the parameter αt is called the learning
time TL ≤ T.
Action-selection policy
After the buyer has calculated the action-value function
Vt[.], the buyer tries to select an action αt+1 from its action
space A in order to maximize the sum of its discounted
rewards, which are received over time. Thus, the buyer is
confronted with the trade-off between choosing the current
action and choosing a varied action with the prospect of a
higher reward in the future. An easy and common action-
selection policy is the so-called ϵ-greedy policy, which means
that with probability (1 − ϵt) the action with the highest Vt[.]
is chosen, while with probability ϵt ∈ [0, 1] a random action
is selected [14].
αt+1 =



argmax
α∈A
Vt[α]
with probability (1 − ϵt)
∼ Unif(A)
with probability ϵt
(10)
Furthermore, in our model, ϵt is a decreasing function of
the time with the two properties that, at the beginning of a
simulation run, ϵt1 is one which indicates that the action-
selection is total random (pure exploration) and, in the end,
ϵTL is zero (pure exploitation) and, thus with probability one,
the ﬁnal learned action αTL leads to the highest value of the
action-value function learned during the simulation run.
Number of time steps after learning
After the buyer has learned which quality-price preference
is a good choice, the buyer’s supplier structure is analyzed.
For this purpose, more time steps are simulated in which
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

the parameter αt is unchanged. In the case, the buyer’s
quality measurement system works perfectly, i.e., σ = 0,
the buyer’s supplier structure stabilizes within TS ∈ N time
steps after learning. Since we are also interested in how the
model reacts when imperfectly quality is imperfectly measured
by the buyer’s quality measurement system, i.e., σ > 0,
further TE
∈ N time steps are required to evaluate the
stochastic simulation outcomes. This results in a total number
of TL + TS + TE time steps of which only the last TE time
steps are used to analyze the buyer’s supplier structure.
IV. PARAMETER SETTINGS
We conduct our simulation experiments in two steps: (1)
we start with the ’perfect scenario’ in which there is no
discrepancy between the actual quality and the observed
quality. (2) we investigate further scenarios, called ’imperfect
scenarios’, to ﬁnd out how the buyer’s supplier structure
changes when imperfect quality is imperfectly measured by
the buyer’s quality measurement system.
TABLE II
PARAMETER SETTINGS.
Exogenous parameters
Values/Types
Time steps to learn
TL = 100
the parameter αt
Time steps to stabilize
TS = 10
the allocation
Time steps to evaluate
TE = 10
the outcome
Number of sim. runs
N = 1000
Number of suppliers
m = 3
Market price
pM = 1
Retail price
pR = 1
Supplier type
Type 1
Type 2
Type 3
Supremum of qS
i,t
H1 = 1.0
H2 = 0.8
H3 = 0.6
Inﬁmum of qS
i,t
G1 = 0.0
G2 = 0.0
G3 = 0.0
qS
i,t(xS
i,t = 0) (in %)
C1 = 99
C2 = 79
C3 = 59
Logistic growth rate
k1 = 0.23
k2 = 0.109
k3 = 0.068
Inﬂection point
xIP
1
= 20
xIP
2
= 40
xIP
3
= 60
Relative price reduction
L1 = 0.05
L2 = 0.10
L3 = 0.15
Action space
A = {0.0, 0.1, ..., 1.0}
Discount factor
γ = 0
Procurement volume
X ∈ {1, 2, ..., 100}
Buyer’s precision of
σ ∈ {0, 0.01, 0.02, ..., 0.10}
quality measurement
Supplier types
In our paper, we focus on a small buyer-supplier network
and, therefore, we distinguish only between three different
supplier types (hereafter type 1, type 2, and type 3), which
represent ﬁctitious companies pursuing different competitive
strategies. Supplier type 1 captures a company, which pursues
a high-quality leadership strategy and, thus, seeks to be unique
regarding the high level of quality of its product it offers to the
buyer and that the buyer rewards this with a premium price.
Supplier type 3, on the other hand, captures a company, which
pursues a low-cost leadership strategy where cost advantages
are essential to gain a high return and long-term success.
Supplier type 2 is considered to capture a company that failed
to achieve one of the above-mentioned generic strategies and
can be, to put it in the words of [10], labelled as ’stuck in
the middle’. Similar to supplier type 1, also supplier type
2’s quality deteriorates with a higher procurement volume and
falls below the quality of supplier type 3.
Supplier quality
Figure 2 depicts the quality functions of our three sup-
plier types (for the quality parameters see Table II). We
set the quality parameters as follows: The quality parameter
Hi corresponds to the quality that can be guaranteed with
small volumes, while Gi is associated with the worst quality
that can occur. In order to obtain the quality parameters Ci
and ki, we deﬁne the following two constraints: Parameter
Ci refers to the quality, if nothing is produced, i.e., Ci =
−(qS
i (0) − Gi)/(qS
i (0) − Hi). For simplicity, we assume
qS
i (0) = Hi − 0.01. Parameter ki can be obtained by solving
d2
dx2
i qS
i (xi) = 0 or easier through qS
i (xIP
i ) = (Hi − Gi)/2,
which reﬂects the inﬂection point xIP
i
of the quality function,
i.e., up to this point, the quantity-quality trade-off (which is
nothing more than the ﬁrst derivative of the quality function,
i.e.,
d
dxi qS
i (xi)) increases and, concurrently, the quality drops
to half of its value. Both equations lead to the same solution,
namely ki = ln(Ci)/xIP
i .
Figure 2. Suppliers’ quality and price functions in our scenarios.
Incidentally, in the inﬂection point xIP
i , the quantity-quality
trade-off (hereafter abbreviated to τ IP
i
) ﬁnds its maximum
because the ﬁrst derivative is bell shaped with a peak at
xIP
i . For the sake of simplicity, we set the inﬂection points
xIP
1
= 20, xIP
2
= 40, and xIP
3
= 60 or rather their quantity-
quality trade-offs τ IP
1
= −0.0575, τ IP
2
= −0.0218, and
τ IP
3
= −0.0102 for our scenarios (see Table II).
Supplier price
The suppliers do not only distinguish from each other in
terms of the quality, but also in terms of the price they
charge. In regard to the supplier price considered in our model,
Figure 2 depicts the price functions for our three supplier
types. As mentioned before, a supplier price curve results, for
instance, from a combination of various effects of learning,
volume, and specialization. Therefore, we set the suppliers’
price parameters in such a way that supplier type 2 can
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

offer the buyer a relative price reduction that is twice as
high as that of type 1, while supplier type 3 can provide a
relative price reduction that corresponds to the sum of supplier
type 1 and 2. This way of proceeding is also applied to the
quality functions where the inﬂection points of the quality
functions are determined. Note that our price (quality) function
has a non-linear quantity-price (-quality) trade-off and, hence,
cannot be expressed by a constant exogenous parameter. For
the sake of simplicity, we suppose that the price of supplier
type 1/2/3 decreases by 5%/10%/15% each time the volume
is doubled.
Action space
Next, we discuss the choice of the discrete action space A. If
the number of possible quality-price preferences is small, the
buyer’s supplier structure cannot be investigated thoroughly,
and, on the other hand, if the size of the action space is chosen
too large then learning is slowed. Since we guess that the buyer
can only differentiate between a limited number of quality-
price preferences, we vary the parameter αt ∈ A between
0 and 1 in steps of 0.1. Consequently, the buyer has eleven
possible quality-price preferences.
Action-selection policy
For the action-selection policy in our model, we apply a
monotonically decreasing ϵ-greedy policy (see Figure 3). To
do this, we decide for a quadratic function (ϵt = at2 +bt+c).
ϵt = −
97
970200 · t2 −
1
323400 · t + 9703
9702
(11)
To determine a, b, and c, we use the boundary conditions
ϵt=1 = 1, ϵt=TL = 0, and ϵt=TL/2 = 0.75, where the learning
time TL is set to 100. In order to achieve a higher level
of exploration at the beginning than at the end, we set the
third boundary condition to 0.75, which results in a degree of
exploration of about 66% during a simulation run. Note that
the area under the ϵt curve represents the degree of exploration.
Learning rate
With respect to the aforementioned learning rate properties,
we use a linear function (βt = a + bt).
βt = 111
110 −
1
110 · t
(12)
To solve a and b, we apply the boundary conditions βt=1 = 1
and βt=TL = 0.1, where the learning rate at the end of the
learning time is ﬁxed to 0.1 and this value is small enough so
that, in all scenarios, the action-value function converges to a
local optimum.
Discount factor
Another exogenous learning parameter in temporal differ-
ence learning is the discounting factor γ. Since we limit our
research to a manageable number of scenarios, we set γ to
zero, which means, that the buyer does not take future rewards
into account.
Figure 3. The left-hand-side graph shows the ϵt-greedy policy and the right-
hand-side graph depicts the learning rate βt.
Number of time steps and number of simulation runs
In our simulation experiment, the number of time steps to
learn the parameter αt in one simulation run is determined,
on the one hand, based on the size of the action space A and,
on the other hand, based on the degree of exploration. Our
pre-generated simulations suggest a learning time of 100 to
guarantee that the action-value function converges to a local
optimum.
After the complexity of learning the parameter αt has been
determined by the cardinality of the action space and the
degree of exploration, further TS time steps are run through
until the buyer’s volume allocation converges. According to
our pre-generated simulations, 10 time steps are enough to
stabilize the behavior of the buyer’s volume allocation in each
scenario, hence TS = 10. After the buyer’s volume allocation
has stabilized, only the buyer’s quality measurement system
has an impact and, therefore, we simulate further 10 time steps
to take the stochastic ﬂuctuations into account, hence TE = 10.
Note that, in all our examined scenarios, only the last TE time
steps are used to analyze the buyer’s supplier structure.
Finally, we perform 1000 simulation runs for each scenario
because, due to the coefﬁcient of variance (ratio of standard
deviation to the mean), 1000 simulation runs are sufﬁcient
to express the precision and repeatability of this simulation
experiment.
Procurement volume and buyer’s precision of quality
measurement system
Besides the ﬁxed exogenous parameters, we vary the pro-
curement volume X and the buyer’s precision of quality
measurement system σ, which are also set exogenously at the
very beginning of a simulation run. In particular, we model the
procurement volume between 1 and 100 in steps of 1, because
up to about 100 the buyer’s proﬁt in the scenarios is positive,
and, in addition, we study a number of different values of σ
ranging from 0 to 0.1 in steps of 0.01 in order to examine
the effects of the buyer’s suppler structure when the buyer’s
quality measurement system is not working perfect.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we analyze the results of our agent-based
simulation in two main steps: (1) we present the results of our
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

perfect scenarios in which the quality is perfect measured by
the buyer’s quality measurement system. (2) we analyze the
imperfect scenarios when there is a discrepancy between the
actual quality and the observed quality, i.e., the buyer’s quality
measurement system works imperfectly.
In each scenario, we start by analyzing the quality-price
preference parameter αt that the buyer learns during its
learning time. Then, we study the buyer’s supplier structure by
comparing the suppliers’ volumes xS
i,t relative to each other,
because this allows for an easy interpretation and comparison,
and this is also the main objective of this paper.
A. Results of our perfect scenario with σ = 0
Buyer’s quality-price preference
We start by analyzing the buyer’s quality-price preference
αt in our perfect scenario. Figure 4 depicts the means and
standard deviations of αt from 1000 simulation runs, whereby
an extract for the means, standard deviations, and also the
95% percentiles of αt from X = 17 to 23 is given in Table
III. Interestingly, we identify a tipping point at around X = 20
where the buyer’s preference changes from quality to price. Up
to that tipping point, the buyer puts more emphasis on quality
rather than on price and, from which onwards, the buyer’s
quality-price preference αt gets lower, which means that the
buyer prefers a supplier who charge a low price. In the tipping
point, the quality-price preference is approximately 0.5, which
implies that the buyer attaches equal emphasis on quality and
price.
Figure 4. Means and standard deviations of the buyer’s learned quality-price
preferences αt in our perfect scenario with σ = 0 from X = 1 to 100.
TABLE III
MEANS, STANDARD DEVIATIONS, AND THE 95% PERCENTILES OF THE
BUYER’S QUALITY-PRICE PREFERENCES αt IN OUR PERFECT SCENARIO
WITH σ = 0 FROM X = 17 TO 23.
X
Mean of αt
Std. dev. of αt
95% percentile of αt
17
0.98
0.05
[0.9 − 1.0]
18
0.97
0.05
[0.8 − 1.0]
19
0.95
0.07
[0.8 − 1.0]
20
0.52
0.06
[0.4 − 0.6]
21
0.04
0.09
[0.0 − 0.3]
22
0.02
0.05
[0.0 − 0.2]
23
0.02
0.04
[0.0 − 0.1]
In addition, it seems that the quality-price preference αt
slowly converges towards a value close to zero when the
procurement volume increases. This would also be plausible
because, if the procurement volume X becomes larger, the
qualities of all three suppliers drop to almost zero, while the
suppliers’ prices still differ from each other. In such a case,
the buyer prefers a supplier who charge a low price.
Buyer’s supplier structure
In the next step, we analyze the buyer’s supplier structure.
For this purpose, we compare the suppliers’ volumes xS
i,t
relative to each other. Figure 5 reports the means of xS
i,t. In the
tipping point X = 20, every supplier type gets approximately a
third of the procurement volume (speciﬁcally, xS
1,t = 35.58%,
xS
2,t = 33.82%, and xS
3,t = 30.60%). This volume allocation
appears plausible as far as the buyer attaches equal emphasis
on quality and price. To the left of the tipping point, i.e.,
X < 20, supplier type 1 receives about 42% and supplier type
3 about 25% of the procurement volume and, for X > 20,
the buyer’s supplier structure turns over so that the relative
supplier volume of supplier type 1 (type 3) slowly converges
towards 16% (49%) when the procurement volume increases
(cf. Figure 5). Only supplier type 2 always receives about 34%
of the procurement volume.
Figure 5. Means of the relative suppliers’ volumes xS
i,t in our perfect scenario
with σ = 0 from X = 1 to 100.
Simulation results over time
Conclusively, we investigate the quality-price preference
and the supplier structure of the buyer for changes over
time. In the ﬁrst step, we look at the buyer’s quality-price
preference αt. Figure 6 represents the buyer’s learned quality-
price preferences αt over time. For procurement volumes
lower than the tipping point, αt slowly grows towards one,
while for X > 20, αt slowly approaches zero. Note that
the buyer’s quality-price preference remains unchanged after
learning.
In the next step, we look at the buyer’s supplier structure
and, especially, how does the buyer’s supplier structure shape
the way an equilibrium-state is reached over time. For this
purpose, we depict the means of the relative suppliers’ volumes
xS
i,t. Figure 7 shows how an equilibrium-state is achieved
when the procurement volume is given by X = 10, X = 20
(the tipping point), and X = 30. For lower procurement
volumes (X < 20), the buyer needs approximately 1/3 of
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 6. Means of the buyer’s learned quality-price preferences αt in our
perfect scenario with σ = 0 from X = 1 to 100 and t = 1 to 120.
the learning time to separate the supplier types 1 and 3, while
for larger procurement volumes (X > 20), the separation of
suppliers proceeds much faster. In the tipping point, there is
only a small separation, which means that all suppliers receive
approximately the same proportion of the buyer’s procurement
volume.
Figure 7. Means of the relative suppliers’ volumes xS
i,t for selected procure-
ment volumes with σ = 0 from t = 1 to 120. Means are represented by
thick lines, while the 95% percentiles are displayed by thin lines.
B. Results of our imperfect scenarios with σ > 0
For the so far presented results, a perfect level of precision
of the buyer’s quality measurement was considered. In this
section, we investigate scenarios in which the precision of the
buyer’s quality measurement is affected by noise and, hence,
the quality is imperfectly measured.
Buyer’s quality-price preference
Once again, we start with the buyer’s quality-price prefer-
ence. Figure 8 depicts the curve progressions of αt from σ = 0
(minor differences on average between the actual quality and
the observed quality) to σ = 0.1 (major differences).
Figure 8. Means of the buyer’s learned quality-price preferences αt, whereby
σ varies between 0 (light green) to 0.1 (dark green) from X = 1 to 100.
Buyer’s supplier structure
Next, we plot the means of the relative suppliers’ volumes
xS
i,t from σ = 0 to σ = 0.1 (see Figure 9). Based on the
curve progressions in Figure 9, the buyer’s supplier structure
becomes more stable because the value difference around the
tipping point becomes smaller. In the case of σ = 0.1, the
buyer’s supplier structure is smooth enough so that there is no
longer a jumping behavior around X = 20.
In comparison to the perfect scenario (see Table IV), sup-
plier type 1 receives about 3.4% less (3.9% more) procurement
volume to the left (right) of the tipping point and, thus, supplier
type 1 loses (gains) market shares. Oppositely, supplier type
3 obtains about 3.4% more (3.8% less) procurement volume
to the left (right) of the tipping point and, hence, supplier
type 3 gains (loses) a greater share of the market than
the other two suppliers. Note that, again, supplier type 2
receives around 34% of the total procurement volume and,
on average, supplier type 2 is able to continue its position in
the market. Summarized, if the buyer’s precision of quality
TABLE IV
MEANS OF THE RELATIVE SUPPLIERS’ VOLUMES xS
i,t TO THE LEFT AND
RIGHT OF THE TIPPING POINT X = 20 WITH σ = 0 AND σ = 0.1.
X < 20
X > 20
σ = 0
σ = 0.1
Diff.
σ = 0
σ = 0.1
Diff.
xS
1,t
41.3%
37.9%
−3.4%
14.8%
18.7%
3.9%
xS
2,t
33.5%
33.5%
0.0%
34.4%
34.3%
−0.1%
xS
3,t
25.2%
28.6%
3.4%
50.8%
47.0%
−3.8%
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 9. Means of the relative suppliers’ volumes xS
i,t with σ = 0 to 0.1
from X = 1 to 100.
measurement system decreases, supplier type 1 beneﬁts from
large procurement volumes, whereas supplier type 3 proﬁts
from small procurement volumes.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In our paper, we analyze the effects of different procurement
volumes and levels of precision of the buyer’s quality measure-
ment system on the buyer’s supplier structure in a multiple-
sourcing environment using an agent-based simulation.
The results of our simulation experiment show that, in case
the buyer has to learn its own quality-price preference via
temporal difference learning, the buyer puts more emphasis
on quality than on price when a small procurement volume
is allocated among the existing suppliers. On the other hand,
the higher the procurement volume allocated to the suppliers,
the more important the price that is offered to the buyer. In
such a case, the buyer is considered to pursue a cost leadership
strategy searching for sources of cost advantage including, for
instance, economies of scale, proprietary technology, prefer-
ential access to raw materials, and other factors.
Interestingly, we identify a tipping point at which the
buyer’s preference behaviour abruptly changes from quality to
price. Up to that tipping point, the buyer puts more emphasis
on quality rather than on price and, from which onwards, the
buyer prefers a supplier who charges a low price. In the tipping
point, the buyer attaches equal emphasis on quality and price.
Furthermore, we ﬁnd that the poorer the precision of the
quality measurement system and the lower the total procure-
ment volume, the less the buyer orders from suppliers who
focus on a high-quality leadership strategy. As a consequence,
these suppliers lose part of their market shares to other
suppliers. Such noises in the buyer’s quality measurement
system are at the expense of these suppliers, however the
noise stabilizes the buyer’s supplier structure, so that there
is no longer a jumping behavior. Moreover, we ﬁnd that the
buyer separates the different supplier types much faster when
the procurement volume is large and the quality measurement
system works perfectly.
Finally, there are some limitations in this research: (1) for
the sake of simplicity, we assume that the buyer only employs
a limited number of suppliers and, in particular, that the
suppliers’ parameters are constant over time, which may not
adequately represent the true market situation in a multiple-
sourcing environment. (2) the buyer only makes decisions
based on the suppliers’ quality and price in order to allocate
the procurement volume among the suppliers. (3) the suppliers
do not communicate between each other nor they have the
possibility to outsource part of their volumes to other suppliers.
We believe this model provides some useful insights into the
sourcing behaviour of a buyer who allocates different procure-
ment volumes to suppliers who pursue different competitive
strategies.
REFERENCES
[1] M. J. Anzanello, and F. S. Fogliatto, ”Learning curve models and
applications: Literature review and research directions,” International
Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 573–583, 2011.
[2] J. Asker, and E. Cantillon, ”Procurement when price and quality matter,”
The Rand journal of economics, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 1–34, 2010.
[3] G. J. Burke, J. E. Carrillo, and A. J. Vakharia, ”Single versus multiple
supplier sourcing strategies,” European journal of operational research,
vol. 182, no. 1, pp. 95–112, 2007.
[4] R. L. Keeney, and H. Raiffa, ”Decisions with multiple objectives:
preferences and value trade-offs,” Cambridge university press, 1993.
[5] S. E. Kimes, ”The basics of yield management,” Cornell Hotel and
Restaurant Administration Quarterly, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 14–19, 1989.
[6] P. R. Koya, and A. T. Goshu, ”Generalized mathematical model for
biological growths,” Open Journal of Modelling and Simulation, 2013.
[7] M. Lin, Jr. H. C. Lucas, and G. Shmueli, ”Research commentary–too
big to fail: large samples and the p-value problem,” Information Systems
Research, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 906–917, 2013.
[8] B. C. McCannon, ”The quality-quantity trade-off,” Eastern Economic
Journal, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 95–100, 2008.
[9] T. M. Mitchell, ”Machine learning,” 1st ed. New York, NY: McGraw-
Hill Education, 1997.
[10] M. E. Porter, ”The Competitive Advantage: Creating and sustaining
superior performance,” NY: Free Press, 1985.
[11] F. Richards, ”A ﬂexible growth function for empirical use,” Journal of
experimental Botany, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 290–301, 1959.
[12] A. J. Ruiz-Torres, and F. Mahmoodi, ”A supplier allocation model
considering delivery failure, maintenance and supplier cycle costs,”
International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 103, no. 2, pp. 755–
766, 2006.
[13] K. Strmenik, F. Wall, C. Mitsch, and G. M¨odritscher, ”Volume allocation
in multi-sourcing: effects of the quantity-quality trade-off,” Central
European Journal of Operations Research, 2020.
[14] R. S. Sutton, ”Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differ-
ences,” Machine learning, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 9–44, 1988.
[15] J. Wallenius, J. S. Dyer, P. C. Fishburn, R. E. Steuer, S. Zionts, and
K. Deb, ”Multiple criteria decision making, multiattribute utility theory:
Recent accomplishments and what lies ahead,” Management science,
vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1336–1349, 2008.
[16] T. P. Wright, ”Factors affecting the cost of airplanes,” Journal of the
aeronautical sciences, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 122–128, 1936.
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

