Hycon 2 Network Show Case: Sugar Factory 
A. Rodriguez, L. F. Acebes, R. Mazaeda, A. Merino, and C. de Prada 
Systems Engineering and Automatic Control Department 
University of Valladolid 
Valladolid, Spain 
alexander.rodriguez@autom.uva.es; felipe@autom.uva.es; rogelio@cta.uva.es; alejandro@cta.uva.es; prada@autom.uva.es 
 
Abstract— The paper describes a dynamic simulator of a 
scaled sugar factory to use as a reference, or benchmark, to 
design and test complex systems control strategies. The process 
is a subset of a general sugar production process that contains 
both continuous and batch process units and is closely linked 
to the factory energy consumption and the quality of the 
produced sugar. The control problem and the indexes to 
measure the process performance are set up and the simulation 
scenarios, or study cases, are given. Finally, different ways to 
use the simulator from the software point of view are outlined. 
Keywords-process-industry; benchmarking; hybrid systems 
control 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
HYCON2 Network of excellence [1], supported by the 
European Union Seventh Framework Programme, has as 
aims stimulating and establishing the long-term integration 
of the European research community, leading institutions 
and industry in the strategic field of control of complex, 
large-scale, and networked dynamical systems. It has 
identified several applications domains: transportation, 
energy, and biological and medical systems. 
HYCON2 organizes in ten Work Packages (WP), the WP 
V is related to benchmarking for testing and evaluating the 
technologies developed in the network. In particular, two 
show-case 
applications 
corresponding 
to 
real-world 
problems have been selected: the freeway network around 
the Grenoble area and the high-level operation of two 
coupled sections of a sugar factory. 
In the field of process control, different benchmarks can 
be found. Some of them are used to controller design [2][3]; 
others are process-identification oriented (for instance de 
Wiener-Hammerstein benchmark); control plant-wide is 
another subject for some of them [4]. 
In our proposal, a system oriented to design high level 
controllers, which includes plant scheduling, operation and 
economic optimization, has been thought. The sugar factory 
show case considers significant problems and elements of a 
real sugar plant combining sections with continuous and 
batch process units. The low level regulatory control system 
is given and the researchers must concentrate on designing 
methods and algorithms to operate the plant optimally, 
according to a set of economic targets and observing a set of 
constraints. Four performance indexes, to compare the 
solutions, are given. They measure the energy cost, the 
economic profit and the productive capacity of the system. 
The simulation model has been implemented in 
EcosimPro [5][6], that is an Object Oriented Modeling and 
Simulation Tool with similar characteristics of any language 
that 
implements 
Modelica 
[7][8][9], 
reusing 
model 
components from sugar process model libraries [10][11][12]. 
The simulation model cannot be validated versus real data, 
because the real system doesn’t exist. However, the library 
of models has been used to develop a simulator to train plant 
operators of sugar factories. This training simulator has been 
partially quantitative validated with real data and totally 
qualitative validated by managers and control plant operators 
[13][14][15]. 
The simulator is available from EcosimPro or MATLAB-
SIMULINK environment and, additionally, a standalone 
version with a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
(SCADA) interface is available too. The standalone version 
can communicate with any software tool that works as an 
OLE for Process Control (OPC) server [16]. 
The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, a 
description of the simulated process and the control problem 
is outlined; Section 3 explains the show case performance 
indexes and study cases; Section 4 deals with the computer 
subjects and, finally, some conclusions are given. 
II. 
PROCESS DESCRIPTION 
A. Sugar Production Process 
A typical beet sugar factory (Fig. 1) is divided in two 
great sections: the Beet End and the Sugar End [17][18]. The 
Beet End contains the diffusion, purification and evaporation 
stages. The sucrose is extracted from beets by using a 
diffusion process, the removal of as many impurities as 
possible is carried out in the purification section and the 
concentration of the resulting sucrose solution is achieved in 
the evaporation section, which uses live steam. In the Sugar 
End is where the crystallization of the dissolved sucrose is 
carried out to deliver the white sugar grains with commercial 
value. The crystallization is performed in batch and 
continuous crystallizers that are heavy consumers of the 
steam, which is served by the evaporation. Other parts of a 
standard sugar factory are the boilers and turbo generators, 
where fuel or gas is used to obtain electric energy and live 
steam, and the pulp dryer, where the exhausted beets are 
dried to obtain food for the cattle. 
For the show case, only a subset of the real process has 
been selected: the evaporation and crystallization sections. 
Although the proposed process is smaller than a real factory, 
the control problem is very significant, because of the great 
interaction between sections, the continuous mode operation 
of the evaporation section and the semi-batch operation in 
the crystallization one. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 1. Schematic of a sugar factory 
B. Evaporation Section 
The aim of this section is to increase the Brix (matter 
content in sugar solution) of the juice (sugar solution), by 
evaporating the water to obtain syrup. The required heat is 
provided by a flow of fresh steam that comes from the 
boilers after passing by electricity generating turbines. 
Usually, the evaporators are grouped in four or more effects. 
An effect is a cascade of evaporators, in which the juice 
flows from one to other one, but using the same source of 
steam. 
In the show case, each effect contains only one 
evaporator and it’s a three effect arrangement (Fig. 2), in 
which the juice circulates in series increasing its Brix up to a 
certain value. The first evaporator receives its heating steam 
from the boilers, but the heating of the other evaporators is 
provided by the steam produced in the previous one. The 
scheme is energy efficient in the sense that allows the 
multiple reuse of the live steam that comes from the factory 
boilers. It is important to mention that part of the steam 
produced in each evaporator is redistributed in the factory to 
fulfill other technological duties. In particular, the most 
important consumers of the steam generated by the 
evaporation section (steam I and II) are the crystallizers of 
the Sugar End. 
Figure 2. The show case Evaporation Section 
With respect to the low level control structure, the Brix 
of the syrup at the output is controlled by a cascade 
arrangement of two Proportional Integral and Derivative 
(PID) controllers; the outer loop (CC) gives the reference of 
the inner loop (PC), which controls the vacuum pressure in 
the last effect chamber. Besides, the juice level in the 
evaporators and in the feeding tank is maintained by level 
controllers (LC). Additionally, there is a controller to set the 
value of the fresh steam pressure (PC). 
C. Crystallization Section 
In modern factories, the Sugar End, usually, has an 
architecture consisting of three stages: the first, or A stage, is 
dedicated to the production of commercial white sugar 
crystals and the rest to the exhaustion of the remaining syrup. 
 
Figure 3. The show case Sugar End (Crystallization Section) 
The show case, exclusively, considers A stage (Fig. 3). 
The syrup from the evaporation stage is sent to the melter 
plus a flow of recycled rich syrup and another one of low-
quality sugar from the B and C stages, with the purpose of 
obtaining the so called standard liquor. The latter is 
discharged in a storage tank, which serves the feed syrup to 
the crystallizers or pans (it should accommodate the peaks in 
demands from the crystallizers with the continuous supply of 
standard liquor from the melter). These vacuum pans (Fig. 4) 
operate in batches, following a recipe with a set of stages 
using steam from the evaporation section to further 
concentrate the syrup until over-saturation stage. After 
discharge, the mixture of crystals and non-crystallized syrup 
(mother liquor) is stored in an agitated tank called strike 
receiver that feeds to another tank that supplies the mother 
liquor to a set of centrifuges where white sugar crystals are 
separated from the syrup. The centrifuges, that are modeled 
as a continuous component, use a small amount of water in 
their operation and produce two types of syrups (honeys): a 
high purity one, that is recycled to the melter, and a low 
purity one that is processed further in other stages (B and C) 
and finally is partly recycled to the melter too as a flow of 
low quality sugars (B and C). The recipes of the crystallizers 
are automated with Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs) 
and the inner control loops are implemented with PIDs (level 
and pressure). In manual mode, the operator only decides 
when then recipe is started and the type of heating steam. 
Thus, the consumed steam and syrup and produced mother 
liquor by each crystallizer are not homogeneous and they 
depend on the stage (Fig. 5). 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

At the Sugar End, another three PIDS control the flow of 
massecuite (mother liquor), to the centrifuges and the levels 
of the melter and the tank that feeds the centrifuges (Fig. 3). 
However, the storage tank and the strike receiver levels are 
not controlled. Then, the high level operation of the process 
must guarantee that are kept within certain limits. 
 
Figure 4. Sugar Batch Crystallizer 
 
 
Figure 5. Flows (kg/s) and level (%) in a crystallizer cycle 
 (time in hours: minutes: seconds) 
D. Operation 
The process operation is complex because both sections 
interact strongly in terms of mass flow and energy. For a 
given flow of juice before evaporation, the flow of produced 
syrup and the fresh steam demands depend on the set points 
for the fresh steam pressure and syrup concentration (Brix) 
controllers as well as on the steam demands from the 
crystallizers. On their side, each crystallizer’s cycle time and 
its variable profiles depend on the concentration and purity 
of the evaporation syrup as well as on the pressure of the 
steam provided. Purity is defined as the % of sucrose of the 
solids dissolved in the syrup and affects also the % of 
crystals obtained in a batch. The cycle time determines the 
syrup processing capability of the Sugar End, which 
obviously limits the maximum allowable syrup flow from 
the evaporation. Other technical variable that affects the 
working of the Sugar End is the ratio water/massecuite in the 
centrifuge. Increasing it, the purity and flow of the rich syrup 
recycled are increased and it means that the cycle time of the 
crystallizers is decreased but, on the other hand, it decreases 
directly the white sugar crystals flow from the centrifuge. 
Thus, there are many choices of a set of key variables that 
determine the right operation of both sections, both from the 
point of view of the process working and its economy. 
On the other hand, the crystallizers must be well 
sequenced. For instance, they mustn’t start at the same time 
because it would imply a great initial demand of syrup and 
steam from the evaporation that it may not be supplied. 
Besides, the storage tank in the crystallization could empty 
and the strike receiver in the discharge stage could overflow. 
Fig. 5 shows the peaks in the steam and juice demand at the 
beginning of each cycle crystallizer and the peak in the 
discharge of mother liquor at the end of the same cycle). 
 
Figure 6. Fresh steam flow (kg/s) 
 
Figure 7. III effect level controller (PV: Process Variable (%), SP: Set 
Point, OP: Output to Process (%)) 
 
Figure 8. Storage tank level (%) 
For instance, Fig. 6 shows the fresh steam demands when 
the crystallizers are well synchronized. The peaks, that are 
due to start a crystallizer, are homogeneously distributed 
along the time and their values are assumable by the boilers. 
Fig. 7 displays the level in the last evaporation effect and the 
control signal of the valve that govern the flow of syrup. This 
flow goes down when a crystallizer starts, because the 
increase of the steam demand of the crystallizer (see Fig. 5) 
affects to the Brix and pressure at the last effect that are 
controlled variables. Fig. 8 shows the level of the storage 
tank. When a crystallizer starts, it demands a great amount of 
syrup (see Fig. 5) and the produced syrup in the last effect 
decreases. Then, the level of this tank goes down. Later, this 
level recovers its value when the demand of syrup decreases 
and the produced syrup gets back its average value. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Summarizing, although the process is automated using 
PID and PLC controllers, some variables must be handled by 
a high level controller (or qualified operators) to assure that: 
1. All the juice before evaporation will be processed, 
ensuring that the levels of uncontrolled buffer tanks 
are kept within certain limits. 
2. Additionally, the process operation must minimize 
the energy consumption, trying to obtain a smooth 
and homogeneous fresh steam demand to avoid 
problems in boilers and turbo generators. 
3. And, if possible, maximize the produced sugar. 
To obtain these aims, the main decision variables are: 
1. A set of set point controllers: (a) the fresh steam 
pressure to the evaporation from the boilers, Pfs; (b) 
the syrup concentration from the last evaporator, Bs 
and (c) the massecuite flow to the centrifuges, Wm. 
2. The ratio water/massecuite in the centrifuge (Rw/m). 
3. And, for each crystallizers, the scheduling, that is, 
when the operation of each batch cycle starts; and 
the selection of the steam source (steam I or II). 
Finally, the control objectives must be met in the 
presence of disturbances. The main ones are changes in the 
amount of juice before evaporation (Wj), or its composition 
(Brix, Bj, and purity, Puj). 
III. 
STUDY CASES 
In this section, the study cases to test the different control 
algorithms are described. Each study case is characterized by 
some unknown operating boundary conditions and a process 
performance criterion. 
A. Process Performance Criteria 
The following criteria or targets have been defined: 
First: Operate the plant to assure that uncontrolled buffer 
tanks levels (storage tank and strike receiver) are kept within 
certain limits and to maintain the value of the Brix and purity 
of the standard liquor within a maximum and minimum 
value due to technological requirements of the crystallizers. 
               
;              
;      
Min
Max
Min
Max
Min
Max
Min
M
st
st
st
sr
sr
sr
sl
sl
sl
ax
l
sl
s
s
l
L
L
L
L
L
L
Pu
Pu
Pu
B
B
B
<
<
<
<
<
<
<
<
            (1) 
Lst and Lsr are the storage tank and strike receiver levels. 
Pusl and Bsl are the purity and Brix of the standard liquor. 
Second: Minimize the energy to the system per kg of 
produced sugar (J1, kJ/kg) and the variance of the normalized 
power to the system (J2), respecting the first target. 
( )
( )
0
1
0
 
  
T
T
sugar
E t dt
J
W
t dt
= ∫
∫
        (2)    
( )
( )
2
2
2
0
1
1  
 
T
E t
J
dt
T
E t
σ


=
−






=
∫
   (3) 
T is the total simulation time.
Wsugar
is the produced sugar 
flow. E(t) is the instantaneous power or energy flow to the 
first evaporator, and, 
( )
E t  is the moving average of E(t). 
                            
( )
1
( )
  
t
t
t
E t
E
d
t
τ
τ
−∆
= ∆ ∫
                              (4) 
Being Δt, the time interval for the moving average and 
it’s equal to the total cooked time in one batch crystallizer 
(normally 9.000 seconds). 
Third: Maximize the average profit per kg of produced 
sugar (
3J (€/Kg)), respecting the first criterion: 
               
( )
( )
(
)
( )
0
3
0
·
·
·
( )
 
T
sugar
j
T
sugar
W
t
E t
W t
dt
J
W
t dt
δ
β
γ
−
−
= ∫
∫
               (5) 
Where ,
,
δ β γ  are the prices of the produced white sugar 
in centrifuges (€/kg), consumed energy (€/kW) and juice 
before evaporation (€/kg), respectively. 
Fourth: Maximize the average value of the flow of juice 
before evaporation (
4
J (Kg/s)), respecting the first criterion. 
                                   
( )
0
4
1
   
T
j
J
W
t dt
T
= ∫
                              (6) 
This target is oriented to maximize the production 
capacity of the process, respecting the constraints. 
In the simulation, these four indexes are calculated and 
their values are available for the users (Fig. 9). 
Figure 9. Performance indexes at the simulator interface 
B. Operation Conditions 
Two days was selected as the total simulation time of 
each exercise. The cooked time in a crystallizer is about 2 
hours and a half, thus, the total simulation time must be 
broad enough to consider several batches. Thus, when the 
boundary conditions are modified, changing of a stationary 
point to another one spends several hours. 
Two different boundary conditions are specified. 
Operation condition one (OP1): 
a. 
The system remains in a stationary state 6 hours. 
b. Then, during 36 hours, the process is disturbed with 
variations in the flow, Brix and purity of the juice 
before evaporation. 
c. 
Here, the initial values of the boundary conditions 
are restored and the simulation continues during 6 
hours more until the end of the exercise. 
Operation condition two (OP2): it is similar to the OP1, but 
the flow of the juice before the evaporation is not disturbed. 
Now, it must be managed by the high level controller. 
Fig. 10 shows the trend of the uncontrolled level of 
storage tank when the operation condition one is selected and 
no actions are made over the process (red line). It can be 
seen that the storage tank level will go through the limits 
(20-80%). However, the black line shows the same situation 
with some changes in the crystallizer scheduling to satisfy 
the first target. Now, the performance of the uncontrolled 
tank level is better than in the previous situation and the 
constraint is satisfied. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 10. Red/black (without/with control actions 
C. Summary of Study Cases 
Thus, based on the operation conditions and the 
performance criteria, four benchmark study cases have been 
proposed (Table 1). Each study case is defined by one 
operation condition and one operation criterion or target. 
TABLE I.  
STUDY CASES 
 
Operation 
Variables 
Study 
Case 
Conditions 
Criteria 
Manipulated 
Disturbance 
1 
OP1 
First 
Psf, Bs; rw/m; Wm; 
Pans scheduling 
Wj, Bj; Puj; 
2 
OP1 
Second 
Idem study 
case 1 
Idem study 
case 1 
3 
OP1 
Third 
Idem study 
case 1 
Idem study 
case 1 
4 
OP2 
Fourth 
Idem study 
case 1 plus Wj 
Bj; Puj 
The controller for the study cases number 1, 2 and 3, that 
isn’t implemented in the software, should have the same data 
interface (Fig. 11). The disturbances are the same ones (flow, 
Brix and purity of the fresh juice) and the difference is the 
target function. The study case number 1 looks for a 
controller that operates the process subject to constraints in 
some variables without target function. The controller for the 
study case number 2 must operates the process subject to the 
same constraints and minimize the J1 and J2 indexes, that are 
related with the energy consumption. Finally, the controller 
for the study case number 3 must operates the process 
subject to such constraints and maximizes the J3 index that is 
related with the greatest profit. 
 
Figure 11. Control Structure for Operation Condition 1 
For the study case number 4, the data structure of the 
high level controller changes, because the flow of the juice 
before evaporation is considered a manipulated variable, 
instead a disturbance. Now, the operation target to maximize 
is the number four (J4). In this case, the controller must look 
for the maximum production capacity of the system with 
disturbance on the Brix and purity of the juice. 
IV. 
SOFTWARE 
The model and control system of the show case process 
is programmed in the simulation environment EcosimPro, 
which incorporates state-of-the-art simulation features. The 
model can be simulated, and the controller could be 
implemented, within the EcosimPro software environment 
but, for those that prefer to use other tools, and in order to 
facilitate the operation of the process from a graphic Human 
Machine Interface (HMI), a system with the architecture 
represented in Fig. 12 has been set up. It combines a real 
time execution of the simulation with a SCADA system to 
supervise and control the simulation. The communication 
between both elements is made by OPC. Additionally, using 
OPC, it’s possible to connect the simulator and the SCADA 
with other external devices and software tools.  
 
Figure 12. Show case software architecture 
The SCADA system, called EDUSCA [19], was 
developed at the University of Valladolid and it’s a not 
licensed tool that runs on PC over Windows OS. It has a 
friendly configuration environment and can work versus 
simulations or real process. It’s used in a training simulator 
for control operators of sugar factories carried out by the 
Center of Sugar Technology and in some university labs. An 
example of the SCADA HMI is shown in Fig. 13. 
 
Figure 13. SCADA HMI, a synoptic of the Sugar End section 
There are different display boxes associated to the 
process variables showing their values and units. Pushing on 
them, a graphic with the time evolution of the variable is 
displayed (some instances can be seen in Fig. 6-8). If the 
variable is a manipulated one of a control loop, full graphical 
information of the loop parameters and variables is provided. 
In order to facilitate the operation of the process, an alarm 
system is included, so if any variable goes beyond the 
allowed limits the process, the operator is warned with an 
alarm. An alarm register and historic data storage is 
maintained as well. The HMI includes the possibility of 
entering changes in previously defined modifiable process 
variables, set point controllers and scheduling of the 
crystallizers. By default, the simulator runs in real-time, the 
user can to speed-up its execution by a certain rate. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Besides, it is possible to interact with the simulator in 
different ways to the ones previously exposed (here, 
communication details are not given). In particular, it is 
possible to use the simulator from the MATLAB-
SIMULINK environment. First, it is possible to connect the 
OPC server simulator to MATLAB-SIMULNK using the 
OPC toolbox, being MATLAB-SIMULNK a standard OPC 
client. Second, the EcosimPro simulation code, not the OPC 
server simulator, can be called directly from MATLAB using 
some functions provided for this purpose.  
Summarizing, the user can access to the show case 
simulator using the next methods: 
a) From the EcosimPro environment, if a program 
license is available. 
b) EcosimPro simulation code can be used from 
MATLAB using a toolbox supported by EcosimPro. 
c) It can be used the set formed by the OPC show case 
simulator and the SCADA system, that it is supplied 
by the developers. 
d) The OPC show case simulator can be connected with 
any OPC client. It is possible to link it with several 
OPC clients simultaneously.  
e) Especially, the OPC show case simulator can be 
connected with the OPC clients provided by 
MATLAB or SIMULINK. 
The first two methods implies run the simulation as fast 
as possible, but in the last three methods it runs in real-time, 
being possible to speed-up its execution to a certain rate. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper has showed the result of one and a half year of 
work to develop a complex dynamic simulator of a standard 
industrial process. The simulator, that includes the low level 
control system, is thought to serve as a test bench of plant-
wide control algorithms. The proposed control problem 
implies plant scheduling, operation and economic targets. 
Several scenarios and different performance indexes are 
defined. The combinations of these simulated scenarios with 
the targets constitute the so called study cases. 
The simulation program can be used for different 
methods and tools. The MATLAB users can run the 
simulator easily. The simulator can run in real time or to a 
certain rate of real time, but in a standard PC, due to the 
model complexity, the acceleration rate is not greater than 
20. In this way, a study case of 48 hours of real time can 
need about 2 hours of simulation time (the computational 
load of the high level plant controller is not considered). 
The system can be used for the scientific community 
interested in the plant-wide control linked to economic 
requirements. Supplementary material and software of the 
sugar factory show case can be downloaded [20]. 
Researchers are invited to use this benchmark to test their 
control algorithms for hybrid complex systems. 
As, strictly, benchmarking means comparing a solution to 
a reference, the exposed simulator cannot be still consider a 
benchmark, because a reference control system solution is 
not provided. Thus, the authors are working to supply a 
reference solution as soon as possible. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors are grateful to the European Union Seventh 
Framework Programmed [FP7/2007-2013] for its support 
under grant agreement n°257462 HYCON2 Network of 
excellence and to the Spanish sugar producers (ACOR and 
Azucarera Iberia) for their support to carry out this research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
HYCON2-Highly-complex and networked control systems [Online]. 
Available: http://www.hycon2.eu, [retrieved: july, 2013]. 
[2] 
R.Chylla and D. Haase. “Temperature control of semi-batch polyme-
rization reactors”. Comput. Chem. Eng., vol. 17, 1993, pp. 257–264. 
[3] 
G. Pellegrinetti and J. Bentsman. “Nonlinear Control Oriented Boiler 
Modeling–A Benchmark Problem for Controller Design”. IEEE Tran-
sactions on Control Systems Technology, Vol. 4, n 1, January 1996, 
pp. 57–64. 
[4] 
U. Jeppsson et al. “Towards a benchmark simulation model for plant-
wide control strategy performance evaluation of WWTPs”. Water 
Science & Technology, Vol 53, No 1, 2006, pp. 287–295, Q IWA 
Publishing. doi: 10.2166/wst.2006.031. 
[5] 
ESA International. “EcosimPro User Manual, EL Modelling Guide”. 
EA International and ESA, 2011. 
[6] 
F. Vazquez, J. Jiménez, J. Garrido, and A. Belmonte. “Introduction to 
Modelling and Simulation with ECOSIMPRO”. Ed. Pearson 
Educación, 2010. 
[7] 
F. Cellier. “Continuous systems modeling”. Ed. Springer Verlag, 
New York, USA, 1991. 
[8] 
P. Fritzson. “Introduction to Modeling and Simulation of Technical 
and Physical Systems with Modelica”. Ed. Wiley-IEEE Press, 2011. 
[9] 
Modelica Association [Online]. Available: https://www.modelica.org, 
[retrieved: july, 2013]. 
[10] R. Mazaeda, C. de Prada, A. Merino, and L.F. Acebes. “Librería de 
Modelos Orientada a Objetos para la Simulación del Cuarto de 
Azúcar: Cristalizador Continuo por Evaporación al Vacío”. RIAI. 
Vol. 8, num. 1, 2011, pp: 100-111. 
[11] R. Mazaeda, C. de Prada, A. Merino, and L.F. Acebes. “Hybrid 
Modelling of Batch Centrifuges as Part of a Generic Object Oriented 
Beet Sugar Mill Library”. Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory. 
Volume 22, March 2012, pp. 123-145. 
[12] A. Merino, L.F. Acebes, R. Mazaeda, and C. de Prada,. “Modelado y 
Simulación del proceso de producción del azúcar”. RIAI. Vol. 6, 
num. 3, 2009, pp: 21-31. 
[13] L.F. Acebes, A. Merino, R. Mazaeda, R. Alves, and C. de Prada. 
“Advanced dynamic simulators to train control room operators of 
sugar factories”. International Sugar Journal. Vol. 113, NO. 0000, 
October 2011, pp. 18-25. 
[14] R. Mazaeda, A. Merino, C. de Prada, and L.F. Acebes. “Sugar End 
Training Simulator”. International Sugar Journal. Vol. 114, NO. 
0000, April 2011, pp. 42-49. 
[15] A. Merino, R. Mazaeda, L.F. Acebes, R. Alves, and C. de Prada. 
“Beet End Training Simulator”. International Sugar Journal. Vol. 114, 
NO. 0000, May 2012, pp. 34-40. 
[16] OPC Foundation [Online]. Available: http://www.opcfoundation.org, 
[retrieved: july, 2013]. 
[17] R. A. Mc Ginnis “Beet sugar technology”. 3d Edition. Beet Sugar 
Development Foundation. Colorado, USA, 1982. 
[18] P. Poel, H. Schiweck, and T. Schwartz. “Sugar Technology. Beet and 
Cane Sugar Manufacture”. Dr. Albert Bartens, 1998. 
[19] R. Alves, J.E. Normey-Rico, A. Merino, L.F. Acebes, and C. de Prada 
(2005) “OPC based distributed real time simulation of complex 
continuous processes”. Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory. 
Volume 13, Issue 7, October 2005, pp. 525-549. 
[20] HYCON2 
WP5 
sugar 
show 
case 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://hycon.isa.cie.uva.es/home.html, [retrieved: july, 2013]. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

