The Impact of Control Setpoints on Building Energy Use 
 
Stephen Treado, Xing Liu
Department of Architectural Engineering 
Pennsylvania State University 
University Park, PA, USA 
Emails: {streado, xul121}@psu.edu
 
 
Abstract—This paper examines the impact of building Heating, 
Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) control system 
setpoints such as temperature and flow rate on total building 
energy requirements, for a typical system design and 
operation. Through the analysis focused on a summer and 
winter operating condition, the range of energy usage and the 
potential for minimizing building energy requirements by 
dynamically adjusting setpoints are presented in this paper. 
Keywords-buildings; cooling; control systems; energy; heating; 
HVAC; optimization  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The increasing demand of air-conditioning and the 
energy crisis during the last decades have led to a surge of 
attention and there is no doubt that the improvement of the 
Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning (HVAC) control 
system is one of the effective solutions to realize sizable 
energy-saving for the building sector. The aim of HVAC 
control is to provide a comfortable, safe, healthy and 
productive environment for occupants using the least 
energy. Significant energy saving potential exists for 
building systems during operation with the help of current 
technology such as intelligent, adaptive or model predictive 
control. The development of this kind of technology has led 
to the possibility of the improvement of building operational 
performance. However, it is difficult to evaluate the 
potential or effectiveness of the new control strategies 
without first gaining a better understanding of the range of 
operating 
conditions 
possible 
for 
any 
particular 
building/HVAC system combination. That is, the amount of 
energy savings is a function of both the actions of the new 
control strategy and the fundamental capabilities of the 
HVAC system. In its most basic form, a building control 
system can do no more than monitor sensors, apply logic 
and manipulate actuators. Thus, the main objective of the 
work described in this paper is to clearly identify and define 
the space within which the building/HVAC combination is 
capable of operating in order to enable the determination of 
both energy saving potential and optimal setpoints and 
control logic. While this is not specifically an optimization 
effort, i.e. we are not seeking a single optimal solution since 
it is understood that setpoints and control logic may need to 
be adjusted on a dynamic basis, the primary metric utilized, 
namely total building energy usage, can be considered as an 
objective function. 
The content is organized as follows. Section II reviews 
the recent studies. Section III presents the models adopted 
and simulation work. Section IV gives the results and 
Section V presents the conclusions. 
II. 
LITERATURE RIEVEW 
Simulation is taken as one of the oldest but very 
effective tools to engineers in every discipline. Building 
simulation began in the 1960s and became the hot topic of 
the 1970s within the energy research community. For 
nowadays, computer simulation is not only used for the 
building design stage like sizing and configuration design, 
but also adopted for system performance analysis more and 
more widely. Building simulation can be applied to reveal 
the inter-actions between the building itself and its 
occupants, HVAC systems, and the outdoor climate. A large 
amount of work has been done to show how important 
building simulation is in the study of energy performance 
and the design and operation of energy-efficient buildings 
[2]. For examples, Li et al. [8] and Pan et al. [12] analyzed 
and displayed the building energy break-down with 
calibrated models in 2007 and 2009, respectively; however, 
more effort is needed to understand how to obtain optimum 
operating parameters, particularly for building control 
systems. Simulation does provide a good opportunity to 
evaluate the dynamic and energy performance of HVAC 
system control strategy in a convenient and low cost way. 
The control strategy can also be pre-tuned before being 
utilized in the real system with the help of simulation. 
Recent 
research 
also 
showed 
performing 
building 
simulation analysis enabled diagnosis of malfunctioning or 
incorrectly commissioned equipment within the building 
and thus also assisted with future commissioning and tuning 
of the building performance [11].  
Future development and application of information 
technology in the building industry will lead to a completely 
new building design philosophy and methodology [7]. In 
2003, Mathews and Botha [9] conducted simulation with 
three cases and proved that simulation does indeed have the 
ability to improve the thermal and energy management of 
building HVAC systems. A lot of work has been done in the  
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

TABLE I. 
REFERENCE CHARACTERISTICS OF EQUIPMENT 
*T-Temperature, V-Flow Rate, lcw-leaving chilled water, ecf-entering 
condenser fluid, chw-chilled water, cdw-condenser water 
 
TABLE II. 
DEFAULT PARAMETER VALUE FOR SIMULATION 
 
field of building energy consumption simulation but more 
work remains to be done. Traditionally, less attention has 
been put on buildings operation compared with the design 
of a system and its construction/installation. What’s more, 
the simulation software has been evolving steadily over 
recent years. HVAC component and subsystem models are 
now generally well understood and have been the subject of 
a number of researches [4]. Simulation has been extended to 
the use to the building operation process, although it has 
been traditionally regarded as a design tool. 
III. SIMULATIONS 
The simulations that were conducted consisted primarily 
of quasi steady state determinations of hourly incremental 
and total building energy requirements for a range of 
setpoint combinations and exposed to a summer (cooling) or 
winter (heating) condition.  In essence, a grid was 
established which represented a collection of setpoints, and 
annual building energy performance was determined for 
each grid point. The setpoints were constrained to maintain 
proper equipment operating conditions (e.g. temperature, 
mass flow).  The primary objective of the simulations was 
to quantify the range of possible operating points and the 
maximum potential savings, assuming that the control logic 
could direct the HVAC system to the optimal operating 
conditions. Equipment performance was modeled as 
described below. 
Total 
building 
energy 
was 
determined 
utilizing 
performance characteristics of the each component, the 
chiller, the cooling tower and chiller water pump and the 
supply air fan plus the energy input value related to lighting 
and other electrical equipment. The evaluation metric:  
Etotal   =  Elighting  + Eequipment
 + Echiller  + Epump  + Efan
(1) 
 
where: 
E Total = total energy power density 
E Lighting = lighting power density input 
E Equipment = Equipment power density input 
E Chiller = chiller power density input 
E Pump = pump power density input 
E Fan = fan power density input 
The first two terms are specified as follows, according to 
ASHRAE Standard 90.1 IP [1]: 
E Lighting =1.0 w/ft2          
E Equipment =1.5 w/ft2         
 
The system schematic is presented in Figure 1. As the 
diagram shows, one zone of a multiple zone Variable Air 
Volume (VAV) system with energy recovery ventilator was 
studied for this simulation analysis. For HVAC component 
energy consumption analysis, polynomial fits were used 
with representative coefficients, with the important variables 
being chilled water supply temperature, coil loads, chilled 
water flow rate, outdoor air fraction, supply airflow rate, 
supply air temperature and room temperature [6]. These 
component mathematical equation models are commonly 
used in similar applications. For the simulation software, 
Engineering Equation Solver (EES) [5] was selected 
because of its built–in high-accuracy thermodynamic and 
heat transfer parameters and capability for solving design 
problems in which the effects of one or more parameters 
must be determined. Previous research work shows that the 
simplicity of the models and the use of an equation solver to 
run the simulation ensure good robustness and full 
transparency [3]. Table I summarizes the model parameters.  
To minimize the effect from the building itself on the 
simulation results, the zone is simplified as much as 
possible. The case that is used in this simulation is assumed 
to be an office zone has a dimension of 25ft ×30ft with a 9ft 
high ceiling. An overall envelop thermal transfer rate is 
Components 
Selected parameters values 
Chiller 
25000    Capacity (W) 
2.75        COP 
44          T_lcw (℉) 
85           T_ecf (℉) 
111.7     V_chw (gpm)         128.5      V_cdw (gpm) 
Natural Gas 
Boiler 
0.8         Boiler Efficiency 
950         Heat Value 
(Btu/lb) 
Variable 
Volume Fan 
4500      Rated Flow rate 
(gpm) 
1837       Rated Power (W) 
600        Pressure Rise 
(Pa) 
0.7          Fan Efficiency 
Variable 
Speed Pump 
67.02     Rated Flow rate 
(gpm) 
500         Rated Power (W) 
50         Pump head (ft) 
0.66       Pump Efficiency 
Variable 
Value 
Zone Area 
S=750 ft2 
Overall Envelope Heat Transfer 
Rate 
UA = 0.3 Btu/h-ft2-℉ 
Ambient Temperature 
 
T a = 90 ℉ (summer condition) 
T a = 30 ℉ (winter condition) 
Ambient Pressure 
P = 101 atm  
Zone Air Temperature 
T z = 75 ℉ (summer condition) 
T z = 72 ℉ (winter condition) 
Outdoor Air fraction 
F o = 70% 
Solar Heat Gain 
q S =1.5 w/ft2 (summer condition) 
q S =0.8 w/ft2 (winter condition) 
Lighting Heat Gain 
q l = 1.0 w/ft2 
 
Equipment Heat Gain 
q e = 1.0 w/ft2 
 
Occupants Heat Gain 
q o = 1.0 w/ft2 
Ventilation Air Flow rate 
M v = 1.5 cfm/ft2 
Infiltration Air Flow Rate 
M i = 0.1 cfm/ft2 
Heat Exchanger Effectiveness 
U1 = 75% 
Energy Recovery Effectiveness 
U2 = 70% 
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

given. The U value is assumed to be 0.3 Btu/h-ft2-℉. The 
infiltration rate through the exterior walls is set at 
0.1cfm/ft2, which is based on information from [10]. This 
infiltration occurs 24 hours a day. The ventilation rate is 
assumed to be 1.5 cfm/ ft2. For the lighting, equipment and 
occupants heat gain are all assumed equal to 1w/ft2. Also, 
the effectiveness of the energy wheel is assumed to be 
constant throughout the year while it is not true in real word. 
It should change as the outdoor temperature and humidity 
change throughout the year. For this case, the effectiveness 
is set at 70% and the effectiveness for the heat exchanger is 
assumed to be 75%. 
Two representative outdoor conditions were analyzed, 
namely 1) summer condition, and 2) winter condition. And 
the latent load, which is produced when moisture in the air 
goes from a vapor to a liquid state, is not calculated in this 
paper but will be discussed in the future work. In order to 
evaluate the objective function as defined, it is necessary to 
specify some parameters first (Table II).  
Qz   =  qs  + qi  + qt  + qo  + qe  + ql
(2) 
where: 
q s = solar load 
q i = infiltration air load 
q t = envelope thermal load  
q o = occupants load 
q e = equipment load 
q l = lighting load 
 
As shown above, the zone load is made up of solar load, 
lighting load, equipment load, occupants load, infiltration 
air load and envelope thermal load (heat gains to zone were 
assumed as positive). The zone heating and cooling loads 
are met by supplying conditioned air to the zone such that 
the product of the mass flow rate of the supply air, the 
specific heat of air and the temperature change of the air 
from supply (Ts) to return (Tr) are equal to the zone thermal 
load:  
qi   =  m i  · cpair  · ( Tz  – Ta )
                     (3) 
qt   =  UA  · ( Tz  – Ta )
                                 (4) 
Since the heat gain from lighting, equipment occupants 
and solar was already set up, the load values of infiltration 
and envelope thermal conduct can be determined from the 
thermodynamic relationships as described above, the zone 
load can be figured out for the energy consumption 
simulation. 
 For the summer condition simulation, five parameters: 
condenser entering temperature, chilled water supply 
temperature, chilled water mass flow rate, supply air 
temperature and flow rate are set as variables. Ten different 
values are selected for each parameter so there are 50 
different scenarios in total. As only hot water supply 
temperature and mass flow rate, supply air temperature and 
flow rate were changed in the winter condition, 40 group of 
total power density resulted from the simulation. The 
component energy consumption was simulated with 
polynomials, as described below: 
Echiller   =  
Qavail  · ChillerEIRFTemp  · ChillerEIRFPLR
COPref
(5) 
                    (6) 
Ef an   =  fpl  · m design  · 
Prise
etot  · rair
                 (7) 
where: 
Q avail = Q ref × ChillerCapFTemp 
V water = mass flow rate of chilled/hot water 
f pl = air part load factor 
m design = fan design flow rate 
P rise = fan pressure rise 
E tot = fan total efficiency 
ρ air = density of air 
In the heating situation, the fuel input was calculated 
with this equation [13]: 
Fboiler   =  m hw  · cpwater  · 
Thws  – Thwr
BE  · VHI
 · 3600
 (8) 
where: 
BE = boiler efficiency 
VHI = fuel heat value 
      m hw = hot water mass flow rate 
      cp water = specific heat capacity of water 
      T hws = hot water supply temper 
      T hwr= hot water return temperature 
 
 
TABLE III. 
CASE DESCRIPTION FOR THE TWO CONDITIONS 
 
Cases(summer) 
Simulation Description 
Results Range 
1 (group 1-10) 
Increase condenser entering 
temperature (50-68 ℉) 
4.87-5.21 w/ ft2 
2 (group11-20) 
Increase chilled water supply 
flow rate (0.4-0.7 lbm/s )       
4.70-5.40 w/ ft2 
3 (group 21-30) 
Increase chilled water supply 
temperature (41-59 ℉) 
5.14-5.12 w/ ft2 
4 (group 31-40) 
Increase supply air flow rate 
(0.4-0.7 lbm/s)       
4.57-5.27 w/ ft2 
5 (group 41-50) 
Increase supply air temperature 
(59-68 ℉) 
5.24-4.75 w/ ft2 
 
Cases(winter) 
Simulation Description 
Results Range 
1 (group 1-10) 
Increase hot water supply 
temperature (176-194 ℉) 
5.95-5.61 w/ ft2 
2 (group11-20) 
Increase hot water supply flow 
rate (0.4-0.7 lbm/s)       
5.60-5.36 w/ ft2 
3 (group 21-30) 
Increase supply air flow rate 
(0.6-0.8 lbm/s) 
5.36-5.16 w/ ft2 
4 (group 31-40) 
Increase supply air temperature 
(85-92 ℉) 
5.12-4.88 w/ ft2 
 
Epump   =  vwater  · 
PumpHead
TotalEf f iciency
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

IV. 
RESULTS 
Figure 2 illustrates the power density for five different 
cases from largest to the smallest in the summer condition. 
The different colors indicate the breakdown of the 
electricity usage. Lighting and equipment represent fixed 
loads, while chiller, pump and fan energy, respectively, vary 
in response to the each specific combination of setpoints.  
Variation in total building energy for the summer condition 
is 18%. This indicates that use of the best setpoint 
combination could achieve an 18% reduction in total 
building 
energy 
compared 
to 
the 
worst 
setpoint 
combination. As we can see, HVAC system (including 
chiller, cooling tower pump, chiller water pump and supply 
air fan) is the biggest electric consumer in the building, 
which accounts 
for around 45% of total energy 
consumption, while lighting and equipment account for 
around 22% and 33% of the total electricity consumption, 
respectively. According to Table III, the maximum power 
density can reach 5.40w/ft2 when the chilled water flow rate 
at the biggest value and a small supply air flow rate can 
decrease the energy consumption to 4.57w/ft2. These 
calculations could be repeated at any desired interval to 
enable the continuous reassessment and adjustment of 
setpoints. 
Figure 3 illustrates the power density for four different 
cases from the largest value to smallest value in winter 
condition. In this case, the tradeoff is between boiler fuel 
inputs, pump and fan power. As the natural gas boiler 
replaced the electrical chiller for conditioning the zone 
temperature, the electricity usage is decreased, because 
cooling tower pump is not needed, so the pump energy 
percentage is also reduced. As a result, the HVAC system 
(including pump and fan) only accounts about 30% of total 
electricity consumption. 
The best and worst scenarios happened when the hot 
water flow rate is the highest and when the supply air flow 
rate is lowest respectively, which was similar to the results 
for the summer condition.  The largest power density is 
5.95w/ft2 and the smallest value is 4.88 w/ft2 based on Table 
III. The maximum potential savings due to setpoint 
manipulation for the winter condition was 22%.  As before, 
this process can be repeated at any desired time interval to 
allow continuous dynamic adjustment of setpoints to 
achieve maximum energy efficiency. 
The 
energy 
performance 
of 
this 
particular 
building/HVAC system combination was evaluated for 
typical summer (cooling) and winter (heating) scenarios in 
order to illustrate the methodology and the energy saving 
potential of dynamic setpoint manipulation. While the 
magnitude of the potential energy savings would be 
expected to vary for different buildings and locations, the 
methodology would still be applicable and useful provided 
the proper information was available to accurately model 
the HVAC system and its components.  The methodology 
could also be used to evaluate the effectiveness of advanced 
control strategies by comparing the energy savings predicted 
or realized by those methods to the maximum potential 
savings identified using the approach described here. 
V. CONCLUSION 
A methodology was developed and demonstrated for 
determining the impact of HVAC control system setpoints 
on the total building energy requirements for different 
building operation situations in the cooling and heating 
seasons in order to quantify the maximum potential energy 
savings due to dynamic setpoint adjustment. According to 
the simulation result, the energy saving potential through 
possible optimum control is substantial and more noticeable 
in winter season. The potential saving can be as high as 18% 
and 22% for cooling and heating, respectively, when 
comparing the best performance with the worst one.  
Different control system setpoints provide different degree 
of energy savings. Minimizing the supply air flow rate is 
shown to be the most effective measure to save electricity 
usage in both cooling and heating season, while a large 
chilled/hot water flow rate will consume the most power. 
The results suggest that control strategies that are capable of 
dynamically 
adjusting 
setpoints 
in 
response 
to 
environmental and occupant conditions can potentially save 
a substantial amount of energy as compared to fixed 
setpoints. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] ASHRAE, 2010. ASHRAE Standard 90.1-2010, Energy 
standard for buildings except low-rise residential buildings, 
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning 
Engineers, Inc. 
[2] S. Bertagnolio, P. Andre, and V. Lemort, “Simulation of a 
building and its HVAC system with an equation solver: 
Application to audit,” Building Simulation, Volume 3, Issue 2, pp. 
139-152, June 2010.  
[3] J. Clarke, J. Cockroft, S. Conner, J.Hand, N. Kelly, R. Moore, 
T. O’Brien and P. Strachan, “Simulation-assisted control in 
building energy management systems,” Energy and Buildings, 
34(9), pp. 933-940, 2002. 
[4] R. C. Clark, “HVACSIM+ Building Systems and Equipment 
Simulation Program Reference Manual,” Published by the U.S. 
Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, National 
Engineering laboratory, Center for Building Technology, Building 
Equipment Division, Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
[5] Engineering Equation Solver, User Manual, F-Chart Software, 
1992. 
[6] Energy Plus, Engineering Reference Manual, U.S. Dept. of 
Energy, 2010. 
[7] T. Z. Hong, S. K. Chou and T. Y. Bong, “Building simulation: 
an overview of developments and information sources,” Building 
and Environment 35 (2000), 2000, pp. 347-361. 
[8] Y. Li, Y. Pan and C. Chen, “Study on energy saving retrofitting 
strategies for existing public building in Shanghai,” Proceedings of 
Energy Sustainability2009, San Francisco, California, USA, 2009. 
pp. 64 
[9] E. H. Mathews and C. P. Botha, "Improved thermal building 
management with the aid of integrated dynamic HVAC 
simulation," Building and Environment 38(12), 2003, pp. 1423-
1429. 
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

[10] F.C. McQuiston and J.D. Spitler, Cooling and Heating Load 
Calculation Manual, 2nd ed., American Society of Heating, 
Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., Atlanta, 
Georgia, 1992. 
[11] G. Osborne, “The contribution of simulation to the building 
tuning process for 2 Victoria Avenue,” Proceedings of Building 
Simulation, Sydney, Australia, November 14-16, 2011. 
[12] Y. Pan, Z. Huang and G. Wu, “Calibrated building energy 
simulation and its application in a high-rise commercial building in 
Shanghai,” Energy and Buildings 39 (2007), 2007, pp. 651-657. 
[13] A. Wienese, “Boiler, Boiler Fuel and Boiler Efficiency,” 
Proceedings of South African Technology Association, 2001, pp. 
75. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. 
System Schematic 
 
 
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 2. 
Total Power Density for Summer Condition 
 
 
Figure 3. 
Total Power Density for Winter Condition 
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

