An Analytical Model to Evaluate the Response Capacity of Emergency Departments 
in Extreme Situations 
Work-in-Progress Paper 
 
Eva Bruballa, Manel Taboada 
Tomàs Cerdà Computer Science School 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB) 
Barcelona, Spain 
e-mail: eva.bruballa@eug.es, manel.taboada@eug.es  
Alvaro Wong, Dolores Rexachs, Emilio Luque 
Computer Architecture and Operating Systems Department 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB) 
Barcelona, Spain 
e-mail: alvaro@caos.uab.es, dolores.rexachs@uab.es, 
emilio.luque@uab.es
 
 
Abstract—One of the most important current problems in the 
healthcare system is the saturation of Emergency Departments, 
due to the increasing demand of the service. Healthcare staff 
often has no margin to absorb the demand in case of an 
unexpected increase of patients entering the service caused by 
an emergency. We aim to evaluate the response capacity of an 
Emergency Department, specifically of doctors, nurses and 
specialist technicians that make up a specific sanitary staff 
configuration, 
facing 
an 
unexpected 
emergency. 
Such 
situations cannot be tested in the real system and simulation is 
the only way to obtain data about them. We present an 
analytical model to obtain information from data obtained 
through the simulation of a Hospital Emergency Department. 
The model defines how to calculate the theoretical throughput 
of a particular sanitary staff configuration, that is, the number 
of patients it can attend per unit time given its composition. 
This index is a reference in order to measure the emergency 
response capacity of the system and also other indicators 
concerning to performance. The data for the analysis will be 
generated by the simulation of any possible scenario of the real 
system, 
taking 
into 
account 
all 
valid 
sanitary 
staff 
configurations and different number of patients entering into 
the emergency service. The designed model offers the 
availability of relevant knowledge to the managers of the 
service to make decisions concerning the composition of the 
sanitary staff configuration in anticipation of extraordinary 
situations. 
 
Keywords—Agent-Based Modeling and Simulation (ABMS); 
Decision Support Systems (DSS); Emergency Response Capacity; 
Emergency Department (ED); Knowledge Discovery. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Currently, given the growing demand of emergency 
medical care, the management of Emergency Departments 
(ED) is increasingly important. Particularly, how to manage 
the increasing number of patients entering into the service is 
one of the most important problems in the ED worldwide, 
because it requires a substantial amount of human and 
material resources, which unfortunately are often too limited, 
as well as a high degree of coordination between them [1][2]. 
A major consequence of the increase of patients entering the 
service is its saturation [3]. This results in an increase in the 
length of stay of patients in the service, which produces a 
general discontent among them, abandoning patients without 
receiving care, limited access to emergency care and an 
increasing patient mortality [4]. 
A sudden or unexpected increase in the entrance of 
patients is an extraordinary, but possible situation, which 
most likely cause the collapse of the service. The response 
capacity of the system in anticipation of such situations is the 
leeway of the sanitary staff configuration to absorb an extra 
demand of the service, and it will depend on its composition. 
Also, the waiting time of patients for medical attention and 
the total time spent in the service, which are indicators of the 
quality of service from users’ point of view, will heavily 
depend on the configuration composition. 
Even though computerized systems in hospitals provide 
more and more real data, there are no real data available to 
analyze concerning this kind of situations, which cannot be 
tested in the real system, but this limitation can be overcome 
through computer simulation. 
There are many examples of computer simulation models 
that support decision-making processes in the health sector 
[5][6][7][8]. Specifically, simulation has been widely used to 
understand causes of ED overcrowding and to test 
interventions to alleviate its effects, and many contributions 
show how simulation can be used as a tool to address this 
problem. An extensive review of this related work is done in 
[9]. 
Our contribution in this context consists on using 
simulation as a sensor of the real system, being our main 
source of data, an ED simulator, based on an Agent-Based 
Modeling (ABM) design of the system [10]. The simulator 
has been developed, verified and validated by the “High 
Performance Computing for Efficient Applications and 
Simulation” Research Group (HPC4EAS) of the Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB) in collaboration with the 
Hospital de Sabadell (Parc Taulí, Barcelona). The input 
parameters that characterize each different scenario in the 
simulation of the real system are the healthcare staff 
configuration, the number of incoming patients, the 
derivation percentage of patients and the period of time 
simulated. In addition, each simulation provides data of the 
length of stay of all patients in all locations in the ED and the 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

number of patients per hour and location [11][12]. The 
number and variety of simulated agents and the different 
possible values for the input parameters of the simulator, 
give a great number of different possible scenarios to 
execute. Each execution will generate the corresponding data 
based on the designed model. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the 
research objectives and methodology; Section III describes 
the Emergency Department process; Section IV presents the 
analytical model proposed. Finally, Section V closes the 
paper with discussion and future work. 
II. 
RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY 
The general purpose of our research is to gain knowledge 
about the variables that may influence in the performance 
and the quality of service of an emergency department from 
the data generated via simulation of the real system for any 
possible situation. 
Specifically, the goal of this work is to develop an 
analytical model to obtain information about the emergency 
response capacity of the system. This will provide staff 
demand prediction models in the service, especially for 
unusual situations, as a reference to make decisions and to 
anticipate solutions in exceptional cases. 
The simulator will be the main source of data. These data 
are the raw material for the analysis. When the user assigns 
them some special meaning, they become information. We 
refer to as knowledge when a model is found or designed, in 
order to interpret this information, and the model represents 
an added value [13]. Therefore, the analysis of the data 
generated by the simulator can give us prediction and 
behavior models for an emergency department for any 
possible situation. In particular, our specific objective is to 
determine the features associated to a sanitary staff 
configuration to ensure an acceptable response capacity in 
anticipation of a possible emergency situation. 
With this objective in mind, an analytical model has been 
designed for the processing and analysis of the raw data 
obtained directly from the simulator. 
III. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE SIMULATION MODEL 
A. Emergency Department Process 
The operation of the ED is based on a process consisting 
of different steps or phases on which each patient is passing 
from its entry into the service until it is discharged, referred 
to another service or admitted to the hospital. 
The ED is divided into different areas, which correspond 
with the different process phases: 
 
Admissions Area: Administrative staff carries out the 
registration of the patient's arrival and the reasons for 
his visit to the emergency service. 
 
Triage Area: Professional sanitary staff identifies the 
priority level with which the patient should be 
treated. 
 
Diagnosis-Treatment Zone: Sanitary staff (doctors, 
nurses and specialist technicians) tries to identify the 
causes of the patient's health problem, and to the 
extent possible, try to solve it. This area is in turn 
divided into different areas or zones (medical room, 
nursing room, care boxes and X-ray laboratories). 
 
Waiting Rooms: Distributed in different zones of the 
ED, where patients wait to be treated at the different 
stages of the process. 
B. Functionality of the Simulator 
The simulator includes the following agents: patients, 
admissions staff, triage nurses, assistant nurses, doctors and 
radiology technicians. In the case of agents representing 
sanitary staff (all except patients), we consider two levels of 
experience (Junior/Senior) and all of them can work in 
parallel on each phase. 
The actions and interactions between the involved agents 
at each process step result in changes of state of the agents, 
which ultimately result in the global operation of the system. 
From the moment when the patient enters the service, the 
simulation runs according to the patient flow shown in 
Figure 1. 
Figure 1.  Patient flow in the emergency department. 
The admission and triage phases are common to all 
patients entering the service, and there is a percentage, 
although low, of patients being referred to other services 
after triage stage. 
In the diagnostic and treatment phase, all patients 
generated by the system go through an initial medical 
exploration phase. Some of them are discharged and leave 
the ED (in blue in Figure 1). The rest remain in the ED and 
they go through a phase of complementary examinations 
carried out by technical staff and/or clinical nurses. After this 
they return again with the doctor who analyzes the test 
results and, finally, they are discharged from the service (in 
red and dashed line in Figure 1).  
For a given number of patients in the service, the 
simulation runs for all possible sanitary staff configurations. 
Each scenario is identified by a sanitary staff configuration 
and a specific input of patients into the service, and the 
output of the simulation brings data concerning the number 
of attended patients, attention time and waiting time for each 
patient in all phases in their way through the service. 
IV. 
ANALYTICAL MODEL 
In order to transform this raw data directly generated by 
the simulation and to visualize the potential information 
which they contain, we have defined a set of indexes that 
characterize numerically each scenario and, in particular, 
each configuration. These defined indexes facilitate the 
treatment and analysis of latent information in data. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

A. Definition of indexes 
As an indicator of the quality of service from the point of 
view of the user, we define an index called Patient attention 
Time (PaT) as the total time a patient is receiving attention 
throughout all stages in the service for a given configuration. 
Another indicator of quality is the Length of Stay (LoS) 
defined as the total length of stay of a patient in the service. 
And finally the Length of Waiting (LoW) is the total waiting 
time of a patient along the service. Note that, 
 
LoS – PaT = LoW and always   PaT ≤ LoS. 
(1) 
Moreover, the Equivalent Patient attention Time for the 
stage i (EpaTi) is defined as the attention time of a patient 
taking into account the possibility of working in parallel for 
the agents in that stage, and (2) shows how is calculated: 
 
      
 
 
 
         
     
   
 
(2) 
where PaTstaff j  represents the value of the attention time 
corresponding to each type of sanitary staff, depending also 
on their level of experience. This values result from the 
simulator’s calibration with the historical real data provided 
by the hospital. 
The slowest phase of the configuration will fix the speed 
at which patients can be attended in the service and also is 
the one which can saturate the system. It is, therefore, the 
equivalent attention time of the slowest phase, which will 
determine the number of patients that a given configuration 
can treat per unit of time, given its composition. We call this 
index Theoretical Throughput (T_ThP), which is an indicator 
patients' attention capacity of the configuration. Expression 
(3) gives its calculation: 
 
      
 
          
(3) 
It is also defined the Real Throughput (R_THP) index as 
the real number of patients treated per unit time. This is an 
index which values are direct output data from simulation. 
Then, the ratio between real and theoretical throughput is 
defined as an indicator of Performance (PeR) of a given 
configuration for a specific scenario: 
 
    
      
        
(4) 
B. Theoretical throughput for the diagnosis and treatment 
phase. 
Unlike other stages of the process of a patient along his 
pass through the emergency department, this is the most 
complex stage due to its nonlinearity. The return of patients 
for 
the 
doctor's 
final 
diagnosis 
after 
completing 
complementary examinations requested by the doctor after 
his first contact with the patient (initial exploration phase), 
must be taken into account. 
We have defined the Theoretical Throughput (T_ThP) as 
an indicator of the attention capacity of each phase, that is, as 
the number of patients that, for its composition, this phase 
could treat.  
In this phase, the attention time of each type of doctor 
depending on their experience (Junior or Senior) and 
depending on the type of care they are doing, either in the 
first step of initial exploration, or in the second, consisting of 
the analyzing of the results of a requested supplementary 
examination, are known and denoted by: 
 
IPaTS/J : Attention time of a senior/junior doctor in 
the Initial Exploration phase (I). 
 
ARPaTS/J: Attention time of a senior/junior doctor in 
the Analysis of  Results phase (AR). 
Given these times, their inverse will give us the number 
of patients that each doctor can treat per unit time 
considered. 
Moreover, we represent with D (Doctors) the total number 
of doctors in the considered combination. Then: 
 
DSI = Number of senior doctors attending patients in 
the Initial Exploration phase. 
 
DSA = Number of senior doctors attending patients 
in the Analysis of Results phase. 
 
DJI = Number of junior doctors attending patients in 
the Initial Exploration phase. 
 
DJA = Number of junior doctors attending patients 
in the Analysis of Results phase. 
We consider a sufficient rate of patients entering into the 
service to ensure that the system is running continuously and 
we assume the system is in a steady state. We also 
contemplate that doctors prioritize the attention of patients 
who have already gone through the first exploration phase, 
and therefore, these patients will be treated at the time the 
doctor has availability. This prevents endless queues at the 
return of patients from their requested complementary 
examination. 
Given all these preliminary considerations, in the specific 
case with only senior doctors, and a percentage pt of patients 
who require additional tests, we obtain the following relation 
of continuity: 
 
   
      
  
    
   
       
(7) 
being          , the total of doctors in the 
configuration. 
Then, the Theoretical Throughput of the doctor’s 
combination is calculated in (8): 
                
   
      
      
   
 
   
       
   
      
(8) 
From (7) and considering           we can obtain 
DSI, and then obtain the value for the Theoretical throughput 
of the diagnosis and treatment phase (diag&trat) in (8), in the 
considered case. 
It rests to make a generalization of the model for any 
possible combination of doctors (senior or junior). 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

C. Emergency Response Capacity of the system 
We define the Emergency Response Capacity of the 
system (ERC) as the capacity of a given configuration to 
provide extraordinary service to patients in an exceptional 
situation related with an unexpected increase in the number 
of patients requiring urgent attention. 
The desired leeway of the sanitary staff configuration to 
absorb an extra demand of the service, can be fix in terms of 
the percentage of patients from its theoretical capacity, that 
the current configuration should be able to absorb, in 
expectation of possible but unexpected situations related to a 
surge in patients entering the service. Considering this, the 
Emergency Response Capacity (ERC) for a given 
configuration, can be defined as: 
 
          
  
    
(9) 
where T_ThP is the theoretical capacity (number of patients 
per unit time) of a specific sanitary staff configuration, or a 
specific phase, and it has been defined in (3). 
This percentage also establishes a maximum throughput 
for the considered configuration, or specifically, for each 
stage, in normal situation, that is: 
 
             
      
    
(10) 
The ultimate goal is to anticipate the best mix between 
each type of sanitary staff (senior/junior), and the total 
number of sanitary people to be able to ensure the 
established emergency response capacity. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The initial contribution of the research is the idea of 
using the simulator of the ED as source of intensive data 
(sensor of the real system), as it brings the possibility of 
obtaining data from simulation of any kind of situations, 
including those which cannot be tested in the real system. 
Other contribution to knowledge of the presented work, 
is the definition of a model to analyze these intensive data to 
obtain the potential information contained in data, related 
with the influence of the staff configuration on the 
efficiency, the performance and the exceptional response 
capacity of the system.  
As immediate future work, in order to check that the 
proposed model works well, we will try to extract 
information from a set of data already available, which 
finally would allow us to obtain relevant knowledge through 
the values of the defined indexes for all the simulated 
scenarios. 
To do this we will begin working with the data generated 
by the execution of the simulation of 93780 different 
scenarios with a reduced version of the simulator [14]: 23445 
different staff configurations and four different inputs for the 
number of patients, one corresponding to a regular situation, 
and the rest simulating other extraordinary situations. The 
generated data processing will consist in obtaining the values 
of the defined indexes in the model, for all the executed 
scenarios. 
The information from the indexes will allow us to see 
similarities between configurations with lower values of 
LoS, which will give us a first approach to the desirable 
features for a configuration regarding the quality of service 
from the point of view of the patient, user of the service. To 
perform this study we plan to use data mining, in particular 
k-means clustering method, which should allow us to 
visualize common characteristics between configurations in 
the same cluster. 
Moreover, the analysis of the emergency response 
capacity and performance of the system, should lead us to 
identify 
the 
characteristics 
of 
the 
most 
suitable 
configurations facing an increase in the number of input 
patients, and therefore, this is desirable knowledge from the 
point of view of the service manager. It could also be 
interesting, for further work, the selection of new useful 
indexes and generation of their models. 
Finally, we aim to translate and extrapolate the model to 
a general model, as the basis for the processing and analysis 
of data generated by the simulator in its extended version 
[15].  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been supported by the MINECO 
(MICINN) Spain under contracts TIN2011-24384 and 
TIN2014-53172-P. 
REFERENCES 
[1] F. Kadri, S. Chaabane, T. Berger, D. Trentesaux, C. Tahom, 
and Y. Sallez, “Modelling and management of the strain 
situations in hospital systems using ORCA approach”, IEEE 
IESM, Rabat, Morocco, October 2013, pp. 1-9. 
[2] F. Kadri, S. Chaabane and C. Tahon, “A simulation-based 
decision support system to prevent and predict strain 
situations in emergency department systems”, Simulation 
Modelling Practice and Theory, vol. 42, March 2014, pp. 32-
52. 
[3] A. Boyle, K. Beniuk, I. Higginson and P. Atkinson, 
“Emergency Department Crowding: Time for interventions 
and policy evaluations”, Emergency Medicne International, 
2012, pp. 1-8 . 
[4] P.C. Sprivulis, J.A. Da Silva, I.G. Jacobs, A.R.L. Frazer and 
G.A. 
Jelinek, 
“The 
association 
between 
hospital 
overcrowding and mortality among patients admitted via 
Western Australian emergency departments”, Medical Journal 
of Australia,  vol. 184, num. 5, 2006, pp 208-212. 
[5] B. Mielczarek and J. Uzialko-Mydlikowska, “Application of 
computer simulation modeling in the health care sector: a 
survey”, Simulation, vol. 88, num. 2, 2010, pp. 197-216. 
[6] M.D. Rossetti, G.F. Trzcinski and S.A. Syverud, “Emergency 
department simulation and determination of optimal attending 
physician staffing schedules”, In: Proceedings of the 1999 
Winter Simulation Conference, 1999, pp 1532-1540. 
[7] F.F. Baesler, H.E. Jahnsen and M. DaCosta, “The use of 
simulation and design of experiments for estimating 
maximum capacity in an emergency room”, In: Proceedings 
of the 2003 Winter Simulation Conference, 2003, pp 1903-
1906. 
[8] S. Samaha, W.S. Armel and D. W. Starks, “The use of 
simulation to reduce the lehgth of stay in an emergency 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

department”, In: Proceedings of the 2003 Winter Simulation 
Conference, 2003, pp 1907-1911. 
[9] A.P. Sharoda, M.C. Reddy and C.J. DeFlitch, “ A systematic 
review of simulation studies investigating emergency 
department overcrowding”, Simulation, vol. 86, num. 8-9, 
2010, pp. 559-571. 
[10] C.M. Macal and M.J. North, “Introductory tutorial: Agent-
based modeling and simulation”, In: Proceedings of the 2013 
Winter Simulation Conference, 2013, pp 362-376. 
[11] M. Taboada, E. Cabrera,  M. L. Iglesias, F. Epelde and E. 
Luque, “An agent-based decision support system for hospitals 
emergency departments”, Procedia Computer Science, vol. 4, 
ICCS 2011,  pp. 1870–1879.  
[12] M. Taboada, E. Cabrera and E. Luque, “Modeling, simulation 
and optimization of resources management in hospital 
emergency departments using the agent-based approach”, 
Advances in Computational Modeling Research, 2013, pp.1-
31. 
[13] L.C. Molina, “Data mining: Torturando a los datos hasta que 
confiesen”, Fundación Oberta de Catalunya (FUOC), 
Barcelona, Spain, 2002.  Retrieved: september, 2015: 
http://www.giaa.inf.uc3m.es/miembros/lmarti/_media/master-
intel%3Bmolina1102.pdf 
[14] E. Cabrera, M. Taboada, M. L. Iglesias, F. Epelde and E. 
Luque, “Simulation optimization for healthcare emergency 
departments”, Procedia Computer Science, vol. 9, ICCS 2012, 
pp. 1464–1473. 
[15] L. Zhengchun, E. Cabrera, D. Rexachs and E. Luque, “A 
generalized agent-based model to simulate emergency 
departments”, The Sixth Intermational Conference on 
Advances in System Simulations, IARIA, Nice, France, 
October 2014, pp. 65-70. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-442-8
SIMUL 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

