Developing an Interface between ANSYS and Abaqus
to Simulate Blast Effects on High Security Vehicles
Enrico Hansen, Nicole Ehlers, Arash Ramezani, Hendrik Rothe
Helmut-Schmidt-University
Holstenhofweg 85
22043 Hamburg
Germany
Email: {e.hansen, ehlersn, ramezani, hr}@hsu-hh.de
Abstract—The present time is shaped by a variety of religious,
political and military conﬂicts. In times of asymmetric warfare
and constantly changing sources of danger from terrorist attacks
and other violence based crimes, the personal need for protection
continues to rise. Aside from military applications there is a
large area for the use of high security vehicles. Outwardly
almost indistinguishable from the basic vehicles, security vehicles
are used for protecting heads of state as well as individuals.
To remain state of the art it is necessary for security ve-
hicles to permanently continue to develop protection against
modern weapons and ammunition types. It is enormously cost
intensive to check any new technology by ﬁring or blasting of
real vehicles. Therefore, more and more calculations of new
security concepts and materials are carried out by numerical
computer simulations. However, product simulation is often being
performed by engineering groups using niche simulation tools
from different vendors to simulate various design attributes. The
use of multiple vendor software products creates inefﬁciencies
and increases costs. This paper will present the analysis and
development of an interface between the most common computer-
aided engineering applications ANSYS Autodyn and Abaqus to
exploit the advantages of both systems for the simulation of blast
effects.
Keywords–CFD-FEM coupling methods; fully automatic struc-
ture analyses; high-performance computing techniques; blast load-
ing; vehicle structures.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the security sector, the partly insufﬁcient safety of people
and equipment due to failure of industrial components are
ongoing problems that cause great concern. Since computers
and software have spread into all ﬁelds of industry, extensive
efforts are currently being made in order to improve the safety
by applying certain computer-based solutions. To deal with
problems involving the release of a large amount of energy
over a very short period of time, e.g., explosions and impacts,
there are three approaches, which are discussed in [1].
As the problems are highly non-linear and require in-
formation regarding material behavior at ultra-high loading
rates, which is generally not available, most of the work is
experimental and may cause tremendous expenses. Analytical
approaches are possible if the geometries involved are rel-
atively simple and if the loading can be described through
boundary conditions, initial conditions, or a combination of
the two. Numerical solutions are far more general in scope
and remove any difﬁculties associated with geometry [2].
For structures under shock and impact loading, numerical
simulations have proven to be extremely useful. They provide
a rapid and less expensive way to evaluate new design ideas.
Numerical simulations can supply quantitative and accurate
details of stress, strain, and deformation ﬁelds that would
be very costly or difﬁcult to reproduce experimentally. In
these numerical simulations, the partial differential equations
governing the basic physic principles of conservation of mass,
momentum, and energy are employed. The equations to be
solved are time-dependent and nonlinear in nature. These equa-
tions, together with constitutive models describing material
behavior and a set of initial and boundary conditions, deﬁne
the complete system for shock and impact simulations.
The governing partial differential equations need to be
solved in both time and space domains. The solution over
the time domain can be achieved by an explicit method. In
the explicit method, the solution at a given point in time is
expressed as a function of the system variables and parameters,
with no requirements for stiffness and mass matrices. Thus,
the computing time at each time step is low but may require
numerous time steps for a complete solution. The solution for
the space domain can be obtained utilizing different spatial
discretisations, such as Lagrange [3], Euler [4], Arbitrary
Lagrange Euler (ALE) [5], or mesh free methods [6]. Each
of these techniques has its unique capabilities, but also limita-
tions. Usually, there is not a single technique that can cope with
all the regimes of a problem [7]. Fig. 1 gives a short overview
of the solver technologies mentioned above. The crucial factor
is the grid that causes different outcomes.
Due to the fact that all engineering simulations are based on
geometry to represent the design, the target and all its compo-
nents are simulated as CAD models. Real-world engineering
commonly involves the analysis and design of complicated
geometry. These types of analysis depend critically on having
a modeling tool with a robust geometry import capability in
conjunction with advanced, easy-to-use mesh generation algo-
rithms [8]. It is often necessary to combine different simula-
tion and modeling techniques from various CAE applications.
However, this fact can lead to major difﬁculties, especially in
terms of data loss and computational effort. Particularly the
leading software providers prevent an interaction of their tools
with competing products. But, to analyze blast loading and its
effects on vehicle structures, different CAE tools are needed.
Therefore, it is important that an interface is provided that
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 1. Examples of Lagrange, Euler, ALE, and SPH simulations on an
impact problem [1].
allows a robust interaction between various applications. Using
a CAD neutral environment that supports direct, bidirectional
and associative interfaces with CAE systems, the geometry
can be optimized successively and analysis can be performed
without loss of data.
This work will present an interface between ANSYS and
Abaqus, both leading software suites for ﬁnite element analy-
sis and computer-aided engineering. The goal is to develop
and demonstrate an efﬁcient FEA/CFD coupling technique
for vehicle structures under high-pressure shock compression.
The coupling is achieved by an iterative procedure between
FEA and CFD calculations using CATIA, ANSYS Autodyn,
and Abaqus. ANSYS Autodyn provides shock compression
data and the knowledge of shock-wave properties. Abaqus
and CATIA (both developed by Dassault Systmes) implement
the numerical models with all relevant information. Here,
the major challenge is to establish a continuous and fully
automatic transfer of blast loadings with high-variation rates
from ANSYS Autodyn to Abaqus.
After a brief introduction with a description of the different
methods of space discretization in Section I, there is a short
section about the concept of this work. Section III describes the
experimental set-up and the implementation of our interface.
The paper ends with an outlook in Section IV and a concluding
paragraph.
II.
CONCEPT
Real-world engineering commonly involves the analysis
and design of complicated geometry. These types of analysis
depend critically on having a modeling tool with a robust ge-
ometry import capability in conjunction with advanced, easy-
to-use mesh generation algorithms [8]. It is often necessary
to combine different simulation and modeling techniques from
various CAE applications. However, this fact can lead to major
difﬁculties, especially in terms of data loss and computational
effort. Particularly the leading software providers prevent an
interaction of their tools with competing products. But to
analyze blast loading and its effects on vehicle structures,
different CAE tools are needed. Therefore, it is important
that an interface is provided that allows a robust interaction
between various applications. Using a computer-aided design
(CAD) neutral environment that supports direct, bidirectional
and associative interfaces with CAE systems, the geometry
can be optimized successively and analysis can be performed
without loss of data.
This work will present an interface between ANSYS and
Abaqus, both leading software suites for ﬁnite element analysis
and computer-aided engineering. The goal is to develop and
demonstrate an efﬁcient ﬁnite element analysis/computational
ﬂuid dynamics (FEA/CFD) coupling technique for vehicle
structures under high-pressure shock compression. The cou-
pling is achieved by an iterative procedure between FEA
and CFD calculations using CATIA, ANSYS Autodyn, and
Abaqus. ANSYS Autodyn provides shock compression data
and the knowledge of shock-wave properties. Abaqus and
CATIA (both developed by Dassault Systmes) implement
the numerical models with all relevant information. Here,
the major challenge is to establish a continuous and fully
automatic transfer of blast loadings with high-variation rates
from ANSYS Autodyn to Abaqus.
III.
EXPERIMENTAL SECTION
In computing, an interface is a shared boundary across
which two separate components of a computer system ex-
change information. The exchange can be between software,
computer hardware, peripheral devices, humans and combi-
nations of these. Some computer hardware devices such as
a touchscreen can both send and receive data through the
interface, while others such as a mouse, microphone or joystick
operate one way only [9].
Coupled FEA/CFD analysis is an alternative technique,
where separate FEA and CFD codes are used for solid and ﬂuid
regions, respectively, with a smooth exchange of information
between the two codes to ensure continuity of blast loading
data. The main merit of the approach is to enable users to take
full advantages of both CFD and FEA capabilities.
The objective of this work is to develop an interface
between ANSYS Autodyn and Abaqus. The software ANSYS
is used to solve linear and non-linear problems of struc-
tural mechanics, computational ﬂuid dynamics, acoustics and
various other engineering sciences [10]. Here, ANSYS will
provide data from the simulation of blast effects. The capability
to couple Eulerian and Lagrangian frames in ANSYS is helpful
in blast ﬁeld modeling. The Eulerian frame is best suited
for representing explosive detonations, because the material
ﬂows through a geometrically constant grid that can easily
handle the large deformations associated with gas and ﬂuid
ﬂow. The structure is modeled with the Lagrangian frame in
Abaqus. Abaqus supports familiar interactive computer-aided
engineering concepts such as feature-based, parametric model-
ing, interactive and scripted operation, and GUI customization
[11]. First, every possibility of transferring the data from
ANSYS outputs to Abaqus inputs has to be detected (see Fig.
2).
ANSYS will provide the data by generating a data set for
the blast loading (see Figure 3). This data set will include
snapshots of given points in time. At this stage there is a data
set of ﬁve points in time, between 0.0291s and 0.0475s (after
detonation). Related to the points in time this data set includes
the pressure values with Cartesian coordinates based on the
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 2. Inputs and outputs for an interface.
Figure 3. Expansion of blast in ANSYS Autodyn.
simulation of the spread of explosive materials. A script is
coded to read the blast loading data in Abaqus. This script,
coded in Python, uses the line interface in Abaqus directly.
First, a blast loading data is generated in ANSYS and saved
as a normal text ﬁle in .txt format. The data set will be splitted
to separate the different types of information. After that, a list
will be created to save the data and connect the related time
points to the coordinates and pressure values. At this point,
there is a possibility to use linear interpolation between the
ﬁve time points to generate a larger data base. After reading
and saving the data set, the script will load the model used
for impact tests in Abaqus. A surface of the model must be
selected to project the blast data on it.
The goal is to investigate the impact of the blast data
on a full vehicle model in Abaqus. This work (in progress)
starts with a less complex model to validate the function of
the script and the interface itself. The ﬁrst model was a basic
rectangle to be strained by the pressure data. Afterwards, two
more complex models were tested successfully. This approach
will lead to a surface similar to the silhouette of high security
vehicles (see Figure 4). The coupling is realized through an
iterative loop between the FEA and CFD simulations, with
Figure 4. Testing structure in Abaqus.
communications ensuring continuity of shock compression
data across the coupled boundaries between the FEA and
CFD models. In the coupling process, intermediate individual
FEA and CFD solutions are obtained in turn with dynamically
updated boundary conditions. To avoid exceptional dead lock
of the individual CFD simulations, appropriate maximum
numbers of iterations are assigned for each CFD model.
IV.
OUTLOOK
There are a variety of approaches in implementing the
coupled FEA/CFD analysis. One is generally called ”‘strong
coupling”’, where data have to be transferred between ANSYS
Autodyn and ABAQUS in every single time step. A ”‘semi-
strong coupling”’ can get along with a smaller set of date,
using mathematical interpolation for a sufﬁcient approxima-
tion. The third concept is a ”‘weak coupling”’ solution. Here,
neural networks and deep learning can be used to replicate
blast effects on different vehicle structures. These approaches
are going to be tested in a next step.
Furthermore, a larger blast loading data set has to be
created in ANSYS. This will allow a more accurate illustration
of blast effects on vehicle structures. Smaller time steps will
enable a linear interpolation with a higher accuracy. Different
explosives are going to be tested to expand the data base. The
next step will be a model for the reﬂection of blast waves
and dynamic changes of pressure values. Using a full vehicle
model will provide important information about the behavior
of armored structures under blast effects. But to validate the
results of the simulation, more ballistic trials are needed.
Based on the difﬁculties of full vehicle model simulations,
the implementation of an automatic surface detection has to
be taken into consideration. This could be helpful if a large
number of different vehicles are investigated. In order to create
a user-friendly interface it is possible to generate the script as
a plug-in which can be started from the Abaqus user surface
directly.
By using pre-deﬁned blast data to create forces as vectors
on our vehicle structures, the proposal can be generalized.
Then, FEA analysis can be done with other software suites
as well. Right now, the concept is not applicable to other
systems. This is a major disadvantage and part of our future
work. Furthermore, a parallelization of the problem should be
considered.
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
A technique for efﬁciently coupling FEA/CFD for the
simulation of blast effects is described. An interface between
ANSYS and Abaqus was created to provide blast data sets.
The data sets from ANSYS include snapshots from the blast
simulation saved at different points in time. The interface is
coded in Python and also contains the possibility to use linear
interpolation on the data sets.
A good agreement of blast load test data and simulation
results was observed. Furthermore, it is shown that the coupled
solutions can be obtained in sufﬁciently short turn-around
times for use in design. These solutions can be used as the
basis of an iterative optimization process. They are a valuable
adjunct to the study of the behavior of vehicle structures
subjected to high-velocity impact or intense impulsive load-
ing. The combined use of computations, experiments and
high-strain-rate material characterization has, in many cases,
supplemented the data achievable by experiments alone at
considerable savings in both cost and engineering man-hours.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Ramezani and H. Rothe, ’Investigation of Solver Technologies for
the Simulation of Brittle Materials,’ The Sixth International Conference
on Advances in System Simulation (SIMUL 2014) IARIA, pp. 236-242,
Oct. 2014, ISBN 978-61208-371-1
[2]
J. Zukas, ’Introduction to Hydrocodes,’ Elsevier Science, February 2004.
[3]
A. M. S. Hamouda and M. S. J. Hashmi, ’Modelling the impact and
penetration events of modern engineering materials: Characteristics of
computer codes and material models,’ Journal of Materials Processing
Technology, vol. 56, pp. 847-862, Jan. 1996.
[4]
D. J. Benson, ’Computational methods in Lagrangian and Eulerian
hydrocodes,’ Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering,
vol. 99, pp. 235-394, Sep. 1992, doi: 10.1016/0045-7825(92)90042-I.
[5]
M. Oevermann, S. Gerber, and F. Behrendt, ’Euler-Lagrange/DEM simu-
lation of wood gasiﬁcation in a bubbling ﬂuidized bed reactor,’ Particuol-
ogy, vol. 7, pp. 307-316, Aug. 2009, doi: 10.1016/j.partic.2009.04.004.
[6]
D. L. Hicks and L. M. Liebrock, ’SPH hydrocodes can be stabilized
with shape-shifting,’ Computers & Mathematics with Applications, vol.
38, pp. 1-16, Sep. 1999, doi: 10.1016/S0898-1221(99)00210-2.
[7]
X. Quan, N. K. Birnbaum, M. S. Cowler, and B. I. Gerber, ’Numerical
Simulations of Structural Deformation under Shock and Impact Loads
using a Coupled Multi-Solver Approach,’ 5th Asia-Paciﬁc Conference
on Shock and Impact Loads on Structures, Hunan, China, pp. 152-161,
Nov. 2003.
[8]
N. V. Bermeo, M. G. Mendoza, and A. G. Castro, ’Semantic Represen-
tation of CAD Models Based on the IGES Standard,’ Computer Science,
vol. 8265, pp. 157-168, Dec. 2001, doi: 10.1007/ 978-3-642-45114-013
[9]
IEEE 100 - The Authoritative Dictionary Of IEEE Standards Terms.
NYC, NY, USA: IEEE Press. pp. 574-575, 2000. ISBN 0-7381-2601-
2
[10]
”ANSYS”, 2016, URL: http://www.ansys.com [accessed: 2016-04-01].
[11]
”Abaqus CAE”, 2016, URL: http://www.3ds.com/products-services/
simulia/ products/abaqus/abaquscae/ [accessed: 2016-04-05]
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

