Future Tasks of Lightweight-Polymer Combat Helmets 
 
Henrik Seeber, Arash Ramezani, Hendrik Rothe 
Chair of Measurement and Information Technology 
University of the Federal Armed Forces  
Hamburg, Germany 
Email: henrik.seeber@hsu-hh.de, ramezani@hsu-hh.de, rothe@hsu-hh.de 
 
 
Abstract—In the military and police sector, the endangerment 
for the forces has risen over the last decades. Especially police 
forces are facing new threats due to increased terrorist activity 
in western European cities and a rising propensity to violence. 
This development makes it necessary to provide state of the art 
protection for patrol officers. This includes helmets made of 
ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) to lower 
the overall weight of equipment and increase the combat value 
of the forces by providing more comfort and possibilities for 
attachments. However, at the moment these types of helmets 
are not ready to provide the required level of protection 
against projectiles. The intention of this paper is to provide 
background information about those new threats and to 
mention first ideas how to tackle the emerging problems of 
current UHMWPE combat helmets.  
Keywords-applied 
research; 
fiber-reinforced 
plastics; 
optimization; armor systems; ballistic trials. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Combat helmets are a key factor in personal protection for 
military and police forces. Rapidly changed threats on 
missions, especially for police patrol officers [5] and 
soldiers in stabilization missions [1], prove that protection 
needs a new ability profile. This work in progress provides 
background information to specify the problems and first 
ideas how to solve these problems. The overall aim is to 
create a ballistic combat helmet that meets the union of test 
center 
for 
armored 
materials 
and 
constructions 
3 
(Vereinigung 
der 
Prüfstellen 
für 
Angriffshemmende 
Materialien und Konstruktionen 3) (VPAM 3) regulations 
and the technical directive “System Ballistic Helmet” 
5/2010 [2].  
A. Structure of the Paper 
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, there will 
be brief information about the history of combat helmets 
and their materials through time. In Section III, threats for 
ballistic protection will be mentioned. Section IV is about 
the disadvantages of current UHMWPE combat helmets and 
Section V is about the advantages of lighter polymer combat 
helmets. In the final section, Section VI, the aim will be 
concretized and explained.  
II. 
HISTORY 
Combat helmets have a long tradition. Before the invention 
of gunpowder, they were used as a protection against blunt 
trauma and cuts. They were designed to deflect, e.g. a 
sword, so there was less residual energy on the head. Later 
on, helmets were mainly worn for pageantry and unit 
recognition until the First World War began. 
A. Combat Helmets in the 20th Century  
Due to the massive use and increased lethality of artillery, 
the German forces introduced the “Steel Helmet Modell 
1916” in 1915. All fractions introduced nearly the same 
helmet models in mode of action at this time, which were 
made out of basic steel. These helmets were only able to 
stop the primary threat of that time: fragmenting projectiles 
of artillery bombs, they were not able to stop bullets because 
of the available materials. During the Second World War, 
the U.S Military introduced the M1 in 1942, which was 
made out of “Hadfield steel”. This helmet was used by the 
German armed forces until the 1990s. Problems with this 
type of steel helmet occurred because the helmets were too 
heavy and reduced the view, hearing and mobility of the 
wearer. The M1 was followed by a very new generation of 
combat helmets, which was made of aramid. Aramid was 
the first synthetic bulletproof material and was invented in 
the 1960s by DuPont.   
B. Combat Helmets in the 21st Century  
As a replacement of the M1, the German armed forces 
introduced the “Combat Helmet, Ground Forces” made of 
aramid. In addition, they used the new retention system 
“NOSHA”, which provided a better shock absorption and 
air circulation. The next stage of development was – again – 
a totally new material: the ultra-high molecular weight 
polyethylene fibers (UHMWPE). With hybridization 
techniques, the U.S Military developed a new generation of 
combat helmets in 2010, the so-called “Future Assault Shell 
Technology” (FAST). The German armed forces also use 
FAST with the name “Combat Helmet Special Forces”. 
Also, FAST helmets were added to the concept “Infantry of 
the Future” (see Figure 1) [6]. Moreover, this generation has  
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 1. FAST helmet with the concept “Infantry of the Future” [6]. 
 
improvements at the retention system with a multi-pad and 
four-point retention system. In addition to the reduced  
weight, the FAST helmet provides higher comfort.  
III. 
NEW THREATS 
A. Changed Threats for Police Forces  
Threats for police forces and the military have changed a lot 
over the last decades. Police forces face international 
terrorism, especially in western European cities. More and 
more, terrorists are military trained and equipped with 
military weapons and gear.  Time is the most crucial point 
in chaotic situations, so patrol officers have to engage first 
[6]. Only a combination of ballistic vests and ballistic 
helmets provides the necessary level of protection in such 
situations. Especially patrol officers are facing unpredictable 
threats on duty so their helmets have to provide protection 
against multiple threats. Apart from ballistic threats, hits 
with blunt and sharp weapons, fire and chemicals are 
common threats for them. The willingness of patrol officers 
in Baden Wurttemberg to wear their helmets also in 
common situations like brawls and skirmishes make it 
necessary to provide good shock absorbing attributes against 
blunt trauma [5].  
B. New Threats for Military Forces 
But also, military forces are facing changed threats. 
Statistics of the American Operations in Afghanistan and 
Iraq show that head and neck wounds are increasing. The 
distribution of wounds shows that 30% of all wounds are in 
the head and neck area (based on injuries/treatments from 
hospitalization, including persons who died of wounds) [1]. 
The main threats at patrol missions are improvised 
explosive device (IED) attacks and ambushes with assault 
rifles. Due to the increased use of IEDs, blast associated 
head injuries, e.g., fragments, have increased compared to 
gunshot wounds. Furthermore, the characteristics of the 
fragments have changed compared to mortar and artillery 
shells. This can lead to a different impact behavior. In 
addition, blunt traumatic injuries have increased because 
they are linked to blast events. Nevertheless, blunt trauma is 
also associated with noncombat situations like vehicle 
crashes, parachute drop accidents or falls. Common blunt 
trauma threats have an impact velocity of 6.1m/s, which is 
equal to a drop of 1.9m [1]. The primary ballistic threat is 
caused by assault rifles of type AK-47 (7.62x39-mm) and 
owing to the increased close combat situation pistols 
emerging as threats, for example Makarov (9x18-mm) or 
Tokarev (7.62x25mm). Altogether, the America Department 
of Defense locates the main threat of infantry weapon at 
5.56-mm and 7.62-mm rounds at muzzle velocity from 
735m/s 
to 
more 
than 
800m/s. 
This 
corresponds 
approximately VPAM 6 to VPAM 7 [1].  
IV. 
DISADVANTAGES OF ACTUAL UHMWPE COMBAT 
HELMETS 
A. Back-face Deformation 
Back-face deformation is one of the main problems of the 
actual UHMWPE combat helmets. On the one hand, the 
material has very good attributes against bullet penetration. 
On the other hand, the energy of the bullet is not well 
dispersed (see Figure 2). This leads to the so-called back-
face deformation, the material indent and the residual 
energy appeals on the head. For German police helmets, the 
residual energy has a maximum tolerance limit of 25 Joule 
[5]. The residual energy could lead to possible head injuries 
like long linear skull fractures or closed head brain trauma. 
At the moment, it is unclear whether the injuries occur from 
the deforming of the helmet onto the head or from 
acceleration loads transmitted through the helmet padding to 
the head. In addition, the test methodology with clay to 
display back-face deformation is not totally linked to head 
injuries. The human skull behavior in such situations is 
inadequately represented in the actual test methodology with 
clay. Especially in the area of back-face deformation there is 
a lot of potential for necessary improvements.  
 
 
 Figure 2. Energy distribution in a fiber impacted by a projectile [3]. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

B.   Blunt impacts 
In addition, the current generation of UHMWPE combat 
helmets have deficits with blunt impacts. The current 
combat helmets can only absorb impacts with a velocity of 
3m/s or 45J drop energy [1]. As mentioned earlier, common 
blunt traumas occur with a velocity of 6.1m/s. In fact, blunt 
traumas occur especially in noncombat and training 
situations. Therefore, there needs to be an improvement, 
because most of the time the wearer of the helmet is in such 
a situation. 
V. 
 COMBAT HELMET AS MODULAR HEADGEAR SYSTEM 
Combat helmets will evolve from a device only used for 
protection to a multi useable platform to increase the 
survivability and efficiency of the wearer.  This includes 
basic attachments like active ear protection, flashlights or 
counter weights to provide a stable weight balance. 
Moreover, the helmet platform can be used to increase the 
leading ability of the group by adding integrated voice 
radio, a head up display with important mission information 
or health sensors to monitor the group vital functions. This 
would increase the situational awareness of the group leader 
and would lead to an overall increase of safety during 
missions. Also the combat value of every solider or 
policeman can be increased by adding feeder plates for night 
vision, the ability to wear protective masks against warfare 
agent or attaching standardized rails like MIL-STD 1913. Of 
course, the possibilities are limited due to the weight the 
wearer can handle over the duration of the mission. So, if 
the combat helmet weighs as little as possible, there are 
more possibilities for attachments and this leads to earlier 
mentioned advantages.  
VI. 
AIM OF THE PROJECT 
First of all, the aim is to create a UHMWPE combat helmet, 
which meets the regulations of the police institute of the 
German police academy in Muenster, this regulation is 
based on the technical directive “System Ballistic Helmet” 
(Technische 
Richtlinie 
“Gesamtsystem 
Ballistischer 
Schutzhelm”) [2] of 5/2010. That implies that the project 
has the focus on police helmets.  
A. Threats Which the Helmet has to Withstand 
The main focus of the research is on the ballistic attributes 
of the helmet. So the helmet has to provide protection 
against soft-core projectiles 9mmx19 fired by small arms 
and machine pistols. This is comparable to VPAM 3.  
Overall, our aim is also to meet the regulations of VPAM 4 
to compete with the current generation of titanium helmets 
and provide a state-of-the-art alternative [6]. The mentioned 
titan helmet, which is actually used, by the state of Baden 
Wuerttemberg is the “Hoplit” model by Ulbrichts Witwe 
GmbH (see Figure 3). As mentioned, earlier protection 
against blunt trauma is also a challenge for combat helmets. 
The residual energy has to be lower than 25 Joule.  
  
Figure 3. “Hoplit F” by Ulbrichts Witwe GmbH [5] 
  
B. Constructional Problems  
At the moment, the material has a reliable protection against 
projectile penetration. Also, the material in a possible 
helmet shape provides a reliable protection. It has to be 
verified in which areas the protection is effective. Especially 
near the edges of the calotte, it is possible that the protection 
efficiency is much lower compared to the central areas. The 
actual titanium helmets have an efficiency distance of 
10mm to the edges. All in all, these helmets provide an 
effective protection area of 90% [5]. As with aramid 
helmets, which have a much lower protective area, the fiber 
structure of the UHMWPE could also be a crucial point to 
provide a protection area as big as titanium helmets [4].  
C. Possible Solutions 
The main problem is back-face deformation. The residual 
energy dispensation of the material is too low in the current 
configuration. Now three possibilities to increase the 
dispensation have to be tested. Varying the direction of the 
material layers may mitigate the deformation. This has to be 
balanced between penetration and deformation of the 
material. The best penetration protection is provided when 
the layers are rotated by 90 degrees. Another idea is to use 
energy-absorbing materials under the calotte and as helm 
pads to reduce the residual energy. So, this means to 
integrate strictly the inlay into the helmet. Another 
possibility is to use two calottes, the first one as a ballistic 
shell and the second one as a shell to disperse the residual 
energy and to add absorbing material between the shells. 
The next step would be to precise the ideas and test their 
efficiency. After this, a combination of ideas could reduce 
the residual energy to a value lower than 25 Joule. Finally, 
the aim is to meet the regulations of VPAM 3. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
There are three main risks for ground forces: the main blast, 
blunt trauma and ballistic threats. Especially ballistic threats 
are challenging the UHMWPE helmets because of a high 
amount of residual energy. This leads to back-face 
deformation, which could result in live risking head injuries. 
In addition, this characteristic of injuries appears with blunt 
traumas. Some of the mentioned ideas could also lower the 
risk of blunt traumas even if the main challenge is to reduce 
back-face deformation. Moreover, an advantage of lighter 
helmets is, in addition to more comfort, the ability as a multi 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

role carrier for attachments. This ability could improve the 
survivability and efficiency of the wearer. Nevertheless, the 
focus is to reduce back-face deformation to meet the 
regulations of VPAM 3.  Possible ideas are to verify the 
direction of the layers, using energy-absorbing materials for 
the helmet inlay or using two decoupled shells with energy 
absorbing materials in between. Therefore, a combination or 
balance between the mentioned ideas is necessary. This 
means that the first step is to test how we can construct such 
a helmet with these possible solutions integrated. After this, 
ballistic tests are necessary to get an overview over the 
efficiency and how practical the solutions are. Especially the 
findings relating to the test methodology of the Review of 
Department of Defense Test Protocols for Combat Helmets 
[1] could be implemented into the test cycle. To conclude, 
back-face deformation is current the main problem of 
UHMWPE helmets due to the residual energy transmitted 
through the inlay. As mentioned in Section IV, also, the test 
methodology, to investigate the relation between back-face 
deformation and head injuries, has to be beheld and then 
maybe adjusted.   
REFERENCES  
 
[1] Committee on Review of Test Protocols Used by the DOD to 
Test Combat Helmets, “Review of Department of Defense 
Test Protocols for Combat Helmets”. Washington: The 
National Academies Press, pp. 8–24, 2014. 
[2] Police Institute of the German Police Academy in Muenster, 
Technical Directive “System Ballistic Helmet” (Technische 
Richtlinie 
“Gesamtsystem 
Ballistischer 
Schutzhelm”). 
Muenster, pp. 10-16, 5/2010. 
[3] I. G. Crouch, L. Arnold, A. Pierlot, and H. Billion, “Fibres, 
textiles and protective apparel” in “The Science of Armour 
Materials”. Amsterdam: Elsevier, p. 271, 2017. 
[4] T.Tam and A.Bhatnagar, “High-performance ballistic fibers 
and tapes” in “Lightweight Ballistic Composites: Military and 
Law-Enforcement 
Applications”, 
Second 
Edition. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 1-30 and 210-214, 2016. 
[5] Polizei Praxis. Ballistic Helmets for Patrol Officers 
(Ballistischer Schutzhelm für Streifenpolizisten). [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.polizeipraxis.de/themen/arbeitsschutz-in-der-
polizei/detailansicht-arbeitsschutz-in-der-
polizei/artikel/ballistischer-schutzhelm-fuer-
streifenpolizisten.html [08.01.2017]. 
[6] J. Weisswange, Protection for the “Main”-Weapon, Modern 
Combat Helmets (Schutz für die “Haupt”-Waffe, Moderne 
Gefechtshelme). 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.esut.de/fileadmin/user_upload/EST916 
Schutz_fuer_die_Hauptwaffe_Moderne_Gefechtshelme.pdf 
[08.01.2017]. 
 
 
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

