Application of Complex Systems Architecting Approach to Develop a Digital Twin 
Application: Phosphate mining site of Benguerir  
 
Makouar Kaltoum, Deshayes Laurent 
ILO 
UM6P 
Benguérir, Morocco 
Email : Kaltoum.makouar@um6p.ma 
Email : Deshayes.laurent@um6p.ma 
Mouchtachi Ahmed, Aitelmahjoub Abdelhafid 
L.I.S.S.I.E.E 
ENSAM 
Casablanca, Morocco 
Email: ahmedmouchtachi@yahoo.fr 
Email: aitelmajoub@gmail.com 
 
Abstract— The aim of this paper is to present the application of 
complex systems architecting approach in the development of 
the digital twin through a use case of an industrial process: 
phosphate mining site of Benguérir. We introduce the digital 
twin concept and its influence on the development of 
manufacturing processes. Further, we present the complex 
systems engineering approach and its added value to the design 
and the manipulation of systems with a higher level of 
complexity, and how this approach allows designing a digital 
twin model of the mining site. Previous work undertook the 
digital twin concept and its benefits on industry without 
mentioning an efficient method to develop it. To realize our 
vision to design the digital twin of the mining site of Benguérir, 
we used SysML diagrams to model the solution based on the 
three visions of the complex systems engineering: the 
operational vision, the functional vision and the constructional 
vision.  
Keywords- Industry 4.0; digital twin; simulators; complex 
systems engineering; mining site; fixed infrastructures. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The fixed infrastructures of the mining site are a main 
process in its value chain, whose function is the physical 
treatment of the extracted product. It consists in separating 
rocks from valuable product and the transfer of this product 
to the other sites (chemical treatments); this process is 
composed of three units:  
- 
Stone removal unit: The trucks bring the product 
(the phosphate) from the field, and put it into two 
hoppers, then it is screened, the rocks are crushed 
and sent to a waste rock storage and the product is 
sent to the next unit via conveyors. 
- 
Screening unit: A second screen is necessary; the 
unit contains five screens and five hoppers; the 
product is now sent via conveyors to the loading 
unit. 
- 
Loading unit: The product is stored and then loaded 
in specific wagons depending on the quality, the type 
and the quantity demanded from the customers. 
The industrial manufacturing and, of course, the mining 
sites are getting into a deep transformation, which considers 
digital technologies getting into industrial equipment. This is 
the fourth industrial revolution, called Industry4.0. It is 
characterized by the fusion of virtual world of internet and 
the real industrial facilities. 
There are three big challenges to face, in order to be able 
to pursue this transformation: 
- 
Training: Industry 4.0’s transformation requires not 
only to change equipment but also to change minds, 
operators should be aware of the new technologies 
and their use. 
- 
Test and verification: The operator needs to change 
the configurations, edit the program, upgrade the 
system or maintain a new equipment, and this 
without any risk or failure, so, the operator must 
simulate 
and 
test 
the 
modification 
before 
implementing it in the real process. 
- 
R&D: Engineers and researchers need to develop 
algorithms and new methods based on the data 
collected from the field and test the results and 
algorithms. 
To face those challenges, and pursue the change, the 
Polytechnic University of Mohammed VI and the mining site 
of the Office Chérifien des Phosphates (OCP) adopted the 
digital twin concept to deal with the issues discussed before. 
The digital twin is the virtual representation of a real 
process, product or service [1]; it contains of real time 
simulators and this representation is a complex system since 
it must be a very close model of the real system. 
Furthermore, a well-defined design process should be used in 
order to collect all requirements from all stakeholders. The 
complex engineering system approach provides a structured 
and flexible modelling methodology in order to implement 
and develop a clear functional architecture. 
The aim of this paper is to present the impact of complex 
systems architecting approach in developing the digital twin 
of the mining site. 
After first describing the principles of systems 
engineering approach and the digital twin concept, this paper 
then demonstrates how this approach is an effective 
methodological support and allows an early detection of 
possible weaknesses during initial design stages.  
The paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, a state of 
art will be presented, then Section 3 is dedicated to the 
definition of digital twin concept and its advantages. 
Furthermore, the complex systems architecting method is 
presented is Section 4, while Section 5 will present the 
application of the complex systems architecting method in 
the process of the mining site and results of this work, and 
we conclude with a conclusion and perspectives of the work. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

II. 
STATE OF ART  
Different understandings of the digital twin can be 
observed in industrial practice. In this regard, it has been 
argued that Parametric Technology Corporation  (PTC) is 
focusing on establishing a link between the virtual product 
model and the physical part to increase the manufacturing 
flexibility and competitiveness, while Dassault Systèmes 
targets the product design performance. Moreover, the digital 
twin understanding of General Electric focuses on 
forecasting the health and performance of their products over 
lifetime, whereas SIEMENS strives for improved efficiency 
and quality in manufacturing. TESLA aims at developing a 
digital twin for every built car, hence enabling synchronous 
data transmission between the car and the factory, while 
other companies increasingly use complex product models to 
boost the immersion in virtual and augmented reality 
applications [2]. 
To develop a flexible digital twin framework and satisfy 
the multiple understandings, a developed architecting 
method should be adopted, and as the system is complex and 
provides many parameters, this work proposes the complex 
systems architecting method to model and implement the 
digital twin based on simulators. 
The design and development of a system indeed requires 
the contribution of various processes, stakeholders and 
techniques. Each person often concentrates on a specific 
aspect of the system without any perspective on the other 
aspects: designers have an architectural and functional vision 
of the system, the manufacturing team considers a system as 
an element to be integrated in the assembly line, the 
procurement department views it as a list of supplies to be 
purchased. Complex systems engineering thus enables a 
global view of the system to guarantee the consistency of 
specific contributions to the system; it takes into account the 
whole life cycle of the system including the definition of 
customer requirements, design, production, and marketing. It 
defines the most effective methods and means for satisfying 
the technical and organizational requirements which, in 
practice, means satisfying cost, time and productivity 
constraints. The challenge of complex systems engineering is 
to design and product the best system to meet a customer's 
requirements with the most efficient control of deadlines and 
costs. As system complexity continues to increase, systems 
engineers now use modelling techniques to guarantee that 
specification and design models are correctly built and can 
be easily communicated to the development teams [3]. 
The objective of the work described in this paper is to 
demonstrate 
the 
advantages 
of 
using 
recommended 
methodology for the development of complex systems.  
III. 
DIGITAL TWIN CONCEPT 
First, the project of the digital twin (DT) was originated 
in the Institute of Automation, Measurement and Applied 
Informatics of the faculty of Mechanical Engineering of the 
Slovak University of Technology in Bratislava [4]. The DT 
is one of the main concepts associated with the new 
industrial revolution, Industry 4.0. Manufacturers are taking 
a more systems-design approach by implementing rigorous 
systems-design processes that accommodate the complexities 
of developing multi-disciplinary systems. Digital twins are at 
the core of this development process [5]. 
The digital twin can allow companies to have a complete 
digital footprint of their products from design and 
development through the end of the product life cycle. 
Digital twins are designed to model complicated assets or 
processes that interact in many ways with their environments 
for which it is difficult to predict outcomes over an entire 
product life cycle, and to solve physical issues faster by 
detecting them sooner, predict outcomes to a much higher 
degree of accuracy, design and build better products, and, 
ultimately, better serve their customers [6].  
IV. 
COMPLEX SYSTEMS ENGINEERING APPROACH 
Complex systems engineering approach is the whole 
activity that allows to design an optimal system to meet a 
need. It is based on system vision that includes multiple 
parameters, the multidisciplinary aspect, the life cycle and 
the use cases. It consists of establishing the functional and 
physical compatibility of a system with the needs and the 
constraints 
Systems engineering approach enables engineering 
organizations to proceed toward the design of complex 
systems and its impact across multiple engineering 
disciplines: mechanical, electrical, and software. With this 
approach, customer requirements are defined early in the 
development cycle and are implemented through design and 
system validation—from concept to operation [7]. This 
approach is based on three essential visions: Operational 
vision, functional vision and constructional vision. 
- 
Operational Vision: The operational vision provides 
“black box” models [8] of a given system where one 
describes the interactions and the interfaces of a 
system of interest with its environment. Its core 
motivation is to understand the “Why” – of the 
system. 
- 
Functional Vision: The core notion of the functional 
vision is to understand the “what” of the system, it 
functions, and the main mission is to understand 
deeply what does the system without however 
knowing at this point how it is concretely structured. 
- 
Constructional Vision: The aim is to describe all 
concrete hardware, software and human-ware 
components of a system with their interactions; all 
constructional concepts, such as configuration, 
constructional scenarios or constructional objects are 
again uniquely referring to the system of interest 
without involving any external system [9]. 
V. 
APPLICATION & RESULTS 
In order to implement the complex systems engineering 
approach, we have employed the SysML modeling language 
to develop different diagrams for each vision.  
The results of applying each vision are the operational, 
the functional and the constructional diagrams; those 
diagrams will facilitate to develop the digital twin of the 
mining site. This method is characterized by high precision, 
accurate functioning and various configurations. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

A. Operational vision  
The aim of the operational vision is to identify the 
multiple users of our system and its environment, also to 
understand the stakeholders and the interactions between 
them. It facilitates to design our system with high precision 
because a misunderstanding or an error occurred during the 
operational architecture process may lead to costly and 
disastrous consequences on our system under development.  
   Fig.1 below describes the use cases of our system. The 
digital twin of the OCP mining site will be used by multiple 
stakeholders which are: Operators, supervisors, production 
agents, maintenance agents and office managers. Its use 
cases are: the test of the configurations, the optimization of 
process, the simulation of the process, prediction of the 
system performance, real time monitoring and also for the 
production management. 
 
Figure.1: Use cases diagram of the digital twin 
 
B. Functional vision 
The results of the treatment of this vision are the 
functional requirements of our system (the digital twin) 
which are the functional needs of the operators from the 
field, agents, engineers and office managers. We will present 
the results of applying the functional vision of complex 
system engineering to develop the functional diagrams that 
will serve to develop the digital twin of the mining site.  
As mentioned before, requirements engineering is an 
essential part of systems engineering. Indeed, understanding 
the need facilitates designing the solution. Every requirement 
should be S.M.A.R.T: Specific, Measurable, Achievable, 
Relevant and Traceable [10].  
Operators express their needs and the challenges they 
face by writing texts and classical sentences, e.g., The 
stacker needs to be automated; the provider of the solution 
may have different reflections and challenges to design the 
right and exact solution for the problem. The aim of this 
work is to identify the real needs of the operators, to model 
those needs in a flexible way based on a system modeling 
language and use the requirements model to verify and 
validate the solution proposed to implement the digital twin. 
   Fig.2 below describes the functional requirements of our 
system. Those requirements have been identified from the 
users of the digital twin.   We classified them into four 
sections: Simulators, Research and development (R&D), 
Training and test and validation.  We have also set the 
requirements for each section in order to model those 
requirements in a flexible way. 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure.2:  Functional Requirements diagram of the digital twin 
 
C. Constructional vision 
Constructional architecture is key since it consolidates all 
architectural analyses in a concrete vision of the considered 
system. It makes in particular the synthesis between a top-
down design approach, as provided by the systems 
architecting process, and a bottom-up one, which is typically 
induced by the constraints due to the existing product 
architecture or by the new possibilities brought by the 
advances of technology [11].  
Fig.3 shows the definition block diagram of the digital 
twin. This system is composed of n number of PLCs, motors, 
actuators, sensors, panels and computers. The definition 
block diagram shows the components of the digital twin, 
their parts, their values and the ports of the material and the 
energy of those components.  
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure.3. Definition block diagram of the digital twin 
 
 
Those diagrams will be used to establish the physical 
architecture of the digital twin of the fixed infrastructures 
with all the components. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES 
The mining site of OCP and the Polytechnic University 
of Mohammed VI are pursuing the digital transformation by 
developing innovative and advanced solutions for mining 
and chemical processes. The example of this project is a 
good demonstration that the complex engineering systems 
approach is a powerful tool to design future advanced and 
fully digitalized systems and to optimize existing mining 
systems. The results obtained in this work, which are the 
operational, the functional and the constructional diagrams of 
the digital twin of the mining site will be used to implement 
our digital twin; they facilitate modeling the global 
architecture of our system and maintain its flexibility. In 
addition, it allows to test the automation solutions and 
advanced technologies implemented in the digital twin and it 
helps to offer innovative technological solutions in order to 
implement an advanced model of control and real time 
monitoring of the mining site.  
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Negri, L. Fumagalli, and M. Macchi, “A review of the 
roles of digital twin in CPS-based production systems”, 
Modena, Italy, p. 427, June 2017. 
[2] B. Schleich, N. Anwer, L. Mathieu, and S. Wartzack, 
“Shaping the digital twin for design and production 
engineering”, Germany, p.2, 2017. 
[3] G. Auriol, C. Baron, and J. Y. Fourniols, “The advantages of 
systems engineering standards, a case study of application of 
the EIA632 standard to design of a small-scale yacht”, 
Toulouse, France, p.2, 2011. 
[4] M. Morhàc, M. Moksik, J. Vanchalek, L. Bartalsky, O. 
Rovny, and D. Sismisova, “The digital twin of an industrial 
production line within the industry 4.0 concept”, Štrbské 
Pleso, Slovakia, p. 1, June  2017. 
[5] P. Goossens, “Industry 4.0 and the Power of the digital twin”, 
Canada, p. 4, September 2017. 
[6] A. Parott, L. Warshaw, Deloitte University Press, “Industry 
4.0 and the digital twin Manufacturing meets its match”,USA, 
p. 2, May 2017. 
[7] EETIndia, “Advantages of systems engineering approach”, p. 
2, October 2013. 
[8] CESAM Community, CESAMES Systems Architecting 
Method, A Pocket Guide, p. 42, January 2017. 
[9] CESAM Community, CESAMES Systems Architecting 
Method, A Pocket Guide, p. 46, January 2017. 
[10] White book, Requirements engineering for an information 
system, Compliance Consulting, p .11. 
[11] CESAM Community, CESAMES Systems Architecting 
Method, 
A 
Pocket 
Guide, 
p. 
93, 
January 
2017.
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

