A Multi-Layer Constraint and Decision Support System for Construction Operation 
A simulation framework for the exterior construction works in high rise building 
Amir Elmahdi, Hong-Ha Le, Hans-Joachim Bargstädt 
Institute for Construction Engineering and Management 
Bauhaus Universität Weimar, Germany 
emails: amir.elmahdi@uni-weimar.de, hong-ha.le@uni-weimar.de, hans-joachim.bargstaedt@uni-weimar.de 
 
Abstract—Up till now, traditional methods of planning 
construction projects such as 2D technologies including bar 
charts, network diagrams and other scheduling tools, which 
are typical methods for modeling the progress of a project, 
have been the only methods considered. These planning tools 
are incapable of acknowledging different aspects of 
construction projects, that it to say, they ignore the space 
requirements, in which activities are executed and the 
impact of weather on construction processes. This leads to 
drawbacks during the execution of these tasks such as work 
area overlapping, reduction in productivity, safety hazards, 
long hauling paths and poor quality of work. Therefore, the 
objective of this paper is to acknowledge the requirements of 
spatial aspects and the impact of weather, and to integrate 
these requirements into one simulation framework model.  
We propose a constraints-based simulation framework. That 
is to say, the simulation framework executes only tasks, 
which satisfy the requirement of the space availability and 
sensitivity towards weather conditions. The implementation 
of the multi-layer decision support system for construction 
operations was carried out in Plant Simulation environment 
and the Simulation Toolkit Shipbuilding (STS) Tool Box 
Component. This concept will assist site managers in 
planning and updating the near-term activities for the 
exterior construction work of high rise buildings. This is on-
going research; therefore, other aspects such as execution 
strategies for different tasks will be developed in a future 
approach. This research contributes a new approach to 
integrating 
different 
construction 
problems 
in 
one 
simulation model, which have not been much considered in 
previous work. 
Keywords-Weather 
impact; 
spatial 
constraints; 
construction operation; plant simulation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Construction projects are subject to quite a number of 
influencing factors and are characterized by many 
unavoidable disturbances. Typical influencing factors in 
the construction processes are workspace overlapping, 
missing material and poor quality of work or delays caused 
by workspace congestion and/or bad weather conditions. 
They are difficult to predict beforehand and their impact is 
difficult to evaluate by using the current traditional 
planning tools due to their complexity [1]. Usually, project 
managers deal with these disturbances and uncertainties 
mainly as they happen, using their experiences, historical 
data and “gut engineering feeling”. However, the 
stochastic nature of construction processes, the principles 
superintended in the intervention of each resource as well 
as the respective interaction between the resources and the 
associated workspace requirements for the different trades 
cannot be managed efficiently using traditional planning 
tools, such as 2D technologies including bar charts, 
network diagrams and other scheduling tools [2]. These 
methods are not capable of considering the different 
influencing parameters of construction operations such as 
the attributes of component installation and their spatial 
information as well as the impact of weather [3]. This 
leads to drawbacks during the execution of these tasks 
such as overlapping of work areas, reduction in 
productivity, safety hazards, and poor quality of work. 
Traditional measures such as working on weekends or 
increasing the number of workers have been applied to 
overcome these disturbances. However, they are often 
used without detailed analysis and so they do not give the 
desired effect or are oversized. Therefore, project 
managers are in need of new and more innovative decision 
support tools that extend the use of traditional planning 
tools from the planning phase to assist them at the 
construction phase in order to deliver the end product of 
the project on time and on budget.  
Simulation models have been used to examine the 
impact of possible disturbances of construction processes 
and to compare all possible strategies and methodologies 
for task execution so that project managers identify the 
actual encountered problems and analyze their impact [4]. 
Thus they can undertake appropriate measures and identify 
the most appropriate and cost effective solutions. 
However, simulation models lack the development of an 
integrated 
system, 
which 
incorporates 
different 
construction aspects such as technology, space, logistics, 
or weather conditions, etc. in one simulation model.  
The paper is structured as follows: first, we summarize 
previous work on workspace modeling and the impact of 
weather on construction activities. Then, we introduce the 
research work at the Institute for Construction Engineering 
and Management at Bauhaus University. Next, we 
describe our methodology to address the proposed 
objective of this paper. Lastly, we summarize our 
conclusion and future work. 
II. 
MOTIVATION  
The exterior construction work phase is shaped by the 
involvement of many individual trades, or rather 
companies. That is to say, there are many different activity 
fields. Thus, there are a variety of construction processes, 
material properties and storage methods, equipment, and 
different workspace needs. These trades are restricted to 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

perform their job in limited workspaces. Moreover, the 
type of work focuses mainly on manual assembly, 
adjustment, and some awkward positioning in operations 
such as on scaffolding, ceiling and wall surfaces [5]. 
Furthermore, there is a high degree of interdependencies 
and technological dependencies of the individual trades. 
In another scenario, weather conditions are also a 
factor, which affect the exterior construction work phase. 
Benjamin and Greenwald suggest that 50% of construction 
activities are sensitive to weather conditions [6]. The final 
product of construction operations is a collection of 
different interactions between materials, multiple pieces of 
equipment and crew members, which are completely 
dependent on the weather status. Therefore the impact of 
weather is an important factor, which should be seriously 
considered in estimating construction time. Project 
planners normally prepare for additional time in the 
construction schedule to consider delays due to bad 
weather conditions. However, the buffer time is used 
without exact analysis and is based on the experience of 
project managers. 
This paper proposes a multi-layer decision support 
system. We have developed our system in a constrained-
based simulation framework environment, which includes 
an integration of technological dependencies, the dynamic 
nature of workspace management and the impact of 
weather on construction operations at the project level. 
Then, the fulfillment of the constraints at the construction 
site can be checked and verified. The developed system 
has been implemented for trades in the exterior 
construction work of high rise buildings.  
III. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
In the following subsections, we highlight the previous 
work related to the research areas of workspace problems, 
weather impact and some main researches at Bauhaus 
Universität Weimar.  
A. Related work on workspace modeling 
Workspace is conventionally addressed solely by 
different researchers. For instance, Riley and Sanvido 
develop a methodology to constrict workspace by the 
actual work in place and the amount of space available 
[7][8]. They extended their previous proposal by defining 
various space patterns for different trades based on 
selected methods of working. Akinci et al. developed a 
methodology to model construction activities in 4D CAD 
models, by formalizing the general description of space 
requirements through a computer system. By using 4D 
CAD a user can automatically generate the project-specific 
workspaces according to schedule information and 
represent the workspaces in four dimensions with their 
relationships to construction methods [9]. Akbas proposes 
a geometry-based process model (GPM) that uses 
geometric models to create and simulate workflows and 
work locations. This method provides spatial insight into 
the planning of workspaces and space buffers for repetitive 
crew activities [10]. 
B. Related work on weather impact 
Similarly, the impact of weather on construction 
activities has also been set to different studies to determine 
their severity on construction operations. Some studies 
estimate the relationship between weather parameters and 
productivity or task duration using regression analysis or 
neural networks [11][12]. Related to the impact of bad 
weather conditions on productivity and the duration of 
construction activities, some other researchers have 
pointed out how these impacts affect baseline schedules 
and have also analyzed weather-related construction 
claims [13][14][15]. These researches provide a decision 
support framework to analyze the impact of weather on the 
whole schedule, where the input data is construction 
processes, weather historical data, and the impacts of 
weather, whereas the output is the final schedule with a 
weather-related delay duration. Some construction types 
have been researched concerning how weather impacts 
different construction types such as masonry, highway 
construction, 
general 
construction, 
transportation 
construction [16], wind turbine construction [17], and 
earthwork [18].  
C. Research at the Bauhaus Universität Weimar 
At Bauhaus-Universität Weimar, the Institute for 
Construction Engineering and Management researches on 
different 
aspects 
of 
modeling 
construction 
and 
manufacturing processes. For instance, Beißert et al. 
propose a Constraint-based Simulation for modeling 
construction processes [19][20]. Thereby, the construction 
tasks and their constraints for production such as 
technological dependencies, availability and capacity can 
be specified, and valid execution schedules can be 
generated. Further work developed by Voigtmann et al. 
concern construction site logistics between construction 
sites and work locations [21][22].  
Le and Bargstädt have developed a simulation model 
to acknowledge the impact of weather on construction 
processes [23][24]. They developed a network component 
“WEATHER” within the software Plant Simulation. This 
network generates weather data and makes decisions on 
how weather may impact construction processes. The 
impact of weather has been divided into 3 cases: (1) 
temporarily prevents workers from working, (2) affects the 
delivery of material by preventing cranes from operating, 
(3) reduces labour productivity causing the extension of 
activities’ construction duration [23]. Thereby weather 
thresholds such as wind velocity, temperature, humidity 
and precipitation for the first and second cases need to be 
decided. Besides, relationships between productivity and 
weather parameters need to be estimated for the third case. 
The weather impact decisions made by the “WEATHER” 
component are finally integrated into the construction 
processes as weather constraints. Thus, the weather-related 
schedule is provided with the estimated delays. 
Similarly, Elmahdi and Bargstädt acknowledge the 
workspace requirements within the schedule plan for good 
workmanship. Based on literature and site observations, 
they classified the different required areas in large scale 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

building projects [1]. With this they propose a semi-
automatic methodology to generate the required areas for 
the scheduled project activities [3]. The acknowledgement 
of workspace requirements are developed in a new 
network component “SpatialNetwork”. Furthermore, the 
“SpatialNetwork” is embedded as an additional constraint 
component within the software Plant Simulation. Thus the 
fulfillment of spatial constraints at the construction site 
can be checked and verified. 
However, all these advanced works have been 
considered in separate models. That is to say, there is no 
interaction between the “WEATHER”, “SpatialNetwork” 
and the site logistic components. Therefore, the objective 
of this paper is to combine three aspects within one 
simulation framework. To achieve this goal we have to 
acknowledge technological dependencies with individual 
trades, workspace requirements and the impact of weather. 
Furthermore, we integrate these requirements as additional 
constraints. Then, the fulfillment of these constraints at the 
construction site can be checked in a hierarchical structure 
and verified.  
IV. 
MULTI-LAYER CONSTRAINT AND DECISION 
SIMULATION FRAMEWORK 
We propose a constraint-based simulation to achieve 
the objective of this paper. Therefore, in the following 
subsections, the fundamental idea of the constraint-based 
simulation concept is introduced and the framework of the 
multilayer simulation framework is described.  
A. Constraint-based simulation 
The proposed multi-layer simulation framework to 
acknowledge the technological and spatial constraints as 
well as the impact of weather on construction processes is 
a constraint based simulation environment. Spriprasert and 
Dawood define constraint in the context of construction as 
“one that restricts, limits or regulates commencement or 
progress of work-face operations to achieve construction 
products within agreed time, cost and quality [25]”. They 
classify the different types of constraints into three major 
groups: physical, contract and enabler constraints [25]. 
Koenig et al formalize two characteristics for the 
constraints: hard constraints and soft constraints [26]. Hard 
constraints define conditions that are embedded with work 
steps, which must be fulfilled before work steps can be 
started. Soft constraints describe also conditions that are 
embedded with work steps. However, these conditions are 
not necessary to be completely fulfilled. Our framework 
acknowledges this approach for spatial aspects and the 
impact of weather. 
B. Description of multi-layer constraint and decision 
simulation framework 
Fig. 1 illustrates the concept of the multi-layer 
simulation framework to investigate the impact of weather 
conditions 
and 
spatial 
conflicts 
on 
construction 
performance. The framework consists of five layers which 
represent different types of constraints and decisions.  
In this framework, the weather and spatial impacts are 
represented as hard or soft constraints of the construction 
processes. For example, safety issues for crane operation 
such as wind conditions or the required workspaces such 
as material or equipment are describe as hard constraints. 
On the other hand, the size of workspace and the labor 
productivity are described as soft constraints. The three 
cases of weather impact mentioned in the previous section 
are considered in this framework. Besides these, the 
required spaces and space conflicts are also examined.  
The first layer describes the technological constraints. 
The technological constraints include global and local 
constraints. While global constraints describe the priority 
of the scheduled works between different trades such as 
the installation of windows before facade and/or between 
different objects for one trade (such as window-East 
before window-West), local constraints describe the 
sequence of their defined multi work steps for one element 
within one object or the sequence of work steps between 
two different elements within one object. The second layer 
controls the fulfillment of weather impact criteria such as 
wind velocity for crane operation. Furthermore, it 
identifies weather-sensitive construction activities. The 
identification of required space types (material, equipment 
and laborers) and the availability of the required 
workspaces are described in the third layer. Finally, 
decisions concerning weather impact and the spatial 
constraints are proposed in the last two layers.  
This multi-layer framework describes two types of 
interaction: horizontal interaction and vertical interaction. 
Vertical interaction describes the sequences between two 
processes in two different layers. For example, the crane 
operation is first checked in the weather layer. This step is 
achieved by comparing the current wind velocity with 
wind thresholds [23]. If the crane can be operated then we 
identify in the spatial layer the required type of defined 
work steps such as material and equipment spaces. If this 
constraint is fulfilled then material can be transported by 
crane to the execution positions, which is performed in the 
weather layer. Horizontal interaction describes sequences 
between two processes within one layer. For example, the 
processes in the last layer interact with each other 
horizontally. The aim of presenting the layer concept is to 
show how the sequences of processes within one layer 
interact with each other. In the same way we can show 
how these processes interact with different processes in 
different layers. Thus, different constraints of construction 
processes are presented as flexible, logical and transparent. 
The input data of this framework consists of the 
construction process data, weather data and spatial data. 
The construction process data include: the hierarchical 
description of project activities that are required to fulfill 
the final product, the assembly strategy for the different 
elements, their technological dependencies (local and 
global constraints) and date constraint, which allows the 
specification of the start dates of individual tasks, the 
required resource such as execution time, the number of 
workers, and the type and quantity of material. The more 
accurate this information is, the more reliable the results 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

will be. Weather data is based on historical data or weather 
forecast data. For making weather-impact decisions, the 
weather thresholds and a function—which together can 
determine the relationship between the productivity and 
weather parameters—are needed. Finally, the spatial data 
contains the required workspace types, the level of 
assignment, 
the 
orientation, 
and 
reference 
type. 
Furthermore, we define two strategies in order to resolve 
workspace conflicts between different workspaces: the 
spatial adjustment strategy and the productivity adjustment 
strategy. For the spatial adjustment strategy, we define 
additional attributes for the different types of workspace 
such as ability to rotate, resize, and/or relocate workspace. 
For the productivity adjustment strategy we identify 
different parameters, such as overlapping areas, quality 
and quantity of material, actual available number of 
resources, etc. that affect the performance of workers on a 
specific task. We integrate these parameters as additional 
functions for conflict resolution in the simulation 
framework. Furthermore, these parameters are considered 
cumulative and so we therefore gave a weight factor for 
each parameter. 
new event
start task & generate 
new events
Y
executable tasks ?
wait for
next event
identify the 
required spaces
check laborer 
space
Process
Input Data 
 Weather 
Input Data 
 Spatial
 Input Data 
recalculate
 productivity
evaluate
weather impact
executable
steps
not executable
steps
Y
crane operation?
N
weather sensitive?
N
stop conditions?
N
material &  equipment 
space available?
work space conflict?
evaluate
space impact 
N
Y
Y
N
N
Y
recalculate
productivity
productivity adjusment?
Y
Y
total 
productivity
new event
recalculate
 size/position
wind 
conditions
transport 
material
check 
technological 
constraints
select next 
executable 
steps
spatial adjusment?
Y
N
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
conflict resolve?
N
Y
N
 
Figure 1.  Multi-layer constraint and decision simulation framework
Activities are built within Plant Simulation in a 
hierarchical structure. The highest level of the activity 
description is the trade. The lowest level of the activity 
description is the element or section. For each element or 
section one or more work steps may be defined [3]. A 
work step has three states: “not started,” “started” and 
“finished,” and requires certain execution times, resources 
and space [19]. The procedure of the constraint-based 
simulation outlines the search for process steps that can be 
started for the current simulation time. Upon the 
occurrence of an event, all process steps do not start with 
the state of examining the performance of their 
technological constraints. Those process steps that meet 
their assigned constraints will be stored as the next 
executable steps. The next executable steps begin with 
their status “not started” and will be delivered to the 
developed weather constraints and spatial constraints. 
There, they will be checked up on the availability of 
workspaces and their sensitivity to weather hierarchically 
to verify their execution possibility to be started for the 
current simulation time as shown in Fig. 1.  
The required resources and workspaces have to be 
locked during their execution. That means they cannot be 
used by other work steps. After locking the required 
resources and workspaces, the work step state changes 
from “not started” to “started” Subsequently, the set of 
“not started” work steps is checked to see if the required 
space and resources are available and if weather conditions 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

are favorable by going to step one until no more work 
steps can be started at the current time. The simulation 
time is continuously checked during a simulation run. If 
the required time has expired, the work step status changes 
from “started” to “finished” and is marked as finished. Its 
locked resources and working spaces will be unlocked and 
can be used by other work steps.  
V. 
SIMPLE CASE STUDY 
We 
have 
validated 
the 
multi-layer 
simulation 
framework concept in a simple case study. The case study 
is a 5-story school building in Schwarzenberg, Germany. 
The construction site includes trades at the exterior 
construction phase. Our investigation is concentrated for 
trades to install the façade system and the windows. 
The fiber cement façade construction is applied. 
Erecting a fiber cement façade system consists of the 
assembling of four main components: wall angle, 
insulation, aluminum profile and the fiber cement façade 
element. The installation of these four main components is 
decomposed into ten work steps: (1) measuring the 
position, (2) fixing wall angles to the building’s structure; 
(3) measuring the position and dimension of elements, (4) 
cutting, (5) fixing insulation elements to wall angles and 
building structure; (6) measuring position and dimension, 
(7) cutting aluminum profiles, (8) installing aluminum 
profiles; (9) measuring position, (10) installing façade 
element. The installation of windows consists of two 
components: window sill and window frame, which 
includes four work steps: (1) measuring the position, (2) 
fixing the window sill; (3) leveling, and finally, (4) fixing 
the window frame. The execution duration of each type of 
work step was determined based on an expert’s 
knowledge, which is shown in Fig. 2. 
The weather input data used in this case study is the 
local 5-day weather forecast data. That is to say the model 
runs in every period of 5 days to check for the impact of 
weather on the construction process. The weather 
parameters are temperature (o C), wind velocity (m/s), 
relative humidity (%), and precipitation (mm). The 
installation of the façade and window is performed 
through a scaffolding system. Thus the required workspace 
for laborer is driven due to the installation positions of the 
unique work steps of the elements and the width of the 
scaffolding platform. Since the work mainly focuses on 
assembling, the equipment workspace is modeled within 
the laborer workspace. Materials are transported from the 
storage area in small amounts to the installation through a 
crane. Aligned to the storage area a debris area is defined. 
An offset distance from the scaffolding is set as a hazard 
workspace. 
In order to simulate the execution process, the 
constraints for assembling the façade system and windows 
need to be specified. The technological dependencies are 
represented in Fig. 2. Fixing the wall angles to the building 
structure, for example, needs to be finished before the 
measuring of the position or dimension of insulation 
elements can be performed. Generally, specific material 
and workers are required to execute a certain work step. 
For instance, to execute the work step “fixing wall angle”, 
a highly skilled worker, a semi-skilled worker and a wall 
angle element are needed. The on-site working time of 
workers is defined in a simulation calendar. In this 
example, working days are from Monday to Friday and the 
daily working time is from 8:00 am to 5:30 pm including a 
pause of an hour at noon. 
 
Facade element
            Aluminum profile
Inslulation
Wall angle
Fixing
4 min/piece
Measuring
5 min/piece
Measuring
4,8 min/m2
Fixing
6 min/m2
Cutting
3,6 min/m2
Measuring
9 min/piece
Cutting
6 min/piece
Installing
6 min/piece
Measuring
4 min/m2
Installing
4 min/m2
Window frame
Window sill
Fixing
5 min/piece
Measuring
7 min/piece
Leveling
4 min/piece
Fixing
10 min/piece
 
Figure 2.  Technological dependencies between work steps and their 
non-weather-space-related execution duration 
Based on the concept represented in Fig. 1, two 
schedules have been achieved from the simulation model: 
the as-built schedule and the as-possible schedule. The 
term “as-built schedule” is used to describe the actual 
schedule as constructed on site. The “as-possible 
schedule” expression is used to describe the schedule 
which considers the technological dependencies as well as 
the impact of weather conditions and workspace 
requirements.  
In this example, the contract specifies a start 
construction date of February 12, 2008. The results of the 
model for the as-planned, as-built and as-possible schedule 
are shown in Fig. 3. The term “as-planned schedule” 
mentions the schedule which is prepared in the 
preconstruction stage. 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Number of finished work steps
Working days
as-planned schedule
as-built schedule
as-possible schedule
 
Figure 3.  Output of one simulation run 
The results consist of the number of work steps, which are 
finished in a period of 5 days. Because the first day (Feb 
12) is Tuesday, the fifth day (Feb 16) is Saturday, which is 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

a non-working day. Thus the schedules from Feb 12 to Feb 
15 are achieved. Fig. 3 provides a daily comparison 
between the finished work steps of the as-possible, as-
planned and as-built schedules for the first 4 working days. 
The number of finished work steps of the as-possible 
schedule is fewer than that of as-planned or as-built 
schedules. For example, on the first day, the number of 
finished work steps of as-planned, as-built, and as-possible 
schedule are 400, 400, 350 work steps respectively. During 
these 
four 
working 
days, 
construction 
operations 
experience delays and work steps’ duration extended due 
to bad weather and spatial conflicts. On the first 3 days, 
there is heavy rain for 2 hours every day. Thus the work on 
the construction site is temporarily shut-down during the 
rain storm and the labor productivity is recalculated 
considering the uncomfortable conditions of temperature, 
humidity, wind velocity and unavailable workspace. Fig. 4 
shows the work steps’ execution table, including the start, 
duration, end point of time and specific information of the 
corresponding work steps.  
One simulation run calculates exactly one practical 
execution schedule. Thus, project managers can develop 
different execution strategies and chose the optimal one to 
reduce the consequences caused by weather and space 
problems.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Statistic of the execution process 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Construction processes are complicated by nature and 
usually disturbed by many factors. These factors can affect 
progress individually or simultaneously, in the latter case 
they can create even worse consequences. The requirement 
to provide decision support systems to consider 
simultaneously different affected factors is necessary, 
which has not been researched enough in previous studies. 
Using simulation models to research construction 
problems is proven to be effective and convenient. This 
paper provides a multi-layer simulation framework which 
considers technological and spatial constraints as well as 
the impact of weather for construction planning. These 
aspects are described as hard and soft constraints in 
construction processes. This approach provides a flexible 
way to consider weather and spatial aspects where the 
model can easily be adapted by adding or removing 
constraints. Moreover, layers of this framework can 
interact flexibly with each others to ensure that the impact 
of spatial conflicts and bad weather conditions can be 
considered hierarchically. Based on this concept, more 
different influencing factors of construction processes can 
be integrated in the same model.  
Furthermore, in the next research steps, based on 
weather-spatial-impacted results, alternative strategies to 
reduce the consequences can be provided and analyzed 
using this simulation model. Therefore, it is easier for 
managers to make the right decisions when encountering 
weather and spatial problems. 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

REFERENCES 
[1] 
H.-J. Bargstädt and A. Elmahdi, "Simulation von 
Bauprozessen 
- 
ein 
Qualitätssprung 
für 
die 
Arbeitsvorbereitung," 
8. 
Grazer 
Baubetriebs- 
und 
Bauwirtschaftssymposium, 
Tagungsband 
2010 
- 
Arbeitsvorbereitung 
für 
Bauprojekte, 
Nutzen 
der 
Arbeitsvorbereitung für den Projekterfolg, vol. 2010, pp. 
131 - 146. 
[2] 
S. Castro and N. Dawood, "RoadSim: Simulation 
Modelling and Visualisation in Road Construction," 
Conference on construction application of virtual reality, 
Lisbon, 2004, pp. 33-42. 
[3] 
H.-J. Bargstädt and A. Elmahdi, "Automatic Generation of 
workspace 
Requirements 
Using 
Qualitative 
and 
Quantitative Description," 10th International Conference 
on 
Construction 
Applications 
of 
Virtual 
Reality 
CONVR2010 Organizing Committee, Japan,  Sendai 
2010, pp. 131-137. 
[4] 
D.W. Halphin and L.S. Riggs, "Planning and Analysis of 
Construction 
Operations." 
1992, 
Canada: 
Wiley-
Interscience. 
[5] 
G. Heinicke, "Technologie des Ausbaus," 2., durchges. ed. 
Lehrbuchreihe Technologie der Bauproduktion Technische 
Hochschule Leipzig. 1982, Berlin: Verl. für Bauwesen. 
[6] 
N.B. Benjamin and T.W. Greenwald, "Simulating effects 
of weather on construction," Journal of Construction 
Engineering and Management, vol. 99, 1973, pp. 175-190. 
[7] 
D.R. Riley and V.E. Sanvido, "Patterns of Construction-
Space 
Use 
in 
Multistory 
Buildings," 
Journal 
of 
Construction Engineering and Management, vol. 121, 
1995, pp. 464-473. 
[8] 
D.R. Riley and V.E. Sanvido, "Space Planning Method for 
Multistory 
Building 
Construction," 
Journal 
of 
Construction Engineering and Management, vol. 123, 
1997, pp. 171-180. 
[9] 
B. Akinci, M. Fischer, and J. Kunz, "Automated 
Generation of Work Spaces Required by Construction 
Activities," Journal of Construction Engineering and 
Management, vol. 128, 2002c, pp. 306-315. 
[10] R. Akbas, "Geometry-Based Modeling and Simulation of 
Construction Processes," 2004. 
[11] E. Koehn and G. Brown, "Climatic Effects on 
Construction," Journal of Construction Engineering and 
Management, vol. 111, 1985, pp. 129-137. 
[12] H.R. Thomas and I. Yiakoumis, "Factor Model of 
Construction Productivity," Journal of Construction 
Engineering and Management, vol. 113, 1987, pp. 623-
639. 
[13] O. Moselhi and K. El-Rayes, "Analyzing Weather-Related 
Construction Claims," Cost Engineering vol. 44, 2002, pp. 
12-19. 
[14] H.-S. Lee, H.-G. Ryu, J.-H. Yu, and J.-J. Kim, "Method 
for Calculating Schedule Delay Considering Lost 
Productivity," Journal of Construction Engineering and 
Management, vol. 131, 2005, pp. 1147-1154. 
[15] A. Shahin, S. AbouRizk, Y. Mohamed, and S. Fernando, 
"A simulation-based framework for quantifying the cold 
regions weather impacts on construction schedules," 
Proceedings of the 39th conference on Winter simulation, 
IEEE Press, Washington D.C., 2007, pp. 1798-1804. 
[16] S. Kenner, R.L. Johnson, J.R. Miller, J.A. Salmen, and 
S.A. Matt, "Development of Working Day Weather Charts 
for Transportation Construction in South Dakota," Study 
SD97-07, Technical Report, South Dakota Department of 
Transportation, Pierre, SD., 1998. 
[17] D. Atef, H. Osman, M. Ibrahim, and K. Nassar, "A 
simulation-based planning system for wind turbine 
construction," Proceedings of the 2010 Winter Simulation 
Conference, Baltimore, Maryland, 2010, pp. 3283-3294. 
[18] ForBau, "Modellierung der Wettereinflüsse auf den 
Erdbau," in Forschungsverbund: Virtuelle baustelle-
Digitale Werkzeuge für die Bauplanung und -abwicklung, 
Abschlussbericht. 2010. pp. 117-120. 
[19] U. Beißert, M. König, and H.-J. Bargstädt, "Constraint-
Based Simulation of outfitting processes in Building 
Engineering," CIB 24th W78 Conference, Maribor, 
Slovenia 2007, pp. 491-497. 
[20] U. Beißert, M. König, and H.-J. Bargstädt, "Considering 
quality 
aspects 
for 
construction 
scheduling 
using 
Constraint-Based Simulation," CIB W078 & MC4T - 
Managing IT in Construction., A.A. Balkema, Istanbul, 
Turkey, 2009, pp. 1-9. 
[21] J.K. Voigtmann and H.J. Bargstädt, "Logistic Strategies 
for Construction Processes," Proceeding of the IABSE ICT 
Conference, Helsinki, Findland, 2008a, pp. 1-8. 
[22] J.K. Voigtmann and H.J. Bargstädt, "Simulation of 
construction logistics in outfitting processes," EWork and 
EBusiness in Architecture, Engineering and Construction: 
ECPPM, 2008b, pp. 195-203. 
[23] H.H. Le and H.-J. Bargstädt, "A simulation approach to 
integrate weather impact into the execution planning," 
Proceedings of the 27th CIBW78 - Applications of IT in 
the AEC Industry, Cairo, Egypt, 2010a, pp. 1-10. 
[24] H.H. Le and H.-J. Bargstädt, "Simulation des Einflusses 
von Witterungsbedingungen auf die Bauausführung," 14th 
ASIM - Integration Aspects of Simulation: Equiptment, 
Organization and Personnel, KIT Scientific Publishing, 
Karlsruhe, Germany, 2010b, pp. 125-132. 
[25] E. Sriprasert and N. Dawood, "Requirements identification 
for 4D constraint-based construction planning and control 
system," Proceedings of CIB w78 Conference, Aarhus, 
Denmark, 2002, pp. 1-8. 
[26] M. König, U. Beißert, D. Steinhauer, and H.-J. Bargstädt, 
"Constraint-Based Simulation of outfitting processes in 
Shipbuilding and Civil Engineering," 6th EUROSIM 
Congress in Modelling and Simulation, Ljubljana, 
Slovenia, 2007, pp. 1-11. 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

