Model-based Method to achieve EMC for Distributed Safety-Relevant Automotive
Systems
Andreas Baumgart∗, Klaus H¨ormaier†, Gerhard Deuter‡
∗Carl von Ossietzky Universit¨at Oldenburg
Email: andreas.baumgart@uni-oldenburg.de
†Inﬁneon Technologies Austria AG
Email: klaus.hoermaier@inﬁneon.com
‡TWT GmbH - Science & Innovation
Email: gerhard.deuter@twt-gmbh.de
Abstract—Automobiles contain an increasing number of dis-
tributed Electrical and Electronic systems. Among such systems,
Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) is a major issue that
impacts functional safety and requires a high veriﬁcation effort.
The automotive standard for functional safety ISO 26262 already
provides requirements for EMC and refers to agreed standards.
It addresses the topic during the development process in order
to obtain a tolerable level of risks arising from possible causes
for system malfunctions. Yet, a coherent process for EMC
and functional safety on a concept level is missing. With this
publication a model-based method is provided that connects
speciﬁcation, design, and analysis of functional as well as physical
characteristics for distributed safety-relevant systems with EMC
simulations. By applying our method, potential coupling paths
and EMC issues can be systematically identiﬁed, analyzed and
addressed by introducing counter measures at a concept level
of the development process. The resulting technical design is
compliant to a technical safety concept and traceable with
respect to electromagnetic characteristics of affected hardware
components and wires.
Keywords–Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC); Model-based
design; Automotive; ISO 26262; Safety-relevant systems
I.
INTRODUCTION
Today’s cars contain an increasing amount and variety of
Electrical and Electronic (E/E) systems. Thereby, many of
them implement safety-relevant functions. The ISO 26262 is
the agreed automotive standard for functional safety, which
provides requirements and recommendations for the develop-
ment of such systems.
One issue addressed by that standard is EMC for a safety-
relevant system and its environment. Electromagnetic interfer-
ence (EMI) between hardware components is a typical cause
for failure dependencies (e.g., common cause failures) and
for systematic failures in hardware components that realize
functions of safety-relevant systems. Physical characteristics of
hardware components and interconnecting wires can provide
coupling conditions leading to critical malfunctions. Therefore,
EMC must be addressed when deﬁning a safety concept for
a safety-relevant E/E system and when designing its hardware
such that it is sufﬁciently robust against EMI. However, the
parameter space for a speciﬁc EMC problem is typically very
large. Thus, the evaluation of its electromagnetic (EM) proper-
ties is very complex. Trying to simulate all hardware compo-
nents on a detailed level requires enormous effort. Abstraction
of the EMC problem with conservative over-approximation of
EMC can help. In order to reduce the complexity and to ensure
functional safety w.r.t EMC this work presents a guideline on
how to tackle the problem on the system level of the safety
process.
The proposed method is a combination of analysis and
simulation-based test methods. It allows a systematic iden-
tiﬁcation and evaluation of safety-relevant malfunctions and
faults related to EMC. We propose a model-based approach
together with contracts. It allows specifying dependencies
between functional and physical characteristics of distributed
and interconnected components. With it the EMC problem can
be addressed for distributed system development. Typically,
contracts are used to model and analyze functional character-
istics of E/E systems. The electromagnetic inﬂuence of hard-
ware components and connector systems (wiring harness) and
their relationship to functional system properties is neglected.
Thus, we propose a meta-model together with a corresponding
workﬂow to address this problem. In order to cope with the
complexity of the EMC problem the scope of this paper is
limited to electrical near ﬁeld coupling. Since the paper refers
mainly to the ISO 26262, we use the wording and terms from
this standard.
This paper is structured as follows. We ﬁrst describe the
state of the art with regard to this publication. In the following
section we introduce the basics of contracts, functional safety
according to the ISO 26262, and multi-perspective modeling.
Finally, we deﬁne the meta-model and the workﬂow of the
proposed methodology in IV and discuss its beneﬁts.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
In this section, the state of the art is described and discussed
regarding methods for safety-relevant automotive systems,
EMC, model-based methods including existing standards and
tools as well as related work.
A. Safety-relevant automotive systems
Today’s automotive system engineering processes and qual-
ity management guidelines take into account the topic func-
tional safety respecting the standard ISO 26262 [1] that has
been effective since 2011. The standard addresses EMC in
the context of robustness as well as systematic and dependent
failures on different levels of abstraction, i.e., system and
hardware level. Standardized testing methods are referenced
for usage to ensure EMI robustness of hardware components
as well as parts and to address EMC in system integration
tests. Depending on the ASIL safety goals and derived safety
requirements may only be violated with a maximum failure
rate which is analyzed using quantitative methods like Fault
Tree Analysis (FTA) or by applying fault metrics. FTA is
263
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

deﬁned in [2]. A typical topic regarding the analysis of fault-
trees is the analysis of cut-sets and the determination of
minimal cut-sets as shown in [3]. In order to analyze the
quantitative inﬂuence of common cause failures like those
related to EMI the parent standard IEC 61508 [4] suggests the
usage of a β-factor analysis. The analysis is systematic using a
table with questions to determine the β- factor. Implementation
assumptions including EMC-related wire alignment such as
cable alignment and further environmental characteristics are
considered in this catalog of questions. The analysis is for
instance supported by the tool FaultTree+ [5] or by Medini
Analyze from IKV[6].
B. EMC
EMC is a major topic for automotive industry and sub-
ject to many publications, standards and physical simulation
tools. A detailed description of cross talk in the automotive
environment is given in [7]. The number of tool, suitable
for modelling and simulation of EMI of car components
seems quite limited. Yet their number increases. EMC Studio
[8], for example, provides a useful framework to simulation
EMI between cables and devices. The same is possible with
FEKO [9]. Both tools allow deﬁning a cable tree, attaching
circuits and simulating the interference in terms of parasitic
voltages, currents, and critical frequency ranges. Powerful
hybrid tools such as COMSOL Multiphysics [10], also allow
correct simulation of EMI providing a profound knowledge
of electromagnetism. All those tools are equally suitable for
the evaluation of EMI at a ﬁxed geometry. The data obtained
from such simulation is available for formulating or reﬁning
contracts, which can be used in the authors evaluation process.
The authors focus on the development of such a simulation
tool which is also able to optimize cable and cable tree geome-
try with regard to EMC for given external boundary conditions,
such as a case or housing. With regard to the topic of functional
safety discussed above, an overview about the impact of
functional safety on EMC is provided by Kado et al. [11].
The authors of that publication discuss environmental factors
like temperature and ageing effects and note their importance
for EMC. According to them, a safety manager must have
an overview on all EMC activities. Failure modes caused by
EMI have to be taken into account during the hazard analysis
and risk assessment. Inductive and deductive safety analyses
as well as fault injection tests need to be performed. Common
cause failures with regard to environmental conditions need
to be identiﬁed for all safety-critical functions to determine
appropriate measures. A respective test plan should be created
with regard to EMC relevant characteristics and traceability of
EMC related documents needs to be ensured.
C. Model-based approaches
Capturing the complexity is one challenge for safety-
relevant systems and also for EMC. This challenge is often
addressed by model-based methods and tools supporting them.
One related formalism is the use of contracts. Contracts have
been subject to various research projects in the context of
safety-relevant systems like SPEEDS [12], CESAR [13] or
SPES2020 [14]. The contracts enable formal requirements en-
gineering and systems engineering by explicitly distinguishing
between assumptions and promises of system components.
An overview about contracts is provided by Benveniste et
al. [15]. Formal representations of assumptions and promise
are often discussed, e.g., regarding the use of Linear Tempo-
ral Logic (LTL) formulas for functional conditions or other
pattern-based expressions with deﬁned syntax and semantics
for various aspects. Among other things virtual integration
testing is deﬁned for contracts with functional and safety
characteristics allowing formal analysis of consistency and
compatibility between system components as well as checking
the correct implementation of a contract by components with
derived contracts. To analyze integration of components re-
garding physical conditions typically tools like Simulink [16]
or Modelica [17] are referenced. Modelling languages can be
used to describe design artefacts and their relationships such
as system components and requirements to be satisﬁed on
different abstraction levels and architectural perspectives as
described by Damm et al. [18]. An architectural modelling
language for automotive system design is EAST-ADL [19].
It addresses topics like hardware modelling, error modelling
and traceability between design and requirements on differ-
ent abstraction levels and architectures. Hardware connectors
between hardware components are considered as wires. It is
possible to allocate requirements (including requirements on
EMC) to both, connectors and components. The alignment of
wires can be described by using descriptive concepts from
the Harness Description List (HDL) [20]. Functional design
traceable with the topological layout of wires can be deﬁned
in the tool PREEvision from Vector. It provides different
architectural views including a logical architecture view, a
hardware architecture view, a wiring harness view, and a
geometric view. Therefore, reasoning about the alignment of
wires is possible with PREEvision.
D. Related work
A methodology similar to the approach of this document
is proposed in previous work [21]. The methodology suggests
the usage of contracts to cope with environmental factors
related to physical conditions in a dependent failure analysis
with regard to the topology of a safety-related automotive
system. Simulation methods were recommended to determine
potential dependent failures. This approach instruments the
heterogeneous rich components (HRC) meta-model developed
in the SPEEDS project [22] in order to model contracts. The
method is evaluated for temperature. It will be shown how the
approach can be extended to investigate wire installations and
EMC together with physical simulations.
E. Discussion
From our point of view the presented state of the art
lacks in the missing interaction between EMC and functional
safety aspects. On the one hand, EMC is typically addressed
on detailed levels (II-B), which incorporates several risks.
Adhering to the recommendations of standards leads to over-
engineered (too robust) systems, or is not necessarily complete
regarding all safety-relevant EMI faults of a system under
design. Furthermore, the consistency of a system’s EMC
properties with its electromagnetic environment is not ensured
at design time. Unintended additional development loops can
therefore be required. On the other hand, an ISO 26262
compliant safety process is systematic and starts at an early
stage of system design. But, the standard does not deﬁne exact
methods or formalisms to integrate and analyze relevant EMC
264
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

properties with derived safety concepts. In order to perform
a β-factor analysis for EMI-related dependent failures EMC
characteristics of the system implementation must be known. A
systematic design process and derivation of requirements is not
considered. The discussed model-based methods, formalisms,
and tools only partially address the needs to address EMC in
an automotive safety process. For instance, existing contract
based methods do not address EMC. Formalisms like EAST-
ADL or KBL and tools like PREEvision do not allow to deﬁne
and analyze all relevant EMC characteristics with functional
and hardware architectures or wiring harnesses.
Thus, we propose a method to combine functional and
safety views of a system under design with a physical view. By
using concepts from the previously published approach [21],
extending it with concepts from HDL and PREEvision we are
able to link and analyze an automotive wiring topology and
related EMI) with a functional safety concept compliant to the
ISO 26262.
The main difference to the state of the art is the systematic
approach for EMC in the context of safety relevant automotive
systems. Starting with the requirements on the level of a
functional safety concept, technical EMC requirements are
consistently derived for concepts of a safety concept and its
environment. EMC requirements are made explicit in terms
of physical assumptions and promises for all relevant compo-
nents.
III.
BASICS
Our methodology builds upon contracts, functional safety,
EMC principles and multi–perspective modelling.
A. Contracts
Our approach includes the usage of contracts. They provide
a component speciﬁcation framework for distributed system
development. The usage of contracts allows a formalized ar-
gumentation about the combination of the single component’s
speciﬁcations in a deﬁned environment. Contract-based reason-
ing can be used for early validation in distributed development
with different suppliers or company divisions and for the reuse
of existing designs. Within the contract speciﬁcations, different
viewpoints such as functional, safety or physical concerns can
be addressed.
The basic idea of contracts is a structured speciﬁcation of
component characteristics in terms of assumption - promise
pairs. Crucial for contracts is the explicit deﬁnition of as-
sumptions made on the integration environment of a single
component. The component itself is considered as a black box.
Characteristics promised in the component’s speciﬁcation are
only guaranteed if the corresponding assumption holds.
In particular, compatibility between contracts of distributed
components and their combined integration in a context with
a contract on a higher level of abstraction can be analyzed by
applying contract based methods like a Virtual Integration Test
(VIT) as shown in [18].
In order to illustrate the structure of contracts, the following
contract speciﬁes a function with a promised execution time
for processing an output signal b, assuming that an input signal
a is available at a certain frequency: Assumption: ”a occurs at
most every 100 ms.” Promise: ”whenever a occurs b occurs at
most after 80 ms.
B. EMC, Functional Safety and ISO 26262
The automotive functional safety standard ISO 26262 [1]
provides a framework of requirements, activities, and rec-
ommendations to achieve functional safety for automotive
E/E systems. According to this standard, functional safety is
a property of E/E systems that guaranties the “absence of
unreasonable risk due to hazards caused by malfunctioning
behavior”.
In an early stage of the safety process the E/E system
is deﬁned in its boundary on vehicle level as item. For this
item hazardous malfunctions are identiﬁed in a hazard analysis
and risk assessment. These hazards are considered in different
operational scenarios as risks. An Automotive Safety Integrity
Level (ASIL) is determined and assigned to the risks, rating
a risk as safety relevant (ASIL A to D) or as a matter of
an established quality management (QM). Safety goals are de-
rived from the safety relevant risks. They go along with further
requirements for the system design depending on the ASIL. For
each safety goal functional safety requirements are derived,
deﬁning together the functional safety concept. They consist
of technology independent deﬁnitions on how safe states are
maintained by a system’s elements in order to achieve a
safety goal. Dependent failures caused by, e.g., EMI have to
be taken into account. Reasoning about them on the level
of the functional safety concept typically requires knowledge
about the technical realization, which is not complete at that
stage of the process. Yet, preliminary architectural assumptions
and environmental constraints are typically available and can
be reﬁned. Therefore, dependent failures have to be taken
into account when deﬁning the technical safety concept and
when arguing about its compliance to the functional safety
concept. When deriving technical safety requirements from the
functional safety requirements, analysis methods like a FTA
are recommended to “identify causes of systematic failures and
the effects of systematic faults”. EMC violations are systematic
causes related to the integration environment of a hardware el-
ement (victim) implementing parts of a safety relevant system.
Therefore, EMC is related to integration testing. Also, when
reusing an existing technical design, environmental conditions
such as EMC shall be checked before implementing a system.
Additionally, on hardware level the “level of robustness shall
be demonstrated using feasible test methods” for which the
ISO 26262 refers to typical standards such as ISO 7637
“Road vehicles - Electrical disturbances from conduction and
coupling”. To test whether an EMC-related environmental
conditions is relevant for functions safety, the safety-relevant
situations must ﬁrst be identiﬁed in the safety process.
C. Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC)
A component is EM compatible when the emitted interfer-
ence is low enough to not affect other components or systems
and is robust enough not to be inﬂuenced by other sources of
disturbance. As shown in Figure 1, each atomic EMC problem
consists of an aggressor, the victim and at least one coupling
path. EMC can generally be improved from three different
angles in a system: Reduction of the interference generated
by the aggressor, improving EM decoupling or improving the
victim’s robustness. Simulation of the system can be used to
determine the most effective counter measure or veriﬁed the
compatibility.
265
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Potential 
Victim
wirining harness
Potential 
Victim
Potential 
Aggressor 
or load
Potential 
Aggressor
electrical near field coupling
Figure 1. Overview of the aggressor, the coupling path and the victim
In electrical engineering, EM coupling is typically modeled
as a feedback from the victim to the aggressor. To describe
the aggressor, the victim and the coupling path as impedance
networks, design models, and measured data can be used. The
component’s impedances are either determined by measuring
S-parameters or extracted from the design model. Regarding
the aggressor, a guideline for modelling an Integrated Circuits
(IC) black box emission model is given in [23]. For the char-
acterization of external aggressors the standard IEC 61000-2
[24] can be used. The coupling path can be modeled, as shown
in [7], by using a lumped transmission line model.
Currently, simulations use a conﬁgurable aggressor model,
able to emit standardized output. The victim can be speciﬁed
either by its impedance or an equivalent circuit. Modelling
and simulation of the coupling path is a more complex task.
Coupling between wires depends on different variables includ-
ing their geometry, their materials, and additional surrounding
conductors such as a housing. Given all speciﬁc parameters
for the coupling path, one can calculate the frequency and
temperature-dependent coupling parameters, resistance, con-
ductance, capacitance, and inductance per unit length (includ-
ing their parasitic components) for the speciﬁc transmission
line(s). An equivalent circuit can be deﬁned, the aggressor
and victim model added and the crosstalk simulated using
SPICE or any other circuit solver (for a simple schematic
model see Figure 2). Those solvers usually instrument different
numerical methods (various matrix solvers, ﬁnite elements,
ﬁnite differences) to obtain results for the system of cou-
pled differential equations describing the time and frequency
behavior of the circuit. Using suitable numerical methods,
qualitative and quantitative results can be obtained in time and
frequency domain. Using such EMI simulation in the context
of functional safety analysis will be discussed in Section IV-B.
The complexity of the simulated system is usually only limited
by the simulation hardware.
ZI
ZL
ZV1
ZV2
Aggressor
Victim
Cross Coupling Model
Wiring harness
Figure 2. Schematic circuit for aggressor, wiring harness (coupling path) and
victim with impedances.
Currently, any possible dependence of EMC to the victim
or aggressor operation modes must be considered in the general
analysis and cannot be handled by such a simulation. The
operation modes of the victim and the aggressor have inﬂuence
on their EMC properties.
D. Multi-Perspective Modelling
Since EMC is a physical property respective characteristics
need to be related to functional design for a model-based
argumentation in the context of functional safety. A recent
approach described in research projects like SPES 2020 [18]
is the description of models at different structural viewpoints
called perspectives. Their elements are related to another by
means of allocation. This allows for the separation of concerns
while preserving a system’s properties. For the perspectives
the viewpoints operational, functional, logical, and geomet-
rical are considered where this work’s focuses on the last
three. Functions are mapped to an architectural description in
the logical perspective with decomposed and interconnected
logical components as a “description of the logical solution
independent from technological constraints” [25]. A model in
a technical perspective is a description of a system’s hardware
and software, their interactions, as well as their technical and
physical properties and constraints. In a geometrical perspec-
tive, a model describes the topological layout of a system i.e.,
a deﬁnition of physical positions claimed by elements of a
hardware architecture within a reference coordinate system.
The idea and the concepts of multi-perspective modelling
provide an important base for the proposed EMC method,
which will be discussed in IV.
IV.
DESIGN METHODOLOGY
In this section, the proposed methodology for contract
based automotive EMC is presented. At ﬁrst, the application of
the meta-model is discussed. Then the EMC-workﬂow is pre-
sented. We conclude with a comparison of the disadvantages
and advantages of our method.
A. Meta–Model
The model that we propose for EMC-related safety analysis
extends hardware modelling concepts from EAST–ADL by
contracts, wires, and topological information as depicted in
Figure 3. The model can be used as an extension of EAST-
ADL in order to support the workﬂow discussed in section
IV-B. EAST–ADL is implemented in different ways such as
proﬁles for several UML tools (e.g. Eclipse / Papyrus UML)
or with the EATOP platform, all listed by the EAST-ADL
association [26]. The concepts and relationships of the model
can also be used in a meta-model of a Reference Technology
Platform, discussed in research projects like CESAR, MBAT or
CRYSTAL, to support the workﬂow with integrated and inter-
operating tools, as shown, for instance, in [27]. EAST–ADL
allows modelling of a hardware architecture with hardware
components, parts and logical as well as electrical connections.
The proposed extension allows the deﬁnition of contracts with
regard to the concepts of the HRC meta-model [21]. The
contracts contain speciﬁcations of assertions that deﬁne the
assumptions and promises of the contracts. EAST–ADL allows
to allocate requirements to architectural elements like hardware
components by using the concept of a satisfy-link. We extend
the satisfy-link concept such that contracts can be allocated to
the architectural elements. By introducing concepts for wires
266
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

in our extension, contracts can be allocated to wires of a
wiring harness, too. Prototypes (instances) of such wires are
related to hardware connectors via a wire mapping allowing
assignment of physical properties to the hardware connectors.
A crucial part of our proposed model is the introduction of a
geometric view with topological information as discussed in
previous work [21]. Topological elements can be deﬁned like
a component hierarchy with topological nodes as parts and
routed interconnection segments in between them. Looking at
PREEvision and HDL one would distinguish between hierar-
chies of installation spaces and locations as topological nodes
and installation routes described by topological segments with
deﬁned curves between such nodes. Geometrical information is
assigned to the hardware elements like prototypes of hardware
components and wires by installing them to the topological
elements. By such an installation, physical space claimed by
the elements of the hardware architecture is deﬁned. Reasoning
about physical properties like distance, length of wires, or
alignment of wires is enabled this way. These properties are
needed for analyses like a dependent failure analysis w.r.t.
environmental factors such as EMC.
WirePrototype
HardwareConnector
HardwarePin
HardwareComponentType
TopologyElement
HardwareComponentPrototype
Contract
Assertion
WireType
EAST-ADL
+assumption
0..1
+part
0..*
+pin
0..*
+connector
0..*
+type
1
+type
1
«Installation»
+promise
1
«instanceRef»
+pin
2
«Installation»
«Wire Mapping»
«satisfy»
«satisfy»
Figure 3. Overview on the meta-model concepts and relationships
A generic instance of the proposed meta–model is as
follows. With existing EAST–ADL concepts an automotive
hardware architecture with the hardware components of a
vehicle (typically ECUs, actuators, sensors) is modelled as
described in [19]. By using the concepts and relationships
of the proposed EAST-ADL extension, depicted in Figure 3
and described above, a model can be deﬁned in a way that
it can be used for the proposed workﬂow. Safety require-
ments are formulated as contracts by using the Contract
concept. Like in [22], assumption and promise of a con-
tract are modelled using the Assertion concept with an
attribute to carry the descriptions of the respective conditions.
As considered by EAST–ADL for safety requirements the
contracts are allocated to the HardwareComponentTypes
of the hardware components by using the ≪satisfy≫ link
concept indicating that a hardware component shall satisfy
the contract. The wiring harness of a vehicle is modelled by
using the concept WirePrototype for every wire of the
wiring harness. Each wire is typed by a WireType deﬁning
the type of the wire with its properties. As intended by the
proposed methodology the properties are deﬁned in contracts
using the Contract concept, as described above, and the
satisfy link concept. A HardwareConnector becomes
a wire by using the ≪Wire Mapping≫ link concept between
a HardwareConnector and a WirePrototype. The
geometric perspective for the hardware architecture and the
wiring harness is deﬁned by using the TopologyElement
concept. With it the geometric topology of the vehicle is
deﬁned and its installation spaces. Furthermore, with this
concept installation locations for the hardware components
and routes for the wires are deﬁned. Details on how to de-
ﬁne a geometric architecture with concrete topology elements
are given in [21]. The hardware components are assigned
installation locations by using the
≪Installation≫ link
concept between a HardwareComponentPrototype and
the related TopologyElement. The hardware components
of the hardware architecture are assigned installation loca-
tions by using the
≪Installation≫ link concept be-
tween a HardwareComponentPrototype and the re-
lated TopologyElement. The wires of the wiring harness
are assigned routes by using the
≪Installation≫ link
concept
between
a
WirePrototype
and
the
related
TopologyElement.
For a model-based realization of our workﬂow, different
architectural, mapping, and requirement views are required.
These include technical hardware architecture, wiring harness,
geometric topology, contract-based requirements, and mapping
relationships between the respective views. The proposed
meta-model provides concepts and relationships needed for
the required views. The development of a technical safety
concept (TSC) for an item w.r.t. ISO 26262 is usually done
by the Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) before the
actual implementation is done by the suppliers on hard- and
software level. Our goal is to specify and validate EMC on
system level in an environment of preliminary architectural
assumptions with technical safety as well as functional and
EMC requirements.
B. Proposed workﬂow
The prerequisites for our workﬂow, as illustrated in Figure
4, consist of a Functional Safety Concept (FSC) with func-
tional safety requirements. The functional safety requirements
are allocated on system elements that belong to preliminary ar-
chitectural assumptions. Typically, dependent failure situations
cannot be addressed in the functional safety concept because a
reﬁned architecture description must be known. Dependencies
between functions mainly arise with lower abstraction levels
(implementation details), like e.g., shared resources or physical
implementation. For EMC, dependent failures regarding EMI
and systematic failures in the TSC affecting the elements of the
item are investigated. To address EMI faults, the requirements
speciﬁcations of other electrical systems are also taken into
account. The technical speciﬁcations and requirements for the
wiring harness must be checked as well, because they describe
the possible coupling paths. To rate the EM coupling paths,
an existing geometrical model that deﬁnes the topology of the
technical elements and the wiring harness is used. The entire
267
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

topology model is created by mapping the technical elements
and the elements of the wiring harness to the geometrical
topology elements as described by the meta-model.
Figure 4. Proposed workﬂow
The ﬁrst step (1) of the proposed method is a FTA and
a cut-set analysis. In the FTA combinations of possible cause
(faults) are analyzed which lead to violations of the safety
goals assigned to the item. How to perform a cut-set analysis
can be found in [2] or [28]. Additionally, the preliminary
architectural assumptions are reﬁned towards an architectural
description with technical elements of the item that become
hardware components (e.g., sensors, ECUs, actuators). In the
FTA also faults related to EMI are visible as base events. The
reﬁned preliminary architectural assumptions allow to address
failures with regard to the hardware components of the item
and to derive a TSC that respects EMC for the hardware
components as possible victims. Therefore EMC-related faults
are included.
An example for an EMI related fault is the radio frequency
(RF) signal, which is inadvertently identiﬁed as valid signal.
We deﬁne EMC faults as violations of electrical-constraints
caused by coupled RF signals. These characteristics have to be
considered in the FTA leading to base events in the fault tree,
which can be potentially caused by disturbances or coupling
with other systems. With the cut-set analysis the combinations
of the faults including EMC faults, which lead to violations of
the safety goals for the item are extracted from the fault-tree.
In the second step (2), the technical safety requirements
are formulated. They are derived from the functional safety
concept as well as from the FTA and cut-set analysis results
including the EMC faults. For each functional speciﬁcation
that can be violated by an EMC fault according to the fault-
tree an EMC assumption is formulated. The EMC assumption
speciﬁes an EMC constraint whose violation leads to the EMC
fault. For instance for the fault ”RF-voltage at sensor port”
an assumption is formulated ”RF-voltage at sensor port in [-
5 V, 5 V]. Note: Other EMC assumptions can address electro-
magnetic characteristics including frequency, time, power or
current. The contract deﬁning the technical safety requirement
consists of the EMC assumption and the related functional
speciﬁcation as promise. The technical safety requirements are
allocated to the technical elements of in the preliminary archi-
tectural assumptions. By neglecting the EMC characteristics of
the assumptions in the technical safety requirements existing
contract-based integration analysis tests, as shown in [29], can
be used in order verify compliance between the TSC and
the FSC. The compliance between the TSC and the physical
environment w.r.t. EMC is analyzed in later steps.
The next step (3) aims to elicit the potential aggressor
contracts and the EMC properties. Typically, all technical
elements can act as EM aggressors w.r.t. the technical elements
of the item including its own. At this point it is assumed
that the OEM has already decided which components will
be installed. We assume that the requirements specifying EM
properties take the form of contracts. In a new environment
all contracts are not necessarily available. Thus, data has to
be requested by the suppliers or the components have to
be characterized. The assumption is typically a functional
condition e.g., given by a LTL formula or similar concept like
the Requirements Speciﬁcation Language (RSL) described in
[18]. The promise is a physical condition that depends on
e.g., input voltage range and operating mode. An example
for contracts with physical conditions regarding EMC in the
promise is given with the following contracts. They are written
down using natural language pattern.
Contract 1:
Assumption: (mode = off implies SwitchingTime > 20 ms);
Promise: mode = off implies RF voltage(power out) in [-0.1 V,
0.1 V] with a inner resistance higher 120 Ω,
Contract 2:
Assumption: (mode = on implies SwitchingTime ≥ 10 us);
Promise: mode = on implies RF voltage(power out) in [-20 V,
20 V] with a inner resistance higher 120 Ω,
Contract 3:
Assumption: (mode = error implies 10 ns < SwitchingTime <
10 us );
Promise: mode = error implies RF voltage(power out) in [-
120 V, 120 V] with a inner resistance higher 18 Ω.
The result of step 3 will typically be a large amount of EM
aggressor contracts. Step 4 therefore targets a reduction of the
amount of involved EM aggressor contracts by ﬁltering. For
the ﬁltering an ideal coupling path is assumed, which is the
worst case. An assumption on a voltage between -5 V and 5 V
is not violated by hardware components with a guaranteed RF
voltage between -5 V and 5 V. So the contract
Contract 1:
Assumption: (mode = off implies SwitchingTime > 20 ms);
Promise: mode = off implies RF voltage(power out) in [-0.1 V,
0.1 V] with a inner resistance higher 120 Ω,
from step 3 is not taken. The result is a set of critical victim
- aggressor combinations (including modes of operation), for
which the TSC is violated. Due to the overestimation not
necessarily all of the combinations will violate the TSC in
the implementation. Therefore, reﬁnement of the models and
analysis as described in Step 5 is necessary.
In Step 5, the correct physical model is created reducing
the overestimation. For each critical victim - aggressor
combinations from step 4, the coupling model is generated
using
the
physical
and
geometrical
information
from
268
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

the speciﬁcations. An example for a contract specifying
characteristics of a wire is
Contract 1:
Assumption:
(shielding
type
=
braided
&
manufac-
turer tolerance
>
-5%
frequency
range
=
[10
Hz
to
200 kHz]);
Promise: shielding thickness ≥ 1 mm; attenuation > 10 dB
These models can be simulated using the method described in
Section III-C or commercial tools (e.g., FEKO, EMC Studio).
Each outcome of an executed simulation has two possible
states regarding the EMC assumptions of the victim:
- The EMC assumptions are not violated within the simulated
EM environment with the respective aggressors and coupling
paths.
- They are violated by the simulated environment.
For the victim - aggressor combinations that remain after
ﬁltering and violate the EMC assumptions, adequate counter
measures are speciﬁed. Possible measures w.r.t to EMC faults
and their impact are described as follows:
•
For a violation of an EMC assumption the robustness
of the victim has to be increased by changing the EMC
assumption (e.g., immunity against RF voltages up to
20 V instead of 5 V).
Impact: Introduction of hardware measures to achieve
a better EM immunity. This will eventually be covered
by the supplier.
•
If there are no degrees of freedom for the victim’s
speciﬁcation, modiﬁcation of the wiring harness can
be required. This can lead to stronger requirements
for the affected parts of the wiring harness (e.g., a
cable within the harness must be shielded) or to a
modiﬁcation of the geometry of the wiring harness
(e.g., change the install of a wire from an identiﬁed
coupling path to another location).
Impact: Coordination with the person responsible for
the wiring harness.
•
If there are no degrees of freedom for the speciﬁcation
of the victim and the wiring harness, it seems reason-
able to strengthen the aggressors EMC promises (e.g.,
voltage output in case of error below 20 V instead of
50 V).
Impact: Coordination with the person responsible for
the aggressor.
•
If there are violations of EMC assumptions in case
of failures related to the aggressors (e.g., error states)
and there are no degrees of freedom for changes on
aggressor, victim or wiring harness, the respective
EMC assumption can be removed and instead a safety
mechanism is speciﬁed. The deﬁnition of the safety
mechanism takes the form of a contract and is spec-
iﬁed in the promise. The safety mechanism typically
deﬁnes how a safe state is maintained (e.g., Promise:
Whenever the voltage at sensor port is larger than
20 V the sensor interface shall deliver the code ”No
valid data”.
Impact: New veriﬁcation of compliance between func-
tional and technical safety concept.
The order of the different measures is exchangeable and
depends on the effort to be spent as well as the inﬂuence of the
OEM on the affected suppliers. After a “safety measure” has
been chosen, the fault tree is adjusted and the cut-set Analysis
performed again. The modiﬁcation(s) have to be applied to the
requirement speciﬁcations and the TSC, also, the architecture
models have to be adjusted. Depending on the modiﬁcation,
some simulation models might not change and therefore don’t
need to be investigated again. The determination of such
models will not be discussed during this work.
C. Summary
The beneﬁts of the presented method are the following:
Coarse ﬁltering of dependencies and identiﬁcation of possibly
safety-relevant problems have been simpliﬁed by using a sys-
tematic model-based approach with contracts. Early validation
of the TSC for typical EMC problems is possible, reducing
unnecessary iteration loops during testing and development.
Changes and/or removal of hardware components do not
necessarily force a reevaluation of the TSC. A less pessimistic
EMC design is possible, the OEM can reduce overprotection
of individual technical system elements. Including topological
information to the safety analysis allows characterization of
the EM coupling paths. The approach and the proposed meta-
model allows traceability of functional and physical speciﬁca-
tions in the safety process.
The drawbacks, on the other hand, are: Assumptions about
the completeness of the system deﬁnitions must be made.
If a technical system element is added, a major change is
committed, which results in reevaluation of the TSC. The
restriction to near ﬁeld coupling is an approximation, as
simulation of all possible EM disturbances is not possible.
Also, the initial effort to specify the architecture is large.
To summarize, a structured approach for identiﬁcation
of EMI problems of safety-relevant automotive systems has
been shown. It is important to point out, that conditions of
a component’s physical environment are now accessible for
investigation of safety concerns on system level. The use of
contracts allows to consider EMC victims and aggressors as
black boxes. Their EMC characteristics are identiﬁed as part
of the safety lifecycle w.r.t. the ISO 26262. An argumentation
about their integration is done at an early stage of the develop-
ment process and takes the geometric topology into account.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a methodology to address EMC
for safety-relevant automotive systems. For the methodology
we consider contract-based speciﬁcations and a meta-model
that allows to characterize functions and their relationship to
distributed E/E components in a hardware topology with EMC
properties. The proposed model is a possible extension of
EAST-ADL and allows modelling of topological information
for a hardware architecture and to determine the alignment of
wires forming coupling paths. The model ensures traceability
of related engineering as well as analysis and test information
as required by the ISO 26262. By applying the proposed
method an early validation of EMC characteristics is enabled
on system level before E/E components are actually built
and integrated. The dependency between OEM and supplier
can therefore become less pessimistic. Safety-relevant EMC
problems are identiﬁed and addressed on concept level. In
contrast to existing methods that make assumptions on a
system’s implementation regarding EMI robustness in safety-
analyses and consider robustness tests on lower design levels
269
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

with the proposed method safety-relevant EMC characteris-
tics are identiﬁed and validated at an early stage of the
development process. They are systematically written down
in requirements using contracts for involved components of
a safety-relevant system and its physical environment. With
the proposed method the effort needed to achieve EMC in a
development process for a safety-relevant automotive system
is focussed on safety-relevant EMI characteristics.
VI.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research leading to these results has received funding
from the ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking under grant agreement
Nr. 295311, and Nr 269335, as well as from the German
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) under the
grant number 01IS11003L and the Austrian Research Promo-
tion Agency FFG under the program ”Forschung, Innovation
und Technologie f¨ur Informationstechnologien (FIT-IT)”.
REFERENCES
[1]
ISO, Road Vehicles - Functional Safety.
International Standard
Organization, November 2011, ISO 26262.
[2]
W. Vesley, F. Goldberg, N. Roberts, and D. Haasl, Fault Tree Handbook.
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commision, 1981.
[3]
T. Peikenkamp, A. Cavallo, L. Valacca, B. Eckard, M. Pretzer, and
E. M. Hahn, “Towards a Uniﬁed Model-Based Safety Assessment,”
Assessment, pp. 275–288, 2006.
[4]
IEC, Functional safety of electrical/electronic/ programmable electronic
safety-related systems, iEC 61508, all parts.
[5]
[Online]. Available: www.isograph.com
[6]
ikv++ technologies ag, MediniTM analyze functional safety analysis for
ISO 26262 , February 2013, Version 2.1.
[7]
S. Alexandersson, “Automotive electromagnetic compatibility - Pre-
diction and Analysis of Parasitic Components in Conductor Layouts,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Lund University, 2008.
[8]
[Online]. Available: www.emcos.com/
[9]
[Online]. Available: www.feko.info
[10]
[Online]. Available: www.comsol.com
[11]
R. Kado, J. J. Nelson, and W. Taylor, “Impact of Functional Safety
on EMC: ISO 26262,” in Proceedings of SAE 2013 World Congress &
Exhibition, Detroit, MI, USA, April 2013, SAE Technical Paper 2013-
01-0178, 2013, doi:10.4271/2013-01-0178.
[12]
[Online]. Available: www.speeds.eu.com
[13]
[Online]. Available: www.cesarproject.eu/
[14]
[Online]. Available: http://spes2020.informatik.tu-muenchen.de/
[15]
A. Benveniste, B. Caillaud, D. Nickovic, R. Passerone, J.-B. Raclet,
P. Reinkemeier, A. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, W. Damm, T. Henzinger,
and K. Larsen, “Contracts for Systems Design,” INRIA, Research
Report N◦8147, November 2012, project-Teams S4.
[16]
[Online]. Available: www.mathworks.com
[17]
[Online]. Available: www.modelica.org
[18]
W. Damm, A. Baumgart, E. B¨ode, M. B¨uker, G. Ehmen, T. Gezgin,
S. Henkler, H. Hungar, B. Josko, M. Oertel, T. Peikenkamp, P. Reinke-
meier, I. Stierand, and R. Weber, “Architecture Modeling,” OFFIS,
SPES2020 Project Result, March 2011.
[19]
EAST-ADL Association, EAST-ADL Domain Model Speciﬁcation, May
2013, version V2.1.11.
[20]
M. Ungerer and O. Rabe, Harness Description List (KBL), 2005,
Version 2.3 SR-1.
[21]
A. Baumgart, “A Contract-Based Installation Methodology for Safety-
Related Automotive Systems,” in Proceedings of SAE 2013 World
Congress & Exhibition, Detroit, MI, USA, April 2013, SAE Technical
Paper 2013-01-0192, 2013, doi:10.4271/2013-01-0192.
[22]
SPEEDS Project, SPEEDS L-1 Meta-Model, May 2009, SPEEDS
WP.2.1 Deliverable D.2.1.5, Revision 1.0.1.
[23]
IEC, IEC62433-2-1, Ed.1 - EMC IC modelling Part 2-1: Theory of black
box modelling for conducted emission.
International Electrotechnical
Commission, 2009.
[24]
——, IEC61000-2 Environment: description, classiﬁcation; compatibil-
ity levels.
International Electrotechnical Commission, 2008.
[25]
K. Pohl, H. H¨onninger, R. Achatz, and M. Broy, Model-Based Engi-
neering of Embedded Systems: The SPES 2020 Methodology. Springer,
2012, ISBN 978-3642346132.
[26]
EAST-ADL
Association,
“EAST-ADL
Association,”
Website,
http://www.east-adl.info/, 2013.
[27]
A. Baumgart and C. Ellen, “A Recipe for Tool Interoperability,” in
Proceedings of MODELSWARD 2014.
SCITEPRESS, 1 2014, pp.
300–308.
[28]
Goble, Control Systems Safety Evaluation and Reliability, 3rd Edition.
International Society of Automation (ISA), 2010.
[29]
W. Damm, B. Josko, and T. Peikenkamp, “Contract based ISO CD
26262 safety analysis,” in Proceedings of SAE 2009 World Congress &
Exhibition, Detroit, MI, USA, April 2009, SAE Technical Paper 2009-
01-0754, 2009, doi:10.4271/2009-01-0754.
270
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

