Simulation Improves Material Handling in General Assembly 
Improvement of Material Flow, Work Apportionment, and Equipment Usage 
 
Julio Pérez, Gabriel Carreño, Ozge Çivit 
Simulation Analysis 
PMC 
Dearborn, Michigan, USA 
{e-mail: jperez, gcarreno, ocivit}@pmcorp.com 
Edward J. Williams 
Business Analytics, College of Business 
University of Michigan - Dearborn 
Dearborn, Michigan, USA 
e-mail: williame@umich.edu
 
 
Abstract—Discrete-event process simulation has long since 
achieved distinction as a powerful tool for the improvement of 
all aspects of manufacturing operations, including but not 
limited to equipment selection, maintenance policies, inventory 
management, buffer sizing and location, production scheduling, 
and work flow.  The study documented here used simulation to 
analyze and improve the material handling operations 
responsible for delivering raw material to the line and taking 
finished product away for subsequent shipment.  The 
improvements addressed important metrics such as reliability 
of supply, timeliness of supply, equipment utilization, worker 
utilization, and cost. 
Keywords- Material Handling; Material Flow; Assembly; 
Manufacturing; Discrete-Event Process Simulation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Historically, the first highly important commercial 
application of discrete-event simulation modelling was 
manufacturing operations [1].  Along with more recent and 
current simulation applications such as call centers [2], health 
care delivery [3], supply chains [4], retail stores [5], urban 
transport [6], and others, manufacturing remains a highly 
important application area. 
In this paper, we document the successful use of 
simulation to analyze and improve material handling 
operations in the context of a large and complex 
manufacturing operation.  This manufacturing operation 
undertakes the assembly of motor vehicles.  The scope of the 
study included the assembly lines themselves, docks, material 
handling equipment (e.g., fork trucks and tuggers), the 
employees responsible for material-handling work, and the 
design of workflow.  The client managers and engineers 
sought improvement of vital performance metrics such as 
timeliness and reliability of deliveries, worker and equipment 
utilization, inventory levels, and aggregate costs (labor, 
equipment, and operations).  Simulation studies such as this 
one are often very useful for researchers and practicing 
industrial engineers seeking productivity improvements not 
only in manufacturing operations, but also in warehouses [7] 
and in shipping terminals such as those in railroad freight 
yards [8] and oceangoing ports. 
The organization of this paper is as follows:  Section II 
provides an overview of the manufacturing and material-
handling operations.  Next, in Section III, we provide a 
summary of operational data required to build, verify, and 
validate the model, with commentary on methods of collecting 
those data.  The following Section IV describes the building, 
verification, and validation of the simulation model.  Next, in 
Section V, we describe the execution of the model and 
summarize the conclusions drawn from that experimentation.  
We 
conclude, 
in 
Section 
VI, 
by 
describing 
our 
recommendations to the client company, along with 
indications for likely future work. 
II. 
OVERVIEW OF OPERATIONS 
The manufacturing plant in question fabricates automotive 
vehicle bodies; indeed, it is referred to colloquially as a “body 
shop.”  As such, it has many subassembly lines and therefore 
extensive material-handling requirements.  This body shop 
has supply docks on both its east side (having four bay doors) 
and its west side (having two bay doors).  These docks 
collectively contain three production hours’ worth of 
inventory, comprising many (hundreds) of small lot parts, 
bulk parts, and unique part types.  As the study began, the east 
side was served by six tuggers and four fork lift trucks; the 
west side, by five tuggers and three fork lift trucks.  Dolly 
preparation occurs in front of the dock receiving doors, and 
empty dollies are subsequently returned to these dolly 
preparation areas. 
At this plant, manufacturing operations were chronically 
plagued by tardy deliveries (idling expensive machines and 
highly paid production workers), frequent congestion of the 
material-handling equipment (the tuggers and fork lift trucks) 
in various aisles (leading to increased fuel costs and 
downtimes for battery recharging), and, derivatively, 
increased inventory levels and hence costs (consisting of both 
excessive accumulation of raw materials at the receiving 
docks and tardy delivery of finished goods to outgoing 
shipping docks, each of which worsened the client company’s 
cash flow position).  Motivated by these difficulties, the client 
company’s engineers and managers requested an extensive 
consultation using the methods of industrial engineering.  As 
is typically the case, the analytical methods of industrial 
engineering (e.g., process simulation, work flow analysis, 
ergonomics, value stream mapping, etc.) collaborated 
synergistically to provide suggestions for process and 
operational improvements. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Specifically, the objectives of this simulation project, 
defined collaboratively by plant managers, plant engineers, 
and the consultant’s analysts, were to: 
 
Verify and update the existing material data for the 
current status of operations 
 
Update the “Plan for Every Part” (PFEP), the in-plant 
logistics 
database); 
this 
proprietary 
database 
comprises information about part storage locations, 
containers and racks used in storage, and in-plant 
replenishment systems  
 
Perform a material flow study to analyze the receiving 
of parts, staging of parts, delivery of parts (or 
containers there) to the assembly lines, and shipment 
of finished product 
 
Determine 
current-state 
material 
handling 
requirements 
 
Undertake a material flow analysis. 
Having defined these objectives, the client company and 
the consultants then agreed on a division of responsibilities, 
most 
particularly 
including: 
 
providing 
complete 
documentation of plant operations; collection of data; analysis 
of data; model construction, verification, and validation; 
analysis of results, and presentation and documentation of 
results. 
III. 
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 
Data collection began with confirmation of these basic 
assumptions, as provided by client engineers and managers: 
 
1290 available minutes of work per calendar day 
 
Workers’ walking speed 4.8 feet/second (English 
units used throughout study) 
 
8.8 feet/second maximum fork truck speed and 
maximum tugger speed 
 
2.28 feet/second/second fork truck and tugger 
acceleration (and matching deceleration) 
 
626 unique part types in the PFEP 
 
133 distinct delivery locations alongside the assembly 
lines 
 
423 distinct locations for containers to be stored 
immediately after unloading from a truck 
A PFEP, as mentioned in the previous section, was 
provided by the client company; each of these comprised a 
part description (sufficient to uniquely identify each part), 
storage location, location(s) of usage, daily volume required 
at these locations, container type, density, and physical 
dimensions.  Using the numerous and powerful library of 
Microsoft Excel® functions – particularly those operating on 
text strings --  the consultant team sorted and filtered these 
data in various ways in search of errors in the client’s 
originally supplied PFEP.  Several such errors – primarily due 
to volatile data, which routinely become out-of-date – were 
called to the attention of client engineers.  Therefore, the 
simulation project could and did begin with currently correct 
and audited data comprising details pertinent to all parts used 
in the manufacturing operations.  An example subset of these 
data appears in the Appendix as Table 1. 
Likewise, these initial observations of current plant 
operations determined the precise apportionment of material-
handling tasks between tuggers and fork trucks, confirmed the 
carrying capacities of both, and mapped their routes through 
all parts of the operation.  For the purpose of model run 
initialization, the assumption of three hours’ initial inventory 
at the docks was made.  For the tuggers, loading time of dollies 
was 29 seconds and unloading time was 47 seconds.  For the 
fork trucks, both load and unload times were calculated based 
on the location and dimensions of the containers being loaded 
or unloaded.  Consultant engineers travelled to the plant site 
for direct observation; their observation and data collection 
confirmed, with minor amendments agreed to by the client, 
for these and other detailed data items.  In view of extensive 
worker involvement in the material-handling operations (as 
contrasted with extensively automated work tasks), great care 
was taken, largely by unobtrusive observation methods, to 
guard against the Hawthorne effect [9].  Given this detailed 
overview of operational procedures, it will be readily 
appreciated that (a) guarding against the Hawthorne effect was 
vitally important and (b) data collection (as opposed to model 
construction) was on the project critical path [10].  For the 
purposes of this study, no stochastic variation was 
incorporated in the values quoted above, in view of the 
“capacity planning” objective of the study. 
IV. 
MODEL CONSTRUCTION, VERIFICATION, AND 
VALIDATION 
After considerable discussion, the client managers and 
engineers, jointly with the consultants, decided on the use of 
Flow Planner®, which works within and compatibly with the 
well-known AutoCAD® tools, as an analytical software tool 
highly appropriate for this project.  This software, like many 
of its worthy competitors [11], provides ease of use, high 
analytical power, the ability to analyse multiple alternatives, 
and extensive graphics and animation.  The tool provides all 
of these capabilities in the context of manufacturing 
simulation.  As such, it represents an advance over similar 
software tools often used for projects, such as this one, which 
aim to improve efficiency via manufacturing plant design 
[12].  A relatively recent application of Flow Planner® is 
documented in [13]. 
After visually analysing the material flow throughout the 
facility, the consultants worked with client engineers and plant 
operations supervisors to create flow diagrams.  Material-
handling methods (fork truck, tugger, or manual transport by 
an operator) varied with the part types, and each part flow was 
identified and checked based on both client-supplied data and 
the consultants’ observations.  Next, using information from 
the PFEP and the newly constructed flow diagrams, the 
consultants created a large Microsoft Excel® comma-
separated-variable (“.csv”) file, as required by Flow 
Planner®.  Much of the actual construction of this file 
involved repetitive and tedious tasks.  Therefore, the 
consultants decided to, in large measure, automate it by 
investment of time in the creation of and debugging of a macro 
written in Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) [14].  Versus 
completely manual operations, the consultant team estimated 
that development of the macro returned a 5:1 benefit ratio of 
time required, and also greatly reduced the risk of “clerical” 
errors in organization of the data.  A separate Microsoft 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Excel® workbook, incorporating multiple worksheets, 
contained additional information of products, their method of 
transport, and their locations of storage and use. 
Explicit verification and validation steps undertaken by 
the modeling engineers included the following [15]: 
 
Inserting one entity into the model and following it 
step-by-step (a “trace”). 
 
Provisionally removing all randomness from the 
model 
and 
checking 
results 
against 
hand 
computations. 
 
Performing directional analysis – e.g., when the rate 
at which entities enter the model is increased, the 
lengths of queues must either remain the same or 
increase. 
 
Ensuring the client engineers and managers watched 
the animation and concurred in its representation of 
current operations. 
 
Building 
the 
model 
incrementally 
with 
the 
precautions above successfully performed upon the 
completion of each increment, before proceeding to 
model the next segment of the system. 
After running Flow Planner®, the consultants collected 
the calculated parts-movement distances.  Using these 
distances, loading and unloading times, and speed of transport 
method used, the consultants built a Microsoft Excel® file 
calculating expected time for all parts transport for all point 
pairs (A,B), considering “A” as the point of storage and “B” 
as a point of use.  Similar calculations were performed for 
transport return trips “running empty.”  Then, with available 
work time per day being readily available, the utilizations of 
each class of transport equipment were calculated.  
Furthermore, these utilizations were readily subdivided into 
“definitely value-added” (transporting parts to where they 
were needed) and “inevitably necessary” (returning empty for 
another load).  All these results were verified and validated 
against client data and experience. 
V. 
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS 
Many of the results of this study were most usefully 
visualized in the output graphics routinely provided by the 
Flow Planner® software.  For example, Figure 1 in the 
Appendix depicts “straight-flow” aggregate data.  In this 
figure, a particular line color represents an assignment of the 
vehicle to a plant zone (west, east, or LRS [a nickname for the 
stamping area, the origin of this nickname would reveal 
confidential information]).  Straight flow paths are typically 
the best for viewing, understanding, and verifying where 
flows originate from and travel to, as they (mythically) go 
straight from the origin to the destination regardless of 
obstacles.  By contrast, Figure 2 (Appendix), derived from the 
same input data as Figure 1, represents the part transport flows 
grouped by aisle.  These flows are geometrically realistic, 
inasmuch as the vehicles do not “magically” penetrate 
physical obstacles.  Different colors continue to represent 
vehicles assigned to different zones.  This representation is 
superior for evaluating actual travel distances, travel paths, 
and aisle congestion, since they consider actual routes from 
the origin to the destination using user-defined aisles.  
Additional graphs (e.g., Figure 3, Appendix) and numerical 
output reports captured key performance metrics.  For 
example, Figure 3 summarized tugger utilization by plant 
zone (west, east, or LRS).  At this stage of the project, vehicle 
travel time performance metrics are not yet subdivided into 
travel time carrying parts versus “returning empty.” 
From the client’s viewpoint, the three major revelations of 
this simulation study were: 
 
Due to the large numbers of parts (and their high 
variety) stored in the dock and the central market area 
(CMA), 
actually 
a centralized 
storage area, 
congestion in both areas is severe and obtrusively 
significant. 
 
The workload is well balanced on the dock areas (80-
85%).  However, the stamping fork trucks’ traveling 
time was unduly high compared with the time that 
they spend loading and unloading, due to the 
distances between the stamping presses, CMA and the 
secondary storage areas (95%). 
 
With respect to the tuggers from both dock areas that 
served the lines, analysis (using the straight flow 
study) of the material flows from the respective dock 
area to the consumption point (Using LOCation, 
abbreviated “ULOC”) identified the parts “guilty of” 
requiring the tuggers to travel long distances; these 
parts were stored in a conspicuously inappropriate 
area. 
Accordingly, two recommendations were made to the 
client: 
After identifying some of the parts that were making the 
tuggers travel long distances from the origin to the using 
locations (#1 above), the consultants recommended that the 
client transfer  storage of eight specific parts from the west 
dock location to the east dock location, and one specific part 
from the east dock location to the west dock location.  The 
client implemented this change, causing utilization of the 
vehicles assigned to the west zone to fall from 73.1% 
utilization to 66.4% utilization. 
As a follow-up to the success of recommendation #1, the 
client was advised to reduce the total number of vehicles 
assigned to the east area from nine to seven, and in the west 
area from five to four.  After this removal of three vehicles at 
first seemed excessive (reducing the total number of vehicles 
from fourteen to eleven), the vehicles were not over-utilized.  
After the client made this second change (hence saving 
significant labor and operations costs) vehicles assigned to the 
east area were utilized 87.5% and in the west area 83.1%, 
while still meeting delivery demands.  Furthermore, for small 
lots, three vehicles were originally assigned to three 
continuous routes.  After analysis of consumption patterns for 
these small lots within the ULOC, which was their typical 
destination for consumption, the consultant engineers created 
various scenarios involving only two routes, not three.  
Experimentation with the model, again using FlowPlanner®, 
revealed that the three routes could be profitably coalesced 
into two routes, using only two vehicles.  The software readily 
recalculated the utilization of the two tuggers using these two 
new routes, based on the volume of parts being delivered to 
their respective ULOCs from their respective Dock 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

LOCations, (DLOC) and the pickup of empty containers then 
being returned to their Empty container LOCation (ELOC).  
Figure 4 in the Appendix shows this spatial analysis from the 
vantage point of the client.  In this figure, the yellow circle 
delimits the workspace of the first tugger handling small lots.  
The two green circles delimit the delivery operations of the 
second tugger handling small lots; this tugger typically serves 
each of the two delimited areas alternately.  The client also 
made this recommended change, and – as the model predicted 
– delivery demand for these small parts was still met, with new 
tugger utilizations as shown in Figure 5 (Appendix).  As is to 
be expected, the first of these tuggers (serving the two areas 
delimited in green) has a higher percentage of load-&-unload 
time, a higher percentage of travel time, and hence a lower 
percentage of idle time, all relative to the second tugger 
serving only one area (delimited in yellow).  This 
recommendation, the culmination of studying several 
proposed scenarios for using two instead of three tuggers, 
came gratifyingly close to equalizing the utilizations of the 
two remaining tuggers. 
VI. 
PLANNED AND ANTICIPATED FUTURE ANALYSES 
Aside from the quantitative financial benefits of this study, 
a significant qualitative benefit is the new understanding and 
appreciation, among the client engineers and managers, of the 
power of simulation.  Since the enterprise is highly volatile, 
ongoing studies are very likely, and will be further refined.  
For example performance metrics on vehicles will be 
expanded to obtain travel distances and times “traveling 
empty” versus “traveling loaded,” plus statistics on average, 
maximum, and minimum loads carried, both in aggregate and 
subdivided by part type.  The model as currently implemented 
contains no provision for downtime of the material-handling 
equipment.  Future work will include adding plausible 
downtimes to assist in the development of various 
contingency plans.  Further, the graphical aids to client 
understanding (as exemplified by Figures 1, 2, and 4 in this 
paper) can be upgraded to two- or three-dimensional real-time 
animations. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors most gratefully acknowledge help, advice, 
and support graciously provided by consultant colleagues, 
client engineers and managers, and support personnel at 
Proplanner, the vendor of the Flow Planner® software.  
Furthermore, criticisms from anonymous referees have helped 
the authors greatly improve the organization and clarity of the 
paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Miller and D. Pegden, “Introduction to manufacturing 
simulation,” Proceedings of the 2000 Winter Simulation 
Conference, Volume 1, eds. J. A. Joines, R. R. Barton, K. 
Kang, and P. A. Fishwick, 63-66, 2000. 
[2] B. Mathew and M. K. Nambiar, “A tutorial on modelling call 
centres using discrete event simulation,” in Proceedings of the 
27th European Conference on Modelling and Simulation, eds. 
W. Rekdalsbakken, R. T. Bye, and H. Zhang, 315-321, 2013. 
[3] Z. S-Y. Wong, A. C-H. Lit, and S-Y. Leung, “A discrete-event 
simulation study for emergency room capacity management in 
a Hong Kong hospital,” Proceedings of the 2016 Winter 
Simulation Conference, eds. T. M. K. Roeder, P. I. Frazier, R. 
Szechtman, E. Zhou, T. Huschka, and S. E. Chick, 1970-1981, 
2016. 
[4] A. E. Azab and A. B. Eltawil, “A simulation based study of the 
effect of truck arrival patterns on truck turn time in container 
terminals,” Proceedings of the 30th European Conference on 
Modelling and Simulation, eds. T. Claus, F. Herrmann, M. 
Manitz, and O. Rose, 80-66, 2016. 
[5] J. W. Gruber, R. Smiddy, J. M. Watson, and E. J. Williams, 
“Simulation helps local grocery store compete effectively 
against large chains,” Fifth International Conference on 
Industrial Engineering and Operations Management 2421-
2424, 2015. 
[6] I. Garcia, G. Gutiérrez, and R. Moreno, “Simulation model for 
the redesign of the Spanish combined rail transport network,” 
Proceedings of the 13th European Simulation Symposium, eds. 
N. Giambiasi and C. Frydman, 402-404, 2001. 
[7] S. Takakuwa, “Efficient module-based modeling for a large-
scale AS/RS-AGV system,” Proceedings of the 1996 Winter 
Simulation Conference, eds. J. M. Charnes, D. J. Morrice, D. 
T. Brunner, and J. J. Swain, 1141-1148, 1996. 
[8] I. García, Gil Gutiérrez, and Raúl Moreno, “Simulation of an 
Intermodal Rail Freight Terminal,” Proceedings of the 13th 
European Simulation Symposium, eds. N. Giambiasi and C. 
Frydman, 399-401, 2001. 
[9] G. Wickstrom and T. Bendix, “The ‘Hawthorne Effect’--what 
did the original Hawthorne studies actually show?,” 
Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment & Health (26,4), 
363–367, 2000. 
[10] M. A. Centeno, “An introduction to simulation modeling,” 
Proceedings of the 1996 Winter Simulation Conference, eds. J. 
M. Charnes, D. J. Morrice, D. T. Brunner, and J. J. Swain, 15-
22, 1996. 
[11] L. M. S Dias, A. A. C. Vieira, G. A. B. Pereira, and J. A. 
Oliviera, “Discrete simulation software ranking – a top list of 
the worldwide most popular and used tools,” Proceedings of 
the 2016 Winter Simulation Conference, eds. T. M. K. Roeder, 
P. I. Frazier, R. Szechtman, E. Zhou, T. Huschka, and S. E. 
Chick, 1060-1071, 2016. 
[12] D. P. Sly, “Plant design for efficiency using AutoCAD and 
FactoryFLOW,” Proceedings of the 1995 Winter Simulation 
Conference, eds. C. Alexopoulos, K. Kang, W. R. Lilegdon, 
and D. Goldsman, 437-444, 1995. 
[13] D. P. Sly, “Handling material problems as they arise,” Cutting 
Tool Engineering (63,3):30, 2011. 
[14] S. C. Albright, “VBA for modelers:  Developing decision 
support systems with Microsoft Office Excel, 5th edition.  
Boston, Massachusetts:  Cengage Learning, 2015. 
[15] R. G. Sargent, “ Verification, validation, and acccreditation of 
simulation models,” Proceedings of the 2000 Winter 
Simulation Conference, vol. 1, 50-59, 2000. 
 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
APPENDIX 
 
TABLE I: 
SUBSET OF PARTS-ROUTING DATA AS INPUT INTO MODEL FROM MICROSOFT EXCEL®. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Straight Flow Point-to-Point Study. 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 2. Vehicle Travel along Aisles. 
 
 
Figure 3. Tugger Utilization by Plant Zone. 
 
34.52%
42.66%
49.31%
20.66%
22.24%
23.83%
44.82%
35.10%
26.86%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
TUGGER-LRS
TUGGER-EAST
TUGGER-WEST
TUGGER
Loading & Unloading
Travelling
Idle
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 4. Scope of Operations of the “Coalesced” Small-Lot Tuggers 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Small Tugger Utilization 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

