Provision of Model Parameters for Capacity Planning of Aircraft
Maintenance Projects: A Workload Estimation Method based on
Enterprise Resource Planning Data
Christian Fabig∗, Michael V¨olker†, Thorsten Schmidt‡
Institute of Material Handling and Industrial Engineering
Technische Universit¨at Dresden
Dresden, Germany
email: ∗christian.fabig@tu-dresden.de, †michael.voelker@tu-dresden.de, ‡thorsten.schmidt@tu-dresden.de
Abstract—Capacity planning is a major issue in aircraft
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) companies, given
that signiﬁcant parts of the workload are stochastic in nature.
Vast amounts of data are gathered within Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) systems. Despite their availability, data still has
to be utilized to assist the capacity planning process. Besides a
quantitative characterization of the capacity planning problem in
aircraft MRO, this paper proposes a method for the classiﬁcation,
analysis and estimation of maintenance workloads. This enables
to provide model input parameters for a discrete-event simulation
on a daily basis. The proposed method comprises the selection of
comparable historical projects for analysis, the transformation
and mapping of operation data by means of rule-based data
wrangling and the characterization of maintenance workloads
broken down into network activities and skills.
Keywords— aircraft maintenance; workload estimation; project
scheduling; simulation-based capacity planning.
I. INTRODUCTION
Maintenance is deﬁned as the ”combination of all technical,
administrative and managerial actions during the life cycle
of an item intended to retain it in, or restore it to, a state in
which it can perform the required function” [6]. Examples of
items to be maintained include physical assets (e.g., machines,
plants, buildings, ships, and aircraft). Maintenance, Repair and
Overhaul (MRO) companies produce maintenance services.
Thus, maintenance can be regarded as a production process
that needs to be planned [16]. Far in advance to a maintenance
project, an overall effort estimation is done resulting in a rough
estimate of the total project workload. In order to carry out a
capacity planning, this estimate has to be broken down into
required resources and workloads of (predeﬁned) work pack-
ages, serving as model input for specialized planning software.
Performing the effort breakdown manually is cumbersome,
especially when a rescheduling is needed to take production
conﬁrmations and more detailed information into account, and
is prone to produce model inconsistencies. Thus, the workload
estimation process ought to be supported by the Enterprise
Resource Planning (ERP) system.
While work package efforts are estimates of the sum of
working hours of (yet unknown) associated work plan activities,
there usually is the possibility to compress or stretch each
work package duration. From a theoretical point of view, the
problem of capacity planning in aircraft MRO corresponds
to a Multi-Mode Resource-Constrained Project Scheduling
Problem (MRCMPSP; see [9]). In order to provide model
input, ERP systems data are found to have shortcomings.
For example, there may be an ambiguous classiﬁcation of
maintenance events, non-use of industry standards (e.g., aircraft
zoning [17]) and outdated or duplicated work centers resulting
from past organizational changes. These issues severely hamper
data consistency and may prove them invaluable for capacity
planning purposes [7]. Therefore, the objectives of this paper
are as follows. Based on data from a German third-party MRO
provider, (1) we quantitatively analyze the capacity planning
problem in terms of routine and non-routine workloads of
different types of maintenance projects and (2) propose an ERP-
based method to classify maintenance operations of previously
performed aircraft maintenance projects in order to estimate
the workload for an integrated capacity planning process of
prospective maintenance projects.
The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section II
presents related work on the practical application of capacity
planning models and fundamentals of aircraft maintenance.
A quantitative analysis of aircraft maintenance workloads is
given in Section III concerning maintenance project types,
aircraft types and aircraft ages. In Section IV, we present the
proposed method to classify maintenance operations based
on ERP data of previously completed maintenance projects.
Furthermore, we show how the evaluation can be used for
estimating workloads per project network activity and skill of
future projects. Section V presents an example of a maintenance
workload estimation for an Airbus A380 cabin modiﬁcation
event that can be transferred into a simulation-based capacity
planning software. Finally, in Section VI we draw conclusions
on the presented method and future research opportunities.
II. RELATED WORK
1) Practical application of capacity planning models: Sig-
niﬁcant research on allocating limited resources to competing
activities has been carried out using mathematical solution
techniques (see, e.g., [5][12][18]). Since large-scale problems
can hardly be handled using mathematical modeling and solving
techniques, simulation-based scheduling and optimization is
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

proposed by several authors for real-life applications [11].
Concerning the ﬁeld of Production Planning and Control
(PPC), Carl [3] proposes a simulation model for planning
and optimization of assembly lines and Pinha and Ahluwalia
[15] address the short-term resource management in a ship
yard using a discrete-event simulation software. In order to
incorporate further aspects of real-world problems, a broad
variety of model extensions of the basic Resource-Constrained
Project Scheduling Problem (RCPSP) have been proposed
in literature (see [9][14]). The MRCMPSP model comprises,
brieﬂy described, the following aspects (see [2][20]):
• Projects are divided into activities, which require multiple
renewable (worker force, machines, tools, etc.) or non-
renewable (standard parts, components, etc.) resources to
be performed.
• Activities have to respect certain precedence constraints
that can be modeled by means of relationships in a project
network.
• Resource groups are available with limited amounts and
may have certain skills and/or organizational afﬁliation,
thus being applicable to perform a certain proportion of
the activities’ workload.
• Resources are not dedicated to a speciﬁc project. Thus,
activities of multiple projects compete for the same set
of limited resources.
However, despite considerable research effort, there exist
gaps between the model capabilities and its practical application.
In particular, model inputs have to be updated with ERP data
(e.g., production conﬁrmations, resource availabilities) and
hand over to a planning system in order to facilitate a (daily)
PPC procedure. Alﬁeri and Urgo [2] provide an application of
project scheduling and a model formulation based on network
activity workloads to one-of-a-kind production systems. Dinis
and Barbosa-P´ovoa [7] propose a set of generic requirements
for aircraft maintenance data treatment in order to improve the
MROs risk management and planning process.
One important set of parameters in MRCMPSP model
formulations describes the (estimated) activity workload for a
given project network. The workload of renewable resource
k incurred by activity i is given as Wik. Activity i can be
performed in each discrete combination of processing time pi
and resource request rik that allows to reach the workload, i.e.,
Wik ≤ pi ∗rik.
(1)
A mathematical formulation of the MRCMPSP is given in [20].
In Section IV, we will focus on our method for estimating Wik
in aircraft MRO based on ERP data.
2) Fundamentals of aircraft MRO: Concerning aircraft
MRO, the following maintenance actions can be distinguished
(see Figure 1):
• Preventive maintenance is carried out intended to assess
and/or to mitigate degradation and reduce the probability
of failure of an item during ﬂight operation. Therefore,
a comprehensive set of work orders is carried out at
prescribed intervals of time or number of ﬂight hours.
This may require a complete or partial dismantling of the
item (i.e., a ’overhaul’).
• Corrective maintenance has to be carried out after fault
recognition. It is intended to restore an item into a state
in which it can perform a required function. In case of
a safety-critical item corrective actions are mandatory in
order to assure airworthiness before the aircraft is allowed
to return to ﬂight operation.
• Modiﬁcation & Improvement actions are intended to
change the functions of an item or to improve existing
functions. This also includes available modiﬁcations that
are judged by the manufacturer to be a matter of safety
rather than simply product improvement.
During the planning process, actions for preventive main-
tenance and modiﬁcation & improvement are referred to as
routine or scheduled maintenance, deﬁned as work orders
”carried out in accordance with a speciﬁed time schedule or
speciﬁed number of units of use” [6]. Corrective maintenance
is referred to as non-routine or unscheduled maintenance,
resulting from Discrepancy Reports (DR) that are detected
during routine activities and thus are not completely known
before inspection tasks are ﬁnished. In case of a third-party
MRO provider, the customer might also inquire further services
while the aircraft is already undergoing its routine maintenance.
Since those Additional Service Requests (ASR) are not part of
the previously assigned routine work orders, it is also regarded
as non-routine. Due to the uncertainty caused by non-routine
workload, proper planning is of key importance in aircraft
maintenance. Multiple examples and research papers show that
cost savings can be gained through a ﬁtted, robust capacity
planning and scheduling process [19]. Low and predictable
costs as well as guaranteed turnaround times are the main
production targets [16]. Hence, there is a need for accurate
estimations of the future maintenance workloads.
III. QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS OF MAINTENANCE
WORKLOADS
The project samples originate from 201 maintenance projects
conducted at a German third-party MRO provider between
January 2013 and March 2020 on a total of 147 different
aircraft from ﬁve different Airbus aircraft families. Projects are
classiﬁed within that mentioned company into ’Event Types’,
reﬂecting the main objective of a maintenance project. Concern-
ing the necessity of accurate workload estimations, so called
Heavy Maintenance Checks (HMC) are of particular interest
as they are complex due high intensity of workload and scope.
HMC projects are labor-intensive and often subcontracted to
a third-party service providers. HMC comprise the ’C-check’
and the ’D-check’ that have to be performed every two year
and every six years, respectively [19]. We will further elaborate
on the event types in Section IV.
Table I shows the comparison of event types with regard
to median workloads in man-hours (MH) of work performed.
As can be seen, the project workload diverges greatly from a
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Preventive
Maintenance
1. to analyze the state of a 
physical asset
2. to maintain the required 
level of item performance
inspection, testing;
cleaning, lubricating
Maintenance Actions
Modification & 
Improvement
1. to change the functions 
of a physical asset
2. to improve the reliability 
and/or maintainability 
and/or safety of an item
original item replacing
(includes changed or 
improved functionality)
Aims
Activities
(Examples)
Corrective 
Maintenance
1. to restore the required 
function of a faulty item
repairing, refurbishing;
item replacing
Routine workload
 prior to offer submission: loosely defined 
as a request for information (RFI) 
 work orders prepared prior to project start
Non-Routine workload
 workload becomes known after inspections 
or through additional service requests
 work orders prepared during project 
execution
Discrepancy 
Report 
(DR)
Additional Service 
Request
(ASR) 
Routine 
Work
Work order
types
Maintenance 
workload
Figure 1. Maintenance actions and origin of workloads in aircraft maintenance projects
TABLE I
WORKLOAD CHARACTERISTICS OF MAINTENANCE EVENT TYPES
Event Type
# of 
projects
Project
workload 
Routine
Non-
Routine
[ - ]
[MH, median]  [% of project 
workload]
[% of project 
workload]
COMPONENTCHANGE--ENGINES
4
        464
56%
44%
COMPONENTCHANGE--GEARS
29
        659
75%
25%
MODIFICATION--AVIONICS
4
        718
67%
33%
CHECK--A
5
      1.103
64%
36%
REPAIR--STRUCTURE
13
      1.512
47%
53%
CHECK--B
23
      6.659
56%
44%
CHECK--C
54
      8.159
44%
56%
MODIFICATION--CABIN
28
    13.010
65%
35%
CHECK--D
20
    16.612
54%
46%
MODIFICATION--STRUCTURE
17
    23.450
86%
14%
MODIFICATION--PTOF
4
    55.210
64%
36%
Overall (median)
201
    6.641
62%
38%
Zeilenbeschriftungen
Anzahl von Year
COMPONENTCHANGE--ENGINES
4
COMPONENTCHANGE--GEARS
29
MODIFICATION--AVIONICS
4
CHECK--A
5
REPAIR--STRUCTURE
13
CHECK--B
23
CHECK--C
54
MODIFICATION--CABIN
28
CHECK--D
20
MODIFICATION--STRUCTURE
17
MODIFICATION--PTOF
4
Gesamtergebnis
201
Overhead als NonRoutine
’component change’ with less than 1,000 MH to a ’passenger-
to-freighter conversion’ (PtoF) with more than 55,000 MH. The
share of non-routine workload for ’modiﬁcation’ event types
is rather low (14 - 35% of total project workload) while it is
comparably high for HMC (46 - 56% of total project workload).
Further analyzing the non-routine workload, Figure 2 shows the
median of non-routine workload by age of aircraft measured in
ﬂight hours (FH). According to the linear regression trendline,
in this regard an increase occurs throughout the service life of
an aircraft. However, compared to the total project workload one
can see that maintenance events performed on aging aircraft
R2 = 0,87
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
 -
 1.000
 2.000
 3.000
 4.000
 5.000
 6.000
0 
< FH ≤
10.000
10.000 
< FH ≤
20.000
20.000 
< FH ≤
30.000
30.000 
< FH ≤
40.000
40.000 
< FH ≤
50.000
50.000 
< FH ≤
60.000
60.000 
< FH ≤
70.000
FH >
70.000
Non-Routine [% of project workload]
Non-Routine [MH]
NonRoutine [MH]
NonRoutine [% of project workload]
Figure 2. Median of non-routine workload by age of aircraft
(40,000 FH or more) comprise of approximately 45% non-
routine workload.
IV. WORKLOAD ESTIMATION METHOD
The proposed workload estimation method consists of a set
of data mining procedures based on aircraft maintenance data
stored in an ERP system and of a procedure to classify and
analyze the data. Two motivations have let to the development:
(1) to characterize the maintenance workloads accurately
despite uncertain and scare information during the offer
submission process; and (2) to provide means for a simulation-
based capacity planning software that allow for scheduling and
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

08.2020
Folie 4
Event type
Modification
Repair
Component 
Change
Check
Figure 3. Event types of aircraft maintenance projects
progress control of aircraft maintenance projects. The main
steps of the method are presented next.
A. Select completed projects for analysis
The starting point for estimating workloads of future main-
tenance projects is to select similar completed projects. In
aviation, a maintenance project is called ’event’. Separately
from an aircraft model, the ’Event Type’ has been established
in order to gather the main purpose of an event (Figure 3). The
aforementioned checks refer to periodic execution of scheduled
inspection tasks that have to be done on all commercial and
civil aircraft after a certain amount of time or usage, ranging
from minor extent (A- and B-check) to major overhauls (C-
and D-check). The second category is component change (e.g.,
engine change and landing gear change). Changes might occur
as a separate event since the item is subject to wear and
tear or, expiring lease contracts (e.g, aircraft engines and the
aircraft often have separate lease contracts) and other reasons.
Repair refers to any maintenance service with the main purpose
of corrective actions. Those events include repairs such as
lightning strikes, bird strikes, skin panel replacements and
fuel tank resealing. The fourth category modiﬁcation includes
maintenance services with the main purpose of changing
the functions of an item or to improve existing functions.
Subcategories are reconﬁguration of the passenger cabin,
sharklet modiﬁcation, avionic modiﬁcation, and others. A PtoF-
modiﬁcation is a way to extend the economic life of an aircraft
by converting it into a freighter when it reaches its useful
operational service as a passenger jetliner and is one of the
most extensive modiﬁcations.
An event often includes parts from two categories. E.g., a
customer may want to perform a C-check including an engine
change or a PtoF-modiﬁcation with an accompanying A-check.
In those cases the event is classiﬁed due to its main purpose,
i.e., the part with the most extensive workload. When choosing
similar projects out of the ERP database, the event type serves
as a pre-selector. It is up to the user to either reference only
one project or multiple projects of an event type for further
data classiﬁcation and analysis.
B. Transform and map data of completed work orders
In order to analyze the ’raw’ data from the ERP system it is
necessary to transform and map data into another format or into
a standardized classiﬁcation. Data wrangling and preparation
TABLE II
RULE TYPES FOR DATA WRANGLING
Rule type
Description
Translate Value
(TV)
Translation of the field content based on 
the field name and content to a defined 
value.
Translate RegEx
(TR)
Translation of the field content using a 
Regular Expression to a defined value.
Translate Unit
(TU)
Translation of a unit field and offsetting 
of the associated data fields.
Replace Part
(RP)
Replacement of character part of field 
content based on start / end position 
with a defined value.
Replace Content
(RC)
Replacement of a field with a certain 
field content by the field content of an 
external table.
Replace Field
(RF)
Replacement of a field content with field 
contents of an alternative field.
is applied using a rule-based approach. Table II shows the rule
types implemented to translate a ﬁeld content or to replace it
by alternatively using content from another storage location. A
rule might be used for an arbitrary ﬁeld of an ERP data table
(e.g., work center, duration, date). Also, a combination of rules
might be used whereby the order of the rules corresponds to
their processing.
The Aircraft Maintenance Manual (AMM) and other manuals
are available from the aircraft manufacturer Airbus SE, deﬁning
work content and workﬂow, required personnel skills and
equipment for routine tasks. The aforementioned rules are
applied to perform a data preparation and classiﬁcation (1) to
provide an adequate level of detail for the purpose of capacity
planning and (2) to align the companies’ ERP data with the
AMM standards. Next, we present the classiﬁcations.
1) Aircraft locations: Among other location systems, a three-
digit ’zone’ numbering system applies to every aircraft and
is used within the AMM maintenance task speciﬁcation [1].
Locations are reﬁned from major zone (e.g., 200 - passenger
deck), to major subzone (e.g., 210 - cockpit), to unit zone (e.g.,
211 - cockpit, left hand side). However, workload estimation
and capacity planning based on unit zones and even major sub-
zones is hard to master. By grouping zones one can, obviously,
characterize the workload spatially throughout the aircraft. The
adequate level of detail can be controlled by the user through
wrangling rules. Maintenance planning managers have deﬁned
the major zones 100 - 700 complemented with ﬁve selected
major subzones (e.g., cockpit, main aviation compartment) and
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

TABLE III
MAJOR ZONES OF AN AIRCRAFT (EXTRACT)
Major 
zone
Major 
subzone
Description
100
-
LOWER THIRD OF FUSELAGE
110
RADOME - NOSE CONE TO FR0
120
MAIN AVIONICS COMPARTMENT
130
LOWER DECK FORWARD CARGO COMP.
140
CENTER WING BOX
150
LOWER DECK AFT CARGO COMP.
160
LOWER DECK BULK CARGO COMP.
170
AFT CABIN UNDERFLOOR COMP.
190
BELLY FAIRING, AIR CONDITION COMP.
200
-
UPPER TWO THIRDS OF FUSELAGE 
300
-
REAR FUSELAGE SECTION
400
-
POWER PLANT NACELLES & PYLONS
500
-
LEFT WING
600
-
RIGHT WING
700
-
LANDING GEARS & GEAR DOORS
800
-
DOORS
four selected backshops (e.g., Non-Destructive Testing (NDT),
saddler shop) as an appropriate level of detail for capacity
planning purposes, resulting in a total of 16 locations.
2) Skills: Skills can be broadly deﬁned as the ability to
perform certain tasks [5]. In aircraft maintenance, a skill can
be further deﬁned as to possess a license to perform particular
maintenance tasks on a speciﬁc aircraft model. A skill certiﬁcate
can be held by a technician and is issued by a national aviation
authority [4]. One way to model skills for tasks in an ERP
system is to deﬁne a speciﬁc work center for each of them
[10]. In analyzed data of the German third-party MRO provider,
more than 150 work centers are currently in use and another
550 work centers are outdated or duplicated resulting from past
organizational changes. Thus, in order to estimate workloads by
analyzing previously performed aircraft maintenance projects
the work centers have to be grouped through wrangling rules.
Table IV presents the skills that maintenance planning managers
have identiﬁed as an appropriate level of detail for capacity
planning.
3) Network activities: Maintenance events are typically
conducted in several phases. In the ’Reception’ phase (I), the
aircraft undergoes initial tests and preparations, e.g. docking.
After that, in the ’Disassembly’ phase (II), access panels, doors
and aircraft components are removed in order to accomplish the
maintenance actions. In the ’Inspection’ phase (III) airframe,
systems and components are inspected for wear and tear and
other discrepancies such as dents or corrosion. Discrepancies
are then corrected to ensure the items functions and airworthi-
ness in a ’Repair & Overhaul’ phase (IV). After completion
of all non-routine works, the removed aircraft components,
doors and panels will be reinstalled in the ’Installation’ phase
TABLE IV
CONSIDERED MAINTENANCE SKILLS
Skill code
Description
A/P
Airframe & powerplant systems
AIM
Aircraft interior maintenance 
E
Engineering
ERI
Electric & avionic systems
FRL
Outsourced services
KM
Painting & Composites
NDT
Non-destructive testing
QS
Quality inspection (general)
STR
Structural mechanics
TP
Work preparation
(V) before operational and functional tests of aircraft systems
and components are performed in a ﬁnal ’Redelivery’ phase
(VI). Although the above sequence of phases is technologically
given, concerning the maintenance event as a whole those phase
may overlap with each other since work in one location can
(largely) be executed independently from that of other locations
[8]. Sequence dependencies are modeled by means of a project
network, as shown in Figure 4. The project network for MRO
events has been deﬁned in collaboration with maintenance
managers and technicians. It includes the aforementioned MRO
phases further detailed into the aircraft locations, if appropriate,
and consists of a total of 56 network activities.
Figure 4. Network activities of a maintenance event (extract)
C. Classify and assign operations to network activities
An algorithm has been developed to assign operations
listed in work orders of completed projects to the most
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

appropriate network activities one by one. The order in which
the assignment of an operations to the most appropriate network
activity is checked has a decisive inﬂuence on the correct
and complete classiﬁcation of the operations. In general, the
possible assignment of an operation to a network activity with
the most speciﬁc classiﬁcation (e.g., NDT inspection work
in zone 140) should be checked ﬁrst while its assignment
to a network activity with a more general classiﬁcation (e.g.,
inspection work in zone 100) is evaluated afterwards since the
former is a subclass of the latter.
The classiﬁcation and assignment process is implemented
within the ERP system by extending each network activity
with its classiﬁcation after data wrangling in terms of aircraft
location, skill, work order type, AMM reference and other
attributes in an additional data table. The algorithm thus starts
with checking for the matching of an operation to the network
activity with the highest amount of attributes (ﬁeld), i.e., the
most speciﬁc classiﬁcation, and subsequently those network
activities with a lower amount of attributes until a matching is
found. In case no matching could be found, the operation is
assigned to the ’project’ as the root element. Multiple values
(ﬁeld contents) of the same attribute are linked via a logical OR-
concatenation while different attributes are linked via a logical
AND-concatenation when checking the amount of attributes.
A ﬁrst draft version had been designed by [13]. The algorithm
has been implemented in ERP system ”SAP ERP 6.0”, using
its Advanced Business Application Programming (ABAP)
language, and further improved together with maintenance
planning managers.
D. Evaluate workload distribution
The analysis of the completed projects is consolidated using
a workload distribution matrix shown in Figure 5.
Activities i
Skills k


Wikc


Sum of
activity i


Wic


Sum of skill k

Wkc

Figure 5. Structure of the workload distribution matrix
Where:
• Wikc - median workload in network activity i for skill k
of workload category c, in [MH],
• Wic - median workload in network activity i of workload
category c, in [MH],
• Wkc - median workload for skill k of the workload category
c, in [MH].
Typically, there are several work order types that have to be
mapped into a workload category c by means of the rule-based
data wrangling procedure in order to differentiate ’routine’
and ’non-routine’, respectively. To quantitatively assess the
workload of a prospective maintenance event for each category,
the work performed through operations o from historical ERP
data of completed projects p is sorted using the classiﬁcations
deﬁned in Subsection IV-B. Each matrix element is calculated
as the median value of the analyzed historical projects and
provides model input parameters for the left-hand side given
in equation (1).
V. CASE EXAMPLE
Figure 6 presents an example of a maintenance workload
estimation for an Airbus A380 cabin modiﬁcation event. The
workload distribution matrix for routine and non-routine work-
loads has been obtained analyzing ﬁve historical maintenance
events that were classiﬁed as event type ”MODIFICATION-
CABIN” and assessed to be comparable to the prospective
event by maintenance managers. These events contain 2,700
2,900 2,400 3,100 and 3,400 order operations, respectively.
In the data wrangling procedure, the ’raw’ order operation
data has been transformed and mapped into the standardized
classiﬁcations given in Section IV-B. Among other things, the
roughly 700 work centers deﬁned in the ERP system were
mapped to the skills shown in Table IV using wrangling rules.
Note that in this case example skill ”NDT” is not present in the
workload distribution matrix as there were no order operations
having structural testing works (as could be expected for cabin
modiﬁcations). On top of that, operations have been assigned
to the network activities of the maintenance event (see Figure
4) and classiﬁed into workload categories. The total ”routine”
workload is estimated at 8,915 MH (64 %) and the total ”non-
routine” workload is estimated at 4,960 MH (36 %), which
roughly corresponds to the workload characteristics given in
Table I.
The aim is to use these results as model input for a multi-
project capacity planning. An interface to a simulation-based
Skills k
Activities i (extract)
Estimated MH of Workload 
Category “Routine”: 
Figure 6. Example of a workload estimation matrix of a cabin modiﬁcation
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

capacity planning software has been implemented, allowing
to export the workload distribution matrix as well as project
networks, skills, resources, and resource availabilities (see [8]).
VI. CONCLUSION
The objectives of this paper were twofold: (1) to quan-
titatively analyze the capacity planning problem in terms
of routine and non-routine workloads of different types of
maintenance projects and (2) to propose an ERP-based method
to classify maintenance operations of previously performed
aircraft maintenance projects in order to estimate the workload
for an integrated capacity planning process of prospective
maintenance projects.
Regarding the ﬁrst objective, results show that the workload
of a maintenance project diverges greatly depending on the
event type carried out. Non-routine workload has been found
to be comparably high for HMC checks with 46 - 56% of total
project workload. Furthermore, aging aircraft turned out to
have a non-routine workload share of 45% independently from
the type of maintenance event. Those amounts of uncertainty
imply a serious threat to MROs capacity planning, particularly
when multiple aircraft are maintained contemporaneous. As for
the second objective, an ERP-integrated method for selecting
comparable projects for analysis, transforming and mapping of
operation data by means of rule-based data wrangling is pro-
posed. Each operation is then assigned to one network activity
of the prospective project in order to estimate routine and non-
routine workloads. The workloads are further broken down into
network activities and skills. This allows to characterize the
maintenance workloads accurately despite uncertain and scare
information as early as during the offer submission process.
Furthermore, gathered within a workload distribution matrix,
the method can provide model input parameters for simulation-
based capacity planning software that allow for capacity plan-
ning, scheduling and progress control of aircraft maintenance
projects. This constitutes research opportunities to further
enhance the multi-project planning and scheduling methods for
aircraft maintenance companies, thus providing them a decisive
competitive advantage.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors gratefully acknowledge the ﬁnancial support
by the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy
of Germany (BMWi) in the project MRO21 (project number
20X1714C).
REFERENCES
[1]
Airbus SE, Aircraft Maintenance Manual (AMM) for Airbus A380:
Electronic Document. Blagnac Cedex, France, 2017.
[2]
A. Alﬁeri and M. Urgo, “Project Scheduling for Aggregate Produc-
tion Scheduling in Make-to-Order Environments”. In: Handbook
on Project Management and Scheduling Vol.2. Ed. by C. Schwindt
and J. Zimmermann. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2015,
pp. 1249–1266.
[3]
S. Carl, “Modell und L¨osungsansatz zur Bestimmung kostenmin-
imierter Ablaufpl¨ane in Multiressourcen-Montagen (Model and 
solution approach for the determination of cost-minimized process 
schedules in multi-resource assemblies”. Dissertation. Dresden: 
Technische Universit¨at Dresden, 2015.
[4]
G. Chen, W. He, L. C. Leung, T. Lan, and Y. Han, “Assigning 
licenced technicians to maintenance tasks at aircraft maintenance 
base: A bi-objective approach and a Chinese airline application”. 
In: International Journal of Production Research 55.19, 2017, 
pp. 5550–5563.
[5]
P. De Bruecker, J. Van den Bergh, J. Beli¨en, and E. Demeulemeester, 
“Workforce planning incorporating skills: State of the art”. In: 
European Journal of Operational Research 243.1, 2015, pp. 1–16.
[6]
DIN Deutsches Institut f¨ur Normung e.V., Maintenance - Mainte-
nance Terminology EN 13306:2017. Berlin, 2018.
[7]
D. Dinis and A. Barbosa-P´ovoa, “Aircraft Maintenance Capacity 
Planning: A Decision Support Framework”. In: Conference Proceed-
ings. Ed. by T. Bousonville, T. Melo, N. Rezg, and F. Vernadat. 
Saarbr¨ucken, 2017, pp. 412–417.
[8]
C. Fabig and E. Winter, “A multi-level modeling approach for 
simulation-based capacity planning and scheduling of aircraft 
maintenance projects”. In: Simulation for a noble cause. Ed. by
M. Rabe. [Piscataway, NJ]: IEEE, 2018, pp. 3252–3263.
[9]
S. Hartmann and D. Briskorn, “A survey of variants and extensions of 
the resource-constrained project scheduling problem”. In: European 
Journal of Operational Research 207.1, 2010, pp. 1–14.
[10]
K. Liebst¨uckel, Plant maintenance with SAP: Business user guide. 
4th edition. Bonn and Boston: Rheinwerk Publishing, 2017.
[11]
D. Mourtzis, M. Doukas, and D. Bernidaki, “Simulation in Manu-
facturing: Review and Challenges”. In: Procedia CIRP 25,  2014, 
pp. 213–229.
[12]
A. Naber and R. Kolisch, “MIP models for resource-constrained 
project scheduling with flexible resource profiles”. In: European 
Journal of Operational Research 239.2, 2014, pp. 335–348.
[13]
J. H. Peaceman, “Conception of a Business Intelligence-based 
method for the causal allocation of a given effort estimation to 
network activities”. Diploma thesis. Dresden: Technische Universit¨at 
Dresden, 2018.
[14]
R. Pellerin and N. Perrier, “A review of methods, techniques and 
tools for project planning and control”. In: International Journal of 
Production Research 57.7, 2019, pp. 2160–2178.
[15]
D. C. Pinha and R. S. Ahluwalia, “Flexible resource management 
and its effect on project cost and duration”. In: Journal of Industrial 
Engineering International 15.1, 2019, pp. 119–133.
[16]
C. Rem´enyi and S. Staudacher, “Systematic simulation based 
approach for the identification and implementation of a scheduling 
rule in the aircraft engine maintenance”. In: International Journal 
of Production Economics 147, 2014, pp. 94–107.
[17]
T. L. Seamster and B. G. Kanki, eds., Aviation Information 
Management: From Documents to Data. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2002.
[18]
E. B. Tirkolaee, A. Goli, M. Hematian, A. K. Sangaiah, and
T. Han, “Multi-objective multi-mode resource constrained project 
scheduling problem using Pareto-based algorithms”. In: Computing 
101.6, 2019, pp. 547–570.
[19]
J. Van den Bergh, J. Beli¨en, P. De Bruecker, and J. Peeters, “Aircraft 
maintenance operations: state of the art”. Research Paper. Leuven: 
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 2013.
[20]
T. Wauters, J. Kinable, P. Smet, W. Vancroonenburg, G. Vanden 
Berghe, and J. Verstichel, “The Multi-Mode Resource-Constrained 
Multi-Project Scheduling Problem”. In: Journal of Scheduling 19.3, 
2016, pp. 271–283.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

