 
BUS BLOCKED BY TURNING RIGHT VEHICLES
(BLOCKED BY PEDESTRIANS)
BUS BLOCKED BY PARKING VEHICLE
(ADJACENT LANE OCCUPIED BY
STREAM OF VEHICLES)
BUS FORCED TO SLOW DOWN BY
INEPTLY PARKED
VEHICLES (ADJACENT LANE
OCCUPIED BYCONTINUOUS
STREAM OF VEHICLES)
 
Simulation of the Influence of Curb-Parking on the Efficiency of Designated Curb 
Bus Lanes 
 
Marek Bauer 
Department of Transportation Systems 
Cracow University of Technology (PK) 
Cracow, Poland 
e-mail: mbauer@pk.edu.pl 
 
 
Abstract—This paper discusses the influence of curb parking 
on speeds of buses on designated bus lanes. This is a universal 
practical problem, its solution would aid the running of buses 
in many cities. This is also an important issue from the point of 
view of the construction of the simulation models used in the 
planning of transportation systems. It often happens that in the 
planning and design process, overly optimistic values of bus 
speeds are often adopted, and these can be very difficult to 
achieve after implementation of the planned solutions. The 
main tool in this discussion is the author’s own probabilistic 
model of conflict between running buses and parking cars. 
This model states the part of comprehensive bus lane studies in 
Polish cities, leading to develop a scientific method of traffic 
organization within the right curb bus lanes. The model is 
based on the real measurement of the results of bus running 
times and parking facilities. The paper presents the results of 
the duration of parallel parking maneuvers by buses and cars 
within designated bus lane space and the time of occupying the 
potential conflict area in the separated lane. In this analysis, 
inter alia – bus driver’s decision time and the time required for 
safe bus stopping are considered. The presented model can be 
used in simulations of the effects of curb-parking on bus 
speeds, in relation to different frequencies of parking 
maneuvers.  
Keywords-urban transport; bus lane; curb-parking. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Designated lanes for bus public transport are an effective 
tool of transport policies, the objective of which is to 
increase the share of trips effected by public transport, as 
described in [1]. Thus, they form part of the group of highly 
relevant issues for managing mobility in cities. Dedicated 
lanes provide far more advantageous conditions for bus 
transit than lanes used by the generality of vehicles. They 
enable buses to reach high speed, contribute to an increasing 
punctuality and regularity of service. In Polish conditions 
(including Cracow), mostly right curb bus lanes have been 
introduced. Their greatest advantage is the ease of locating 
bus stops on the pavement, i.e., directly by the lane [2]. They 
are, however, susceptible to disturbances largely resulting 
from traffic signaling systems, the movement of vehicles 
turning right involving bus lane usage and due to maneuvers 
related to the service of buildings located in the immediate 
vicinity of the bus lane, including sidewalk parking [3]. 
These factors are characterized by substantial randomness of 
impact and the impossibility of their mutual separation. An 
illustration of these problems is shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1.  Disadvantages of right curb bus lanes (own work). 
The negative impact of vehicles parking on the sidewalk 
results directly from the necessity for parking cars to use the 
bus lane, and also from bus drivers’ apprehension to drive 
faster in conditions of limited visibility. In current research 
in Cracow (unpublished own research), it has been 
established that the average speed of buses on sections with 
bus lanes where sidewalk parking is permitted is on average 
2.3-4.3 [km/h] (section lengths: 0.3 – 0.7 [km]) lower than 
where it is not allowed. This means a significant decrease in 
average speed, amounting to between 13 and even up to 22 
[%]. Yet, the fact cannot be ignored that sidewalk parking is 
regarded as being particularly convenient for car users due to 
its relatively short parking operation time and quick access to 
journey destinations located in the immediate vicinity of the 
parking spaces. In this context, it is crucial to determine the 
scale of the difficulty of sidewalk parking for bus traffic. 
This is of even greater importance, because increasingly 
frequently paid parking areas are being introduced in Polish 
cities, which is an highly efficient method of restricting car 
traffic in central city districts. 
In Section 2, the probability model of conflict between 
running bus and parking car is presented. Section 3 includes 
the results of the duration of parking maneuvers, whilst in 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
POTENTIAL CONFLICT PLACE
BUS DRIVER'S
DECISION TIME
TIME REQUIRED
FOR SAFE STOPPING
CONFLICT AREA:
RUNNING BUS  vs PARKING CAR
BUS DRIVER'S DECISION AREA:
CHANGING LANE or SLOWING
DOWN or STOPPING
 
Section 4, the time of occupying the potential conflict area 
on a separated bus lane is analyzed. Section 5 presents a 
practical application of the model. Finally, Section 6 presents 
the conclusion of the paper. 
II. 
THE MODEL OF CONFLICT: RUNNING BUS VERSUS 
PARKING VEHICLE 
Various possible solutions to the given problem, 
including the queueing theory, were taken into account. 
However, at the stage of the construction of the model, it was 
found that to describe the influence of sidewalk parking 
maneuvers on bus running time on a dedicated bus lane, 
reliability theory [4] is most useful. In this fully individual 
approach, the reliability structure of a system presents the 
manner of mutual connections of components, determining 
the dependency of system failures on failures of its elements. 
In the case of a section with sidewalk parking allowed right 
next to the bus lane, the system elements are the subsequent 
points on the bus lane, where a running bus and parking 
vehicle can meet [5]. This is an approach used in models of 
discrete events. However, the case here is not the probability 
of physical collision but specification of the probability of 
disturbances in bus running as a result of a parking vehicle 
[6]. This was defined as the probability of conflict between a 
running bus and a parking vehicle. The system will be 
unreliable if a bus driver, traveling along a dedicated bus 
lane is not be able to continue at the chosen speed as a result 
of a parking maneuver. When seeing a vehicle being parked 
(or a vehicle preparing for such a maneuver), the driver has 
three possibilities: he can slow down or change the lane or 
even stop the bus on the separated lane. All of these options 
are a waste time for passengers [7]. Since conventional 
parking spaces are located sequentially along the bus lane, it 
can be stated that the system has a serial reliability structure 
in which inefficiency of any component causes inefficiency 
of the entire system. In other words, a maneuver related to 
parking on one of the parking lots impacts on the reaction of 
a bus driver, even if the distance from the potential conflict 
place is significant. In general, the system unreliability 
function describing the probability of the conflict between a 
running bus and parking vehicle has the following form: 

( )
)
(
1
t
t
n
i
i
s







where:  
Λs(t) – function of failure intensity of the system, which is a 
function of intensity of potential disturbances of running 
time on the analyzed section (as a result of parking vehicles); 
Λi(t) – function of failure intensity of i-th component of the 
system, as a result of a parking vehicle at parking position 
number i. 
Most often, the peak hour (morning or afternoon) is 
adopted as the reference point, because of the increased 
number of parking maneuvers. The model can be simplified 
by applying average values of intensity of potential running 
time disturbances; i.e., the same for each parking space, 
regardless of its location on a section. Then, the average 
intensity of disturbances in the bus lane area, right next to 
one parking space – can be multiplied by the number of 
parking positions: 

( )
( )
P A
P C
n
s






where:  
Λs [No. of maneuvers/h] – average intensity of potential 
disturbances of running time on the analyzed section, during 
one hour of analysis; 
n [-] – number of effective parking positions at the analyzed 
section, assuming that in case of unspecified parking 
positions – one position is on average 6.0 [m] long; 
P(C) – probability that a parking car enters the bus lane 
(taking position or leaving parking position), right next to 
one parking space, during 1 hour; 
P(A) – probability of bus entries into the analyzed section, 
during 1 hour. 
In the proposed approach, the intensity of section running 
time disturbances is modeled as the product of the 
probability of a meeting between a parking vehicle and an 
approaching bus, at the same time and place. These 
probabilities can be determined, including the time of 
occupying the separated lane by buses and maneuvering cars, 
attributable to one parking position.  
The time of occupying the potential conflict area on the 
separated bus lane can be divided into two parts: the bus 
driver’s decision time and the time required for eventual (if 
needed) safe bus stopping before a maneuvering vehicle. 
Decision time tA,d is defined as the time when a bus driver, 
having diagnosed the possibility of a parking maneuver 
(taking or leaving a parking position), makes the decision to 
slow down, stop the bus or change the lane. While the time 
required for safe stopping tA,s is defined as the time 
anticipated by the driver for potential slowing down at a 
deceleration acceptable for the passengers (Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2.  Bus driver’s decision time and the time required for safe 
stopping before a maneuvering vehicle (own work). 
Finally, the average intensity of section running time 
disturbances has the form: 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

























3600
)
(
3600
3600
,
,
,
,
A s
A d
A
C lp
lp
C tp
tp
s
t
t
c Q
t
b
t
a
n


 
where:  
Λtp, Λlp [veh/h] – average intensity of car maneuvers related 
to one typical parking position, in the case of – respectively: 
taking a parking position and leaving a parking position; 
tC,tp, tC,tp [s] – average time of typical parking maneuver – 
respectively: taking or leaving a parking position; 
QA [veh/h] – bus traffic volume; 
tA,d [s] – average bus driver’s decision time; 
tA,s [s] – average time required for safe bus stopping; 
a, b [-] – disturbance factor for – respectively: taking a 
parking position and leaving a parking position by a single 
car – values can be estimated on the calibration stage; 
c [-] – coefficient of other traffic on bus lane; 
all remaining variables – according to equation (2). 
This is the classic approach used in traffic engineering, 
where calculations are often based on the average durations 
of the traffic processes. However, it should be noted that the 
choice of a mathematical formula and the choice of model 
variables are the result of the work of the author. 
III. 
THE DURATION OF PARKING MANEUVERS 
The characteristics of parking maneuvers are similar in 
European cities. In Polish conditions, the duration of parallel 
parking maneuvers was measured by Gaca, Suchorzewski 
and Tracz [8]. They have established that the average full 
duration of typical parallel parking manoeuver is 30 [s]. To 
confirm these values, my own measurements were carried 
out on one typical street section with a bus lane and parking 
places located at the sidewalk, right next to bus lane. During 
a 12-hour video registration, not only was the duration of 
maneuvers while taking or leaving parking positions taken 
into consideration, but also the time spent by the parking 
vehicle on the bus lane, looking for a free space as well as 
leaving bus lane and taking the general access lane was 
measured. In a situation when after leaving the parking space 
a vehicle continued driving on the bus lane, the moment of 
leaving the entire section was regarded as the time of leaving 
the lane. The duration of maneuvering only on the sidewalk 
area was not included, unless its effects could impact the bus 
traffic on the dedicated lane. Characteristics of maneuvers 
are shown in Table I.  
TABLE I.  
CHARACTERISTICS OF PARALLEL PARKING MANEUVERS 
WITH BUS LANE USAGE 
Kind of maneuver 
Time [s] 
Minimum Maximum Average 
Standard 
deviation 
Entry to 
the 
position 
Time spent on the 
bus lane 
2 
19 
8 
4 
Taking parking 
position 
7 
59 
20 
13 
Departure 
from the 
position 
Leaving parking 
position 
2 
26 
10 
8 
Time spent on the 
bus lane 
4 
31 
13 
8 
The results provide a good insight into the time of taking 
and leaving a parking position located on the sidewalk right 
next to a bus lane. The more important values are those 
concerning the time taken to park and then leave positions – 
these are on average 20 and 10 [s]. However, the additional 
time spent by a car on the bus lane is also significant. In the 
case of leaving a parking position – this is on average 13 [s]. 
The differences in times are caused by the differential 
characteristics of maneuvers. Drivers taking position are 
looking for a free space from a distance. In general, they 
continue driving along the general access lane and change 
lane only when they see a free parking place. These 
maneuvers are done under time pressure. In the case of 
leaving a parking position, drivers must wait for a gap on the 
bus lane. A maneuver without time pressure is easier to do. 
Total average time of taking position is 28 [s], but the time 
of leaving a parking position is 23 [s]. These results are very 
similar to the general findings from publications presented at 
the beginning of this Section. So, they can be used in further 
analysis. Of course, such research should be conducted on a 
much broader scale, in order to obtain more reliable variables 
for the conflict model. 
On the basis of the above measurement results, it would 
be difficult to conduct a reliable analysis including the 
randomness of parking duration caused by different spaces 
between already parked vehicles and the sizes of vehicles 
being parked. This should be the next level of studies. 
Therefore, at the present stage of analysis it has been decided 
that the study will have a deterministic character. Cases of 
unlawful car movement on the bus lane were also recorded. 
These will not be considered in the current analysis. 
IV. 
TIME OF OCCUPYING THE POTENTIAL CONFLICT 
AREA ON THE SEPARATED LANE 
The model presented in Section 2 can be applied to 
analyze the increase in probability of conflict between the 
buses driving on a dedicated bus lane and the cars 
performing maneuvers related to parking. 
A. Bus driver’s decision time 
Firstly, the study focused on the period of time when a 
bus driver upon seeing a vehicle maneuvering can diagnose 
the situation and make a decision either to potentially slow 
down (or stop, or change the lane), or to continue driving at 
the current speed. The point here, however, is not emergency 
braking (which can also occur in exceptional situations), but 
any decrease in speed resulting in longer running time. In the 
case of a decision to continue driving, without visible 
danger, more time is required. This is the reason why values 
from the interval 3-7 [s] were taken into account. A 
comparison of distances covered during 3-7 [s] are presented 
in Figure 3. 
For example, during 5 [s] a bus driving at a speed of 30 
[km/h] covers the distance of 42 [m]. Due to the fact that 
buses on dedicated lanes often move at a speed of 40 [km/h] 
and faster, it was decided not to include longer decision 
times. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Comparison of distances covered by buses during bus drivers’ 
decisions in relation to current speed of vehicle (own work). 
B. Time required for safe bus stopping 
Furthermore, the study also covered the time in which the 
bus reaches the potential conflict. Decelerations from 0.8 
[m/s2] to as much as the exceptionally acceptable for 
passengers value of 1.6 [m/s2] were taken into account. 
Assuming that a bus running at a speed of 30 [km/h] brakes 
with a smooth deceleration of 0.8 [m/s2], the breaking 
distance can be as long as 43 [m]. In the case of 1.6 [m/s2], 
which is generally inconvenient for passengers – this 
distance is only 22 [m]. Both cases seem unlikely, therefore 
in Figure 4, braking distances only for decelerations from 1.0 
to 1.4 [m/s2], depending on the current bus speed, are 
presented. 
 
Figure 4.  Comparison of distances covered by buses with time required 
for safe stopping (own work). 
Current speed has a very significant influence on braking 
distances. Due to the fact that buses on dedicated lanes often 
move at a speed of 40 [km/h] and faster, even distant parking 
maneuvers can lead to bus (and passenger) time losses. 
C. Total time of occupying the potential conflict area 
On the basis of the length of the section covered during 
the driver’s decision about potentially slowing down and of 
the length of the section covered during safe braking, the 
time in which the bus reaches the point of potential conflict 
with a parking vehicle was established. These times are 
presented in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5.  Comparison of times of reaching the point of potential conflict 
with a parking vehicle (own work). 
V. 
APPLICATION OF THE MODEL OF THE CONFLICT: 
RUNNING BUS VERSUS PARKING VEHICLE 
Analyses of potential conflicts on the designated bus 
lanes were conducted on the basis of results of measurements 
carried out along a section of Trzech Wieszczow Avenue in 
Krakow (Figure 6). 
 
Figure 6.  Analyzed sections along Trzech Wieszczow Avenue in Cracow. 
From a bus public transport perspective, this is one of the 
key transport corridors in the city. It has been provided with 
right curb bus lanes which can be used by all public transport 
vehicles, taxis and vehicles from municipal services (police 
and municipal guard) and additionally at intersection entries 
– by all vehicles, turning right. This part of the transport 
corridor has a typical urban character with intersections 
controlled by traffic signals, without priorities for buses. The 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

analysis covers a section starting from the “Jubilat” bus stop 
to the stop “AGH”. Taking into account distances between 
stops, the studied section amounts in total to 920 [m]. If one 
was to accept that parking takes place only in the allowed 
areas there would be 425 [m] at drivers’ disposal for parking. 
As parking positions have not been designated, drivers 
occupy them according to their needs, habits and skills, not 
infrequently against the regulations. In order to determine the 
potential number of available parking spaces, it was assumed 
that the length of one parallel parking position is 6.0 [m]. 
Having assumed this, only 68 parking positions in total have 
been made available in the studied section. In practice, only 
intersection zones, pedestrian crossings and bus stop areas 
are free from parking. The numbers of parking positions are 
presented in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
NUMBER OF PARKING POSTIONS AT THE ANALYZED 
SECTIONS 
No. 
Section 
Total 
length of 
the section 
[m] 
Length of 
the section 
(with legal 
and illegal) 
parking 
spaces [m] 
Approxima
te number 
of parking 
positions [-] 
1 
“Jubilat” stop – 
Smoleńsk street 
197 
176 
29 
2 
Smoleńsk street – 
„Cracovia” stop 
203 
108 
18 
3 
„Cracovia” stop – 
Krupnicza street 
261 
236 
39 
4 
Krupnicza street – 
„AGH” stop 
259 
75 
12 
A. The number and intensity of maneuvers related to 
parking on the sidewalk right next to the bus lane 
From the perspective of potential conflicts between buses 
driving on a dedicated lane and the vehicles parking on a 
sidewalk and thus using the bus lane, the number of all 
maneuvers related to parking positions appears to be of great 
importance.  
Studies were conducted using the patrol measurements 
method, by registration of vehicle numbers on individual 
positions. 
These 
were 
logged 
during 
subsequent 
measurement cycles – in morning (6:00 – 10:00) and 
afternoon (14:00 – 18:00) time periods. In order to describe 
the impact of parking vehicles on bus traffic, average 
intensities of entries and leavings were established for 
individual peak hours. Here it was assumed that in relatively 
homogenous peak periods the numbers of maneuvers can be 
divided evenly into single hours of study. It needs to be taken 
into account that the relatively long hourly measurement 
cycle could result in some maneuvers not being logged. 
Therefore, it can be acknowledged that the actual maneuver 
intensities will not be lower than those given in Table III.  
In the current state, the number of maneuvers related to a 
single parking position in the analyzed section varies greatly 
– ranging between 0.028 and 0.291 maneuvers. In some 
cases, this ratio exceeds 0.2. Therefore, the number of 
parking positions at the analyzed sections will be crucial. 
TABLE III.  
NUMBER OF PARKING MANEUVERS AT THE ANALYZED 
SECTIONS (PER 1H) 
Section 
Average intensity of 
entries per 1h [-] 
Average intensity of 
leavings per 1h [-] 
Morning 
peak hour 
Afternoon 
peak hour 
Morning 
peak hour 
Afternoon 
peak hour 
“Jubilat” stop – 
Smoleńsk street 
0.207 
0.126 
0.057 
0.218 
Smoleńsk street – 
„Cracovia” stop 
0.148 
0.148 
0.074 
0.167 
„Cracovia” stop – 
Krupnicza street 
0.291 
0.179 
0.034 
0.171 
Krupnicza street – 
„AGH” stop 
0.222 
0.111 
0.028 
0.194 
B. Running times of buses 
There are 40 urban transport (municipal) buses and 
additionally 80 microbuses from private companies during 
each peak hour along Aleje Trzech Wieszczow. The 
measurements of running time were conducted using GPS 
receivers in selected buses. These were collated after 37 
(morning peak hour) and 40 (afternoon peak hour) running 
times of two analyzed stop-to-stop sections. Average values 
of running times and running speeds are shown in Table IV. 
TABLE IV.  
AVERAGE BUS RUNNING TIMES AND SPEEDS 
Section 
Average running time 
[min] 
Average running 
speed [km/h] 
Morning 
peak hour 
Afternoon 
peak hour 
Morning 
peak hour 
Afternoon 
peak hour 
“Jubilat” stop – 
“Cracovia” stop 
1.20 
1.21 
20.3 
20.1 
„Cracovia” stop – 
“AGH” stop 
1.25 
1.29 
24.7 
24.0 
 
The running times of buses are very similar in both the 
peak periods. Unfortunately, in both sections, the running 
speeds of buses are not very high, which may be partly the 
result of curb-parking. Average time loss per bus is 15 [s], so 
in total, this is a significant problem for public transport 
passengers. 
C. Probability of the conflict: running bus vs parking car 
The impact of parking maneuvers on bus traffic, 
calculated using the model described in Section 2, is the 
greatest in the longest section where the number of potential 
conflicts is the lowest (Table V). On average, in existing 
situation, every fourth public transport bus is blocked by a 
parking vehicle. It should be noted that the process of taking 
and leaving a parking position includes the behavior of car 
drivers towards approaching buses. It was established that, in 
the case of entries, drivers generally do not take bus traffic 
into consideration as they need to occupy the bus lane earlier 
and when driving on the bus lane they need to find a free 
parking space. The situation in the case of leaving a parking 
position is different. In the majority of cases, drivers wait for 
the possibility to leave as long as there are no buses within a 
well seen distance. A problem arises when visibility is 
limited and a bus is running fast. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

TABLE V.  
PROBABILITY OF CONFLICT BETWEEN RUNNING BUS AND 
PARKING VEHICLE IN CURRENT SITUATION 
Section 
Probability of conflict [-] 
Morning peak 
hour 
Afternoon peak 
hour 
“Jubilat” stop – Smoleńsk street 
0.038 
0.032 
Smoleńsk street – „Cracovia” stop 
0.018 
0.020 
„Cracovia” stop – Krupnicza street 
0.072 
0.056 
Krupnicza street – „AGH” stop 
0.018 
0.014 
 
Therefore, after the model calibration process, it was 
proposed to adopt the following values of disturbance factors 
(equation (3)): 0.9 and 0.5 [-], for – respectively: taking and 
leaving a parking position by a single car. 
D. Scenarios of increase of rotation on parking positions 
and the simulation results 
In this analysis, the influence of the elimination of curb-
parking and a potential increase in rotation at the parking 
positions along the bus lane is taken into account. There 
following four scenarios are included: 
 
Scenario S0: current state; 
 
Scenario S1: elimination of curb-parking along the 
bus lanes; 
 
Scenario S2: implementation of a paid parking zone, 
parking rotation rate = 0.50 [veh/h]; 
 
Scenario S3: implementation of a paid parking zone, 
rotation rate = 1.00 [veh/h]. 
In the interest of simplification it was assumed that the 
rotation rates will remain the same at positions located in all 
four parts of the analyzed transport corridor. Simulation of 
probability of conflict between a running bus and a vehicle 
performing a parking maneuver was carried out for all 
scenarios using formula (3). The results of the simulation are 
presented in Table VI. 
TABLE VI.  
PROBABILITY OF CONFLICT (ALL SCENARIOS, AFTERNOON 
PEAK HOUR) 
Section 
Probability of conflict [-] 
Running time of buses 
[min] 
S0 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S0 
S1 
S2 
S3 
“Jubilat” – 
Smoleńsk 
0.016 
0.000 
0.017 
0.032 
1.21 
1.18 
1.21 
1.24 
Smoleńsk  – 
„Cracovia”  0.010 
0.000 
0.010 
0.019 
„Cracovia” – 
Krupnicza 
0.028 
0.000 
0.035 
0.068 
1.29 
1.26 
1.30 
1.34 
Krupnicza  – 
„AGH”  
0.007 
0.000 
0.007 
0.014 
 
Liquidation of parking along the bus lane will shorten 
running times of buses by an average of only 4 [s], while 
increasing the rotation to 1 [veh/h] will result in an extension 
of 3-6 [s], depending on the section. This is a relatively small 
effect, but it affects many passengers. If we assume that the 
section in the afternoon rush hour is traveled along by 3,000 
passengers, this total can be achieved in close to 3.5 hours. 
However, one can conclude that the possible introduction of 
paid parking zones will not cause a serious loss of time for 
passengers. Another problem is a slower ride on buses 
resulting from reduced visibility - in this case, the profit 
would have been much larger. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Parking vehicles have a relatively slight influence on 
running speeds of buses along the designated bus lanes. 
Also, it will not be easy to find an efficient solution to the 
problem resulting from the growth of parking rotation on 
sidewalks located right next to bus lanes. One immediate 
solution, i.e., to create a maneuver lane between the bus lane 
and the sidewalk, cannot be applied in every case due to a 
lack of space. Therefore, it is worthwhile considering the 
removal of sidewalk parking from those transport corridors 
with separated bus lanes. This could have positive results, in 
the form of shortening the bus running times. This action 
could have yet another positive aspect. The area retrieved in 
this way could be used to improve conditions for pedestrian 
traffic, or it could be dedicated to the needs of bike traffic. It 
is true that even the least efficient bus lanes are better than 
general access lanes in increased traffic conditions, yet this 
should not be a reference point. Instead, the maximum 
functional possibilities, especially high speed of running, 
should be the reference. Studies on the efficiency of bus 
lanes, including the impact of sidewalk parking, will be 
continued, also with the use of stochastic methods. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Marsden, K.T. Frick, A.D. Maya and E. Deakin, “How do 
cities approach policy innovation and policy learning? A 
study of 30 policies in Northern Europe and North America,” 
Transport Policy, 18, 3, 501–512, 2011, 
[2] J. Młyńczak, “Analysis of Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) 
in Public Transport of Upper Silesia,” Modern Transport 
Telematics Communications in Computer and Information 
Science 239, 164 – 171, 2011, 
[3] M. Bauer, “Model of Running Time Disturbances for Buses 
Using Designated Lanes on Approaches to Junctions 
Equipped with Traffic Signals,” In Proceedings of The Sixth 
International Conference on Advances in System Simulation 
SIMUL2014, (Nice, France, October 12 - 16, 2014, 
[4] I. Bazovsky, “Reliability Theory and Practice,” Englewoods 
Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall, 1961, 
[5] K.Ch. Keong Goh, G. Currie, M. Sarvi and D. Logan, “Bus 
accident analysis of routes with/without bus priority,” 
Elsevier: Accident Analysis and Prevention 65, 18-27, 2014, 
[6] A.E. Wåhlberg, “Characteristics of low speed accidents with 
buses in public transport: part II,” Accident Analysis and 
Prevention 36, pp. 63–71, 2004, 
[7] H. Guo, Z. Gao, X. Yang, X. Zhao and W. Wang, “Modeling 
Travel Time under the Influence of On-Street Parking,” J. 
Transp. Eng., 138(2), 229–235, 2012, 
[8] S. Gaca S, W. Suchorzewski and M. Tracz, „Inżynieria ruchu 
(in English: Traffic engineering),” Warsaw, 2008, 
[9] Z.P. Sándor and C. Csiszár, "Role of Integrated Parking 
Information System in Traffic Management," Periodica 
Polytechnica. Civil Engineering 59.3 (2015): 327. 
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

