Numerical Simulation and Experimental Model-Validation for 
Fiber-Reinforced Plastics Under Impact Loading 
Using the Example of Ultra-High Molecular Weight Polyethylene 
 
Arash Ramezani and Hendrik Rothe 
Chair of Measurement and Information Technology 
University of the Federal Armed Forces  
Hamburg, Germany 
Email: ramezani@hsu-hh.de, rothe@hsu-hh.de 
 
 
Abstract—In the security sector, the partly insufficient safety of 
people and equipment due to failure of industrial components 
are ongoing problems that cause great concern. Since 
computers and software have spread into all fields of industry, 
extensive efforts are currently made in order to improve the 
safety by applying certain numerical solutions. This work 
presents a set of numerical simulations of ballistic tests which 
analyze the effects of composite armor plates. The goal is to 
improve fiber-reinforced plastics in order to be able to cope 
with current challenges. Of course, the maximization of 
security is the primary goal, but keeping down the costs is 
becoming increasingly important. This is why numerical 
simulations are more frequently applied than experimental 
tests which are thus being replaced gradually. 
Keywords-solver technologies; simulation models; fiber-
reinforced plastics; optimization; armor systems. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
This work will focus on composite armor structures 
consisting of several layers of ultra-high molecular weight 
polyethylene (UHMW-PE), a promising ballistic armor 
material due to its high specific strength and stiffness. The 
goal is to evaluate the ballistic efficiency of UHMW-PE 
composite with numerical simulations, promoting an 
effective development process.  
Due to the fact that all engineering simulation is based 
on geometry to represent the design, the target and all its 
components are simulated as CAD models. The work will 
also provide a brief overview of ballistic tests to offer some 
basic knowledge of the subject, serving as a basis for the 
comparison of the simulation results. Details of ballistic 
trials on composite armor systems are presented. Instead of 
running expensive trials, numerical simulations should 
identify vulnerabilities of structures. Contrary to the 
experimental result, numerical methods allow easy and 
comprehensive studying of all mechanical parameters. 
Modeling will also help to understand how the fiber-
reinforced plastic armor schemes behave during impact and 
how the failure processes can be controlled to our 
advantage. By progressively changing the composition of 
several layers and the material thickness, the composite 
armor will be optimized. There is every reason to expect 
possible weight savings and a significant increase in 
protection, through the use of numerical techniques 
combined with a small number of physical experiments. 
After a brief introduction and description of the different 
methods of space discretization in Section III, there is a 
short section on ballistic trials where the experimental set-
up is depicted, followed by Section V describing the 
analysis with numerical simulations. The paper ends with a 
concluding paragraph in Section VI.  
II. 
STATE-OF-THE-ART 
The numerical modeling of composite materials under 
impact can be performed at a constituent level (i.e., explicit 
modeling of fibre and matrix elements, e.g., [1]), a meso-
mechanical level (i.e., consolidated plies or fibre bundles, 
e.g., [2]), or macromechanically in which the composite 
laminate is represented as a continuum.  
In [3–6] a non-linear orthotropic continuum material 
model was developed and implemented in a commercial 
hydrocode (i.e., ANSYS® AUTODYN®) for application 
with 
aramid 
and 
carbon 
fibre 
composites 
under 
hypervelocity impact. The non-linear orthotropic material 
model includes orthotropic coupling of the material 
volumetric and deviatoric responses, a non-linear equation 
of state (EoS), orthotropic hardening, combined stress 
failure criteria and orthotropic energy-based softening. For 
more detail refer to [7].  
Lässig et al. [8] conducted extensive experimental 
characterization of Dyneema® HB26 UHMW-PE composite 
for application in the continuum non-linear orthotropic 
material model, and validated the derived material 
parameters through simulation of spherical projectile 
impacts 
at 
hypervelocity. 
The 
target 
geometry 
is 
homogenized. The projectile is an aluminum ball in 
simplified terms. However, homogenized target geometries 
with orthotropic material models are not able to reproduce 
different modes of failure. The results are valid for 
aluminum spherical-shaped projectiles in hypervelocity 
range only. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Nguyen et al. [9] evaluated and refined the modeling 
approach and material model parameter set developed in [8] 
for the simulation of impact events from 400 m/s to 6600 
m/s. Across this velocity range the sensitivity of the 
numerical output is driven by different aspects of the 
material model, e.g., the strength model in the ballistic 
regime and the equation of state (EoS) in the hypervelocity 
regime. Here, the target geometry is divided into sub-
laminates joined by bonded contacts breakable through a 
combined tensile and shear stress failure criterion.  
The models mentioned above are valid for blunt FSP´s 
from a velocity range of 400 to 6600 m/s. They show 
considerable shortcomings in simulating pointed projectiles 
and thick HB26-composites. 
This paper will present an optimal solution of this 
problem with an enhanced model for ultra-high molecular 
weight polyethylene under impact loading. For the first 
time, composite armor structures consisting of several layers 
of fiber-reinforced plastics are simulated for all the current 
military threats. 
III. 
METHODS OF SPACE DISCRETIZATION 
To deal with problems involving the release of a large 
amount of energy over a very short period of time, e.g., 
explosions and impacts, there are three approaches: as the 
problems are highly non-linear and require information 
regarding material behavior at ultra-high loading rates 
which is generally not available, most of the work is 
experimental and thus may cause tremendous expenses. 
Analytical approaches are possible if the geometries 
involved are relatively simple and if the loading can be 
described through boundary conditions, initial conditions or 
a combination of the two. Numerical solutions are far more 
general in scope and remove any difficulties associated with 
geometry [10]. They apply an explicit method and use very 
small time steps for stable results. 
For problems of dynamic fluid-structure interaction 
and impact, there typically is no single best numerical 
method which is applicable to all parts of a problem. 
Techniques to couple types of numerical solvers in a single 
simulation can allow the use of the most appropriate solver 
for each domain of the problem.  
The goal of this paper is to evaluate a hydrocode, a 
computational tool for modeling the behavior of continuous 
media. In its purest sense, a hydrocode is a computer code 
for modeling fluid flow at all speeds [11]. For that reason a 
structure will be split into a number of small elements. The 
elements are connected through their nodes (see Fig. 1).  
 
Figure 1.  Example grid. 
The behavior (deflection) of the simple elements is 
well-known and may be calculated and analyzed using 
simple equations called shape functions. By applying 
coupling conditions between the elements at their nodes, the 
overall stiffness of the structure may be built up and the 
deflection/distortion of any node – and subsequently of the 
whole structure – can be calculated approximately [12].  
Using a CAD-neutral environment that supports 
bidirectional, direct, and associative interfaces with CAD 
systems, the geometry can be optimized successively [13]. 
Therefore, several runs are necessary: from modeling to 
calculation to the evaluation and subsequent improvement 
of the model (see Fig. 2). 
Bullet-resistant materials are usually tested by using a 
gun to fire a projectile from a set distance into the material in 
a set pattern. Levels of protection (see Fig. 3) are based on 
the ability of the target to stop a specific type of projectile 
traveling at a specific speed.  
IV. 
BALLISTIC TRIALS 
Ballistics is an essential component for the evaluation 
of our results. Here, terminal ballistics is the most important 
sub-field. It describes the interaction of a projectile with its 
target. Terminal ballistics is relevant for both small and 
large caliber projectiles. The task is to analyze and evaluate 
the impact and its various modes of action. This will 
provide information on the effect of the projectile and the 
extinction risk.  
Given that a projectile strikes a target, compressive 
waves propagate into both the projectile and the target. 
Relief waves propagate inward from the lateral free surfaces 
of the penetrator, cross at the centerline, and generate a high 
tensile stress. If the impact was normal, we would have a 
two-dimensional stress state. If the impact was oblique, 
bending stresses will be generated in the penetrator. When 
the compressive wave reached the free surface of the target, 
it would rebound as a tensile wave. The target may fracture 
at this point. The projectile may change direction if it 
perforates (usually towards the normal of the target surface).    
 
Figure 2.  Basically iterative procedure of a FE analysis [12]. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Because of the differences in target behavior based on 
the proximity of the distal surface, we must categorize 
targets into four broad groups. A semi-infinite target is one 
where there is no influence of distal boundary on 
penetration. A thick target is one in which the boundary 
influences penetration after the projectile is some distance 
into the target. An intermediate thickness target is a target 
where the boundaries exert influence throughout the impact. 
Finally, a thin target is one in which stress or deformation 
gradients are negligible throughout the thickness. 
There are several methods by which a target will fail 
when subjected to an impact. The major variables are the 
target and penetrator material properties, the impact 
velocity, the projectile shape (especially the ogive), the 
geometry of the target supporting structure, and the 
dimensions of the projectile and target. 
 
In order to develop a numerical model, a ballistic test 
program is necessary. The ballistic trials are thoroughly 
documented and analyzed – even fragments must be 
collected. They provide information about the used armor 
and the projectile behavior after fire, which must be 
consistent with the simulation results (see Fig. 4). 
In order to create a data set for the numerical 
simulations, several experiments have to be performed. 
Ballistic tests are recorded with high-speed videos and 
analyzed afterwards. The experimental set-up is shown in 
Fig. 5. Testing was undertaken at an indoor ballistic testing 
facility. The target stand provides support behind the target 
on all four sides. Every ballistic test program includes 
several trials with different composites. The set-up has to 
remain unchanged.  
Figure 3. The APR 2006 resistance classification and related CAD models [14]. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 4.  Ballistic tests and the analysis of fragments. 
The camera system is a PHANTOM v1611 that enables 
fast image rates up to 646,000 frames per second (fps) at 
full resolution of 1280 x 800 pixels. The use of a polarizer 
and a neutral density filter is advisable, so that waves of 
some polarizations can be blocked while the light of a 
specific polarization can be passed. 
  
 
Figure 5.  Experimental set-up. 
Several targets of different laminate configurations 
were tested to assess the ballistic limit (V50). The ballistic 
limit is considered the velocity required for a particular 
projectile to reliably (at least 50% of the time) penetrate a 
particular piece of material [15]. After the impact, the 
projectile is examined regarding any kind of change it might 
have undergone. 
V. 
NUMERICAL SIMULATION 
The ballistic tests are followed by computational 
modeling of the experimental set-up. Then, the experiment is 
reproduced using numerical simulations. Fig. 1 shows a 
cross-section of the projectile and a CAD model. The 
geometry and observed response of the laminate to ballistic 
impact is approximately symmetric to the axis through the 
bullet impact point.  
Numerical simulation of modern armor structures 
requires the selection of appropriate material models for the 
constituent materials and the derivation of suitable material 
model input data. The laminate system studied here is an 
ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene composite. Lead 
and copper are also required for the projectiles.  
The projectile was divided into different parts - the jacket 
and the base - which have different properties and even 
different meshes. These elements have quadratic shape 
functions and nodes between the element edges. In this way, 
the computational accuracy, as well as the quality of curved 
model shapes increases. Using the same mesh density, the 
application of parabolic elements leads to a higher accuracy 
compared to linear elements (1st order elements). 
A. Modelling 
In [8], numerical simulations of 15 kg/m2 Dyneema® 
HB26 panels impacted by 6 mm diameter aluminum spheres 
between 2052 m/s to 6591 m/s were shown to provide very 
good agreement with experimental measurements of the 
panel ballistic limit and residual velocities, see Fig. 6. The 
modelling approach and material parameter set from [8] 
were applied to simulate impact experiments at velocities in 
the ballistic regime (here considered as < 1000 m/s). In Fig. 
6 the results of modelling impact of 20 mm fragment 
simulating projectiles (FSPs) against 10 mm thick 
Dyneema® HB26 are shown. The model shows a significant 
under prediction of the ballistic limit, 236 m/s compared to 
394 m/s. 
B. Simulation Results 
Relatively newer numerical discretization methods, 
such as Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH), have 
been proposed that rectifies the issue of grid entanglement. 
The SPH method has shown good agreement with high 
velocity impact of metallic targets, better predictions of 
crack propagation in ceramics and fragmentation of 
composites under hypervelocity impact (HVI) compared to 
grid-based 
Lagrange 
and 
Euler 
methods. 
Although 
promising, SPH suffers from consistency and stability issues 
that lead to lower accuracy and instabilities under tensile 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

perturbation. The latter makes it unsuitable for use with 
UHMW-PE composite under ballistic impact, because this 
material derives most of its resistance to penetration when it 
is loaded in tension. For these types of problems, the grid-
based Lagrangian formulation still remains the most feasible 
for modeling UHMW-PE composite. 
3D numerical simulations were performed of the full 
target and projectile, where both were meshed using 8-node 
hexahedral elements. The projectile was meshed with 9 
elements across the diameter. The target is composed of 
sub-laminates that are one element thick, separated by a 
small gap to satisfy the master-slave contact algorithm 
(external gap in AUTODYN®) and bonded together as 
previously discussed. The mesh size of the target is 
approximately equal to the projectile at the impact site. The 
mesh was then graded towards the edge, increasing in 
coarseness to reduce the computational load of the model. 
Since UHMW-PE composite has a very low coefficient of 
friction, force fit clamping provides little restraint. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Experimental and numerical impact residual velocity results for 
impact of 6 mm diameter aluminum spheres against 15 kg/m2 Dyneema® 
HB26 at normal incidence (left) and impact of 20 mm fragment simulating 
projectiles against 10 mm thick Dyneema® HB26 at normal incidence 
(right). Lambert-Jonas parameters (a, p, Vbl) are provided in the legend. 
High speed video of ballistic impact tests typical 
showed the action of loosening and moving clamps upon 
impact. As such no boundary conditions were imposed on 
the target. The FSP material was modelled as Steel S-7 from 
the AUTODYN® library described using a linear EoS and 
the Johnson-Cook strength model [16]. The aluminum 
sphere 
was 
modelled 
using 
AL1100-O 
from 
the 
AUTODYN® library that uses a shock EoS and the 
Steinburg Guinan strength model [17]. The master-slave 
contact algorithm was used to detect contact between the 
target and projectile. 
The sub-laminate model with shock EoS was applied to 
the aluminum sphere hypervelocity impact series and 20 
mm FSP ballistic impact series presented in Fig. 6, the 
results of which are shown in Fig. 7. The sub-laminate 
model is shown to provide a significant improvement in 
predicting the experimental V50 of 394 m/s for the FSP 
ballistic impacts (377 m/s) compared to the monolithic 
model (236 m/s).  
 
 
Figure 7.  Comparison of the experimental results with the two numerical 
models for impact of 20 mm fragment simulating projectiles against 10 mm 
thick Dyneema HB26® at normal incidence (left) , and impact of 6 mm 
diameter aluminium spheres against 15 kg/m2 Dyneema® HB26 at normal 
incidence (right). Lambert-Jonas parameters (a, p, Vbl) are provided in the 
legend. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 8.  Bulge of a 10 mm target impact by a 20 mm FSP at 365 m/s 
(experiment) and 350 m/s (simulations), 400 µs after the initial impact. 
The ballistic limit and residual velocity predicted with 
the sub-laminate model for the hypervelocity impact case 
are shown to be comparable with the original monolithic 
model. For conditions closer to the ballistic limit, the sub-
laminate model is shown to predict increased target 
resistance (i.e., lower residual velocity). For higher 
overmatch conditions there is some small variance between 
the two approaches. 
In Fig. 8, a qualitative assessment of the bulge 
formation is made for the 10 mm panel impacted at 365 m/s 
(i.e., below the V50) by a 20 mm FSP. Prediction of bulge 
development is important as it is characteristic of the 
material wave speed and is also a key measure in defence 
applications, particularly in personnel protection (i.e., vests 
and helmets). The sub-laminate model is shown to 
reproduce the characteristic pyramid bulge shape and 
drawing of material from the lateral edge. In comparison, 
the bulge prediction of the baseline model is poor, showing 
a conical shape with the projectile significantly behind the 
apex. In the baseline model penetration occurs through 
premature through-thickness shear failure around the 
projectile rather than in-plane tension (membrane) which 
would allow the formation of a pyramidal bulge as the 
composite is carried along with the projectile. Furthermore, 
in the baseline model the extremely small through thickness 
tensile strength (1.07 MPa) in the bulk material leads to 
early spallation/delamination of the back face. This allows 
the material on the target back face to fail and be accelerated 
ahead of the projectile. In the sub-laminate model, these two 
artifacts are addressed, and so a more representative bulge is 
formed.   
C. Further Validations 
The material model developed in [8] and [9] has some 
shortcomings 
regarding 
the 
simulation 
of 
handgun 
projectiles (see Fig. 9). The ballistic limit was significantly 
under predicted. Evaluation of the result suggests that the 
failure mechanisms, which drive performance in the rear 
section of the target panel (i.e., membrane tension) were not 
adequately reproduced, suggesting an under-estimate of the 
material in-plane tensile performance. 
 
Figure 9.  Comparing experimantal results with the previous simulation 
models of Lässig [8] and Nguyen [9], 265 μs after impact (grey = plastic 
deformation, green = elastic deformation, orange = material failure); 
projectile velocity: 674 m/s; target thickness: 16.2 mm (60 layers of HB26). 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

A major difficulty in the numerical simulation of fibre 
composites under impact is the detection of failure 
processes between fibre and matrix elements as well as 
between the individual laminate layers (delamination). One 
promising 
approach 
is 
the 
use 
of 
"artificial" 
inhomogeneities on the macroscale. Here, an alternative 
simulation model has been developed to overcome these 
difficulties. Using sub-laminates and inhomogeneities on 
the macroscale, the model does not match the real 
microstructure, but allows a more realistic description of the 
failure processes mentioned above. 
Approaches based on the continuum or macroscale 
present a more practical alternative to solve typical 
engineering problems. However the complexity of the 
constitutive equations and characterization tests necessary to 
describe an anisotropic material at a macro or continuum 
level increases significantly. 
When considering the micromechanical properties of 
the orthotropic yield surface with a non-linear hardening 
description, a non-linear shock equation of state, and a 
three-dimensional failure criterion supplemented by a linear 
orthotropic softening description should be taken into 
account. It is important to consider all relevant mechanisms 
that occur during ballistic impact, as the quality of the 
numerical prediction capability strongly depends on a 
physically accurate description of contributing energy 
dissipation mechanisms. Therefore, a combination of 
ballistic experiments and numerical simulations is required. 
Predictive numerical tools can be extremely useful for 
enhancing our understanding of ballistic impact events. 
Models that are able to capture the key mechanical and 
thermodynamic processes can significantly improve our 
understanding of the phenomena by allowing time-resolved 
investigations of virtually every aspect of the impact event. 
Such high fidelity is immensely difficult, prohibitively 
expensive or near impossible to achieve with existing 
experimental measurement techniques. 
The thermodynamic response of a material and its 
ability to carry tensile and shear loads (strength) is typically 
treated separately within hydrocodes such that the stress 
tensor can be decomposed into volumetric and deviatoric 
components. Since the mechanical properties of fibre-
reinforced composites are anisotropic (at least at the meso- 
and macroscale level), the deviatoric and hydrostatic 
components are coupled. That is deviatoric strains will 
produce a volumetric dilation and hydrostatic pressure leads 
to non-uniform strains in the three principal directions. 
The strength and failure model was investigated by 
modeling single elements under normal and shear stresses. It 
was found that under through-thickness shear stress, the 
element would fail prematurely below the specified through-
thickness shear failure stress. It was found that if the 
through-thickness tensile strength was increased, failure in 
through-thickness shear was delayed. This evaluation study 
shows the importance of the strength, failure and erosion 
models for predicting performance in the ballistic regime. 
Previous material models for fiber-reinforced plastics 
were adjusted and the concept has been extended to 
different calibers and projectile velocities. Composite armor 
plates between 5.5 and 16.2 mm were tested in several 
ballistic trials and high-speed videos were used to analyze 
the characteristics of the projectile – before and after the 
impact. 
The simulation results with the modified model are 
shown in Fig. 10. The deformation of the projectile, e.g., 
7.62×39 mm, is in good agreement with the experimental 
observation. Both delamination and fragmentation can be 
seen in the numerical simulation.  
Compared to the homogeneous continuum model, 
fractures can be detected easily. Subsequently, the results of 
experiment and simulation in the case of perforation were 
compared with reference to the projectile residual velocity. 
Here, only minor differences were observed. 
It should be noted that an explicit modeling of the 
individual fibres is not an option, since the computational 
effort would go beyond the scope of modern server systems 
(see Fig. 11). 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This work demonstrated how a small number of well-
defined experiments can be used to develop, calibrate, and 
validate solver technologies used for simulating the impact 
of projectiles on complex armor systems and composite 
laminate structures.  
Existing material models were optimized to reproduce 
ballistic tests. High-speed videos were used to analyze the 
characteristics of the projectile – before and after the 
impact. The simulation results demonstrate the successful 
use of the coupled multi-solver approach and new modeling 
techniques. The high level of correlation between the 
numerical results and the available experimental or observed 
data demonstrates that the coupled multi-solver approach is 
an accurate and effective analysis method.  
 
Figure 10.  Effect of a 5.5 mm target impact by a 7.62×39 mm bullet at 686 
m/s, 47 µs and 88 µs after the initial impact. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 11.  Cross section of a Dyneema® HB26 panel. 
A non-linear orthotropic continuum model was 
evaluated for UHMW-PE composite across a wide range of 
impact velocities. Although previously found to provide 
accurate results for hypervelocity impact of aluminum 
spheres, the existing model and dataset revealed a 
significant underestimation of the composite performance 
under impact conditions driven by through-thickness shear 
performance (ballistic impact of fragment simulating 
projectiles). The model was found to exhibit premature 
through thickness shear failure as a result of directional 
coupling in the modified Hashin-Tsai failure criterion and 
the large discrepancy between through-thickness tensile and 
shear strength of UHME-PE composite. As a result, 
premature damage and failure was initiated in the through-
thickness shear direction leading to decreased ballistic 
performance. By de-coupling through-thickness tensile 
failure from the failure criteria and discretizing the laminate 
into a nominal number of kinematically joined sub-
laminates through the thickness, progresses in modelling the 
ballistic response of the panels was improved. 
New concepts and models can be developed and easily 
tested with the help of modern hydrocodes. The initial 
design approach of the units and systems has to be as safe 
and optimal as possible. Therefore, most design concepts 
are analyzed on the computer. 
FEM-based simulations are well-suited for this purpose. 
Here, a numerical model has been developed, which is 
capable of predicting the ballistic performance of UHMW-
PE armor systems. Thus, estimates based on experience are 
being more and more replaced by software.  
The gained experience is of prime importance for the 
development of modern armor. By applying the numerical 
model a large number of potential armor schemes can be 
evaluated and the understanding of the interaction between 
laminate components under ballistic impact can be 
improved. 
The most important steps during an FE analysis are the 
evaluation and interpretation of the outcomes followed by 
suitable modifications of the model. For that reason, 
ballistic trials are necessary to validate the simulation 
results. They are designed to obtain information about 
• 
the velocity and trajectory of the projectile prior to 
impact, 
• 
changes in configuration of projectile and target 
due to impact, 
• 
masses, velocities, and trajectories of fragments 
generated by the impact process. 
Ballistic trials can be used as the basis of an iterative 
optimization process. Numerical simulations are a valuable 
adjunct to the study of the behavior of metals subjected to 
high-velocity impact or intense impulsive loading. The 
combined use of computations, experiments and high-strain-
rate material characterization has, in many cases, 
supplemented the data achievable by experiments alone at 
considerable savings in both cost and engineering man-
hours. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D. B. Segala and P. V. Cavallaro, “Numerical investigation of 
energy absorption mechanisms in unidirectional composites 
subjected to dynamic loading events,” in Computational 
Materials Science 81, pp. 303–312, 2014. 
[2] 
S. Chocron et al., “Modeling unidirectional composites by 
bundling fibers into strips with experimental determination of 
shear and compression properties at high pressures,” in 
Composites Science and Technology 101, pp. 32–40, 2014. 
[3] C. J. Hayhurst, S. J. Hiermaier, R. A. Clegg, W. Riedel, and 
M. Lambert, “Development of material models for nextel and 
kevlar-expoxy for high pressures and strain rates,” in 
International Journal of Impact Engineering 23, pp. 365–376, 
1999. 
[4] R. A. Clegg, D. M. White, W. Riedel, and W. Harwick, 
“Hypervelocity impact damage prediction in composites: Part 
I—material model and characterisation,” in International 
Journal of Impact Engineering 33, pp. 190–200, 2006. 
[5] W. Riedel, H. Nahme, D. M. White, and R. A. Clegg, 
“Hypervelocity impact damage prediction in composites: Part 
II—experimental 
investigations 
and 
simulations,” 
in 
International Journal of Impact Engineering 33, pp. 670–80, 
2006. 
[6] M. Wicklein, S. Ryan, D. M. White, and R. A. Clegg, 
“Hypervelocity impact on CFRP: Testing, material modelling, 
and numerical simulation,” in International Journal of Impact 
Engineering 35, pp.1861–1869, 2008. 
[7] ANSYS. AUTODYN Composite Modelling Release 15.0. 
[Online]. Available from: http://ansys.com/ 2016.07.08. 
[8] T. Lässig et al., “A non-linear orthotropic hydrocode model 
for ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene in impact 
simulations,” in International Journal of Impact Engineering 
75, pp. 110–122, 2015. 
[9] L. H. Nguyen et al., “Numerical Modelling of Ultra-High 
Molecular Weight Polyethylene Composite Under Impact 
Loading,” in Procedia Engineering 103, pp. 436–443, 2015. 
[10] J. Zukas, Introduction to hydrocodes. Elsevier Science, 2004. 
[11] G.-S. 
Collins, 
An 
Introduction 
to 
Hydrocode 
Modeling. Applied Modelling and Computation Group, 
Imperial College London, 2002. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

[12] P. Fröhlich, FEM Application Practice. Vieweg Verlag, 2005. 
[13] H.-B. Woyand, FEM with CATIA V5. J. Schlembach 
Fachverlag, 2007. 
[14] R. Frieß, “General basis for ballistic material, construction 
and product testing,” presented at the Ballistic Day in Ulm, 
2008. 
[15] D. E. Carlucci and S. S. Jacobson, Ballistics: Theory and 
Design of guns and ammunition. CRC Press, 2008. 
[16] G. Johnson and W. Cook, “A constitutive model and data for 
metals subjected to large strains, high strain rates and high 
temperatures,” in 7th International Symposium on Ballistics, 
pp. 541–547, 1983. 
[17] D. Steinberg, Equation of state and strength properties of 
selected materials. California, 1996. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

