Thermal Softening Effects on Simulation Models of Fiber-Reinforced Plastics  
Under High-Velocity Impact  
 
Arash Ramezani and Hendrik Rothe 
Chair of Measurement and Information Technology 
University of the Federal Armed Forces  
Hamburg, Germany 
Email: ramezani@hsu-hh.de, rothe@hsu-hh.de 
 
 
Abstract—In the security sector, the partly insufficient safety of 
people and equipment due to failure of industrial components 
is an ongoing problem that causes great concern. Since 
computers and software have spread into all fields of industry, 
extensive efforts are currently made to improve the safety by 
applying certain numerical solutions. A fibre-reinforced 
composite is a promising material for ballistic protection due 
to its high strength, stiffness and low density. Para-aramid 
fibre was introduced into the market in the 1970s. These fibres 
are five times stronger than steel. In more recent years, Ultra-
High Molecular Weight Polyethylene (UHMW-PE) fibre has 
been used in ballistic application owing to certain property 
advantages. UHMW-PE composites as part of the personal 
armour system have the potential to provide significant weight 
savings or improved protection levels over traditional metallic 
materials. Although already used in different applications, 
both as spall liners and within complex multi-element/multi-
material packages, there is a limited understanding of the 
mechanisms driving ballistic performance. Existing analysis 
tools do not allow a good approximation of performance, while 
existing numerical models are either incapable of accurately 
capturing the response of thick UHMW-PE composite to 
ballistic impact or are unsuited to model thick targets. In 
response, this paper aims to identify the key penetration and 
failure mechanisms of thick UHMW-PE composites under 
ballistic impact and develop numerical models that capture 
these mechanisms and allow accurate prediction of ballistic 
performance to optimize modern armour systems. An 
important aspect of impact loading of polyethylene-based 
composites is their propensity to thermally soften or even melt 
during a collision due to shock heating. Consequently, this 
needs to be taken into account in both analytical and 
computational models. The motivation of this work was to 
develop a thermal softening model and investigate the effects 
on existing simulation models. 
Keywords-hydrocode analysis; thermal softening; fiber-
reinforced plastics; optimization; armor systems; ballistic trials. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The object behind combining different materials to form 
a composite with enhanced properties and synergetic effects 
is par for the course in nature. A section through a 
paracortical cell in merino wool or through a bamboo stems 
exhibits structures similar to the micrograph of a 
unidirectional Carbon-Fibre-Reinforced Epoxy Resin (CF-
EP). Not only in the microstructure can nature be seen as the 
progenitor of fibre-reinforced plastics, but also in the 
application of lightweight design principles.  
Why material scientists integrate fibers in materials to 
such advantage can be answered by the following four 
paradoxes of engineering materials:  
• 
The paradox of the solid material: The actual 
strength of a solid material is very much lower than the 
calculated theoretical value. 
• 
The paradox of the fiber form: The strength of a 
material in fiber form is many times higher than that of the 
same material in another form, and the thinner the fiber, the 
greater the strength. 
• 
The paradox of the free clamped length: The 
shorter the length between the clamps, the greater the 
strength measured on the test piece. 
• 
The paradox of composites: When taken as a 
whole, a composite can withstand stresses that would 
fracture the weaker component, whereas the composite’s 
stronger component can exhibit a greater percentage of its 
theoretical strength than when loaded singly. 
So, the principle of combining different materials to 
form a composite with enhanced properties is just as 
common in nature as it is in lightweight engineering. This 
design method based on nature’s example has virtually 
revolutionized many fields of technology, with the result 
that they can now utilize the superior properties of high-
tensile, lightweight materials for the first time. 
This work will focus on fiber-reinforced plastics, more 
precisely composite armor structures consisting of several 
layers of UHMW-PE, a promising ballistic armor material 
due to its high specific strength and stiffness. First 
numerical approaches are discussed in [1]. 
UHMW-PE is a thermoplastic polymer made from very 
long molecular chains of polyethylene. Thermoplastics 
soften when subjected to heat and so can be repeatedly 
remoulded. Cut-offs can be remelted and introduced back 
into the production process. Many thermoplastics are 
soluble in organic solvents. Thermoplastics can be joined by 
welding under the application of heat or by the action of 
solvents [2]. 
Figure 1 shows the chemical structure of polyethylene, 
where in UHMW-PE the number of repeated chains (n) is in 
the order of 105, giving rise to molecular weights in the 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

order of 106 [3]. As a non-polar molecule, interaction 
between polyethylene molecules is given by very weak Van 
der Waals forces.  
However, due to the ultra-long polymer chain, 
significant strength can be derived through a gel spinning 
process that produces highly oriented and crystalline 
molecular structures aligned in the spinning direction. The 
gel spinning process firstly involves dissolving UHMW-PE 
in a solvent at high temperature. The solution is then pushed 
through a spinneret to form liquid filament that is then 
quenched in water to form gel-fibers. These fibers are then 
drawn in hot air at high strain rates of the order of 1 s-1 
forming 
fibers 
with 
smooth 
circular 
cross-sections 
approximately 17 µm in diameter [4] with a molecular 
orientation greater than 95% and a crystallinity of up to 85% 
[3], see Figure 2.  
These fibers are composed of smaller macro-fibrils 
approximately 0.5 mm to 2 mm in diameter, which in turn 
are made of micro-fibrils, 20 nm in diameter. Commercial 
UHMW-PE fiber is manufactured by, amongst others, 
Dutch State Mines (DSM) and Honeywell under the trade 
names Dyneema® and Spectra®, respectively. The fibers are 
used in a variety of applications requiring high specific 
strength and low weight. This includes high strength ropes 
and nets, cut-resistant gloves, as well as blast and ballistic 
protection. 
 
Figure 1.  Skeletal formula and spacefill model of a polyethylene. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Increase in molecular orientation and crystallinity through gel 
spinning of UHMW-PE [5]. 
For ballistic protection applications, the fibers can be 
woven into fabrics to provide a soft and flexible material or 
coated in a matrix and aligned to form uni-directional plies, 
which are then stacked and pressed under temperature and 
pressure to form rigid laminates. 
UHMW-PE composites and fabrics have been shown to 
be extremely effective against ballistic threats, particularly 
in weight-critical applications, e.g., personal protection 
vests and helmets for protection against small calibre threats 
[6]. The goal is to evaluate the ballistic efficiency of 
UHMW-PE 
composite 
with 
numerical 
simulations, 
promoting an effective development process. Additionally, a 
thermal softening model is implemented and analyzed.  
After a brief introduction and an overview of all state-of-
the-art models of fiber-reinforced plastics, the principles of 
simulation are discussed in Section III, followed by the 
penetration and perforation principles of composites in 
Section IV. There is a short section on ballistic trials where 
the experimental set-up is depicted, followed by Section VI 
describing the model validation. Section VII presents the 
analysis with numerical simulations and the results of this 
work. The paper ends with a concluding paragraph in 
Section VIII. 
II. 
STATE-OF-THE-ART 
The numerical modelling of composite materials under 
impact can be performed at a constituent level (i.e., explicit 
modelling of fiber and matrix elements, e.g., [7]), a meso-
mechanical level (i.e., consolidated plies or fiber bundles, 
e.g., [8]), or macromechanically in which the composite 
laminate is represented as a continuum.  
In [9–12], a non-linear orthotropic continuum material 
model was developed and implemented in a commercial 
hydrocode (i.e., ANSYS® AUTODYN®) for application 
with 
aramid 
and 
carbon 
fiber 
composites 
under 
hypervelocity impact. The non-linear orthotropic material 
model includes orthotropic coupling of the material 
volumetric and deviatoric responses, a non-linear Equation 
of State (EoS), orthotropic hardening, combined stress 
failure criteria and orthotropic energy-based softening. For 
more detail refer to [13].  
Lässig et al. [14] conducted extensive experimental 
characterization of Dyneema® HB26 UHMW-PE composite 
for application in the continuum non-linear orthotropic 
material model, and validated the derived material 
parameters through simulation of spherical projectile 
impacts at hypervelocity.  
A number of researchers have applied the non-linear 
orthotropic model for UHMW-PE composites with varying 
levels of success (Hayhurst et al. [15], Herlaar et al. [16], 
Ong et al. [17], Heisserer and Van der Werff [18] and 
Lässig et al. [14]). Ong et al. [17] assumed material 
properties of UHMW-PE composite based on those of 
Kevlar® with some data from literature, which resulted in 
poor predictions of the penetration behaviour. Hayhurst et 
al. [15], Herlaar et al. [16], Heisserer and Van der Werff 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

[18] used material input parameters derived from a range of 
experiments, and reported better prediction, although the 
results cannot be independently verified because the 
material parameters are not provided. Nguyen et al. [19] 
evaluated and refined the modelling approach and material 
model parameter set developed in [14] for the simulation of 
impact events from 400 m/s to 6600 m/s. Across this 
velocity range, the sensitivity of the numerical output is 
driven by different aspects of the material model, e.g., the 
strength model in the ballistic regime and the EoS in the 
hypervelocity regime. 
This paper will present an optimized solution of this 
problem with an enhanced model for ultra-high molecular 
weight polyethylene under impact loading. The composite 
armor structures consisting of several layers of fiber-
reinforced plastics are simulated for all current military 
threats. Following this, a user-defined subroutine was 
written to incorporate the effects of thermal heating into the 
material data. This subroutine was then tested iteratively 
until an appropriate level of thermal softening was 
accounted for to accurately predict the deformation, damage 
and residual velocity of a range of target thicknesses and 
impact velocities. 
III. 
PRINCIPLES OF SIMULATION 
To deal with problems involving the release of a large 
amount of energy over a very short period of time, e.g., 
explosions and impacts, there are three approaches: as the 
problems are highly non-linear and require information 
regarding material behavior at ultra-high loading rates 
which is generally not available, most of the work is 
experimental and thus may cause tremendous expenses. 
Analytical approaches are possible if the geometries 
involved are relatively simple and if the loading can be 
described through boundary conditions, initial conditions or 
a combination of the two. Numerical solutions are far more 
general in scope and remove any difficulties associated with 
geometry [20]. They apply an explicit method and use very 
small time steps for stable results. 
For problems of dynamic fluid-structure interaction and 
impact, there typically is no single best numerical method 
which is applicable to all parts of a problem. Techniques to 
couple types of numerical solvers in a single simulation can 
allow the use of the most appropriate solver for each domain 
of the problem.  
The goal of this paper is to evaluate a hydrocode, a 
computational tool for modelling the behavior of continuous 
media. In its purest sense, a hydrocode is a computer code 
for modelling fluid flow at all speeds. In essence, the code 
considers the effect of external and internal forces on a 
predefined “mesh” of cells [21]. For that reason, a structure 
will be split into a number of small elements. The elements 
are connected through their nodes (see Figure 3). The 
behavior (deflection) of the simple elements is well-known 
and may be calculated and analyzed using simple equations 
called shape functions [22].  
 
Figure 3.  Example grid. 
By applying coupling conditions between the elements 
at their nodes, the overall stiffness of the structure may be 
built up and the deflection/distortion of any node – and 
subsequently of the whole structure – can be calculated 
approximately [23].  
A repeatedly used term in this context will be 
discretization. Its meaning is that equations, formulated to 
continuously describe a function or functional in space and 
time, is solved only at certain discrete locations and instants 
of time [24]. The most commonly used spatial discretization 
methods are Lagrange, Euler, ALE (a mixture of Lagrange 
and Euler), and mesh-free methods, such as Smooth Particles 
Hydrodynamics (SPH) [25].  
A. Lagrange 
The Lagrange method of space discretization uses a mesh 
that moves and distorts with the material it models as a result 
of forces from neighboring elements (meshes are imbedded 
in material). There is no grid required for the external space, 
as the conservation of mass is automatically satisfied and 
material boundaries are clearly defined. This is the most 
efficient solution methodology with an accurate pressure 
history definition.  
The 
Lagrange 
method 
is 
most 
appropriate 
for 
representing solids, such as structures and projectiles. If 
however, there is too much deformation of any element, it 
results in a very slowly advancing solution and is usually 
terminated because the smallest dimension of an element 
results in a time step that is below the threshold level.  
B. Euler 
The Euler (multi-material) solver utilizes a fixed mesh, 
allowing materials to flow (advect) from one element to the 
next (meshes are fixed in space). Therefore, an external 
space needs to be modeled. Due to the fixed grid, the Euler 
method avoids problems of mesh distortion and tangling that 
are prevalent in Lagrange simulations with large flows. The 
Euler solver is very well-suited for problems involving 
extreme material movement, such as fluids and gases. To 
describe solid behavior, additional calculations are required 
to transport the solid stress tensor and the history of the 
material through the grid. Euler is generally more 
computationally intensive than Lagrange and requires a 
higher resolution (smaller elements) to accurately capture 
sharp pressure peaks that often occur with shock waves.  
C. ALE  
The ALE method of space discretization is a hybrid of 
the Lagrange and Euler methods. It allows redefining the 
grid continuously in arbitrary and predefined ways as the 
calculation 
proceeds, 
which 
effectively 
provides 
a 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

continuous rezoning facility. Various predefined grid 
motions can be specified, such as free (Lagrange), fixed 
(Euler), equipotential, equal spacing, and others. The ALE 
method can model solids as well as liquids. The advantage of 
ALE is the ability to reduce and sometimes eliminate 
difficulties caused by severe mesh distortions encountered by 
the Lagrange method, thus allowing a calculation to continue 
efficiently. However, compared to Lagrange, an additional 
computational step of rezoning is employed to move the grid 
and remap the solution onto a new grid [26].  
D. SPH 
The mesh-free Lagrangian method of space discretization 
(or SPH method) is a particle-based solver and was initially 
used in astrophysics. The particles are imbedded in material 
and they are not only interacting mass points but also 
interpolation points used to calculate the value of physical 
variables based on the data from neighboring SPH particles, 
scaled by a weighting function. Because there is no grid 
defined, distortion and tangling problems are avoided as 
well. Compared to the Euler method, material boundaries 
and interfaces in the SPH are rather well defined and 
material separation is naturally handled. Therefore, the SPH 
solver is ideally suited for certain types of problems with 
extensive material damage and separation, such as cracking. 
This type of response often occurs with brittle materials and 
hypervelocity impacts. However, mesh-free methods, such as 
Smooth Particles Hydrodynamics, can be less efficient than 
mesh-based 
Lagrangian 
methods 
with 
comparable 
resolution. 
ANSYS Autodyn lets you select from these different 
solver technologies so he most effective solver can be used 
for a given part of the model. Figure 4 gives a short overview 
of the solver technologies mentioned above. The crucial 
factor is the grid that causes different outcomes.  
Using a CAD-neutral environment that supports 
bidirectional, direct, and associative interfaces with CAD 
systems, the geometry can be optimized successively [28]. 
Therefore, several runs are necessary: from modelling to 
calculation to the evaluation and subsequent improvement of 
the model. 
 
Figure 4.  Examples of Lagrange, Euler, ALE, and SPH simulations on an 
impact problem [27]. 
AUTODYN’s interaction logic enables automatic 
communication between the various solvers coexisting 
within the same model. Lagrange-Lagrange, SPH-Lagrange 
and Euler-Lagrange interactions can all be created within 
the model in a simple and intuitive manner. This allows 
fluid structure interactions to be simulated. Furthermore, it 
can be combined with AUTODYN’s extensive remapping 
and dezoning capabilities between the different solvers and 
a wide range of erosion settings. It is also possible to retain 
inertia of eroded material. In this case, the mass and 
momentum of the free node is retained and can be involved 
in subsequent impact events to transfer momentum in the 
system.  
IV. 
PENETRATION AND PERFORATION OF COMPOSITES 
Composites have arguably been used as armor materials 
since the middle ages. Advantages of using composite 
materials are their relatively low density, their tailorable 
properties, and fair to high strength. The disadvantages of 
composites are the inconsistency of hand lay-up, the 
dependency of strength on manufacturing process, and the 
somewhat 
expensive 
nature 
of 
their 
manufacture. 
Additionally, composites pose a problem to the designers 
because they are difficult to model.  
Composites resist penetration primarily by dissipating 
energy. Because of the complex structure of the material, 
this energy dissipation manifests itself in the failure of 
portions of the laminate, fiber breakage, matrix cracking, 
and delamination. Since composite properties can vary from 
isotropic to a complicated anisotropic, the behavior will 
depend upon the configuration.  
In chopped fiber composites, the material properties are 
usually isotropic. A notable exception to this is in injection 
moldings where the fibers tend to align with the flow 
directions near mold gate areas or areas of higher velocity 
flow. An isotropic composite is usually treated as we do a 
metal and those formulas should work well.  
Continuous fiber composites behave differently from 
metallic plates. A typical load-displacement curve is shown 
in Figure 5. In this figure, after an initial delamination point, 
where the load carrying capability is degraded, we see 
increases and decreases in load carrying ability based on 
successive delaminations of material followed by a final 
plug shear out. This delamination actually promotes energy 
dissipation by forcing the fibers to elongate. In many 
composites, shear failure of the fibers, as well as tensile 
failures dominate during an impact [29]. 
It is extremely difficult to obtain an analytical model for 
the penetration of continuous fiber composites. This is due 
to the change of energy dissipation as the composite is 
damaged. Finite element methods have been utilized to 
determine limit velocities, but there are nuances to each 
analysis that must be explained. Section II presents a 
general view of all state-of-the-art models of fiber-
reinforced plastics. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 5.  Load–displacement curve for a typical continuous fiber 
reinforced composite. 
The first issue that must be dealt with is how to handle 
the damage and its effect on the remaining strength of the 
composite. Some researchers have actually modeled each 
lamina with its correct directional properties and assumed a 
failure criterion based on interlaminar shear strength [30]. 
When the interlaminar shear strength is exceeded, the layer 
no longer supports shear and the overall bending stiffness is 
reduced. This can be accounted for explicitly having the 
model change internal constraints between layers or 
implicitly by tracking the overall smeared bending stiffness 
of the composite and reducing it based on the lamina that 
failed. Another means of handling the behavior of the 
composite is to average the stiffness change because of the 
progressive failure of lamina as shown in Figure 6. The 
issue with this approach is that test data from some sort of 
penetration event is required.  
A second issue with analyzing fiber reinforced 
composites is the actual failure of the fibers themselves. The 
fibers can themselves delaminate from the matrix. They can 
also fail in tension and are usually very sensitive to fracture. 
These issues of necessity complicate the analysis.  
After extensive work in the area of composite materials 
under impact loads, the following observations regarding 
their behavior were made: First, delaminations tend to prefer 
moving along the fiber direction. Additionally, compression 
of the composite material (e.g., at clamped locations) tends 
to suppress delamination, as one would expect. The extent 
of delamination increases linearly as the distal surface is 
approached if perforation occurs.  
 
Figure 6.  Load–displacement curve for a typical fiber reinforced 
composite modeled with averaged properties after initial delamination. 
 
Figure 7.  Extent of delamination in a composite with respect to increasing 
velocity during both perforating and nonperforating impacts. 
However, the delamination increases then decreases if 
no penetration occurred. As the impact velocity increases, 
the delamination decreases indicating that the bending of the 
target becomes less significant. This is shown in Figure 7. 
V. 
BALLISTIC TRIALS 
Ballistics is an essential component for the evaluation of 
our results. Here, terminal ballistics is the most important 
sub-field. It describes the interaction of a projectile with its 
target. Terminal ballistics is relevant for both small and 
large caliber projectiles. The task is to analyze and evaluate 
the impact and its various modes of action. This will 
provide information on the effect of the projectile and the 
extinction risk.  
The science and engineering of impacting bodies have a 
large range of applications depending on their type and their 
impact velocities. At very low velocities, these impacts can 
be limited to the elastic range of response, with practically 
no damage to the impacted bodies. In contrast, at very high 
impact velocities these bodies experience gross deformation, 
local melting, and even total disintegration upon impact. 
Various scientific and engineering disciplines are devoted to 
specific areas in this field such as: vehicle impacts, rain 
erosion, armor and anti-armor design, spacecraft protection 
against meteorites and the impact of planets by large 
meteors at extremely high velocities.  
Given that a projectile strikes a target, compressive 
waves propagate into both the projectile and the target. 
Relief waves propagate inward from the lateral free surfaces 
of the penetrator, cross at the centerline, and generate a high 
tensile stress. If the impact was normal, we would have a 
two-dimensional stress state. If the impact was oblique, 
bending stresses will be generated in the penetrator. When 
the compressive wave reached the free surface of the target, 
it would rebound as a tensile wave. The target may fracture 
at this point. The projectile may change direction if it 
perforates (usually towards the normal of the target surface).  
Because of the differences in target behavior based on 
the proximity of the distal surface, we must categorize 
targets into four broad groups. A semi-infinite target is one 
where there is no influence of distal boundary on 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

penetration. A thick target is one in which the boundary 
influences penetration after the projectile is some distance 
into the target. An intermediate thickness target is a target 
where the boundaries exert influence throughout the impact. 
Finally, a thin target is one in which stress or deformation 
gradients are negligible throughout the thickness.   
There are several methods by which a target will fail 
when subjected to an impact. The major variables are the 
target and penetrator material properties, the impact 
velocity, the projectile shape (especially the ogive), the 
geometry of the target supporting structure, and the 
dimensions of the projectile and target. 
In order to develop a numerical model, a ballistic test 
program is necessary. The ballistic trials are thoroughly 
documented and analyzed – even fragments must be 
collected. They provide information about the used armor 
and the projectile behavior after fire, which must be 
consistent with the simulation results (see Figure 8). 
Several experiments have to be performed to create a 
data set for the numerical simulations. Ballistic tests are 
recorded with high-speed videos and analyzed afterwards. 
The experimental set-up is shown in Figure 9.  
The camera system is a PHANTOM v1611 that enables 
fast image rates up to 646,000 frames per second (fps) at 
full resolution of 1280 x 800 pixels. The use of a polarizer 
and a neutral density filter is advisable, so that waves of 
some polarizations can be blocked while the light of a 
specific polarization can be passed.  
Several targets of different laminate configurations were 
tested to assess the ballistic limit (V50). The ballistic limit is 
considered the velocity required for a particular projectile to 
reliably (at least 50% of the time) penetrate a particular 
piece of material [30]. After the impact, the projectile is 
examined regarding any kind of change it might have 
undergone.  
 
 
Figure 8.  Ballistic tests and the analysis of fragments after 47 µs (left) and 
88 µs (right). 
 
Figure 9.  Experimental set-up. 
The damage propagation is analyzed using the software 
called COMEF [31], image processing software for highly 
accurate measuring functions. The measurement takes place 
via setting measuring points manually on the monitor. Area 
measurement is made by the free choice of grey tones 
(0…255). Optionally the object with the largest surface area 
can be recognized automatically as object.  Smaller particles 
within the same grey tone range as the sample under test are 
automatically ignored by this filter. 
VI. 
MODEL VALIDATION 
Experimental 
characterisation 
of 
the 
ballistic 
performance of UHMW-PE composite can be prohibitively 
expensive, 
so 
it 
is 
highly 
desirable 
to 
establish 
computationally efficient numerical models that accurately 
predict the ballistic response of the material. First, existing 
models should be validated. 
A. Resources 
In [19], numerical simulations of 15 kg/m2 Dyneema® 
HB26 panels impacted by 6 mm diameter aluminum spheres 
between 2052 m/s to 6591 m/s were shown to provide very 
good agreement with experimental measurements of the 
panel ballistic limit and residual velocities, see Figure 10. 
The modelling approach and material parameter set from 
[14] were applied to simulate impact experiments at 
velocities in the ballistic regime (here considered as < 1000 
m/s). Lambert-Jonas parameters (a, p, Vbl) are provided in 
the legend.  
In Figure 11, the results of modelling impact of 20 mm 
fragment simulating projectiles (FSPs) against 10 mm thick 
Dyneema® HB26 are shown. The model shows a significant 
under prediction of the ballistic limit, 236 m/s compared to 
394 m/s. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
Figure 10.  Experimental and numerical impact residual velocity results for 
impact of 6 mm diameter aluminum spheres (above) and 20 mm FSP 
(below) against 10 mm thick HB26 at normal incidence. 
B. Method 
The FSP material was modelled as Steel S-7 from the 
AUTODYN library using a linear EoS and the Johnson-
Cook strength model [32]. The aluminum sphere was 
modelled using AL1100-O from the AUTODYN library that 
uses a shock EoS and the Steinburg Guinan strength model 
[33]. The master-slave contact algorithm was used to detect 
contact between the target and projectile. 
The sub-laminate model with shock EoS was applied to 
the aluminum sphere hypervelocity impact series and 20 mm 
FSP ballistic impact series presented in Figure 10, the results 
of which are shown in Figure 11.  
The sub-laminate model is shown to provide a significant 
improvement in predicting the experimental V50 of 394 m/s 
for the FSP ballistic impacts (377 m/s) compared to the 
monolithic model (236 m/s).  
The ballistic limit and residual velocity predicted with the 
sub-laminate model for the hypervelocity impact case are 
shown to be comparable with the original monolithic model. 
For conditions closer to the ballistic limit, the sub-laminate 
model is shown to predict increased target resistance (i.e., 
lower residual velocity). For higher overmatch conditions, 
there is some small variance between the two approaches. 
 
 
Figure 11.  Experimental and numerical results with the two numerical 
models for 20 mm FSP against 10 mm thick HB26 (above), and 6 mm 
diameter aluminium spheres against HB26 (below) at normal incidence.  
Now, regarding common handgun projectiles, the results 
look sobering. As the most widespread weapon in the world, 
the Kalashnikov rifle (AK-47) is a good example to compare 
ballistic trials and simulation results.  A 7.62×39 mm full 
metal jacket (FMJ) projectile with a velocity of 700 m/s is 
used and the model is shown in Figure 3.  
In Figure 12, a qualitative assessment of the bulge 
formation is made for the 11 mm panel. Prediction of bulge 
development is important as it is characteristic of the 
material wave speed and is also a key measure in defence 
applications, particularly in personal armour systems (i.e., 
vests and helmets). In the ballistic experiments, the 11 mm 
target panel resists the 7.62×39 mm FMJ projectile. On the 
left, the “state-of-the-art” models of Lässig and Nguyen are 
shown. But in both models, material fails, and the projectile 
penetrates the plate.  
There is no accurate reproduction of the bulge. The 
problem is a neglect of micro-structures. Fraction and 
fragmentation between the laminate layers cannot be 
described by homogeneous continuum models.  
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 12.  Bulge of a 11 mm target impact by a 7.62×39 mm FMJ 
projectile at 689 m/s (experiment, left) and the simulation results. 
The significant decrease in accuracy of the numerical 
prediction may be due to an insufficient in-plane tensile 
strength defined in the material data set, a critical material 
property in the ballistic performance of fiber reinforced 
composites. Numerous researchers have investigated the 
tension properties of UHMW-PE composite (e.g. [6] and 
[34]). These tests showed that due the low friction coefficient 
and poor fibre/matrix adhesion in UHMW-PE composites, 
specimen 
griping 
is 
problematic, 
often 
leading 
to 
delamination rather than tension failure [8]. These 
disadvantages are addressed in a very new and more 
representative model. 
VII. NUMERICAL SIMULATION 
As mentioned before, the ballistic tests are followed by 
computational modelling of the experimental set-up. Then, 
the experiment is reproduced using numerical simulations. 
The geometry and observed response of the laminate to 
ballistic impact is approximately symmetric to the axis 
through the bullet impact point.   
Numerical simulation of modern armor structures 
requires the selection of appropriate material models for the 
constituent materials and the derivation of suitable material 
model input data. The laminate system studied here is an 
ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene composite. Lead 
and copper are also required for the projectiles. 
A. Geometry 
The projectile is a 7.62×39 mm round, a rimless 
bottlenecked intermediate cartridge of Soviet origin that was 
designed during World War II. It was divided into different 
parts - the jacket and the base - which have different 
properties and even different meshes. These elements have 
quadratic shape functions and nodes between the element 
edges. In this way, the computational accuracy, as well as the 
quality of curved model shapes increases. Using the same 
mesh density, the application of parabolic elements leads to a 
higher accuracy compared to linear elements (1st order 
elements). The standard model geometry was replicated from 
previous works with targets sized 250×250 mm at 
thicknesses of 5.5 mm, 11 mm and 16.2 mm. 
B. Modelling 
Because of the discrepancies discussed in Section VI, a 
new model was developed – a concept for the numerical 
simulation of fiber-reinforced plastics under impact loading. 
Here, the homogeneous continuum model is replaced. 
Alternating layers of fibers and matrix are used for the 
geometry. The mesh applied used a central bias to ensure the 
elements in vicinity of the point of impact were cubic whilst 
decreasing the overall computational complexity and hence 
run-time of the simulations. A 0.1 mm gap was placed 
between each layer for the use of an external gap contact 
algorithm. It was established in previous works that gapless 
contacts resulted in overpenetration of elements leading to 
poorer predictions [1]. An example of the standard model 
geometry and mesh can be seen in Figure 13.  
The fiber layers apply anisotropic elasticity, no plasticity 
and anisotropic material failure (stress-dependent). The 
matrix layers use isotropic elasticity, von Mises plasticity 
and isotropic material failure (stress-dependent). To simulate 
the effect of delamination, principal stress failure is applied. 
3D numerical simulations were performed of the full 
target and projectile, where both were meshed using 8-node 
hexahedral elements. The projectile was meshed with 9 
elements across the diameter. 
The target is composed of sub-laminates that are one 
element thick, separated by a small gap to satisfy the master-
slave contact algorithm (external gap in AUTODYN) and 
bonded together as previously discussed. The mesh size of 
the target is approximately equal to the projectile at the 
impact site. The mesh was then graded towards the edge, 
increasing in coarseness to reduce the computational load of 
the model. Since UHMW-PE composite has a very low 
coefficient of friction, force fit clamping provides little 
restraint. High speed video of ballistic impact tests typical 
showed clamp slippage upon impact. As such no boundary 
conditions were imposed on the target. 
C. Thermal Softening 
In order to create automatic thermal softening in the 
UHMW-PE model, a custom subroutine was required that 
could update the material parameters of each cell based on 
the local element temperature. The software packages 
Microsoft Visual Studio 2010 and Intel Professional Fortran 
Compiler 2013 were used to create the custom subroutines 
and compile them into AUTODYN® executables. These 
software packages enabled the implementation of the 
existing erosion model along with the creation of a new 
subroutine for the application of thermal softening. The 
initial standard model was modified as to ensure each sub-
laminate layer was defined as a unique material. By this 
method the subroutine could be called at the end of each 
cycle to iterate through each sub-laminate layer and modify 
the material parameters based on the maximum temperature 
within each layer.  
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 13.  Geometry of a target plate: alternating layers of fibers and 
matrix are used in the computer model. 
In this work, the Young’s modulus was not softened 
since in AUTODYN® it is intimately linked to the equation-
of-state and was unlikely to affect the ballistic performance 
of the laminate. Instead, the master effective stress, plastic 
strain curve was softened according to the data given by 
Dessain et al. [35] where a linear decrease in strength was 
interpolated. Given that softening occurred over the whole 
individual layer in the laminates as opposed to local cells, it 
was necessary to introduce a thermal-softening limit. In this 
work, this limit was set to 50%. The variables that were 
thermally softened in the model are shown in Table I. 
D. Simulation Results 
The model developed in [19] was adjusted and the 
concept has been extended to different calibers and projectile 
velocities. Composite armor plates between 5.5 and 16.2 mm 
were tested in several ballistic trials and high-speed videos 
were used to analyze the characteristics of the projectile – 
before and after the impact. An example of the simulation 
results with the modified model and a 7.62×39 mm bullet is 
shown in Figure 14. 
The deformation of the projectile is in good agreement 
with the experimental observation. Both delamination and 
fragmentation can be seen in the numerical simulation. 
Compared to the homogeneous continuum model, fractures 
can be detected easily. Subsequently, the results of 
experiment and simulation in the case of perforation were 
compared with reference to the projectile residual velocity. 
Here, only minor differences were observed. The results are 
summarized in Table II.  
TABLE I.  
PARAMETERS THAT WERE CHANGED IN EACH INDIVIDUAL 
LAYER DUE TO THERMAL SOFTENING 
Parameter 
Description 
Initial value 
k 
Master effective stress – effective plastic 
strain curve 
- 
A22 
Plasticity constant, 22 
6×10-4 
A33 
Plasticity constant, 33 
6×10-4 
S22 
Tensile failure stress, 22 
1.15 GPa 
S33 
Tensile failure stress, 33 
1.15 GPa 
 
Figure 14.  Effect of a 5.5 mm target impact by a 7.62×39 mm bullet at 686 
m/s, 47 µs and 88 µs after the initial impact; comparing experimantal (left) 
and simulation (right) results. 
TABLE II.  
SUMMARY OF RESULTS FOR A 7.62×39 MM BULLET 
Target 
Thickness 
5.5 mm 
Residual 
Velocity  
11.0 mm 
Residual 
Thickness 
16.2 mm 
Residual 
Thickness 
Experiment 
604 m/s 
6 mm 
11 mm 
Simulation 
587 m/s 
4 mm 
10 mm 
 
It was found that the ballistic limit was satisfactorily 
reproduced in all cases. The tests showed that the projectile 
was stopped using thick target panels. Here, the residual 
thickness was correctly predicted by the FE-simulation.  
VIII. CONCLUSION 
The material model developed in [19] has some 
shortcomings 
regarding 
the 
simulation 
of 
handgun 
projectiles (e.g., 7.62×39 mm). Although previously found 
to provide accurate results for hypervelocity impact of 
aluminum spheres, the existing model and dataset was 
found 
to 
significantly 
underestimate 
the 
composite 
performance under impact conditions driven by through-
thickness shear performance (ballistic impact of fragment 
simulating projectiles). The model was found to exhibit 
premature through thickness shear failure as a result of 
directional coupling in the modified Hashin-Tsai failure 
criterion and the large discrepancy between through-
thickness tensile and shear strength of UHME-PE 
composite. As a result, premature damage and failure was 
initiated in the through-thickness shear direction leading to 
decreased ballistic performance. By de-coupling through-
thickness tensile failure from the failure criteria and 
discretizing the laminate into a nominal number of 
kinematically joined sub-laminates through the thickness, 
progresses in modelling the ballistic response of the panels 
was improved. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Thermal softening and melting effects have been shown 
in previous work to account for a large degree of error in the 
prediction of thick UHMW-PE composite ballistic limit 
velocities. Through the modification of a custom subroutine 
the thermal softening effects of UHMW-PE have been 
adequately modelled in a manner that both saves 
computational processing time and increases predictive 
capability through softening whole individual discrete layers 
of the laminate.  
New approaches make it possible to increase the 
accuracy of the simulation results. The previous concept 
was not valid for all projectiles/calibers. An alternative 
model has been developed to overcome these difficulties. 
Using 
sub-laminates 
and 
inhomogeneities 
on 
the 
macroscale, 
the 
model 
does 
not 
match 
the 
real 
microstructure, but allow a more realistic description of the 
failure processes mentioned above. The numerical model 
proposed a sub-laminate discretisation of the laminate in 
order to better model delamination failure. For this to occur, 
the sub-laminates are joined together using bonded contacts 
where failure is initiated based on a combined normal and 
shear stress criterion.  
This work also demonstrated how a small number of 
well-defined experiments can be used to develop, calibrate, 
and validate solver technologies used for simulating the 
impact of projectiles on complex armor systems and 
composite laminate structures. Ballistic trials can be used as 
the basis of an iterative optimization process. Numerical 
simulations are a valuable adjunct to the study of the 
behavior of metals subjected to high-velocity impact or 
intense 
impulsive 
loading. 
The 
combined 
use 
of 
computations, experiments and high-strain-rate material 
characterization has, in many cases, supplemented the data 
achievable by experiments alone at considerable savings in 
both cost and engineering man-hours.  
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Ramezani and H. Rothe, “A New Approach to Modelling 
Fiber-Reinforced 
Plastics 
for 
Hydrocode 
Analysis 
- 
Experimental Model Validation of Composite Materials 
Under Ballistic Impact,” The Ninth International Conference 
on Advances in System Simulation (SIMUL 2017) IARIA, 
Oct. 2017, pp. 41-50, ISBN 978-1-61208-594-4. 
[2] R&G 
Composite 
Technology, 
Manual 
of 
Fibre 
Reinforcements. D-71111 Waldenbuch, 2009. 
[3] J. Van Dingenen, “Gel-spun high-performance polyethylene 
fibres,” in High Performance Fibres, pp. 62–92, 2001. 
[4] B. Russell, K. Karthikeyan, V. Deshpande, and N. Fleck, 
“The high strain rate response of ultra-high molecular-weight 
polyethylene: From fibre to laminate,” in International Journal 
of Impact Engineering (60), pp. 1–9, 2013. 
[5] L. H. Nguyen, The Ballistic Performance of Thick Ultra High 
Molecular 
Weight 
Polyethylene 
Composite. 
RMIT 
University, 2015. 
[6] P. M. Cunniff, “Dimensionless parameters for optimization of 
textile based body armor systems,” in 18th International 
Symposium on Ballistics, pp. 1303–1310, 1999. 
[7] 
D. B. Segala and P. V. Cavallaro, “Numerical investigation of 
energy absorption mechanisms in unidirectional composites 
subjected to dynamic loading events,” in Computational 
Materials Science 81, pp. 303–312, 2014. 
[8] 
S. Chocron et al., “Modeling unidirectional composites by 
bundling fibers into strips with experimental determination of 
shear and compression properties at high pressures,” in 
Composites Science and Technology 101, pp. 32–40, 2014. 
[9] C. J. Hayhurst, S. J. Hiermaier, R. A. Clegg, W. Riedel, and 
M. Lambert, “Development of material models for nextel and 
kevlar-expoxy for high pressures and strain rates,” in 
International Journal of Impact Engineering 23, pp. 365–376, 
1999. 
[10] R. A. Clegg, D. M. White, W. Riedel, and W. Harwick, 
“Hypervelocity impact damage prediction in composites: Part 
I—material model and characterisation,” in International 
Journal of Impact Engineering 33, pp. 190–200, 2006. 
[11] W. Riedel, H. Nahme, D. M. White, and R. A. Clegg, 
“Hypervelocity impact damage prediction in composites: Part 
II—experimental 
investigations 
and 
simulations,” 
in 
International Journal of Impact Engineering 33, pp. 670–80, 
2006. 
[12] M. Wicklein, S. Ryan, D. M. White, and R. A. Clegg, 
“Hypervelocity impact on CFRP: Testing, material modelling, 
and numerical simulation,” in International Journal of Impact 
Engineering 35, pp.1861–1869, 2008. 
[13] ANSYS. AUTODYN Composite Modelling Release 15.0. 
[Online]. Available from: http://ansys.com/ 2018.07.28. 
[14] T. Lässig et al., “A non-linear orthotropic hydrocode model 
for ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene in impact 
simulations,” in International Journal of Impact Engineering 
75, pp. 110–122, 2015. 
[15] C. J. Hayhurst, J. Leahy, J., M. van der Jagt-Deutekom, and P. 
Kelly, “Development of Material Models for Numerical 
Simulation of Ballistic Impact onto Polyethylene Fibrous 
Armour,” in Personal Armour Systems Symposium, pp. 5–8, 
2000. 
[16] K. Herlaar, M. van der Jagt-Deutekom, and M. Jacobs, “Finite 
element simulations and experiments of ballistic impacts on 
high performance PE composite material,” in 22nd 
International Symposium on Ballistics, pp. 1040–1047, 2005. 
[17] C. Ong, C. Boey, R. S. Hixson, and J. O. Sinibaldi, 
“Advanced layered personnel armor,” in International Journal 
of Impact Engineering 38(5), pp. 369–383, 2011. 
[18] U. Heisserer and H. Van der Werff, “The relation between 
Dyneema fiber properties and ballistic protection performance 
of its fiber composites,” in 15th International Conference on 
Deformation, Yield and Fracture of Polymers 3, pp. 242–246, 
2012. 
[19] L. H. Nguyen et al., “Numerical Modelling of Ultra-High 
Molecular Weight Polyethylene Composite Under Impact 
Loading,” in Procedia Engineering 103, pp. 436–443, 2015. 
[20] J. Zukas, Introduction to hydrocodes. Elsevier Science, 2004. 
[21] G.-S. 
Collins, 
An 
Introduction 
to 
Hydrocode 
Modeling. Applied Modelling and Computation Group, 
Imperial College London, 2002. 
[22] E. Madenci and I. Guven, “The Finite Element Method and 
Applications in Engineering Using ANSYS,” Springer 
Verlag, February 2015. 
[23] H.-B. Woyand, FEM with CATIA V5. J. Schlembach 
Fachverlag, 2007. 
[24] S. J. Hiermaier, Structures Under Crash and Impact. Spinger 
Verlag, 2008. 
[25] R. F. Stellingwerf and C. A. Wingate, “Impact Modeling with 
Smooth Particle Hydrodynamics,” International Journal of 
Impact Engineering, vol. 14, pp. 707–718, Sep. 1993. 
[26] X. Quan, N. K. Birnbaum, M. S. Cowler, and B. I. Gerber, 
“Numerical Simulations of Structural Deformation under 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Shock and Impact Loads using a Coupled Multi-Solver 
Approach,” 5th Asia-Pacific Conference on Shock and Impact 
Loads on Structures, Hunan, China, Nov. 2003, pp. 152-161. 
[27] ANSYS Inc. Available Solution Methods. [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://www.ansys.com/Products/Simulation+Technology/Stru
ctural+Analysis/Explicit+Dynamics/Features/Available+Solut
ion+Methods [retrieved: August, 2018] 
[28] P. Fröhlich, FEM Application Basics. Vieweg Verlag, 
September 2005. 
[29] J. Zukas, T. Nicholas, H.F. Swift, L. B. Greszczuk, and D. R. 
Curran, Impact Dynamics, Krieger Publishing, FL: Malabar, 
1992. 
[30] D. E. Carlucci and S. S. Jacobson, Ballistics: Theory and 
Design of Guns and Ammunition, CRC Press, FL: Boca 
Raton, 2007. 
[31] OEG Optical Measuring and Test Equipment. [Online]. 
Available from: http://www.oeg-messtechnik.de/?p=5&l=1 
[retrieved: August, 2018] 
[32] G. Johnson and W. Cook, “A constitutive model and data for 
metals subjected to large strains, high strain rates and high 
temperatures,” in 7th International Symposium on Ballistics, 
pp. 541–547, 1983. 
[33] D. Steinberg, Equation of state and strength properties of 
selected materials. California, 1996. 
[34] A. Levi-Sasson, I. Meshi, S. Mustacchi, I. Amarilio, D. 
Benes, V. Favorsky, R. Eliasy, J. Aboudi, R. Haj-Ali, 
“Experimental 
determination 
of 
linear 
and 
nonlinear 
mechanical properties of laminated soft composite material 
system,” Composites Part B: Engineering 57, pp. 96–104, 
2014. 
[35] B. Dessain, O. Moulaert, R. Keunings, and A. R. Bunsell, 
“Solid Phase Change Controlling the Tensile and Creep 
Behaviour of Gel- Spun High-Modulus Polyethylene Fibres,” 
in Journal of Material Science, 27 (16), pp. 4515–4522, 1992. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

