Social Sustainability and Manufacturing Simulation 
Defining Social Criteria for a Holistic Sustainability Simulation Approach in Manufacturing Companies 
 
Andi H. Widok 
Dept. of Engineering II / Dept. of Modeling and Simulation 
Industrial Environmental Informatics Unit 
HTW Berlin / University of Hamburg 
Berlin / Hamburg, Germany 
a.widok@htw-berlin.de 
Volker Wohlgemuth 
Department of Engineering II 
Industrial Environmental Informatics Unit 
University of Applied Sciences, HTW Berlin 
Berlin, Germany 
volker.wohlgemuth@htw-berlin.de
 
 
Abstract — This paper presents the concept and prototype of a 
plugin, as part of a software suite (MILAN), aimed to provide 
technical analysts with the means to simulate various 
sustainability criteria in manufacturing companies. The plugin 
is intended to enable analyst to freely define relevant social 
influence indicators, as well as influence functions and combine 
them with the existing environmental and economic modeling 
approach. Various social indicators are, on the one hand still 
fuzzy, as well as disputed, and on the other hand, dependent on 
the company’s structure. In this regard, the free definition 
aims to give the modeler the needed flexibility to create a 
model of his choosing, while also providing him with a 
structural guideline on how the integration of social criteria is 
best realized in a holistic sustainability approach. This paper 
thus addresses the key challenges of the integration of a social 
perspective in manufacturing simulation and gives an overview 
over a first implementation of a software that is able to 
integrate the economic, environmental and social dimension in 
a single model. 
Keywords – sustainability; discrete event simulation (DES); 
material flow analysis (MFA); life cycle analysis (LCA); social 
life cycle analysis (SLCA). 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
From the very start of the modern sustainability debate 
the idea always included the call for the third pillar of 
sustainability, i.e., the social pillar, resulting in the term of 
the triple bottom line [1]. While the classical usages of 
simulation considering the economical perspective of 
manufacturing systems and its rather output oriented point of 
view have already been discussed in much detail [2], the 
social perspective is, to this day, underrepresented in modern 
simulation tools. That is, even though many Occupational 
Health and Safety (OHS) factors, such as ergonomic criteria, 
or influences through material exposure play an important 
role in the planning of new and legal compliance of existing 
entities [3].  
Aside from the obvious still debated definition problem 
of social sustainability [4] the integration of such a 
perspective is facing other problems, for example the fact 
that the correlations between humans and their environment 
are highly dependent on both, which makes a general 
handling of human resources in a software very difficult and 
scientifically challenging [5]. Furthermore, the quantification 
between the relation of the output and the way humans 
interact with existing production processes may need a great 
variety 
of 
different 
physical, 
organizational 
and 
psychological algorithms, which indicates a very high 
modeling effort. This high effort combined with the fact that 
simulation studies are usually carried out in order to find 
(economic) optimization potential is contributing to the 
disregard 
of 
social 
and 
environmental 
inclusion. 
Consequently, in order to promote a more holistic 
perception, the questions this paper is focusing on are:  
• 
what are possible abstract formulations of social 
criteria relevant in manufacturing companies, 
• 
how can these criteria be modeled in a way that pays 
tribute to the great differences between humans and 
their possible reactions to different strains, 
• 
and how can the modeling effort itself be reduced in 
order to promote such an integration. 
These are the problems this paper addresses and will 
answer by: 
• 
present the main problems with the integration and 
related work for this approach (Section II) 
• 
identifying the most relevant aspects of social 
criteria in producing companies (Section III A), 
• 
categorizing the accorded impacts and deducing 
criteria for the simulation (Section III B and III C), 
• 
presenting a simulation software for environmental 
and economic evaluation (Section IV A), 
• 
elaborating the concept and the implementation of a 
software prototype purposed to integrate the social 
perspective into the existing simulation software 
(Section IV B), 
• 
highlight possible results and briefly state strengths 
and weaknesses of the approach (Section V). 
Lastly, an outlook will be given in Section VI. 
II. 
THE PROBLEM IN MORE DETAIL 
A. Motivation 
To understand the driving force behind this paper and the 
problem with social criteria integration one has to question 
how producing companies are motivated to produce in a 
more sustainable way. Aside from intrinsic motivations of 
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

given deciders, the two main concepts are legal compliance 
and the demand of customers, representing top down and 
bottom up tendencies. Both of these tendencies have inherent 
difficulties. The main problem with the top down tendency is 
that regional and international frameworks, as basis for 
policy decisions, pay tribute to the different regional 
necessities, hence reflecting the needs and situation of the 
people in the region. Ultimately the given diversification 
results in a different prioritization of criteria, which leads to 
different compliance criteria for the resident entities. These 
differences allow for a distortion of competition and 
consequently to a higher prioritization of the economic 
orientation in order to keep up with the globalized market. 
For the bottom up tendency consider that, while time is 
limited, if a consumer wants to buy a product that is 
environmentally viable and socially friendly without having 
to spend too much money, the necessity for an elaborate 
research develops, in order to find a fitting product. While it 
is fairly easy to assess the economic value behind the chosen 
product, when it comes to environmental and social 
identifying values, it is a difficult task. With regard to firms, 
and particularly manufacturing companies, reports on the 
sustainability of their operations rarely include the social 
dimension. Many companies are issuing corporate reports 
which stress governance aspects and environmental 
practices, but tend to overlook the role of the employees or 
workforce [6][7]. Normally, a detailed analysis of products is 
impossible to find and thus, in order to make a decision, 
consumers relay, for example, on brand identification 
combined with rather current information on how 
environmental and social friendly the company is or displays 
itself to be. In other words and from a capitalistic 
perspective, the steering of the capital by the consumer is not 
based on the actual environmental and social impacts of the 
product, but by the little information they can gather about 
its manufacturing processes and the company itself. The data 
to assess the environmental and social friendliness of the 
product itself is not at the consumer’s disposition [6]. 
Naturally a choice regarding the price comes easier than 
basing the decision on facts that the consumer can hardly 
evaluate. In order to address the information gap different 
(modeling and simulation) approaches can be noted, which 
will be presented in the following. 
B. Related Work 
Over the last decade the environmental perspective has 
become more prominent, examples for the focus on the 
environmental sustainability of production systems can be 
found in Seliger [8], Andersson [9] and Reinhard et al. [10]. 
In Thiede [11], one can find a list of simulation tools with a 
status overview of their features considering sustainability 
aspects, which gives a broad overview even though the 
feature list for most tools has already changed. Furthermore, 
material and energy flow data are under observation in 
Thiede et al. [12], which can become relevant when 
considering interaction of human and material, i.e., exposure. 
The software solutions described were used as references for 
the meaningful combination of different perspectives. 
Most existing simulation software is however not 
integrating the life cycle approach. It seems that the 
perception of the system borders of the simulation approach, 
which logically inhibits the gate to gate focus, is hindering 
the other. In order to change that and integrate upstream data, 
two strategies can be observed: on the one hand, through the 
integration of Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) data (for used 
material) at least the environmental and some social aspects 
of the upstream can be integrated, examples can be found in 
Andersson [9] and Kellens et al. [13], while on the other 
hand different simulation techniques (for example Discrete 
Event Simulation (DES) and System Dynamics (SD) and or 
Agent Based Simulation (ABS)) are combined in order to 
model and integrate different parts of the life cycle in 
appropriate and possible detail/granulation. These will 
logically be integrated once the simulation has finished; see 
for example Andersson et al. [14]. The combination of these 
different models is however usually happening via interfaces 
or meta-models and not integrated in one combined 
modeling approach, which was the intention when designing 
the different prototypes of MILAN. In that regard, Widok et 
al. [15][16] and the elaborations in the following depict the 
integration of LCA, DES and MFA in a combined modeling 
approach, where only one model has to be created. 
Social criteria are only very rarely elaborated when 
considering the sustainability of manufacturing system in 
general [7][17] and when it comes to simulation and or 
software solutions for these, even less. In Heilala et al. [18], 
ergonomic criteria are, as part of a social domain, integrated 
in one simulation approach; Lind et al. [19] displays the 
findings of the research paper in more detail. The general 
approach and findings of [18][19] were carefully reviewed 
for input considering the scope of a possible social domain. 
The approach defined in Section IV is however intended to 
go beyond the depicted ergonomic criteria and hence had to 
be designed more flexible considering very different 
influences and their respective algorithms. In Makhbul et al. 
[20] stress at the workplace is analyzed and ergonomic 
workstation factors 
categorized. 
These 
factors were 
important for the general handling and served as one 
reference for the design of the calculation methodology. 
Implications towards the work performance of following 
measures can also be found in Yahaya et al. [21]; in the 
future, it may be possible to integrate the described ideas, 
even though they only served as reference for the design 
phase. Detailed analysis of occupational musculoskeletal and 
mental health with specific focus on production systems can 
be found in Westgaard and Winkel [3]. They also show an 
overview over relevant studies and highlight the significance 
of their findings. The European Agency for Safety and 
Health at Work Report 2013 is also highlighting OSH risk 
and trends [22]. A detailed analysis of historic occupational 
safety measures and trends can be found in Luczak et al. 
[23]. Examples and guidelines for shift-management and 
workplace fatigue can be found in [24]. The more general 
sources [22][23][24] were used as basis for the domain 
development, while [3] served as guideline for the 
integration of specific indicators, i.e., which indicator 
integration was worthwhile and could possibly lead to 
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

meaningful results. Furthermore, Sharma [25] presents a case 
study about a conceptual framework for the improvement of 
business performance with lean manufacturing and human 
factors interventions, which served as idea for the post-
simulation 
framework 
development, 
i.e., 
for 
result 
interpretation. In addition, a new guideline by the association 
of German engineers has been published in 2013, depicting 
the representation and physical strains on humans in virtually 
modeled manufacturing halls, an analysis is described by 
Zülch [26] (in German), while it did not influence the 
development, adaptation in the future may be oriented in 
order to comply with the formulated standards. Lastly, Zaeh 
and Prasch [27] are making suggestions for systematic 
workplace/assembly redesign for aging workforces, which 
was always considered for future uses of the domain, 
especially when with regard to the fatigue, ergonomics, 
skillset and possible differentiations of work performance. 
More holistic approaches (needed for the combination of 
the perspectives) are presented by Omann and Spangenberg 
[4]. The capital approach for sustainability evaluation is 
explained in chapter V of the UN report [28], which is also 
relevant for framework compositions and hence contributed, 
as Sharma [25] did to the post-simulation framework design 
for result evaluation. Social capital in relation to quality of 
life is discussed by Grünberger and Omann [29] and in 
relation to productivity Reagans and Zuckermann [30], both 
of these are relevant general evaluation strategies. When 
trying to incorporate the idea of holistic sustainability 
approaches one should furthermore consider Gasparatos et 
al. [31], where the authors list important arguments against 
the reductionist approach and also directs the attention to 
possible struggles and problems with their integration. A 
supplementary holistic design approach is discussed by 
Spangenberg et al. [32], where most of the already described 
problems are addressed. While Schneider [17] is giving a 
specific example for breaking down criteria from a macro 
management oriented (OECD – Sustainable Development) 
perspective, to social criteria in firms (see also the OECD 
report [6] for that matter); this was very important for the 
general design of the framework composition. Further 
extensive reviews of social sustainability can be found in 
Schneider [33] and an extensive literature review of social 
sustainability assessment methodologies has been published 
by Benoît and Vickery-Niederman [34]. These papers are 
also very valuable considering LCA integration and possible 
SLCA adaptations in the future. Considering SLCA 
integration further extensive summaries were made by author 
Jørgensen [35][36], which’s findings will be at the basis for 
further component development in the SLCA segment.  
To sum up, one can note various modeling approaches 
for social sustainability, but very few actual software 
implementations when it comes to manufacturing simulation. 
Furthermore, combinations with different perspectives and 
focus on holistic perception of social criteria are usually 
intended for reporting, after careful aggregation of various 
different sources. Actual implementations are usually 
conducted with a single focus (for example ergonomic 
criteria). With this in mind, the following sections will 
describe what specifically had to be taken into account for 
the definition of a more holistic oriented implementation of a 
social domain in the described simulation software. 
III. 
SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY IN THE MANUFACTURING 
INDUSTRY 
A. Understanding Social Sustainability on Company Level, 
definitions, challenges 
The definition of social sustainability and the deduction 
of relevant criteria are both far from new; in the last decades 
various entities have made great efforts to give deciders a 
stronger foundation on what social sustainability implies.  
Starting with the World Bank’s sponsored Social Capital 
Initiative at the beginning of the millennium [37] many 
international and regional organizations have since created a 
variety of international policy/reporting guidelines, such as 
the G4 guidelines of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) 
[7] /monitoring/auditing frameworks and other instruments, 
such as value chain analysis, social impact assessments and 
other that all aim for a broad perception and integration of 
social criteria in sustainability assessment. 
When considering these framework approaches and 
social criteria, the problem arises, that different social criteria 
will be relevant to different regions, companies and different 
people. Furthermore, as the sustainability concept has an 
inherent function to be able to shift in time [16], potential 
sustainability criteria have to have their qualification flexible 
in those regards (hinting the change of the model used for 
their qualification, i.e., iterations of simulations to pay tribute 
to the change of normative values at the basis of the 
qualification). In addition to those modeling challenges, 
Omann and Spangenberg formulated four major challenges 
on how to assess social sustainability, namely: 
• 
the 
lack 
of 
conceptual 
clarity 
(emphasizing 
definitions to be dependent on countries and 
entities), 
• 
the complexity (questioning if the concept is even 
manageable 
with 
current 
organizational 
and 
technical means), 
• 
the “bad experience” from the past (1960’s) 
considering the formulation of normative goals, in 
order to place social values in relation to economic 
and environmental goals (see also Colantonio [38]), 
• 
the fact that a stronger integration of social values 
may question the very foundations of current 
development models [4], reducing the likeliness of 
acceptance/introduction. 
Many other authors [33][38][39] argue in similar 
directions, yet the first argument should not be understood as 
lack 
of 
conceptual 
clarity; 
this 
is 
because 
the 
regional/organizational 
shift 
of 
relevant 
criteria 
is 
explainable. If we consider social criteria to be in direct 
relation to human beings, similar to any human need 
categorization, regional social sustainability frameworks will 
represent the state of the needs of the people in that region. 
This does not necessarily influence the validity of existing 
frameworks, 
but 
only 
reduces 
their 
comparability. 
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Summarizing one can observe two functions that influence 
the definition of social sustainability criteria in companies: 
• 
The 
first differentiation needs to be 
made 
considering the people and organizations that are at 
the basis of the question of what is sustainable (i.e., 
sustainable for whom, for what, for how long). The 
definition is thus dependent and pays tribute to the 
different states of the people and organizations in 
question. 
• 
The second variance is in relation to manufacturing 
companies. It is necessary to make a difference 
between the social impact manufacturing processes 
have on the people directly involved in them (i.e., 
the people working for example at a workstation) 
and the social influences emitted by the production 
itself. 
In addition to these differences, the technology choice 
needs to be discussed. Consequently confronted with a 
variety of possible input factors the question poses itself, 
what are the relevant criteria and how could they be 
integrated. 
B. Categorization of social sustainability aspects on 
company level 
This categorization of social sustainability aspects is 
oriented on Porter and Kramer’s depiction of social impacts 
of the value chain of companies [40][41]. Extending their 
description of different criteria and placing them in a 
manufacturing company perspective (their elaborations are 
more general), we can note that the main value creating 
activities for manufacturing companies are operations, 
inbound and outbound logistics, as well as procurement, 
while the logistics, procurement and human resource 
management enable and facilitate the operations in the same 
way as the firm infrastructure and marketing/sales enable the 
function of the firm itself. 
Given these main branches of the company (including 
also technology development) it is possible to make a 
differentiation between: 
• 
the infrastructure, marketing and after sales – being 
categorized as mainly socio-economic with some 
socio-institutional aspects, 
• 
the operations, inbound-, outbound logistics, as well 
as procurement – being categorized as mainly socio-
environmental, 
with 
natural 
socio-economic 
(especially if we consider efficiency) and some 
social orientation, 
• 
and the human resource management, as well as 
technology development – being categorized as 
mainly 
social 
orientation 
with 
some 
socio-
environmental (due to new technologies). 
The according social criteria can be derived from these 
main categories, as for example energy, water and material 
usage, emissions and waste, worker safety and labor 
regulations, hazardous material usage and general ecological 
impacts, for the operation category. The same derivation (for 
the other main aspects of the value chain) has already been 
done a few times and can be reviewed for example in Porter 
[40]. The idea behind this division is one can now 
understand where existing simulation approaches have high 
correlations. 
C. Definition of social criteria relevant to the simulation of 
manufacturing companies 
The main thesis that was described in Section III B is that 
many of the social impacts at operation’s level and generally 
in the primary value creating activities of manufacturing 
companies (mainly operations, but also inbound/outbound 
logistics, procurement) have high correlations with existing 
DES and ABS modeling approaches. This is because the 
social impacts are almost directly linked to either the 
materials in usage (socio-environmental orientation and 
socio-economic if we consider efficiency aspects) or the 
people working and facilitating the functioning of the 
workstations (social orientation, OHS aspects). One can thus 
note, that a limited integration of a social perspective in 
existing economic, environmental orientated manufacturing 
simulation models is possible without having to change the 
model itself drastically, opening the possibility for an 
integrated holistic modeling approach. In that regard the 
choice for a first set of resulting criteria was based on the 
described social impact criteria from these aspects. Also 
note, that the indicated social impacts are not complete, 
further elaborations of social impacts at midpoint level can 
be found in [35]; the given lists were simply intended to 
demonstrate examples and their general categorization. 
Furthermore, as social impact criteria have been categorized 
as socio-environmental, basically representing the original 
sustainability perception of conservation, and as socio-
economic, 
the 
correlations 
between 
the 
pillars 
of 
sustainability become even more apparent. 
While this only considers a limited view on social 
impacts (reducing the perception to the manufacturing 
processes), it is important to note, that the life cycle approach 
can consequently be incorporated through the integration of 
social life cycle assessment (SLCA) data for the materials in 
usage and general upstream input data. To clarify this, 
consider a classical manufacturing model, which depicts the 
system borders at the in- and output flows before and after 
the existing manufacturing processes. This model has and 
produces little life cycle knowledge but only considers the 
manufacturing aspects (which depending on the used 
materials make more or less of the overall impact). It is 
however possible to have a combination of classical 
DES/ABS manufacturing approaches in combination with 
life cycle assessment (LCA) upstream data (and possibly 
even downstream data, depending on the modeling 
approach), as has been demonstrated among others by 
Kellens et al. [13], Andersson et al. [14] and Widok et al. 
[16] for the environmental LCA (ELCA) part. Taking SLCA 
parallel to ELCA, it can thus potentially be used for two 
different overall purposes, already discussed in 1997: 
• 
to compare the social impacts of two comparable 
products or services (or compare a product or service against 
a standard – which is what we want to achieve in the future), 
• 
to identify hot spots or improvement potentials in 
the life cycle of the product or service [34]. 
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

There are different approaches, which use different 
simulation techniques in order to model and simulate the 
bigger picture (apart from the LCA integration), i.e., changes 
in customer demand (due to marketing for example) or the 
abstract term of innovation (tech. dev.) can be modeled and 
simulated using system dynamics, examples can be found in 
Georgiadis and Besiou [42], as well as, Venkateswaran and 
Son [43] and then combinations of these can be found in 
Andersson [9], Rabelo et al. [44] and Jain et al. [45] using 
also LCA. 
Since the integration of social issues into LCA, SLCA 
methodology now advanced to the point where it is left with 
many of the same unresolved issues as ELCA (see also 
Jørgensen [36]). These include: 
• 
the challenges of tracking down site-specific data, 
• 
the challenges of integrating location sensitive 
information, 
• 
the challenges of integrating information collected at 
different scale (from general sectors to specific unit 
processes), 
• 
 developing characterization methods [34].  
Yet, even though the data situation is always a problem 
to be taken seriously, the concept of integrating social 
impacts for the production processes in the simulation 
model, as was already done for environmental criteria, while 
integrating social impacts for the different other life cycle 
stages through SLCA data, was found worthwhile and is at 
the basis of the depicted prototype that will be elaborated in 
the following. 
IV. 
INTEGRATION OF SOCIAL CRITERIA IN THE 
DES/MFA/LCA SIMULATIOR 
A. The basics of the simulation software MILAN 
The software MILAN has its origin in 2001, when the 
conviction began, that the combination of material flow 
analysis (MFA) with existing simulation approaches was 
worthwhile [46]. 
The concept of combining discrete event simulation and 
material flow analysis in a component-based approach was 
then presented in 2006 [47] and its re-implementation on 
.NET basis was elaborated in 2009 [48]. The integration of 
DES with the material flow perspective of MFA within a 
single integrated modeling approach was made possible in 
order to strengthen the perception of correlations between 
environmental and economic questions. Based on the 
dynamic, tactic and strategic character of the simulation 
approach itself, the perception of material and energy flows, 
which was at that point not part of the operative level, was 
intended to be given a more strategic, proactive tendency. 
In 2011, a capital measurement approach for a more 
holistic sustainability perspective was presented, hinting the 
beginning of the integration of the life cycle approach [15]. 
In 2012, the ELCA integration was elaborated and the 
integration of the social perspective was discussed in the 
outlook [16]. Since then the simulation software has 
constantly been enhanced with new features and has been 
used for case studies with companies in Germany and 
Switzerland (under a different scope with a MILAN core). 
The most basic components of the software are: 
• 
a simulation core (central simulation service, 
interfaces and abstract base classes for models), 
• 
a bundle for discrete event simulation (specific for 
DES, with scheduler, timing aspects, etc.), 
• 
stochastic distributions (e.g., Bernoulli, Exponential, 
etc., to generate streams of numbers), 
• 
a graph editor (enabling the visual representation and 
manipulation of models), 
• 
property editors (facilitating the parameterization of 
model entities and given metadata), 
• 
a reporting suite (creating the simulation results and 
preparing charts depending on the scope), 
• 
the 
material 
management 
(for 
the 
creation, 
management 
of 
materials, 
batches, 
bills 
of 
materials), 
• 
the material accounting (by its means it is possible to 
show, save and manage material and energy 
bookkeeping resulting from the simulation. The 
bookkeeping is realized using accounting rules, 
which can be added to all discrete events in 
combination with relevant model components), 
• 
a LCA browser, which enables an easy, string-based 
search and the subsequently integration of LCA 
material data, enabling life cycle inventory (LCI) 
and LCA in the simulation and the results. 
For more information about the technical aspects of the 
simulation software, see Jahr et al. [48]. 
B. The social perspective prototype 
The main components of the social domain are visualized 
in Figure 1 below. The first two lines represent the social 
domain layer, the two lines below that represent 
sustainability related components, the elements in the fifth 
line from the top represent DES relevant components, while 
the last two stand for technical features facilitating the 
general functioning of the software. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Abstracted overview of the main components of and needed for 
the social domain 
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

When the social prototype was first conceptualized the 
two attributes considered to be the most important were: 
The 
component 
architecture: 
aside 
from normal 
component-development reasons, such as high reusability 
and the easier understanding of the code, through clear, small 
packages, this also means that the usage of the social 
perspective is not enforced, i.e., it is possible to model social 
aspects through the software, but one does not have to. The 
software also allows to only build DES simulation models 
and not integrating MFA or LCA, but if the data is existing 
and the intention is to have a strong, holistic model, one can 
use the different techniques combined in one modeling 
approach and only a single model has to be created, 
incorporating the methodologies. 
The free definition of influences: this is based on the 
conviction that social criteria, as well as their measurement, 
are still disputed. Based on this, it was decided that an open 
definition of different influences would be made possible, 
with different editors for the most common influences 
(physical, 
organizational, 
psychological), 
incorporating 
current knowledge considering the measurement of such 
criteria and their impact on human resources over time. 
These impacts however are not validated by the tool itself, 
i.e., the reasonableness of the defined influences and their 
impact lays currently with the modeler (except for logically 
excluding behavior). 
The main features of the social component will be 
elaborated in the following (see Figure 1 for reference). 
Human resource management/editor: based on normal 
resource management approaches a functionality was created 
to split existing resources into three different resource types, 
1) human resources, 2) tools and 3) usable resources. Each of 
these resource types has a different editor, facilitating for the 
human resources possibilities to adjust for skill set, 
integration of distributions considering illness or weaknesses 
(also usable for the modeling of elderly workers and 
adjustment of strengths in the following) and many others. 
Furthermore, a new pooling mechanism was created based 
on a list of categories attributable to the existing resources, 
for example one could attribute a human resource different 
locations, workplaces and others (also at different time 
steps). The categorization/pooling then manages for example 
the availability of the resource. 
Shift management module: the shift management is 
basically a standard shift planning tool, which is used for 
both, the workstations, i.e., one can define if production 
processes are continuously or with breaks for a period of 
time. This is of course relevant for the warm up phases and 
different states of the workstations. Furthermore, the shift 
management is used to attribute different human resources to 
their respective work-related entities. These could be 
different workplaces (although a workplace editor is yet to 
be integrated). For the moment, these are the respective 
workstations (i.e., the rather classic DES workstations model 
entities). In that regard a classical resource usage over time 
can be calculated and attributed to locations, as well as 
workstations and other categories that were defined in the 
resource categorization. In addition, the possibility is given 
to attribute a type of influence on the resource over time. 
These possible strains can be either physical, or otherwise, 
depending on the modeled influences through the different 
influence editors and the following choice of the modeler. 
Social influence layer: in this layer, different editors for 
different types of influences were developed, the main 
differentiation is between physical, psychological and 
organizational influences, where the physical editor guides 
the definition of a physical influence through possible input 
choices (strong relation to German OHS guidelines, as in 
strains for lifting, crouching, carrying, but also general, as in 
workload dependent, biological interaction, noise, etc.) all of 
the possible choices are backed up with known formulas for 
the development of the influence (such as the physical basics 
of noise development or basics for the development of 
particulate matter in production processes), as well as known 
limit values considering the strain on an average human 
being. The psychological editor does currently have a 
completely free definition of influences, while different types 
are suggested, no choices of formulas is, but rather the 
definition of a type is mandatory, which can subsequently be 
used in the rule set editor. The same procedure is 
implemented for the organizational influences. Even though 
many studies were incorporated in a knowledge basis for 
these components (a systematic review of occupational 
musculoskeletal and mental health studies for production 
systems can be found in [3]), the definition of the non-
physical influences was implemented without structural 
restriction. 
Human environmental influences rule set component: 
this is the second key element for the integration of the social 
criteria. In this element one can choose from the previously 
defined social influences and by the usage of a math 
expression parser and the existing model of shifts and or the 
production system (i.e., the workstations), combine time with 
influences to create an impact over time. Different dose 
concepts were evaluated in that regard, which are also 
integrated in a knowledge base and selectable (note: the tool 
is only making a basic validation for reasonable combination 
choices). Once an influence is attributed to a shift or a 
workstation, the simulation is then calculating an impact of 
the indicated influence over time. 
V. 
POSSIBLE RESULTS AND BRIEF DISCUSSION OF 
STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES 
The social component is currently being tested in two use 
cases, respectively in one plastic processing company and 
one company that manufactures technical boilers. Aside 
from the classic results, such as new information on resource 
usage, failure times, etc. new information considering 
workload and strains on human resources are expected as 
results. Different scenarios are still under evaluation (noise, 
repetition, material exposure influences). What can however 
be observed, is that the bringing into focus of social aspects, 
already created ripple effects, considering the perception and 
the management of social impacts. 
In light of the current feedback, we argue that the main 
weaknesses/challenges of this approach (bad data situation, 
privacy issues, fear of abuse, wrong evaluations) are 
manageable and that it is similar as with the environmental 
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

sustainability assessment in the past, i.e., that the best way to 
address the complexity is by making one step at a time, 
without losing focus of the needed flexibility and 
adaptability of further models, simulations and their result 
qualification. This approach is intending to do just that. 
While others have shown that different social aspects can be 
integrated in DES manufacturing approaches, it is our 
intention to create the scientific basis for the step by step 
integration of new impact criteria, by delivering results of 
successful integration and evaluation of social criteria 
through the depicted method in the future. The concept for a 
worthwhile integration of SLCA criteria is currently being 
worked on. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
Last year’s Amnesty International Report [49], titled “the 
dark side of migration” was discussing the exploitation of 
humans as workforce under inhuman conditions. While this 
very terrifying problem is less occurring in western 
countries, it is common sense, that as long we cannot track 
and measure the social impacts of production processes, it is 
less likely that consumers will be empowered to choose 
social friendly created products, and hence not be able to 
steer their capital accordingly. 
Even though we agree with the conclusion of Gasparatos 
et al. [31], considering methodological pluralism (very 
simplified: more is not necessarily better), the key idea of the 
approach in this paper is the attempt of the integration and 
ability to put different perspectives in correlation. It is clear 
that the social aspects have yet to mature in their scientific 
provability, yet potentials can clearly already be indicated. 
This is what the tool already delivers as result, potentials 
compared to limit values (i.e., elevated by x%, without 
qualifying beyond stating that it is a positive or negative 
tendency and putting it into context). 
The main arguments against the integration of social 
criteria are usually their fuzziness and the fact that every 
human is different. These points are valid, however the main 
aspects of human beings are not so different, as a variety of 
studies suggest (see Westgaard and Winkel [3]). Of course, it 
is complicated to derive exact numbers, but that is where the 
free definition of influences comes into play, by allowing for 
the modeling of workers, as well as the impact on different 
levels. So while the presented approach is far from 
scientifically established, its purpose is more to promote the 
re-integration of social values in existing manufacturing 
processes. Human development author and activist Max-
Neef mentioned in his keynote at Zermatt Summit 2012 that 
sustainability 
has been misused to promote rather 
economical concepts than actually bringing the essence of 
what sustainability incorporates into prominence, hence it is 
the intention of this paper to clarify that the deficit of social 
integration in these regards can be overcome. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Elkington, “Towards the suitable corporation: Win-win-win 
business strategies for sustainable development,” California 
management review, vol. 36, iss. 2, 1994, pp. 90-100. 
[2] J. Banks, J. Carson, B. L. Nelson, and D. Nicol, Discrete-
event system simulation, 4th edition, Upper Saddle River. 
New Jersey, USA, 2005. 
[3] R. 
H. 
Westgaard 
and 
J. 
Winkel, 
“Occupational 
musculoskeletal 
and 
mental 
health: 
Signiﬁcance 
of 
rationalization and opportunities to create sustainable 
production systems - A systematic review,” Applied 
Ergonomics, vol. 42, iss. 2, Elsevier Ltd. and The Ergonomics 
Society, 2011, pp. 261-296. 
[4] I. Omann and J. H. Spangenberg, “Assessing Social 
Sustainability - The Social Dimension of Sustainability in a 
Socio-Economic Scenario,” Proceedings of the 7th ISEE, 
Barcelona, Spain, 2002. 
[5] A. 
H. 
Widok 
and 
V. 
Wohlgemuth, 
“Simulating 
Sustainability,” Proceedings of the 27nd Int. Conference 
Environmental 
Informatics, 
Shaker 
Verlag, 
Hamburg, 
Germany, 2013, pp. 514-522. 
[6] Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD), 
“Measuring 
material 
flows 
and 
resource 
productivity,” OECD Report, Paris, France, 2008. 
[7] Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), “G4 Sustainability 
Reporting Guidelines Implementation Manual,” GRI Report, 
Netherlands, 2013. 
[8] G. Seliger, Sustainable Manufacturing, 1st edition, Springer 
Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 2012. 
[9] J. Andersson, Environmental Impact Assessment using 
Production Flow Simulation, Sweden, 2014. 
[10] J. Reinhard, R. Zah, and V. Wohlgemuth, P. Jahr, “Applying 
Life Cycle Assessment within Discrete Event Simulation: 
Practical Application of the Milan/EcoFactory Material Flow 
Simulator,” Proceedings of the 27nd Int. Conference 
Environmental Informatics, Hamburg, Germany, 2013, pp. 
532-542. 
[11] S. Thiede, Energy Efﬁciency in Manufacturing Systems. 1st 
edition, Springer-Verlag, Germany, 2012. 
[12] S. Thiede, C. Herrmann, and S. Kara, “State of Research and 
an innovative Approach for simulating Energy Flows of 
Manufacturing Systems,” Proceedings of the 18th CIRP 
International Conference on Life Cycle Engineering, 2011, 
pp. 45-48. 
[13] K. Kellens, W. Dewulf, M. Overcash, M. Z. Hauschild, and J. 
R. Duflou, 2011. “Methodology for systematic analysis and 
improvement of manufacturing unit process life-cycle 
inventory (UPLCI),” International Journal of Life Cycle 
Assessment, vol. 17, iss. 1, 2011, pp. 69-78. 
[14] J. Andersson, A. Skoogh, and B. Johansson, “Evaluation of 
Methods used for Life-Cycle Assessments in discrete event 
simulation,” Proceedings of the 2012 Winter Simulation 
Conference, Edited by C. Laroque, J. Himmelspach, R. 
Pasupathy, O. Rose, and A.M. Uhrmacher, IEEE, Berlin, 
Germany, 2012, pp. 135-141. 
[15] A. H. Widok, V. Wohlgemuth, and B. Page, “Combining 
Event Discrete Simulation with Sustainability Criteria,” 
Proceedings of the 2011 Winter Simulation Conference, 
IEEE, Phoenix, USA, 2011, pp. 859-870. 
[16] A. H. Widok, L. Schiemann, P. Jahr, and V. Wohlgemuth, 
2012. “Achieving Sustainability through the Combination of 
LCA and DES integrated in a Simulation Software for 
Production Processes,” Proceedings of the 2012 Winter 
Simulation Conference, IEEE, Berlin, Germany, 2012, 
pp.264-276. 
[17] R. Schneider, “Measuring Social Dimensons of Sustainable 
Production,” Measuring Sustainable Production, Chapter 4, 
OECD Publishing, Paris, France, 2008. 
[18] J. Heilala, S. Vatanen, H. Tonteri, J. Montonen, S. Lind, B. 
Johansson, and J. Stahre, “Simulation-based Sustainable 
Manufacturing System Design,” Proceedings of the 2008 
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Winter Simulation Conference, IEEE, USA, 2008, pp. 1922-
1930. 
[19] S. Lind, B. Johansson, J. Stahre, C. Berlin, A. Fasth, J. 
Heilala, K. Helin, S. Kiviranta, B. Krassi, J. Montonen, H. 
Tonteri, S. Vantanen, and J. Viitaniemi, “SIMTER - A Joint 
Simulation Tool for Production Development,” VTT Working 
Paper, No. 125. Espoo, Finland, 2009. 
[20] Z. M. Makhbul, N. L. Abdullah, and Z. C. Senik, 
“Ergonomics 
and 
Stress 
at 
Workplace: 
Engineering 
Contributions to Social Sciences,” Jurnal Pengurusan, vol. 37, 
iss. 1, 2013, pp. 125-131. 
[21] A. Yahaya, N. Yahaya, A. T. Bon, S. Ismail, and T. C. Ing,  
“Stress level and its influencing factors among employees in a 
plastic manufacturing and the implication towards work 
performance,” Elixir Psychology, vol. 41, 2011, pp. 5923-
5941. 
[22] European Agency for Safety and Health at Work (EASHW), 
“Green jobs and occupational safety and health: Foresight on 
new and emerging risks associated with new technologies,” 
EU Report, Spain, 2013. 
[23] H. Luczak, O. Cernavin, K. Scheuch, and K. Sonntag, 
“Trends of Research and Practice in Occupational Risk 
Prevention as Seen in Germany,” Industrial Health, vol. 40, 
iss. 2, 2002, pp. 74-100. 
[24] Department of Labour New Zealand, “Managing shift work to 
minimise workplace fatigue - A Guide for Employers,” 
Crown, Wellington, New Zealand, 2007. 
[25] R. Sharma, “Conceptual Framework for Improving Business 
Performance with Lean Manufacturing and Successful Human 
Factors Interventions - A Case Study,” International Journal 
for Quality Research, vol. 6, iss. 3, 2012, pp. 259-270. 
[26] G. Zülch, „Ergonomische Abbildung des Menschen in der 
Digitalen Fabrik – Die neue VDI-Richtlinie 4499-4,“ 
Simulation in Produktion und Logistik 2013, edited by 
Dangelmaier W., Laroque C. and Klaas A., Paderborn, 
Germany, 2013, pp. 53-60. 
[27] M. F. Zaeh and M. Prasch, “Systematic workplace and 
assembly redesign for aging workforces,” Production 
Engineering, vol. 1, iss. 1, 2007, pp. 57-64. 
[28] United Nations (UN), Indicators of Sustainable Development: 
Guidelines and Methodologies, 3rd edition, United Nations. 
New York, USA, 2007. 
[29] S. Grünberger and I. Omann, “Quality of Life and 
Sustainability. Links between Sustainable Behaviour, Social 
Capital and Well-being,” Proceedings of the 9th Biennial 
Conference of the European Society for Ecological 
Economics (ESEE), Istanbul, Turkey, 2011. 
[30] R. Reagans and E. W. Zuckermann, “Network, Diversity, and 
Productivity: The Social Capital of Corporate R&D Teams,” 
Organization Science, vol. 12, iss. 4, 2012, pp. 502-517. 
[31] A. Gasparatos, M. El-Haram, and M. Horner, “A critical 
review of reductionist approaches for assessing the progress 
towards sustainability,” Environmental Impact Assessment 
Review, vol. 28, iss. 4-5, 2007, pp. 286-311 
[32] J. H. Spangenberg, A. Fuad-Luke, and K. Blincoe, ”Design 
for Sustainability (DfS): the interface of sustainable 
production and consumption,” Elsevier Ltd., Journal of 
Cleaner Production, vol. 18, iss. 15, 2010, pp. 1485-1493. 
[33] S. 
McKenzie, 
“Social 
Sustainability: 
Towards 
some 
definitions,” Hawke Research Institute, Magil Australia, 
Working Paper Series, No. 27, 2008. 
[34] C. Benoît and G. Vickery-Niederman, “Social Sustainability 
Assessment 
Literature 
Review,” 
White 
Paper, 
The 
Sustainability Consortium, Arizona State University and 
University of Arkansas, USA, 2010. 
[35] A. Jørgensen, A. Le Bocq, L. Narzarkina, and M. Hauschild, 
„Methodologies 
for 
Social 
Life 
Cycle 
Assessment,” 
International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, vol. 13, iss. 2, 
2007, pp. 96-103. 
[36] A. Jørgensen, Developing the Social Life Cycle Assessment: 
Adressing Issues of Validity and Usability, Thesis (PhD), 
Lyngby, Denmark, 2010. 
[37] C. Grootaert, T. van Bastelaer, S. Assaf, T. Rossing Feldman, 
and G. Ochieng, “The Initiative on Defining, Monitoring and 
Measuring Social Capital,” Social Capital Working Paper 
Series, Social Capital Initiative Working Paper No. 1. 
Washington, DC, USA, 1998. 
[38] A. Colantonio, “Social sustainability: an exploratory analysis 
of its definition, assessment methods metrics and tools”. In 
EIBURS Working Paper Series, 2007/01, Oxford Brooks 
University, UK, 2007. 
[39] N. Pelletier, E. Ustaoglu, C. Benoit, and G. Norris, “Social 
Sustainability in Trade and Development Policy,” European 
Union, Ispra, Italy, 2013. 
[40] M. E. Porter, The Competitive Advantage, NY Free Press, 
1985. 
[41] M. E. Porter and M. R. Kramer, “The Link Between 
Competive Advantage and Coporate Social Responsibility,” 
In: Harvard Business Review, vol. 84, iss. 12, 2006, pp. 78-
92. 
[42] P. Georgiadis and M. Besiou, “Environmental and economical 
sustainability of WEEE closed-loop supply chains with 
recycling: a system dynamics analysis,” Springer Verlag, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Advanced 
Manufacturing 
Technology, vol. 47, iss. 5-8, 2010, pp. 475-493. 
[43] J. Venkateswaran and Y.-J. Son, “Hybrid system dynamics - 
discrete event simulation based architecture for hierachical 
production planing,” Taylor & Francis Group, International 
Journal of Production Research, vol. 43, iss. 20, 2005, pp. 
4397-4429. 
[44] L. Rabelo, M. Helal, and A. Jones, H.-S.. Min, “Enterprise 
Simulation: A Hybrid System Approach,” International 
Journal Computer Integrated Manufacturing, vol. 18, iss. 6, 
2005, pp. 498-508. 
[45] S. Jain, S. Sigurðardóttir, E. Lindskog, J. Andersson, A. 
Skoogh, and B. Johansson, “Multi-Resolution Modeling for 
Supply Chain Sustainability Analysis,” IEEE, Proceedings of 
the 2013 Winter Simulation Conference, 2013, pp. 1996-
2007. 
[46] V. Wohlgemuth, L. Bruns, and B. Page, „Simulation als 
Ansatz 
zur 
ökologischen 
und 
ökonomischen 
Planungsunterstützung 
im 
Kontext 
betrieblicher 
Umweltinformationssysteme (BUIS),“ in L. M. Hilty; P. 
Gilgen (Eds.): 15th International Symposium Informatics for 
Environmental Protection, 2001. 
[47] V. Wohlgemuth, B. Page, and W. Kreutzer, “Combining 
discrete event simulation and material flow analysis in a 
component-based approach to industrial environmental 
protection,” Elsevier Ltd., Environmental Modeling & 
Software, vol. 21, iss. 11, 2006, pp. 1607-1617. 
[48] P. Jahr, L. Schiemann, and V. Wohlgemuth, “Development of 
simulation components for material flow simulation of 
production systems based on the plugin architecture 
framework EMPINIA,” Proceedings of the 23nd Int. 
Conference Environmental Informatics,” 2009, pp. 151-159. 
[49] Amnesty International, “The Dark Side of Migration - 
Spotlight on Quatar's Construction Sector ahead of the World 
Cup,” Amnesty International Report, London, UK, 2013. 
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

