SimARC: An Ontology-driven Behavioural Model of Alcohol Abuse 
Francois Lamy 
 CRICS 
Charles Sturt University 
Bathurst, Australia 
flamy1978@gmail.com 
Pascal Perez 
SMART Infrastructure  
UOW 
Wollongong, Australia 
pascal.perez@uow.edu.
au 
Alison Ritter 
NDARC 
UNSW 
Sydney, Australia 
alison.ritter@unsw.edu.
au 
Michael Livingston 
TPADC 
Uni. of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
michaell@turningpoint.
org.au 
 
 
Abstract—Alcohol-related problems (assaults, accidents and/or 
crimes) and alcohol abuse are recurrent societal problems 
leading to high social costs. Finding adapted policies to tackle 
this issue isn’t a trivial task due to the highly complex nature of 
alcohol consumption as many interrelated risk factors interact 
in a hardly predictable way. This paper describes an agent-
based simulation model, called SimARC (Simulation of 
Alcohol-Related Consequences), aiming at exploring the 
complex interplay of these factors following a generative 
process whereby theory and model co-evolve within iterative 
loops. To explore the complexity of alcohol use and abuse, we 
need not only to include the aforementioned risk factors but 
also their evolution and highly dynamical interactions across 
scales. Therefore, our agent-based model aims to encapsulate 
several levels of reality. Considering an ontology as catalog of 
elements and relation amongst those elements, our ontology-
driven behavioral model includes: neuro-biological responses 
to alcohol use (individual level), peer influence channeled 
through various social networks (meso-level) and societal 
responses to alcohol-related problems (meta-level). This 
ontological framework aims to establish a robust test-bed to 
analyze – in silico – the plausible consequences of various 
public policies related to alcohol abuse in public venues. After 
a brief review of the literature, we present SimARC’s core 
structure and preliminary results. 
Keywords-agent-based model; ontology; alcohol; social 
simulation; public health. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In its «Global Status Report on Alcohol and Health 
2011», World Health Organization (WHO) points that 
alcohol «is a causal factor in more than 60 major types of 
diseases and injuries and results in approximately 2.5 million 
deaths each year […] Thus, 4% of all deaths worldwide are 
attributable to alcohol» [1]. Furthermore, a recent report 
from the Independent Scientific Committee on Drugs (ISCD) 
indicates via that alcohol, in term of social cost, is more 
dangerous than heroin and crack [2]. In the same vein, 
Collins and Lapsley have estimated at 15.3 billions AUS$ 
(11.6 billions €) the social cost of alcohol [3].  
Moreover, both in Europe and Australia, «binge 
drinking» (heavy drinking session leading to intoxication) is 
on the rise inducing greater chances of individual harms (i.e., 
falls, pedestrian/car accidents) as well as greater risks of 
violence (i.e., brawl, degradation, violent assaults) [4][5].  
 
Due to its legal status and large availability alcohol has 
become a major health problem for governments [6][7] who 
generally attempt to solve this problem by different 
combinations of public policies, such as alcohol taxation, 
prevention campaigns or reduction in availability [8][9]. 
Beside, net revenues associated with alcohol consumption 
largely make up for subsequent expenditures in the 
Australian federal budget [3]. 
 
Hence, alcohol-related social harm remains a difficult 
research topic [10] as consumption patterns adapt quickly to 
new policies. For example, individual change their drinking 
habits (i.e., "preloading" episode, shifting from one type of 
alcohol to another one) or license premises adapting their 
marketing to remain competitive. As well as all the others 
drug uses, alcohol consumption and its aftermaths are 
complex social phenomena: they result from the interaction 
of many risk and protective factors that dynamically evolve 
through time [11].  
 
These factors belong to distinct levels of analysis: genetic 
predispositions; neurophysiology and neuro-pharmacology 
of alcohol; individual psychology; social and environmental 
conditions; current laws; economical constrains or cultural 
norms [12]. We consider here three levels of analysis: a 
micro-level (the individual, his neurologic, physiologic and 
social characteristics), a meso-level (groups, peer influence 
and significant others) and a macro-level (public policies, 
urban geography and societal responses). 
  
 
Our work aims to create a social simulation, which 
integrates three levels of analysis in order to get a better 
understanding of alcohol use and misuse. Once calibrated 
and validated, this type of simulation model could be used to 
inform policy-making debate on alcohol [13]. To describe 
this simulation, we will review the different components of 
the model, then we will discuss the need for new 
technologies to capture alcohol-related problems, and finally, 
we will describe the different components of SimARC and 
show some preliminary results. 
 
 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

II. 
ALCOHOL USE: A MULTI-FACTORIAL  SYSTEM 
Our three different levels represent three levels of 
interactions between five components: alcohol, individual, 
group, context and society. We consider the relation between 
the alcohol and individual components constitutes the prima 
causa of alcohol-related harms.  
A. Micro-level: Alcohol/Individual 
Alcohol is a powerful psychoactive substance highly 
addictogen. BAC (Blood Alcohol Concentration) is the main 
indicator of alcohol intoxication and impairment. BAC gives 
good 
indications 
concerning 
cognitive 
and 
motor 
impairment: the following figure (cf. Figure 1) illustrates the 
relation between accident and BAC [14]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Risk of traffic accident/BAC 
However, aggressive behaviors are consequences of the 
neural action of alcohol on the brain. Ethanol, the active 
principle 
of 
alcohol, 
has 
an 
impact 
on 
many 
neurotransmitters, but Dopamine, GABA, Glutamate and 
Serotonin (5-HT) are strongly related to behavioral changes 
[15]. As most of the other drugs, alcohol generates release of 
Dopamine, the neurotransmitter of reward and pleasure. 
From behavioral viewpoint, dopamine increases self-
confidence, and happiness; however, it is also considered as 
one of the key-factors that trigger craving, addiction and 
schizophrenia [16].  
 
Alcohol also acts on GABA (Gamma-Amino-Butyric 
Acid) the principal inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. 
In standard volume, GABA has a relaxant effect, but higher 
doses cause drowsiness and motor impairments [17]. 
Another role of GABA is to balance the excitatory action of 
Glutamate. At normal dose, this neurotransmitter is implied 
in learning and memorization [18], inversely, higher 
concentration of Glutamate in the brain leads to 
"excitotoxicity", impairing or killing neurons.  
 
Finally, ethanol interacts strongly with Serotonin. Also 
known as 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), this neurotransmitter 
is responsible for mood regulation, sleeping cycles and 
thermoregulation. Mild dose brings euphoria and a sentiment 
of happiness. Conversely, depleted serotonin level is 
generally correlated with feeling of depression and 
aggressive behaviors [19]. 
 
From a neurophysiologic viewpoint, during alcohol 
consumption the level of Glutamate in the brain decreases 
with a correlative increase in GABA concentrations, giving a 
mild relaxant feeling and desinhibition. At the same time, the 
agonist effect of alcohol on Dopamine and Serotonin 
neurotransmitters induces euphoria as well as feelings of 
happiness and self-confidence in the user [20]. Inversely, 
excessive amounts of GABA and low rates of Glutamate 
lead to motor impairment, lack of concentration and 
potentially induce sleep, increasing dramatically the chance 
of being involve in a car or pedestrian accident.  
 
Once alcohol slowly disappears from the bloodstream 
and "stocks" of those neurotransmitters have been partially 
or completely depleted, a "calm down" period starts and 
users sense the different side effects following their 
consumption. Individuals will start to feel depress, get 
moody or exhibit violent behaviors (due to dopamine and 
serotonin depletions). Furthermore, some neurons may be 
damaged due to the rise of glutamate (excitotoxicity) after 
drinking  [21].  
 
This short review of the neuro-pharmacology of alcohol 
gives a partial explanation of behavioral changes but remains 
insufficient if it is not linked to social reactions and 
especially peer influence.  
B. Meso-level: Individual/Group 
Sociology has studied the impact of peer perception and 
influence regarding alcohol and drug use. Making reference 
to social learning theory, Kilpatrick et al. [22] and Flay et al. 
[23] have shown that children witnessing drug consumption 
from "significant others" (parents, sibling or tutors) have an 
increased risk of substance abuse. Obviously this influence 
can be extended to other elements of personal interactions,  
“peer pressure” has an important influence on experimental 
alcohol and drug use. On this subject, a vast literature exists 
about the social influence of friendship groups [24] 
indicating that individuals are influenced (positively or 
negatively) by their friends but also select which peers they 
have to mix with in order to find and use any drugs [25]. 
 
If peer-pressure has been the object of many studies as a 
risk factor, "social control" coming from members of the 
family, friends or community consist a solid protective factor 
[26]. Drug users compare their behaviors and consumption to 
other consumer comportments: irrational or erratic behaviors 
are generally banned and stigmatized [27]. However, 
repeated public misbehaviors around a particular location 
and/or generalization of alcohol-fuelled violence and 
disorders call to societal and political responses.    
C. Macro-level: Social Environment/all components 
As pointed by Livingston, the density of alcohol-related 
venues is directly related to violence in all neighborhood 
type, but bars and nightclubs are associated with violence in 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

the inner city while packaged alcohol outlets were associated 
with violence in suburban zone [28][29]. Similarly, the social 
capital of neighborhood seems to decrease with the density 
of alcohol outlet leading to more incivilities and to a possible 
social segregation [30]. 
Inside those venues, measures as closing times [31], 
limitation of crowding and a coordinated staff [32] have 
significant positive impact on alcohol-related violence.   
Alcohol price taxation is accurately associated to alcohol-
consumption: in their review of the different studies done on 
the subject, Chaloupka et al. indicated that increasing the 
monetary prices of alcoholic beverages reduces significantly 
alcohol consumption and alcohol-related problems [33].   
 
Having reviewed those different factors, we need to find 
a robust framework able to encapsulate these components 
and capture their inter-evolutions over time. Hence, we 
propose to employ computer simulation to mimic this social 
phenomenon. 
III. 
AGENT-BASED MODEL AND SOCIAL SIMULATION 
CONCERNING ALCOHOL 
Computer simulation models have attracted an increasing 
number of researchers and practitioners over the last decade. 
As a matter of fact, social simulations can be used as 
artificial social experiments (in-silico) to explore the 
consequences of pre-defined conditions on a range of 
specific social and environmental indicators. In his seminal 
book ‘Generative Social Science’, Epstein argues that 
computer simulations provide new tools for integrative and 
empirical research in social sciences [34].  
 
A particular instance of computer simulation, called 
Agent-Based Modelling (ABM), allows building artificial 
societies 
from 
the 
bottom-up; 
whereby 
individual 
autonomous agents interact, communicate and pursue 
personal goals while societal norms and regulations constrain 
their freedom [35].  ABM is also very helpful for collecting 
and making sense of dynamical (spatial movements, time 
series) 
or 
heterogeneous 
information 
(qualitative, 
quantitative, ill-defined or aggregated).  
 
Finally, ABM is largely used in environmental, health or 
defence studies to explore intervention scenarios with policy 
makers [36]. According to Liu and Eck, “crime simulation is 
[also] an emerging research area that has the potential of 
revealing hidden processes behind urban crime patterns and 
criminal justice system operations” [37]. Again, the 
analytical value of the approach doesn’t rely on its capacity 
to describe spatiotemporal dynamics, but – more importantly 
– on its ability to assess different hypothesis about social 
causality [38]. 
 
In the field of alcohol and other drugs use, ABM has 
been successfully used to explore mechanisms of drug use 
initiation [39], and impacts of different policing interventions 
on street-based illicit drug markets [40]. Agent-based 
simulations concerning alcohol experiences gossiping 
amongst student [41], interactions agent-environment [42] or 
movement of alcohol user in the city [43] have mainly 
studied agent/group or agent/environment interactions. 
 
Our aim is to encapsulate both neurologic physiology, 
impact of the network on decision, geographic data and 
societal response in a single model.  Computer science 
concept of ontology seems to tally with our objectives. 
Originally, ontology was a philosophical concept which, a 
branch of metaphysics: coming from ontos (being) and logos 
(discourse), ontology aims to describe general properties of 
things. For our purpose, we will consider ontology as a 
description of a particular domain defined by its objects, 
concepts, and their properties and relations [44]. This 
framework enables the description of the previous data and 
concepts in a common language, Unified Modeling 
Language (UML) (cf. Figure 2):  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  SimARC Class Diagram 
IV. 
SIMARC: GLOBAL FUNCTIONNING  
As indicated by Ferber [45], a Multi-Agent System 
(MAS) comprises of the following elements: 
• 
An environment (E), a space that generally has a 
volume; 
• 
A set of passive objects (O) which can be perceived, 
created, destroyed and modified by the agents; 
• 
An assembly of agents (A) representing the active 
set of objects; 
• 
An assembly of relations (R) that link active or 
passive agents to each other; 
• 
An assembly of operations (Op) making it possible 
for the agents of A to act on objects from O.  
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

SimARC aims to encompass all those different 
components. Besides that some part of this simulation are 
still under construction, we coded the UML structure in 
Netlogo 
4.1.3 
[46]. 
SimARC 
interface 
allows 
the 
experimenter to choose the number of Streets, Bar, Disco, 
Bottle-shop, Hospital and Police station. Sliders help to 
choose how many Agents and Constables will be created. 
Finally, the simulation user can select Alcohol Price, 
Police Operations and Public Policies (those two latter are 
pre-implemented by the programmer).  He can also select via 
sliders the percentage for a constable to arrest an alcohol user 
and the "brawl risk" percentage. 
 
In the two next sections, we will describe the manner in 
which we have implemented most of our algorithms and the 
last section will give some preliminary results.  
A. SimARC Urban Environment and Interface  
The visual interface is a drastic simplification of an urban 
area, the grid includes the following features: street (here in 
black), house (green), bar (blue), disco (purple), bottle-shop 
(orange), police station (red), hospital and a rehab centre. 
The Figure 3 gives an outline of the urban environment.    
 
 
Figure 3.  SimARC Urban Grid 
 Licensed premises (venues) have different Retail Prices 
and 
characteristics 
(Happy-Hours, 
Lock-out, 
Curfew, 
Crowding) as well as ‘Reputation’. Every step (tick in 
Netlogo) represents 2 hours time, 12 ticks a real weekday 
and weekend (Monday, Saturday etc.). 
 
The Retail Price varies according to the type of venues: 
bottle-shops have their retail price equal to the price chooses 
by the experimenter; bar sees this price increases by 2 and 
discos have a retail price multiply by 2. According to the 
Reputation of the venue, constables may be more incline to 
patrol in that neighborhood and some agents can just avoid 
this venue. Actually and according to the implemented 
Public Policies, Retail Prices can increase for every alcohol-
venues, but Happy-Hours can also be suppressed and/or 
Curfews or Lock-outs can be imposed. These different 
policies influence the choice and drinking patterns of the 
virtual alcohol users.    
B.  SimARC Agents and Networks 
Each agent is characterized by the following attributes: 
• 
Physical attributes (Health, Age, Gender, BAC); 
• 
Status of neurotransmitters (Serotonin, GABA, 
Glutamate and Dopamine); 
• 
A Stage representing its frequency of alcohol use 
and a correlated Alcohol-routine; 
• 
Behavioral 
tendencies 
(aggressive, 
neutral 
or 
elusive)  
• 
Memories of past experiences (past consumption, 
accidents, violence and sickness); 
• 
Strategy to "get-back-home" once the night-out is 
over (private or public transport); 
• 
Social characteristics (Income, Friends, Address, 
Favorite Venues). 
 
An agent acts according to a series of heuristics based on 
an hourly schedule. All agents have a routine "daily-life": 
they go to work (part of their Address data), earn virtual 
money every fortnight (Income), eventually, decide to have a 
drink and finally, come back home to rest (restore their 
Health and Status of neurotransmitters). Agents earn ten 
times their Income (normal-distribution) every fortnight 
(randomly predefined). This fortnight income constitutes 
"pocket money" for non-essential expenses. The average 
amount of this pocket money is equal to 180. 
 
Alcohol consumption varies according to each agent’s 
Alcohol-routine and Stage: some agents may have a few 
drinks in their favorite bar during the weekend while others 
can have several binge-drinking sessions at home during 
weekdays. Some agents are just staying home and sober the 
whole week, resulting in no individual harm or social 
trouble. Other agents consuming large quantities of alcohol 
can display violent or dangerous comportments (brawl, 
accident and having been sick are counted and memorized) 
and these heavy drinking decrease their Health attribute.  
 
Each "Drink" represents a Standard Drink (10 g of 
alcohol) and each intake increases the BAC of male agent by 
10/(Weight x 0.7) and by 10/(Weight x 0.6) for female agent. 
BAC is reduced by 0.15 every tick (2 hours time). 
Each consumption modifies the levels of neuro-
transmitters and the relative balance of neurotransmitters 
governs changes in behavioral patterns. An agent might 
change his opinion about alcohol consumption based on its 
cumulative experience of negative consequences (personal or 
witnessed) during or after successive night-outs. In turn, 
these updated opinions might change an agent’s Alcohol-
routine and Stage.  
Furthermore, agents can interact through physical co-
location in the spatial environment or through messages 
amongst friendship networks. Therefore, agents of a same 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

network move all together in Favorite Venues. Those 
Friends of the network can also "ask" an agent with a low 
Health or frequent dangerous behaviors to "slow down": if it 
accepts, the agent will not drink for some weeks, recovering 
from its past consumptions, otherwise, it will change its 
primary network to find new drinking mates.    
C. Preliminary Results 
In this section, we present some preliminary results from 
SimARC. However, this simulation hasn't been entirely 
calibrated yet. Therefore, these experimentations intend to 
test the internal consistency of the model. To do so, we 
examine the consequences of alcohol taxation policy. Four 
different prices have been tested 1, 5, 10 and 15 (relatively to 
the average 180 "pocket money").  
For this experiment, the virtual population is composed 
of 750 agents and 2 constables. Those latter have 1% chance 
to arrest users with a BAC > 0.5. In order to initiate the 
simulation, we consider that 70% of the agents start with a 
Stage = 1, 15% with a Stage 2, 10% with a Stage 3 and 5% 
with Stage 4 (those data have to be calibrated).  
 
For each scenario, we have run 50 replicates of 4367 time 
steps (one year simulation time). We have measured 
quantities of alcohol consumed for each scenario as well as 
the number of accidents and fatal accidents.  
Figure 4 summarizes our results on Standard Drink 
consumption depending of the price of alcohol:  
 
Figure 4.  Alcohol Consumption (SD)/Price of Alcohol 
Alcohol consumption decreases of 8.6% between P5 and 
P10, and decreases of 23.6% between P5 and P15. Those 
results seem to be concordant with economic studies [33]. 
However, it seems surprising that the amount of alcohol 
consumed for P1 and P5 are quasi-equivalent: we attribute 
this proximity of SD consumed to the "social control" 
operates by peers and to evolution of individual opinions in 
response to bad experiences during heavy drinking sessions 
(see IV.B).   
 
Concerning Accidents with have implemented an 
algorithm matching the relative risk to be involved in an 
accident shown in Figure 1. Risk increases with BAC 
according to the following equation: 
 
p(crash|BAC) =1 / (1 + 0.2 exp (5 –2*%BAC)). 
 
According to MUARC (Monash University Accident 
Research Centre) on alcohol-related car crashes provoke 
fatal accidents in approximately 1% of cases, and cause 
serious wounds in 34,5% and 64,5% constitute minor trauma 
[47]. Our experiments display the following results (Figure 
5): 
 
Figure 5.  Accidents (green) and Fatal Accidents (blue)/Price of Alcohol 
As expected, the number of accidents and related lethal 
injuries decreases with the increase of alcohol price. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORKS 
From reviewing different factors involved in alcohol use, 
we have underscored the necessity of a multidisciplinary 
perspective 
to 
understand 
the 
complexity 
of 
this 
phenomenon. This complexity leads us to consider an 
ontologic ABM as a suitable method to mimic alcohol 
consumption and alcohol-related social problems. This 
ontologic model is implemented and simulated with Netlogo 
in order to run multiple simulations and so achieve public 
policies testing. 
 
At this stage, most of the algorithms are based on 
empirical heuristics calibrated against existing quantitative 
and qualitative data. While the simulation of behavioral 
patterns linked to alcohol consumption and driven by the 
neurobiological status of an agent is well advanced, the 
research team is still seeking complementary information to 
represent the consequences of these behavioral patterns. Both 
quantitative and qualitative complementary data are needed. 
 
We plan to realize in-depth interviews with different 
categories of alcohol users in order to obtain a better 
understanding of alcohol users behaviors (how their habits 
change, what are the different reasons for such changes, how 
users evolve through life....). As proposed by Moore and 
colleagues, SimARC aims to integrate ethnographical and 
epidemiological information in an iterative way [48]. Later 
on we intend to integrate real urban information (GIS) in 
order to display an accurate geographical context and to give 
a 
more 
accurate 
representation 
of 
public 
policies 
implications and results. 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

REFERENCES 
[1] 
D.J. Nutt, L.A. King & L.D. Phillips, Drug harms in the UK: a 
multicriteria decision analysis. The Lancet. vol. 376 (9752). 2010. 
[2] 
WHO, «Global Status Report on Alcohol and Health». 2010.  
[3] 
D.J Collins & H.M Lapsley, The costs of tobacco, alcohol and illicit 
drug abuse to Australian society in 2004/2005. 2008.   
[4] 
Drugs and Crime Prevention Committee, Report on Inquiry into 
Strategies to Reduce Harmful Alcohol Consumption. Melbourne: 
Parliament of Victoria. 2006. 
[5] 
OFDT, Tendances (76), Les niveaux d’usage de drogues en France en 
2010. 2011. 
[6] 
H. Parker, F. Measham  & J. Aldridge, Illegal Leisure: the 
Normalisation of Adolescent Recreational Drug Use. Routledge. 1998 
[7] 
J. Grace, D. Moore & J. Northcote, Alcohol, Risk and Harm 
Reduction: Drinking Amongst Young Adults in Recreational Settings 
in Perth, NDRI. 2009. 
[8] 
WHO, European Alcohol Action Plan 2012-2020. 2011 
[9] 
Australia Commonwealth, National Alcohol Strategy 2006-2009. 
Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy. 2006. 
[10] R. Nicholas. Understanding and responding to alcohol-related social 
harms in Australia. Options for Policing. NDLERF. 2008. 
[11] D.M. Gorman et al. Implications of Systems of Dynamic Models and 
Control Theory for Environmental Approaches to the Prevention of 
Alcohol-and other Drug-use related Problems. Substance Use & 
Misuse. vol. 39 (10-12). 2004. 
[12] J. Unger et al. What are the implications of structural/cultural theory 
for drug abuse prevention? Sub. Use & Misuse. vol. 39 (10-12). 2004. 
[13] P. Gruenewald. Why do alcohol outlets matter anyway? A look into 
the future. Addiction. vol. 103. pp. 1585-1587. 2008.   
[14] www.infrastructure.gov.au 
[15] R.M. Julien, C.D. Advokat & J.E. Comaty. A Primer in Drug Action: 
a comprehensive guide to the actions, uses, and side effects of 
psychoactive drugs. Worth Publishers. 2008. 
[16] H.J. Hanchar, P.D. Dodson, R.W. Olsen, T.S Otis & M.Wallner. 
Alcohol-induced motor impairment caused by increased extrasynaptic 
GABA A receptor activity. Nature Neurosciences, vol. 8 (3). 2005. 
[17] M.K. Ticku & A.K. Mehta. Effects of alcohol on GABA-mediated 
Neurotransmission. Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology. vol. 
114 (6). pp. 103-119. 1995. 
[18] W. McEntee & T. Crook.Glutamate: its role in learning, memory, and 
the aging brain. Psychopharmacology vol. 111 (4). 1993. 
[19] D.M. Lovinger. The Role of Serotonin in Alcohol's Effects on the 
Brain. Current Separations. vol. 18 (1). 1999. 
[20] K. Yoshimoto et al. Alcohol stimulates the Realease of Dopamine and 
Serotonin in the Nucleus Accumbens. Alcohol. vol. 9 (1). 1992. 
[21] P.L. Hoffman. Glutamate receptors in Alcohol Withdrawal-Induced 
Neurotoxicity. Metabolic Brain Disease. vol. 10 (1). pp. 73-79. 1995. 
[22] D.G. Kilpatrick, et al. Risk Factors for Adolescent Substance Abuse 
and Dependence Data from a National Sample. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, vol.  68 (1). 2000.  
[23] B.R. Flay et al. Differential Influence of Parental Smoking and 
Friends’ Smoking on Adolescent Initiation and Escalation and 
Smoking, Journal of Health and Social Behavior, vol. 35(3). 1994. 
[24] M. Pearson & L. Michell. Smoke Rings: social network analysis of 
friendship groups, smoking and drug-taking, Drugs: education, 
prevention and policy, vol. 7 (1). 2000. 
[25] K.E. Bauman & S.T. Ennet. On the importance of peer influence for 
adolescent drug use: commonly neglected considerations, Addiction, 
vol. 91 (2). 1996. 
[26] S. Sussman et al. Adolescent peer group identification and 
characteristics: A review of the literature. Addictive Behaviors. vol. 
32. pp. 1602-1627. 2007. 
[27] T. Decorte. Drug users’ perceptions of ‘controlled’ and ‘uncontrolled’ 
use. International Journal of Drug Policy, vol.12, pp.297-320. 2001. 
[28] L. Zhu, D.M. Gorman & S. Horel. Alcohol Outlet Density and 
Violence: A Geospatial Analysis. Alcohol & Alcoholism. vol. 39 (4). 
pp. 396-375. 2004.  
[29] M. Livingston. A Longitudinal Analysis of alcohol Outlets Density 
and Assault. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research. vol. 32 
(6). 2008. 
[30] K.P. Theall et al. Social Capital and the Neighborhood Alcohol 
Environment. Health & Place. vol. 15. pp. 323-332. 2009. 
[31] K. Kypri et al. Effects of Restricting Pub closing Times on Night-
Time Assault in an Australian City. Addiction. vol. 106 (2). pp. 303-
310. 2011. 
[32] K. Graham et al. Bad Nights or Bad Bars? Multi-level analysis of 
Environmental Predictors of Aggression on Late-Night Large-
Capacity Bars and Clubs. Addiction. vol. 101. pp. 1569-1580. 2006. 
[33] F.J. Chaloupka et al. The Effects of Price on Alcohol Consumption 
and Alcohol-related Problems. National Institure on Alcohol Abuse 
and Alcoholism. 2002. 
[34] J. Epstein. Generative Social Science: Studies in Agent-Based 
Computation. Princeton University Press. 2007. 
[35] R.K.Sawyer. Social Emergence: Societies As Complex Systems. 
Cambridge University Press. 2005. 
[36] P. Perez & D. Batten. Complex Science for a Complex World: 
Exploring Human Ecosystems with Agents.  ANU Press. 2006.  
[37] L. Liu & J. Eck. Artificial Crime Analysis Systems: Using Computer 
Simulations and Geographic Information Systems. Information 
Science Reference. 2008. 
[38] P.j Bratimgham et al. A Statistical Model of Criminal Behavior. 
Math. Models and Methods in Applied Sceiences vol. 18. 2008.  
[39] N.H. Agar et al. Epidemiology or Marketing? The Paradigm Busting 
Use of Complexity and Ethnography. Proceedings of Agent. 2004. 
[40] P. Perez et al.. SimDrug: Exploring the Complexity of  Heroin Use in 
Melbourne. DPMP. Monograph 11. 2005.  
[41] L.A. Garrison & D.S. Babcock. Alcohol Consumption among College 
Students: An Agent-baded Computational Simulation. Complexity. 
vol. 14 (6). 2009.  
[42] D.M. Gorman et al. ABM of drinking Behavior: A Preliminary Model 
and Potential Applications to Theory and Practice. American Journal 
of Public Health. vol .96 (11). pp. 2055-2060. 2007. 
[43] J.E. Rowe & R. Gomez. El Botellon: Modelling the Movement of 
Crowds in a City. Complex Systems vol. 14. pp. 363-370. 2003. 
[44] F. Arvidsson and A. Flycht-Eriksson, Ontologies I, Retrieved 26, 
2008. 
[45] J. Ferber, Multi-agent Systems: An Introduction to Distributed 
Artificial Intelligence. Addison-Wesley. 1990. 
[46] http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/. U. Wilensky. NetLogo. Center 
for 
Connected 
Learning 
and 
Computer-Based 
Modeling, 
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL. 1999. 
[47] M. Symmons & N. Hawoth. Safety Attitudes and Behaviours in 
Work-Related Driving, Stage 1: Analysis of Crash Data. MUARC. 
Report no. 232. 2005. 
[48] D. Moore et al. Extending drug ethno-epidemiology using agent-
based modelling. Addiction. vol. 104 (12). pp. 1991-1997. 2009. 
 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

