Effects of Elevated Temperatures on Ballistic Resistance 
of Ultra High Molecular Weight Polyethylene 
Thore Heurich, Arash Ramezani and Hendrik Rothe 
Chair of Measurement and Information Technology 
University of the Federal Armed Forces  
Hamburg, Germany 
Email: thore.heurich@hsu-hh.de, ramezani@hsu-hh.de, rothe@hsu-hh.de 
 
 
Abstract—In the security sector, the partly insufficient safety of 
people and equipment due to failure of industrial components 
are ongoing problems that cause great concern. The 
temperature resistance of cross-plied oriented ultra high 
molecular weight polyethylen (UHMWPE) is an important 
thermomechanical property for using this material under 
different environmental conditions. Therefore, it is essential 
for the safety of people inside the armored vehicle to know the 
ballistic resistance at elevated temperatures. 
Keywords-solver ballistic resistance; elevated temperatures; 
fiber-reinforced plastics; armor systems. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Nowadays, fiber reinforced composites are used in 
numerous technical areas. In contrast to other materials like 
steel or aluminum, they have the advantage of the same 
mechanical strength at less weight. 
This work will focus on composite armor structures 
consisting of several layers of ultra-high molecular weight 
polyethylene (UHMWPE), a promising ballistic armor 
material due to its high specific strength and stiffness. The 
goal is to evaluate the ballistic resistance of UHMWPE 
composite at elevated temperatures. 
While soft armor packages used in body armor have to 
withstand temperatures up to 70 °C, there are hard armor 
panels which have to withstand even higher temperatures. 
Hard armor panels are used in security vehicles where the 
temperature can reach up to 110 °C. In this study, the 
temperature dependent ballistic resistance of hard armor 
panels made of Dyneema® HB26 is analyzed. Therefore, the 
theoretical background of the thermomechanics of fiber 
reinforced composite is presented. Furthermore, practical 
tests were performed to show the influence of temperature 
on  the ballistic resistance. Panels with different thicknesses 
were shot with three types of ammunition at room 
temperature (20 °C) and at elevated temperatures (up to 110 
°C) to compare their ballistic performance at different 
environmental conditions. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
presents the state of the art. Section III introduces 
thermomechanical principles relevant to this work. Section 
IV presents and discusses the ballistic trials. We conclude in 
Section V. 
 
II. 
STATE-OF-THE-ART 
Fundamental studies about the laminate theory were 
performed in [1]. In this work, Mittelstedt presented 
calculation 
methods 
to 
describe 
the 
mechanical 
characteristics of laminates. In thermoplastics, the degree of 
crystallization 
essentially 
determines 
the 
mechanical 
properties of the material, which is described in [2, 3]. 
Further literature describes construction rules, where 
the influence of the temperature on the material is 
explained. For example, the coefficients of thermal 
expansion for different materials are given in [4]. The 
deformation caused by the change of temperature results in 
thermal stress, presented in [5]. 
In order to investigate the thermal effects on 
UHMWPE, it is essential to know the temperature in the 
application area of the material. A lot of researches exist in 
this field, so only the most important are mentioned. First, 
there are practice tests about temperature variations in 
automobiles in various weather conditions [6, 7]. Additional 
simulations in [8, 9] show the highest temperatures under 
extreme environmental conditions, which are 110 °C at the 
vehicle roof and up to 165 °C near the exhaust system. 
UHMWPE cannot be used under these conditions, because 
it has a too low melting temperature, at around 135-138 °C 
[10]. 
Cunniff made important researches to define the 
ballistic resistance of different materials by adding the 
Cunniff-parameter in [11]. This parameter correlates well 
with the limit velocity 
, where 50 % of the bullets 
perforate the target. Moreover, the dependence of 
 and 
the areal density (AD) of Dyneema® composites is analyzed 
in [12]. 
Similar investigations, such as those in this study, are 
made by Meulmann et al. in [13, 14]. First, they analyze the 
aging of Dyneema® HB26 in thermal long-term tests, then 
they performed ballistic tests on HB26 at 90 °C with 
7.62×39 mm MSC-projectiles. 
 
 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

III. 
THERMOMECHNICAL PRINCIPLES 
The constitutive equations describe the connectivity 
between stress  and strain  of an elastic deformed body 
and are summarized in the linear elastic material law. To 
describe the state of an elastic body under load, the one-
dimensional Hooke's Law is needed: 
                                                                     (1) 
where  describes the tensile modulus. 
The three-dimensional form depends on the different 
directions of deformations 
 and 
, of the values 
 of 
the symmetric compliance matrix and of the stress 
 and 
. Therefore, the first index defines the direction of the 
surface normal and the second index the direction of the 
deformation or stress. 
                     (2) 
The compliance matrix can be calculated out of the tensile 
moduli 
, shear moduli 
 and poisson's ratios 
. Also, a 
laminate is an orthotropic material with symmetrical planes, 
so there are some values in the compliance matrix, which 
become zero. Besides the deformation 
caused by 
mechanical stress, there is a deformation caused by the 
change of temperature 
. 
 (3)   
In an orthotropic material, only the first three coefficients of 
thermal expansion 
 are nonzero, so they cause only a 
strain state. Because of different coefficients of thermal 
expansion and orientation of fiber and matrix in the 
laminate, thermal expansion can result in thermal stress. 
Moreover, plastics show three different temperature-
depended states, plotted in Figure 1. First, there is the 
energy-elastic  area,  where  the  material  shows  glassy  
and  brittle 
 
Figure 1. Energy-elastic, entropy-elastic and viscous area of thermoplastics 
shown at the tensile modulus E as a function of the temperature T. 
behavior. In the entropy-elastic area, the material shows 
tough behavior and the mechanical strength values decrease 
slowly at higher temperatures. At the melting temperature 
, the material loses its stiffness so the mechanical 
strength values fall to zero,  which is why this area is called 
the viscous area. 
The temperature also influences the fail-tension 
 and 
fail-elongation 
 of a thermoplastic, shown in Figure 2. 
Higher temperatures cause a decrease in fail tension and 
increase in fail-elongation, so the material can be more 
deformed until it cracks. 
To make a connection between the temperature-
depended mechanical values and the ballistic resistance of  
fiber-reinforced plastics, Cunniff introduced the parameter 
             
                                                   (4) 
which depends on the material parameters of the fibers, like 
the density . The Cunniff-parameter 
 correlates well 
with the limit velocity 
, where the bullet perforates the 
target by a probability of 50 %. 
IV. 
BALLISTIC TRIALS 
Ballistics is an essential component for the evaluation of 
our results. Here, terminal ballistics is the most important 
sub-field. It describes the interaction of a projectile with its 
target. Terminal ballistics is relevant for both small and large 
caliber projectiles. The task is to analyze and evaluate the 
impact and its various modes of action. This will provide 
information on the effect of the projectile and the extinction 
risk. 
A. Experimental set-up 
To analyze the decrease of the ballistic resistance at 
elevated temperatures, the test results at room temperature 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

(20 °C) are used as reference values for the following tests. 
Therefore, the experimental set-up shown in Figure 3 is used. 
Ballistic tests are recorded with high-speed videos and 
analyzed  afterwards. Testing  was  undertaken  at  an  indoor  
 
Figure 2. Qualitative effects of the temperature on the stress-strain-diagram 
of thermoplastics with decreasing fail-stress 
 and increasing fail-strain 
 
at higher temperatures. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Experimental set-up. 
 
testing facility. The target stand provides support behind the 
target on all four sides. The camera system is a PHANTOM 
v1611 that enables fast image rates up to 646,000 frames per 
second (fps) at full resolution of 1280 x 800 pixels. Because 
of the short time lapse of about 2ms and the high fps, three 
powerful plasma spotlights Hive Wasp Plasma Par were used 
for lighting with nearly 178,000Lx. 
The oven Hamilton Beach 22 Quart Roaster Oven has to 
be placed near the sample to ensure a fast attachment of the 
panels. Before the test execution, analyses about the cooling 
rate of the panels with different thicknesses have been 
performed. For this purpose, the surface temperature was 
measured with an infrared thermometer Bosch GIS 100C 
Professional and the core temperature was measured with a 
temperature sensor Greisinger GMH 3710. These tests have 
shown that the surface temperature is cooling too fast from 
the temperature of the oven 
 °C to the boundary-
temperature 
 °C. Nevertheless, it can be ensured 
that the core temperature of plates made by 40 plies of HB26 
is still over 110 °C within the first 2 minutes after removing 
them from the oven. 
B. Test execution 
 As described above, this experiment is based on the 
results of ballistic tests at room temperature, so three 
different projectiles were fired at the HB26 plates which 
stopped the projectile in these reference tests. So, the 
projectiles 
9×19 
mm 
Luger 
FMJ, 
7.62×39 
mm 
Kalaschnikow MSC and 7.62×51 mm NATO FMJ were 
fired at plates with 20, 40 or 60 plies of HB26 with a core 
temperature of at least 110 °C. Additional measurements 
have shown that 20 plies have a thickness of 5.5 mm, 40 
plies a thickness of 11.0 mm and 60 plies a thickness of 16.2 
mm. It is important that the impact velocity is nearly the 
same at room temperature and elevated temperature to 
ensure comparability between both experiments. 
The next important fact is that the plates have to heat up 
in the oven for at least 2 hours. In this way, it is guaranteed 
that the core temperature reaches the boundary-temperature 
of 110 °C during the impact. 
C. Test results 
After the ballistic trials at elevated temperatures, the 
results have to be prepared carefully to compare them with 
the results of the measurements at room temperature. For 
this purpose, the following parameters out of the video-
analyses and static measurements are used: 
1)  Impact velocity: The impact velocity 
 will be 
measured to ensure the comparability between the tests with 
the same amunition. Besides the enviromental influences, 
the variations in the amount of propellant in the amunition 
pose a problem. 
2)  Perforation: This is the easiest and most important 
way to evaluate these ballistic tests. Therefore, only the fact 
of a successful or unsuccessful perforation is used.  
3)  Remaining velocity or thickness: Based on the 
previous evaluation of a perforation, there are two more 
parameters for a comparison. For one thing the remaining 
velocity 
 after a successful perforation measured in the 
video, for another thing the remaining thickness of the plate 
 after a unsuccessful perforation measured at the 
undeformed corner of the plates because of the compression 
of the material at the impact zone. 
4) Buckling diameter and depth: The decisive factor for a 
real usage is the space taken by the dynamic deformation 
during the impact, because this space is mostly limited in 
constructions. Hence, the buckling diameter  and buckling 
depth  were measured in the video when the buckling is at 
the maximum, seen in Figure 4. 
First, the 9×19 mm Luger FMJ-projectile is fired at 
plates made of 20 plies of Dyneema® HB26. In Figure 5, the 
maxima of buckling at room temperature (left) and at 
elevated temperature (right) are shown to compare the 
qualitative deformation. The deformation characteristics of 
both tests show no significant difference. The measured 
parameters for comparison are given in Table I. 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
Figure 4. Measuring the buckling diameter a and the buckling depth b at 
the maximum of the dynamic deformation. 
 
TABLE I. COMPARISON BETWEEN THE MEASURED RESULTS OF 
20 PLIES DYNEEMA® HB26  IMPACTS BY A 9X19 mm JMF 
BULLETS  20 °C AND 110 °C. 
 
 
Room temp. 
Elevated temp. 
Impact velocity 
348 m/s 
316 m/s 
Perforation 
no 
no 
Remaining velocity 
0 m/s 
0 m/s 
Remaining thickness 
4.5 mm 
4.9 mm 
Buckling diameter 
224 mm 
202 mm 
Buckling depth 
27 mm 
34 mm 
 
The test at elevated temperature has shown a 9.2 % 
lesser impact velocity than the test at room temperature, but 
a larger buckling depth. The reason for these results is the 
changing mechanical values, as explained above. In 
connection therewith the thermoplastic becomes tougher 
and the fail-elongation 
 increases at higher temperatures. 
Indeed, the deformation is a little bit larger at elevated 
temperature, but the ballistic resistance remains nearly 
constant for low-energy projectiles like 9×19 mm FMJ. 
The second analyzed projectile is 7.62×39 mm 
Kalaschnikow FMJ. Here, the ballistic tests at both 
temperatures have a deviation of their impact velocity of 2.9 
%. While the bullet gets stopped easily by a 60 plies HB26 
plate at room temperature with a remaining thickness of 
nearly a third of the initial thickness, the ballistic resistance 
of HB26 decreases critically at elevated temperature. As 
seen in Figure 6, the bullet perforates a headed up 60 plies 
HB26 plate and loses only 19.6 % of the velocity trough 
energy release. Because the buckling has nearly the  same 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Effect of 20 plies Dyneema®HB26 impacts by a 9×19 mm FMJ 
bullets at 20 °C (left) and 110°C (right), 507 µs and 774 µs after the initial 
impact. 
 
 
TABLE II. COMPARISON BETWEEN THE MEASURED RESULTS OF 
60 PLIES DYNEEMA® HB26  IMPACTS BY A 7.62X39 mm JMF 
BULLETS  20 °C AND 110 °C. 
 
 
Room temp. 
Elevated temp. 
Impact velocity 
674 m/s 
708 m/s 
Perforation 
no 
yes 
Remaining velocity 
0 m/s 
569 m/s 
Remaining thickness 
10.9 mm 
- 
Buckling diameter 
224 mm 
- 
Buckling depth 
27 mm 
- 
 
size in both tests, it is obvious that the decrease of the fail-
tension 
 is the dominating problem here. 
Finally, the standardized NATO projectile 7.62×51 mm 
FMJ will be fired at 60 plies HB26 plates. Both pictures out 
of the video analysis are shown in Figure 7 and the 
measured parameters are given in Table III. Although the 
impact velocity of both ballistic tests are exactly the same 
(measuring errors are neglected), there is an obvious 
difference in the results. The result of the bullet fired at the 
HB26 plate at room temperature causes initial approaches of 
delamination at the margins, but has not enough energy for a 
perforation. At elevated temperature, the bullet does not 
break up all plies, but causes a fully delamination of the 
plate. This result gets classified as a successful perforation, 
because the plies at the far end get detached from the rest 
and will be accelerated in the firing direction. The reason for 
the delamination is the failing matrix, which cannot transfer 
the forces between the fibers because of the decreased 
strength. 
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
Figure 6. Effect of 60 plies Dyneema®HB26 impacts by a 7.62×39 mm 
FMJ bullets at 20 °C (left) and 110°C (right), 265 µs and 53 µs after the 
initial impact. 
 
 
TABLE III. COMPARISON BETWEEN THE MEASURED RESULTS 
OF 60 PLIES DYNEEMA® HB26  IMPACTS BY A 7.62X19 mm JMF 
BULLETS  20 °C AND 110 °C. 
 
 
Room temp. 
Elevated temp. 
Impact velocity 
819 m/s 
819 m/s 
Perforation 
no 
yes 
Remaining velocity 
0 m/s 
- 
Remaining thickness 
6.4 mm 
4.2 
Buckling diameter 
144 mm 
- 
Buckling depth 
42 mm 
- 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Effect of 60 plies Dyneema®HB26 impacts by a 7.62×51 mm 
FMJ bullets at 20 °C (left) and 110°C (right), 409 µs and 2050 µs after the 
initial impact. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This 
paper 
examines 
the 
effects 
of 
elevated 
temperatures on ballistic resistance of ultra high molecular 
weight polyethylene. Therefore, ballistic trials with different 
projectiles were fired at plates made of Dyneema® HB26 
plies. 
At the beginning, the thermomechanical principles of 
thermoplastic composites were presented. Starting from the 
one-dimensional Hooke's Law, the three-dimensional linear 
elastic material law was established. After this, the 
deformations caused by the change of temperature were 
introduced and added to the linear elastic material law. 
These deformations can lead to thermal stress in the 
material. 
Afterwards, the temperature-depended states of plastics 
were explained on mechanical strength values. These 
include the energy-elastic area, the entropy-elastic area and 
the viscous area. In connection with this, the effect of the 
temperature on the stress-strain-diagram of plastic is shown. 
Completing the thermomechanical principles, the 
Cunniff-parameter was presented to connect the mechanical 
parameters with the ballistic resistance in one equation. 
Finally, ballistic trials were performed, where plates 
made of 20 or 60 Dyneema® HB26 plies were fired first at 
20 °C and then at 110 °C. Therefore, the projectiles 9×19 
mm Luger FMJ, 7.62×39 mm Kalschnikow FMJ and 
7.62×51 mm NATO FMJ were used. High-speed videos 
were used to analyse the characteristics of the deformation 
during the impact. Subsequently, the results were 
qualitatively and quantitatively compared. The results have 
shown that the ballistic resistance has a low to high lack at 
elevated temperatures, depending of the type of projectile.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. Mittelstedt, W. Becker. 2012. “Strukturmechanik ebener 
Laminate.” 
[2] H. Domininghaus, P. Elsner, P. Eyerer, T. Hirth. 2012. 
“Kunststoffe: Eigenschaften und Anwendungen,” Berlin,  
Springer Verlag. 
[3] A. Franbourg, F. Rietsch. 1990. “Influence of the melt 
temperature on the thermoplastics crystallization process,” in 
Polymer bulletin, pp. 445-450. 
[4] H. Schürmann, 2005. “Konstruieren mit Faser-Kunststoff-
Verbunden,” Berlin, Springer Verlag. 
[5] W.Schneider, 1977. “Thermische Ausdehnungskoeffizienten 
und 
Wärmespannungen 
faserverstärkter 
Kunststoffe,” 
Kohlenstoff- 
und 
aramidfaserverstärkten 
Kunststoffen. 
Düsseldorf. VDI Verlag. 
[6] W. Marty, T. Sigrist, D. Wyler, 2001. “Temperature 
variations in automobiles in various weather conditions: An 
experimental contribution to the determination of time of 
death,” in The American journal of forensic medicine and 
pathology  22, pp. 215-219. 
[7] Volkswagen-AG, 2004 “Vehicle parts - Testing of Resistance 
to Enviromental Cycle test,” PV 1200 Klass.-Nr. 50321. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

[8] S. 
Schlegl, 
2016 
“Schutzkonzepte 
für 
zivile 
Sicherheitsfahrzeuge,” presented at Carl-Cranz-Gesellschaft 
e.V. in Lichtenau, Germany. 
[9] E. T. Hasegawa,  2008. “Simulation der thermischen Ver 
hältnisse 
in 
Motorräumen 
mit 
CFD,” 
in 
ATZ-
Automobiltechnische Zeitschrift 110, pp. 330-335. 
[10] J. P. Attwood, S. N. Khaderi, K. Karthikeyan, N. A. Fleck, M. 
R. O'Masta, H. Wadley, V. S. Deshpande. 2014. “The out-of-
plane compressive response of Dyneema composites,” in 
Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 70, pp. 200–
226 
[11] P. M. Cunniff, 1999. “Dimensionless parameters for 
optimization of textile-based body armor systems,” in 
Proceedings of the 18th International and Symposium on 
Ballistics, pp. 1303-1310. 
[12] M. J. N. Jacobs, J. L. J. Van Dingenen. 2001. “Ballistic 
protection mechanisms in personal armour,” in Journal of 
Materials Science 36, pp. 3137-3142. 
[13] J. H. Meulman, H. van der Werf, S. Chabba, A. Vunderink. 
2010. “Ballistic performance of Dyneema® at elevated 
temperatures, extreme for body armor,” in Proceedings 
Personal Armor System Symposium. Quebec. 
[14] J. H. Meulman, 2012. “Ballistic performance of Dyneema® at 
elevated temperatures, extreme for body armor - part 2.” 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-501-2
SIMUL 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

