Modeling the Contact Propagation of Nosocomial Infection
in Hospital Emergency Departments
Cecilia Jaramillo, Dolores Rexachs
and Emilio Luque
Computer Architecture and
Operating Systems Department
Autonomous University of Barcelona
Bellaterra/Barcelona, Spain
Email: cjaramillo@caos.uab.es,
dolores.rexachs@uab.es,
emilio.luque@uab.es
Francisco Epelde
Medicine Department,
Hospital Universitari Parc Taul´ı
Autonomous University of Barcelona
Sabadell/Barcelona, Spain
Email: fepelde@tauli.cat
Manel Taboada
Tomas Cerda Computer Science School
Autonomous University of Barcelona
Sant Cugat/Barcelona, Spain.
Email: manel.taboada@eug.es
Abstract—The nosocomial infection is a special kind of in-
fection that is caused by microorganisms acquired inside a
hospital. In the daily care process of an emergency department,
the interactions between patients and sanitary staff create the
environment for the transmission of such microorganisms. Rates
of morbility and mortality due to nosocomial infections are
important indicators of the quality of hospital work. In this re-
search, we use Agent Based Modeling and Simulation techniques
to build a model of Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus Aureus
propagation based on an Emergency Department Simulator
which has been tested and validated previously. The model
obtained will allow us to build a contact propagation simulator
that enables the construction of virtual environments with the
aim of analyzing how the prevention policies affect the rate of
propagation of nosocomial infection.
Index Terms—Agent Based Modeling and Simulation; Noso-
comial Infection; Hospital Emergency Departments.
I. INTRODUCTION
The nosocomial infection is a kind of infection that is caused
by microorganisms acquired inside a health care environment.
It is the most common type of complication affecting hospi-
talized patients. Inside a health care environment we can ﬁnd
several microorganism that can be causative of a nosocomial
infection, but our work has focused in the propagation of the
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus Aureus (MRSA), one of
the most common and dangerous microorganisms in this en-
vironment. The presence of these bacteria could mean serious
health problems for a patient. It is a common cause of skin,
wound and, most seriously, blood stream infections as it may
be responsible for a greater hospital length of stay, expensive
treatments and an increased mortality [1]. MRSA is a bacteria
usually resistant to conventional antibiotics that makes it very
difﬁcult to treat. These bacteria live in the skin of some
patients and could be transmitted to another patient by physical
contact through the interaction between patients, healthcare
staff and environment. The most common transmission vias
are: healthcare staff’s hands, contaminated medical equipment
and objects in the hospital room environment. The risk of
MRSA acquisition is particularly high in elderly patients, se-
vere underlying disease, prolonged hospitalization (especially
in ICUs, surgery and burns units), use of invasive medical
devices, previous antibiotic treatment and exposure to infected
or colonized patients [2].
An emergency department is undoubtedly one of the most
complex and dynamic areas in a hospital. Its operation is
not linear and depends on several factors. This way, we can
conclude that an emergency department can be classiﬁed as
a complex system. When we work with complex systems,
one of the strongest problems is how we can represent human
behaviors that cannot be predicted using conventional methods
such as qualitative or statistical analysis. Modeling techniques
using agents can bring the most beneﬁt when applied to human
systems, where agents exhibit complex and stochastic behavior
and the interaction between agents are heterogeneous and
complex [3]. In our research, we make use of an Agent Based
Model and Simulation (ABMS) to create a contact propagation
model of MRSA inside a emergency department. For this
purpose, we deﬁned all actors involved in the emergency
departament process and their speciﬁc function and behavior:
patients, doctors, nurses, admission staff, laboratory techni-
cians, auxiliary personnel and cleaning staff. Every person
who has a role in the emergency department is deﬁned as
an active agent in our model. It is very important to take into
account the environmental objects that healthcare staff use in
the process of attention patient because our model is focused
on the transmission by contact and this transmission could be
between active agents (direct transmission) or between active
and passive agents (indirect transmission). Each one of the
agents who is interacting in a emergency department can be a
multiplier of MRSA bacteria, which depends on the condition
of colonized or infected, in the case of active agents, or the
condition contaminated in the case of passive agents. In all
cases, we apply the term ”transmission vector” to any agent
capable of transmitting MRSA bacteria and ”susceptible” to
any agent that has risk to adquire the infection.
Some health services have implemented concrete actions
that attempt to control the rate of propagation of nosocomial
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

infections. These actions are called ”prevention policies” and
are represented in our model through the deﬁnition of beha-
viors performed by members of the sanitary staff.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows: the
previous emergency department model is detailed in Section
2. Section 3 describes the related and previous works. Section
4 the proposed contact propagation model of nosocomial
infection. Finally, Section 5 closes this paper with future works
and conclusions.
II. EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT SIMULATOR. PREVIOUS
MODEL
We based our model in a previous emergency department
model (ED-Simulator) that had been developed as part of a
previous research work [4][5][6] in our research group.
This model considers the emergency department divided
into two zones, A and B. The patients are divided in 5 acuity
levels according to the Spanish Triage System [7], very similar
to the Canadian Triage System. Acuity level I means that the
state of patient is very serious and a patient with acuity level V
is the patient with the least severity. Patients with acuity level
I, II and III are located in zone A, and patients IV and V are
located in zone B. The agents are divided into active agents
and passive agents. The active agents represent people who act
upon their own initiative and passive agents represent systems
that are solely reactive, such as patient information system
and diagnostic services (radiology service and laboratories).
Each agent has variables and behavior. The behavior depends
of the kind of agent and the interactions between agents allow
a system behavior to emerge. The behavior of agents has been
modeled using Moore State Machines [8]. In each state, the
agent has a set of probable outputs. Each state of the state
machine for a speciﬁc agent has been deﬁned on basis of
the values of state variables of each agent at a certain time.
Moreover, each one of the state variables could have more
than one possible value. The agent will remain in a speciﬁc
state until, through interaction with other agents, they receive
an ”input” (an output generated by other agents), which could
cause a change in the state of such agent and generating an
”output” sent to the agent with whom they are interacting. The
agents state machine will move to the next state following the
transition, which may be another state or the same one in
which the agent was before the transition.
With this background, our proposal is obtain an efﬁcient
model of the propagation of MRSA by adding new features
to the actual model through the use of ABMS technics.
Propagation of nosocomial infections has already been
widely studied using different techniques. In this section, we
will refer to some relevant papers relating to the modeling
of the transmission of MRSA with ABMS techniques. These
investigations focus on contact transmission of MRSA mainly
through the interaction between patients, doctors and nurses,
other members of healthcare staff are not included. The inter-
action between patients or healthcare staff with the environ-
mental objects or medical equipment have only been dealt with
in three research papers. In general, the patients are divided
TABLE I: COMPARISON BETWEEN OUR RESEARCH
AND RELATED RESEARCHES.
Characteristic / Researches
8
9
10
11
12
Our work
Interaction
Doctors
x
x
x
x
x
x
between
Nurses
x
x
x
x
x
x
patients
Others healthcare staff
x
and...
Equipment and objects
x
x
Prevention policies
x
x
x
x
x
Patient risk adquired NI
x
x
x
x
Transmission probability
x
x
x
x
into colonized or infected patients and the healthcare staff
are divided into colonized and non-colonized or transiently
colonized. Neither considers the severity level of the patients
and only two members of healthcare staff are included in
the simulation, doctors and nurses. All of these features are
resumed in the Table I.
In Barnes et al. [9], MRSA transmission reduction using
agent-based modeling and simulation is presented. The en-
vironment of this simulation is a hospital ward. Two types
of interactions are modeled: patients-healthcare staff, and
patients-visitors. The interaction between the members of
the healthcare staff is considered unnecessary for the model.
Patients are generated continually and are housed in a waiting
room until replacing the discharged patient, so hospital wards
are always full. Admitted patients can take one of two states:
susceptible or colonized. It is not taken into account the
possibility that the patients come as infected but they can
develop infection during their stay. Members of the healthcare
staff are created at the beginning of the simulation and are
all considered as being in an uncolonized state. During the
simulation the healthcare staff could be susceptible or colo-
nized. This research includes visitors as agents and they have
a colonized status (non-colonized, colonized); therefore, they
can transmit the infection. The visitors only have interaction
with the patients. The transmission of MRSA between agents
is based on the risk level of the patient to becoming infected
and the behavior of the healthcare staff members who visit the
patient.
In Milazzo et al. [10], the following factors are taken
into account: the status and the movement of each agent,
the contacts between individuals during a ward round, the
hand hygiene compliance for each agent, and the control
measures applied. The environment of the simulation is a
hospital ward. The main parameters that characterize each
agent, patient and healthcare staff, are: the colonization status,
the transmission probability, and the compliance factor. The
transmission dynamics of the infection is based only on
transmission from patient to patient via healthcare staff. The
model does not take into account the direct transmission from
patient to patient or the indirect transmission from patient to
patient via environmental surfaces. The healthcare staff may
become transiently colonized and carry MRSA on their hands
if their compliance with hand hygiene is poor.
The model proposed by Meng et al. [11] is a propagation
model in a single hospital ward divided into bays, with
some isolation rooms. Transmission is modeled by pairwise
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

interaction between colonized and non-colonized patients,
patient and healthcare staff (nurse and doctor) transiently or
permanently colonised, patient-to-patient contacts and trans-
mission from a contaminated environment. This model takes
into account the susceptibility of the patient to colonisation.
Some possible states are deﬁned for the patient: colonisation,
detection, decolonisation treatment and location status. This
model includes the time required to treat colonization or
infection carried by the patient and a metric that assesses the
patient’s susceptibility to acquire a nosocomial infection. This
model therefore assumes that a susceptible patient may acquire
MRSA due to the presence of colonised patients in the vicinity,
regardless of the mode of transmission.
According to Raboud et al. [12], a Monte Carlo simulation
was used to model MRSA transmission in a hospital ward.
They used the simulation to study the impact of different
components of infection control programs on the propagation
of MRSA on a hospital ward representative of a general
hospital ward. Visits from healthcare staff to patients were
simulated and MRSA was assumed to be transmitted from
patient-to-patient via healthcare staff. Once colonized, health-
care staff remained colonized until they next washed their
hands. The model did not address transmission related to
healthcare staff who chronically carry the organism or to
contaminated environment surfaces or equipment.
In Barnes et al. [13], a dynamic patient network model
is deﬁned through ABMS techniques. The environment is a
hospital unit. They explicitly deﬁne only patients as agents.
Patients have a single boolean state that indicates whether
or not a patient is infected or colonized with some type of
pathogen. In the simulation, two healthcare staff types are
deﬁned, nurses and doctors that they are not modeled as agents
but they are implicit through the transmission mechanism.
Each patient has a primary nurse and a primary doctor who
provide care a patient during the hospital stay. There is an un-
derlying network that connects patients who share nurses and
a separate network for patients who share doctors. A patient
could be infected only if there is a source patient who shares
a nurse or doctor. Patients who are connected by a nurse and a
doctor have an increased probability of transmission if one of
them becomes infected. A single parameter called virulence
deﬁnes the probability of an infected agent transmitting the
microorganism to a susceptible agent.
III. MODEL OF THE PROPAGATION BY CONTACT OF
NOSOCOMIAL INFECTION
As explained above, the model proposed in our research has
the advantage of being developed based on a previous emer-
gency department model and previous emergency simulator,
both of which have been developed as part of previous research
works [4][5][6] carried out with the collaboration of healthcare
staff at the Emergency Department of Hospital Universitari
Parc Taul´ı. This previous model used ABMS techniques to
deﬁne the full attention process of an emergency department.
Some agents deﬁned in this model can be used as part of the
model of propagation by contact, but we need to add more
passive and active agents. In the same way, it is necessary
to add new variables and behaviors in all agents, in order to
represent MRSA transmission between a transmission vector
and a susceptible host.
A. Transmition Forms
There are two forms of contact transmission, direct trans-
mission and indirect transmission. In both cases we need a
transmission vector.
1) Direct transmission: When MRSA bacteria is trans-
mitted from an active agent (transmission vector) to an-
other active agent (susceptible agent). For instance, when
an infected/contaminated patient is touched by a member of
healthcare staff without a physical barrier.
2) Indirect Transmission: When an active agent (transmis-
sion vector) touches medical equipment or objects in the
hospital environment and MRSA bacteria is transmitted to
the object, later, a susceptible agent (patient or healthcare
staff) has contact with the same object and acquires the
microorganism.
In the real process, for the ﬁrst time to diagnose an MRSA
infection or colonized , it is necessary to apply a laboratory
test. Many laboratory test options exist but we mention two:
culture testing and polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The
culture testing is a conventional laboratory test, which has
a low cost but the results are available in 72 or 96 hours
(3 or 4 days). In contrast, PCR has a high cost but the
results are available in a few hours (2-6 hours) and it may
be more sensitive [14]. The time required to obtain results is
an important factor in the attention process because the length
of stay (LoS) of the patient in an emergency department is
usually short. On the other hand, the long wait for the result
of the laboratory test could contribute to increasing the rate of
propagation of nosocomial infection.
To make a model about the indirect transmission, it is
necessary to bear in mind the lifetime of MRSA on dead
surfaces. There is scientiﬁc evidence that suggest that bacteria
can live more than 90 days on different surfaces [15]. If
we consider that the time of the attention process of the
ED changes in function of the illness severity of the patient
and availability of the healthcare services, in all cases it is
less than 90 days, then we can assume in our model that
the lifetime of MRSA bacteria is unlimited on dead surfaces
(objects and medical equipment) but can be eliminated through
a disinfection process carried out by cleaning staff.
B. Agents and Behaviors
Frequent interaction between patients and healthcare staff is
the principal way to MRSA propagation. To combat MRSA,
some healthcare services implement prevention polices to
control transmission. These prevention policies are a set of
concrete actions and behaviors that healthcare staff perform
to control the rate of propagation. Some of these actions
are: handwashing, use of hydroalcoholic solution and use of
isolation material. Healthcare staff are required to practice the
handwashing and use of hydroalcoholic solution every time
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Sx
Sx+1
Passive Agent carebox
State Variables
ID  = c021
Available  = Yes 
Type  = normal
Infected = No Contaminated  
Passive Agent carebox
State Variables
ID  = c021
Available  = No
Type  = isolation
Infected =  Contaminated  
t+1
Active agent patient
State Variables 
ID  = p001
Age  =  67   
Provenance  = nursing home
Acuity-leve  l= III
Infected = Colonized  
Sy
t
Colonized patient is 
assigned to carebox c021
Timeline
Change “infected” and 
“available” variables. 
Fig. 1: Interaction between colonized patient and carebox.
that they attend a patient, but the use of isolation material is
required only when they attend an isolated patient.
1) Passive Agent: Passive agents are agents that do not have
their own initiative, they are solely reactive. All passive agents
react to an action of an active agent or time. The actual model
of ED has some passive agents such as information system.
For our purpose, we added the passive agent ”Carebox” in
order to represent the interaction between active agents with
the environmental objects.
Carebox: The carebox is the physical space where the
patient is accommodated during the treatment and diagnosis
process. In the model, once it has been conﬁrmed that a patient
is a transmission vector we have the possibility to isolate
the patient in a carebox. All careboxes could be transformed
in isolated careboxes. We use the infected variable to reﬂect
whether a carebox is contaminated with MRSA or not. The
possible value for infected are: non-contaminated or contam-
inated. When an MRSA patient is assigned to a carebox, the
infected variable takes the value contaminated (see Figure 1),
and it will remain at such a value until a disinfection process
has been carried out. This process can only be executed
when the MRSA patient leaves the emergency department
and releases the carebox. The disinfection process is carried
out by cleaning staff. The isolated carebox contains the entire
equipment needed for patient care, which means that we have
a lot of objects likely to be a vector of transmission, though all
these objects are usually inside the same carebox, therefore we
consider them as a single object. In extreme cases, where all
carebox are busy, it is possible to use ”a virtual carebox”,
which are additional spaces located in the ED. The main
difference between a virtual box and a carebox is that the
virtual one does not have the same level of isolation, which
is why the probability of MRSA propagation is higher.
2) Active Agents: Any actor who has the ability to act
by himself/herself is an active agent. The propagation model
includes the interaction between patients and some agents
of healthcare staff, such as doctors, triage nurses, nurses,
admission staff, auxiliary personnel and cleaning staff (see
Figure 2). For the purpose of our propagation model we can
devide all these active agents in two cathegories: Patient and
Healthcare Staff.
Patient: In order to properly deﬁne the propagation model
of MRSA, it is important to consider that the patient on
arriving to an emergency department, regardless of their acuity
level, has a probability of being a transmission vector (infected
or colonized) of MRSA. It means that the patient has a
probability of being a carrier a microorganism causative to
nosocomial infection. MRSA bacteria could live in the skin
of some patients without their knowledge it and without any
symptoms. However these patients could transmit the bacteria
to another patients by physical contact.
In our model, we use the infected variable to show if
the patient is non-colonized, colonized or infected. All non-
colonized patients are susceptible to acquiring a nosocomial
infection. We can classify patients in two groups: 1) patients
that do not have a clear possibility of being colonized or
infected with MRSA bacteria. In this case the healthcare staff
assumes that this patient is non-colonized; 2) patients that are
known or can be assumed to be colonized or infected with
MRSA. If a patient has had a previous admission, the ED has
their clinical history and knows if they had or have MRSA
(during the admission process). In such cases the patient is
classiﬁed as colonized, because a patient who has previously
been colonized has a higher risk to a new colonization [16].
However, if it is the ﬁrst time that the patient attends the
emergency department, healthcare staff evaluate the MRSA
Risk Factor (RF) of the patient.
In some health services, when it has been conﬁrmed that
a patient has MRSA (on the basis of the doctor’s exploration
and laboratory test results), this patient is immediately isolated
in a carebox.
The MRSA risk factor is a metric that allows us to give the
patient a level of probability (P(RF)) of being a transmission
vector. With the purpose of calculating the risk factor, we
can ask about several factors associated with a higher risk of
acquisition of MRSA [17], but our research focused on three
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Active agent: patient.
Clean
Doctor
Admission
personnel
Patient
Carebox
Cleaning Staff
Auxiliary
personnel
Nurse/Triage nurse
Fig. 2: Diagram of physical contacts of the patient with other actives and
passives agents.
aspects that we consider require special attention:
• Patient age: patients over 65 years old have more prob-
ability of being an MRSA patient carrier because their
immunological systems are usually weakened due to
several illnesses or extended treatments.
• Place of residence: when patient is an institutionalized
patient, sharing their residence with many people, such
as a nursing home, prison, etc.
• Acuity level: usually patients with acuity level I, have
more probability of acquiring a nosocomial infection
because their immunological system is weakened.
P(RF)= f(Age,PlaceResidence,AcuityLevel)
When the risk factor is high then we assume that there is
a high probability that the patient be colonized. The patient
can be considered infected only when the diagnostic can be
supported by the results of laboratory tests. It is very important
to ensure the results because if one positive case escapes, we
have a transmission vector together with susceptible patients,
and on the other hand, if one negative case is assigned as
positive, the patient will receive an unnecessary treatment that
will increase the cost.
It is very important to differentiate between infected and
colonized patients. Colonized patients carry MRSA on their
skin, but they are asymptomatic and therefore require labora-
tory tests for it to be detected. If MRSA bacteria get inside
the body, the patient will develop an infection, becoming
a symptomatic carrier, which is called an infected patient.
However, the doctor needs to apply a physical examination and
laboratory test to support the diagnosis. Both colonized and
infected patients may transmit MRSA bacteria to susceptible
patients and this can lead to infections with serious conse-
quences.
Healthcare Staff: In this model we study the interactions
with some active agents of healthcare staff: admission staff,
triage nurses, patients, doctors, nurses, laboratory technicians,
auxiliary personnel and cleaning staff. Each of these agents
has a speciﬁc function in the attention process. The healthcare
staff agent has the infected variable with three possible values:
1) non-carrier; 2) carrier; 3) and colonized. A member of
the healthcare staff could be a carrier when they acquire
temporarily bacteria. This happens when they have physical
contact with a transmission vector and acquire the bacteria.
Later, if the healthcare staff complies with the prevention
policies, the bacteria will be eliminated and the healthcare
agent will return to non-carrier. The accomplishment level
of the healthcare staff agents with the prevention policies is
measured by the accomplishment factor (AF).
This metric measures the probability that a member of the
healthcare staff transmits the bacteria to a susceptible agent.
This probability (P(AF)) will be calculated on the basis of the
accomplishment level of prevention policies/actions. The three
prevention actions that are evaluated in this research are:
• Handwashing: the most important of the actions. The
healthcare staff is required to do it, before and after they
have a physical contact with a patient.
• Sanitizing hand: with a hidroalcoholic solution. It is nece-
ssary to do it before and after they have physical contact
with a patient. There is no substitute for handwashing
and it is better if both actions are done.
• Using isolated material: this is required only when they
attend an isolated patient.
P(AF)= f(Handwashing,SanitizeHand,IsolatedMaterial)
C. Propagation of Nosocomial Infection by Contact Model
The model takes into account the parts of the overall process
in which contact propagation can take place. For this it is
necessary to clear the entire care process. This section is
dedicated to describing the emergency attending process and
identifying in which parts of this process a transmission vector
can be in contact with a susceptible patient.
Attention Process: When a patient arrives in the emergency
department they approach the admissions zone. Here the
admissions staff ask for their health card and registers their
arrival. Then the patient waits in the waiting room for the
triage process. When the triage nurse is available, they call
the patient and takes their vital signs and asking for some
additional information in order to identify the acuity level of
the patient. The acuity scale applied in Spanish ED considers
ﬁve different values, from I until V, with I being the highest
level, and V the lowest. If acuity level assigned to the patient
is IV or V, they will wait for diagnosis and treatment process
in a waiting room, but patients with acuity level I, II or
III will be assigned immediately to a carebox and diagnosis
and treatment phases should be done inside such a carebox,
with the exception of some speciﬁc tests. The diagnosis and
treatment process is divided in 3 phases: 1) laboratory test; 2)
treatment; 3) Exit from ED. When a doctor is available, they
call the patient and decide what the next step is. Laboratory
test and treatment can be carried out several times.
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

TABLE II: POSSIBLE WAYS OF TRANSMISSION BE-
TWEEN ACTIVE AGENTS.
Agent1
Agent2
Carrier healthcare staff
Susceptible patient
Carrier healthcare staff
Passive agent
Infected/colonized patient
Passive agent
Infected/colonized patient
Healthcare staff
Passive agent
Healthcare staff
Passive agent
Susceptible patient
When the treatment has ﬁnished and an additional labora-
tory test is not necessary, the doctor will prescribe that patient
leaves the ED. In the case of patients IV and V, the interaction
with the doctor will be carried out in attention boxes, and the
patient will remain in a speciﬁc waiting room while there is
no interaction (between each one of these phases). We focus
on the stages in which agents have physical contact with other
agents, that is, when patients have interaction with healthcare
staff. The MRSA transmission is possible in one of several
ways (Table II). If patient is a transmission vector and has
contact with a susceptible agent, transmission is probable [17],
in which case the susceptible agent will change their state. The
variable ”infected” is used to reﬂect changes in the state of
agents. To decide if one agent acquires the MRSA bacteria,
we will use a probabilistic distribution based on the likelihood
of the transmission vector transmitting the microorganism,
and the probability of a susceptible patient acquiring the
microorganism.
IV. FUTURE WORK AND CONCLUSIONS
As a result of our research, we proposed an agents-based
model of the contact propagation of MRSA in emergency
departments. This model has been designed based on an
emergency department simulator, ED-Simulator, developed in
previous research and which has the advantage of having been
veriﬁed and validated in several cycles or iterations, taking
into account a wide variety of data and conﬁgurations, and
with the participation of ED staff at the Hospital of Sabadell
(Spain). Based on such an ED-Simulator and after a careful
analysis of the care process, we have established in which
parts of the process there is risk of infection and which agents
have to be added in order to complete the propagation model.
We have enhanced the model by including new agents, and
by adding new variables and new behaviors in all the agents
that participate in the transmission process. In this way, we
have obtained a model of contact propagation of MRSA.
Our future work is to implement the contact propagation
model of MRSA in the ED-Simulator in order to obtain the
computational model of the contact propagation. The next step
will be the execution, validation and veriﬁcation stages for
improving the model. The computational model will allow the
ED managers to analyze and evaluate potential solutions (the
possible effects of applying the control policies’ actions) for
propagation of nosocomial infection in a virtual environment
and to evaluate the effectiveness of different combinations of
laboratory tests, isolation, and other control policies, with the
purpose of identifying the best infection control policy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research has been supported by : MINECO (MICINN)
Spain under contract TIN2011-24384. Ecuador government.
SENESCYT, under contract 2013-AR7L335.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Graves et al., “Effect of HealthcareAcquired Infection on Length of
Hospital Stay and Cost,” Infection Control and Hospital Epidemiology,
vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 280–292, 2007.
[2] W. Hryniewicz, “Epidemiology of MRSA,” Infection, vol. 27, no. 2, pp.
S13–S16, 1999.
[3] E. Bonabeau, “Agent-based modeling: Methods and techniques for
simulating human systems,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 99, no. Suppl 3, pp.
7280–7287, 2002.
[4] M. Taboada, E. Cabrera, M. Iglesias, F. Epelde, and E. Luque, “An
agent-based decision support system for hospitals emergency depart-
ments,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 4, pp. 1870–1879, 2011.
[5] E. Cabrera, M. Taboada, M. L. Iglesias, F. Epelde, and E. Luque, “Si-
mulation optimization for healthcare emergency departments,” Procedia
Computer Science, vol. 9, pp. 1464–1473, 2012.
[6] M. Taboada, E. Cabrera, F. Epelde, M. Iglesias, and E. Luque, “Using
an Agent-Based Simulation for predicting the effects of patients deriva-
tion policies in Emergency Departments,” Procedia Computer Science,
vol. 18, pp. 641–650, 2013.
[7] R. Sanchez et al., “El triaje en urgencias en los hospitales espa˜noles,”
Emerging Infectious Diseases, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 74–76, 2013.
[8] R. Katz and G. Borriello, Contemporary logic design. Pearson Prentice
Hall., New York, 2014, chapter 7, pp. 321–334, ISBN: 0201308576.
[9] S. Barnes and B. Golden, “Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus
transmission reduction using Agent-Based Modeling and Simulation,”
INFORMS Journal on Computing, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 635–646, 2010.
[10] L. Milazzo, J. Bown, A. Eberst, G. Phillips, and J. Crawford, “Modelling
of Healthcare Associated Infections: A study on the dynamics of
pathogen transmission by using an individual-based approach,” Com-
puter methods and programs in biomedicine, vol. 104, no. 2, pp. 260–
265, 2011.
[11] Y. Meng, R. Davies, K. Hardy, and P. Hawkey, “An application of agent-
based simulation to the management of hospital-acquired infection,”
Journal of Simulation, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 60–67, 2010.
[12] J. Raboud et al., “Modeling Transmission of MethicillinResistant
Staphylococcus aureus Among Patients Admitted to a Hospital,” Infec-
tion Control and Hospital Epidemiology, vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 607–615,
2005.
[13] S. Barnes, B. Golden, and E. Wasil, “A dynamic patient network
model of hospital-acquired infections,” in Simulation Conference (WSC),
Proceedings of the 2010 Winter.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 2249–2260.
[14] S. Van Hal, D. Stark, B. Lockwood, D. Marriott, and J. Harkness,
“Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) detection: com-
parison of two molecular methods (IDI-MRSA PCR assay and Geno-
Type MRSA Direct PCR assay) with three selective MRSA agars
(MRSA ID, MRSASelect, and CHROMagar MRSA) for use with
infection-control swabs,” Journal of clinical microbiology, vol. 45, no. 8,
pp. 2486–2490, 2007.
[15] A. Neely and M. Maley, “Survival of enterococci and staphylococci on
hospital fabrics and plastic,” Journal of clinical microbiology, vol. 38,
no. 2, pp. 724–726, 2000.
[16] L. Coia, J. Alistair and J. Reilly, “Screening for meticillin resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA): who, when, and how?” British Medical
Journal, p. 348:g1697, 2014.
[17] C. Salgado, B. Farr, and D. Calfee, “Community-acquired methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus: a meta-analysis of prevalence and risk
factors,” Clinical Infectious Diseases, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 131–139, 2003.
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

