Simulation of Particle Deposition in an Airplane Cabin Mockup 
 
 
Miao Wang 
School of Mechanical Engineering 
Purdue University 
West Lafayette, IN 47906, USA 
wang283@purdue.edu 
 
Chao-Hsin Lin 
Environmental Control Systems 
Boeing Commercial Airplanes 
Everett, WA 98124, USA 
chao-hsin.lin@boeing.com 
Qingyan Chen 
School of Mechanical Engineering 
Purdue University 
West Lafayette, IN 47906, USA 
yanchen@purdue.edu 
and 
School of Environmental Science and Technology 
Tianjin University 
Tianjin 300072, China 
yanchen@tju.edu.cn 
 
 
 
Abstract— Accurate prediction of particle deposition in 
airliner cabin is important to estimate exposure risk of 
occupants to infectious diseases. This investigation simulated 
airflow field, particle dispersion and deposition in a half-
occupied four-row cabin mockup using a Detached-Eddy 
Simulation (DES) model with a modified Lagrangian method. 
Three types of particles with diameters of 0.7, 10 and 100 μm 
were studied that represent different particle dispersion and 
deposition processes. This study tested two flow scenarios: one 
is a breathing case in which particles were released from an 
index occupant with very small inertial force; and the other is 
a coughing case in which the particles were released by a high 
momentum jet flow. This study found that the DES model with 
the modified Lagrangian method can predict reasonably good 
results for air velocity, particle concentration and deposition in 
the cabin environment. The particle deposited depended on 
particle size and inertial forces. For the breathing case, the 
deposition rate on the cabin surfaces was 35% for the small 
(0.7 μm) particles, 55% for the medium (10 μm) particle and 
100% for the large (100 μm) particles. In the coughing case, 
the particle deposition was enhanced due to the high initial 
velocity. The particle deposition rate was 48%, 69%, and 
100% for the small, medium and large particles, respectively. 
Keywords-CFD; experiment; particle; deposition; indoor  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Over four billion people arrive at and depart from 
airports all over the world every year. This figure will double 
by 2025, according to a long term traffic forecast [1]. 
Commercial airplane passengers travel in an enclosed cabin 
environment at close proximity [2]. During the long time of 
air travel, the exposure risk to infectious diseases can be very 
high. Mangili and Gendreau [3] evaluated the risk of 
infectious disease transmission in commercial airplane 
cabins and concluded that air travel was an important factor 
in the worldwide spread of infectious diseases. 
Infectious disease transmission in airplane cabins can 
occur in many ways, such as direct contact with contagious 
particles generated from an infected person, inhaling 
pathogenic airborne agents or droplets, or touching 
contaminated surfaces. These different disease transmission 
paths are all closely related to the deposition and transport of 
contaminant particles or droplets. For example, saliva 
droplets generated by an index person through coughing or 
sneezing can deposit directly on the mouth or eyes of another 
person. The dose of airborne infectious agents and droplets is 
associated with their deposition rate and transport path, and a 
surface in an airplane cabin can be contaminated by the 
trapping of contaminant particles. As the commercial 
airplane cabins are crowded and packed with different solid 
surfaces, their influence on particle deposition and transport 
can be significant. Therefore, it is essential to evaluate the 
level and distribution of particle deposition in a cabin 
environment. 
The rapid growth of computer power makes CFD a 
promising 
tool 
for 
predicting 
airflows, 
particle 
transportation, and deposition in enclosed environments 
[4,5]. For cabin airflow and contaminant transport 
simulation, Baker et al. [6] validated their CFD prediction of 
air velocity and mass transport inside an aircraft cabin using 
measurement data. Zhang et al. [7] measured and simulated 
gaseous and particulate contaminant transport in a four-row 
cabin mockup. Poussou et al. [8] simulated transient flow 
and contaminant concentration field in a small-scale cabin 
mockup with a moving body. These studies explored 
complicated airflow and contamination concentration fields 
inside a cabin environment. However, particle deposition on 
cabin surfaces was neglected in these cases, which could be 
significant for a crowded cabin environment. 
Particle deposition has been studied by many researchers, 
however, for other enclosed environments. Lai and Nazaroff 
[9] applied an analogous model for particle deposition to 
smooth indoor surfaces and predicted a reasonable result for 
simple geometry. Lai and Chen [10] conducted a Lagrangian 
simulation for aerosol particle transport and deposition in a 
chamber and found good agreement between their CFD 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

result and the empirical estimation. Zhao et al. [11] 
simulated particle deposition in ventilated rooms. Their 
deposition results agreed with the measured data at low 
turbulence level, but failed to match the experimental data 
when the turbulence was high. Zhang and Chen [12] 
simulated particle deposition on differently oriented surfaces 
inside a cavity using a modified Lagrangian method and 
predicted improved results. Although reasonable prediction 
of deposition was reported by many studies, the relatively 
simple geometry and airflow conditions in these cases may 
not guarantee a good result in a much more complex 
environment such as an airplane cabin. A study of the 
literature showed that particle deposition inside an airplane 
cabin has not been well investigated by either numerical or 
experimental studies.  
Using numerical simulations, this paper aims to extend 
the understanding of contagious particle depositions inside 
an airplane cabin environment. This investigation first 
evaluated a modified Lagrangian particle deposition model 
with Detached Eddy Simulation (DES) [13] and applied it to 
a four-row cabin mockup. The simulation included two flow 
scenarios, one breathing and talking case, and the other a 
coughing case. The particle depositions on different cabin 
surfaces were determined from the simulation results. The 
study discussed the deposition statistics and identified key 
factors related to particle depositions in airplane cabins. 
Section I of this paper introduces the background 
information of this study. Section II shows the numerical 
models used in the simulation. Section III shows the test case 
and simulation results. Section IV discusses the result. 
Section V concludes this study. 
II. 
AIRFLOW AND PARTICLE PHASE MODELS 
Accurate models of airflow and turbulence in an indoor 
environment are important for predicting the particle 
transportation and deposition process. This study used the 
DES Realizable k-ε model [13], which can provide accurate 
prediction of air velocity and turbulence quantities [14]. Due 
to limited space available, the formulation of this model was 
not included in this paper, but can be found from literature 
[13].  
With the airflow information, this study modeled the 
particle dispersion and deposition with a Lagrangian method, 
which can be expressed as: 





p
p
D
p
p
g ρ -ρ
du =F
u-u
+
+F
dt
ρ



 


where 
p
u  and  u  are the particle and air velocities, 
respectively;  
pρ and  ρ  are the densities of particles and air 
respectively; g  is the gravitational force;  F

 is other forces 
such as the Thermophoretic force, Saffman lift force, and 
Brownian force; and   is the drag coefficient. 
In (1), the term u  represents the actual airflow velocity, 
which should be written as: 

u=u+u'



where u  is the velocity solved by the DES model,  u' is 
the turbulence velocity component that should be properly 
modeled. Although there is no model available for the DES 
model used in this study, many models have been developed 
for different RANS models, which may be used by the DES 
in its near wall region. This study applied a deposition model 
proposed by Matida et al. [15]. 

*
+2
+
i
'
i
+
i
ζ Au y
y
4
u =
y >4
ζ
2k/3






where 
A  0.008
is a constant, 
*u is the shear velocity,  
and 
+
y is the distance from a particle to the nearest wall in 
the wall unit. 
III. 
PREDICTION OF PARTICLE DEPOSITION IN A FOUR-
ROW AIRPLANE CABIN 
A. Case Description 
Fig. 1 depicts the schematic of the four-row twin-aisle 
cabin mockup. In the experiment [7], the cabin mockup had 
28 seats, 14 of which were occupied by human simulators, as 
shown in red in the figure. The air was supplied from two 
groups of linear diffusers located near the center of the 
ceiling. The total airflow rate was 0.23 m3/s, or 8.2 L/s per 
passenger seat. Three-dimensional air velocity and air 
temperature were measured at two planes, as depicted in 
green in Fig. 1. The air velocity and temperature profiles at 
the inlet diffuser and the temperature of different surfaces 
were also measured. 
The particle source was located at the center seat of the 
third row (seat 3D), as shown in Fig. 1. Non-evaporative, 
monodispersed Di-Ethyl-Hexyl-Sebacat (DEHS) particles 
were released from the source into the cabin with a small 
momentum. After the airflow and particle field reached a 
steady-state, the particle concentration was measured at eight 
positions, as shown in Fig. 1. The particle used in the 
experiment had a diameter of 0.7μm. However, in the CFD 
simulation, three sizes of particles (0.7, 10, and 100μm) were 
simulated to study the influence of particle size on the 
particle deposition. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 2.  Schematic of the four-row cabin mockup [7]. 
0.3 m/s
 
(a) 
0.3 m/s
 
(b) 
Figure 1.  Comparison of simulated (black vectors) and measured (red 
vectors) airflow field at: (a) the cross-section through the third row, and 
(b) the mid-section along the longitudinal direction.
The numerical simulation was conducted based on CFD 
code ANSYS FLUENT (version 12.1). The study applied the 
DES Realizable k-ε model with the modified Lagrangian 
method as discussed before. The simulation used a solution 
from the RNG k-ε model as the initial field and calculated 10 
minutes of flow time to reach the steady-state flow field. 
Then, the particles were continuously released from the 
source into the cabin and were mixed with the cabin air. For 
each particle size, 1000 particles were generated every 
second. The case was calculated for another 15 minutes of 
flow time until the particle concentration field reached 
steady-state, which corresponded to six complete air changes 
in 
the 
cabin. 
The 
averaged 
air 
velocity, 
particle 
concentration, and deposition results were obtained in the 
next five minutes of flow time. 
B. Air Velocity Field 
Fig. 2 compares the simulated and measured air velocity 
vectors at the cross-section through the third row and at the 
mid-section along the longitudinal direction. In the cross-
sectional view (Fig. 2 (a)), the ceiling diffusers and the 
thermal plume in the middle generated two large circulations 
at each side of the cabin. The prediction agreed with the 
measurement in terms of circulation pattern. But significant 
discrepancies can be found in a quantitative comparison. 
Similar results were also reported by Zhang et al. [7], who 
concluded that the simulation was very sensitive to the 
accuracy of the boundary conditions, which may not have 
been accurately measured. Note that the airflow field was 
asymmetrical due to the inlet and wall-boundary conditions. 
In the mid-section along the longitudinal direction, the 
vector field shows an upward motion due to the two 
circulations and the thermal plume in the middle of the 
cabin. The CFD result agreed reasonably well with the 
measured data as shown in Fig. 2 (b), though differences can 
be found at some positions. For example, at the third row, the 
CFD model predicted a backward airflow motion, which was 
not supported by the measurements. At the same location, 
the CFD results also predicted a smaller upward velocity 
than did the experiment. 
C. Particle Deposition onto Different Surfaces 
1) Breathing and Talking 
In the experiment, the particles were released with a very 
small initial velocity, which could be representative of the 
particle release from the breathing or talking of a passenger. 
The distribution of the particle deposition at solid walls and 
exhaust vents was also calculated for five minutes of flow 
time in this investigation. The density of the deposition was 
calculated as: 

dA
total
N
C= N
dA 

where 
NdA
was the number of particles deposited on 
surface area, dA , during a certain amount of time; 
Ntotal
was 
the total number of particles generated during the same time; 
and dA was a small surface area, which was the same as the 
computational mesh. 
Fig. 3 shows the normalized particle deposition density 
of the 0.7, 10, and 100 μm particles. Due to the asymmetrical 
airflow pattern, the deposition was also asymmetrical. For 
the small (0.7 μm) particles, a high particle deposition 
density was observed at the ceiling and side walls along the 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

path of the major circulation (Fig. 3(a)), while the floor and 
seat had relatively low deposition density (Fig. 3(d)). This is 
because the particles were small, and mainly followed the 
airflow pattern. The small 0.7 μm particles were carried by 
the thermal plume to reach the ceiling, where most particles 
joined the airflow circulation formed by the supply jets. The 
particles deposited at the ceiling and side walls along their 
path to the exhaust.  
For the medium (10 μm) particles, Fig. 3(b) shows that 
their deposition at the ceiling and side walls was similar to 
that of the small particles, but the deposition rate was much 
lower. The deposition density at the floor was higher. As the 
particle size increased, the gravitational force became 
comparable to the drag force, which changed the deposition 
distribution.  
For the large (100 μm) particles, Fig. 3(c) shows no 
deposition on the ceiling and side walls. All the particles 
were deposited at the surfaces of passenger 3D, as shown in 
Fig. 3(f). For particles of this size, the gravitational force was 
dominant. The particles had a free fall motion from its source 
(mouth/nose) and deposited within a very small area on 
passenger 3D. 
2) Coughing 
This study further modified the initial conditions for the 
particles so as to study the particle deposition with a cough 
from a passenger. The inlet velocity, flow rate, area of 
opening, and angle of the jet flow from the cough were 
chosen according to Gupta et al. [16]. As in the previous 
case, seven sizes of particles were continuously released 
from the cough by the passenger at seat 3D. All the models 
and simulation procedures were the same as in the breathing 
and talking case. 
Fig. 4(a) shows the normalized particle deposition 
density of the 0.7 μm particles at the ceiling and side walls. 
Compared with the previous case, the deposition on the 
ceiling and side walls was significantly reduced. This was 
because the jet flow that carried the particles could penetrate 
the thermal plume. Therefore, most of the particles did not 
enter the major circulation so they could not reach the 
ceiling. For the deposition on the floor and seats, Fig. 4(d) 
shows a high deposition density on the seat back of 
passenger 2D, the surface of passenger 3D, and the floor area 
close to seat 3D, due to the jet impingement. 
For the 10 μm particles, Fig. 4(b) shows a lower 
deposition density at the ceiling and side walls than that for 
the breathing and talking case. As shown in Fig. 4(e), a high 
deposition density was observed in the areas of jet 
impingement. Unlike the 0.7 μm particles that mostly 
suspended in the air after entering the air, a majority of the 
10 μm particles deposited due to the jet momentum and the 
gravity. 
For the 100 μm particles, Fig. 4(c) shows that no particles 
deposited on the ceiling and side walls. All the particles 
deposited on the back surface of seat 2D, the surface of 
passenger 3D, and the floor close to seat 3D due to direct 
impingement and gravity because these particles were too 
heavy to be carried by the airflow. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Table I shows the statistics of the particle deposition on 
different types of surfaces. For the breathing and talking 
case, 65% of the 0.7 μm particles were removed by air 
through the exhaust. The side walls and ceiling trapped a 
large portion of the particles (12% and 8%, respectively). 
These surfaces may not be frequently contacted by 
passengers. The passenger surfaces had 7% of the 0.7 μm 
particles. Despite the large area, the floor only received 3% 
of the particles. The two section ends trapped 2% of the 
particles because the airflow along the longitudinal direction 
was small. The seat front, seat back, and tray tables trapped 
3% of the particles that could likely be touched by the 
passengers. For the 10 μm particles, the number of particles 
exhausted was reduced to 55%, but was still a majority. The 
deposition on the ceiling decreased to 2% since gravity 
became important for this size of particle. For the 100 μm 
particles, all the particles deposited on the surface of the 
index passenger, which can be explained by their free fall 
motion. In general, the gravity force played a major role in 
the particle deposition. 
In the coughing case, the jet could penetrate the thermal 
plumes and could transport the particles to the lower part of 
the cabin. The jet impingement enhanced particle deposition 
on the floor, thus increasing the total particle deposition by 
13% and 14% for the 0.7 μm and the 10 μm particles, 
respectively. For the two particle sizes, the deposition on the 
passenger also increased. The deposition on the ceiling and 
side walls decreased slightly. About 91% of the 100 μm 
particles deposited on the floor, with the rest on the seat back 
and tray table in front of the index passenger. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This study applied the DES model with a modified 
Lagrangian method to predict the particle dispersion in a 
four-row airplane cabin mockup. By comparing with the 
experimental data, this investigation found that this new 
model can predict reasonably good results for air velocity, 
particle concentration, and particle deposition. 
For the cabin case, three sizes of particles were assumed 
to be released by an index passenger sitting in the middle of 
the cabin due to breathing with zero velocity and due to 
coughing with suitable jet velocity. This study found that the 
distribution of particle deposition onto surfaces depended on 
particle size, particle release mode, and the airflow pattern in 
TABLE I.  
STATISTICS OF PARTICLE DEPOSITION ON DIFFERENT TYPES 
OF SURFACES 
Surfaces 
Deposition Percentage 
Breathing and talking 
Coughing 
0.7 μm 
10 μm 
100 μm 
0.7 μm 
10 μm 
100 μm 
Exhaust 
65% 
55% 
0 
52% 
31% 
0 
Passenger 
7% 
8% 
100% 
20% 
14% 
2% 
Floor 
3% 
21% 
0 
15% 
49% 
91% 
Ceiling 
8% 
2% 
0 
4% 
1% 
0 
Side wall 
12% 
10% 
0 
4% 
1% 
0 
Section end 
2% 
1% 
0 
2% 
1% 
0 
Seat back 
1% 
1% 
0 
1% 
1% 
4% 
Seat front  
1% 
1% 
0 
1% 
1% 
0 
Tray table 
1% 
1% 
0 
1% 
1% 
3% 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

the cabin. In the breathing case, 35% of the small (0.7μm) 
particles, 55% of the medium (10μm) particles, and 100% of 
the large (100μm) particles deposited onto the cabin surface 
and the rest were removed by the cabin ventilation. In the 
coughing case, the number of small, medium and large 
particles deposited changed to 48%, 69%, and 100%, 
respectively. 
REFERENCES 
[1] ACI. 
The 
Global 
Airport 
Community, 
2007. 
www.airports.org/aci/aci/file/Annual 
Report/ACI 
Annual 
Report 2006 FINAL.pdf . Last accessed 09/17/2011. 
[2] J. D. Spengler and D. G.Wilson, “Air Quality in Aircraft,” 
Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part 
E: Journal of Process Mechanical Engineering 217, 2003, pp. 
323-335. 
[3] A. Mangili and M.A.Gendreau, “Transmission of infectious 
diseases during commercial air travel,”  Lancet 365, 2005, pp. 
989-996. 
[4] P. R. Spalart and D. R. Bogue, “The role of CFD in 
aerodynamics, off-design,” Aeronautical Journal 107(1072), 
2003, pp. 323-329. 
[5] Q. Chen, “Ventilation performance prediction for buildings: 
A method overview and recent applications,” Building and 
Environment 44(4), 2008, pp. 848-58. 
[6] A. J. Baker, S. C. Ericson J.A. Orzechowski, K.L. Wong and 
R. P. Garner, “Aircraft passenger cabin ECS-generated 
ventilation velocity and mass transport CFD simulation: Mass 
transport validation exercise,” Journal of the IEST (Online) 
51(1), 2008, pp. 90-113. 
[7] Z. Zhang,  X. Chen, S. Mazumdar, T. Zhang and Q. Chen, 
“Experimental and numerical investigation of airflow and 
contaminant transport in an airliner cabin mockup,”  Building 
and Environment 44(1), 2009, pp. 85-94. 
[8] S. Poussou, S. Mazumdar, M. W. Plesniak, P. Sojka and Q. 
Chen, “Flow and contaminant transport in an airliner cabin 
induced by a moving body: Scale model experiments and 
CFD predictions,”  Atmospheric Environment 44(24), 2010, 
pp. 2830-2839. 
[9] A. C. K. Lai and W. W. Nazaroff, “Modeling indoor particle 
deposition from turbulent flow onto smooth surfaces,” Journal 
of Aerosol Science 31, 2000,  pp. 463-476. 
[10] A. C. K. Lai and F. Chen, “Modeling of particle deposition 
and distribution in a chamber with a two-equation Reynolds-
averaged Navier–Stokes model,” Journal of Aerosol Science 
37(12), 2006, pp. 1770-1780. 
[11] B. Zhao, C. Yang, X. Yang and S. Liu, “Particle dispersion 
and deposition in ventilated rooms: Testing and evaluation of 
different Eulerian and Lagrangian models,” Building and 
Environment 43(4), 2008, pp. 388-397. 
[12] Z. Zhang and Q. Chen, “Prediction of particle deposition onto 
indoor surfaces by CFD with a modified Lagrangian method,” 
Atmospheric Environment 43(2), 2009, pp. 319-328. 
[13] FLUENT, 2005. Fluent 6.2 Documentation. Fluent Inc., 
Lebanon, NH. 
[14] M. Wang, and Q. Chen, “Assessment of various turbulence 
models for transitional flows in enclosed environment,” 
HVAC&R Research 15(6), 2009, pp. 1099-1119. 
[15] E. A. Matida, W. H.  Finlay, C. F. Lange and B. Grgic, 
“Improved numerical simulation of aerosol deposition in an 
idealized mouth–throat,” Journal of Aerosol Science 35, 2004, 
pp. 1-19. 
[16] J. K. Gupta, C.-H. Lin, and Q. Chen, “Flow dynamics and 
characterization of a cough,”  Indoor Air 19, 2009, pp. 517-
525. 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
 
(e) 
 
(f) 
Figure 3.  Particle depositions at different surfaces for the breathing and talking case: the top row is for the ceiling and side wall surfaces and the bottom 
row for the floor and seats surfaces (a) and (d) for 0.7 μm particles, (b) and (e) for 10 μm particles, and (c) and (f) for 100 μm particles. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
(e) 
 
(f) 
 
Figure 4.  Particle depositions at different surfaces for the coughing case: the top row is for the ceiling and side wall surfaces and the bottom row is for the 
floor and seats surfaces (a) and (d) for 0.7 μm particles, (b) and (e) for 10 μm particles, and (c) and (f) for 100 μm particles. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-169-4
SIMUL 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

