Internet of Things Simulation Tools: Proposing Educational 
Components  
Majid Bayani 
School of Informatics 
National University of Costa Rica 
Heredia, Costa Rica 
mbayani@una.cr 
Alberto Segura 
School of Informatics 
National University of Costa Rica 
Heredia, Costa Rica 
alberto.segura.gutierrez@una.cr 
Jeffrie Saenz 
School of Informatics 
National University of Costa Rica 
Heredia, Costa Rica 
jeffrie.saenz.rodriguez@est.una.cr 
Brayan Mora 
School of Informatics 
National University of Costa Rica 
Heredia, Costa Rica 
brayan.mora.morera@est.una.cr
Abstract— Internet of Things (IoT) refers to a developing and 
prevalent trend which provides connectivity between a huge 
number of objects (things) by using innovative features of the 
Radio Frequency Identification and Wireless Sensor networks 
technologies. As IoT develops, it is being expanded in 
magnitude and scope, reshaping the context of human life. 
Education is one of the most popular areas in our life where 
IoT can have an influence on. The educational process can be 
implemented and tracked by making use of the IoT objects and 
devices. In this work, an educational component is proposed in 
order to include it in the IoT simulation toolkits. A four-block 
module containing educative objects is designed and proposed. 
The module includes the smart elements, such as smart 
backpack, IoT school check in, smart desk and whiteboard. 
The final model design includes the procedures, methodology, 
block design and functions of each element. The paper shows 
that the IoT educational components can provide a novel and 
flexible virtual platform which can take advantage of the IoT 
features in the learning system. 
Keywords-Internet of Things(IoT); Smart desk; Smart book; 
Educational components;Web of Things(WoT);Smart objects; 
Smart whiteboards; Smart backpack. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
          The basic idea of Internet of Things (IoT) is a new 
model based on the presence of a variety of objects like 
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) tags, sensors and 
actuators that are able to interact with each other [1]. 
Internet of Things is considered the internetworking of 
smart physical objects that are enabled to collect and 
exchange data through the unique IPv6 addressing schemes. 
Also, it refers to the use of smartly connected objects, agent 
and devices to manage data obtained by embedded sensors 
in the machines and other physical-virtual objects. Based on 
the recommendation of The Global Standards Initiative on 
the Internet of Things (IoT-GSI) [7], IoT has been defined 
as the global infrastructure for the information society that 
can facilitate the interconnecting of the physical and virtual 
things based on the RFID and Wireless Sensor Network 
technologies. IoT-GSI also emphasized on establishing a 
Study Group on IoT and its applications, in order to 
promote an integrated methodology for the development of 
technical standards related to the IoT objects [2] [3] [4] [5].   
          The range of IoT applications (few applications are 
currently developed [6]) and the driving technologies, are 
expanded form the smart-cities to the complex IoT systems. 
IoT applications can embrace all human-object activities 
such as the smart home & cities, online-business, smart 
environment, security & emergencies, smart transportation, 
smart energy consumption, smart industrial process and 
education.   
           More than 50 billion sensor devices will be 
connected through the Internet by 2020 and a huge number 
of users will interact with each other over the many smart 
areas in different forms of the services, programs or 
applications.  [14]. IoT devices provide connectivity for the 
objects, and systems, Machine-to-Machine (M2M), machine 
to object and object to object that implies a complex 
topology between devices. It means that it is required to 
design the objects with specific feature and capacity such as 
a small processor, memory, radio and software [9] [10].  
The 
implementing 
of 
a 
complex 
topology 
for 
interconnecting between large numbers of devices is not 
simple to design. In these cases, simulation of the functions 
is required to study the scenarios before implementing them. 
In addition, the connectivity between objects is affected by 
their geographical features such as the location, their 
capabilities, and quality of the communications [13]. 
          The huge number of smart IoT objects are deployed 
over the sensor field and can be controlled remotely through 
the Internet. But, sometimes implementation of the IoT 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

infrastructure is complicated to administrate due to 
inaccessible distribution fields such as volcano, wild jungle 
or even underwater deployment places [11] [12]. Based on 
the mentioned reasons, simulating the process and functions 
for IoT scenarios is required.          
          Simulating the events, functions, and platforms allows 
the designers to survey a problem at different levels of 
abstraction. This approach at a higher level of abstraction 
permits the developers to better understand the object 
interactions within a complex topology [15]. 
          The IoT implementation field is a large space 
complex system and it contains lots of objects. Testing the 
applications running on the high density of physical objects 
is possible just by using a flexible platform in the labs. On 
the other hand, real implementation of an IoT scenario is 
challenging since complex IoT environments are dynamic. 
Hence, simulation modeling of the IoT scenarios is a proper 
answer to this paradigm [16].       
         This paper is organized as follows: after giving a brief 
description around the main topic, a state of the art related 
to the previous IoT simulation studies is explored in the 
second section. The third section broadly discusses the case 
study model of the proposed components along with the IoT 
basic system architecture, technologies that support IoT and 
main blocks of the system design. Finally, a concise 
conclusion and future work will be described in the fourth 
section.  
II.
RELATED WORK
In order to provide smart services, modeling of the IoT 
environments is a big challenge due to the existing 
difficulties in designing heterogeneous environments, 
nodes, devices and wireless technologies [13]. On the other 
side, monitoring an event without the central administration 
is another challenge for identifying, observing the events 
and detecting the critical system components in time [17]. 
For these reasons, currently, in the real-time heterogeneous 
IoT environments, there exist very limited models and 
simulators. For example, Moschakis and H. Karatza [18] 
offer several simulation concepts for IoT environments. 
Sotiriadis et al. in [19] present a SimIoT derivative version 
of Sim-IC framework. SimIoT introduces an innovative 
level of security for IoT connected devices along with a 
very deep vision of the IoT behavior structure [20]. A fault 
model for dynamic IoT system is introduced by Ivanovitch 
Silva et al. in [21] with a novel perspective. Khan and 
Manate [22] [23] introduce an innovative infrastructure and 
coordination 
techniques 
for 
the 
large 
scale 
IoT 
infrastructure. MicroGrid [24] elaborates a platform for the 
basic simulation experiments, performing in the grid 
positions. DGSim [25] also provides a particular framework 
for scheduler implementation of various grid resource 
management in a simulation architecture. Finally, Belli et 
al. [26] present a Web of Things testbed tool. They claim 
WoT enables developers to design and evaluate easily, 
smart services and applications in a real IoT- environment.
Currently, IoT concepts and designs, as well as the 
communication technology, are involved in almost all 
human-machine activities. In fact, IoT comprises all macro 
human/object activities; among them, education is one of 
the most visible applications that IoT can be involved in. 
Also, it can be said that education is one of the most 
perceptible undertakings in the human life and is facing 
several challenges of technology development [8][27]. 
Simulation of the educational process implemented by IoT 
technology is one of these challenges. However, there exist 
several general-purpose IoT simulators such as Cisco packet 
tracer (recently added the IoT features) which can be used 
in simulating IoT process with the educational purposes 
[28]. But, in the most of IoT simulators, educative objects 
are not present. 
            The main idea in this work is to propose a novel 
model design related to the educational components in order 
to give a proper awareness to the designers with the purpose 
of incorporating IoT elements into the simulators. A basic 
model of the educational IoT component will be presented 
in the following section. 
III.
CASE STUDY MODEL
In this section, firstly, a basic IoT structure will be 
described as well as technologies such as Radio Frequency 
Identification (RFID) and Wireless Sensor networks 
(WSNs) that support IoT. In the second step, an IoT 
scenario will be discussed with a concise explanation of the 
proposed model.    
A.
The IoT Basic system Architecture 
       The most common basic IoT system architecture is 
shown in Figure 1. Based on Figure 1, a basic IoT 
architecture is divided into three layers. They are 
application, network and perception layers [29].
1)
The application layer is responsible for providing 
smart services to the users through an interface.
2)
The network layer is responsible for providing 
communication between the network devices and objects, 
cabling, clouding system, and a data local processing unit.  
A gateway connection point is in charge of obtaining the 
information which are sensed by sensors of  the perception 
layer. 
3)
The perception layer includes the physical sensors, 
objects or actuators.  
A small sensor processing system includes the event 
sensing, local storing, data and controllers. These units 
build the perception layer. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 1. A simple architecture of IoT scenario 
B.
Technologies that drive IoT  
1)
RFID Sensor System 
         Figure 2 shows a basic RFID system architecture. The 
RFID readers detect the sensory data or receive the energy 
from the tag-pasted object and send information to a private 
cloud system for more processing or decision taking. 
Figure 2. Block diagram of a typical RFID system 
2)
Wireless Sensor Network  
As Figure 3 demonstrates, a group of tiny sensors 
distributed over a field can build a non-centralized network 
to sense an event and send the data back to a sink point 
(gateway) in order to monitor the area or further analysis 
related to the events [30]. 
Figure 3. A Basic Wireless Sensor Network Structure
C.
The Main blocks of the Module 
        The main blocks of the proposed model are shown in 
Figure 4.    
Figure 4. Main blocks of the proposed model 
          The proposed module consists of four separated 
blocks: Home smart backpack, school check in, smart desk 
and whiteboard. Based on the model, firstly, a pre-check of 
backpack content is carried out at home by students, parents 
or even a teacher. Mainly, this block is designed for 
schedule checking. After performing the pass-through 
authentication process, the user can check the diary agenda. 
The books or documents are RFID/WSN sensor labeled and 
will be identified when they are going inside or outside of 
the backpack. The movement of the RFID-labeled objects 
generates some control messages that will be sent through 
the IoT network to a smartphone or a display device for 
further analysis and collaborative actions. 
           Another component is the school check-in block that 
includes a two-phase IoT authentication process. This block 
is designed for getting access to the main school system 
menu by students or teachers. The menu for the students is 
different from the teachers. In this case, a user can have 
access to the personalized option designed for teaching or 
administrative objectives. The administrative menu is 
related to the managerial correspondences and functions, 
schedule of the semester, student list, etc.  
            Homework, exams, quizzes, projects, educational 
materials, evaluation results, and reports of the student will 
be available in the educational menu. 
            A second fingerprint authentication is employed for 
detecting the authority level of each user physically, in order 
to link the user to its educative profiles, correctly. The 
second physical authentication is used for user detection and 
connecting students to the options which are designed 
specifically for them, as well as their profiles. When the 
learners´ fingers touch the authentication device, the IoT 
system identifies if the user is registered in the database 
(DB) and the type of the user. The students can get access to 
the first level permission of the main menu designed for the 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

learners. 
This 
menu 
contains 
many 
educative 
or 
(administrative) options for students such as: the actual 
semester program and enrolled courses, financial and 
scholarship status, smart homework, projects, smart exams, 
evaluation results, etc. The student users can touch any 
options of the menu and can find the personalized exam, 
quiz or any projects designed by instructors.          
             After passing the first checking level, the learners 
can look for the related class numbers that were registered 
in the main system. Last two blocks are related to the class 
activities. In a typical class, students have their own desks 
that sit on it. Each desk has a sensor for authentication 
(fingerprint or RFID card). So, each learner uses a smart 
unique desk and table. The desks are connected wirelessly 
or by a cable connection to the main IoT system. The smart 
desks can interact with other IoT devices through a gateway 
and a small private cloud system, sending or receiving the 
control messages. In the following, each component, its 
connections and functions will be analyzed in detail.  
1)
Home Smart backpack checking:  
             This component is related to the smart IoT backpack 
element. First of all, a RFID element and a WSN sensor is 
pasted on the backpack.   
Figure 5. Backpack authentication  
The process of authentication is performed through 
scanning the sensor (RFID or ID card) (Figure 5).   This 
process is an essential security process to protect the 
unauthorized access to the smart backpack. As Figure 6 
demonstrates, after checking the authorization the smart 
backpack is on ready mode and open status. The reader 
scans each object that goes into the backpack, sending the 
signal to the smart phone. The sensory data will be 
transferred through the IoT gateway to a private cloud 
system storing the information and control signals.  
       This element is designed as a flexible system that can 
scan all physical objects tracking, inside and outside of the 
backpack.  
        The sensory data are stored in a small cloud server, 
communicating with a display device such as a smartphone 
or a laptop through the internet informing the student 
parents or the same user. The users arrange this process 
based on their scheduling.  
Figure 6. Backpack components  
2)
School check-in  
          Based on the main blocks topology, in the first phase 
of the school check-in, the people should authenticate 
themselves through presenting any physical identity such as 
the fingerprint, RFID card or the cellphone interaction with 
the central entrance terminal. Based on the registered 
information, the system can detect the validity or type of 
user. They can be a teacher, student or an administrative 
member of the institute. 
          Figures 7 and 8 show that after passing this phase, the 
user can get access to the personalized main menu. For 
example, if the user is a student, the options that appear on 
the screen will be available, exclusively, for the students. In 
the second phase, the student should perform the second IoT 
level of validity process. After verifying the user authority, 
once the user touches any option, more personalized 
functions for this particular user will be accessible. For 
example, if the user is a learner and touches the smart 
homework, a specific homework for this user, uniquely, will 
open to get access to that content. In this way, the users can 
have access to the several facilities by this terminal which is 
connected to school data base (DB).   
          Email notification is one of these facilities for both 
students and instructors. In this sub-option service, a web of 
thing (WoT) service provides the email service for the 
student and teacher users. They can observe a short list of 
the updated email box with related subjects and degree of 
urgency for future email checking.     
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 7. School check-in components  
Figure 8. School check in second security level authentication  
          The third section is related to the smart desk 
component. The user can enter the smart class looking for 
preconfigured desks. The class is equipped with the smart 
IoT devices such as smart desk, smart board, etc.  
3)  Smart Desk
          Each student has a preconfigured smart desk equipped 
with the IoT sensor detection. Figures 9 and 10 show a 
scenario in which the smart desks interact with the users.  
Figure 9. Smart Desks 
Figure 10. Smart Desk Authentication
            Based on Figures 9 and 10, when the users pass the 
authentication process by checking fingerprint, RFID ID 
card or a cellphone interaction, they can use the facilities of 
the smart desks. IoT desks can connect to the network via 
wireless or cable connection. They can interact with the 
smart whiteboards as well as the teacher device. Once the 
users demonstrate the required authority, they can have 
access to the main system and offered services. For 
example, they can receive what the instructor is writing on 
the whiteboard and see it on their laptops. They can also 
interrupt 
the 
professor’s 
lecture 
(configuration 
and 
permission needed) and write enquiries or questions. 
          The smart desks can be employed for attendance 
checking list in a secure method. This is an IoT secure way 
to send the list to a mini-cloud system. The professors can 
generate a report of the list by using the data stored in the 
cloud system.  
         As IoT can implement and use the WSNs, all WSN 
sensors will be activated and a mini monitoring system can 
track graphically the user nodes, in a real time mode.  
        The last component of the module is a smart IoT 
whiteboard that will be discussed in the following section.  
4)
Smart Whiteboard
           This block contains the authentication IoT elements, 
and users can check the security validity, physically (Figure 
11). A Web of thing (WoT) system software connected to 
the whiteboard collects the sensory data sending them to a 
private cloud system.  
          The users can have access to their personalized 
facilities built in the smart whiteboard. The educator can 
touch the menus and get access to the educational services 
that they need.  
             A menu with several options appears on the screen 
and users can select any option or service that needed to 
proceed. As the validity checking is a physical IoT process, 
different profiles for instructors can be defined in the main 
WoT system. For example, the professor of a particular 
course can get access to all packages related to that course. 
In this form, the IoT technology provides multi-discipline 
area platforms for different courses, purposes or users. 
Similarly, the student users can obtain and get the services 
after the validity check that is provided only for the 
students. They can interact with the whiteboard IoT system 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

through their smartphones to send and receive the messages, 
questions, images, text, or even send an interrupting 
message during the instructor’s lecturing.  
Figure 11. IoT smart Whiteborad  components  
         Figure 11 is a graphical demonstration of a smart IoT 
whiteboard structure.  Based on the Figure 11, the learners 
can interact with the whiteboard. The smart whiteboard has 
the capacity of dividing in several areas: student area, 
messaging, questions, and lecture areas. In this way, in a 
real time mode, the learners can exchange information with 
the teacher and vice versa. The instructor can receive the 
messages and queries from the students and answer them. 
The students can see the answers on their laptops or 
computers. Both students and teachers can validate 
physically their identities through a RFID ID-card taking 
advantage of the IoT authentication feature. 
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK           
          Many times, implementing the complex procedures in 
a real mode is difficult and performing a process for the 
innovative phenomenon is converted into a big challenge. 
The solution for these cases is “simulating the process”. IoT 
technology is involving in all aspects of the human life. It 
can provide a platform and many facilities in many areas 
such as in education. This paper presented a novel 
application of IoT, offering an educational IoT module with 
physical-machine object authentication. The main idea in 
this work is proposing the educational components for IoT 
simulation toolkits. These elements are smart backpack, IoT 
check-in system, and two more elements; smart desk and 
whiteboard that are practically used in the smart IoT class. 
In case of the smart backpack, the objects (books) will be 
WSN/RFID labeled which can facilitate a real-time 
monitoring of the object tracking. This system helps the 
parents (or the same user) to check the user’s activities. The 
check-in school system is another IoT system that 
eliminates the web authentication process just by using a 
physical authentication. The user performs the check-in 
process before entering the classroom. The two-level 
physical security system increases safety of the system. The 
users based on their predefined profile can get access to 
their options. The second component is a smart desk. The 
users log in physically to have access to the services and 
interact with other objects such as a smart whiteboard. The 
idea of proposing this novel component is to inherit all 
benefits that IoT can provide for a typical education 
scenario.  Internet of things can remove the physical 
existence limitation and increases the accessibility to several 
educational recourses and tools, anytime, anywhere 
improving the effect e-learning.
         IoT and related technologies such as RFID and WSN 
can elaborate a flexible collaboration platform through 
connecting the objects. And also, it can offer a more secure 
system 
by 
eliminating 
the 
traditional 
web-based 
authentication process by using the physical authentication.  
        This work is considered as a first step to take to 
involve the IoT concepts in the educational objects. 
Connectivity, collaboration and scalability are some of the 
advantageous attributes of the IoT that are inherited by any 
IoT-based learning system. Based on this reality, our future 
work will be focused on implementing tangibly the 
proposed module in order to study the impact of applying an 
IoT-based structure on the learning system performance.    
REFERENCES 
[1]
R. Parashar, A. Khan, and Neha, “A Survey: The Internet of Things”, 
International Journal of Technical Research and Applications, e-
ISSN: 2320-8163, vol. 4, Issue 3, 2016, pp. 251-257. 
[2]
M. Friedemann and C. Floerkemeier, "From the Internet of 
Computers to the Internet of Things," Informatik- Spektrum, vol. 33, 
Issue 2, pp. 107–121, April 2010. 
[3]
M. Weiser, “The Computer for the 21st Century,” Scientific 
American. Bibcode: 1991SciAm.265c.94W, vol. 265, Issue 3, 1991, 
pp. 94–104. 
[4]
Silicon Labs, “The evolution of wireless sensor networks,” URL: 
http://www.silabs.com/Support%20Documents/TechnicalDocs/evolut
ion-of-wireless-sensor-networks.pdf, 2013.  
[5]
A. Wood, “The internet of things is revolutionizing our lives, but 
standards are a must, ” Theguardian.com. Guardian. Retrieved 31 
March 2015.    
[6]
C.A. Vázquez, M. Mejía and R. Pinto, “Modeling Student 
Engagement by means of nonverbal behavior and Decision trees,” 
IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics, Electronics and 
Automotive Engineering (ICMEAE), pp. 24-27, November 2015, 
DOI: 10.1109/ICMEAE.2015.56. 
[7]
IoT-GSI, “Internet of Things Global Standards Initiative,” February 
2012, URL: http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/gsi/iot/Pages/default.aspx.  
[8]
M. Bayani and E. Vilchez, “"Predictable Influence of IoT (Internet of 
Things) in the Higher Education," International Journal of 
Information and Education Technology, vol. 7, no. 12, 2017, pp. 914-
920. 
[9]
J. Höller, V. Tsiatsis, C. Mulligan, S. Karnouskos, S. Avesand and D. 
Boyle, “From Machine-to-Machine to the Internet of Things: 
Introduction to a New Age of Intelligence,” Elsevier, 2014, ISBN 
978-0-12-407684-6. 
[10] M. Bayani, G. Marin and G. Barrantes, “Performance e Analysis of 
Sensor Placement Strategies on a Wireless Sensor Network,” IEEE 
Fourth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and 
Applications, Sensorcomm2010, ISBN: 978-0-7695-4096-2, 2010, 
pp. 609-617. 
[11] J. Williams, “Internet of things: Science Fiction or Business 
Fact?” Harvard Business Review Analytic Services Report, pp. 2-9, 
December 2014.    
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

[12] D.  Evans, "The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the 
Internet Is Changing Everything," Cisco Corporation, April 2011. 
[13] G. D'Angelo, S. Ferretti and V. Ghini, “Simulation of the Internet of 
Things,” IEEE International Conference on High Performance 
Computing & Simulation (HPCS), Austria, 18-22 July 2016, pp. 1-8.  
[14] D. Lund, C. MacGillivray, V. Turner, and M. Morales, “Worldwide 
and Regional Internet of Things (IoT) 2014–2020 Forecast: A 
Virtuous Circle of Proven Value and Demand,” International Data 
Corporation (IDC), #248451, May 2014. 
[15] B. P. Zeigler, “Object-Oriented Simulation with Hierarchical, 
Modular Models,” Intelligent Agents and Endomorphic Systems 
Boston, Massachusetts, Academic Press, ISBN: 978-0-12-778452-6, 
1990. 
[16] J. Engblom,“ Internet of Things Automatic Testing- Using 
Simulation,” INTEL company, Wind River Blog Network,  
URL://blogs.windriver.com/wind_river_blog/2014/11/internet-of-
things-automatic-testing-using-simulation.html. 
[17] S. Dhouib et al., “Papyrus for IoT – A Modeling Solution for IoT,” 
CEA, LIST, Laboratory of Model Driven Engineering for Embedded 
Systems, 
91191, 
Gif-sur-Yvette 
CEDEX, 
2016, 
URL: 
https://ido2016.sciencesconf.org/122755/document. 
[18] M. Ioannis and H. D. Karatza, “Towards scheduling for internet-of-
things applications on clouds: a simulated annealing approach. 
Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience,” vol. 27, 
no.8, 2015, pp.1886–1899. 
[19] S. Sotiriadis, N. Bessis, E. Asimakopoulou, and N. Mustafee, “To-
wards simulating the internet of things,” 28th IEEE International 
Conference 
on 
In 
Advanced 
Information 
Networking 
and 
Applications Workshops (WAINA), 2014, pp. 444–448.  
[20] S. Sotiriadis, N. Bessis, N. Antonopoulos, and A. Anjum, “Simic: De-
signing a new inter-cloud simulation platform for integrating large-
scale resource management,” IEEE 27th International Conference on 
In Advanced Information Networking and Applications (AINA 
2013), 2013, pp. 90–97.  
[21] S. Ivanovitch, R. Leandro , D. Macedo , L. Affonso, “A dependability 
evaluation tool for the Internet of Things,” Computers and Electrical 
Engineering, vol. 39, no.7, 2013 , pp.2005-2018.  
[22] A.M. Khan, L. Navarro, L. Sharifi, and L. Veiga, “Clouds of small 
things: 
Provisioning 
infrastructure-as-a-service 
from 
within 
community networks,” IEEE 9th International Conference on in 
Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications 
(WiMob), 2013, pp. 16–21.   
[23] B. Manate, TF Fortis, and V. Negru, “Optimizing cloud re-sources 
allocation for an internet of things architecture,” Scientific 
International Journal for Parallel and Distributed Computing, Scalable 
Computing: Practice and Experience Journal,” vol. 15, no. 4, 2014, 
pp. 345–355. 
[24] H.J., Song, X. Liu, D. Jakobsen, R. Bhagwan, R., X. Zhang, K. Taura  
and A. Chien, “The microgrid: A Scientific tool for Modeling 
Computational grids,” SC '00: Proceedings of the 2000 ACM/IEEE 
Conference on Supercomputing, DOI: 10.1109/SC.2000.10028, 
November 2000.  
[25] A. Iosup, O., Sonmez, and D. Epema, “DGSim: Comparing grid 
resource management architectures through trace-based simulation,” 
In Euro-Par 2008-Parallel Processing, Springer, 2008, pp. 13-25. 
[26] L. Belli, S. Cirani, L. Davoli, A. Gorrieri, M. Mancin, M. Picone, and 
G. Ferrari, “Design and Deployment of an IoT Application-Oriented 
Testbed,” IEEE Computer Society, Computer, Vol. 48, no. 9 , pp. 32-
40, September 2015, doi:10.1109/MC.2015.253. 
[27] M. Selinger, A. Sepulveda and J. Buchan, “Education and the Internet 
of Everything: How ubiquitous connectedness can help transform 
pedagogy,” Cisco Consulting Service and Cisco EMEAR Education 
team, October 2013. 
[28] W. Werapun, “Packet Tracer 7.0: IoTs workshop, Introduction to 
Cisco 
IoTs,” 
URL:https://werapun.com/packet-tracer-7-0-iots-
workshop-17d4763f696.  
[29] P. Sethi and S. R. Sarangi, “Internet of Things: Architectures, 
Protocols, and Applications,” Journal of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering, 
2017, 
Article 
ID 
9324035, 
25 
pages, 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/9324035. 
[30] M. Bayani, Y. Alpizar, O. Ramirez, I. Ulate, and R. Gamboa, “Radio 
communication range effects on a flat wireless sensor network 
performance,” IEEE 36th Central American and Panama Convention, 
DOI: 10.1109/CONCAPAN.2016.7942365, November 2016. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-594-4
SIMUL 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

