 
 
A Reactive “In silico” Simulation for Theoretical Learning Clinical Skills  
and Decision-Making 
Alex Vicente-Villalba, Montserrat Antonin, 
Escuelas Universitarias Gimbernat: Nursing School 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB) 
Barcelona, Spain  
e-mail: alejandro.vicente@eug.es, 
montserrat.antonin@eug.es 
Dolores Rexachs, Emilio Luque 
Computer Architecture and Operating Systems Department 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB) 
Barcelona, Spain 
e-mail: Dolores.rexachs@uab.cat, 
 emilio.luque@uab.cat
 
 
Abstract- One of the problems found nowadays in the field of 
healthcare, and in particular in the emergency services, is that 
clinical staff members have to make many decisions and they 
have to implement them promptly. In addition, in the academic 
field, we must work to train in the competence of decision 
making with the aim of improving both critical thinking skills 
and clinical skills. The aim of our research is to develop a 
conceptual model of the evolution of the Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease (COPD) in a patient, depending on the 
performances 
(INPUTS) 
of 
the 
clinician 
or 
student 
(medicine/nursing), in order to transfer that knowledge to a 
VIRTUAL computerized model. The simulator will enhance a 
student’s training in decision-making and the assessment of 
acquired skills. Clinical variables, conditions, the evolution of 
the disease and the input of the clinicians who attend the 
patient in emergency services define the model. Considering 
the system configuration, the training offered will be more or 
less controlled depending on the expertise of the student. 
Moreover, it will show them not only those scenarios which are 
more frequent probabilistically, but also those scenarios which 
are less usual but likely to be encountered in real life.   
Keywords-Simulation; Nursing and Medical Education; 
Learning; computer models. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Chronic pathologies, especially Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Illness (COPD), are very common in our society 
and they are responsible for a high number of visits to our 
emergency services. Correct decision making can result in 
chronic-pathology 
sufferers 
making 
fewer 
visits 
to 
emergency departments. Nowadays, being capable in the 
professional field consists of solving problems and 
situations at work in an autonomous manner. All the 
knowledge acquired in the formative stages, whether it is 
higher education or professional education, is not enough 
since it is essential to have the skills, knowledge, and 
attitude needed to perform the specific tasks of a job.  
Today, unfortunately, medicine and nursing students can 
learn a great deal about physiopathology, pharmacology, 
specific care, but they may ignore, or not know, how to use 
all that knowledge in a stressful situation, such as working 
in the emergency department.  
Drawing from our own career, we have concluded that 
this deficiency is due to the decontextualization created by 
formal learning. In the same way, we see that not only stu-
dents, but professionals as well must, on many occasions, 
make decisions and implement them as quickly as possible.          
This many sometimes lead to error due to the inability to 
assess multiple scenarios quickly when situations are unex-
pected. If we refer to the mortality data included in the re-
port published in 1999 by the Institute of Medicine of the 
United States and titled “To Err is Human: building a safer 
health system”, nearly 100,000 deaths were estimated to 
have been caused by medical errors [1]. Hence, back then, 
the need to improve the training of the professionals in order 
to avoid these errors was had already been suggested. The 
increase in medical errors was blamed on several factors, 
some of them being the lack of investment in technology 
and the growing complexity therapeutic procedures. As a 
result of such report, health educators started to add simula-
tion components to their educational activities.  
As stated by Vázquez and Guillamet [2], it has been 
shown that the use of these clinical simulations reduces the 
time needed to learn the skills. Figure 1  shows Miller’s 
pyramid, where in the DEMONSTRATE and DO levels the 
learning processes in simulation are found [3]. 
 
 
                  
                                  
Figure 1.  Miller’s pyramid 
Furthermore, it is claimed that the learning curves based 
on simulation are better than the curves based on classical 
learning [4]. 
As 
opposed 
to 
the 
potential 
shown 
by 
the 
implementation of clinical simulation in the degree or 
professional field, this implementation is not without its 
challenges.  Clinical simulation is not a technology but a 
technique or learning methodology focused on the 
Practice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Theory 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-756-6
SIMUL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
participant. Therefore, the main limitation to its widespread 
application is the high price resulting from its formation in 
teaching methodology, infrastructure and the excessive 
amount of time spent by them and the participants in the 
clinical activity [5]. 
If we concentrate deeply on the world of simulation, the 
use of computers encouraged the use of mathematics in the 
development 
of 
physiology 
and 
pharmacology, 
communication around the world and the design of virtual 
worlds similar to reality [6]. Thanks to this, the development 
of software to train in the medical field (doctors and nurses) 
has been made possible. In this software, the user was 
depicted as a medical or nursing professional and was able 
to work with virtual tools and perform therapeutic 
procedures [7]. 
Authors 
such 
as 
Aldrich 
[8], 
highlight 
that 
computational simulation is a genre that can help students 
since it allows self-assessment, real-time feedback, 
simulations at any time or place without a teacher on site 
thanks to the possibility of sending messages during the 
learning process; in short, it makes online learning easier for 
the student and the instructor. Table 1 summarizes the 
differences between clinical simulation and computational 
simulation. 
TABLE I.  
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN CLINICAL AND COMPUTATIONAL 
SIMULATIONS. 
Differences 
 
 
 
Clinical simu-
lation 
Computational 
Self-assessment 
No 
Yes 
Real-time feedback 
Not recom-
mended 
Yes 
Simulation at any 
time 
No 
Yes 
Simulation at any 
place 
No 
Yes 
Teacher needed on 
the premises 
Yes 
No 
Cost 
High 
Lower 
Major infrastruc-
ture 
Yes 
No 
Time dedicated to 
each activity by the 
teacher (prepara-
tion of the case) 
High 
Low 
 
Our contribution, in this context, consists of designing a 
responsive conduct model and its simulation for the creation 
of an educational resource with the objective of, a priori, 
training and in the immediate future, adding another ap-
plicability based on prediction [9]. This offers us the possi-
bility to evaluate the possible evolutions in the shortest time 
attainable, according to the performances carried out by the 
clinician, and thus, support decision-making in the selection 
of the specific treatment for each patient. 
In reference to current simulators, The Synergy-COPD 
project studies the human body’s different functions through 
computer models at different levels (subcellular, tissue, or-
gan and organ system) [10]. The Synergy-COPD environ-
ment is focused on preventive prediction of a disease’s evo-
lution through data obtained by  the patient in a non-urgent 
external consultation. In contrast, our project is designed for 
a hospital emergency department and it allows us to observe 
the patient’s physiological changes in relation to the inter-
ventions carried out by the healthcare staff. Authors such as 
Agustí et al [11] developed a theoretical multi-stage COPD 
computational model that dynamically integrates and graph-
ically depicts the relationships between the exposure and 
inhalation of particles and gases (smoking), the biological 
activity (inflammatory response) of the disease, the severity 
of airflow limitation (FEV1) as well as the impact of the 
disease (dyspnea). We want to highlight the research project 
carried out by Reyes, A., Viciana, R., Díaz, A., and Hermi-
da, R. [12], which is based on the design of an intelligent 
nucleus for a medical emergency training simulator, specifi-
cally in extra-hospital care. The reason why we want to 
highlight this is that our project resembles the abovemen-
tioned study [12] in its decision-making process and the 
changes in the patient’s cardiological condition, yet our ob-
jective is focused on the emergency department and COPD 
patient. Without wishing to reiterate this too much, we have 
observed that most research projects reviewed are based on 
the development of models for different systems or diseases, 
but they always model the pathophysiological progression 
behavior of the disease. In contrast, our project focuses on 
the evolution of patients already diagnosed and exacerbated 
by the pathology and on checking their evolution based on 
the decision making carried out by healthcare staff. 
 This article is organised as follows: Section II shows the 
objectives of the research and the methodology. Section III 
describes the model of simulation. Section IV displays a 
conceptual model outline and finally, Section V closes up 
with a discussion and the work that is to come in the future. 
II. 
RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY 
Chronic pathologies, especially Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Illness (COPD), are very common in our 
environment. 
The general objective of our research is to create a 
conceptual and computational model that will simulate a 
virtual patient with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
(COPD) in the emergency services by the use of modelling 
techniques.  
When the patient goes to the emergency services, they 
are first attended by clinicians in a zone known as “triage”, 
where an initial evaluation takes place. This initial 
evaluation consists of a few questions (their reason to be in 
the hospital, personal background, etc.) and parameter 
values (heart rate, blood pressure, etc.) so as to try to 
ascertain the patient’s level of severity. Once the patient has 
been assessed, they are classified applying the triage scale 
used in Spain (I, II, III, IV, and V). Here they are classified 
in 5 different levels of acuity and priority (from I, the 
maximum level, to V, the minimum), following the acuity 
scale used in the Spanish Emergency Services, the Andorran 
Triage Model. We will focus on the patients classified as 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-756-6
SIMUL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
level I, II and III, who will be placed in the emergency box. 
We start our investigation with patient in the Emergency 
Room (ER). In ER some performances will be carried out in 
order to know internal data about the patient (for example, 
monitoring their vital signs, heart rate, temperature.) Some 
other performances are to diagnose him (for example, 
requesting an analytical test) and finally, some performances 
will be carried out to change his evolution (for example 
administering a drug). In each and every one of these 
performances, we find variables of both qualitative and 
quantitative types.  Due to their complexity, the variables, 
many of which are generated by uncertainty, will be 
addressed through the concept of fuzzification. Basically, 
this concept is a multivalued logic that allows us to 
mathematically represent 
uncertainty and 
vagueness, 
providing formal tools for their management. Table 2 shows 
an example: 
TABLE II.  
SOME EXAMPLES OF VARIABLES 
Variables 
 
 
 
Qualitative 
Value 
Quantitative 
Value 
Cyanosis (blue skin) 
Yes/No  
Temperature 
Ranges 
(36-
37,5/37,5-
37,9/ 38-
41) 
 
As we can see, in the performances there are multiple 
variables that are to be considered but in each performance, 
mainly in the diagnosis (for example the analytical test) and 
the change of evolution (for example drug administration), 
time is essential in order to see the result or evolution, 
seeing the changes in the variables with the purpose of 
stabilizing the patient and discharging them. 
Our methodological proposal is presented in Figure 2, 
bottom-up, our methodology stages will be implemented 
iteratively. The Iterative Model of Spiral Development will 
be used to develop the simulator. This system iterates 
permanently over the traditional development cycle of 
software [13]. The objective of this philosophy is to 
implement the model in each completed cycle so that a more 
complex model can be established. 
 
   
Figure 2.  Stages of the suggested methodology 
The long-term applicability of this investigation is, as 
stated previously, to support decision making, based on the 
prediction of the patient's evolution considering different 
scenarios. This will result in an important number of varia-
bles to work with and that is why we will gain from the 
methodology suggested, supported by the use of High-
Performance Computing (HPC). 
HPC enables us to run a great number of simulations, 
with a view to acquiring a large number of situations that in 
many cases would not be available without the simulation.   
III. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE MODEL 
The simulator will enhance student’s training and for 
this it will have an interface, as shown in the example and 
its interpretation in Figure 3, obtained from “Pulse, The 
Virtual Clinical Learning Lab” [14]. 
The interface will feature a virtual space, as alike an 
emergency room as possible, where the monitoring of vital 
parameters, the patient and the clinical staff will be 
displayed. Additionally, there will be a menu, described 
briefly below, where the student will interact in order to 
obtain the data related to diagnosis and performance. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Example of Interface. Image obtained from Pulse. The Virtual 
Clinical Learning Lab. 
To design the model, we propose to use Probabilistic 
Finite-State Machines, which is a generalization of the non-
deterministic finite State Machines. It includes the 
probability of a given transition into the transition function.  
We define a finite set of states, a finite set of input, a 
transition function, a set of possible following states and the 
probability of a particular state transition taking place. To 
define the states, the first step has been defining the clinical 
variables that are to be considered and the value ranges for 
each variable in each situation. To change the situation, not 
only has the course of time been taken into consideration, 
but also the inputs or performances carried out by the 
healthcare team in the emergency service. The next step has 
been the creation of a state transition diagram. More details 
are shown below: 
A. Clinical variables 
According to the group of state variables analysed and 
agreed on by the Experts Committee, the following 
designation has been established: 
 
Visibles variables, internal variables of the system 
that describe the patient’s state and that are known, 
and 
therefore 
will 
be 
shown 
to 
the 
student/professional (user) when they are interacting 
with the patient. These variables will be shown as 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-756-6
SIMUL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
requested by the student, simulating the exploration, 
the record consulting and the tests undergone in the 
emergency room. 
 
Not visible- monitored variables, (internal variables 
of the system that describe the patient’s status but 
that are not available to the user when they take 
decisions while interacting with the patient). They 
are taken into account in the state changes. 
 
Complementary tests variables (variables that are 
finally shown if requested, after a predefined period 
depending on the test.  
B. State 
The virtual patient’s state is conceptually defined by the 
variables described above that determine the physiological 
time of the patient.  The change of state shows changes in 
the variables depending on the evolution of the pathology 
and the decision making by the clinician and thus it will put 
together a new status. Each variable has a predefined set of 
values. The specific values that have the variables will 
determine the patient’s specific state. Figure 4 shows an 
example of state:  
 
Key 
Ei=Initial status, Cy= Cyanosis yes, Ty= Tirage yes, 
Sy=Sleepiness yes, HR=Heart rate, FR= Respiratory rate, 
PosF= Fowler position, Sat= 
 Saturation, T=Temperature, AuS=Auscultation, GasoT1= 
arterial blood gas type1, 
AnaT1=analysis T1, RxT1= X-rays type 1, HemoT1= blood 
culture type1.  
 
Status 1 [(Cy), (Ty), (Sy), (PosF), (HR<100), (FR>20), 
(Sat<80), (T 38-41), (AuS), (GasoT1), (AnaT1), (RxT1), 
(HemoT1)] 
 
Figure 4.  One specific example of state 
C. Inputs 
We define as Inputs the decisions or decision making of 
the clinician in order to make the patient recover 
physiologically, involving a change in the variables that 
constitute the status, and turning the previous status into a 
different one. These so-called Inputs have been classified 
into three different types:  
 
Data-attainment Inputs are those inputs in which 
the student requests this information. They are re-
lated to the visible and non-visible variables men-
tioned before.  
 
Diagnose Inputs are those inputs that the students 
request to gather evidence that will help them to 
make a diagnosis. They are related to the comple-
mentary tests variables. 
 
Performance Inputs are those inputs that are related 
to the performances (drug administration, changing 
the patient’s position, etc.), and what the student 
will do in order to change the patient’s state.  
Once the different parts that constitute the model are 
defined, the objective is to design a conceptual model that is 
summarised and explained below. 
IV. 
CONCEPTUAL MODEL OUTLINE 
Figure 5 shows an example of the interaction in which 
the input is implemented. This input causes some changes in 
the status of the conceptual model to take place, considering 
the time unit, and it will be shown on a monitor to the 
student through the interface as showed before. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Example of the state changes of the conceptual model. 
We propose to use Probabilistic Finite-State Machines. 
From each possible state that constitutes the model, each 
and every input will be defined and will evolve toward 
another state in a percentage of definite probability, 
considering what usually happens to the patients. Despite 
this, as mentioned before, the model will have a great 
variety of state evolution, including those that are more 
likely and those which are very rare in the health field but 
which could still happen. In relation to the latter, professors 
will be able to change the percentage, offering the student or 
professional these unusual evolutions and controlling the 
training to a greater or lesser extent. 
Regarding some variables that constitute the state in the 
health field, they generate some uncertainty; there are 
different ranges and that means we must work with the 
concept fuzzy. There are different investigations in which 
fuzzy logic has been used by healthcare workers mainly to 
make decisions and, more specifically to develop models. In 
other words, the fuzzy logic theory combines both 
epistemological and philosophical vision, making it possible 
to understand how healthcare staff deals with complex, 
ambiguous and imprecise evens [15]. 
The verification, calibration and validation process will 
begin once we have the simulator. In order to calibrate and 
validate, we will process data on hospitalized patients from 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-756-6
SIMUL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
two hospitals, Parc Tauli hospital and Vendrell Hospital.
 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Our study´s initial contribution is designing a virtual 
emergency room so that healthcare staff or students can 
develop the necessary critical thinking through decision 
making and make them face situations which they will face 
in a real environment. Simulation is a way of gaining 
knowledge from these kinds of situations, which can take 
place in real life and which on many occasions cannot be 
tested in a real system before they happen.  
Another contribution of this study, and which is also 
related to knowledge, is the definition of the Method to 
follow in order to develop the conceptual model that will 
help us to develop future models of other medical 
conditions. The methodology suggested will be supported 
using High-Performance Computing. HPC allows us to 
make use of the simulator as a real system to carry out a 
great number of simulations with the aim of obtaining many 
scenarios; situations which in many cases are not available 
without the simulation.  
As immediate work, and in order to make sure that the 
suggested model works well, it will be implemented in a 
computational model.  
In order to do so, we will continue working in the 
conceptual model iteratively to end up generating a model 
as complex and realistic as possible.  
Another long-term contribution is using such a simulator 
for training students and professionals; and once it has been 
calibrated and validated, it could be used to support the de-
cision making based on the prediction of the patient’s evolu-
tion considering of the clinical staff and thus improve the 
flow of patients in emergency services [16]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been supported under contract 
TIN2017-84875-P, (AEI/FEDER), and partially funded by 
Escuelas Universitarias Gimbernat (EUG). 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. T. Kohn, J. M. Corrigan, and M. S. Donaldson, “To Err Is 
Human Building a Safer Health System,” National Academy 
Press, 1999, pp.1-34.  
[2] G. Vázquez and A. Guillamet, “Training based on simulation 
as an essential innovation in medical training,” Educ Méd, 
vol. 12, num 3, 2009, pp.149–55.  
[3] G. 
Miller, 
“The 
assessment 
of 
clinical 
skills 
/competence/performance,” Acad Med, vol. 65, num 9, 1990, 
pp. 63-67. 
[4] D. J. Scott and G. L. Dunnington, “The New ACS/APDS 
Skills Curriculum: Moving the Learning Curve Out of the 
Operanting Room,” J Gastrointest Surg, vol. 12, num 2, 
2008 pp. 213, June. 2019, doi.org/10.1007/s11605-007-
0357-y. 
[5] J. Riancho, J. Maestre, I. del Moral, and J.A. Riancho, “Clini-
cal simulation of high realism: an experience in undergradu-
ate,” Educ Méd, vol. 15, 2012, pp. 109-115.  
[6] C. D. Smith, “Simulation Technology: A Strategy for Imple-
mentation in Surgical Education and Certification,”  
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, vol. 9, num 6, 2000, 
pp. 
 
632- 
637, 
June. 
2019,   
doi.org/10.1162/105474600300040420 
[7] S. Stansfield, D. Shawver, and A. Sobe, “Medisim: A proto-
type virtual reality system for training medical first respond-
ers,” Sandia National Laboratories, vol. 14, num 18, 1998, pp. 
198, July. 2019, doi.org/ 10.1109/VRAIS.1998.658490    
[8] C. Aldrich, “Learning by doing: a comprehensive guide to 
simulations, computer games, and pedagogy in e-Learning 
and other educational experiences,” San Francisco, Pfeiffer, 
2005. 
[9] A. Vicente, M. Antonin, D. Rexachs, and E. Luque, “Comput-
er simulation as a methodology for theoretical Learning of 
clinical skills in nursing,” International Journal of Integrated 
Care, vol. 18, num 2, 2018, pp. 297, June. 2019, 
doi.org/10.5334/ijic.s2297  
[10]   F. Miralles, D. Gomez-cabrero, M. Lluch-ariet, J. Tegnér, M. 
Cascante, and J. Roca, “Predictive medicine: outcomes, chal-
lenges and opportunities in the Synergy-COPD project”, 
Journal of Translational Medicine, vol. 12, num 2, 2014, pp 
1–8, September. 2019, doi.org /10.1186/1479-5876-12-S2-
S12  
[11]   A. Alvar, A. Compte, R. Faner, J. Garcia-aymerich, G. Noell, 
G. Cosio, R. Rodriguez-Roisin, and J. M. Anto, “The EASI 
model: A first integrative computational approximation to the 
natural history of COPD”, PLoS ONE, vol. 12, num 10, 
2017, 
pp 
1–11, 
September. 
2019, 
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0185502 
[12]  A. Reyes, R. Viciana, A. Díaz, and R. Hermida, "Training 
Simulator in the Field of Medical Education: Emergency Pa-
tient Modeling Based on Expert Systems”, The Sixt Ibero-
American Educational Informatics Congress, November 
2002. 
[13]  B. Boehm, “A Spiral Model for Software Development and 
Enhacement,” Computer, vol. 21, num 5, 1988, pp. 61-67, 
September. 2019, doi.org/10.1109/2.59 
[14] The Serious Games Showcase and Challenge. “Pulse,” Orland. 
July. 2019, http://sgschallenge.com/pulse/ 
[15]  R. Jensen, M. Helena, and B. Moraes, “Nursing and fuzzy 
logic: an integrative review,” Latino-Am. Enfermagem, vol. 
19, num 1, 2011, pp. 195-202, September. 2019, 
doi.org/10.1590/S0104-11692011000100026 
[16]  Z. Liu, E. Cabrera, D. Rexachs, and E. Luque, “A generalized 
agent-based model to simulate emergency departments,” The 
Sixth Intermational Conference on Advances in System Sim-
ulations, IARIA, Nice, France, October 2014, pp. 65-70, Ju-
ly. 
2019, 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jocs.2017.05.015
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-756-6
SIMUL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

