An Agent-Based Model for the Management of the
Emergency Department During the COVID-19
Pandemic
1,2,4Ramona Galeano, 1Dolores Rexachs, 1Alvaro Wong, 5Eva Bruballa,
2Cynthia Villalba, 3Diego Galeano, 1Emilio Luque
1Computer Architecture and Operating Systems Department
Universitat Aut´onoma de Barcelona (UAB)
Barcelona, Spain
e-mail: RamonaElizabeth.Galeano@autonoma.cat, Dolores.Rexachs@uab.cat
alvaro.wong@uab.es, eva.bruballa@eug.es, emilio.luque@uab.es
2Facultad Polit´ecnica
3Facultad de Ingenier´ıa
4Facultad de Ciencias M´edicas
Universidad Nacional de Asunci´on
San Lorenzo, Paraguay
e-mail: cvillalba@pol.una.py, dgaleano@ing.una.py
5Escuela Universitaria de Inform´atica
Escuela Universitaria Gimbernat
Abstract—The COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant
mortality in healthcare worldwide. A challenge for hospitals is
the management of overcrowding in emergency departments,
which can be critical for patient survival and effective patient
care. Modeling and simulation can provide a more accurate and
effective method to test new management techniques without
endangering patients. In this paper, we present an improve-
ment/extension of a previous agent-based model proposal that
allows imitating the operation of an emergency department to
design a simulator that helps to plan and manage a pandemic
situation. We have enhanced the model by adding the variables to
patient and staff hospital agents participating in the transmission
process; and separated emergency rooms for the infected and non
infected to evaluate the effectiveness using different combinations
such as laboratory tests, isolation, and other control policies.
This modeling can help the configuration of the medical staff,
nursing, beds, devices, and patient waiting time management.
Furthermore, two health personnel levels (emergency intensivists
(seniors) and personnel from different specialties (junior)) have
been incorporated in the emergency department to treat COVID
patients.
Keywords: simulation, pandemic, COVID-19, agent-based model.
I. INTRODUCTION
A pandemic occurs when an infectious disease spreads and
affects many people in more than one continent. Pandemics
are caused by viruses that can be easily transmitted from
person to person and spreads over a wide geographical area,
usually, spreading in to many countries or attacking almost all
individuals in a locality or region.
The unpredictability, uncertainty, fear, and restrictions re-
lated to the COVID-19 pandemic have represented partic-
ular challenges, mainly due to government’s measures of
quarantine, confinement, and social distancing, among others.
The pandemic has also affected the economy worldwide,
generating critical situations in companies around the world,
unemployment, and economic difficulties for most families
and individuals.
During the pandemic, management of hospital’s emergency
departments have played a key role for patient survival.
Improving such services without knowing in advance how
changes made can affect patient care cycle remains challeng-
ing. One of the critical points in managing the emergency
department is improving its ability to contain the spread of
contagious diseases. For instance, we could seek to understand
how changes made to specific variables in the emergency
management cycle could help reduce the spread of the virus.
The three main approaches used in the simulation of an
emergency department are agent-based simulation, discrete
event simulation, and system dynamics [1] [2]. The advantages
of using simulation is to facilitate the automatic search for
scenarios that can provide the best solutions given a set of
constraints and future states. This automation of the search for
improvements to an emergency department can significantly
help managers who need answers to problems.
We have previously developed agent-based models for mod-
eling the management in an emergency department [3]–[6].
Agent-based model is an approach to model systems in which
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

individual agents interact. It offers ways to more easily model
interactions of individuals and also how these interactions
affect other agents in the system [7].
In this paper, we propose designing and developing an
agent-based model that allows modeling the management of an
emergency department during the COVID-19 pandemic. Our
work presented here builds upon the work of Jaramillo et al.
[6] that developed a simulator for planning and management of
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) spreads
among hospitalized patients which has the advantage of having
been verified and validated in several cycles or iterations,
taking into account a wide variety of data and configurations,
and with the participation of emergency department staff at
the Hospital of Sabadell (Spain). Jaramillo’s [6] work is a
simulator with a design that allows the spread of infections
by contact (MRSA). It does not work in a pandemic situation.
The pandemic has emerged, and some requirements must be
added to make it work in a pandemic situation.
We have modified the Jaramillo et al. [6] agent-based model
to be useful for COVID-19 emergency rooms. First, we have
incorporated COVID-related variables for each patient that
includes their state of infection, symptoms, viral load, and
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) test result. And variables
for each hospital staff that include acuity level, age, location,
infected or not, symptomatic or not, vaccinated or not, viral
load, and PCR test. Second, we have made the simulator more
flexible to include: (i) the management of multiple emergency
rooms within the same hospital; (ii) multiple PCR test results
for each patient; and (iii) separate emergency rooms for the
infected and non-infected.
Our emergency clinical staff has been modeled incorporat-
ing two possible levels of experience: juniors (with limited or
low experience) and seniors (with experience). This is very
important because during a significant part of the ”Covid
attack”, in addition to emergency intensivists (seniors), some
health personnel from different specialties (juniors compared
with the intensivists) were incorporated into the emergency
department.
A set of synthetic input data has been prepared for the
simulation, which is why the distribution of arrival patients had
to be generated. COVID and NO COVID with different levels
of severity and the general distribution of simulated patient
ages.
Our simulator describes the behavior of the emergency
department during the COVID-19 pandemic and can assist
doctors and administrators as a decision support system for
emergency department management. Our simulator allows
us to build virtual scenarios to understand the transmission
phenomenon of COVID-19, and the potential impact of im-
plementing different policies on the rates of viral spread.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we explain state of the art. Section III presents the description
of the emergency department model. Section IV describes
the initial simulation. Section V presents the experiments and
discussion, and Section VI presents the conclusions and the
future work.
II. STATE OF THE ART
A problem stands out in the 21st century: the increase in mi-
crobial resistance and oncological diseases to the appearance
of new infectious diseases, such as COVID-19. Some viruses
have caused severe pandemics. According to World Health
Organization (WHO) data, many emerging and re-emerging
infectious diseases are of zoonotic origin. The coronavirus is
a big family of viruses that can cause disease in animals and
humans.
COVID-19, also called novel coronavirus disease, is caused
by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. The high
probability of infections in high population density places
made the initial transmission faster and stronger. This pan-
demic put health systems in different parts of the world in
uncertainty; they had few resources to face a pandemic of
such magnitude.
COVID-19 is transmitted by direct contagion from person
to person, by droplets of respiratory secretions emitted when
breathing, speaking, yelling, coughing, sneezing, kissing, etc.,
from one to two meters away. The deposit of secretions
generates droplet aerosols that remain in the air at greater
distances.
The simulation topics most frequently found in the literature
in the COVID-19 simulation area are studies for contact trac-
ing with COVID-19, transmission models of healthy patients
with infectious, affected tourist cities, spread in health systems
[8], patient flow improvement [9], how simulation modeling
can help reduce the impact of COVID-19 [10], among others.
Some simulation methods found that were used in the area
of COVID-19 simulations are discrete events [9] [11] [12], ar-
tificial intelligence [13] and agent-based simulation [14]. Some
countries used the simulation to predict scenarios, including
the behavior of the Delta variant to know the number of deaths,
infected, and vaccinated infected, others to see the evolution
of COVID-19, others to establish the infected, quarantined,
recovered, and dead, using the Susceptible Exposed Infected
Asymptomatic Quarantined Recovered (SEIAQR) model [15].
The studies about the emergency department deal with the
practice of protocols or objects for medical procedures. An-
other job in the emergency department talks about managing
the resources in intensive care, intensive care beds and their
devices, but there is not a similar work as ours at the time.
Some of our works in the emergency department area
are: Create a simulator for the emergency department with
the participation of the Sabadell Hospital emergency team
[3]. Active agents, passive agents, and the environment are
identified, and an initial simulation is created using NetLogo
[3]. Another task is to optimize the emergency department’s
performance [4]. Extensive search optimization is used to
find the optimal configuration of emergency department staff,
a multi-dimensional, multi-objective problem [4]. An index
is proposed to minimize the patient’s length of stay in the
emergency department. The results obtained using alterna-
tive Monte Carlo and Pipeline schemes are promising [4].
This paper presents a layer-based application framework for
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

discovering knowledge of an emergency department system
by simulating micro-level behaviors of its components [5].
This paper proposes the use of a simulation tool, the MRSA
Simulator to design and conduct virtual clinical trials to study
contact transmission of MRSA among hospitalized patients
[6].
The difference between our job and the others is that this
model of COVID-19 in the emergency department- simulator
will allow the emergency department managers to analyze
and evaluate potential solutions for the beds and devices.
And also has been considered at two levels with experience
and without experience (juniors and seniors); when reinforc-
ing, the health personnel treating COVID have incorporated
emergency intensivists (seniors) and health personnel from
different specialties (juniors). And to evaluate the effectiveness
of different combinations of scenarios. Many countries have
been experiencing extreme stress with patients unable to access
therapy beds, dying in emergency department corridors while
waiting for beds to be released, and a lack of experienced
doctors.
III. DESCRIPTION OF THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
MODEL
This section presents a model for the emergency department
during the COVID-19 pandemic. The general objective of this
research is to propose a model that allows the functionality
of the simulator to be extended to adapt it to changes in
the operation of the emergency department when there are
exceptional situations such as pandemics, in such a way that
it helps in the planning and management of the service.
The first step of the work consists of making a conceptual
model of the system’s operation, from which the computational
model that will allow the system to be simulated is elaborated.
It is planned to use the simulation environment and a high-
level platform.
One of the main properties of the agent-based model is its
scope; that is, the domain in which it is capable of executing
modeling and simulation scenarios. Agent-based models are
increasingly used in several scientific areas, in the simulation
of large-scale dynamic complex systems and the observation
of emergent behaviors. Complex systems can be thought of
simply as sets of interacting agents or entities [16].
The agents can be organizations, human beings, companies,
institutions, and any other entity that intends to pursue a
specific purpose. Agent-based models are mainly used in the
case of complex modeling phenomena, where many active
agents or entities interact with each other with specific inherent
attributes to establish relationships, thus facilitating automated
reasoning and problem-solving [16]. Agent-based models are
rule-based systems.
Agent-based model simulation tools support researchers and
practitioners in investigating how the macroscopic behavior of
a system depends on micro-level properties, constraints, and
rules. Agents as objects are typified by specific states and sets
of attributes, properties, or functional rules; behaviors that can
trigger particular actions through predefined parameters [16].
The ultimate goal is to build simulations of complex systems
that evolve as a set of artifacts that interact between multiple
decentralized modules. Individual objects or agents refer to
the elements that live in the environment and have properties
that can change over time; agents can manifest as different
independent objects under a discrete or continuous configura-
tion. The agents interact, and the system is constituted by the
active interaction of entities or agents and conflict resolution
[16].
A. Active agents:
The active agents are the individuals who act dynamically;
they are all the human actors in the emergency department.
They are:
Patient: They are the essential individuals in the system.
Admissions staff: The personnel to whom the patient goes
to request an appointment, update their data and request the
opening or search of their medical record.
Doctor: They interact with patients to diagnose and treat
them.
The triage nurse: They are who calls the patient to carry
out the pre-consultation.
Laboratory Staff: These are the persons who perform the
tests and analyze the patient if necessary.
Nurse: They provide treatment to the patient, takes and
sends test to laboratorys.
B. State variables
Fig. 1.
State transition when interacting with other agents or with time
elapsing
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Fig. 2.
State transition when interacting with other agents or with time
elapsing
The agents move from one place to another by interacting
with other agents. During this time, each agent changes its
state as a result of the interactions. A state machine perfectly
represents this behavior, so they have chosen a state machine
to model all agents. Specifically, the agents are represented by
a probabilistic Moore machine. An initial set of state variables
defined through the round of physician interviews is based on
the minimum amount of information needed to model each
patient and staff. An initial set of state variables is shown in
Figure 1 for the agent patient and Figure 2 for the hospital staff
(admissions staff, doctor, the triage nurse, laboratory staff and
nurse).
The input vector (I) contains a series of input values that
includes many different values. The output (O) depends on
the state. The transitions between states depend on the current
state in time (ST). The agent patient variables are acuity level,
age, body condition, location, infected or not, symptomatic
or not, vaccinated or not, viral load, contact time and PCR
test. The hospital staff (admissions staff, doctor, triage nurse,
laboratory staff, nurse) the variables are acuity level, age,
location, infected or not, symptomatic or not, vaccinated or
not, viral load, and PCR test.
The agents are divided by their state variables and their
behaviors. The values of the state variables of an agent at a
given time t defines the situation of a said agent at that time t.
The behavior of each agent depends on the category to which it
belongs and is defined based on the rules previously assigned
to each. To represent the different states of the agents during
the attention process are used finite state machines.
These Finite State Machines (FSM) are commonly used
to organize and represent a flow of execution. They can be
graphically represented as a sequence of nodes and arrows,
where nodes are states and arrows are transitions. Each state
of the state machines is defined based on the value of the
agent’s state variables at a given time, considering that each
has more than one possible value and a probability associated
with each.
The agent’s passage from one state to another will then be
determined by (a) the current state and (b) by the input value
it receives as a result of the interaction with another agent,
always considering that this value will be granted based on a
previously defined probability.
There is a single-state machine for all the different types
of agents in the model, so some combinations of values don’t
make sense and would never occur during the model operation.
Still, it is preferable to have one machine for all agents than
different machines because there is the possibility of increasing
the model to the point of reflecting the difference between
patients with varying levels of knowledge.
C. Output
The agents are represented by Moore machines; each state
can have a different output. The output of an agent-based
simulator includes the status information (sensors) of the
emergency department; some of the outputs are the length of
stay (LOS), the length of waiting (LOW) for each stage (e.g.,
waiting time for service request: wtsr, time of admission: at,
waiting time in admission: wta, waiting time in nursing: wtn,
time nursing care: twnc, waiting time in doctor’s treatment:
wtd, doctor treatment care time: twmd and others), destination,
age, acuity level, infected, symptomatic, PCR test, vaccinated,
viral load. In this way, the simulator does not directly provide
information about the simulated department’s behavior. In
contrast, cross-analysis through different simulation scenarios
is how to obtain information.
IV. INITIAL SIMULATION
An initial simulation is created to verify the proposed model
designed, using the NetLogo [17] agent-based simulation envi-
ronment, a high-level platform especially suited for modeling
complex systems that develop over time. NetLogo [17] allows
visualizations of actions and agent interactions, an essential
aspect considering that a primary use of the tool is gathering
feedback from the emergency department.
The emergency department is divided into different zones
in which different types of agents can act, maintaining inter-
actions that can also be different. The input to our model is a
group of patients arriving in the emergency department. After
the arrival of the patient and the registration is completed by
the admission staff, based on the seriousness of their situation
in the triage, the patients are categorized, taking into account
their acuity level. There are five different values, level 1 is
for the most critical situation, and level 5 is not urgent [18].
There are different areas in emergency departments (Figure 3):
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Fig. 3. Simulation display in Netlogo of the emergency department
admissions area, triage area, diagnosis-treatment area, waiting
rooms, etc. After triage, patients with diagnosed acuity levels
1, 2, and 3 are treated separately and assigned to Area A, and
patients 4 and 5 are treated in Area B.
nscenarios = nadmissions ∗ ntimeadmissions ∗ ntriagenursing
∗ntimetriagenursing ∗ nnursing ∗ ntimenursing
∗ndoctor ∗ ntimedoctor
(1)
The scenario adopted for this initial stage is to simulate the
patients who move through the emergency department. The
areas and the different types of active agents represented in this
simulation are patients, admission staff, triage nurses, nurses,
doctors, auxiliary staff, laboratory tests, internal tests, external
tests, ambulance, and care box. Each combination of values
represents a different scenario simulation. Wide varieties of
values make up the parameter space. The parameters can
generate a large number of different scenarios (1).
In general, the time to compute a time interval of a simula-
tion based on agents is the product of time it takes to simulate
the actions of an agent within the world of simulation in this
step. In the model described agents in the simulation are the
hospital staff and patients. The simulator will be conducted
by time. Time is divided into discrete, identical intervals and
period each time step the agents operating system. Each time
step are divided into two phases. Assuming that the simulator
this at time t, the phases are: First, each agent processes the
inputs of the last phase, (It-1) and according to that input and
the state as it was during the last step (St -1) and changes
to its new state St. Second, each agent emits its output to its
current state, Ot. This output uses receivers to switch to the
next state. In time each agent changes state. It may change
to the same state it was previously, but there is a change
nonetheless. The metrics that are to be used for each state input
It and output Ot are: waiting time to request a service: twrs,
Time for register a required service: trs, time admission: ta,
waiting time in admission: twa, waiting time in nursing: twn,
time nursing care: te, waiting time in doctor: Twmc, health
care Time: tm. The machine simulation has been chosen as the
basis for when the simulator is implemented because NetLogo
[17] has all the features needed to implement a model of this
type. NetLogo [17] is a simulation environment agent-based
model and provides a basis for machine simulation agent based
system.
The run time of a simulation step, in an agent based model
simulation, is the product of the time it takes to simulate
the actions of an agent and the number of agents in the
simulation world in this step. In the model described, agents
in the simulation are the hospital staff and patients. During
simulation, the hospital staff is fixed, does not enter or exit
the simulation. On the other hand, patients are constantly in
and out of the simulation. This changes the load of each time
slot simulation, base on the equation (2) that calculates the
running time Ti in step i, with the number of hospital staff
h, the number of patients in the simulation in step i and the
runtime of a Tagente agent.
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

We assume that the runtime of an agent is a fixed value.
In different simulations, the number of hospital staff can
change, but during one simulation, the number of hospital
staff is maintained. Concerning the number of patients, this
can change from one simulation step to the other because
there are patients in and out, but within each simulation step,
this number is constant. For a simulation that takes n steps,
equation (3) shows the formula.
Ti = (h + pi)Tagente
(2)
T = (hn+pk)Tagente
(3)
In order to generalize the process of all patients, the
next status will be decided by probability distribution during
simulation. The distribution model of the probability was
based on the statistical data from the emergency department.
Figure 4 indicates the general process during the patients stay
in emergency department; P1(%), P2(%), P3(%) and Pn (%)
represent the probability of the next state transition separately,
equation (4), (5), (6), (7) show the formulae. All of the
probabilities follow some probability distributions. The proba-
bility density function of the distribution is decided by several
key parameters based on the statistical analysis of doctor’s
decision and patient’s behavior, the value of these parameters
are estimated by a tuning process from real historical data of
the specified emergency department. The uniform forms of the
density functions are:
Pi = f(LOS, age, level)
(4)
n
X
i=1
Pi = 100%
(5)
P ′ = f ′(TOT, age, level)
(6)
n
X
i=1
P ′
i = 100%
(7)
where LOS is the patient’s length of stay and age is the age
of the patient, which also has big influence to the probability
of status transition. Level is the acuity level of the patient and
TOT is the type of test service or diagnosis by doctor. The
functions f and f’ are the probability density function. These
functions will be implemented by analyzing real historical data
in tuning process. As the simulator is implementing the general
model of the emergency departments, the tuning/calibration
process must be carried out for each one of them, in order to
adjust its simulation parameters to the specific characteristics
of each department (e.g., experience of the specific department
staff). Therefore, combined with (1) - (10), every patient
will show different behavior during the execution of the
model because of the probability distribution and their own
differences in body condition. But the statistical property of
agents will reflect their common behavior.
In the case of active agents for medical staff, two different
levels of experience are considered (LOW, labeled as junior,
and high, labeled as a senior). The less experienced user will
need more time to carry out their part of the process than the
most experienced. The time of the agents is fixed internally by
the programmer. Still, the simulator user can easily define the
number of each type of personnel and their level of experience
using the configuration console. The less experienced will
use more time to carry out their work because they have
no experience; they could be a resident doctor who has just
finished. The more experienced will take less time. They
already know the process and treatment because they have a
lot of experience and years of service. To make a preliminary
demonstration of how a simulation can be reproduced using
only a few parameters, a simplified set of patient attributes
and patient flow is less complicated have been defined. The
time of the doctor’s attention change according to each patient
and its severity level.
V. EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSION
Preliminary results obtained with the Instituto de Previsi´on
Social (IPS) Ingavi data are:
A. Case Study: COVID-19 at the IPS Ingavi of Paraguay
TABLE I
QUANTITATIVE REPRESENTATION OF THE SIMULATED EMERGENCY
DEPARTMENT OF THE HOSPITAL IPS INGAVI
Value of the human resources configuration
Label
Interpretation
Number
JA
Junior Admission staff
3
SA
Senior Admission staff
3
JTN
Junior Triage Nurse
5
STN
Senior Triage Nurse
5
JNA
Junior Nurse area A
5
SNA
Senior Nurse area A
5
JNB
Junior Nurse area B
5
SNB
Senior Nurse area B
5
JLE
Junior Outside Laboratory
3
SLI
Senior Internal Laboratory
3
JDA
Junior Doctor area A
10
SDA
Senior Doctor area A
10
JDB
Junior Doctor area B
10
SDB
Senior Doctor area B
10
aValue of the human resources configuration
The IPS Ingavi is a modern high-complexity hospital in
Paraguay, offering medical care and emergency department to
more than 2,000 insured persons per day, with approximately
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Fig. 4. Waiting for service
Fig. 5. Overall arrival acuity level and the patient’s age distribution
1,500,000 insured persons. It is one of the reference hospitals
for caring for patients with COVID-19 in the country.
From March 2020 to September 2021, the IPS Ingavi Hospi-
tal treated approximately 15,000 COVID-19 patients, of whom
1,500 died despite medical efforts. In the most critical period
of the disease, up to 10 deceased patients were registered daily,
and per month they had between 200 and 300 deaths. Table I
shows the values of the human resources configuration of the
parameters to represent the simulated emergency department.
Netlogo [17] stores information about everything that hap-
pens during the execution of the simulator and allows the
creation of reports that can be exported and processed with
statistics. We did an initial simulation with the data and got
to analyze the simulator’s behavior against the variables that
influence the emergency department; several simulations have
been carried out with different values to observe what results
we could get.
The patient arrival model includes patients with severity L
(acuity level). To do quantitative verification and validation,
we built a patient arrival model according to the actual data
from our cooperative Hospital.
A set of synthetic input data has been prepared for the
simulation, which is why the distribution of arrival patients
had to be generated. COVID and NO COVID with different
levels of severity, the general distribution of simulated patient
ages and the patient arrival rates distribution due to hours of
the day.
Patient arrival is the emergency department simulator’s
input, directly influencing the system’s behavior. A precision
model to reflect patient arrival is necessary to simulate and
predict the behavior of an emergency department; the patient
arrival model includes arrival patients, in the Figure 7 shown
the patient arrival rates distribution due to hours of the day
in the hospital. This figure shows the arrival of patients at the
hospital according to the time and day of the week, and it can
be seen that the range of approximately 6 to 21 hours is the
range where patients go to the hospital the most.
One of the simulator results is that the distribution of L
(acuity) among arrival patients was obtained through statis-
tical analysis of the actual data and the overall patient age
distribution, as shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6. Levels 1,2,3
are the most serious, and 4,5 are milder symptoms. As can be
seen in Figure 5 and Figure 6, at severity level 1,2,3,4,5, the
age range that most visits the hospital in the emergency area
is between 40 and 80 years old.
VI. CONCLUSION
As a result of our research, we present an improve-
ment/extension of a previous agent-based model for managing
the emergency department during COVID-19. Based on such
an emergency department and after carefully analyzing the
care process, we have enhanced the model by adding the
variables to patient agents and hospital staff participating
in the transmission process. We manage different scenarios
to adapt the simulator to pandemic situations, for example,
separate emergency rooms for the infected and non-infected,
to evaluate the effectiveness using different combinations such
as laboratory tests, isolation, and other control policies.
In addition, our emergency clinical staff has been modeled
incorporating two possible levels of experience: juniors (with
limited or low experience) and seniors (with experience).
This is very important because during a significant part of
the ”Covid attack”, in addition to emergency intensivists
(seniors), some health personnel from different specialties
(juniors compared with the intensivists) were incorporated into
the emergency department.
A set of synthetic input data has been prepared for the
simulation, which is why the distribution of arrival patients
had to be generated. COVID and NO COVID with different
levels of severity, the general distribution of simulated patient
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Fig. 6. Overall arrival acuity level and the patient’s age distribution
Fig. 7. Patient arrival rates distribution due to hour of day
ages and the patient arrival rates distribution due to hours of
the day.
One of the significant differences between our job and
the others is that this model/simulator of ”COVID-19 in
the emergency department” allows the emergency department
managers to analyze and evaluate potential solutions for the
clinical staff, boxes/beds, and devices.
Our future work is to make a digital twin of the Hospital,
to validate and add more details to the agent-based simulator
to make it as consistent and close as possible in a pandemic
situation, and to build different scenarios for decision-making.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research has been supported by the Agencia Estatal
de Investigacion (AEI), Spain and the Fondo Europeo de
Desarrollo Regional (FEDER) UE, under contract PID2020-
112496GB-I00 and partially funded by the Fundacion Escuelas
Universitarias Gimbernat (EUG).
This research has been funded through the scholarship by
Carlos Antonio Lopez of Paraguay (Becal)
REFERENCES
[1] E. Bonabeau, “Agent-based modeling: Methods and techniques for
simulating human systems,” Proceedings of the national academy of
sciences, vol. 99, no. suppl 3, pp. 7280–7287, 2002.
[2] P. Escudero-Marin and M. Pidd, “Using abms to simulate emergency
departments,” in Proceedings of the 2011 Winter Simulation Conference
(WSC), pp. 1239–1250, IEEE, 2011.
[3] M. Taboada, E. Cabrera, M. L. Iglesias, F. Epelde, and E. Luque, “An
agent-based decision support system for hospitals emergency depart-
ments,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 4, pp. 1870–1879, 2011.
[4] E. Cabrera, E. Luque, M. Taboada, F. Epelde, and M. L. Iglesias, “Abms
optimization for emergency departments,” in Proceedings of the 2012
winter simulation conference (WSC), pp. 1–12, IEEE, 2012.
[5] Z. Liu, D. Rexachs, E. Luque, F. Epelde, and E. Cabrera, “Simulating the
micro-level behavior of emergency department for macro-level features
prediction,” in 2015 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC), pp. 171–182,
IEEE, 2015.
[6] C. Jaramillo, D. Rexachs, F. Epelde, and E. Luque, “Virtual clinical
trials: A tool for the study of transmission of nosocomial infections,”
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 108, pp. 109–118, 2017.
[7] C. Macal and M. North, “Introductory tutorial: Agent-based modeling
and simulation,” in Proceedings of the winter simulation conference
2014, pp. 6–20, IEEE, 2014.
[8] R. Moss et al., “Coronavirus disease model to inform transmission-
reducing measures and health system preparedness, australia,” Emerging
infectious diseases, vol. 26, no. 12, p. 2844, 2020.
[9] M. Zeinalnezhad, A. G. Chofreh, F. A. Goni, J. J. Klemeˇs, and E. Sari,
“Simulation and improvement of patients’ workflow in heart clinics
during covid-19 pandemic using timed coloured petri nets,” International
journal of environmental research and public health, vol. 17, no. 22,
p. 8577, 2020.
[10] C. Currie et al., “How simulation modelling can help reduce the impact
of covid-19,” Journal of Simulation, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 83–97, 2020.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

[11] J. Le Lay et al., “Impact of covid-19 epidemics on bed requirements in
a healthcare center using data-driven discrete-event simulation,” in 2020
Winter Simulation Conference (WSC), pp. 771–781, IEEE, 2020.
[12] G. Fava, T. Giovannelli, M. Messedaglia, and M. Roma, “Effect of
different patient peak arrivals on an emergency department via discrete
event simulation: a case study,” Simulation, p. 00375497211038756,
2021.
[13] V. Ahuja and L. V. Nair, “Artificial intelligence and technology in
covid era: A narrative review,” Journal of Anaesthesiology, Clinical
Pharmacology, vol. 37, no. 1, p. 28, 2021.
[14] M. Laskowski, R. D. McLeod, M. R. Friesen, B. W. Podaima, and A. S.
Alfa, “Models of emergency departments for reducing patient waiting
times,” PloS one, vol. 4, no. 7, p. e6127, 2009.
[15] Z. Chen, Z. Shu, X. Huang, K. Peng, and J. Pan, “Modelling analysis of
covid-19 transmission and the state of emergency in japan,” International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, vol. 18, no. 13,
p. 6858, 2021.
[16] S. Abar, G. K. Theodoropoulos, P. Lemarinier, and G. M. P. O’Hare,
“Agent Based Modelling and Simulation tools: A review of the state-
of-art software,” Computer Science Review, vol. 24, pp. 13–33, May
2017.
[17] U. Wilensky and W. Rand, An introduction to agent-based modeling:
modeling natural, social, and engineered complex systems with NetLogo.
Mit Press, 2015.
[18] E. Bruballa, A. Wong, D. Rexachs, E. Luque, and F. Epelde, “Evaluation
of response capacity to patient attention demand in an emergency
department,” Int. J. Adv. Syst. Meas, vol. 10, no. 1-2, pp. 11–22, 2017.
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

