Real World Case Study To Teach Simulation
Lara Zakfeld, Carlo Simon, Merlin Hladik and Stefan Haag
Hochschule Worms
Erenburgerstr. 19, 67549 Worms, Germany
Email: {zakfeld, simon, merlin.hladik, haag}@hs-worms.de
Abstract—Classical lectures, supplementary reading and best
practice demonstrations (often) form the core of traditional
teaching. This is appropriate for the education of syntax
and
semantics
of
a
process
modelling
language
and
to
conduct simulation. They are, however, inappropriate to convey
pragmatics. But exactly this is needed to stimulate discrete
thinking and creativity, skills required in business for the
challenges of digitalization in a professional environment. This
paper is about using a real world case study to teach modelling
and simulation of processes and to facilitate students with the
ability to find solutions on their own. Students are confronted
with the challenges as they actually occur. They have to face
the needs of stakeholders which means that in addition to the
actual simulation model, also an interface must be developed
for the input of the simulation parameters and a dashboard for
the presentation of the simulation results. The danger of this
approach is to overburden students with the multitude of tasks
required for a solution, potentially leading to a failure of the
teaching process. At a glance, the paper summarizes the teaching
material developed and the experiences made so far with this
approach.
Keywords—Interactive Education; Real World Case Study;
Modeling; Petri Nets; Simulation.
I. INTRODUCTION
The learning pyramid as depicted in Figure 1 classifies
different teaching approaches and the corresponding learners’
retention rates. The most active and participative methods
show the highest learning coefficients [1]. The more teaching
concepts shift to problem solving, the higher the average
retention rate of the method is.
pyramide
retention rate
5%
10%
20%
30%
50%
75%
90%
use in lecture
Curriculum
Book Reviews
Simulation
Case Study
Problem Deﬁnition
Haptic Experiences
Consult Others
?
Lecture
Reading
Audio/Visual
Demonstration
Discussion Group
Practice by Doing
Teach Others
Carlo Simon · Stefan Haag · Lara Zakfeld
SIMUL 2022 · Informal Ways to Educate About Formal Modeling and Simulation with PN
3 / 5
Fig. 1. Learning Pyramid.
Each layer of the pyramid follows a different didactic
approach and indicates which retention rate can be expected
from the students [2]. This paper is about a method to increase
the retention rate of case studies by using a real world example
of a consulting project the authors have conducted. The aim of
this approach is to convey the complex reality into teaching.
With this way of teaching, the authors want to motivate the
students to answer the question of why they should learn a
specific topic: the answer is to be able to satisfy the customers’
needs later on in a business context.
The wish to offer such kinds of lectures results from the
very specific idea of Universities of Applied Sciences (UAS) in
Germany (like Hochschule Worms). They differ from ”Classic“
Universities (CU) as they are also known in other countries.
In addition to scientific reputation, UAS lecturers must
have practical work experience and circulate this hands-on
knowledge to their students to prepare them for an industry
career. Further, they are encouraged to maintain industry
contacts to exchange ideas, keep their own research and
teaching up to date, and conduct practical industry research
projects. At the other end, CU professors would rather conduct
fundamental research, which is also reflected in their teaching.
Boundaries between the two types of universities are fluid [3].
UAS tend to a learning environment with small class sizes,
are often more hands-on, and include practical projects and
group work. The Hochschule Worms, for example, claims
these ideas in its strategy: research and practice guide the
teaching to increase competence in students’ careers and
academics [4]. The aim of this approach is to expand the
students’ knowledge and enable them to solve problems on
the basis of the newly acquired knowledge [5].
Several teaching concepts have been presented at the
SIMUL 2022 conference ([2][6]), sparking an intensive
discussion about what lecturers do to improve their lecturing:
What further interactive methods for teaching modeling
and simulation are needed? This contribution continues the
discussion started one year ago.
New ideas to develop teaching further is discussed at
the example of process management as an important pillar
in business informatics studies. Process models help to
understand, optimize and automate processes in detail. Thus,
they are an essential foundation of the fourth industrial
revolution
for
the
digital
transformation
of
companies.
However, books and other classic teaching media are only
partially successful in conveying the special features of
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

processes within dynamic systems. Simulation based teaching
combined with a real world case study has the potential to lift
the teaching success to a higher level.
A real world case study on process modeling and simulation
which also includes requirements of practitioners offers the
chance to develop the following competencies [7]:
1) Systems Competence
2) Decision-making Competence
3) Future & Design Competence
The following Section II outlines the real world case
study. Then, Section III explains the shift from the real
world to a digital world. Afterwards, Section IV shows how
to model processes and design an interface to control the
simulation. The actual simulation is discussed in Section V.
The translation of the mathematical results into a dashboard
is explained in Section VI. A conclusion ends the paper.
II. REAL WORLD CASE STUDY
Modeling and simulation play a crucial role in business and
especially in logistics, but need skilled people who are able
to develop and run the models. Future-oriented skills must be
taught for this [7]: System Competence is an indispensable
precondition to conduct process simulation. It trains students
to understand systems and their interdependence. Part of
this knowledge is how to design, implement and monitor
processes. This competence goes hand in hand with the
Decision-making Competence. It involves considering different
alternatives against each other. As soon as students model and
simulate processes, they develop the competence to decide
and act responsible. Finally, simulation trains the willingness
to change and to think ahead as envisaged in the Future &
Design Competence. Based on simulation, students can further
develop scenarios and creatively solve problems. Considering
the learning pyramid of [1], it is important to embed these
skills into an experience-based learning environment, such as
case studies.
In principle, companies use case studies to explain their
products in order to market them afterwards. Those studies
show the impact of commerce on the end result and tell
how real customers overcame their problems with the product
or service offered. In the context of teaching, lecturers
successfully apply such aspects as storytelling, overcoming
problems, or cause-and-effect principles in teaching. Real
world case studies allow students to recreate challenges they
will face in their future work [8]. The gap between theory and
practice is closed [9].
Real world case studies are discussed in literature several
times like in [8], [10], [11] or [12]. They are characterized
by the fact that concrete problems are conveyed to students
for analysis, open discussion, and final debate. It requires five
steps to design a case study [13]:
1) The focus of the analysis is the actual situation.
2) The academic focus of knowledge must be put into
action.
3) Students are intellectually and emotionally involved in
the method.
4) Lecturers act as facilitators and must be both teacher
and practitioner.
5) Students develop an interdisciplinary understanding of
the problem.
The actual situation in this case study chosen by the authors
is as follows: Infraserv Logistics (ISL) at Industriepark H¨ochst
expands its logistics services for the chemical, pharmaceutical
and healthcare industries [14]. A new warehouse is built and
the operation starts. Safety requirements have top priority.
With the new warehouse, ISL sets new standards in the
efficient, largely digitized storage of highly dangerous goods.
To meet these standards across the industry, the industrial
park provides information concerning the pilot phase of
the warehouse to this real world case study. Only concrete
specifications of transport times within the warehouse are
dissembled with respect to the competitive situation.
The goal of the conducted modeling and simulation is to
objectify assumptions made during the conceptual phase. ISL
wants to use simulation to find its own best practices and
seeks verification from external parties. The core task of the
case study is to model and simulate the core processes in the
warehouse. Among other things, the following data is provided
for this purpose:
• Space for more than 25,000 pallets
• 9 separate warehouse sections
• Storage of multiple LGK storage classes
• A wide temperature range from -6 to 20 degrees Celsius
in the different sections of the warehouse [14]
Some of the data is publicly available in press reports or
on the website. All other sensitive data needed to successfully
model and simulate the processes are known to the authors but
had to be modified for this publication for the above mentioned
reasons to guarantee the trust of the industry partner.
III. FROM REAL TO DIGITAL WORLD
The first step in modelling a real world warehouse is to
collect the relevant real data and to build a digital shadow
of the warehouse which can be simulated [15]. The digital
shadow serves as the overarching concept. It does not only
map real processes into a virtual world but can also use the
real world data as input for the simulation.
The first choice to be made is that of an appropriate
modelling language and simulation environment. In this course
the choice is done by the lecturer in order to synchronize the
individual learning processes of the students’ groups.
Petri nets have been chosen due to their mathematical
basis. They differ from other languages in their possibilities
for analysis, simulation and immediate feasibility in a
target system. A suitable tool for this is the Process-
Simulations.Center
(P-S.C).
In
addition
to
its
already
presented features [6], the tool’s connectability to external data
has been expanded. By entering data in a customer-specific
input mask, it is possible to directly access a place in the
Petri net model of the warehouse, as shown in Figure 2.
As already mentioned, the case study contains sensitive real
world data. Therefore, access and visibility must be limited,
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Fig. 2. Interface between Real World and Digital World.
especially for sensitive customer data. Here, the P-S.C-Cloud
as well as the multi-client capability of the tool helps to
manage security issues [6]. Sensitive input data and simulation
results can be stored on in-house servers independent from the
P-S.C-Cloud as explained next.
The close collaboration of real and digital world is shown
in Figure 3. The dashed line shows the interface between
the local UI of the end-users (of the partner company or the
students) and the P-S.C-Cloud. This interface allows to drive
the simulation with real world data in consulting projects and
with modified data during lectures. The latter is defined in a
way that still gives the students a comprehension of the entire
system. In consequence, as the modelled system becomes more
complex, the skill requirements of the students increase.
The phases of the interaction between the local UI and the
P-S.C can be explained as follows:
Feed: The process starts with the end users of the
simulation, i.e., engineers or during operation the warehouse
manager or students who play this role in the lecture. They
use a customized input mask to enter order data and available
resources for a simulation run. All they need for this is a
browser on a computer or even an iPad like the warehouse
employees use on the shop floor. This data is stored in a CSV
file on a company’s local server. The P-S.C uses a link to load
the data into the simulation.
Run simulation: The simulation is conducted on the base of
the linked input data. If necessary, the link to the input data
can be hid from unauthorized users. The input data is loaded
P-S.C
Å
simulate
T
G
feed F
F visualize
P
local UI
Fig. 3. Real World vs. Digital World.
directly into the browser of the end user, i.e., the P-S.C-Cloud
does not get in touch with this data. After the simulation has
finished, an automatic download is started and the users can
store the simulation result on their local computer.
Visualize: The downloaded CSV file in turn can now be
uploaded again in the local UI or another business intelligence
application. The simulation results are visualized in a way that
supports the end users to come to a decision on how to proceed
in the real world.
In guided student projects, all of the following aspects can
be discussed and worked on, which are formulated as todos:
1) Identify the process to transfer pallets into and out of
the stock.
2) Specify the data necessary to control this process.
3) Develop a data driven model for the process.
4) Develop a user interface to administrate the simulation
input data.
5) Develop a user interface to visualize the simulation
results.
Different abilities and skills are demanded for this complex
list of tasks: the students should have previous knowledge and
practical experience in programming. They should be able to
develop user interfaces and visualize data in diagrams. Hence,
the described tasks are part of an advanced concept. In the
context of lectures, a high level of training of the students as
well as assistance for a satisfying solution is required. Once
the infrastructure depicted in Figure 3 has been developed,
different scenarios can be simulated and suggestions to
improve the real world process can be systematically be
derived from the simulation run.
IV. FEED - PROCESSES AND DATA
According to the list of activities named in the previous
section, the work on the following three activities merges
together into one large task:
• Identify the process to transfer pallets into and out of the
stock.
• Specify the data necessary to control this process.
• Develop a user interface to administrate the simulation
input data.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

The goal is to have an end user friendly interface to
administrate the simulation relevant data. This data will control
the simulation run. The virtual order will then run through the
simulation model and its processing proceeds. This progress
needs to be documented such that there must be a data field
within the order that codifies the current state. The naming of
these states is deferred to the next section.
The second aspect is that there are two major movements
within a warehouse: goods are transferred to stock, inbound,
and are released from stock, outbound. Hence, also an attribute
is needed to codify the direction of movement. Finally, since
the simulation result has to be visualized in a dashboard, an
attribute must be reserved to document the duration of each
task.
Further attributes are those that control the process flow
like the arrival time of trucks, the loading ramp to choose,
or the staging time for material. To find these attributes,
students read through the case study and conduct on-site (or
virtual) interviews. A challenging task is to determine a good
degree of detail. For the learning success on understanding the
complexity of systems, it is crucial to maintain authenticity.
Subsequently, the focus lies on the interface. It is important
to stay close to the customer’s needs. The interface of the
application is initially programmed bilingual in English and
German. The input mask shown on an iPad in Figure 2 and as a
screenshot in Figure 4 are examples on how the user interface
may look like. Here, nudging and the poke-yoke effect are
of great assistance. Both ensure that only target-oriented and
required data are entered by the users.
Fig. 4. Feed Data into CSV.
The input mask has a variety of functions:
Æ Load the last uploaded data
Î Upload data (e.g., to the P-S.C-Cloud)
( Remove data
G Download data locally
+ Add a data set
The CSV file to control the P-S.C-simulation can be
generated with this user interface. For this, a place representing
the orders of the warehouse are typed in a similar way. At the
beginning of the simulation, the data can be loaded from a
(company’s) web server using a link to the file.
V. SIMULATE - SIMULATION TO CSV
The results of the last phase, interface and data structure, are
now used to develop the simulation model. This work package
includes several student activities from Section III. The data
structure plays a crucial role, as it links the phases. The starting
point here are also the real processes to inbound and outbound
pallets in the warehouse. First, the process steps need to be
identified in order to reduce the complexity of the overall
processes to single states. The different states are shown in
Table I and Table II.
TABLE I. STATES WITHIN THE ORDER PLACE DURING INBOUND
State
Description
scheduled
Order booked into LAP
arrived
Truck arrived at warehouse
registering
Truck is registering
docking
Truck at ramp
unloading
Truck unloades pallet by pallet
undocking
Truck leaves ramp
leaving
Truck left ramp
departed
Truck left yard & Order released
storaging
Goods are being stored
finished
Goods are in storage
TABLE II. STATES WITHIN THE ORDER PLACE DURING
OUTBOUND
State
Description
scheduled
Order booked into LAP
staging
Goods are taken from storage
completed
Staging is completed
arrived
Truck arrived at warehouse
registering
Truck registered on the yard
docking
Truck arrived at warehouse
loading
Truck is loaded pallet by pallet
undocking
Truck leaves ramp
leaving
Truck left ramp
departed
Truck left yard
Besides the state changes of the orders the execution of the
orders is controlled by the available resources, such as type
and kind of forklifts. In ISL’s new warehouse, there are two
types of forklifts - SGS for high-bay movements and VHS,
which move on the shopfloor. These forklifts add more states
and transitions to the Petri net. Forklifts remove the goods
from the truck, transfer them from the ramp to the staging
area, and finally via the transfer area into the high rack.
Such state transitions involving multiple resources are
displayed in Figures 5 and 6. Both figures are parallel finite-
state machines with prioritized resources. The previous tables,
but also the finite-state machine, help during modeling to
become aware of the individual states of the orders, forklifts
and other resources.
All forklifts, especially VHS, are in a competitive situation
with each other. The allocation takes place as seen in the
finite state machine at state i5 for inbound (Figure 5) and
state o8 for outbound (Figure 6). Further, the transition next,
shown in Figure 7 organizes and sorts the orders according to
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

the requirements of the warehouse managers. The data of the
orders as well as the resources control the processes in the
simulation.
Ablauf: Einlagern
￿
scheduled
(i0)
arrived
(i1)
registering
(i2)
docking
(i3)
unloading
(i4)
allocating
(i5)
undocking
(i6)
leaving
(i7)
departed
(i8)
storaging
(i9)
allocating
(i10)
ﬁnished
(i11)
registration
is free
ramp is
free
free
registration
fork is
free
free
fork
forks
are free
free
forks
free ramp
￿
00:00
20:00
08:00
00:00
04:00
00:00
10:00
04:00
00:00
00:00
04:00
00:00
Simon · Haag · Zakfeld
Dokumentation Infraserv
18 / 29
Fig. 5. Finite-state machine - Inbound.
Ablauf: Auslagern
￿
scheduled
(o0)
staging
(o1)
allocating
(o2)
completed
(o3)
arrived
(o4)
registering
(o5)
docking
(o6)
loading
(o7)
allocating
(o8)
undocking
(o9)
leaving
(o10)
departed
(o11)
ramp is
free
forks
are free
free
forks
registration
is free
free
registration
fork is
free
free
fork
free ramp
￿
00:00
04:00
00:00
￿
00:00
20:00
08:00
00:00
04:00
00:00
10:00
04:00
Simon · Haag · Zakfeld
Dokumentation Infraserv
17 / 29
Fig. 6. Finite-state machine - Outbound.
A central clock synchronizes the activities as already
described in [16]. This clock increases only, if all activities
for a specific moment in time have been finished. The time at
which an specific state transition is conducted is documented
within a timestamp.
Figure 7 shows the setup of the Petri net and the clock
mechanism at the same time. While the simulation runs, the
orders change. Each change is copied into a protocol file, also
in CSV-format. And this file is the input for the next step.
VI. VISUALIZE - CSV TO VISUALIZATION
This final step completes the students’ work. This step
involves the development of a user interface to visualize
the simulation results. Firstly, students draw insights from
working with the project partner, as well as its real world
challenges. Secondly, part of the education includes research
in professional literature. Third, students learn with each
model or dashboard they create. For example, the students are
sensitized to choose the right format (16:9 or 9:16) or provide
the most accessible frame, such as a CSV file to enter, process
or visualize data. Practice literature like [17] clearly elaborates
on the benefits and features of useful dashboards: dashboards
serve to create a coherent and coordinated picture that allows
users to see and understand data.
Orders
Process control
Resources
C/
next(C)
O/
update(O, C, G, S, V)
C
R/
alterR(R, O)
G/
alterG(G, O)
S/
alterS(S, O)
V/
alterV(V, O)
+
pulse
+
next
clock
order
control
ramp
SGS
VHS
gate






F750
42
26
9
9
9
2
Fig. 7. Screenshot Petri net model by P-S.C.
On this basis, the dashboard of Figure 8 offers a step
towards more objectivity and thus addresses the needs of
the project partner. In addition, the dashboard now unites all
parts of the warehouse - from registration to the high-bay
warehouse. Therefore, this dashboard is the evolution of the
last dashboard shown in [6].
Fig. 8. Interactive Dashboard.
The strategy behind this dashboard is that all information is
visible in one place. It combines recognition and objectivity:
users have to recognize their processes and the orders flowing
along these processes. Symbols within the dashboard help
to keep track of the things. With a rising complexity, these
additional symbols might deviate from what is important.
Further Few (2013) reminds to design dashboards, such that
users are able to understand and interpret the data - this is more
than just to see it [17]. Based on this, the authors recommend
that students do not visualize the movement of forklifts and
trucks as described in [6] or as is popular with 3D animation
software. Such animations also became less important for the
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

project partner as the project progressed and the dashboard
could be observed along with the real world as its shadow.
The board can be divided into several parts:
• An interactive control panel is located at the top left.
Users may control the speed of the visualization, or pause
it at interesting moments. Further aspects like opening
hours for externals, closing times, preparatory times can
be controlled here.
• Below of the control panel, an analytic’s board shows
varies statics concerning the processes like staging time
over the period of a work week. This information can be
presented in different types of charts.
• The remaining areas of the dashboard belong to the
different areas of the warehouse, from registration to high
rack. Chemical and pharmaceutical goods are separated.
Within each area, the amount of disposable is shown.
When the visualization is started, the staffing of resources
and their allocation by orders is presented over time.
The remaining area presents the following information:
• Ramps quantity and allocation
• Forklift quantity including buffer space
• Parking slots for waiting trucks
• Truck load limit
• Number of employees for registration
This setting is ideal for both, the employees in the
company and the students, to “play“ with the data and to
observe how the performance of the warehouse changes with
changing capacities of the various resources. Resources that
are underutilized or bottlenecks can be identified.
VII. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
Taking a real world scenario and putting it into a classroom
is a challenging task. Details hinder the students from
having easy and simple solutions. But this experience is very
important for young people being prepared for the challenges
of a digitalized world.
The case study helps to develop critical competencies:
• Understand the benefit of modeling and simulation.
• Build models of the real world that can be simulated as
their shadows.
• Understand the purpose of a valuable dashboard.
• Learn how to design a dashboard.
• Link a dashboard with the simulation results.
• And learn how to explain each single step.
The authors had to recognize that only the best Bachelor
students were able to follow the entire story. And even using
transformer AI-technologies do not help to ease this task at the
moment [18]. For this reason they do not plan to complicate
the scenario and simulation further more.
The next objective is to publish the use case in the tutorial
to the P-S.C, and to make it accessible to a broad learning and
teaching community in modelling and simulation. The funding
for this project will end by the end of 2023. It is planned to
finish this work then.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was supported by ”OpenEdu-RLP “ [19] .
REFERENCES
[1] J.Artal-Sevil, A. Gargallo, and M. Valero, “Flipped teaching and
interactive tools. A multidisciplinary innovation experience in higher
education.”
Sixth International Conference on Higher Education
Advances, 2020, pp. 1–8.
[2] L. Zakfeld, S. Haag, and C. Simon, “Informal Ways to Educate About
Formal Modeling and Simulation with Petri Nets,” in SIMUL 2022: The
Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation,
F. Herrmann, Ed., Lissabon (Portugal), 2022, pp. 38–43.
[3] P. Loos, R. Clarner, F. Hermann, T. Hess, A. Gadatsch, and E. Sinz,
“Business and information systems engineering programs at universities
and fachhochschulen – convergence or differentiation?” Business &
Information Systems Engineering, vol. 5, pp. 281–286, 2013.
[4] German
Accreditation
Council,
“System
Accreditation,”
https://akkreditierungsrat.de/en/accreditation-system/system-
accreditation/system-accreditation (last accessed 09.08.2023), 2023.
[5] Kultusministerkonferenz,
“Qualifikationsrahmen
f¨ur
deutsche
Hochschulabschl¨usse,”
https://www.hrk.de/themen/studium/qualifika
tionsrahmen/ (last accessed 6.08.2023), 2017, German, transl. Higher
Qualifications Framework for German Higher Education Qualifications.
[6] C. Simon, S. Haag, and L. Zakfeld, “The Process-Simulation.Center,”
in SIM-SC: Special Track at SIMUL 2022: The Fourteenth International
Conference on Advances in System Simulation, F. Herrmann, Ed.,
Lissabon (Portugal), 2022, pp. 74–77.
[7] U.
Ehlers,
“Next
Skills:
Future
Skills
Finder,”
https://nextskills.org/future-skills-finder/
(last
accessed
02.08.2023),
2023.
[8] G. Rivera et al., “Genetic algorithm for scheduling optimization
considering heterogeneous containers: A real-world case study,” Axioms,
vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 27–43, 2020.
[9] P. Raju and C. Sankar, “Teaching Real-World Issues through Case
Studies*,” Journal of Engineering Education, vol. 88, no. 4, pp. 501–
508, 1999.
[10] F. Gu, J. Guo, W. Zhang, P. A. Summers, and P. Hall, “From
waste plastics to industrial raw materials: A life cycle assessment of
mechanical plastic recycling practice based on a real-world case study,”
Science of The Total Environment, vol. 601-602, pp. 1192–1207, 2017.
[11] R. Mahmoudi and M. Rasti-Barzoki, “Sustainable supply chains under
government intervention with a real-world case study: An evolutionary
game theoretic approach,” Computers & Industrial Engineering, vol.
116, pp. 130–143, 2018.
[12] C. Simon and S. Haag, “A Case-Study to Teach Process-Aware
Information Systems,” EMISA Forum: Proceedings of the SIG Enterprise
Modelling and Information Systems Architectures of the German
Informatics Society, vol. 40, pp. 9–10, 2020.
[13] L. Barnes, C. Christensen, and A. Hansen, Teaching and the Case
Method: Text, Cases, and Readings, 3rd ed.
Bosten: Harvard Business
Review Press, 1994.
[14] Infraserv Logistics GmbH, “Overview hazardous substances warehouse,”
https://www.infraserv-logistics.com/en/isl/news/news/
(last
accessed
15.08.2023), 2023.
[15] T. Bergs, S. Gierlings, T. Auerbach, A. Klink, D. Schraknepper, and
T. Augspurger, “The Concept of Digital Twin and Digital Shadow in
Manufacturing,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 101, pp. 81–84, 2021, 9th CIRP
Conference on High Performance Cutting.
[16] C. Simon, S. Haag, and L. Zakfeld, “Stratification of Timed Petri Nets at
the Example of a Production Process,” in ECMS 2022: 36th International
ECMS Conference on Modelling and Simulation, 2022, pp. 128–134.
[17] S. Few, Information Dashboard Design: Displaying Data for At-A-
Glance Monitoring, 1st ed.
CA: Analytics Press, 2013.
[18] C. Simon, S. Haag, and L. Zakfeld, “Experiments on GPT-3 Assisted
Process Model Development,” in ECMS 2023 : 37th International ECMS
Conference on Modelling and Simulation, Florenz (Italy), 2023, pp. 270–
276.
[19] “OpenEdu-RLP,”
https://www.vcrp.de/projekte/oer-programm/
(last
accessed 12.10.2023).
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

