 
Concept for Geopolitical Crisis Simulation as Assistance  
During a Decision Making Process 
 
 
Maria Epp, André Brahmann, Uwe Chalupka, Oliver Kröning and Hendrik Rothe 
Institute of Automation Technology,  
Measurement and Information Technology 
Helmut-Schmidt-University 
Hamburg, Germany 
emails: {maria.epp, andre.brahmann, uwe.chalupka, oliver.kroening, rothe}@hsu-hh.de 
 
 
Abstract — In the aftermath of September 11, the classical 
term of security is not longer valid and has to be extended. The 
security forces and decisions makers are faced with new 
challenges posed by the phenomena of terrorism, piracy, 
climate change and new economic practical constraints. To 
cope with this task, they need some support. This paper 
describes a possible simulation concept of geopolitical crises. 
As part of the concept the theory of finite element method 
should be examined on practicability. The starting point is a 
hypothetical scenario of a fictitious country. Infrastructural, 
cultural and socio-political aspects will be taken into 
consideration for the prediction of future crisis developments. 
 
Keywords-FEM; crisis simulation; crisis management 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A. Definition of a Crisis 
To simulate a crisis, one has to be able to understand and 
explain a crisis at first. In literature, there is no general 
definition of a “crisis” available; therefore, we will have to 
give an explanation of the crisis term to make sure, that a 
common understanding is guaranteed.  
In the beginning of the 18th century, a “crisis” was based 
on the probability of revolutions, counter-revolutions, 
independence and civil wars [1]. Given the rapid 
development of peace research, this term was stretched 
frequently. The changing international environment assigns 
both stakeholders of the security (i.e., states, international / 
national organizations, etc.), as well as political decision 
makers faced with new problems and requirements. 
Therefore, it is important to derive a new common definition. 
A “crisis” is a situation, in which a system or a part of a 
system is extinguished and destroyed. A system is a group of 
actors (states, organizations, resources, etc.) that interact 
together in one or more fixed patters and structures [2]. This 
increases the likelihood of a war or the usage of force [3]. 
Furthermore, if a decision-making process is subjected to 
time pressure to avoid a growing danger of hopelessness [4], 
a crisis is about to rise. 
B. Crisis Management 
In time of a crisis, citizens need the aid of their leaders. 
In other words, they are dependent on the leadership of their 
presidents, local politicians, public managers or religious 
mentors. These leaders must make decisions to minimize the 
damage of the crisis and they have to examine ways that will 
lead their people out of the critical situation.  The 
management of a crisis is often a complex operation, which 
requires a lot of organization. The decision makers must 
supervise 
the 
whole 
crisis 
management 
process, 
communicate with stakeholders, discover what went wrong, 
define possible risks and they have to initiate improvements 
to overcome the crisis.  
To make these important decisions, leaders must have an 
overview of the possible progress of a crisis. To support the 
decision making process, a tool for crisis simulation could 
be of immense value. Such a tool could be used to forecast 
upcoming events. Consequently, this will provide an edge to 
the decision makers in managing the crisis.  
This paper will start with an introduction of some basic 
ideas for a simulation that has to be taken into consideration.  
After that, two basic principles, that seem appropriate for the 
simulation, will be shown and discussed. The next section 
will outline a possible simulation prototype to clarify a first 
simulation concept. Finally, a conclusion is drawn and an 
outline for further steps is given. 
C. State of the Art 
1) CASCON 
 Computer-Aided System for Handling Information on 
Local Conflicts (CASCON) is a computerized history-based 
conflict analysis and decision-support system. This system 
is based on Bloomfield-Leiss model [6] of local conflict, 
which represents conflict as a dynamic process that moves 
in time and space [5]. A local conflict is derived from the 
substantive dispute. The dispute can be caused because of 
the territory, ideology, power, race, religion, or whatever. It 
is derived in phases of varying durations. In each phase, 
there are factors-conditions, perceptions, situations, or 
relationships that generate conflict-relevant pressure.  
 
 
Figure 1. Phases of the Local Conflict Model [5]. 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 1 shows the phases of the local conflict based on 
the Bloomfield-Leiss model. Phase I defines a dispute that 
will be waged at the polls, in the press, economically, 
politically without military participation. Phase II defines a 
conflict (pre-hostilities) with an option of military 
introduction. Phase III, hostilities, arises when one side 
actually inserts military force to resolve the dispute. When 
hostilities are terminated, it skips to phase IV, post-
hostilities. Phase V is entered when the dispute is no longer 
vied in military terms. The conflict is settled, when the 
dispute ends [5][6].  
The users of the CASCON system can access the 
database. They can record the data about a new case or they 
can get the information about previous conflicts in a 
particular phase. The system can recommend steps at the 
onset of the dispute rather than at the outbreak of hostilities.  
This system is very complex. With our simulation, we 
want to visualize possible spread of the conflict in a region. 
Actually, we do not need a database with historical data, but 
rather certain parameters, they must be defined later. 
2) Plague Inc. 
 Plaque Incorporated is a strategic game that is 
developed by Ndemic Creations [7]. The aim of this game is 
to destroy the world with a deadly pathogen. The game uses 
a complex epidemic model to implement a realistic 
simulation. 
Gamers play against the world’s population. The earth is 
modeled as a game map. The map is divided into different 
states. The states have at its real existing models adapted 
factors, which can be divided into four areas: economic 
power, rainfall, temperature, and population density.  
The game begins at the current day and then runs on a 
daily basis. The gamer can select a country, where the 
pathogen begins. First person will be infected. People can be 
healthy, infected, and dead. The disease spreads through 
country infection, ships, aircraft or animals. 
If the world’s population discovers the disease, it begins 
with the development of a cure. The more severe the 
medical condition is, the more money must be invested in 
the remedy. Economically powerful nations have an 
advantage for fighting the pathogen. A gamer has 
possibilities to fight back against the cure, such as the 
development of a resistance or the formation of a new 
disease. The player wins, when the world population is 
completely annihilated before a cure was cultivated. The 
world wins; if the world population develops a cure or kills 
the pathogen and support before all people infected [8].  
This game would be a good template for a simulation of 
crisis spreading. But the project is commercial; there is no 
access to the methods and models that have been applied on 
the development of this game. 
In our research project, we want to develop a crisis 
simulation based on “Plaque Inc.”. We need to examine 
models and methods, which are descriptive of the crisis 
spreading more realistic. We want use the CASCON system, 
to define the influencing factor of crisis spreading. With the 
aid of Finite-Element-Method (FEM) [9], we want to 
present the geographic extension of a region, because this 
method is parallelizable and well scalable in computer 
power [10]. 
II. 
BASIC IDEA OF SIMULATION 
For our investigation, we will use a fictitious country. In 
Figure 2a, one can see that country, which consists of three 
cities. 
Furthermore, 
the 
cities 
are 
connected 
via 
infrastructural objects (i.e., roads). At that point, the 
development of one or more crises, which were triggered in 
one or more parts of a city, shall be examined.  
To analyze the dispersion of a crisis from one point to 
another, a grid is placed on the cities and their compounds. 
The grid can be viewed in Figure 2b. Points that will 
represent a crisis, are placed on one or more grid locations. 
In Figure 2c, you can see the crises points marked as red 
dots. Now, for each part of the grid we could define some 
characteristic traits. These traits can be used to simulate 
infrastructure, regional and political states in that particular 
location. The main idea to model the interaction of every 
trait with a crisis point. To achieve this, we want to use 
differential equations. At the next step our work; we want to 
define these equations. The type and order of the using 
equations are dependent on the kind of interaction and its 
complexity. This leads to a convenient way of describing the 
underlying dependencies. The variables of differential 
equations could be defined using the CASCON system by 
providing the single factors.  
 
 
a) 
b) 
 
c) 
Figure 2. a) A map of fictitious state. b) A map of fictitious state with a grid. 
c) Crisis points marked red in the map of fictitious state.  
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

III. 
BASIC PRINCIPLES 
A. Finite-Element-Method 
Taking performance considerations into account, it 
would not be a good choice to consider the complete map 
for our simulation. It is possible that the largest part of the 
observed country is devoid of infrastructure or important 
objects (forest, grassland, mountains, etc.), but another part 
is of major interest and only that part is in the need of closer 
investigating. Hence, the map should be divided into areas. 
As stated in the previous section, each location has 
particular properties and a degree of influence on 
neighboring locations. The fundamental dependencies are 
simulated via differential equations.  
 At this point, FEM, as a numeric technique for solving 
differential and integral equations, could become handy. A 
region, in which we seek a solution for the underlying 
differential equations, is divided into a finite number of 
elements. For each of the elements FEM provides an 
approximating function. Function values at the boundaries 
of the elements are the approximated solution of the 
differential equations and hence the solution of the 
fundamental problem. The coefficients of the approximating 
functions are determined by the condition of the values of 
neighboring functions on the boundaries between the 
elements. These coefficients are expressed through the 
values of the functions in the elements [9][11]. At this point, 
it becomes clear that the basic idea of the simulation and the 
basic principles of FEM are strongly related. Therefore, it is 
of high interest to examine this approach as possible solving 
mechanism of this kind of simulation.     
B. Game of Life 
Besides FEM, Conways “Game of Life” [12] appears to 
be a well suited template for this kind of problem. The 
“Game of Life” is a grid based computer simulator that was 
invented by Moler [12]. The population spreads over an 
infinite two dimensional squared field (universe). The 
population evolves at discrete time steps and depending on 
the neighborhood they stay alive, die, or bring new life to 
adjacent locations in the next time step. Every location in 
the underlying two dimensional grids is called a cell and 
every cell has two states (population alive or dead).   
 The fundamental concept of "Game of Life" is based on 
a very simple set of rules: 
1. A dead cell with three living neighbors will 
become alive in the next time step, 
2. A living cell with less than two neighbors dies 
in the next time step, 
3. A living cell with more than three neighbors 
dies in the next time step, 
4. A living cell with two or three neighbors will 
stay alive. 
Though this concept is rather plain, it shows some 
similarities to the featured idea for crisis simulation. Crises 
could be regarded as the population and our region of 
interest is subdivided into cells on a grid. A crisis could 
appear (cell becomes alive) and it could disappear (cell 
dies). At this point, it becomes obvious that the set of rules 
have to be more complex to model the fundamental behavior 
of a rising or falling crisis and that is the point where a 
connection between FEM and "Game of Life" could bring a 
more desirable modeling quality. 
IV. 
DESCRIPTION A PROTOTYPE OF THE CRISIS 
SIMULATION  
In this section, a possible implementation of a simple 
prototype for the simulation concept is introduced. An 
arbitrary two dimensional matrix M is chosen as a 
representation of our gridded country map. A second two 
dimensional matrix C is chosen as a representation of the 
crisis population. It becomes clear, that the fundamental 
problem is subdivided into multiple layers and each layer 
has its own matrix. The elements of the matrix M, which 
represent the cities and their infrastructural interconnections, 
are filled with ones (1). Empty spaces are marked with zeros 
(0).  The same is true for the matrix C, a living cell is 
marked with one and a dead one with zero. Now, rules in 
favor of our special "Game of Live" represented by Matrix 
C can be applied. For the prototype, the following rules have 
been prepared: 
1)  
 
 
  
1) A cell with a living crisis in matrix C can spread out 
(i.e., bring life) to another cell, if the corresponding 
cell in matrix M is defined with a one.  
2) A living crisis can cause a new crisis in neighboring 
(adjacent) cells only.  
3) A living crisis can spread out, if at least one 
neighboring element is also defined as a living crisis. 
4) An element can be defined as a living crisis, if this 
element is not a crisis yet (dead crisis). 
5) If a living crisis did not spread to a neighboring 
element in the previous time step, then it will die. 
6) For each element, which is not a living crisis, is made 
a connection to every neighboring crisis element. To 
each connection the value 0 or 1 is assigned and that 
value is random generated with a probability of 50%. 
If at least one connection has the value 1, then this 
element will become a living crisis in the preceding 
time step. 
7) The simulation ends after a predetermined number of 
iteration steps or if all of crisis elements are dead. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The crisis management in geopolitical, economical and 
humanitarian area is a very complex topic. All these areas 
are highly correlated to each other. To make future 
statements about the development of a crisis, all factors 
must be regarded individually and collectively. To 
determine the dependency factors or the factors that have an 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

influence on a crisis, the collaboration with political, 
economical and sociological institutes is planned.  
It must be analyzed, which factor may affect the spread 
of a crisis from one to the other area and how a reasonable 
weighting of each factor with influence could be 
accomplished. A probable approach for accomplishing that 
challenge is to examine real crises and their development in 
the past in existing countries or regions. That is also a 
mandatory assignment for a validation of the simulation 
system, to prove correctness of the underlying algorithms.  
All political and economic aspects have to be taken into 
account and neighboring regions must be analyzed. Once the 
most important factors and parameters are defined, the 
results can be simulated.  
At this moment, an implementation of FEM was 
neglected in the simulation. That kind of methods will 
provide a more sophisticated simulation model, but this is 
only of any value after an interdisciplinary investigation of 
the whole topic, which is planned for the next prototype.  
At last, it must be pointed out that the described 
prototype is at a very early stage of development. It handles 
a simple cellular automaton simulation with yet non-
justified assumptions only. For further investigations, a 
validation and a probable reconsideration of the given rules 
have to be made. Obviously, it is a plain two-dimensional 
approach that solely relies on geographical distances. To 
reflect modern world scenarios, a multi-dimensional 
approach, which could simulate mass transit and electronic 
communication, has to be taken into consideration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Jaenicke, “Krisenbegriff und Krisenforschung,” Westdeutsche 
Verlag, 1973, pp. 11-25. 
[2] C. F. Hermann, “Indikatoren internationaler politischer Krisen,” 
Westdeutsche Verlag, 1973, pp. 44–63. 
[3] K. W. Deutsch, “Zum Verständnis von Krisen und politischen 
Revolutionen,” Westdeutsche Verlag, 1973, pp. 90-100. 
[4] A. Boin, P. Hart, E. Stern, and B. Sundelius, “The Politics of Crisis 
Management: Public Leadership under Pressure,” Cambridge 
University Press, 2005, pp. 1-2. 
[5] L. P. Bloomfield and R. Beattie, “Computers and Policy-Making: The 
Cascon Experiment,” The Journal of Conflict Resolution, vol. 15, 
1971, pp. 33-46. 
[6] A. C. Leiss and L. P. Bloomfield, “The Control of The Local Conflict: 
A design study on arms control and limited war in the developing 
areas”, U.S. Government Printing Office Washington, 1967, pp. 2-8. 
[7] Ndemic 
Creations, 
“Plaque 
Inc.,” 
http://www.ndemiccreations.com/en/22-plague-inc, 
[retrieved 
09.2014]  
[8] C. 
Buffa, 
“Plague 
Inc. 
iPad 
Review,” 
 
Modojo, 
2012 
http://www.modojo.com/reviews/plague_inc, [retrieved: 09.2014]. 
[9] O. C. Zienkiewicz, and K. Morgan, “Finite Elements and 
Approximation,” A Wilea-Interscience Publication, 1983. 
[10] R. Wyrzykowski, J. Dongarra, K. Karczewski, and J. Wasniewski, 
“Parallel Processing and Applied Mathematics,” Springer-Verlag 
Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 299-302. 
[11] O. C. Zienkiewicz, “The Finite Element Mathod in Engineering 
Science, ” McGraw-Hill-London, 1971. 
[12] C. Moler, “Experiments with MATLAB,” Electronic edition 
published by MathWorks, Inc., http://www.mathworks.com/moler, 
[retrieved: 08.2014]. 
 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

