Informal Ways to Educate about Formal Modeling and Simulation with Petri Nets
Lara Zakfeld, Stefan Haag and Carlo Simon
Hochschule Worms
Erenburgerstr. 19, 67549 Worms, Germany
Email: {zakfeld, haag, simon}@hs-worms.de
Abstract—Linking current research and advanced teaching is
one pillar of higher education. Students need to be prepared
for ﬁnding novel solutions for challenges that arise from the
digitalization of products, services, and production. To address
these challenges, planing and forecasting play essential roles.
These tasks can be handled by modeling to understand a real-
world system, and simulating these models to gain insight into
possible consequences of change. Formal modeling and simula-
tion are highly complex activities that require experience and
ﬁtting tools. When lecturers integrate such exciting and cutting-
edge topics, classical head-on teaching is not enough. Instead,
they need inspirational approaches and reliable tools to provide
learners with an easy-to-grasp, direct, and engaging introduction
into modeling and simulation. This paper presents different
approaches to engage students in this task. Case studies illustrate
theoretical and practical business knowledge. The ﬁring rule of
Petri nets can be explained with mazes. Learners experience the
implications of digitalization in production with real models of as-
sembly lines controlled by Petri nets. Students are enabled to act
as consultants who develop simulation models that incorporate
planing and forecasting. Such extensive user interaction requires
elaborated tool support but offers the possibility to intertwine
teaching, theoretical learning, practical application, and current
research.
Keywords—Modeling; Simulation; Interactive Education; Dig-
ital Twins; Petri Nets.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, there has been a shift away from fact-based
teaching to more involving methods such as problem-based
and research-oriented learning. As a result, new concepts like
inverted classrooms, blended learning or case studies become
more commonly used by lecturers. These varied and active
learning experiences encourage student engagement and secure
a lasting learning success.
This ongoing process alters the roles of lecturers and
students alike. While teachers shift more into the role of
mentors and trainers, learners become more responsible to
actively acquire new knowledge. Thus, the connection of
current research, teaching strategies, and student motivation
needs to be considered [1].
Experience shows that high engagement leads to more
attendance in lectures and a striking correlation between
course attendance and exam results of competency tests can
be observed. Consequently, the acquisition of professional
competencies is signiﬁcantly promoted [2]. In a survey of
463 teachers on inverted classrooms, 67 % reported that the
grade point average had improved and 99 % conﬁrmed that
the concept would be maintained [3].
Interactive engagement can induce such positive effects. A
contemporary method is gamiﬁcation. This catchphrase refers
to the idea of using game design elements in a non-game
context to motivate and increase user activity and retention.
Gamiﬁcation is an approach already used in areas as diverse
as ﬁnance and education [4]. Yet, it raises the question about
how other game-based or interactive techniques can improve
students’ learning experience.
The Group of Applied Process Simulation (GAPS) at Worms
University of Applied Sciences pursues the goal to integrate
active research in modeling and simulation with Petri nets
with interactive teaching. The technological backbone is the
Process-Simulation.Center (P-S.C), a Petri net WebApp which
is used as a virtual laboratory. It incorporates features of inte-
grated management systems based on Petri nets, organization
charts, and process maps and is the hub for gamiﬁcation,
blended and interactive learning, and case studies.
• Semester-long case studies evolve student’s competencies
regarding business processes and their simulation in an
organized and coherent fashion.
• Petri net mazes teach operational rules in a game setting:
the faster a maze is solved, the more points are awarded.
• Real world assembly lines in toy size improve the under-
standing on how production processes can be modeled,
predicted, and controlled with Petri nets.
• Consulting projects deliver more insights into the com-
plex challenges that the real world poses.
This approach goes beyond the work of [5] and [6], which
explain how to teach basic Petri net modeling techniques.
However, they do not include teaching a case study nor enable
teachers and learners to cooperate within the tool. Hence, it
provides practical experiences and suggestions to lectures in
the ﬁeld of simulation and develop existing approaches further.
The following Section II classiﬁes the approaches presented
in this contribution. Section III explains some basics on
Petri nets while Section IV provides information about the
P-S.C. Section V shows how to connect business process
management with simulation and modeling by using case
studies. Then, Section VI describes how gamiﬁcation can be
used for teaching Petri net fundamentals. Practical modeling
aspects in an engaging live setting are outlined in Section VII.
Afterwards, Section VIII describes the use of current research
as an example application. A conclusion and future work is
detailed in Section IX.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

II. LEARNING PYRAMID
How can lecturers ensure that the approaches they choose
and practice will achieve the desired outcome? How to activate
a learning group? These and comparable questions arise for
lecturers when they want to improve their teaching, since dif-
ferent approaches enhance competencies at different strengths.
The learning pyramid as depicted in Figure 1 classiﬁes
different approaches and their retention rates. The ﬁgures
on the left show the different learning coefﬁcients (average
retention rate) based on the teaching methods (shown directly
in the pyramid). The most active and participative methods
have the highest learning coefﬁcients [7].
pyramide
retention rate
5%
10%
20%
30%
50%
75%
90%
use in lecture
Curriculum
Book Reviews
Simulation
Case Study
Problem Deﬁnition
Haptic Experiences
Consult Others
?
Lecture
Reading
Audio/Visual
Demonstration
Discussion Group
Practice by Doing
Teach Others
Carlo Simon · Stefan Haag · Lara Zakfeld
SIMUL 2022 · Informal Ways to Educate About Formal Modeling and Simulation with PN
3 / 5
Fig. 1. Learning Pyramid.
The ﬁgure’s right side shows the methods with which the
speciﬁc retention is aspired in the presented courses. A head-
on lecture or an assignment to write a book review have low
retention rates. The use of an integrated case study in combina-
tion with a problem-based introduction to the respective unit
increases the retention rate considerably. Haptic experiences
with suitable tools have exciting effects, as discussed in the
next sections. The weekly presentation of results and, thus,
teaching by students leads to the highest retention rate.
III. ENABLER PETRI NETS
As a formal modeling language, Petri nets can be used
to model and simulate the behavior of dynamic systems. A
Petri net consists of two node-sets: places are marked with
information and transitions can operate on this information.
The allocation of information on places indicates the systems’
state. Information ﬂow is established by alternately linking
places and transitions with directed arcs [8].
Originally, in Place/Transition (P/T) nets, information is
depicted as anonymous tokens. In high-level nets, like Predi-
cate/Transition (Pr/T) nets, the marking may contain arbitrary
data and can be regarded akin to data sets in a database.
The so-called ﬁring rule formalizes state changes: a transi-
tion is enabled iff its pre-set places carry sufﬁcient information
and its post-set can receive information produced when the
transition ﬁres. When an enabled transition ﬁres, the informa-
tion ﬂow is established [8].
The expressiveness of Petri nets can further be enhanced
by time concepts which is relevant for modeling real world
processes or real world technical systems [9].
However, the dilemma of explanations like in this section,
textbooks, or papers on Petri nets is that they cannot convey the
actual dynamics of an operating Petri net. A dedicated tool is
needed to experience this and to proﬁt from their capabilities.
IV. THE PROCESS-SIMULATION.CENTER
OUR SIMULATION LAB
The P-S.C is an integrated management system that allows
for modeling the structural and process organization of corpo-
rate entities. It uses P/T and Pr/T nets to establish simulatable
models and integrates swimlanes, organizational charts and
process maps [10]. Real-world data can be incorporated and
used for simulation, planing and forecasting purposes [11].
The development process combines Design Science Research
Guidelines and Evolutionary Prototyping [12][13].
Figure 2 depicts the process of academic user registration
inside the tool. When a new user registers with the system,
they receive the general role of guest. If the corresponding
mail address is connected to an education tenant, they may
adopt a lecturer or a student role. A lecturer then may deﬁne
groups and assign tasks to the student groups.
11.06.22, 15:05
Seite 1 von 1
file:///Users/larazakfeld/Downloads/Netz-9.svg
Guest:
name@hs-worms.de
Admin-
User
Lecturer-User
Student-User &
 Student groups
Guest enrolls in P-S.C
Guest with role
assign to tenant
Define
group
Assign User to (one)
student group
!
Guest in tenant Public
"
Student & Lecturer
at tenant
#
Group @ tenant
$
Student group
in tenant
%
&
'
&
Fig. 2. The Laboratory in Action. (P-S.C export)
As a WebApp, the P-S.C can be used on personal computers
or mobile devices. The P-S.C Cloud is set up to serve different
tenants (and clients) simultaneously. Users in multitenancy
system can work without getting insight into other tenant’s
settings, users, or data, just as if the environment was exclu-
sively available to them (as stipulated by [14]).
Additionally, the P-S.C and a dedicated interface can be
executed on a Raspberry Pi™, a simple but capable single-
board computer. External sensors and actuators then can be
connected to its input and output pins. Input and output
data is put on a Petri net model’s places, which allows for
computation and further processing. Thus, the P-S.C is able
to control real-world devices [15].
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

V. CASE STUDY BASED SEMESTER SCHEDULE
University teaching aims to train young adults in the best
possible way for the challenges they face after graduation.
To put this to practice, a case study was developed in
which students are guided by the concept of problem-based
or research-oriented learning. Initial approaches have already
been presented [15]. Through the continuous development of
the P-S.C as well as the case study ¨bureau4us GmbH¨, new
opportunities open up.
The pivotal point here is the P-S.C as presented in Section
IV. Through a dedicated tenant for the respective course, a
learning group of 2-3 students can also exchange and work
with each other in the virtual lab. During a semester, students
model and simulate processes of the ﬁctitious company ¨bu-
reau4us GmbH¨.
Furthermore, to increase the identiﬁcation between the case
study and the learners, the protagonist of the case study, Tina
Nett, is also a student in the respective semester. Tina works
with some fellow students as an intern in the ﬁctitious com-
pany and is assigned to the various departments. The learning
group acts as a consulting team to Tina and presents the
developed solution to the actual auditorium in the following
week. The ﬁctitious student group is pictured in Figure 3.
Fig. 3. A Fictitious Student Working Group.
(photo by Jason Goodman on Unsplash)
This schedules a single lecture and exercise unit as follows:
1) A unit starts with a presentation of the current problem
at bureau4us GmbH given by the ﬁctitious protagonists.
2) The lecturer teaches the named topic and delivers the
current unit.
3) Then, the problem is transformed into a direct work
assignment for the students.
4) Students are provided with workspaces such as free
models in the P-S.C. Small student learning groups
operate in their workspace.
5) Feedback is given within the tool as an integral part of
an approval workﬂow.
6) The students present their results in the auditorium using
the P-S.C.
This loop takes place iteratively from week to week. Thus,
students are further immersed in the real problems of a
ﬁctitious company. The case study and the presented workﬂow
have been successfully used for three semesters in Bache-
lor and Master courses. This setting motivates lecturers and
students to continuously develop the case study further, for
example concerning the following topics:
• A website of the bureau4us GmbH for deeper immersion.
• An interactive purchase order interface which directly
connects bureaus4us and simulations on its data.
• Strategically anchor the individual process goals and,
thus, further develop the P-S.C as an integrated manage-
ment system.
Through such active and interactive teaching, both sides,
learners and lecturers, can continuously develop in their skills.
The knowledge gained is also incorporated into the accompa-
nying industrial projects, one of which serves as an application
example and is described in Section VIII.
VI. PETRI NET MAZES
A maze game as depicted in Figure 4 allows for an easy
introduction to the basic rules of Petri nets. As the P-S.C also
runs on tablets, users may tap on transitions to make them ﬁre.
Enabled transitions are colored dark-green while places with
tokens to be collected are colored light-green. The objective is
to clear the net in the shortest time possible while leaving no
tokens inside. A timer starts running as soon as the transition
in the upper left ﬁres. It stops when the last transition in the
lower right ﬁres. Remaining tokens lead to penalties.
(..)
(..)
(..)
START
TIME
GOAL
2
Fig. 4. A medium-sized Maze. (P-S.C export)
Both the mazes’ playability on tablets and the race for high
scores strongly activate users and, thus, impart knowledge on
how Petri nets work. The mazes have been used successfully
at several occasions from eight-year-old pupils’ STEM courses
via lectures for students in their twenties to presentations for
seasoned professionals.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

VII. DIGITAL TWINS IN EDUCATION
The Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) and digitalization
are prominent topics in public discourse. To ready students
for the challenges these and other technological developments
pose, the connection of real world applications and business
processes has to be conveyed. To this end, cyber-physical
systems seem beneﬁcial.
Such systems consist of at least two components: A real-
world one, and a digital one. These components are considered
twins in the sense that the digital and real twin behave
correspondingly. To be more precise, the digital twin, when
executed with real data, should calculate the same state that
the real twin reaches while providing this data [16].
Figure 5 shows a complete setup suitable for teaching
the concepts of digital twins, IIoT, and digitalization. A
ﬁschertechnik™ assembly line model features several different
sensors and actuators. The sensors are connected to the input
pins of a Raspberry Pi™. The output pins in turn are connected
to the actuators of the model. This setup corresponds to wiring
connections that are used in real-world industrial applications.
Fig. 5. Raspberry Pi™ (upper right) Connected to a ﬁschertechnik™ Model
(left) and a Mutli-Channel Relay (lower right). (photo by Stefan Haag)
The digital twin is implemented as a Petri net model in
the P-S.C, as shown in Figure 6. The tool is installed on a
Raspberry Pi™ and runs in a browser. An interface program
that is also installed on the Raspberry Pi™ routes incoming
signals to the Petri net model. These signals are used on special
input places where they act as tokens and, thus, allow the Petri
net to reach the next system state. Correspondingly, special
output places are used to control the ﬁschertechnik™ model:
When a token is placed, the interface translates the token’s
data into control commands for the actuators. As is the case
in industrial applications, the control signals do not directly
inﬂuence the actuators, but use relays for load control.
(..)
(..)
(..)
(..)
(..)
(..)
(..)
(..)
(..)
forward
belt
start
punching

return
belt
remove
finished product
count
punches
storage in

motor runs
forward

machining
in progress

motor runs
backward

storage out


photosensor
puncher
photosensor
item transfer


limit switch
puncher
12345678901234
semaphor

1


Fig. 6. Control Petri Net of the Digital Twin.
By interweaving imported data, business logic and process
models with input and output places, this conﬁguration acts
as real and digital twin. The setup lets learners experience the
concept of digitalization in an industrial setting ﬁrst-hand [15].
VIII. INDUSTRY
The ways to educate students about formal modeling and
simulation presented so far are the ﬁrst steps. When lecturers
include real examples with real challenges, the previously
described path as well as the teaching content is rounded off.
The focus of a current knowledge transfer project with an
industrial partner is to simulate a new warehouse, which is
currently under construction. The warehouse is dedicated for
dangerous chemical and pharmaceutical substances and offers
space for more than 22,000 palettes. A simulation must be
ﬂexible enough to compare different delivery strategies in front
and within the warehouse.
GAPS faces the challenge to simulate these processes in a
user-friendly way to give the industry partner a feeling for
the future operational processes on site. The simulation is part
of the resource planning of manpower and investments into
forklifts for the warehouse.
Figure 7 shows process description and model of the loading
area in the yard. The sub-process involves coordinating trucks
booked into the system at the yard, allocating the correct
loading ramp, loading the goods provided and measuring the
required truck throughput time. The goal of this process is to
establish a sound foundation for operations. This is also shown
in the process description in the left side area.
An important ﬁnding was to evaluate the exported data from
the simulation in a visually appealing way as shown in Figure
8. Trucks are depicted on their corresponding locations in
the yard. When being loaded, the otherwise white trailer gets
ﬁlled. A timer on the right side tracks time in the current
working shift. Even non-modelers and non-simulationists can
directly grasp the added value of the simulation.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Fig. 7. One Model from an Industry Project. (P-S.C screenshot)
Fig. 8. Visualization of the Yard. (P-S.C screenshot)
This realization is also important for students. Appropriately
holistic modeling and simulation tasks in the lecture train and
develop these skills. They can transfer their observations from
the case study described in Section V to a real world scenario.
The next step is to model the inside of the warehouse and,
thus, simulate the goods provided as well. This will further
enrich the experiences the students can gather.
IX. CONCLUSION
Modeling and simulation play crucial parts in practice. They
enable a better understanding of complex systems as well as
better planning and forecasting. However, as the complexity
of the systems increases, so do the requirements for their
modeling.
Thus, learners need a thorough and deep understanding
of modeling techniques and how to handle simulations. To
prepare students for this tasks, and to lower the entry barrier
for new modelers, engaging and active learning methods
are beneﬁcial. In consequence, this necessitates proper tool
support.
By using the P-S.C, ﬁve different examples for holistic
teaching are presented:
1) Case studies let learners experience how modeling and
simulation can help to deal with manifold business and
technological challenges.
2) Mazes provide an interactive and fun activity to learn
the basic Petri net rules and establish an entry point to
model with formal methods.
3) Digital twins show the relevance to combine different
ﬁelds of expertise in an accessible, haptic way. Also,
they give ﬁrst insights into the complex reality students
face after graduation.
4) Real world examples further deepen the understanding
of complex systems. They also provide guidance to
handle these tasks in a structured manner.
5) Feedback is given immediately within the tool in form
of an approval process.
The natural extension of this list is one possible research
path for the future: Which other interactive methods to teach
modeling and simulation can be introduced within the P-S.C?
What functionality does the P-S.C have to provide for these
methods?
In addition to methods that rely on the tool, what kinds of
engaging, haptic methods can be employed? Further, can such
methods be adopted to inspire enthusiasm in STEM courses?
Engaging teaching methods provide for motivated learners.
In turn, motivated learners provide feedback on methods, tech-
nologies, and content. Thus, they improve education, research
and practice alike. A worthwhile endeavor.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

REFERENCES
[1] J. Hattie, Visible Learning for Teachers.
Routledge, 2011.
[2] E. Grosskurth and J. Handke, Inverted Classroom and Beyond, 1st ed.
Marburg: Tectum Verlag, 2016.
[3] B. Goodwin and K. Miller, “Evidence on ﬂipped classrooms is still
coming in,” Educational Leadership, vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 78–80, 2013.
[4] S. Deterding, D. Dixon, R. Khaled, and L. Nacke, “From Game Design
Elements to Gamefulness: Deﬁning ”Gamiﬁcation”,” in MindTrek 11.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 9–15.
[5] J. F. i Jov´e, A. Guasch, P. F. i Casas, and J. Casanovas, “Teaching system
modelling and simulation through Petri Nets and Arena,” Proceedings
of the Winter Simulation Conference 2014, pp. 3662–3673, 2014.
[6] D. Gasevic and V. Devedzic, “Teaching petri nets using p3.” Educational
Technology and Society, vol. 7, pp. 153–166, 2004.
[7] J.Artal-Sevil, A. Gargallo, and M. Valero, “Flipped teaching and inter-
active tools. A multidisciplinary innovation experience in higher educa-
tion.”
Sixth International Conference on Higher Education Advances,
2020, pp. 1–8.
[8] W. Reisig, Understanding Petri Nets.
Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany:
Springer, 2013.
[9] C. Simon, S. Haag, and L. Zakfeld, “Simulation of Push- and Pull-
Processes in Logistics - Usage, Limitations, and Result Presentation of
Clock Pulse and Event Triggered Models,” International Journal On
Advances in Software, vol. 14, no. 1&2, pp. 88–106, 2021.
[10] C. Simon, L. Zakfeld, and S. Haag, “Das Process-Simulation.Center,”
in Tagungsband AKWI, F. Nees, I. Stengel, V. G. Meister, T. Barton,
F. Herrmann, C. M¨uller, and M. Wolf, Eds., 2022.
[11] C. Simon and S. Haag, “Simulatable Reference Models To Transform
Enterprises For The Digital Age – A Case Study,” in European Con-
ference on Modeling and Simulation (Wildau, DEU).
Saarbr¨ucken,
Germany: Pirrot, 2020, pp. 294–300.
[12] A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design Science in
Information Systems Research,” MIS Q., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 75–105, Mar
2004.
[13] C. Floyd, “A Systematic Look at Prototyping,” in Approaches to
Prototyping.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 1984, pp. 1–18.
[14] H. R. Hansen, J. Mendling, and G. Neumann, Wirtschaftsinformatik,
12th ed.
Berlin: De Gruyter - Oldenbourg, 2019, German, transl.
Business Information Systems.
[15] C. Simon and S. Haag, “A Case-Study to Teach Process-Aware Infor-
mation Systems,” EMISA Forum, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 9–10, 2020.
[16] F. Tao, J. Cheng, Q. Qi, M. Zhang, H. Zhang, and F. Sui, “Digital twin-
driven product design, manufacturing and service with big data,” The
International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, vol. 94,
no. 9-12, pp. 3563–3576, Februar 2018.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

