Construction Equipment Emission Modeling and Activity Analysis Using Deep 
Learning 
Reza Akhavian 
Department of Civil, Construction, and Environmental Engineering 
San Diego State University 
San Diego, United States 
Email: rakhavian@sdsu.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Automated activity recognition and modeling of 
heavy construction equipment can contribute to the correct 
and accurate measurement of a variety of project performance 
indicators. 
Productivity 
assessment 
and 
sustainability 
measurement through equipment activity cycle monitoring to 
eliminate ineffective and idle times thus reducing Greenhouse 
Gas (GHG) Emission, are some potential areas that can benefit 
from the integration of automated activity recognition and 
analysis techniques. In light of this, this idea paper describes 
design and development of a deep-learning framework that 
uses accelerometer data to detect activities of construction 
equipment and consequently estimates the emission produced 
corresponding to various activities.  
Keywords-construction 
equipment; 
machine 
learning; 
emission; modeling; sensors . 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Thanks 
to 
the 
cost-effective, 
ubiquitous, 
and 
computationally powerful means of data collection and 
analysis, data-informed process mining and decision making 
have become prevalent. The Architectural, Engineering, 
Construction, and Facility Management (AEC/FM) industry 
as well, begins to realize the benefits of such approaches.  
Monitoring construction resources, such as heavy 
equipment enables not only improvements in productivity 
but also increased awareness of emissions produced as a 
result of fuel consumption. Studies conducted by the United 
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) demonstrate 
that heavy-duty construction equipment is one of the major 
contributors of emissions from diesel engines [1].  
In order to reduce emissions, it is practical to reduce the 
time that construction equipment spends doing non-value-
adding activities and/or idling. Research indicates that 
although using newer equipment, using well-maintained 
equipment, and using clean fuels can improve exhaust 
emissions, reducing engine idling time and enhancing 
equipment operating efficiencies results in improved 
outcomes 
[2][3]. 
Therefore, 
timely 
evaluation 
and 
monitoring of key construction activities may significantly 
contribute to foresee potential failures prior the project 
execution phase. 
The ultimate goal of this line of research is to develop a 
model that enhances sustainability measures of construction 
projects by monitoring the operational efficiency and 
environmental performance of working equipment. Direct 
means of measurement, such as portable emission 
measurement equipment systems (PEMS) provide a reliable 
means of quantifying emissions. While PEMS provide direct 
and reliable measurements, use of PEMS in routine 
emissions assessments is questionable since they require 
time-consuming setup, calibrations, and data collection.   
This idea paper explores the feasibility of developing an 
automated system for construction equipment analysis that 
helps monitor activities by leveraging sensors, such as 
inertial measurement units (IMUs) and deep learning 
technologies. The ultimate goal is to provide a detailed 
equipment operational analysis smart enough to detect idle 
times and the performance of no-value added activities. This 
approach is less time consuming, expensive, and error-prone 
compared to the manual methods.  
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 
II, the methodology adopted is introduced and Section III 
discusses the conclusion and future directions of this work.  
II. 
PROPOSED METHODOLOGY 
Previous work by the author has shown that end-to-end 
deep learning models can learn to accurately classify the 
activities of construction equipment based on vibration 
patterns picked up by accelerometers attached to the 
equipment [4]. The work proposed here extends this prior 
work in two ways: (1) it introduces a new architecture that 
simplifies the previous approach while improving activity 
classification performance and (2) it explicitly studies 
relationships between the equipment activities and the 
emissions that they generate. 
A. Data 
Two of the datasets mentioned in this work for 
comparison purposes were collected and originally studied in 
a prior work led by the author [4]. These datasets study a 
BOMAG BW 145PDH-3 compactor performing six different 
activities and a CAT 328D excavator (Excavator 1) 
performing seven activities. In each experiment, the 
equipment was outfitted with two 3-axis accelerometers 
mounted at different locations, which produced six channels 
worth of vibration patterns. The data were manually labeled 
with their corresponding activity classifications according to 
video taken of the experiments, separated into disjoint 
training and validation sets, segmented into smaller 
sequences using sliding windows, and used to train two deep 
learning models. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-756-6
SIMUL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
This work uses the same approach to data collection as 
these previous studies, but this time a CAT 305D CR 
excavator (Excavator 2) performing seven different activities 
was studied and, in addition to the accelerometer readings, 
emissions data for various gases were collected using a 
PEMS. In total, 377,808 accelerometer readings were 
collected at a sampling rate of 100 Hz. Because the PEMS 
operated at a sampling rate of 1 Hz, its readings were 
upsampled to 100 Hz to match those of the accelerometers. 
The first 324,579 readings (85.9%) were used as training 
data while the remaining 53,229 readings (14.1%) were used 
for validation of the results. This split was chosen so as to 
ensure similar activity distributions in the training and 
validation sets. 
The emissions signals collected and studied include 
carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and carbon 
dioxide (CO2). Because the carbon dioxide emissions were 
much larger, they are reported on a percentage scale, while 
the other signals are reported in parts-per-million (ppm). 
Figure 1 plots the emission signals vs. time below. 
Figure 1.  CO, NOx, and CO2 emissions vs. time. 
B. Predicting Equipment Activities from the Accelerometer 
Readings 
The author applied the same data processing techniques 
as in prior work. That is, the readings in each sensor channel 
were normalized to fall into the range [0, 1] and segmented 
into training examples 200 time steps x 6 sensor channels 
each using an overlapping sliding window process. Each 
frame was labeled according to the activity at the last time 
step so as to structure the problem as follows: given the 200 
most recent accelerometer readings across six channels, 
predict the activity label at the 200th time step. 
C. Linking Equipment Activities to Emissions 
For each emissions signal considered, the readings were 
separated by activity and plotted as histograms in order to 
estimate their true distributions. The training and validation 
subsets of the data were considered separately. 
D. Deep Learning Architecture 
A BaselineCNN and a DeepConvLSTM, two models 
adapted for construction equipment activity recognition 
based on models of the same names originally developed for 
human activity recognition by [5] are investigated. Both 
BaselineCNN and DeepConvLSTM begin with four layers of 
convolutional filters meant to automatically extract features 
from the accelerometer time series. BaselineCNN then uses 
two fully-connected layers to interpret these extracted 
features and make a classification while DeepConvLSTM 
uses two Long Short-term Memory (LSTM) layers to 
interpret the extracted features and make its own 
classification. LSTMs are a particularly popular and 
performant kind of recurrent neural network (RNN), which 
are a broad class of networks that deal with sequence data. 
Temporal convolutional networks (TCNs) are another 
kind of network designed to deal with sequence data. 
Traditional convolutional networks (CNNs) are suited to 
extracting locally correlated features but not suited to 
interpreting features that are distant from each other in space 
or time. This is because the receptive field of a convolutional 
network scales linearly with its number of layers. In order to 
achieve a larger receptive field that scales exponentially with 
the number of convolutional layers, the concept of dilated 
convolutions to CNNs is applied.  
III. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This Idea Paper proposes the use of deep learning 
algorithms for activity recognition of construction equipment 
as well as quantifying the emission attributed to activities. 
Preliminary analysis reveals promising results to predict the 
emission associated with activities. It was seen, across all of 
the measurements taken, that the new TCN model is at least 
competitive 
with 
the 
previous 
reigning 
champion, 
DeepConvLSTM. In fact, it beats DeepConvLSTM in terms 
of validation accuracy every time, despite training much 
faster and being simpler to explain. In the first excavator 
experiment, DeepConvLSTM managed a validation accuracy 
of 82.5%, but the TCN managed to achieve 83.4% validation 
accuracy regardless of whether the Various label was 
present. In the second excavator experiment the TCN 
achieved a validation accuracy of 78.8%. The ongoing and 
future directions of this work include extending the deep 
learning model created for activity recognition to also predict 
the emission levels. 
REFERENCES 
[1] EPA, OAR US. Recommendations for Reducing Emissions 
from the Legacy Diesel Fleet. 10 17, 2014 Available from: 
https://www.epa.gov/caaac/recommendations-reducing-
emissions-legacy-diesel-fleet. [accessed October 15, 2019] 
[2] C. Ahn,, S. H. Lee, and F. Peña-Mora, “Carbon Emissions 
Quantification and Verification Strategies for Large-scale 
Construction Projects,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Sustainable 
Design and Construction, pp. 1-18, 2013. 
[3] R. Akhavian and A. H. Behzadan, “Simulation-Based 
Evaluation of Fuel Consumption in Heavy Construction 
Projects by Monitoring Equipment Idle Times,” in Simulation 
Conference (WSC), pp. 3098-3108, 2013. 
[4] C. Hernandez, T. Slaton, V. Balali, and R. Akhavian, “A 
Deep Learning Framework for Construction Equipment 
Activity Analysis,” in Computing in Civil Engineering: pp. 
479-486, 2019. 
[5] F. Ordóñez and D. Roggen, “Deep Convolutional and LSTM 
Recurrent Neural Networks for Multimodal Wearable 
Activity 
Recognition,” 
Sensors, 
16(1), 
115, 
2016.
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-756-6
SIMUL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

