Simulator for Smart Load Management in Home Appliances
Michael Rathmair and Jan Haase
Vienna University of Technology, Institute of Computer Technology
1040 Vienna, Gusshausstrasse 27-29/384, Austria
[rathmair|haase]@ict.tuwien.ac.at
Abstract—This paper describes a simulator for smart load
management of standard household appliances as a base for
later on-chip integration. The idea is to optimize and balance
the overall power consumption of a household. Implemented
devices in this work provide different stages of internal man-
agement intelligence in the view of shifting and forecasting
their energy load proﬁles. This enables customers and energy
suppliers to utilize the available electrical power in an opti-
mized way. The simulated appliances can be run together with
real household appliances to predict energy consumptions for
bigger and more complex households.
Keywords-load proﬁle modelling; electrical load management
strategies; virtual appliances simulation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Today’s advances in computational technologies com-
bined with state of the art electrical energy management
systems will become a key technology for future home
applications. Modern home automation systems offer for
customers continuous information about their device’s power
consumption [1]. Energy feedback and optimized customer
promotion for energy saving actions increases the usage of
available electrical energy in a more effective way. As of
now, no standard appliances available at the market offers the
feature of being directly controlled by an external instance.
That is why external measurement plugs or additional sen-
sor/actuator hardware inside of a device are the common for
consumption measurement and control function realization.
Another way for power measurement of individual devices
is through nonintrusive load monitoring systems analyzing
a household’s aggregated consumption [2].
In the near future, appliances will get more and more
intelligent in the view of an increased economic and ﬂexible
operation. A main fact is that a device has the intelligence in-
tegrated itself and can react on commands and data provided
by an energy management gateway. Advanced functionalities
are:
• Power measurement information as previously men-
tioned. The current device’s power consumption can
be returned to the customer and energy supplier for
informal feedback purposes.
• Coordinated switching and control of appliances to
combine the ﬁelds of energy supply and informational
technology to a smart grid application [3].
• Load forecasting for effective planning and power plant
management at the energy supplier’s side and similarly
for customers to avoid device activations at times of
high energy prices [4] [5].
• Different behaviors of the device at varying internal
parameters caused by a shifted activation must be
managed. The inﬂuence of user interactions have to be
taken into consideration at any time. For some device
classes the customer can set up a point in time the
appliance must have ﬁnished its operation. For some
other devices there must be immediate support.
To fulﬁll all these functional requirements the develop-
ment of embedded hard- and software with a dedicated
integration in each appliance is needed. This paper intro-
duces in a preliminary software implementation which is
able to support all the bullets listed above. The output of
the simulation is a real power value indicating the current
energy consumption. As a target platform for the simulation
an portable Android tablet PC is chosen (see Figure 1). This
hardware offers an integrated touchscreen, a high resolution
display and enough computational power for load forecast-
ing, virtual appliance management and communication tasks.
Finally this portable simulator application can be used for
development, prototyping and demonstration purposes of
home automation and appliances control systems.
The paper follows the following structure: In Section 2,
modeling techniques of home appliances are introduced; a
concrete realization in the simulator application is described
in Section 3. In Section 4, the implementation of the concept
is stated. Finally, the paper concludes and identiﬁes future
activities in Section 5.
II. APPLIANCES MODELING
For the simulation of typical household appliances, their
load proﬁles must be modelled. Each device has its unique
signature in real and reactive electrical power consumption.
The abstraction level of the used model is chosen in a way
that speciﬁc characteristics of an appliance are highlighted.
To increase the clarity in the process of device power proﬁle
modelling three types of basic characteristics are deﬁned [6]:
• ON/OFF states
• Finite State Machine (FSM)
• Continuously variable
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 1.
Simulator main screen on a Motorola Xoom tablet PC. The
screen shows the twelve virtual household appliances which can be selected
for simulation.
For an ON/OFF state model a boolean variable is used
to identify whether a virtual appliance is activated or
deactivated. Only one single power level during the on state
is allowed [6]. The off state power level can be deﬁned by
a standby consumption of the device. This type of model
is ideal for the description of two level stepwise loads like
heating elements, light bulbs, water pumps, etc. (see Figure
2-a).
Finite state machine (FSM) models enable a deﬁned
number of constant power states which describe the
operational characteristics of a device [6]. At a graphical
representation of the model, these power states (which
can be speciﬁed by the activation of internal appliance
components) are linked by transitions describing all possible
sequences of operations (see Figure 2-b). The duration of
staying in one power state is not deﬁned in this model [6].
Devices, which are described with this modelling type, are
dishwashers, washing machines, coffee machines and an
increasing number of microprocessor controlled appliances
(see Figure 2-c).
Finally, continuously variable load models describe appli-
ances which power consumption is not speciﬁed as a discrete
stepwise proﬁle. The continuous load characteristic is often
based on internal closed loop controllers where a rotation
speed, servo position, etc., is inﬂuencing the electrical power
consumption [7]. Appliances that can be described with a
continuously variable model are typically all HVAC (Heat-
ing, Ventilating and Air Conditioning) devices (see Figure
2-d).
A. Modelled Load Proﬁles
Load proﬁles used for this simulator have basically a
rectangular shape. They can be described as a stepwise
Figure 2.
a) ON/OFF model with only two deﬁned power states, b) Finite
state machine model for the power proﬁle illustrated in c), d) Continuously
variable power proﬁle.
composition of discrete and steady power levels. The ad-
vantage of modelling a load is having a mathematical
representation of the power consumption signature. The
description of the model and as a consequence the behaviour
of the virtual device can be modiﬁed during a running
simulation by updating its parameters. This modiﬁcation
possibility is important for a coordinated load management.
The more management functionalities implemented in an
appliance the more capabilities in the view of shifting the
load proﬁle in time, delaying, or a dynamic forecast of
consumptions are provided [4]. These methodologies are
integrated in the described simulation and discussed in more
detail in Sections III-A and III-B. For time shifting and load
management functions, simulation input parameters are also
required. These input values can be set by widgets at the
graphical user interface or received via an external hardware
interface.
B. Measured Load Proﬁles
Figure 3-a illustrates a typical load proﬁle structure for
refrigeration devices. A two-level controller thermostat will
keep the inner temperature of the appliance between the
speciﬁed bounds (hysteresis of the controller). The time
periods for switching on and off depends on the adjusted
set-point temperature, temperature difference between in-
and outside and user actions (e.g. opening and closing the
device’s door). Figure 3-b shows a measured real power
load proﬁle of a washing machine. The proﬁle can be
partitioned into several blocks which identiﬁes the internal
operations of the machine. At 300 seconds of measurement
time a high amplitude power consumption block of 1900W
with a duration of eight minutes caused by the heating up
phase of water is shown. The constant height power peaks
between 1000 and 2000 seconds describe the cyclic rotation
of the washing drum. The peaks with a height of 600W at
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 3.
a) Measured real power load proﬁle of a typical cooling device.
b) Measured load proﬁle of a washing machine at one dedicated programme.
2700 to 3900 seconds are caused by the spinning-dry and
ﬁnalization period of the washing programme.
The measured load proﬁles of the refrigerator and the
washing machine are used as a basis for the design of
realistic simulation models. Power states and possible
transitions can be directly applied to an appropriate model.
As a proof of a high inﬂuence of model parameters on
the behaviour of a virtual device, and in the real world on
the energy efﬁciency potential, we will give an example. If
the temperature tolerance in a refrigerator for stored frozen
products is deﬁned with 1◦C, all warehouses distributed in
the European Union could act as a 50000 MWh “virtual
energy buffer” [5].
III. SIMULATION SYSTEM DESIGN
The simulation application is basically partitioned into
three stages. The ﬁrst one is the selection of a device type.
In the current version, the simulation application offers a
choice between twelve typical household appliances. The
second stage is the conﬁguration of the selected virtual
device. Parameter default values are displayed at appropriate
screen widgets. The third stage is the simulation itself. At
this simulation mode a diagram area containing the current
load proﬁle, an information ﬁeld and control buttons are
displayed.
Requirements on the simulation system can be divided
into functional software requirements and hardware proper-
ties, which must be fulﬁlled at the target system. Functional
requirements describe the methods provided by the appli-
cation to fulﬁll the mentioned objective of the simulation.
The model based simulated appliances are introduced in the
following itemization.
• TV, electrical heater, computer: These devices are
represented by an ON/OFF model. The power con-
sumption level of each virtual appliance can be set in a
conﬁguration ﬁeld. The simulated virtual appliance can
be turned on an off by a button widget. The activation
of these appliances may not be shifted in time and the
operation of the device must begin immediately.
• washing machine, laundry dryer, dish washer: These
three types of devices allow to choose a speciﬁed op-
eration program provided by the appliance. Depending
on the program a load proﬁle based on a FSM model
with steady power states is displayed on the simulator’s
diagram area.
• refrigerator, freezer, air conditioning, e-car charger,
e-bike charger, general accumulator charging de-
vice:
For this class of loads the power proﬁle shape
is not ﬁxed in time and inﬂuenced by the operation of
the device. As an example the on and off periods of
the refrigerator depend on the temperature inside the
device and can change without notice if, e.g., the door is
opened. The parameters shaping the basic power proﬁle
can be conﬁgured at the appliance’s setup page.
The next two subsections describe types of devices stated
at the last two itemization bullets having automatized inter-
nal load management functionalities.
A. Virtual Devices with Static Load Proﬁles
Appliances with a static load signature (i.e. a washing
machine programme) are described. The setup of the device
contains two parameters for timing conﬁguration. At the
ﬁrst parameter date and time of the load proﬁle’s earliest
start is conﬁgured. The second timing parameter holds the
latest allowed end time and date of the washing process.
If the chosen time interval is too short for the selected
proﬁle a conﬂict message is displayed. Finally, the energy
proﬁle for simulation is displayed at a diagram view. A
second trace, conﬁgured for the simulation is an envelope
function. This describes the maximum level of allowed
power consumption for the operation of the appliance. This
is provided by the energy supplier in order to limit the
consumption of a device at high demand times [4]. The
setup of the envelope function can be accomplished by
drag and drop functionality at signiﬁcant timing points.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 4.
Screenshot of a washing machine simulation with a typical load proﬁle. The dark curve is the objected load proﬁle (corresponding to the chosen
washing programme, in this case ”colored laundry 60 degrees”) and the gray curve is the envelope function showing the maximum allowed (by a central
energy balancing unit, e.g. an enhanced smart meter) energy consumption at all times. The numbers stated at the load proﬁle curve depict minutes the
point of the proﬁle can be delayed without inﬂuencing the washing process (e.g. the start of the spin cycle might be delayed a few minutes). 08:28 is the
conﬁgured latest allowed end for the completion of the washing programme.
During a simulation, the program is started automatically
if the complete desired load proﬁle is less or equal than
the envelope function. In other words the area under
the envelope function must form a full inclusion of the
simulation proﬁle. If this condition cannot be fulﬁlled before
the conﬁgured ﬁnish time a no start in envelope
possible warning message is displayed. The start of
the program can also be manually forced by the user.
The simulation can be paused for modifying the envelope
function shape. In this case, it can happen that a successful
continuation of the proﬁle is not longer possible and an
error message conflict unavoidable is displayed.
So these types of devices provide an increased ability in
managing the objected load proﬁle. The simulator can also
receive the described envelope trace via the implemented
external hardware interface form a higher instance energy
gateway controller or home automation system.
Figure 4 illustrates a static load proﬁle of a washing
machine. The dark curve in the diagram is the desired load
proﬁle. The gray trace is an envelope function, which is
deﬁned by the user. It is shown that the starting point of the
load proﬁle is shifted in a way to fulﬁll the deﬁned envelope
function. In the shown simulation run, it is possible to ﬁnish
the full operation of the washing machine before the latest
allowed endpoint and under the constraints deﬁned by the
envelope.
B. Virtual Devices with Dynamic Load Proﬁles
These types of household appliances have a load proﬁle
which is not constant over its operation process. The load
signature depends on external parameters inﬂuencing the
device’s behaviour. This can be user interactions performed
on the virtual appliance, environmental parameters or
conﬁgurations at the virtual appliance. In simulation run
mode a forecast of the load proﬁle and internal parameters
of the device are calculated. If one of the simulation
input parameters change, the according forecast is not
longer valid and must be recalculated. The load forecasting
ability of a device is a signiﬁcant advantage for the
energy supplier. These data can be used for planning
proposes, coordinated load management and increasing the
efﬁciency of generation and distribution of electrical energy.
A class of appliances having a dynamic load proﬁle
implemented
in
this
simulator
is
charging
devices
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 5.
Simulation screenshot of an electrical car charger. The black curve is the resulting load proﬁle dynamically inﬂuenced by the user. The gray
curve is the corresponding charging state of the accumulator. 10:22 is the current time of simulation. The curves displayed on the right side of 10:22 are
the predicted (by the simulation) load proﬁle and percentage of the charging process.
for electrical accumulators (i.e. e-car, e-bike). At the
conﬁguration page start and the latest desired end time and
date can be set up. Two additional parameters conﬁgure
the capacity of the accumulator and the maximum charging
power. If the device can not be fully charged under the
speciﬁed timing and accumulator properties, a warning
message is displayed. During the simulation a planned load
proﬁle for fully charging the accumulator and the charging
percentage level is displayed. The charging power can also
be modiﬁed manually. After this action, the forecasted
proﬁle is recalculated in a way that the timing requirement
for the end of the charging process is still fulﬁlled. If the
manual setup of charging power would not lead to a fully
charged accumulator at the speciﬁed end time, the charging
power value will be forced and increased automatically to
100%.
Figure 5 for example shows the charging process of an
electrical car. With the radio buttons the charging power can
be manually modiﬁed. The slope of the charging percentage
state is proportional with the conﬁgured charging power. The
forecasted increase of charging power to 100% at 11:13 is
calculated automatically to fulﬁll the requirement of a fully
charged accumulator at the conﬁgured end time.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
This section describes the concrete implementation of
the functionalities described in prior sections. Some details
about system requirements, software structure, user interac-
tion and external interfaces are introduced.
A. Software Structure
The simulation software is implemented as a package of
Java classes. The main class instantiates all other modules
and manages the control ﬂow through the application. The
user can select a device and is lead to the conﬁguration page
of the virtual appliance. For each type of appliance, a speciﬁc
conﬁguration class is implemented. After conﬁguring the de-
vice parameters the simulation can be started. All simulation
algorithms of a device are implemented in a simulation run
class and, called after each step of simulation time. The run
can be executed in real time or in an accelerated simulation
time scale where one second equals to one minute of real
time. The simulation run class of a device also handles
the touchscreen input events and update visible information
ﬁelds. At the start of the simulation, an additional thread for
the handling of the graph view is started. All calculations,
update methods, redrawing functions, etc. concerning the
diagram area are outsourced to this additional thread. Basic
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

thread functionalities (create, cyclic call, etc.) are realized
by using implemented Android API classes.
A process started in the background handles the USB
(Universal Serial Bus) communication for simulation input
parameters. Functions for receiving and sending commands
are sequentially called in this process. The functions for
handling the USB interface are described in more detail in
the next subsection.
B. Hardware Interface
Outputs of the simulation (current power consumption
of a virtual device) can be written into a data buffer. The
buffer content can be forwarded into a ﬁle or provided
for external units via the USB-OTG interface of the tablet
PC. For the simulation of virtual devices which are able to
manage their load consumption automatically also additional
simulation input parameters, such as envelope functions,
start commands, etc. are required. For the demonstration of
the simulator in the GREEN HOME project this commands
will be transmitted by a smart energy gateway board. The ex-
ternal interface is realized with a USB to serial conversation
chip. For a successful communication between tablet PC and
external conversation chip the USB interface of the tablet PC
must work as a host device. Finally, for future applications
and compatibility with different controller units an interface
software layer at the Android system supporting byte transfer
is implemented. For test and demonstration purposes, a
human readable text based command and data protocol
is realized. This allows setting power states, requesting
information about the simulation and the manipulation of
envelope curves.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, the development of a household appliances
simulator was described. The simulator is implemented on
the freely usable operating system Android. Three classes
of virtual appliances are implemented: devices which can
be turned on and off, devices with a static load proﬁle,
and devices with a dynamic reconﬁguration of the load
proﬁle. A desired point in time for the end of the device
operation can be conﬁgured. Depending on the current price
constraints for electrical power the activation is delayed.
Another management functionality is the forecast of a load
proﬁle. Depending on the device’s internal parameters and
under the consideration of a conventional operation, the
load proﬁle can be forecasted for a deﬁned future time
window. To be able to couple the simulator with a real
world application, a serial communication is implemented.
As a summary, it can be said that the implemented simulator
is optimized for demonstration purposes and can act as
a portable prototyping platform for energy management
functions which will be included in future home appliances.
For future work and research, several additions and func-
tional extensions are identiﬁed to improve the performance
and usability of the simulator application.
A parallel simulation of more than one device can be
implemented. The virtual devices can be simulated on one
or distributed on several tablet PCs. An appropriate manage-
ment of the simulation instances (i.e., time synchronization)
must be fulﬁlled. An additional task at running multiple
device simulations on a single tablet PC is a performance
and benchmarking analysis.
A class of appliances not implemented yet are devices
with a continuously load proﬁle as described in Section II.
For a future implementation of such appliances, a model
of internal electrical drives and control loops must be
considered.
Advanced features at the charging devices can be simu-
lated, e.g., the desired charge state of the accumulator at the
end of the charging process might be given by the user as
opposed to always ”full charge”.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported within the research project Grid
Responsive Energy Efﬁcient Networked Home (GREEN
HOME) and partially funded by the Austrian government
and the City of Vienna within the competence center pro-
gram COMET.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Wood and M. Newborough, “Energy-use information trans-
fer for intelligent homes: Enabling energy conversation with
central and local displays,” in Energy and Buildings 39 (2007).
Edinburgh, Scotland EH14 4AS, UK: School of Engineering
and Physical Sciences, Herriot-Watt University, 2 June 2006
2006, pp. 495 – 503.
[2] S. Drenker and A. Kuder, “Nonintrusive monitoring of electric
loads,” in IEEE 0895-0156/99, October 1999, pp. 47 – 51.
[3] M. Hashmi, S. Hanninen, and K. Maki, “Survey of smart
grid concepts, architectures, and technological demonstrations
worldwide,” in Innovative Smart Grid Technologies (ISGT
Latin America), 2011 IEEE PES Conference on, Oct. 2011,
pp. 1 –7.
[4] A. Grein and M. Pehnt, “Load management for refrigeration
systems: Potentials and barriers,” Energy Policy, no. 40, April
2011.
[5] Y. Zong, T. Cronin, O. Gehrke, H. Bindner, J. Hansen,
M. Latour, and O. Arcauz, “Application genetic algorithms for
load management in refrigerated warehouses with wind power
penetration,” in PowerTech, 2009 IEEE Bucharest, 28 2009-
july 2 2009, pp. 1 –6.
[6] G. Hart, “Nonintrusive appliance load monitoring,” Proceed-
ings of the IEEE, vol. 80, no. 12, pp. 1870 –1891, Dec 1992.
[7] C. Laughman, K. Lee, R. Cox, S. Shaw, S. Leeb, L. Norford,
and P. Armstrong, “Power signature analysis,” Power and
Energy Magazine, IEEE, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 56 – 63, Mar-Apr
2003.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

