The Process-Simulation.Center
Prototype of an Integrated Management System for Research, Lectures, and Practice
Carlo Simon, Stefan Haag and Lara Zakfeld
Hochschule Worms
Erenburgerstr. 19, 67549 Worms, Germany
Email: {simon, haag, zakfeld}@hs-worms.de
Abstract—Sustainability and plurality continue to gain sig-
nificance for society and companies. Thus, the consequences of
management decisions on environment and people must be pre-
dicted and optimized. To this end, multiperspective simulations
of various aspects of dynamic systems become more and more
important. There is need for adequate tools, and for people to
conduct this challenging modeling and simulation work. The
Process-Simulation.Center is an Integrated Management System
for company-wide documentation and simulation of (business)
processes using Petri nets, process maps and organizational
charts. It stores the models in a central database, the P-S.C
Cloud, and allows all members of an organization to access the
models according to an elaborated rights concept. To ensure reg-
ulatory requirements, the models run through an approval pro-
cess. These aspects distinguishes the Process-Simulation.Center
from other university projects to develop software for modeling
and simulation, and enable new applications of the Petri net
methodology. This article presents the current prototype and its
application in research, lectures, and practice.
Keywords—Prototype; Petri Nets; Process Map; Organigram;
Integrated Management System.
I. INTRODUCTION
Business information systems are build on the base of
process, data, and organizational models and an integration
of these perspectives. Processes are typically modeled using
BPMN, as EPC, and rarely as flowcharts [1]. Petri nets are
semantically richer. They facilitate analyses, complex simula-
tions, and hence deep integration of the previously mentioned
views. Surprisingly they are used more rarely. Probably there
is a need to automatically enrich given other models to make
this method more popular.
Illustrative teaching on Petri nets requires the use of soft-
ware for modeling, simulation, and analysis. However, an
evaluation of 91 Petri net tools published in [2] shows that
these tools, typically developed at universities, are outdated
or nor longer maintained. In [1], deficits in (also commer-
cial) process management software with regard to resource-
dependent simulation were also pointed out.
The works [3] and [4] explain how to teach basic Petri
net modeling techniques, but exclude how to embed such
models in Integrated Management Systems (IMS) and how
to collaborate within such tools. A low-threshold offer for the
use of an Integrated Management System based on Petri nets
is missing so far.
This situation led to the development of the Process-
Simulation.Center (P-S.C, [5]. It may be used free of charge
by academic users. Other users can get a free trial access
for three months. The P-S.C is currently denoted as a pro-
totype following the notion of a prototype’s definition [6].
It is used to test essential elements and functions of Highly
Integrated Management Systems (HIMS), in particular cross-
model and resource-dependent simulations, impossible with
existing systems. As proposed during the presentation of [7]
at the SIMUL 2021 conference, a multilingual user interface
is also implemented.
Models are stored in the P-S.C Cloud. Users in the same
mandators can edit their models together. The following func-
tionalities have been implemented in the prototype, and are
presented in more detail in this article:
1) The P-S.C features several products which allow for
defining mandators for different target groups such as
academics or companies.
2) Users of a mandator may have different authorization.
3) An approval workflow uses these different authorization
concepts, thus, and models possess a life cycle. Changes
to the models are tracked in a history.
4) Users may be grouped together.
5) The access to the models is controlled with the aid of
user and group rights.
With the implementation of these concepts, the P-S.C now
fulfills important requirements of Integrated Management Sys-
tems. Through this, also new teaching and learning content
can be made tangible. The concrete technical and didactical
implementation will be addressed in the following sections,
inviting colleagues to also use the P-S.C in teaching and in
their own projects.
The following Section II explains the development steps
as well as the current status of the P-S.C. Then, the new
mandator concept and the possibilities to organize users and
models within a mandator are presented in Section III. Section
IV explains the novel authorization concepts and the approval
process. How to use the P-S.C on a daily basis is presented in
Section V and how to gain the respective visualization for a
simulated process is presented in Section VI. The paper closes
with a conclusion and an outlook in Section VII.
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

II. DEVELOPMENT OF THE P-S.C
The P-S.C is a tool for modeling and simulation of the
structural and process-oriented organization of companies. For
several years, the prototype is already in use for research,
teaching, and industry transfer projects at Worms University.
The development process combines recommendations of the
Design Science Research Guidelines [8] and evolutionary
prototyping [9].
Figure 1 shows the development stages of the prototype over
the years. The P-S.C is constantly being further developed. In
the last 18 months, key functions have been introduced which
are the core elements of Integrated Management Systems.
2022
Multi-mandantor
Multilingual interface
P-S.C-Cloud
2021
Process descriptions
User management
Rights management
2020
Save functionality
Version history
2019
Digital twin
Coupling with sensors and actuators
Controlling of fischertechnik
2018
Layout algorithm
Alternative symbol view
CSV import and export
2017
Markdown-inspired
specification language
2016
Visualization
Simulation
Figure 1. Milestones by Year.
The development of the P-S.C began in 2016 through the
visualization of Petri nets in a web-based environment. In the
first two years, the foundation for the later work was laid, in
which Petri nets became simulatable and a markdown-inspired
language for the specification of complex models was created.
Meanwhile, the P-S.C is a tool for modeling and simulating
simple and higher Petri nets with integration of swimlanes,
for creating organizational charts, and for combining models
using process maps (cf. [10]).
Since 2018, a layout algorithm accelerates the model de-
velopment and makes it much faster compared to typical
point-and-click UIs. Alternative symbols taken from the Font-
awesome font set can be used to illustrate the models, and
a CSV interface makes it easy to import data and export
simulation results (cf. [11]).
Installed locally on a Raspberry Pi, the P-S.C has been able
to access the GPIO interface of the Raspi since 2019. This way
it may interact with external devices such as fischertechnik
and can be used for plant control (cf. [12]) and as a digital
twin. In addition to these techniques, case studies that explain
how to create enterprise-wide process models, how to identify
bottlenecks according to the Theory of Constraints, and how
to simulate push and pull strategies in production processes
have been integrated in the tool’s internal tutorial.
Ever since the beginning of the development, this (internal)
tutorial is constantly maintained and further developed. More
than 80 examples explain how to use the tool, model with Petri
nets, and solve challenging problems of dynamic systems with
the aid of simulation.
The newly introduced P-S.C Cloud provides a simple way
to store users’ own models. In combination with the mandator
concept, an authorization concept and an approval process
have been implemented. Both are used extensively in teaching.
Classes of students can be separated into groups. Exercises are
assigned exclusively to the groups, and feedback is given using
the approval process. Exercises, solutions, and feedback can
be layouted with HTML5. Hence, techniques typically known
from IMS are used to support learning processes.
In the meantime, more than 300 students have learned and
worked using their own P-S.C-account. Their experiences and
those gained through transfer projects with companies have
been valuable sources for new requirements for the prototype.
The P-S.C has facilitated the development of new modeling
and simulation techniques that have been presented on several
international conferences. Especially at the SIMUL 2021, there
was a request for a multilingual User Interface which has been
fulfilled as of now. In addition to German, an English version
of the P-S.C is available with the systems in place to support
more.
To increase the visibility of this research work, the Group
for Applied Process Simulation (GAPS) was founded at
Worms University [13].
The most recently implemented milestones will be ex-
plained next in more detail in the course of this paper, and
an outlook on the next steps will be given.
III. MANDATORS, ROLES, GROUPS
The P-S.C Cloud is set up to serve different mandators
simultaneously. As requested for a multi-mandator-capable
system in [14], in the P-S.C the users of the different manda-
tors can work without mutual insight into other peoples’ data
as if the environment were exclusively available to them.
The P-S.C supports various types of mandators for academic
and professional purposes that account for different product
categories. A first special (internal) mandator is Tutorial. A
second special mandator is Public. It allows users to expe-
rience the possibilities of the P-S.C regarding modeling and
simulation. Guests receive an account which is valid for three
months and offers a limited number of own models separated
from other users. They also have full access to the tutorial.
In all other mandators, several users can work together.
Distinguished users with special roles can assign rights and
duties and have the possibility to administrate their mandator
as explained for mandator Academic next:
Mandator Academic establishes the roles Admin, Lecturer
and Student: Admin users can add other users and define their
roles. Lecturer users define learning groups and assign (other)
users to them. They also create models or assign new modeling
tasks in the descriptions of models that are assigned to the
different groups. Lecturer users can also codify the user and
group rights of models and, thus, their visibility within the
mandator. Finally, they play a decisive role in the approval
process. Student users have full access to the tutorial, work
together in their groups, can submit solutions by requesting
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

approval for their models, or take on specific responsibilities
as process owners within their group.
The processes around enrollment and organization of learn-
ing groups are shown in Figure 2, where the places represent
the information that arises, and the transitions represent the
activities conducted according to the swimlanes: new users that
register with the system initially receive a Guest role. If the
registration mail address is related to an Academic mandate,
an Admin user can enroll Guest users in the corresponding
mandator and assign Lecturer or Student roles. Lecturer users
then can define groups and assign Student users to them.
Figure 2. Petri Net Model: Enroll in Mandators and
Organize Learning Groups (P-S.C export)
IV. MODELS, RIGHTS, AND APPROVAL PROCESS
Within a mandator, rights control which users may access
which models. The following access modes are distinguished:
1) View a model without its specification.
2) Comment on a model.
3) See a model including its specification.
4) Simulate a model.
5) Change the working version of a model.
6) Ask for approval of a model.
In the current prototype, models cannot yet be commented.
Figure 3. Rights Management of a Model (P-S.C Screenshot)
The P-S.C-screenshot in Figure 3 shows the possible set-
tings per model. The rights can be defined separately for the
process owner (), users of the group () and all other users
() where the opening of the lock symbolizes the extension
of the numbers of users that might have access. The P-S.C
adopts the most general right of a user that holds with respect
to a specific model.
For all kinds of the aforementioned users, the different six
rights are simply codified with the aid of drop-down menus.
Also, other settings for each model can be made here.
Lecturer users can create new models, assign them to other
users and groups, obligate a process owner, and also give
permission to other interested members.
Models are initially created as Working version. When
students have solved their modeling task, they release it for
approval which is expressed by the state Approval requested.
Lecturer users and the Student users can revoke the request
for their own models, but Lecturer users also may accept the
request and the model state changes to Approved. If a further
working version is created for the model and the approval
process is executed another time, formerly approved versions
change their state to Archived. These models can still be read
from the history log.
V. THE PROCESS-SIMULATION.CENTER
OUR SIMULATION LAB
The following insights in how the working group GAPS
uses the tool might give a better comprehension of its pos-
sibilities. The tool is used for research, teaching and in first
industrial projects. To separate these concerns from each other,
each work focus has its own mandator. Currently, GAPS uses
four active P-S.C mandators in parallel:
• The GAPS research mandator.
• Academic mandators for two different student groups.
• A mandator Consulting for an industry project.
Figure 4 shows a screenshot of the P-S.C with the (foldable)
menu on the left side. The entire user interface and the settings
are now available in German and English. Further languages
can be added easily if required.
Figure 4. English user interface of the P-S.C (P-S.C Screenshot)
For each model, there are three views (from left to right):
• A model description.
• The model as a graph.
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

• The model specification codified in a special markdown
language (not shown here).
This operating concept that differs from usual point-and-
click interfaces, facilitates a rapid development of complex
scenarios with a consistent visual appearance because of the
implemented layout algorithms.
VI. FROM MODEL TO VISUALIZATION
Modeling processes, running simulations, and presenting
results in an appealing and helpful visualization outlines the
entire journey along the simulation pipeline [15]. Due to the
last development steps, this is fully possible in the P-S.C.
Important functional elements of P-S.C coalesce. The CSV
interface enables the use of externally provided simulation
input data, tracking of the Petri net firing sequences, and an
export of the markings of specific places. This data can then
be visualized in external BI tools. One medium-term goal is a
lively, automatically generated visualization based on the real
data within the tool itself.
Figure 5. Dashboard Visualization of a Warehouse Front Yard
As an example, Figure 5 illustrates how to derive a visu-
alization from a simulation model with a dashboard - in this
case the yard of a warehouse (the model depicted in Figure
4). This approach enables people to see and understand data
[16], offers a visual uniform representation and gives an active
assistance to decision makers on the basis of current data [10].
What is represented here is the simplification of a real world
example. A logistics provider simulates possible scenarios of
an upcoming warehouse with the P-S.C. The Petri net of
Figure 4 simulates all movements of trucks and protocols them
on place Protocol at the right border. These series of numbers
are exported and then translated into an animated dashboard
where all truck movements can be observed. Due to the general
nature of Petri nets, application to any other industries and
processes are also possible.
An appealing visualization quickly awakens new ideas and
user needs such as an interactive dashboard where input into
the dashboard is looped back into the simulation. Likely,
this will be a future requirement for the P-S.C. A short-term
requirement for the tool that can be seen as a preparatory step
is: having interactive elements for the description, for example
a monitor for the current filling of a specific place.
VII. CONCLUSION
The development phases show a constantly evolving proto-
type. New features are evaluated in terms of their cost-benefit
ratio in terms of new opportunities for users. Good examples
are the multilingual user interface or the P-S.C Cloud, which
facilitate the use of the tool for each group.
Such new features also enable students to use the P-S.C
for intra-corporate theses. Some of the scenarios they have
to model in their companies are also challenging from a
research perspective, especially if they face multiperspective
considerations and problems how to increase sustainability.
The working group observes that formerly separated activi-
ties merge and that in a next step this multidisciplinarity opens
new fields of applications also for other industries.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Simon, S. Haag, and L. Zakfeld, “Requirements for Highly Integrated
Management Systems - Simulation Expands Past-oriented Documenta-
tion to Future-oriented Optimization,” in Proceedings of The Thirteenth
International Conference on Advances in System Simulation (SIMUL).
Barcelona, Spain: IARIA, 2021, pp. 58–64.
[2] C. Simon, “Web-Based Simulation Of Production Schedules With High-
Level Petri Nets,” in ECMS 2018: 32rd International ECMS Confer-
ence on Modelling and Simulation, L. Nolle, A. Burger, C. Tholena,
J. Werner, and J. Wellhausen, Eds.
Wilhelmshaven, Germany: SCS
Europe, 2018, pp. 275–281.
[3] J. F. i Jov´e, A. Guasch, P. F. i Casas, and J. Casanovas, “Teaching system
modelling and simulation through Petri Nets and Arena,” Proceedings
of the Winter Simulation Conference 2014, pp. 3662–3673, 2014.
[4] D. Gasevic and V. Devedzic, “Teaching petri nets using p3.” Educational
Technology and Society, vol. 7, pp. 153–166, 2004.
[5] C.
Simon,
“The
Process-Simulation.Center,”
https://process-
simulation.center/ (last accessed 12.09.2022), 2022, PSC.
[6] R. Budde, K. Kautz, K. Kuhlenkamp, and H. Z¨ullighoven, Prototyping.
Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany: Springer, 1992.
[7] C. Simon, L. Zakfeld, C. E. Jensen, D. Klietsch, and M. Montag, “Can
simulation prevent companies from the bullwhip trap? New approaches
to model the bullwhip effect with the aid of Excel and high-level Petri
nets,” in Proceedings of The Thirteenth International Conference on
Advances in System Simulation (SIMUL).
Barcelona, Spain: IARIA,
2021, pp. 31–37.
[8] A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design Science in
Information Systems Research,” MIS Q., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 75–105, Mar
2004.
[9] C. Floyd, “A Systematic Look at Prototyping,” in Approaches to
Prototyping.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 1984, pp. 1–18.
[10] C. Simon, S. Haag, and L. Zakfeld, “Stratification of Timed Petri-nets at
the Example of a Production Process,” in ECMS 2022: 36th International
ECMS Conference on Modelling and Simulation, 2022, pp. 128–134.
[11] C. Simon and S. Haag, “Simulatable Reference Models To Transform
Enterprises For The Digital Age – A Case Study,” in European Con-
ference on Modeling and Simulation (Wildau, DEU).
Saarbr¨ucken,
Germany: Pirrot, 2020, pp. 294–300.
[12] C. Simon and S. Haag, “Digitale Zwillinge modellieren und verste-
hen - Eine Fallstudie zum problembasierten und forschenden Lernen,”
in Modellierung: Modellierung in der Hochschullehre (Wien, AUT).
Aachen, Germany: CEUR-WS, 2020, pp. 101–112, In English: Model
and understand digital twins.
[13] C.
Simon,
S.
Haag,
and
L.
Zakfeld,
“GAPS,”
https://www.hs-
worms.de/en/gaps/ (last accessed 12.09.22), 2022, GAPS.
[14] H. R. Hansen, J. Mendling, and G. Neumann, Wirtschaftsinformatik,
12th ed.
Berlin: De Gruyter - Oldenbourg, 2019, In English: Business
Information Systems.
[15] C. Simon, S. Haag, and L. Zakfeld, “Research-Agenda for Process
Simulation Dashboards,” in European Conference on Modeling and
Simulation (Kuwait, KWT).
Saarbr¨ucken, Germany: Pirrot, 2021, pp.
243–249.
[16] S. Few, Information Dashboard Design: Displaying Data for At-A-
Glance Monitoring, 1st ed.
CA: Analytics Press, 2013.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

