Agent-Based Simulation and Cooperation in Business Organizational Settings
Claudia Ribeiro, Jos´e Borbinha, Jos´e Tribolet, Jo˜ao Pereira
INESC-ID
Rua Alves Redol 9 1000-029 Lisbon, Portugal
Department of Information Systems and Computer Science, Instituto Superior T´ecnico
claudia.soﬁa.ribeiro, jlb, jose.tribolet, joao.madeiras.pereira@ist.utl.pt
Abstract—The object of this paper is to use Agent-Based Simulation
(ABS) to study the effects of cooperation in business organizational
settings. To model the functioning of a business organization we have
used an Enterprise Engineering approach named Design & Engineering
Methodology for Organizations (DEMO). DEMO is based on the
Ψ-theory which has the overall goal to extract the essence of an
organization from its actual appearance. This theory assumes that an
organization is a system of actors and incorporates four axioms. The
operation axiom tells us that the implementation independent essence
of an organization consists of actor roles and that the acts performed
by the actor roles can be divided into two kinds: production acts and
coordination acts. Another important axiom is the transaction axiom
which states that coordination acts are performed as steps in universal
patterns. Based on these assumptions and Game Theory principles
of cooperation, a simple ABS was develop focused on studying the
conditions that allow cooperation to emerge. By understanding these
conditions, appropriate actions can be taken to foster the development
of cooperation in such settings.
Keywords-Agent-Based Simulation; Cooperation; Enterprise Engineer-
ing; Game Theory.
I. INTRODUCTION
There is an increasing level of dynamics and uncertainty char-
acterizing organizations and their environments. Consequently,
contemporary organizational thinking has evolved to embrace
paradigms supported by Complexity Theory and its principles.
Complexity-based paradigms replace deterministic perspectives of
the internal and external workings of organizations by perspectives
based on emergence, self- organization and evolution [1]. In
these paradigms, organizations are regarded as Complex Adaptive
Systems that emerge from the interactions among human and non-
human agents.
Complexity Theory involves the study of many actors and their
interactions. The actors may be atoms, ﬁsh, people, organizations,
or nations. Their interactions may consist of attraction, combat,
mating, communication, trade, partnership, or rivalry. One of the
central topics regarding interaction between self-interested agents
is cooperation. Cooperation is crucial for societies and organi-
zations, since it allows the creation of common goods that no
single individual could establish alone. However, this situation
itself presents a dilemma, because as the creation of these goods
requires an individual effort and the result is shared by everyone,
there is the temptation to make an individual contribution as little
as possible and receive as much of the result as one can. The
problem of how can cooperation emerge in a organization of self-
interested individuals is one of the central questions addressed by
Game Theory, Political Science and Behavioural and Evolutionary
Economics.
The study of large number of actors with changing patterns of
interaction often gets too difﬁcult for a mathematical solution,
therefore other type of solutions need to be used. A primary
research tool of Complexity Theory is computer simulation. The
basic underlying function of this tool is to specify how the agents
interact, and then observe properties that occur at the level of the
whole organization.
The simulation of agents and their interactions is known as
Agent-Based Simulation (ABS). The goal of ABS is to enrich
our understanding of fundamental processes that may appear in
a variety of applications. This is the assumptions underlying the
proposal described in this paper. To represent the functioning of
an organization DEMO’s Ψ-theory [2], [3], [4] was used. This
theory combines concepts from the Language/Action Perspective
(LAP) [5] and Speech Act Theory [6]. The Ψ-theory explains
how and why people cooperate and communicate. It postulates
that the operation of an organization can be expressed by a
speciﬁcation of the commitments that the organizational subjects
enter into and comply with [7]. Based on this theory and concepts
developed in Game Theory, this paper proposes an ABS with an
underlying conceptual model that allows to experiment and analyse
the different patterns that emerge when organizational subjects
use different kind of strategies to handle commitments to produce
organizational output.
We start by describing (Section 2) two of the most inﬂuential
games studied as the best representation of the problem of social
cooperation. These are respectively the Prisoner’s Dilemma and
the Stag Hunt. Also, in this section, some conclusions are drawn
about what are the central concepts and conditions that promote
cooperation to emerge. Next (Section 3), we explain and analyse
how organizations are modelled using DEMO’s Ψ-theory. Based
on what was presented in Section 2 and 3, a very simple case
study is presented (Section 4). Also, in this section, some of the
potentials and limitations of the presented solution are discussed.
Finally, (Section 5) conclusions are drawn pointing to the future
scope for development that lies ahead on this vast and interesting
ﬁeld.
II. COOPERATION
The evolution of cooperation has been largely studied in the
research ﬁeld of Game Theory [8], [9]. Game Theory studies what
happens when self-interested agents interact. Self-interested agents
are agents that have their own beliefs, preferences and actions as
opposed to teams where some of these characteristics are shared
among the group [10]. The assumption of self-interested therefore
allows an examination of the difﬁcult case in which cooperation
is not completely based upon the concern for others or upon the
welfare of the group as a whole. So, the assumption of self-
interest is really just an assumption that concern for other does not
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

completely solve the problem of when to cooperate and when not
to. Two of the most studied games in this context is the Prisoner’s
Dilemma [8] and the Stag Hunt [11] game.
The Prisoner’s Dilemma is a game that shows why two indi-
viduals might not cooperate, even if it appears that it is in their
best interest. Axelrod [8] states that a similar problem occurs in
many similar situations where the pursuit of self-interest by each
agent leads to a poor outcome for all. The Prisoner’s Dilemma
game is a general representation of such situation. Axelrod has
explored the conditions in which cooperation would emerged by
promoting a computer tournament where people could submit their
favourite strategy to play the iterative version of the prisoner’s
dilemma game. The winner for the rounds of the tournament
was Anatol Rapoport [12] that submitted the very well know
TIT FOR TAT strategy that was based on reciprocity. This very
simple strategy that consisted in cooperating in the ﬁrst move
and then doing whatever the other player did in the previous
move overcome complex strategies based on Markov processes and
Bayesian inference. After analysing the data that resulted from
this tournament Axelrod concluded the following. The evolution
of cooperation requires that individuals have a sufﬁciently large
chance to meet again so that they have a stake in their future
interaction and also that cooperation be based in reciprocity.
The Stag Hunt [11] is a prototype of the social contract [13].
Like in the Prisoner’s Dilemma game, each player must choose an
action without knowing the choice of the other. If an individual
hunts a stag, he must have the cooperation of his partner in order
to succeed. An individual can get a hare by himself, but a hare is
worth less than a stag.
Skyrms argues that the Stag Hunt does not have the same
melodramatic quality as the Prisoner’s Dilemma but instead raises
its own set of issues. When comparing a two-person Stag Hunt with
a two-person Prisoner’s Dilemma he noticed the following. If two
people cooperate in the Prisoner’s Dilemma, each is choosing less
rather than more. Speciﬁcally, there is a conﬂict between individual
rationality and mutual beneﬁt. In the Stag Hunt, what is rational for
one player to choose depends on his beliefs about what the other
will choose. The Stag Hunt differs from the Prisoner’s Dilemma in
that there are two Nash equilibria: when both players cooperate and
both players defect. In the Prisoner’s Dilemma, in contrast, despite
the fact that both players cooperating is Pareto efﬁcient [14], the
only Nash equilibrium is when both players choose to defect.
The existence of those two Nash equilibria is just to say that it
is best to hunt stag if the other player hunts stag, and it is best to
hunt hare if the other player hunts hare. Therefore, it is clear that
a pessimist, who always expects the worst, would hunt hare. But
it is also true with these pay-offs that a cautions player, who was
so uncertain that he though the other player was as likely to do
one thing as another, would also hunt hare. Hunting hare is said to
be the risk-dominant equilibrium. That is not to say that rational
players could not coordinate on the stag hunt equilibrium that gives
them both a better pay-off, but it is to say that they need a measure
of trust to do so.
A. Conclusion
When observing cooperation from a prisoner’s dilemma point
of view it was concluded that for cooperation to emerge certain
conditions have to hold true. Speciﬁcally, a player will be more
likely to cooperate with another player if there is a high probability
of interacting with that player in the future. The same applies to the
stag hunt since a repeated prisoner’s dilemma is equivalent to a two-
person stag hunt. Another important conclusion is that a strategy
based on direct reciprocity can overcome even complex strategies.
Therefore, if cooperation is established on the basis of direct
reciprocity it will endure even if non-cooperative strategies exist.
Indirect reciprocity should also be consider and has been identiﬁed
has an equal important factor that promotes the emergence of co-
operation. Indirect reciprocity, also denominated reputation, states
that if a player is known as being cooperative than other players
more likely will cooperate with him. Basically, what this means is
that cooperation can emerge either by inducing a certain behaviour
in direct relationships but also through indirect relationships. From
the stag hunt game several important conclusion could also be
extracted. Skirms argued that the viability of cooperation depends
on mutual beliefs, and rest on trust. Therefore, trust is a central
concept when studying cooperation and was the property chosen
in the case study. We believe that even if mutual beliefs don’t exist
or if the players are unaware of each other beliefs, cooperation will
nevertheless emerge if the level of trust is higher enough.
III. DESIGN AND ENGINEERING METHODOLOGY FOR
ORGANIZATIONS (DEMO)
DEMO is the approach that supports our proposal for modelling
the functioning of an organization. Its roots are in the Ψ-theory,
which provides an explanation of the construction and operation
of organizations based on four axioms thus contributing to the
strong theoretical ground that ensures the formal correctness of
its models [2], [3], [4]. DEMO’s methodology has already been
use successfully in a large number of projects [15], [16], [17].
The operation axiom states that the operation of an organization
is constituted by the activities of actor roles, which are elementary
chunks of authority and responsibility, fulﬁlled by subjects. In
doing so, these subjects perform two kinds of acts: production acts
(P-acts) and coordination acts (C-acts). By performing P-acts, the
actors contribute to bringing about the goods or services delivered
to the environment of the organization. However, by performing
C-acts, actors enter into, and comply with, commitments and
agreements towards each other regarding the performance of P-
acts.
In this paper, our focus is to provide a systematic way to study
both the effects of cooperation in organizational performance and
also what are the conditions that foster or promote cooperation.
In this manner, we are not so concerned about how a P-act is
performed but we put more stress in the C-acts since these are the
ones that are focused on the social interactions of the intervening
actors.
A coordination act is an act performed by one actor, called
the performer, and directed to another actor, called the addressee
(Figure 1). It consists of two concurrent acts, the intention act and
the proposition act. In the intention act, the performer proclaims
its ”social attitude” with respect to the proposition. This term
was deﬁned by Searle [6] and Dietz [3] used it to distinguish
coordination acts from communicative acts in general.
The actors are the active elements of an organization and they are
the only ones Dietz considers when modelling the functioning of
an organization. Therefore, machines or any other artiﬁcial systems
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 1.
DEMO Transaction Axiom [3]
are consider as supporting actors an never replacing them. Actors
are not triggered by events, instead they constantly loop through
the actor cycle, in which they deal with their agenda. An agendum
is a C-fact with a proposed time for dealing with it, to which actor
is committed to respond. Action rules guide the actors in dealing
with their agenda; there is an action rule for every type of agendum.
The addressees of these C-acts are other actors, which means
that the resulting C-facts are added to the agenda of these other
actors. In this way, actors keep supplying each other with work.
Dietz described the behaviour of actors as described in common
organizational theories where three main factors are taken into
account: responsibility, authority and, competence. In this paper we
broaden this notion to include other factors borrowed from Game
Theory, namely reciprocity, reputation and trust. This is further
explained in Section IV-A.
Another important notion we have retrieve from the Ψ-theory
is how the C-act are performed and this is explained by the the
transaction axiom. This axiom states that C-acts are performed as
steps in universal patterns. These patterns, also called transactions,
always involve two actor roles (initiator and executor) and are
aimed at achieving a particular result. A transaction is developed
in three phases: the order phase (O-phase), the execution phase
(E-phase), and the result phase (R-phase). In the O-phase the two
actors agree on the expected result of the transaction; in the E-
phase the executor executes the production act needed to create
the anticipated result; and in the R-phase the two actors discuss
if the transaction result is equal to the expected one. The general
transaction pattern is shown in Figure 1.
In this general pattern, the course that is taken is when the
initiator and the executor keep consenting to each other’s acts.
However, they may also dissent. There are two states where
this may happen, namely ”requested” and ”stated”. Instead of
promising, one may respond to a request by declining it, and,
instead of accepting one may respond to a statement by rejecting it.
The reason for declining a request by the executor of a transaction
or for rejecting a statement by the initiator is in principle a mixture
of the three validity claims. These validity claims where deﬁned
by Habermmas [18] and are respectively, claim to truth, claim to
justice and claim to sincerity.
This is central to our proposed ABS because since the transaction
pattern is ﬁxed, then, we can change how the behaviour of the
actors involved is characterized and see the impact of such changes
when performing this general transaction pattern.
IV. AGENT-BASED SIMULATION (ABS)
Formally, ABS is a computational method that enables a re-
searcher to create, analyse, and experiment with models composed
of diverse and heterogeneous agents that interact within an envi-
ronment [19].
The underlying assumption for using ABS to model reality
in organizations is to view organizations as Complex Adaptive
Systems that emerge from the interactions among human agents. In
this context, to take an agent-based approach means not having to
assign an objective to an organization and instead model the agents
that comprise it with explicit attention to their individual behaviours
and how they interact with each other and the environment.
Agent-based models are characterized by the following [20],
[21], [22]:
• A set of agents, their attributes and behaviours. The behaviour
can be either according to rational models, behavioural models
or rule-based models.
• A set of agent relationships and methods of interaction: An
underlying topology of connectedness deﬁnes how and with
whom agents interact.
• The agents environment: Agents interact with their environ-
ment in addition to other agents.
• Model outcomes: simulating a set of agents interacting in an
environment provides insights into phenomena related to the
part of reality being simulated.
Next section its describe how an ABS can be built using the
assumption of DEMO’s Ψ-theory and the conclusions drawn from
the Prisoner’s Dilemma and Stag Hunt game. Also, a simple
instantiation of the model was implemented in Netlogo [23].
A. ABM and Cooperation in Business Organizational Settings
The basic units of the model proposed to systematically study
the effects of cooperation in organizational performance are a set of
agents that can be of two particular types: initiators and executors.
These two types correspond to the two actor roles described in
DEMO Transaction axiom. These two roles can either represent
individual people, groups of people or even different organizations.
As described in Section III each of these roles has a particular set
of actions that deﬁne their behaviour in the context of a transaction
as expressed in Figure 1. Combinations of these actions represent
different possible paths and results that can happen while the two
actor roles interact.
Dietz has a lot more subtleties concerning the Transaction axiom
than what is explained here. But, one of our concerns was to keep
the model as simple as possible, because the essence of modelling
is to simplify things and also, as long as no vital conceptual
features are lost, simplicity is the best modelling strategy. Also,
the complexity of agent-based modelling should be in the simulated
results, not is the assumptions of the model. In this manner when
surprising results occur, it will be possible to understand everything
that went into the model.
Dietz does not explicitly integrate in DEMO’s models how
cooperation factors impact the execution of a transaction. Namely,
nothing is said about how trust affects or inﬂuences what is
the actions the initiator or executor chooses while performing a
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 2.
Initiator actions and behaviour (left). Executor actions and behaviour (right)
transaction. Instead, is assumed that the actors involved in an
interaction do a ”best effort” while performing the transaction. In
reality this is not always the case. The individuals that fulﬁl actor
roles in business contexts are self-interest in the sense that they
may or might not share the same goals. Also, fostering cooperation
among individuals, groups, or even nations is something very
much related to culture and context. What could help foster
cooperation in some situations might not work across all similar
situations. This means that although Axelrod and Skyrms argues
that cooperation can emerge when there’s reciprocity, attention to
reputation and trust, it’s not straightforward how this could be
integrate in work practices nor what are the underlying conditions
to make reciprocity, attention to reputation and trust exist among
interacting individuals. Therefore, it would be very interesting and
important to understand how we can add this kind of factors to
DEMO’s transactions and see if this could help shed some light
on questions such as: ”Does the level of trust between two actors
affect the time a transaction takes to be concluded?”; Does the
level of trust between two actors affect the probability of futures
interactions? If both actors used a reciprocity based strategy will
they become more tolerant to faulty situations, like the level of
quality of the executor output?
We believe that bringing together DEMO’s extensive work in
modelling organizations and Axelrod’s and Skyrms wonderful
work on cooperation could help answer those and other important
questions. In order to do an initial test to understand the potential
of bringing this body of knowledge together, we have implemented
an ABS in NetLogo based on the diagram in Figure 2.
It was assumed that both an initiator and an executor can only
have a maximum number of simultaneous transactions. If a initiator
has reached this maximum number he will only be able to do a
new request after one of the current transactions is ﬁnished. Also,
we have assumed that if an executor is inactive during a maximum
period of time he would be eliminated from the environment. This
is a consequence of all the initiators refusing to interact with them
due to low level of trust.
In this model, we have used trust to test how this would impact
the number of commitments between initiators and executors and
also the number of executors that would die out for being inactive
too long. We have devised three simple scenarios in order to be
able to compare the differences between the results. Among the
different scenarios we have change the probability with which an
Scenario
Description
Results
Scenario1
executors
never
refuse a request
p = 1
Equilibrium is reach very fast (num-
ber of commitments constant ≃ 490)
and no executors die out for lack of
requests (≃ 97.9).
Scenario2
executors
refuse
a request with a
probability p = .5
Equilibrium
takes
longer
to
be
achieve,
number
of
commitments
decreases to less than a half (≃ 218)
executors die out for refusing requests
(≃ 82.5).
Scenario3
executors
refuse
a request with a
probability p = .2
Equilibrium
takes
longer
to
be
achieve, number of commitments is
very low (≃ 40.7) and most executors
die out(≃ 33).
Table I
SCENARIOS AND RESULTS
executor would refuse a request. This probability basically traduces
the level of trust between an initiator and an executor. Therefore,
the higher the level of trust the higher chances of an executor to
fulﬁl a certain commitment. The details of each scenario and the
results after several simulation runs are described in Table I and
Figure 3.
Although the assumptions of the presented scenarios are simple,
the statements describing the scenarios and the respective conclu-
sions show the potential of using Game Theory, DEMO’s Ψ-theory
and ABS to study cooperation in organizational settings.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this paper, we have addressed the problem related to under-
standing what are the effects of cooperation in business organiza-
tional settings. We have started by describing what is cooperation
and how it has been studied from a Game Theory point of view.
In this context we have described two of the most studied games
related to cooperation, namely the Prisoner’s Dilemma and the
Stag Hunt. These games have been extensively used to understand
what are the necessary factors and conditions for cooperation to
emerge in a environment populated by self-interested agents. To
model the social interactions between two actors we have used
DEMO’s Ψ-theory. Finally, we have described how a conceptual
model based on ABS which included concepts from DEMO and
Game Theory could be use to study the effects of cooperation in
business organizational settings. A very simple instantiation of this
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 3.
Scenario 1 (left). Scenario 2 (center) Scenario 3 (right)
model was used to simulate three different scenarios from which
some conclusions were drawn. These conclusion were merely
representative of the potential of bringing these concepts together.
To be able to reach conclusive or even breakthrough insights it
would be necessary to include more details and more though-out
assumptions. Namely, extend the interaction to n-person instead of
just 2-person transactions.
Axelrod, a part from studying the two-person Prisoner’s
Dilemma, he was also concerned in understanding how cooperation
could emerge when many people interact with each other in
groups rather that in pairs. In a n-person Prisoner’s Dilemma, the
dynamics that evolve to sustain cooperation are different from the
two-person version. This is due to the fact that in a n-person
Prisoner’s Dilemma the players have no way of focusing their
punishment on someone in the group who has failed to cooperate.
From this realization, Axelrod developed a new game, the ”norms
game”, that allowed players to punish individuals who do not
cooperate. Another interesting experiment would be to add to
the simulation the ability for executors to create groups among
them to compete with other groups of executors. Finally, failing
to cooperate sometimes is not intentional but instead the result
of a misunderstanding, for example, the previous action was not
understood or the current action failed to be correctly implemented.
In order to also incorporate this possibility, it would be necessary to
add some kind of ”noise” to the model and the ability for executors
to show contrition and generosity.
Extending the interaction to n-person transactions involves con-
sidering a lot more factors that is no doubt a challenge but it could
potentially provide very valuable insights to the questions raised
in this paper. Also, in the possibility of these experiments reach
conclusive statements about how cooperation could be promoted in
such settings it could help to enhance DEMO’s Ψ-theory models
in order to better accommodate the social side of business and
therefore bridge the gap that still exists in many of the approaches
of Enterprise Engineering.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by FCT (INESC-ID multiannual fund-
ing) under the project PEst-OE/EEI/LA0021/2011. The authors also
would like to acknowledge to the European funded Project Games
and Learning Alliance (FP7 258169) the Network of Excellence
(NoE) on Serious Games.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Magalh˜aes, Organizational Knowledge and Technology. Ed-
ward Elgar Publishing, 2004.
[2] J. L. G. Dietz, “The atoms, molecules and ﬁbers of organizations,”
Data Knowl. Eng., vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 301–325, 2003.
[3] J. Dietz, Enterprise Ontology: Theory and Methodology. Springer,
2006.
[4] J. Barjis, “A business process modeling and simulation method
using demo,” in Enterprise Information Systems, vol. 12 of
Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, pp. 254–265,
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009.
[5] F. Dignum and J. Dietz, “Communication modelling: The lan-
guage/action perspective,” in Second International Workshop on
Communication Modeling (LAP 97), 1997.
[6] J. Searle, Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language.
Cambridge University Press, 1969.
[7] A. Caetano, A. Assis, and J. Tribolet, “Using business transactions
to analyse the consistency of business process models,” Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, vol. 0, pp. 4277–
4285, 2012.
[8] R. Axelrod, The Evolution of Cooperation. Basic Books, 1985.
[9] R. Axelrod, The Complexity of Cooperation: Agent-Based Models
of Competition and Collaboration. Princeton University Press,
1997.
[10] K. Leyton-Brown, Essentials of Game Theory: A Concise, Multi-
disciplinary Introduction. Morgan and Claypool Publishers, 2008.
[11] B. Skyrms, The Stag Hunt and the Evolution of Social Structure.
Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[12] A. Rapoport and A. Chammah, Prisoner’s Dilemma. Ann Arbor,
Mich.: University of Michigan Press, 1965.
[13] T. Hobbes, Leviathan. London: Penguin Books, 1985.
[14] M. J. Osborne, An Introduction to Game Theory.
Oxford
University Press, 2009.
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

[15] A. Caetano and J. Tribolet, “On the use of a role ontology
to consistently design business processes,” Building the e-World
Ecosystem, pp. 163–176, 2011.
[16] D. Aveiro, A. Silva, and J. Tribolet, “Control organization: A
demo based speciﬁcation and extension,” Advances in Enterprise
Engineering V, pp. 16–30, 2011.
[17] M. Zacarias, H. Pinto, R. Magalh˜aes, and J. Tribolet, “A context-
aware and agent-centric perspective for the alignment between
individuals and organizations,” Information Systems, vol. 35,
no. 4, pp. 441–466, 2010.
[18] J. Habermas, The Theory of Communicative Action, Volume 1:
Reason and the Rationalization of Society. Beacon Press, 1985.
[19] N. Gilbert, Agent-Based Models (Quantitative Applications in the
Social Sciences). Sage Publications, Inc, 1998.
[20] M.-H. Chang and J. J. Harrington, “Agent-based models of organi-
zations,” in Handbook of Computational Economics (L. Tesfatsion
and K. L. Judd, eds.), vol. 2 of Handbook of Computational
Economics, ch. 26, pp. 1273–1337, Elsevier, 00 2006.
[21] J. Miller and S. Page, Complex Adaptive Systems: An Introduction
to Computational Models of Social Life.
Princeton University
Press, 2007.
[22] C. Macal and M. North, “Tutorial on agent-based modelling and
simulation,” Journal of Simulation, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 151–162,
2010.
[23] U.
Wilensky,
“NetLogo.”
http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/,
1999. [Online; accessed 05-November-2012].
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

