Towards Unified Conceptual Modeling and Integrated Analysis in Joint 
Applications of Project Management, Business Process Management and Simulation 
 
Germano de Souza Kienbaum, Álvaro Augusto Neto 
Associated Lab. for Applied Math. and Computing (LAC) 
National Space Research Institute (INPE) 
São José dos Campos, SP, Brasil 
kienbaum@uol.com.br, prof.alvaro@uol.com.br 
Carlos Alberto M. B. dos Santos, Andréa N. P. Durán, 
Renato Fernandez, Celso Israel Fornari 
Department of Space Systems Eng. and Technology (ETE) 
National Space Research Institute (INPE) 
São José dos Campos, SP, Brasil 
carlos.ambsantos@gmail.com, andrea@ccs.inpe.br, 
renato_fernandez@hotmail.com, celso@las.inpe.br
 
Abstract—This work proposes a systematic approach for model 
building and analysis of the product lifecycle processes of 
complex systems development, products and/or services, 
making use of Project Management, Business Process 
Management and Simulation techniques in an integrated and 
unified way. The approach is demonstrated making use of an 
academic model, describing an online Bookshop, but it 
envisages real systems applications and its use in Product 
Lifecycle Management in general. The modeling process starts 
with the creation of a unified reference process model, which is 
used for the development of multifaceted and cross consistent 
representations, each one related with a different view and 
discipline, aiming at the achievement of the complementary 
benefits resulting from their joint application. 
Keywords-unified conceptual modeling; product lifecycle 
management; 
business 
process 
management; 
project 
management; 
process 
simulation; 
process 
science 
and 
technology 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Process Science and Technology (PROST) is a 
designation given in [1, 2] to an emerging transdisciplinary 
science that addresses the integration and unification of 
concepts and techniques, which were originated and are 
traditionally used in several autonomous scientific areas, 
such as: Systems (Concurrent) Engineering (SE), Project 
Management (PM), Business Process Management (BPM) 
and Simulation. 
The research scope of this emerging unified study area is 
the complete lifecycle of complex products and services: 
modeling, building, simulating, automating, managing and 
continuously improving the system´s concurrent engineering 
process, described as the integration of product development 
and organization management processes, by means of 
creating a unified methodology and its supporting tools. 
The main focus of the unified PROST methodology is 
the development of a unique reference process model of the 
system´s engineering lifecycle (product development and 
organization management processes) under consideration 
and on its use to implement different views and applications, 
according to the various disciplines mentioned, in order to 
perform more complete studies and to achieve the 
complementary benefits of their joint application. 
In comparison to Model Driven Engineering (MDE) [3] 
and Model Based Systems Engineering (MBSE) [4], one can 
say PROST advocates a similar approach, not by creating a 
“yet another modelling view”, but by orchestrating existing 
methodologies, such as those used in SE, PM, BPM and 
Simulation, and unleashing their full potential in joint 
applications. The approach is the result of an ongoing 
research [1], but it has also been used in some real 
applications at INPE [2]. 
The current work describes the basics of the PROST 
modeling methodology, especially those aspects related with 
the Product Lifecycle Management (PLM), conducted with 
the simultaneous use of PM, BPM and Simulation modeling 
and analysis, and illustrates its application on a study case of 
an Online Bookshop. The SE dimension was intentionally 
not addressed in the work, partially due to the nature of the 
problem considered for demonstration, which does not 
require the use of proper product engineering procedures, but 
mainly for attending the article´s length restrictions. 
This work is structured according to the following 
sections: Section II presents the unified approach for 
conducting joint modeling and analysis in PROST studies; 
Section III describes the problem used as study case; Section 
IV shows the creation of the reference model of the 
Bookshop Online system; Section V describes the PM model 
and its implementation; Section VI describes the BPM model 
and its implementation; Section VII describes the Simulation 
Model and its implementation; Section VIII discusses the 
integrated analysis and the results obtained with the 
application of the methodology; and Section IX draws some 
conclusions. 
II. 
THE UNIFIED APPROACH FOR JOINT MODELING AND 
ANALYSIS IN PROST STUDIES 
Fig. 1 shows the unified modeling approach for joint 
applications of the disciplines or dimensions of PM, BPM 
and Simulation proposed by the authors. 
The rounded rectangles are the transformation processes 
and the cylinders stand for the model knowledge content 
(model representations) at a specific point in time. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

The cycle starts with the definition of the system and of 
the study’s objectives, which determine the scope of the 
model to be built. The Unified Conceptual Model is the main 
product of this phase. It contains the specification of the 
logical structure of the product lifecycle model together with 
the organization’s management process (the unified system´s 
model according to the study’s objectives). This phase also 
defines the system’s boundaries, the model control 
parameters and eventual additional premises and restraints. 
 
Figure 1.  - The Unified Approach for PM, BPM and Simulation [11]. 
 
The Unified Conceptual Model is a concept that needs to 
be understood as the logical content of the system’s 
operation taking into account the study’s objectives. The 
concept of Unified Conceptual Model is similar to the one 
presented in Nance’s conical methodology for building the 
conceptual model [5], which is defined separately and prior 
to the creation of the communicative process model. An 
equivalent 
of 
the 
Unified 
Conceptual 
Model 
in 
communicative format is designated Reference Model. 
The Reference Model is created making use of Unified 
Lifecycle Modeling Diagrams (ULMD), a notation based on 
an extension of Activity Cycle Diagrams (ACD) and Project 
Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) diagrams, 
originally proposed in Travassos with the denomination of 
Unified Simulation Modeling Diagrams (USMD) [6, 7]. The 
use of ULMD is a corner stone of the methodology, in order 
to assure the cross consistence of the other communicative 
models to be created later using several kinds of notations.  
Besides the idea of including both the product´s 
development and the organization´s management processes 
(system´s processes), another important difference in relation 
to Onggo´s [8] formulation of multifaceted modeling is that 
all the representations are used to describe the same system, 
the 
integrated 
lifecycle 
processes 
of 
product 
and 
organisation, and they must be kept consistent with a single 
reference model, which is created at the very start of the 
modeling process. 
The next step is building the system´s diversified 
communicative processes models, by transforming the 
reference model described in ULMD into different formats, 
such as PERT diagrams, Business Process Diagrams (BPD) 
and the simulation model. 
The communicative process models undergo a third step 
of 
transformation, 
the 
implementation 
or 
model 
programming, yielding the implemented model or model’s 
applications, which might be seen as different software 
systems or the same system that can be executed according 
to different threads. These threads are at least two: one for 
process enactment in production mode, with business 
process and project management functionalities; and the 
other one for simulation with design of experiments, the 
building of scenarios, assessment analysis and results 
displaying functionalities embedded. Both threads are fed by 
the process models, produced from the set of communicative 
models, all verified to assess their consistency and validity in 
regard to the unified system’s specifications. Data collected 
during real system’s operation are used as input data for 
simulation model execution, making validation easier and 
future scenarios projections more reliable. 
The results from the different threads of execution 
(project 
management 
execution, 
business 
process 
management execution and simulation) provide information 
for the next phase of process analysis and assessment. The 
process analysis and assessment step shall be carried out 
according to the diverse views and disciplines, making use of 
the appropriate metrics, with the aim of continuous process 
model improvement, by restarting the cycle. 
III. 
THE ONLINE BOOKSHOP PROBLEM 
The study case selected to demonstrate the application of 
the methodology proposed in this work is one of a 
hypothetical online Bookshop, as presented by Aalst [9]. 
The process model of the virtual Bookshop might be 
decomposed in three different sub-processes, each one 
corresponding to a different class of entity or participant of 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

the process: the Clients or Customers, the online Bookshop 
itself and the Publisher(s). 
The clients access the Bookshop´s site online via the 
Web. Initially the client places an order for a book filling out 
a form and his order and personal data are registered by the 
system. The Bookshop then sends the client´s request to a 
Publisher, who will check if the book is available in stock. 
The publisher sends a message with the information 
requested and, if the book is not available, the bookshop 
online communicates this fact to the client and the process 
ends. If the book is available, the online Bookshop informs 
the client and pays in advance the publisher, who sends the 
book directly to the client and notifies the Bookshop of the 
fact. The Bookshop sends the invoice to the client, who then 
pays the Bookshop, and the complete process is finished.  
IV. 
UNIFIED CONCEPTUAL MODELING AND THE 
REFERENCE MODEL 
The reference model is created at the start of the 
modeling process, making use of the ULMD notation, and it 
is used to maintain the consistency of the PM, BPM and the 
Simulation models, to be created later, making use of the 
appropriate tools. Fig. 5 placed at the end of this work shows 
the reference model of the online Bookshop problem. 
The main entities involved are: the Customers, the 
Bookshop and the Publisher, with the darker grey color in 
the middle used to differentiate the Bookshop from the other 
entities, placed in the above order. The squares are the macro 
processes or single activities (transformations that require 
real time to be executed) and the circles stand for the queues 
or actual location in which each of the entities (or token 
representing the control flow) stay along their pathway in 
their process lifecycles. Actually, one could think of these 
locations as databases or knowledge contents carried by the 
entity at a specific point of its path and the complete set of 
these databases as the descriptive (structural) model, whereas 
the process map shows the dynamical model associated with 
the product evolution along its lifecycle. If a complex 
product is under construction, one could think that a 
complete representation (including functional aspects of the 
product, using for example SYSML [10] notation) could be 
an artifact produced by a transformation activity in some 
point in time along the workflow of the product development 
process. 
This type of diagram shows important aspects of the 
model logic, such as: the main entities which are involved, 
the flow of control and how the individual processes 
communicate with each other, the queues in the system, and 
which resource is responsible for the execution of each 
activity. In the case of Customers, just one individual at a 
time is responsible for the activity being executed in his 
process lifecycle, but the other entity lifecycles could have 
many resources associated with them, which would mean 
that several instances of an order or other kind of entity 
flowing through the process map could be processed 
simultaneously. The resources are part of the organization´s 
asset and they might have an associated utilization cost, as 
well as their availability could be established according to a 
schedule varying with daytime or weekday, for example. The 
quantity of resources of each kind can be fixed based on 
some kind of cost consideration or the throughput of the 
system can be chosen as the primary control variable for 
process optimization purposes, and the workload and number 
of resources necessary could be derived – making use of 
simulation modeling and performance analysis. 
V. 
THE PROJECT MANAGEMENT MODEL AND ITS 
IMPLEMENTATION 
The traditional way to describe a project is by 
representing it as a sequenced network of activities, by 
means of diagrams known as PERT [11], a renowned and 
well documented technique, used for management of 
engineering projects, be it a service provided by an enterprise 
or an industrial product, aiming at their planning and 
execution control. Fig. 2 shows the PERT network of 
activities for the Bookshop Online Problem. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Project Management Model of the Bookshop Online. 
A project is traditionally seen as “a single enterprise, of 
limited time duration, formally organized, which aggregates 
and applies resources aiming at the fulfilment of precisely 
pre-established objectives” [12]. This "single enterprise" way 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

of viewing projects might be the reason why projects have 
been traditionally treated in the literature of the area and by 
computer systems developers as a matter completely 
dissociated from business process management and 
industrial serial processes. 
The analogies between these study areas and their 
particular types of problems become evident, however, when 
one considers a project not as a single process, but as a serial 
one or, equivalently, when one looks at it as a multi-project, 
made by the repetition, in parallel and possibly with some 
delay between each start, of its basic single process. The 
objective of a project management study could then be seen 
as the determination of the ideal basic process descriptive of 
the project, corresponding to the optimized distribution of all 
allocated resources to achieve the best performance both in 
terms of total process time and cost through all stages or 
phases of the project execution. 
These models can then be used for the analysis and 
management of the project under development, making use 
of PM supporting systems, including the identification of the 
critical path, the scheduling of all activities, the allocation of 
all resources, the assessment of time duration and costs of 
partial segments (model´s components) or total project´s 
process model. 
VI. 
THE BPM MODEL AND ITS IMPLEMENTATION 
A business process occurs when different entities 
(individuals and/or organizations) interact to achieve a 
common business goal. The business process model is 
described by a workflow of activities, that is, how the entities 
interact to perform certain tasks in order to meet the business 
goals. The jobs under execution flow among them and each 
entity performs the part of the business process he/she is 
responsible for. 
The BPM study area requires process model building in 
Business Process Management Notation (BPMN) as a means 
for the creation of representative models of the product´s or 
services´ 
development 
processes 
provided 
by 
an 
organization, in order to better understand them and to allow 
their continuous improvement.  
Fig. 3 shows the transformation of the ULMD reference 
model into the BPMN representation using the Bizagi´s 
Process Modeller graphical editor. 
Bizagi is a Business Process Management System 
(BPMS), a system used for implementation of solutions in 
order to model, analyze, manage and improve performance 
of an organization´s business process [13]. 
Bizagi provides a graphical user interface for business 
process design based on the BPMN notation – called Process 
Modeller – and a Suite Bizagi, an environment with many 
functionalities, for the implementation and the deployment of 
applications to help real system´s operation, automation, 
management and control, the monitoring of results and the 
analysis of performance, in order to continuously improve 
the organization´s business process. 
Graphical editors like Process Modeller allow model 
building of business process operations making use of a 
network of graphical objects, constituted mainly by the 
activities, the routing and the synchronization gates, and the 
lines showing the flow of control - the activities´ sequence of 
execution. A BPMS, like Bizagi, provides several 
functionalities to help the development of automatic BPM 
applications, such as:  
• 
Model building, workflow application generation, 
execution, control, management, automation and simulation 
of business processes; 
• 
Real time monitoring; 
• 
Communication and quality improvement of 
business processes; 
• 
Increasing of efficiency and productivity; 
• 
Fast results and good ROI. 
• 
Optimization and continuous improvement of 
business processes at low cost; 
The editor presents a drag and drop menu with the 
BPMN elements for rapid prototyping of new models, as 
well as the maintenance or reuse of existing ones or parts 
thereof. Each component can be individually entered and 
configured, making use of the templates representative of the 
BPMN elements and of context sensitive help, allowing the 
user to speed up model construction. 
The Customer, Bookshop and Publisher processes shown 
in the reference model were transformed into pools in the 
business process model and a one-to-one correspondence of 
each entity´s activities was kept in the BPMN representation 
format, as well as were kept the control and messages flows 
connecting the activities in each pool representing the 
entity´s process cycle. 
An interesting remark shall be made in relation to the 
apparent duplication of the UPD_C_Info activity, which was 
originally depicted as a single activity under responsibility of 
the bookshop agent executed in cooperation with the 
Customer agent in the ULMD model, and now is depicted as 
a send-receive message pair in the BPMN representation. 
Actually, this kind of coupled or synchronized activities 
shown in the ULMD model is very common and they have 
been already explicitly represented in other parts of the 
model, such as the pairs (S_Query/H_Query), (In_Stock/ 
H_In_Stock), (Out_of_Stock /H_Out_of_Stock), (Confirm/ 
H_Confirmation), (Pay_Publisher/H_Payment) and (S_Bill/ 
H_Bill). These coupled activities can either be represented as 
joint tasks performed under the responsibility of a single 
agent or split in different pools, in which case they are 
represented as pair of send/receive sequential activities 
linked by messages. They are executed in a synchronized 
way, in the sense their agents interact during their execution 
and are liberated to continue their individual lifecycle 
processes after these activities are finished. Both kinds of 
representations reflect a similar logical construct and they 
were used interchangeably in the implementations of the 
BPD described in this section and in the simulation model to 
be described in Section VII of this article. 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 3.  BizAgi´s Model of the  Bookshop Online 
The initial BPMN model description built with Process 
Modeller can be later developed into a fully operational 
application making use of the BizAgi Suite module. For 
example, certain activities might require a form for data 
input by the user. These forms can be designed by the 
application developer and local and global variables can be 
defined for model parameterization and flow of control 
description. Databases can also be used linked to the model 
operation. There are several objects which might be 
configured for expressing different pre-built tasks and a 
report mechanism linked to the databases helps the 
management and analysis of model operation. 
The BizAgi Suite functionalities allow the model to be 
deployed and put into operation. The use of this additional 
module allows the deployment of the model in the form of a 
Web application accessible by usual Web browsers. A 
workflow execution engine provides the enactment of the 
activities to be performed by the agents in the application 
created to support the management of the real system. 
VII. THE SIMULATION  MODEL AND ITS IMPLEMENTATION 
Similar to the BPMN model representation created with 
the BPMS BizAgi, a simulation model is built based on the 
reference model. In the absence of automatic mechanisms for 
model transformation and verification, this procedure 
requires the modeller to check himself model fidelity with 
the reference model and its overall consistence. The 
transformation from the ULMD notation into a workflow of 
activities to be implemented using the graphical elements of 
Simprocess is done in a very straightforward way. One can 
keep the one-to-one correspondence of activities, as 
mentioned in the case of the BPD shown in section VI, but 
the representation chosen was in the form of macro or 
coupled activities, as a way to emphasize their equivalence. 
Fig. 4 illustrates the online Bookshop model implemented 
with the Graphical User Interface (GUI) of the Simprocess 
simulation system [14]. 
Simprocess is a tool for hierarchical process simulation 
modeling that combines workflow modeling with discrete 
event simulation capabilities and Activity Based Cost (ABC) 
analysis in a single environment with a friendly GUI for 
process model design. The model built using Simprocess 
shown in Fig. 4 has six types of entities defined, namely: 
Customer, Bookshop, Publisher, Message, Book and 
Payment. The entities Customer, Bookshop and Publisher are 
the same defined in the ULMD model. In the original 
Simprocess GUI interface, the drawing has colors, which 
help differentiate the entities, but the connections were also 
named to facilitate their identification in tons of grey: 
Customer, Bookshop and Publisher are represented by 
continuous lines, depicting the flow of control or pathways 
of the entities, and the dotted lines represent the message 
exchange between the processes. The dashed lines indicate 
pathways of more than one class of entity, for the sake of 
simplifying the graphical model representation, although 
these entity flows could be duplicated and differentiated 
individually, if preferred. The kind of entity flowing in each 
connection is also identified by text boxes associated with 
this particular conection. 
The entity instances of class Message are created or have 
their type transformed whenever a process needs to send a 
certain kind of message, for example at the moment the 
client enters the system and fills out a form (book order), 
when the bookshop sends this order further to the Publisher 
(query) and when the Publisher answers the request for 
information (book in or out of stock). The entities Book and 
Payment have a similar nature to the Message entity and they 
were created to represent the pathway of the Book and of the 
Payment followed in the system, respectively. Additionally 
to these entities, there were two types of resources created, 
called Bookshop Resource and Publisher Resource, to allow 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

multiple executions of the activities performed under the 
responsibility of the entities Bookshop and Publisher.  
Figure 4.  Simprocess Model of the Bookshop Online 
The system was tested for gradual workload increase and 
determination of warm up period. The warm up period, the 
time necessary for the system to reach the steady state, was 
determined based on the quantity of clients being processed 
in the system. Some pre-built standard graphical displays can 
be activated in Simprocess to help performing these kinds of 
analysis. 
The system maximum workload was determined by 
varying the quantity of available resources of each type in 
different simulation runs. Initially the resources were defined 
independently for each activity and just one instance of each 
type was made available. The quantity of available resources 
was gradually increased until there were no more entities 
waiting for resources in the queues in front of each activity 
and the maximum total number of occupied resources was 
reached. Based on these numbers new simulation runs were 
executed with just two kinds of resources defined, as 
previously described: Bookshop Resource and Publisher 
Resource. 
The total number of resources needed in this last case is a 
bit lower than the total sum of the individual resources 
previously found. This is due to the fact that when two types 
of resources are used they can be assigned in different points 
of the process lifecycles of the entities being served, freeing 
some bottlenecks. The use of individual resources in each 
activity might result in an oversupply, because individual 
resources cannot be allocated elsewhere in the process 
lifecycle of the entities, helping the process overall 
throughput. 
Many other predefined variables for model assessment 
maybe used, besides the total number of clients in the 
system, such as the quantity of clients being processed or 
waiting in specific points in their process flow (activities or 
queues, respectively), as well as the total number of busy 
resources and the percentage of the time they have been 
busy. 
BizAgi and Simprocess have no special integration 
mechanisms, except for import/export using XPDL model 
formats, which are not fully compatible. The integration of 
these kinds of systems is a trend though and Simprocess´ 
manufacturers advertise on the existence of integration 
facilities with Ultimus BPMS and with MS Project, which 
makes it an interesting choice for exploring the unified 
conceptual modeling concepts proposed in this work. 
The most updated version of BizAgi Process Modeller, 
Version 2.5 [13], presents also some functionalities for the 
execution of simulation runs, but these functionalities do not 
substitute the use of a simulation system like Simprocess 
[14], because the last one has pre-built facilities for the 
creation of more complex models, for making them more 
faithful to the real system and for allowing project of 
experiments and an adequate performance analysis, making 
use of scenarios. 
VIII. INTEGRATED ANALYSIS AND ASSESSMENT OF 
RESULTS 
This Section presents an integrated analysis and 
assessment of results obtained from the application of the 
PROST methodology to the case study, divided into the 
following topics: Domain of applicability and limits of the 
approach; Benefits of the methodology and its tools; and 
actual state and future goals of the research. 
A. Domain of Applicability and Limits of the Approach 
The domain of applicability of the proposed approach for 
Unified Conceptual Modeling and its application in PLM of 
complex product and service development is given by the 
discrete event systems which can adequately be represented 
by the ULMD representation, which is a hybrid creation 
from ACDs and a workflow or PERT-like network of 
activities. 
This problem class tends to be very large because a 
network of activities is a good representation of processes 
executed in discrete event systems in general. An additional 
remark to this point is that the use of this kind of diagram in 
PROST studies is solely intended for the product´s lifecycle 
process modeling, whereas other kinds of diagrams, such as 
SysML, are kept for other static and dynamical product 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

descriptions, making the overall modeling procedure very 
powerful. 
ULMD is essentially a sub-set of BPMN; nevertheless, it 
is necessary as a unified conceptual/communicative 
modeling notation due to its higher level of abstraction, 
aiming at allowing flexible modeling with the minimum 
number of elements. The kind of problems that might be 
represented by the ULMD notation includes even discrete 
event systems with a cyclical nature, such as a serial 
production processes. The transformation from a cyclical 
nature into PERT-like networks is possible and demonstrated 
in [7], since the main path and its ramifications do not need 
to correspond to one of the real entities processed by the 
model. It might be described by a virtual entity "execution 
orders or flows of control" that splits for branches that are 
executed in parallel or return for recycling in case it proves 
necessary, in the same way one can use BPMN for 
describing complex processes. 
The application of the methodology and tools derived 
from the project management area is based on the idea that 
the complete production process or its segment currently 
under analysis can be seen as a single project. The successive 
cycles representing the different batches of products are dealt 
with by replicating the basic process, which might be 
restarted any number of times, with or without a time delay, 
creating 
a 
network 
of 
activities 
whose 
graphical 
representation is drawn and executed sequentially from left 
to right or top to bottom. 
Serialized production processes are therefore represented 
as equivalent to a complex process/project of a multi-project 
nature, made of several instances of the single process, each 
instance initialized with a different start time. 
There is no need to consider multi-projects with a high 
number of identical processes, because the finish time of the 
first process would limit the number of total processes which 
would be simultaneously active in the system. The system's 
steady state behaviour would thus depend only on the 
number of simultaneous processes being carried out in it at 
any one moment. 
In some cases, it might be necessary to repeat some parts 
of a process to create its complete graphical representation, if 
the same entity needs to repeat a sequence of activities for a 
fixed number of times, differently of the treatment described 
above for cycles that are originated from the processing of 
successive jobs or entities. 
A problem arises when the number of times a segment 
must be repeated is dependent on a variable attribute for 
different instances of a class of entities being processed in 
the model. In this case the process cannot be described in this 
level of detail as a fixed PERT-like network of activities that 
needs to be traversed only once by that entity class or 
transaction existing in the model. 
In these cases, the problem may only be described as a 
PERT-like network of activities if the level of detail is 
reduced, that is, if the problem is modelled in a higher 
hierarchical form, with some details being encapsulated into 
a macro activity that has to be considered as a single activity 
for the purpose of complementary time and cost analysis 
proposed by the approach. 
B. Benefits of the Methodology and its Tools 
The idea is to take advantage from the joint application 
of several modeling and analysis techniques in support of the 
Product Lifecycle Management of complex products´ and 
services´ development processes, in order to benefit from the 
complementary aspects for which each kind of these 
techniques is especially stronger. 
From the project manager standpoint, it is expected that 
the application of BPM and simulation into PM will 
complement the benefits from the isolated application of the 
PM technique. BPM applications can be built to automate 
and help the management process. Project assessment will be 
made by a combination of the normal procedures used in 
project management with the addition of the simulation 
technique, with the aim of enhancing the understanding of 
the factors and strategies which significantly affect project 
execution. 
The analysis, using simulation, of multi-projects made by 
several single projects of identical nature, will produce a 
better understanding of its characteristic single project or 
process and allow the improvement of its descriptive 
process, by optimizing resources allocation and shortening 
the complete process or segments execution times, while 
keeping control of activities costs. 
The optimization will be based on the dissociation of the 
time delay incurred by the entities staying in the queues in 
front of each activity from the proper duration of these 
activities, what is treated as an aggregated estimation in the 
project management current studies, based on conservative 
estimative. The reduction of these waiting times by 
increasing the number of resources allocated, while keeping 
control of their relative costs, shall produce on its own a 
major gain of productivity in the execution of single projects. 
The gain in productivity will be even greater when one 
considers the scaling factor, existing in systems in which real 
multi-projects or multi-processes need to be carried out, with 
their start time shifted only by a certain delay and their 
processes being executed in parallel, by big work teams 
divided in classes by their specialities. 
The lack of this kind of analysis in project management 
studies actually performed is explained by the fact that the 
existing software tools used in this study area have no 
capabilities for experimentation of alternative forms for the 
modeling of their processes, for the animation of the passage 
of time, and for the testing of its dynamical resources 
allocation in the case of multi-projects. These are clear 
deficiencies of these systems, when they are compared to the 
existing simulation systems. These mechanisms will be an 
essential part of the hybrid PM, BPM and simulation 
environment here proposed. 
Simulation 
studies 
performed 
with 
this 
hybrid 
environment will keep track of the complete map of 
dependences and sequencing of all activities, as well as of 
the resources allocated in the model. Experimentation and 
simulation model assessment will be improved and 
productivity will be enhanced in some segments or in the 
overall project´s lifecycle, through the optimization of 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

resources allocation and the minimization of completion 
times, subject to costs constraints. 
This result can be achieved by creating pre-built 
mechanisms that are independent from the specific model 
under consideration, allowing model assessment for project 
enhanced productivity to become part of the normal 
objectives of simulation systems. These model independent 
mechanisms 
may 
be 
developed 
by 
using 
existing 
functionalities, or may be newly created if these 
functionalities are still not available, in an integrated PM, 
BPM and simulation environment. 
C. Actual State and Future Goals of the Research 
The ULMD model of the online Bookshop was 
implemented both in BizAgi and the Simprocess simulation 
systems. These implementations were conducted by groups 
of research students as final simulation course projects. The 
choice of the application systems above was made solely due 
to their availability as course material, but any existing PM, 
BPM and process simulation software available in the 
market can be used for this exploratory phase of the 
methodology development. 
Concepts such as the identification of idle times of 
entities staying in queues in front of activities and dynamical 
resources allocation via the use of simulation were applied to 
reduce segments or overall process completion times and 
costs in the model. Concepts such as critical paths and 
completion time for a segment of the process, typical of 
project management technique, were not applied in the 
study, since the course´s objective was the joint application 
of BPM and Simulation techniques only. Efforts in this 
direction can be proposed for future research, with the goal 
of yielding greater productivity and a thorough analysis of 
possible strategies for system’s operation.  
As expected, the tools chosen for implementation showed 
their deficiencies in dealing with some aspects of the 
modeling, such as replicating the processes and allowing the 
conduction of experiments with multiple processes in the 
case of simulation and with making activity duration 
dependent upon the quantity of resources of each class 
allocated in the model, in the case of the BPM tool. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION 
The joint use of PM, BPM and simulation in process 
modeling 
and 
analysis 
reveals 
that 
they 
have 
a 
complementary nature. The first two of these procedures 
allow for a better understanding of the logic and strategies 
for managing the lifecycle of the entities flowing through the 
system. The last one allows for the analysis of the dynamics 
of their processes, including optimization of resources 
allocation, a better evaluation of completion time of partial 
or complete production cycles, as well as their cost 
assessment. The combination of these techniques is therefore 
very promising, but the advantages of their joint use have not 
been exploited, as far as the authors are aware, for two main 
reasons: (1) first and more importantly, because there is no 
unified conceptual modeling methodology, capable of 
unifying the modeling procedure prior to the application of 
these individual techniques; (2) second, because they have 
been designed with different purposes and knowledge basis 
in mind, without considering their complementary nature. 
The first aspect can be dealt with by developing a 
unified/integrated conceptual modeling methodology, for 
which one hopes this work may have contributed, but the 
dream of achieving the full benefits of a unified 
methodology shall only come totally true if one undertakes 
the design and the building of a hybrid PM, BPM and 
simulation environment to deal simultaneously in a unified 
and integrated way with all issues involved in these 
autonomous and complementary study areas. 
This work addresses the identification of the similarities 
and differences between model representation formats used 
in the different disciplines dealing with process modeling 
and the formulation of concepts and procedures for their 
integration. An initial conceptual PROST framework has 
been proposed, which one hopes that will lead to the 
development of a complete methodology and its supporting 
tools to deal with the issue of improving PLM procedures. 
The application of PM, BPM and simulation performed on 
the study case of a Bookshop Online illustrated further the 
use of the methodology under construction. The continuation 
of the development and application of the methodology will 
require the use of existing PM, BPM and simulation systems 
to perform several case studies, as well as the creation of a 
new hybrid simulation environment, which on its turn will 
require quite a lot of software development effort. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
To the Brazilian National Research Council (CNPq) for 
sponsoring this research on Process Science and Technology 
with a postdoctoral research grant from the Program Science 
without Borders for the main author. Thanks to all research 
students from the CSE-326-4 Course on Simulation 
Modeling and Business Process Management, taught in the 
first period of the year 2013, as part of the ETE/INPE Post 
graduation Program in Systems Engineering and Project 
Management, for their contributions to this work´s models. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. S. Kienbaum, L. A. Silva, F. Loureiro, A. Augusto Neto, 
and S. Robinson, “A Framework for Process Science and 
Technology Applied to Concurrent Engineering”, Proc. of the 
19th 
ISPE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Concurrent 
Engineering (CE 2012), Springer-Verlag, September 2012, 
vol. 2, pp. 1033-1044. 
[2] L. A. Silva, G. S. Kienbaum, G. Loureiro, and M. M. Tanik, 
“A Process Science and Technology Study Applied to the 
Laboratory of Integration and Testing of the National Space 
Research Institute (LIT/INPE)”. Proc. of the Society for 
Design and Process Science Conference (SDPS 2011), Jeju 
Island, June 2011. 
[3] J. Bezivin, “Model Driven Engineering:An Emerging 
Technical Space”.R. Lämmel, J. Saraiva, and J. Visser (Eds): 
GTTSE 2005, LNCC 4143, Springer, 2006, pp. 36-64. 
[4] 
J. Estefan, “Survey of Candidate Model-Based Systems 
Engineering (MBSE) Methodologies”, International Council 
on Systems Engineering (INCOSE), May 23, 2008. INCOSE-
TD-2007-003-02. 
Available 
in: 
http://www.incose.org/productspubs/pdf/techdata/mttc/mbse_
methodology_survey_2008-0610_revb-jae2.pdf, 
Retrieved: 
September, 2013. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

[5] R. E. Nance, “The conical methodology and the evolution of 
simulation model development”. Annals of Operations 
Research, no. 53, 1994, pp. 1-45. 
[6] P. R. N. Travassos, “An Integrated Approach for Business 
Process Management and System Simulation and its 
Application in Project Management”, PhD Thesis, National 
Space Research Institute, São José dos Campos, 2007. 
Available in portuguese in: http://urlib.net/sid.inpe.br/mtc-
m17@80/2007/06.12.18.51 Retrieved: September, 2013. 
[7] P. R. N. Travassos, G. S. KIENBAUM, “Methodologies and 
Tools for the Integration of Process Simulation and Project 
Management”. Proc. of the VII Navy´s Symposium on 
Operational Research and Logistics, December, 2004, 
CASNAV,vol. 1, pp. 150-163. 
[8] S. B. Onggo, “Towards a unified conceptual model 
representation: a case study in health care”. Journal of 
Simulation, vol. 3, no. 1, 2009, pp. 40-49. 
[9] W. van der Aalst, M. Weske, and G. Wirtz, “Advanced 
Topics in Workflow Management”. Journal of Integrated 
Design and Process Science, vol 7, no. 1, March 2003, pp. 49-
77. 
[10] SysML, Systems Modeling Language User Guide, Available 
in: http://www.sysml.org/, Retrieved: September, 2013. 
[11] Project Management Institute (PMI). “Practice Standard for 
Scheduling”, 2nd ed. Project Management Institute, 2011, pp. 
9-12, pp. 35-39. 
[12] Project Management Institute (PMI), “A Guide to the Project 
Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK® Guide)”, 5th 
ed. Project Management Institute, 2013. 
[13] Bizagi, Bizagi Process Modeler User Guide, Available in: 
http://help.bizagi.com/processmodeler/en/, 
Retrieved: 
September, 2013. 
[14] CACI, 
Simprocess 
Product 
Overview, 
Available 
in: 
http://simprocess.com/products/products.html, 
Retrieved: 
September, 2013. 
 
 
Figure 5.  The Online Bookshop Reference Model. 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-308-7
SIMUL 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

