A Generic Monte Carlo Simulation Algorithm For The Availability Prediction Of 
The Devices With Cold Stand-By Units 
Ekin Kaya 
Department of Chemical Engineering 
Hacettepe University 
Ankara, Turkey 
ekinkaya@hacettepe.edu.tr 
Can Pervane 
Department of Physical Engineering 
Hacettepe University 
Ankara, Turkey 
canpervane@hacettepe.edu.tr 
Haydar Demirhan 
Department of Statistics 
Hacettepe University 
Ankara, Turkey 
haydarde@hacettepe.edu.tr 
 
 
Abstract—Simulation is a strong alternative of analytical 
methods in the area of reliability science. Availability 
prediction of devices within a defined period by Monte Carlo 
simulation is an application of the corresponding area. Devices 
that are connected parallel with their stand-by units are of 
concern as well. This study gives an outline of a method for 
generating a generic algorithm that enables the simulation of  
‘n’ parallel devices. The new method is called LSLB (refers to 
the two main parameters used in the algorithm) method and 
the originality may be highlighted in twofold: firstly, it enables 
the engineer easily generate many scenarios for the stand-by 
device selection strategy when the operating device breaks 
down and secondly; it helps to generate a generic, short and 
comprehensible algorithm for the simulation of several devices. 
In the present paper, application of the method is exemplified 
to develop an algorithm for a parallel system in which no 
device has a priority as a main device and stand-alone 
operation of each device until a break down is considered as 
the case. Complete implementation in a MATLAB code is also 
achieved with 2 x 6 optional scenarios for device assignment 
strategy regarding to the potential difference in mechanical 
behavior of the devices. 
Keywords-stand-by; parallel; Monte Carlo simulation; 
generic; availability; LSLB method. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Availability may be defined as measure of the ratio of 
operating time of the system to the sum of operating time of 
the system plus and down time [1]. There are analytical and 
Monte Carlo based simulation methods for prediction of 
availability. 
Each 
has 
some 
advantages 
but 
also 
shortcomings, some of which are common for both. There 
are also some suggestions to overcome those issues [1]. 
However, Monte Carlo simulation is reported to be more 
advantageous in complex systems availability analysis where 
some operational issues (different types of redundancy, 
different types of failure, preventive maintenance, start-up 
failure, switching, etc.) are taken account and where a 
flexible modeling algorithm is aimed [2-4]. It is also 
necessary to mention that the simulation results achieved by 
the Monte Carlo method are shown to be in accordance with 
the Markov Process calculations which may be considered as 
a more conventional method [2][3]. 
In simulation methods, the probabilistic prediction of the 
availability of a mechanic system is achieved by using 
random numbers generated from probabilistic distributions 
which are used to substitute operation time lengths (without 
any problem, i.e., full performance when operating) and 
repair time lengths. Probabilistic evaluation is needed since 
the failure time of a device is often random. When a limited 
time period is investigated in terms of a device‟s availability, 
device is expected to fail for some times and repaired for a 
new run. So, random numbers from an appropriate 
probability distribution are generated several times, until the 
limiting time is achieved.  
There are some applications of the simulation method for 
availability prediction in the literature [2-4][6-7]. Cristina [2] 
simulated the operation of two parallel electro pumps that are 
simultaneously serving. Some availability and reliability 
indicators that are predicted is presented in the study. Held et 
al. [3] used a commercial software for simulating an optical 
network system in which 4 of the 5 units is working 
simultaneously. One of the most important aspects of that 
study is the sensitivity analysis held to understand the effect 
of variation in mean time to failure and repair time of each 
unit. Variations in the parameters of some units are reported 
to have significant effect on the overall reliability and 
availability while that of some units do not. It is also reported 
that sensitivity analysis would be valuable when there is 
limited data about the mechanic history of the simulated 
system [3]. Chowdhury et al. [4] simulated a back-up gas 
turbine system in which some of the turbines are 
simultaneously operating while some are waiting to 
supersede any failed turbine. Start-up probabilities of the 
units are taken into account and the objective of the study is 
reported as to determine the optimal number  of gas turbines 
in order to satisfy the reliability criteria of the system. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Availability indicators are also presented in that study. Miao 
et al. [5] investigated a ring-standby structure in order to 
assess the corresponding reliability. Ring-standby structure is 
reported to be an important form of redundancy in which 
operating parallel units are linked to separate stand-by units, 
i.e., some units can supersede only some units [5]. 
Availability assessment is not included in that study.  
When the devices (or a collection of devices, i.e., 
systems) have some stand-by units that are connected in 
parallel, using Monte Carlo simulation is not an easy process 
especially for the parallel systems that have more than two 
units. The more unit the more cumbersome is to think about 
„if‟ and „else‟ commands in programming. On the other 
hand, the computer codes such as MATLAB or FORTRAN 
do not work with real time. In programming art, time may be 
defined as time steps by the user but for a probabilistic 
simulation, in which the random times are generated 
iteratively if only the devices are operated, it is not so easy to 
think about the state of the devices. There is no means to put 
a clock on each device when programming with MATLAB 
(etc.). So; determining which device / or devices is under 
repair and which device / or devices is at stand-by state  
usually becomes a difficult task in parallel system‟s 
simulation. In addition, when an algorithm is generated for a 
defined number of devices, it is often hard to use the same 
algorithm for a different parallel system. A creative method 
seems to be necessary to think simple and simulate the 
parallel system in a comprehensible, controllable and short 
way. Any ability to develop a decision making structure for 
selecting the next device, when one another breaks down, 
would be a great chance. This paper will introduce the 
engineers such an algorithmic structure through the use of 
the LSLB method. 
II. 
ABOUT THE MODEL 
A. Scope of the Simulation 
In the simulation of parallel systems that are built by 
parallel connection of stand-by units, there may be two main 
operational strategy in terms of a decision that whether any 
device will dominate the operation. Regarding to the 
economic and / or mechanical considerations, one of the 
devices may be assigned as a main device and all of other 
stand-by units are operated just to hold the system on when 
the main device is under repair. As soon as the main device 
is ready for operation, stand-by device does not wait until a 
breakdown and leave the task to the main device. In the 
second type of operational strategy, neither of the devices 
has a priority and all may operate as a stand-by unit. 
Additionally, every operating device runs until breakdown 
occurs. In both types of strategy, the operating device may 
do the task alone or with some stand-by units operating 
simultaneously. If the operation of the system is achieved by 
one device while the stand-by units are waiting in switch-off 
condition, that is defined as cold redundancy [3].  
Alternatively, the stand-by units may support the system by 
simultaneously operating with the main device. That is 
defined as hot redundancy [3]. One more arrangement may 
be the warm redundancy, i.e. stand-by unit(s) are partly 
loaded and deteriorate so [3]. 
In the present study, the suggested method is outlined for 
the second type of strategy with cold redundancy. A parallel 
system in which only one device operates with no priority is 
simulated. It is important to mention that the algorithmic 
structure would be considerably different for the first type. 
Preventive maintenance, logistics, fatigue, capital cost of 
the 
renewal 
and 
similar 
mechanic 
& 
economic 
considerations that would effect an availability work are not 
included in the study. Their inclusion would be definitely 
important for a strong availability assessment tool but the 
objective of this study is not to effectively simulate a 
mechanic system or make the optimum economical decision. 
Introducing the engineer with the generic use of LSLB 
(Length Short Length Big) method and its use for 
configuration of a decision making structure is aimed. 
However, it is expected by the authors that the integration 
may be easily welcomed by use of the LSLB algorithm. 
B. Main Assumptions 
Some assumptions and exclusions that would affect the 
algorithmic structure are given in this section. They are not 
only for simplification, but also for the definition of the 
system. Some of the following assumptions are common in 
the literature for similar studies [2-5] and it is reported that 
many of them are in accordance with the practical 
considerations [3].   
 
Failures are considered to occur randomly. 
 
Only one device runs the parallel system. 
 
Any fail of any component inside the units lead to 
breakdown of the unit. So „breakdown‟ word refers 
to the fail of units in the parallel system. 
 
Units are independent and none of the failures effect 
or agitate the other. 
 
Devices start to operate with no delay when 
assigned. It is assumed that there would be a perfect 
switching. 
 
Failures are considered not to change the mechanical 
behavior of the device. In other words, history has 
not an influence on the mechanical behavior. That is 
one of the stand-points to the use of exponential 
distribution for random number generation. 
 
For all devices; a repair period starts instantaneously 
after the breakdown of the device.  
 
The simulation does not deal with any system having 
interaction between the simulated system and by so 
continuous operation of the simulated system is 
considered. 
 
Decision making procedures for stand-by device  
assignment are managed by the user of the code and 
decisions are not optimization based in terms of cost 
minimization.  
 
It is necessary to add that the above assumptions should 
be revised if some additional mechanic data are desired to be 
included in the simulation, when the system is considered to 
be shut down periodically (or randomly) for a preventive 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

maintenance, imperfect switching has a possibility, start-up 
failure of the unit has a possibility, a repaired unit is not as 
good as new, fail word does not mean complete breakdown 
of the unit, any fail of one unit (or a system connected in 
series with the parallel system) significantly effects the 
failure characteristics of others, repair of the failed unit can‟t 
be achieved without interrupting the system‟s operation, 
etc... 
On the other hand, some mechanical considerations may 
be easily taken into account by adjusting the utilized 
distribution functions. There would be no need for 
algorithmic modifications; for example, if the preventive 
maintenance is done without interrupting the system, the fair 
effect of preventive maintenance may be taken into account 
in the distribution function of mean time to failure. However, 
the mean value would be increased if the preventive 
maintenance is added to the simulation. Any reasons for 
delay in repair procedures may be handled in a similar 
manner.   
C. Methodology 
The availability prediction is achieved by simulating the 
trouble-free operation time (MTTF-mean time to failure) and 
repair time. Since the corresponding time periods show a 
random 
behavior, 
appropriate probability 
distribution 
functions are utilized to represent the probabilistic behavior 
of operation and repair. That approach refers to the „event 
simulation‟ 
by 
Monte 
Carlo 
method. 
MATLAB 
programming is used for complete implementation of the 
method in a user-friendly computer code. 
In the study, it is assumed that the probabilistic 
distribution of the trouble-free operation and repair times are 
fairly matched with exponential distribution under some 
assumptions. That is also in accordance with the literature 
[2][4][8]. Exponential distribution is adjusted by the mean 
time data supplied by the site engineer and random numbers 
generated from that distribution stand for the corresponding 
times. Each device has it‟s own characteristic exponential 
distribution. It is possible to use a inverse-transform method 
for generating random numbers from the exponential 
distribution [2][9]. However, considering the ease of use, 
MATLAB function „exprnd‟ is utilized in the study. In 
addition, it is necessary to mention that the algorithm is not 
distribution dependent. The user of the method can easily 
utilize another kind of a distribution, if necessary. 
Generating one random number means that the device 
has operated once until a breakdown. Then, the device 
assignment algorithm assigns an appropriate stand-by device 
according to the strategy made at the beginning of the 
simulation. Concurrently, a random number is generated as 
well to represent the repair time of the failed device.  
This sequential procedure is carried out until the limiting 
time for the simulation period is lasted. Then the availability 
is calculated. However, it is necessary to repeat the 
procedure ‘m’ times to obtain the mean value in terms of 
availability. The resulting average is regarded as the 
predicted availability. 
D. Essence of the LSLB Method 
The essence of the LSLB method lies in the creation of 
the following parameters ; 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The main parameters used in the LSLB method  
 
 
Figure 1 is schemed for any time period within the 
simulation time. The solid lines refer to the operation of a 
device while the zig-zags for repair. The direction of the 
rows shows the newly assigned stand-by device. As 
mentioned before, only one device is running the parallel 
system. t_limit is the overall time period in which the 
availability prediction is of concern. L_b refers to the big 
length and L_s refers to the small length. Sampling for each 
operation and repair period assigns a new L_s and L_b value 
to the corresponding device.  
Nature of the method necessitates the iterative definition 
of the values for L_s and L_b. If the operating device fails, 
the decision making structure (see Section II.F) looks for an 
appropriate device to continue the run and when a device is 
assigned; L_s and L_b of that device is updated. The key 
point is to relate L_b and L_s of the assigned device with the 
parameters of the previously operated device; L_s of the 
newly assigned device is defined by using the L_b of the 
lastly operated device. Then by means of the ‘q’ index, L_b 
of the operating device is defined.  
The index ‘i’ refers to the assigned operating device 
while the index ‘q’ is used both for the previously operated 
device and the newly assigned device such that; just before 
the new assignment, ‘q’ refers to the last operation which is 
ended by the fail of the device. If a new ‘i’ is assigned, that 
means a stand-by device which have the ith position on the 
assembly platform is switched-on. Subsequently, L_s (i) is 
defined by using the L_b (q). Then, q is increased by one 
(q=q+1) and the L_b of the operating device is defined. L_b 
is always indexed as L_b (q) and never linked with the index 
‘i’. L_b is a continuosly growing vector by the sequential 
increase of the ‘q’. As a result, the last ‘q’ value reached at 
the end of the simulation shows; how many times the stand-
by device assignment has been done. In addition, since the 
assignments are done when a fail occurs, L_b(q) is used for 
the determination of the fail time and fail period, if the fail 
occurs as a parallel system fail. On the other hand, it is 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

necessary to emphasize that L_s parameter of any device is 
not associated with the previous L_s of that device. L_b (q) is 
used for the calculation of the new L_s (i) so; L_s history of 
a device is meaningless. However the last values of the L_s 
parameters of each device is used to make „system_fail‟ or 
„system_on‟ decision. MATLAB saves the current L_s 
values in a vector (with n -total number of devices- 
elements). New value of the L_s (i) changes the ith element of 
the L_s vector inherently. By means of the ‘i’ index, vector 
‘D’ (1xn) is updated too. This vector contains the data of 
how many times each device is assigned. That data may be 
valuable when the wearing of the devices is important or 
when the repair costs are different for the devices. 
In the method, „fail‟ or „on‟ decision is structured on the 
following basis; 
System_fail decision: if the L_b of the operating device is 
larger than all of the other‟s L_s, then the parallel system 
fails. 
System_on decision: if there is any L_s bigger than the 
operating device‟s L_b, then it means that there is a device 
which is not under repair and ready for operation. The 
algorithm assigns that device for operation.  
E. Structure of the Algorithm 
The structure of the simulation algorithm may be 
summarized in five main categories ; 
 
Determination of the system, strategy making for the 
stand-by device assignment and the data input for 
the average mechanic behavior of the devices 
 
Generation of the random times (repair  time etc.) 
 
Assessment structure for the „sytem_fail‟ or 
„sytem_on‟ decision. 
 
Repetition of the simulation for ‘m’ times 
 
Processing of the simulation outputs 
 
The whole algorithmic structure is explicitly schemed in 
the Figure 2. 
F. Decision Making Modes for Device Assignment 
In both cases (system_fail or not) the decision making 
structure has some different modes to make the assignment. 
They are generated by the authors of the present paper. It has 
been considered that their inclusion would be valuable when 
the mechanistic research in terms of stand-by device 
selection is being interested.  
 
The (2 x 6) operating modes that are allowed for user 
choice in the algorithm : 
 
Modes for system_fail; 
1 When the system fails, the rule is to assign the 
appropriate device that will run the system as soon as 
possible but; if the number of the closest device is bigger 
than one, then the least assigned device (least weared) so far 
is selected. If that number is also not unique, any device 
among the corresponding ones is assigned randomly. 
2 If the number of the closest device is bigger than one, any 
device among them is assigned randomly. 
Modes for system_on; 
1 The device that has the max value of actual L_k vector is 
assigned to continue the run of the system. If there is more 
than one device that has the max (L_k), then the device that 
has the minimum index number is assigned (MATLAB 
default function for „max‟ evaluation selects the first element 
in a vector if there is more than one maximum).  
There is no mechanical meaning of this mode. It is only 
for the simplification of the algorithmic structure. However, 
after a sensitivity analysis, if it is seen that the other modes 
do not significantly favor the availability, it is unnecessary to 
punish the computer. Case-based further discussion may be 
necessary to decide about a decision making strategy for a 
parallel system‟s control loop in terms of simplification. 
2 Among the selectable devices; assignment is done in a 
sequence following the index numbers (position on the 
assembly platform) of the devices. For instance; if the failed 
device is the second device, the assignment algorithm looks 
for the availability of the  third device and then the fourth 
device if the third is not available. The sequence proceeds as 
a cycle of the index  numbers. 
3 Among the selectable devices; the one that has the 
maximum mean operating time (trouble-free) is assigned. If 
there is more than one device that has the same mean, any of 
them is assigned randomly. Random number generator of the 
MATLAB from a discrete uniform distribution is used for 
random assignment throughout the study. 
That mode is considered to be more meaningful when 
there is a periodic maintenance procedure included in the 
study. 
4 Among the selectable devices; the one that has the 
minimum mean repair time  is assigned. If there is more than 
one device that has the same mean, any of them is assigned  
randomly 
5 Among the selectable devices; the least assigned device 
is selected for operation. If there is more than one device that 
served in equal number of times, any one among them is 
assigned randomly.  
In the algorithm, the least assignment refers to the 
counted assignment number thus far, not associated with the 
total operation time of that device. 
6 Among the selectable devices; any of them is assigned 
randomly. 
 
That mode is generated just for a comparison with the 
others. The results of that kind of randomness may be 
interesting for any researcher. 
III. 
ABOUT THE COMPUTER CODE 
All of the work in this study has been held by complete 
implementation of the algorithm to a MATLAB script. 
Considering the use of  the code by the beginners of 
reliability science, the interface of the code was tried to be 
constructed user-friendly. The inputs of the code only 
necessitates the determination of the simulation period, 
number of the stand-by devices and their average mechanic 
data that are expected to be supplied by the site engineer. 
Since the investigation of device assignment strategy may be 
the most advantageous utilization area of the suggested
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

            
             
Figure 2. Flowchart of the LSLB based algorithm 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

algorithm, a decision menu is constructed as a button–type 
menu inside the code. For each simulation, at the beginning, 
the user can easily select any strategy for device assignment. 
Additionally, the code saves all the history within a 
simulation 
period. 
All 
the 
operational 
information 
(simulated) of a device and the system may be called by the 
user. For example, at each iteration (m), the system_fail 
times and their lengths, total time of the system_fails, how 
many times each device is assigned and the availability 
calculated are saved. That ability of the code is expected to 
be helpful when a modification for a further study is 
necessary.  
IV. 
VERIFICATION OF THE MODEL 
The consistency of the algorithm is verified through the 
simulation of a non-identical two-device cold redundant 
parallel system. However, prior to the discussion of the 
verification procedure it is important to highlight some key 
points about the model; 
 
In MATLAB, the default random number generator 
from exponential distribution requires the mean 
value of the distribution. That parameter is entered 
as hour based data in the model. That is in 
accordance with the simulation period which is 
entered as year data and converted to hour data by 
the code. One year is considered to be 8766 hours. 
 
The computer code calls for the mean and generates 
a distribution function. Then any number from that 
distribution is introduced as a random number to the 
simulation. So, mean time for trouble-free operation 
and mean time for repair are entered to the code to 
adjust the exponential distribution functions. 
 
The default uniform number generator of the 
MATLAB has been compared to the „twister‟ 
algorithm which is also already implemented in 
MATLAB. A noticeable difference has not been 
observed.  
 
Mechanic behavior of the devices are considered to not 
change within the present verification procedure as well as 
the presented base algorithm in this study. That is no wearing 
and the resulting variations in probability distribution 
functions or obsolescence of the device is considered during 
the simulation. So, selection of the first mode (i.e. if the 
number of the closest device is bigger than one, least 
assigned device is selected) in case of a system fail would 
not have a meaningful result in terms of a mechanistic 
investigation. If there are more than two stand-by devices, 
the first mode would randomly result in different availability 
values according to the device assigned. That is because the 
characteristics of the devices may be different. However, this 
randomness corresponds  to the second mode as well. In 
other words, the first and the second mode of the 
„system_fail‟ decision making algorithm become same when 
wearing effect is not considered in mechanistic investigation.  
The six modes for the „system_on‟ state would also show 
no difference in the results in a two-device cold redundant 
parallel system simulation. That is because; when there are 
two devices (and if the system is on) the algorithm looks for 
the available device which is always the other.  
Consequently, 1x6 modes are held for the verification 
procedure which are expected to give the same results for 
two-device parallel system. No unexpected results have been 
arised. Same availability is achieved in all of the 6 modes. 
The two devices of the system are not necessarily identical. 
This result reveals that the algorithmic structure has no bugs 
and the model behaves as expected.  
Simulation is traditionally repeated ‘m’ times to obtain 
frequency histogram and mean value of the investigated  
parameter (s). The number that the simulation do not give 
significantly different outputs is considered to be the 
appropriate value of ‘m’, i.e.  30000 in this study. This 
number is not only determined for the two-device system but 
also for some other cold redundant parallel configurations 
with more devices. In the literature, some similar ‘m’ values 
may be seen ; 10000 [2], 100000 [3], 30000[4],  10000 [5].  
The execution of ‘m’ iteration in the developed algorithm 
lasts only in a few minutes. That may be regarded as an 
advantageous property in complex system simulation. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
An availability prediction tool for parallel systems is 
outlined through the use of new LSLB method in the paper. 
Introducing the engineers with the abilities of this new 
method is aimed. The suggested method enables the engineer 
simulate the systems with ‘n’ stand-by units operating in 
cold redundancy state. Although the present simulation has 
been held under some assumptions, the decision making 
algorithm for device assignment is constructed in a generic 
manner and considers many scenerios as if more mechanistic 
investigation is of concern. The suggested algorithm may be 
a framework for future mechanistic / economic studies and 
some modifications on the algorithm may be easily done in 
LSLB method. As mentioned in the previous sections, the 
assumptions that simplify the simulation are not restrictive 
for a potential modification since the logic of the simulation 
does not rely on specific kinds of probability distribution 
functions or some functional interactions between the units. 
All the decisions are stemmed from a kind of geometric 
parameterization. Decision making algorithm  which is 
consist of 2x6 modes is compatible with any further 
modifications in order to include more mechanic knowledge 
to the simulation. However, the presented version of the 
algorithmic structure is already appropriate for many 
practical cases.  
The ability that is not only saving the operational history 
of the device but also of the system is one of the main 
advantages of the method for future mechanistic research. 
Short simulation times are advantageous in complex system 
simulation. Additionally, understanding the random behavior 
of the parallel systems (that may be considered as a common 
advantage of the simulation based prediction tools) and the 
ease of investigating device assignment strategy in 
automatical control loops may be valuable for the 
researchers. 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

REFERENCES 
[1] S. P. Chambal, “Advancing Reliability, Maintainability And 
Availability 
Analysis 
Through 
A 
Robust 
Simulation 
Environment”, Dissertation, Arizona State University, USA., 
1999. 
[2] H. Cristina, „„Reliability Modeling Of A Hydraulic System 
Using The Monte Carlo Method‟‟, Annals Of The Oradea 
University, Fascicle Of Management and Technological 
Engineering, vol. 7-17, 2008, pp. 328-334. 
[3] M. Held and P. M. Nellen, „„Availability Calculation and 
Simulation Of Optical Network Systems‟‟, Proc. Of  SPIE, 
vol. 4940, pp. 163-173. 
[4] A. A. Chowdhury and D. O. Koval, „„Reliability Assessment 
Of A Backup Gas Turbine Generation System For A Critical 
Industry Load Using A Monte Carlo Simulation Model‟‟, 
IEEE Transactions On Industry Applications, vol. 45-1, 2009, 
pp. 310-316. 
[5] Q. Miao, X. Zhang, D. Ling, Z. Chen and H. Z. Huang, 
„„Reliability Assessment Of Ring-Standby Structure Based 
On Monte Carlo Simulation‟‟, International Conference On 
Reliability Maintainability and Safety (ICRMS 2009), July 
20-24, Chengdu, China, pp. 1115-1118. 
[6] A. C. Marquez, A. S. Heuguedas and B. Iung, “Monte Carlo-
Based Assessment Of System Availability-A Case Study For 
Cogeneration Plants”, Reliability Engineering and System 
Safety , vol. 88,  2005, pp. 273-289. 
[7] K. S. Barland, “Verification Of A Monte Carlo Simulation 
Method To Find Lower Confidence Limits For The 
Availability And Reliability Of  Maintained Systems”, Thesis, 
Air Force Institute of Technology, Air University, 1985, 
Ohio,USA. 
[8] R. Dekker and W. Groenendijk, “Availability Assessment 
Methods And Their Application In Practice”, Microelectron. 
Reliab., vol. 35, nos 9-10, 1995, pp. 1257-1274. 
[9] C. Erdemir and C. Kadılar, “Benzetim Tekniklerine Giris”, 
Hacettepe University Press, 2003, pp. 59-62. 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

