Qualitative Simulation of Causal Dynamics in
Higher Education using Fuzzy Cognitive Maps
Levent Yilmaz
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering
Auburn University
Auburn, AL
email: yilmaz@auburn.edu
Abstract—Universities are complex organizations that are
comprised of semi-autonomous interacting units that adapt
to evolving demands and regulations. Administrative decision-
making requires viewing a university as an adaptive system
with a complex causal network of interactions. This paper
presents a qualitative causal simulation model based on the Fuzzy
Cognitive Map (FCM) formalism to demonstrate exploratory
cause-effect analysis of resource tensions and quality in public
higher education institutes. The model is focused on a selected
subset of factors with the primary aim of demonstrating the use of
FCM to support model-centric thinking. The FCM formalism is
simulated under a factorial experiment design that examines the
interaction among state funding, teaching capacity, and research
capacity.
Index Terms—qualitative simulation; fuzzy cognitive map;
higher education; complexity
I. INTRODUCTION
According to the Education Data Initiative [1], as of July
2022, 73.0% of college students at all levels attend public
institutions. Policies aimed at these institutions have a signifi-
cant influence on higher education. In recent years, increasing
fiscal challenges in the public higher education environment
resulted in the development of new administrative models
that emphasize the ability to generate income to provide
additional revenue. Among such capabilities are sponsored
research activities based on contracts and patents. Such ac-
tivities promoted an environment that can sustain fundable
research with implications on hiring policies and incentives for
promotion and balance teaching load with increasing research
commitments.
Increasing fiscal tensions in state funding of public higher
education impact the quality of education, graduation rates,
and overall organizational performance of universities [2].
Factors that influence organizational performance can be clas-
sified into separate activity and policy categories, such as
state funding, affordability, target population characteristics,
faculty teaching and research load, compensation, and admis-
sion. These separate activity zones interact through complex
mechanisms, making it challenging to predict the outcomes of
decisions and emergent behavior due to positive and negative
feedback loops among factors.
Improving graduation rates, research funding, and overall
system quality can involve exploring various options, including
staff compensation, faculty incentives for productive partic-
ipation, teaching and research loads, hybrid instruction, and
improving access and affordability to the target population. In
this paper, the systems approach with an exploratory modeling
and analysis strategy is advocated to provide a foundation to
demonstrate policy analysis in the context of higher education.
The proposed model is focused on a selected subset of factors
with the primary objective of demonstrating the use of the
computational Fuzzy Cognitive Map (FCM) [3] formalism to
support model-centric thinking.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In section 2,
background on simulation methodologies used in the simula-
tion of university dynamics is reviewed. FCM formalism is
introduced in section 3 to specify the fundamental principles
of FCMs and the dynamics of the FCM model. Section 4
presents the implementation and preliminary experiments with
the model, as well as a sensitivity analysis of the dynamics
to discern cause-effect relations under hypothetical scenarios.
Section 5 concludes with a summary of the findings and
limitations of the model.
II. BACKGROUND
Computational models are effective tools in evaluating or-
ganizational dynamics to assess the effectiveness of policies in
the presence of a multitude of interacting factors. Simulation
modeling can help explore the effectiveness of university op-
erations in achieving organizational outcomes while providing
a predictive and prescriptive tool for policy evaluation. The
use of computational models in education has a rich history.
Although the use of qualitative simulations of higher education
with FCM models remains to be explored, both Agent-based
Modeling (ABM) [4] and system dynamics models [5] [6]
are widely used. Next, we provide a brief review of selected
ABM and System Dynamics (SD) approaches, followed by a
discussion on how the FCM formalism, which is the focus of
this paper, can complement the ABM and the SD perspectives.
A. Agent-Based Modeling
Agent-based modeling is a methodology for developing
computational models of systems in terms of autonomous
agents to simulate the decisions, actions, and interactions of
discrete entities. Such entities can represent a broad range of
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

system elements, from individual humans to collectives, such
as organizations and communities. Agent-based simulation
models examine a broad range of aspects of the higher
education system and its interactions with the broader context.
In [7], an agent-based model of a public university is devel-
oped to study the impact of various organizational decisions on
institutional performance with a specific focus on the financial
perspective. During the Covid pandemic, universities faced
significant challenges in avoiding the spread of outbreaks
on campus [8]. Computational studies of randomized testing,
contact tracing, and quarantining reveal the effectiveness of al-
ternative strategies in protecting students, faculty, and staff [9].
Simulation models of innovation dynamics explore industry-
university links to examine the impact of collaboration struc-
tures on innovation effectiveness [10].
Simulation models grounded in theory facilitate understand-
ing system behavior if the real-world behavior unfolds consis-
tently with the premises of the respective theory. For example,
in [11], social impact theory tests social communication and
resource allocation on STEM yield. Besides education sys-
tems, agent-based models are used to study scientific activity
and clustering of research activity into scientific domains and
disciplines [12]. Similarly, [13] uses a simulation model to
represent scientific activity as a sociopolitical system.
B. System Dynamics
System Dynamics (SD) modeling [5] is a mathematical
modeling approach to represent systems and their continuous
non-linear behavior over time. SD models are used to explain
and predict the dynamics of complex issues and problems
ranging from artificial to social and natural systems.
System dynamics modeling in higher education has a long
history with a broad range of applications overviewed by
an early taxonomy of SD models in higher education [14].
Relatively recent research in this area involves capacity plan-
ning and policy evaluation. In [15], the implementation of
sustainable development education programs is examined with
a focus on the sustainability competencies of students. As a
decision support tool, system dynamics models contribute to
exploring efficient resource management and capacity plan-
ning for academic programs [16] [17].
Alternative
simulation
formalisms,
including
semi-
quantitative
and
highly
interpretable
causal
simulation
formalisms,
such
as
FCM,
can
also
offer
avenues
to
perform thought experiments before developing detailed
high-resolution models.
C. Fuzzy Cognitive Maps
FCMs model feedback causal relations in webs of causality
and system design/policy/strategy variables [3]. FCM formal-
ism combines neural network theory and fuzzy logic [18]
synergistically. FCMs are fuzzy signed directed graphs that
allow degrees of causal influence and event occurrence. Such
causal models can simulate a wide range of system designs,
scenarios, and decision processes. Their nonlinear dynamics
permit forward-chaining inference from input causes and de-
sign options to output effects. Users can directly add detailed
dynamics and feedback links to the causal model or infer them
with statistical learning laws [19]. Users can fuse or combine
FCMs from multiple experts by weighting and adding the
underlying fuzzy edge matrices recursively if needed.
III. FOUNDATIONS OF THE FUZZY COGNITIVE MAP
FORMALISM
An FCM concept node is fuzzy because it can take values
in the unit interval [0,1]. Therefore, its values over time define
a fuzzy set. This implies that a concept node that describes
a property or system state both occurs and does not occur
to some degree at the same time. A simple FCM consists of
n concept nodes Cj and n2 directed fuzzy causal edges eij.
The concept nodes C1, C2, . . . , Cn are nonlinear and represent
variable concepts or factors in a causal system. The activation
value of a concept node Ci(tk) measures the degree to which
the concept Ci occurs in the causal dynamics at time tk.
The FCM state vector C(tk) provides a snapshot of the FCM
system at time tk. In addition to the non-linear dynamics of
the concept nodes, an FCM model must also specify the n2
directed and signed causal edge values eij.
The activation value of the concept j is determined at time
tk on the scalar input xj(tk) that reaches and aggregates all
the causal activation inflowing to Cj. A non-linear function
Φj converts xj(tk) into the concept’s new state Cj(tk+1).
Cj(tk+1) = Φj(
n
X
i=1
Ci(tk) eij(tk) + Ij(tk))
where Ij(tk) is an external input at time tk. The simplest
threshold function is a hard threshold that produces bivalent,
on-off concept node values:
Cj(tk+1) =
0
if Pn
i=1 Ci(tk) eij(tk) + Ij(tk) ≤ 0
1
if Pn
i=1 Ci(tk) eij(tk) + Ij(tk) > 0
The external input can be set to high (or low) values to
ensure that a concept is always on (or off). By fixing the
activation value of a node, specific strategy configurations can
be tested. A monotonic increasing Φj nonlinear function can
be used for a continuous dynamic system. Logistic causal acti-
vation functions have a sigmoidal structure that approximates
the hard threshold function if the shape parameter c > 0 is
large enough:
Cj(tk+1) =
1
1 + exp(−c Pn
i=1 Ci(tk) eij(tk) − cIj(tk))
Alternative approaches to modeling causal worlds are Sys-
tem Dynamics (SD) models [20] and Bayesian Belief networks
(BBNs) [21]. System-dynamics models facilitate representing
and simulating causal interactions. Domain experts or random
experiments often choose static parameters of the subsystems
and their interconnections. On the other hand, FCMs allow
data-driven adaptation of the model structure and parameters.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

(a) FCM Concepts and Dependencies
(b) Netlogo Implementation of the FCM Model
(c) Normalized Activation Levels
(d) Feature Scoring
Fig. 1: Face Validity of the FCM Implementation
Statistical learning algorithms estimate causal edges from
training data. Experts can also state edge values directly. While
SD models include stochastic behavior through sensitivity
analyses at the end of modeling, FCMs build uncertainty into
the causal structure.
BBNs model uncertain causal worlds with conditional prob-
abilities that require using a known joint probability distribu-
tion over all the nodes of the directed graph. This may not be
practical for a large number of nodes. Forward inference on a
BBN also tends to be computationally intensive. Furthermore,
the directed graph is usually acyclic and thus has no closed
loops. The acyclic structure simplifies the probability structure
but ignores the feedback of the causal units.
IV. A QUALITATIVE SIMULATION MODEL OF UNIVERSITY
ACTIVITY DYNAMICS
To illustrate the utility of qualitative simulation of university
activities via a Fuzzy Cognitive Map, we start our analysis
with a baseline model with minimal features. The baseline
model is intended to assess the accuracy and face validity of
implementing FCM in the NetLogo environment [22]. Figure
1a presents five concepts and their relations.
The State Funding is the input concept that is varied to
assess the impact of fiscal tensions on the affordability and
enrollment levels. According to [23], the decrease in state
funding levels increases pressure for a tuition increase, which
then results in an increased likelihood of
tuition increase.
These relations are specified as qualitative positive and nega-
tive dependencies. The extent of the impact of tuition increases
on the affordability of higher education is well documented.
Using the empirical findings reported in [24], the FCM model
shown in Figure 1a introduces a negative relation between
tuition raise and affordability. Furthermore, according to [25],
decreasing affordability reduces enrollment levels. In relation
to the dependency between enrollment levels and pressure for
tuition increase, we consider the empirical results that suggest
diseconomies of scale for large universities [26]. Finally, the
causal link between enrollment and tuition closes the feedback
loop.
The conceptual model is implemented within the NetLogo
environment shown in Figure 1b. The Netlogo model is avail-
able at github.com/yilmale/University. In the implementation,
the values of the weights of causal dependencies between
variables are set to 1.0 for positive causal relations and −1.0
for negative relations. The StateFunding variable is updated
episodically every 10 time steps and kept constant during
each interval to validate the expected trends in the activation
levels of enrollment and affordability. As shown in Figure 1c,
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

the increase (decrease) in affordability and enrollment follows
with a slight lag the increase (decrease) in the state funding
level. Similarly, the change in the activation of pressure for
tuition raise and the tuition rate follows the change in the state
funding activation in the expected direction. Feature scoring
analysis of simulation data, shown in Figure 1d, reveals the
significance of the state funding variable on affordability
and enrollment levels. The minimal baseline model facilitates
instilling confidence in implementing the interactive activation
dynamics process underlying the FCM formalism.
The model is extended with additional concepts representing
the student-faculty ratio, student retention, graduation rate, and
quality of experience. In the absence of new faculty hiring and
everything else being equal, an increase in enrollment levels
results in an increase in student-faculty ratio, negatively influ-
encing student retention. Lower levels of student retention are
expected to reduce graduation rates. Furthermore, higher levels
of student-faculty ratio adversely affect experience quality,
which is an important criterion for increasing graduation rates.
The minimal FCM, shown in Figure 1a, is extended in Figure
2 to explore the impact of State Funding on Graduation Rate
under the hypothetical frame characterized by the selected
concepts and conjectured dependencies.
Fig. 2: Extended FCM Model.
Simulation of the FCM with the extended model reveals
in Figure 3 that graduation rates decline regardless of state
funding activity in the absence of teaching faculty hiring
activity.
The factorial experiment examining the interaction between
state funding and hiring teaching faculty shows that hiring
teaching faculty is critical to increasing graduation rate ac-
tivity. State funding does not produce sufficient graduation
activity at lower teaching support levels, assuming that state
funding does not contribute to reducing the student-faculty
ratio through other mechanisms. The heatmap shown in Figure
4, in the absence of other factors, illustrates the significance
Fig. 3: Impact of State Funding on Graduation Rate in the
Absence of Teaching Faculty
of teaching faculty on the graduation rate.
Fig. 4: Impact of State Funding and Teaching Faculty on
Graduation Rate
To examine the role of the research component of a uni-
versity, we extend the model to include additional concepts
and dependencies involving sponsored research. However,
exploring research activities and their impact on the quality
of experience and graduation rates are limited to the current
framework shown in Figure 5. In the extended model, for
illustration purposes, Hiring-Research-Faculty is considered
as an input concept that can be controlled by the university
administration. By hiring research faculty, the university can
be expected to increase the level of Sponsored Research,
which generates new Revenue. Additional resources generated
by sponsored research offices through indirect cost recovery
mechanisms, as well as patents and innovations, stemming
from the increased research activity, lower the pressure for
tuition increase.
Sponsored research is expected to increase the research ac-
tivity by faculty specified by the Faculty-Research node in the
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Fig. 5: Extending the FCM Model with Activities in the Research Zone
FCM. However, more faculty research results in lower levels of
teaching activity due to administrative policies such as course
buyouts or assigning teaching responsibilities to graduate stu-
dents or lecturers. Delegation of teaching to lecturers reduces
the quality of experience for students, resulting in an adverse
impact on graduation and student retention. On the other hand,
with increased faculty research activity, students have more
opportunities to be involved in research, and such research
experience contributes to an increased quality of experience.
These conjectured causal dependencies are conceptualized in
the FCM model shown in Figure 5.
Fig. 6: Feature Analysis of the Extended Analysis
The simulation of the extended FCM explores the tension
among state funding, research faculty hiring, and teaching
faculty hiring. The model does not make resource allocation
decisions among research and teaching activities. Instead, at
a given level of state funding, and given the causal relations
shown in Figure 5, the teaching faculty factor significantly
impacts all outputs except affordability. On the other hand, as
shown in Figure 6, state funding affects affordability, and the
research component does not have significance on output met-
rics under the causal constraints of the model. Regarding the
availability of teaching resources, the graduation rate declines
with small levels of teaching faculty capacity. As shown in
Figure 7a, increasing the teaching resource capacity beyond
the inflection point consistently improves the graduation rate
performance.
On the other hand, an increase in the research capacity im-
proves the graduation rate through moderate levels of increase
in student research experience that positively affects overall
student experience. However, increasing the research load over
the inflection point decreases the overall student experience
and graduation rate due to its impact on suppressing teaching
capacity. Figure 7b shows the observed behavioral trend.
The detailed ANOVA analysis, shown in Figure 8, of the
quality of experience outcome supports the Feature Scoring
analysis by highlighting the significance of state funding and
teaching capacity. Two-way interactions between the factors
reveal that the impact of individual factors is not dependent
on other factors.
V. CONCLUSIONS
Analyzing policies in the higher education system requires
understanding nonlinear dependencies between factors, includ-
ing positive and negative feedback loops that can lead to
nontrivial outcomes. For such complex systems, the tools and
models of complexity can offer reliable frameworks to gain in-
sight into the causal dynamics of constituent elements. In this
paper, we demonstrated a semi-qualitative model based on the
Fuzzy Cognitive Map formalism and conducted experiments
to examine the tension among state funding, research capacity,
and teaching capacity in relation to the quality of student
experience and graduation rates. The causal dependencies
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

(a) The Impact of Teaching Capacity on
Graduation Rate
(b) The Impact of Research Capacity on
Graduation Rate
Fig. 7: Impact of Teaching and Research Capacity on Gradu-
ation Rate
Fig. 8: ANOVA Analysis
presented in the model are based on theoretical and empirical
findings reported in the extant literature. The results indicate
the significance of teaching capacity on graduation rates, while
state funding affects the affordability of higher education.
REFERENCES
[1] EDI, “College enrollment
student demographic statistics,” 2022,
retrieved: September, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://educationdata.
org/college-enrollment-statistics
[2] G. Lucianelli and F. Citro, “Financial conditions and financial sustain-
ability financial financial sustainability in higher education: A literature
review,” Financial sustainability in public administration: Exploring the
concept of financial health, pp. 23–53, 2017.
[3] O. Osoba and B. Kosko, “Beyond dags: modeling causal feedback with
fuzzy cognitive maps,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.11247, 2019.
[4] E. Bonabeau, “Agent-based modeling: Methods and techniques for
simulating human systems,” Proceedings of the national academy of
sciences, vol. 99, no. suppl 3, pp. 7280–7287, 2002.
[5] J. W. Forrester, “System dynamics and the lessons of 35 years,” A
systems-based approach to policymaking, pp. 199–240, 1993.
[6] B. K. Bala, F. M. Arshad, and K. M. Noh, System Dynamics: Modelling
and Simulation.
Springer, 2017.
[7] P. J. Roebber and G. R. Meadows, “Simulating alternative approaches
to addressing fiscal resource tensions and quality in us public higher
education,” Journal of Education Finance, pp. 81–108, 2012.
[8] J. Tang, S. Vinayavekhin, M. Weeramongkolkul, C. Suksanon, K. Pat-
tarapremcharoen, S. Thiwathittayanuphap, and N. Leelawat, “Agent-
based simulation and modeling of covid-19 pandemic: a bibliometric
analysis,” Journal of Disaster Research, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 93–102,
2022.
[9] P. T. Gressman and J. R. Peck, “Simulating covid-19 in a university
environment,” Mathematical biosciences, vol. 328, p. 108436, 2020.
[10] P. Ahrweiler, A. Pyka, and N. Gilbert, “A new model for university-
industry links in knowledge-based economies,” Journal of Product
Innovation Management, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 218–235, 2011.
[11] T. T. Allen and N. Davis, “A simple agent-based social impact theory
model of student stem selection,” in Proceedings of the 2010 Winter
Simulation Conference.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 278–289.
[12] N. Gilbert, “A simulation of the structure of academic science,” Socio-
logical research online, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 91–105, 1997.
[13] M. M¨olders, R. D. Fink, and J. Weyer, “Modeling scientists as agents.
how scientists cope with the challenges of the new public management
of science,” Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, vol. 14,
no. 4, p. 6, 2011.
[14] M. Kennedy, “Towards a taxonomy of system dynamics models of higher
education,” in Proceedings of the 18th International Conference of the
System Dynamics Society (2000) 6-10 August 2000 Bergen, Norway,
2000, pp. 1–12.
[15] E. Faham, A. Rezvanfar, S. H. M. Mohammadi, and M. R. Nohooji, “Us-
ing system dynamics to develop education for sustainable development
in higher education with the emphasis on the sustainability competencies
of students,” Technological Forecasting and Social Change, vol. 123, pp.
307–326, 2017.
[16] S. M. Dahlan and N. Yahaya, “A system dynamics model for determining
educational capacity of higher education institutions,” in 2010 Second
International Conference on Computational Intelligence, Modelling and
Simulation.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 285–290.
[17] L. M. Strauss and D. Borenstein, “A system dynamics model for
long-term planning of the undergraduate education in brazil,” Higher
Education, vol. 69, pp. 375–397, 2015.
[18] E. I. Papageorgiou, “Review study on fuzzy cognitive maps and their
applications during the last decade,” in 2011 IEEE international confer-
ence on fuzzy systems (FUZZ-IEEE 2011).
IEEE, 2011, pp. 828–835.
[19] J. L. Salmeron and E. I. Papageorgiou, “Fuzzy grey cognitive maps
and nonlinear hebbian learning in process control,” Applied intelligence,
vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 223–234, 2014.
[20] J. W. Forrester, “System dynamics, systems thinking, and soft or,” System
dynamics review, vol. 10, no. 2-3, pp. 245–256, 1994.
[21] G. F. Cooper, “The computational complexity of probabilistic inference
using bayesian belief networks,” Artificial intelligence, vol. 42, no. 2-3,
pp. 393–405, 1990.
[22] U. Wilensky and W. Rand, An introduction to agent-based modeling:
modeling natural, social, and engineered complex systems with NetLogo.
Mit Press, 2015.
[23] M. M. Kim and J. Ko, “The impacts of state control policies on college
tuition increase,” Educational Policy, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 815–838, 2015.
[24] S. W. Hemelt and D. E. Marcotte, “The impact of tuition increases on
enrollment at public colleges and universities,” Educational Evaluation
and Policy Analysis, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 435–457, 2011.
[25] D. E. Heller, “The effects of tuition and state financial aid on public
college enrollment,” The Review of Higher Education, vol. 23, no. 1,
pp. 65–89, 1999.
[26] P. T. Brinkman and L. L. Leslie, “Economies of scale in higher
education: Sixty years of research,” The review of higher education,
vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–28, 1986.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-102-2
SIMUL 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

