Agent-based Simulation of Information and Communications Technology 
Practicum Courses for Engineering Students at Instituto Tecnológico Metropolitano 
Julian A. Castillo, Cristian F. Gallego, Yony F. Ceballos, Carlos O. Zapata. 
Engineering faculty  
Instituto Tecnológico Metropolitano 
Medellin, Colombia 
{castillojulian, pharsat, fceball}@gmail.com; carloszapata@itm.edu.co
 
Abstract—In this paper, a simulation of enlisting and use of 
free practicum courses for engineering students from Instituto 
Tecnológico Metropolitano (ITM) is presented. Currently, this 
university is interested in getting better results to rank more 
competitively among other universities. Although the current 
courses are free, a high quality offer is evidently more 
expensive and we need to maximize the impact of the students 
in the labor market. In Colombia, many universities certify 
engineering students in computer sciences so, in order to 
attend the current needs of our institution and the labor 
market, we would like to contribute to decision-making 
processes through agent-based simulation regarding what 
Information Communications Technologies courses may fit 
best for the community and the industrial clusters ITM 
students are and will be working in. 
Keywords-Agent-based modelling; Computer engineering; 
Simulation; Netlogo. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The ITM is a public university whose mission aims to 
provide charge-free education in different areas. Besides, 
ITM is in touch with the needs of the labor market. However, 
the current techniques to identify educational mechanisms to 
meet labor market needs are based on online surveys applied 
to students during practicum and to recently graduated 
bachelors. This may become a reason to use simulations that 
help determine how these different techniques of information 
gathering on the educational offer will allow this population 
to impact positively the labor market in the future, making 
possible to see devise educational mechanisms for students 
to learn about new technologies in the industry and be able to 
found cutting-edge enterprises. 
ITM bachelors have particular features. They are 
educated through propaedeutic cycles and belong to low 
socioeconomic sectors of the city (see Figure 1). Therefore, 
the institution makes efforts to form competitive bachelors 
allocating resources for them to have access to free training 
during their practicum stages, so that they are able to 
improve their quality of life and learn the skills necessary to 
compete in equal conditions with students from other highly 
qualified universities. In order to contribute to decision-
making processes aligned with the university' mission and its 
population, modeling and agent-based simulations are 
proposed in this research to identify where it might be 
necessary to provide student training and decide how the 
university should invest resources to meet the needs of 
students and local enterprises. 
 
Figure 1.  Valle de Aburrá Urban Area. Grey sectors represent bachelors 
geographical location in the Metropolitan area. 
As the student and bachelor population of the institution 
is small and many simulation techniques usually need a huge 
amount of input data, we have used Netlogo. This software is 
used to provide low abstraction levels to characterize a small 
population in a simple and detailed manner, resulting in a 
reliable and easy way to validate a simulation [2]. Moreover, 
we have chosen this low-cost simulation tool that provides 
close-to-reality results regardless of small populations. 
Figure 2 displays the distribution of enterprises in the urban 
area of Medellin city, those who are the main information 
source for this model. 
 
Figure 2.  Distribution of enterprises in Valle de Aburrá urban area. 
For this simulation, local industrial clusters were 
identified in the city [3], which generally hires bachelors 
from different higher education institutions. These clusters 
are leading organizations of software development groups. 
They are located in strategic coordinates of the city. Nearly 
271
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

4-5 enterprises per cluster are development companies. From 
these, two of the most remarkable are the Tata Consultancy 
Services Ltd (TCS) cluster, located in Olaya Enterprise 
Center and Hewlett-Packard in Ruta N Cluster (see Figure 
3). 
 
 
Figure 3.  Typology of Enterprises in Medellin Urban Area [3]. 
For this simulation, we have also developed an agent-
based model. The purpose was to know the relation between 
ITM bachelors' interaction in the mentioned market sectors 
(clusters) with the creation of training courses at ITM. These 
relations have given rise to a number course programs that 
respond to the wishes of students and companies to reach an 
intermediate point where the decisions in training and 
learning and training are the most appropriate for both 
agents.  
Section III discusses the ODD (Overview, Design 
Concepts and Details) protocol [4] used to build the 
simulation. Then, we will present an overview of the 
description of the model. Next, in section IV, we will report 
the results of a set of preliminary simulation experiments. 
Finally, in the section V and VI, we will provide concluding 
remarks of our study and provide a summary of the future 
work that has been projected from this study. 
II. 
JUSTIFICATION 
The proposed research project is part of the modeling 
and simulation of systems by agents, which is an area that 
has been barely explored in Colombia due to its high 
computational requirements and random components [1]. 
This technique differs from other modeling techniques in 
the way that abstraction of the real system and 
consequently, the functional model, is constructed. In the 
models constructed using agent-based simulation, the basic 
components of the real system are explicitly and 
individually represented in the model. Thus, defining the 
basic components of the real system correspond to the 
boundaries that define the model agents, and the interactions 
that take place between the basic components of the real 
system correspond to the interactions that take place 
between agents in the 
model 
[5][6]. This direct 
correspondence contrasts with the traditional use of 
'representative agents' and is able to increase the realism and 
scientific rigor of formal models built using this approach. 
Agent-based systems are characterized by comprising 
several agents that are to a greater or lesser degree, 
autonomous, heterogeneous and independent, each showing 
their own goals and objectives, and are generally able to 
interact with each other and with their environment [7]. 
They are usually characterized by the existence of a large 
number of relatively simple agents that can evolve over time 
to adapt to new environmental conditions or to new systems 
objectives. The agent-based methods facilitate the study and 
modeling of complex systems from their component units, 
allowing to build experimental models of reality from a 
different point of view to the traditional: from the simplest to 
the most complex. Furthermore, an intrinsic agent’s result is 
the idea of an emergency. Emergent phenomena are patterns 
that emerge from the decentralized interactions of individual 
simpler components [8].  
What characterizes these emerging phenomena is that 
their presence or appearance is not apparent from a 
description of the system consisting of the specification of 
the behavior of the individual components and rules of 
interaction between them [9]. A typical example of an 
emerging phenomenon is the formation of distinct groups in 
the Schelling segregation model [10]; the emergence of clear 
patterns of segregation is not explicitly imposed in the model 
definition, but emerges from the local interactions of 
individuals with segregationist tendencies in weak times. 
Another example is the migration patterns of Sugarscape 
[11]. In the next section, we show the ODD protocol [12] 
used in agent-based models. 
Given the small number of courses, the population size, 
geographic location and heterogeneous characteristics of the 
population, the simulation technique used is based on agents 
as it provides a complete mapping of the selection process. 
III. 
SIMULATION PROCESS 
We use an agent-based approach to build a simulation of 
the relationship between the ITM for bachelors with medium 
to low income levels in the Metropolitan Valley in Medellin 
– Colombia and practicum courses. This involves a relation 
made by the bachelor with the ITM and the company where 
the bachelor works for, the training courses that are made for 
them and how they make the decision based on a company 
request and their own preferences and if the course is 
available in the curricular offer. The process is described as 
the ODD protocol [4]. 
A. Purpose 
The purpose of this model is to make decisions for the 
future position ITM a pioneer in the process of educating 
highly trained professionals that learn in relevant aspects 
needed in business and the Institution. This leads to making 
decisions based on the model to allow the institution to grow 
in terms of academic extension courses. 
B. State variables and scales 
Bachelors are located in the metropolitan area and are 
related as agents with a cluster. This determines their initial 
position as return values when the learning cycle ends. Each 
bachelor also has a preference for a specific course given by 
272
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

a vector of 10 positions on which each position determines 
their sympathy for the course of their position, e. g., if at the 
3 position vector of sympathy there is a value close to 10, it 
means that their sympathy to take the course "3" is high; 
instead, if at position 4 there is a value close to zero, it 
means that their sympathy to take the course "4" is low. 
Both the student and the company for which they work 
(Cluster) have preferences and it is this relationship that 
determines the selection of a training course. 
The cluster as agent has the ability to create its own 
sympathy for courses randomly, which is defined as a 10-
position vector where each position represents a course. 
There is also a unique cluster number that identifies its own 
position.  
The university as an agent is related to its two main sites 
that are identified by numbers. With one to two, each has a 
random vector of courses that are offered, which cannot be 
further repeated also defined in 16 weeks with a weekly 
intensity of 4 hours. 
An array of preferences associated with each cluster and 
student is defined. After that, a new array is created using 
the addition from position to position of the elements of 
both arrays, of which a maximum value for the course is 
chosen. This value represents the most suitable for the 
cluster and student, simultaneously. To select this position, 
a run on the array of partial sums is made. The ITM has an 
estimated dropout rate with a maximum value of 30% of 
bachelors enrolled in training courses; this value is 
cumulative for each bachelor and accounts for a temporary 
variable that determines the possibility of dropping out from 
or a course. 
The main attributes of these three classes of agents are 
shown in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4.  Class diagram agent. 
All agents need to be initialized with values for every 
variable. The values are generated based on a set of 
hypothetical assumptions.  
C. Process overview and scheduling 
Description of the World: The world also known as 'work 
area' is defined by the location of the agents located in the 
Valle de Aburrá within the Department of Antioquia - 
Colombia. Valle de Aburrá has several locations that belong 
to the metropolitan area. This simulation considers the 
clusters closely located to the influence area of the ITM. The 
simulated clusters are located as seen in Figure 1. 
According to the dictionary of technology companies 
registered in ClusterTic, these were referenced by 6 strategic 
points located spatially on xy coordinates on the map [1]. 
Each cluster can be identified as follows: 1 Cluster Ruta N, 2 
Bello Cluster, 3 Poblado Cluster, 4 Olaya Centro 
Empresarial Cluster, 5 Candelaria or Downtown Medellín 
Cluster and 6 Envigado and Sabaneta Cluster. For the space, 
each patch is defined with a unit value and a 400 by 400 
patches long map on which the image is overlaid with 
political delimitations of Valle de Aburrá. Each agent 
interacts in the map and each is spatially associated with 
each other. The loaded image below has been enhanced to 
visualize this datum using a filter process in 3 scales: gray, 
black and white (See Figure 5) 
Agents Interaction: Agents that interact in the process are 
denominated: 
Bachelors, 
Clusters, 
and 
ITM's 
(two 
campuses). The central element on which the simulation is 
performed is the Bachelor. We aimed to simulate whether a 
bachelor takes a training course or not and whether the 
bachelor finishes it or drops it, Nonetheless, this information 
measurements are taken into a simulation process of 10 
periods of 2 years interactions each.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Location of cluster and university campus. 
The main process is defined as the student’s empathy to 
choose one training course mixed with the enterprise needs 
they belong to, and this process is conditioned to make a 
decision about the ITM course offers. 
Bachelors: Each bachelor is born randomly in each 
cluster; the number assigned to them is according to a max 
number of bachelors determined by a random variable 
ranging from 100 to 500 agents. For each bachelor, it is 
defined an array of 10 random values for training course 
selection empathy of each training course [2]. These values 
have no relation between them. 
Cluster: Each cluster is an agent. A cluster is created 
spatially approximating to the actual position in the 
metropolitan area for a total of 6 clusters. Each has a number 
that identifies it, and has a need for knowing of same training 
courses. For instance, when an enterprise recommends that a 
bachelor employee (bachelors) take a certain course, there is 
273
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

a preference for courses that would affect the decision of the 
graduates. 
The ITM: It is composed of two branches, each of them 
represented as agents, and they are symbolized by an 
identification number (Figure 5 B2 is for the Robledo 
Section in the west of the metropolitan area and the A1 is for 
the Fraternidad placed in the east of the same area). Each 
ITM campus offers a random number of training courses 
from 1 to 10 as maximum; one ITM campus cannot have all 
courses [2]. The relationship between each entity is shown in 
Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6.  Sequence Diagram (Bachelor and training course flow). 
Decision: As seen in the section of state variables and 
scales, the decision of a bachelor is taken according to the 
highest greater value of sympathy for a course added to the 
sympathy of the courses by the company. After this, the 
algorithm verifies that the student is not taking courses by 
measuring two bachelors' own variables, which are "chosen 
course" and "study time"; both must be zero in order to make 
the assignment of the course.  
The decision is assigned to the variable "course chosen”, 
having the decision taken involving both the company and 
the students. Then, the bachelor proceeds to verify in which 
ITM campus this training course is offered.  
Training course in any ITM campus must exist in order 
to move a bachelor for training, which will take 16 weeks 
decreasing with each time lapse in the software (Tick) one to 
one. 
In order to do the training when a bachelor is assigned to 
an ITM, is assigned the course time left for complete it (16 
weeks, 16 ticks) this number decreases with each tick; when 
it reaches to zero, then the bachelor leaves the ITM returning 
to the original cluster. When a bachelor returns to their own 
original cluster, their training course preferences refresh. 
There is a possibility of that a bachelor not to take a 
course, however is needed a required value of sympathy for 
its selection. This happens when the training course chosen 
by the bachelor and by the enterprise is not offered by any 
ITM campus. In this case, the bachelor awaits a maximum of 
5 weeks; then, the bachelor refreshes their own preferences. 
Every 20 weeks training courses are refreshed by the 
ITM, also it holds a 30% bachelor desertion rate. In order to 
simulate this variable, we defined it by a pseudo-random 
value between 0 and 1. If this value is lower than the 
exogenous variable "likelihood of attrition" (0.3), it is 
excluded from the course. After this, training courses 
preferences are refreshed. 
For this process, we defined 104 weeks or two years, 
being the average period for an extension academic program.  
D. Validation 
The fitting analysis of the data obtained by the simulation 
is performed using the information contained in [2], 
compared to historical data from the year 2013. In addition, 
expert knowledge is used in order to validate the seasonality 
of the series obtained together with the characteristics that 
define each agent and the taking courses frequency. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The simulation setup was executed having the following 
parameters: the inclusion probability of each training course 
for bachelors was 50%, the probability of desertion was 
estimated on 15%, the amount of bachelors was 150, and the 
empathy probability with a training course was presented 
with 10%. For the simulation process, we set and run a 10 
time round of simulations for periods of two years each one, 
meaning 104 weeks or ticks. For coding, the software 
Netlogo ® was used [13].  
As seen in Figure 7 for the Robledo campus, there is an 
oscillation in the amount of bachelors in the training courses 
for all clusters. However, around week 54 there was a re-
initialization of the bachelors who started doing another 
training course. This may have occurred because the courses 
are restarted at week 60 of the academic semester.  
 
Figure 7.  Bachelors taking a training course by cluster. 
274
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

In the Figure 8, there is a change in the trend because in 
the description of the model courses are redefined based on 
information from the office of academic extension.  
 
 
Figure 8.  Bachelors taking a training course by cluster. 
The graphs are related because the students in the courses 
belong to the same population and it is presented in Figure 7 
as a valley and in Figure 8 as a peak and vice versa. This is 
caused by the courses offered per year at each campus are 
exchanged so that generates a migration of the number of 
students between campuses. 
In Figure 9, we can see the student dropout, which is 
exacerbated in the valley of the simulation periods, as 
presented in the above figures is observed.  
 
 
Figure 9.  Bachelors taking a training course by cluster. 
It is suggested and implementation of short courses are 
planned to capture students who drop out often, given the 
duration of 16 weeks of regular courses. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
According to the results obtained for the simulation 
generates an inverse correlation in the number of students 
shown in both graphs, it means when there is increase of 
Fraternidad students will notice a decrease in the Robledo 
campus. 
The variability of the courses influences the dispersion 
of students through them, and if the same training course is 
offered in both campuses the amount of bachelors decrease 
in the related University. 
The flow on the increase and decrease of the number of 
students per campus is consistent with the distribution of 
students in courses on campus with a fluctuation of 20 weeks 
To improve competitiveness in the local market of 
universities and the possibility for graduates to access a 
better labor compensation, will be promoted from the first 
half of 2015 a project based on this simulation, taking the 
information generated in the cluster and weeks in which the 
courses are taken. The offer will be screened with seasonality 
allowing a proper rotation of courses taught previously. 
Desertion of each student and students waiting will be 
considered for a course as well as seen in Figure 9. This is 
necessary to reduce costs because the university takes the fee 
of these courses. 
VI. 
FURTHER WORK  
For future work, the amount of students who change 
campus completing courses will be quantified. We will 
measured how many students quits courses, as is the average 
waiting time of a student with a chosen course without 
availability by the University, the preferred course selected 
by students and their relationship with their respective 
campus. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
AMVA (Área Metropolitana del Valle de Aburra), “Area Digital - 
Area urbana de Medellin,” Municipio de Medellin, 2014. Available in 
spanish 
http://www.clustertic.co/site/DescubraelemClusteremTIC/Qu%C3%A
9esiClusteriTIC.aspx. [retrieved: august, 2014] 
[2] 
I. 
Ramirez, 
“Characterization 
of 
college 
graduates 
ITM” 
“Caracterización de egresados de la institución universitaria ITM,” 
Medellin, 
2013. 
Available 
in 
spanish 
http://www.itm.edu.co/autoevaluacioninstitucional/acreditacion/imag
enes/Anexos/73.InformesCaracterizacionEgresados20122.pdf  
[retrieved: august, 2014] 
[3] 
AMVA (Área Metropolitana del Valle de Aburra), “Cluster 
Technology, Information and Communication” “Cluster Tecnología, 
Información y comunicación,” Municipio de Medellin, 2014. 
Available 
in 
Spanish 
http://www.clustertic.co/site/Comunidad/Directoriodeempresas.aspx. 
[retrieved: august, 2014] 
[4] 
V. Grimm, U. Berger, F. Bastiansen, S. Eliassen, V. Ginot, J. Giske, 
et al, “A standard protocol for describing individual-based and agent-
based models,” Ecol. Modell., vol. 198, no. 1–2, Sep. 2006 pp. 115–
126. 
[5] 
B. Edmonds, A. Building, and A. Street, “The Use of Models-making 
MABS actually work,” Cent. Policy Model. pp. 15–32, 2000. 
[6] 
Q. B. Le, S. J. Park, and P. L. G. Vlek, “Land Use Dynamic 
Simulator (LUDAS): A multi-agent system model for simulating 
spatio-temporal dynamics of coupled human–landscape system,” 
Ecol. Inform., vol. 5, no. 3, May 2010, pp. 203–221. 
[7] 
I. S. Torsun and I. Torson, Foundations of intelligent knowledge-
based systems. Academic Press, 1995. 
[8] 
J. H. Holland, Emergence: From chaos to order. Oxford University 
Press, 1998. 
[9] 
N. Gilbert, “Agent-based social simulation: dealing with complexity,” 
Complex Syst. Netw. Excell., 2004. 
[10] T. C. Schelling, “Dynamics models of segregation,” J. Math. Sociol., 
no. 1, pp. 143–186, 1971. 
[11] J. M. Epstein and R. L. Axtell, Growing Artificial Societies—Social 
Science from the Bottom Up. MIT Press, 1996. 
[12] J. G. Polhill, D. Parker, D. Brown, and V. Grimm, “Using the ODD 
Protocol for Describing Three Agent-Based Social Simulation 
Models of Land-Use Change,” J. Artif. Soc. Soc. Simul., vol. 11, p. 3, 
2008. 
[13] U. Wilensky, “NetLogo: Center for Connected Learning Comp.-
Based Modeling,” Evanston, IL: Northwestern Univ., 1999. 
275
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-371-1
SIMUL 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

