A New Simulation-Based Approach to Schedule Personnel Deployment Times in 
Decentrally Controlled Production Systems 
The Project Sim4PeP 
 
Julia Schwemmer, Thorsten Schmidt, Michael Völker 
Chair of Material Handling 
TU Dresden 
Dresden, Germany 
e-mail: {julia.schwemmer, thorsten.schmidt, michael.voelker}@tu-dresden.de 
 
 
Abstract—The fourth industrial revolution rises new challenges 
for personnel planning. On the one hand, the decentralization 
of production control gains a new level of flexibility. Without a 
fully detailed production schedule in advance, the workforce 
requirement will be just identified during the current 
processes. Therefore, it is almost impossible to deduce the 
concrete times of workforce requirement in advance, but this 
would be necessary for workforce scheduling. On the other 
hand, manual activities themselves will change in smart 
factories, resulting in a reduced deployment continuity. In 
order to ensure efficient resource planning, including 
workforce, the project Sim4PeP develops a simulation-based 
forecasting method to schedule workforce deployment times in 
a decentrally controlled production system for short- to 
medium-term planning horizons.  
Keywords-CPPS; simulation-based optimization; workforce 
requirement planning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
One main topic of the fourth industrial revolution is the 
decentralization of production control [1]. The decentralized 
real-time control will gain a new level of flexibility to 
achieve a rapid reactivity and a demand-oriented production 
by handling customer-specific orders, small batches and 
process disturbances with minimal planning effort [1]. In this 
concept, orders and resources communicate autonomously 
and decide at lowest shop floor level (cyber-physical 
production system) [1]. Thereby, there is no longer a fully 
detailed production schedule in advance. It is not known in 
advance which operation of which order on which machine 
to what time will be processed. This “scheduling gap“ also 
effects the workforce operations and causes a fundamental 
conflict: Staff schedules have to be determined some weeks 
in advance [2] – for individual, administrative and regulatory 
reasons. To enable an efficient staff schedule, that 
synchronizes personnel supply and demand, the times of 
personnel requirement times have to be known already 
during the scheduling of the workforce.  
In addition, the changing tasks of the production workers 
in smart factories intensify the conflict. The scenario of a 
deserted factory stays still both utopian and not to be aspired 
[3]. Instead, the human being remains a key factor in the 
concept of smart factory and will take on a coordinating, 
controlling and directing role. Thus and due to the 
complexity of the system, there will be jobs with high 
qualification requirements and high specialization [3], which 
presumably arise discretely in time. At the same time, 
progressive automatization will increasingly eliminate 
simple work tasks [4], which are often accompanied by a 
steady deployment continuity. Accordingly, there will be 
more specific qualification classes and less consistent 
periods of working time, resulting in a further reduced 
deployment continuity.  
Especially in countries, such as Germany or France, 
personnel costs are a driving force in manufacturing industry 
[5] that have to be optimized. Therefore, an efficient 
resource planning of the workforce is an essential part of 
Production Planning and Control (PPC) and should be a 
“first level resource” during the optimization process. To 
achieve a high workforce capacity utilisation, single tasks 
have to be bundled, so no (or less) idle times will occur. 
However, this has an effect on machine allocation and job 
sequence, too. 
In order to solve the resulting time and planning conflict 
described above, the project develop a simulation-based 
forecasting method to schedule workforce requirements for 
decentrally controlled production systems.  
Section 2 briefly reviews the state of the art. Section 3 
introduces the concept of the new simulation-based approach 
and the related project. The paper concludes by a short 
summary and an outlook on long-term goals. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART  
The “classic” PPC-process focuses on optimization with 
regard to orders or resources (in the sense of machines or 
unspecific form but without care of the specific attributes of 
workforce) [6]. The production planning creates a central 
production schedule from which workforce schedules are 
derived. Accordingly, the workforce is a “second level 
resource” and a subordinated optimization object in the 
optimization process, respectively [6]. Regarding to the 
changed conditions described in Section I, this approach 
does not work anymore at all or at least not in an efficient 
way.  
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 Already at the turn of 2000, a direction of research 
within the PPC has emerged which especially deals with the 
focus of workforce scheduling and its special features (see 
for example [6] or [7]). These approaches take up the issues 
of qualification-related allocation possibilities and resource 
flexibility of workforce via working hours with seasonal 
accounts (e.g., flextime). For example in 2002, there was an 
AiF funded project which dealt with the integration of 
flexible working time models into PPC [7]. 
The reason to introduce flexible working hours in 
production is the short- to medium-term synchronization 
between capacity supply and demand. Consequently, the 
PPC is enabled to react to the volatility of the markets [6]. 
No literature around the millennium 2000 could deal with 
the later emerging idea of the future fourth industrial 
revolution (for example in Germany around 2012 – cf. 
[1][8]). Therefore, they do not deal with the essential core 
aspect of this research effort: The conflict between 
decentralized, real-time driven production control and the 
required lead-time of workforce resource planning. 
There are also publications in the recent past developing 
or improving approaches to personnel planning (see for 
example [9] or [10]). Due to the constantly changing 
production requirements and influences of the rapidly 
changing markets, characterized by global fluctuating supply 
and demand relationships, more customer-specific products 
and shortening delivery times, personnel planning is still a 
current topic within PPC [9][10].  
[9], for example, examined strategically as well as 
operationally opportunities to make personnel planning more 
flexible. Nevertheless, the approach does not attend to the 
dilemma of the time conflict of workforce scheduling in 
decentralized production control. 
[10] developed flexibility instruments for medium- to 
long-term periods that is not within the scope of the 
presented approach. 
[11] contributes an approach to allocate a highly 
qualified and specialized workforce under the aspects of 
flextime via seasonal accounts, heterogeneous deployment 
flexibility with regard to individual qualifications, as well as 
individual efficiency for the time required to fulfil the duties. 
However, the method is based on a deterministic production 
schedule with already known workforce requirement times. 
The same applies, for example, to [12] and [13]. 
 [14] uses a two-stage procedure, in which the workforce 
is just a second level resource.  
The collaborative project MyCPS [15] focuses on the 
integration of humans into the cyber-physical world of 
production. The focus is not on organizational but on 
technological issues, except for one project: KapaflexCy [2]. 
KapaflexCy enables small and medium-sized companies to 
implement innovative forms of working time models for 
more flexibility with personnel deployment schedules, 
individually tailored for each company. For example, they 
developed an app that allows employees to decide whether 
they want to work additional hours at requested times. In the 
case of short-term requirements, the employees receive 
requests on their smartphones. The approach thus focuses on 
the reactive balancing of short-term fluctuations of the 
capacity demand in production with the concrete and in 
advanced fixed allocation of workforce supply. In contrast, 
the core of the presented research approach involves the 
proactive derivation of workforce requirements based on 
variable production programs without a detailed production 
schedule known in advance. Furthermore, the focus is not 
only on the scheduling of additional shifts but also on the 
planning of the base load. The method to be developed for 
the research project also rejects classic shift systems. 
Furthermore, some recent approaches of workforce 
planning and scheduling use machine-learning techniques. 
[16], for example, predicts the need of products and services 
from which it assigns work tasks to employees. In contrast to 
the approach presented below, [16] is an experience based 
approach as it mainly use history-based files. In addition, it 
refers to a public utility service billing company but not to 
the background of industrial production. 
Moreover, there are scientific approaches that integrate a 
digital twin for employees in a self-controlling production 
system (see for example [17]). The twin reflects human 
characteristics, like behavior, skills and preferences, and 
strives for a better collaboration between human and 
automated production system, especially on intuitively 
interaction with technical devices [17]. However, this 
method does not deal with the creation of personnel 
deployment plans or the overall deviation of personnel 
requirement times sufficiently in advance. Therefore, it does 
not match the research focus of this contribution. 
On commercial level, there are also software companies 
of personnel planning products that take up the changes of 
the fourth industrial revolution. Their products provide 
employee self-service portals for, e.g., wishes such as 
absence days or shift changes, model individual working 
time arrangements or the matching process of qualification 
requirements (see for example [18] or [19])). Nevertheless, 
they do not deal with the planning paradox described at the 
beginning. 
Especially due to the thematic reference to working hours 
and models, legal framework conditions have to be taken 
into account; in Germany for example, there are [20] or [21]. 
To sum up the literature reviewed, the workforce should 
be considered as a specific resource in the PPC-process. 
However, none of the approaches was dealing with the 
dilemma of workforce requirement planning in a decentrally 
controlled production system. 
III. 
RESEARCH PROJECT SIM4PEP 
A. Simulation-Based Forecasting Method 
The research project Sim4PeP focuses on the described 
paradox of the lead-time for workforce scheduling and the 
ad-hoc decisions of the decentrally controlled production 
system. To solve this issue, the aim of the project is to 
develop a simulation-based forecasting method for the 
generation of workforce attendance schedules and validate 
the functionality of the method. 
The forecasting method focuses on a short- to medium-
term planning horizon (up to 6 weeks) under stochastic 
influences. It proceeds according to a rolling wave planning 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Simulation-based 
scenario development 
+ optimization, 
merging into
stochastic overall 
production
schedule
Derivation of workforce schedule 
for presence and on-call standby
Retrospective 
check of
generated 
workforce 
schedule
production
(factory simulator) 
reality
forecast
 
Figure 1.  The three steps of the forecasting method 
model and successively updates subsequent planning 
intervals. The method consists of three steps: optimization, 
extraction and test (see Figure 1).  
In the first stage (optimization), a simulation-based 
optimization 
model 
predicts 
proposals 
of 
potential 
production schedules that consist of a timetable with 
resource allocations and order sequences. The objective 
function already includes the optimization objects “order”, 
“machine” and “employee”. Thus, the “classic” optimization 
objects “order” (e.g., minimizing makespan) and “machine” 
(e.g., maximizing capacity utilization) remain in the 
objective function. However, as described in the second 
section, the workforce working times should no longer be a 
subordinated optimization object, but rather a "first-level" 
resource due to the changed situation. Components of 
objective function in relation to workforce scheduling are, 
for example, the minimization of the total attendance time 
over all employees, which is for example a corporate 
objective. The method should not only deal with corporate 
objectives but also with goals of individual employees. For 
example, they should have the opportunity to contribute 
wishes of their own working hours. Thereby, the model 
ensures the legal or even the individually agreed working 
time specifications by hard model restrictions. This way, the 
modeling guarantees that there are, e.g., a maximum 
workload of 8 hours a day and adequate break times. More 
self-chosen and flexible working time leads to a better work-
life balance and finally to a higher motivation at work [20]. 
Furthermore, it increases the attractiveness of the company 
for the workers. The forecasting method will work 
completely with flexible working hours and abandon from 
rigid shift times. So “work 4.0” is partially also available for 
employees in the production. In addition, the flexible 
working hours could enable a better synchronization of 
capacity supply and demand. 
Due to the stochastic disturbances and uncertainty for 
future forecasts, as well as the autonomy in the variety of 
decisions of the decentral control the simulation model 
generates different scenarios. Weighted by the corresponding 
objective function value, a set of the best scenarios build a 
general schedule. That schedule is not exact and 
deterministic but rather a stochastic distribution over 
preferable scenarios (see Figure 2). Stochastic influences are, 
for example, process time deviations or machine and 
personnel failures. 
Furthermore, 
this 
schedule 
already 
contains 
stochastically distributed demand times for the workforce 
according to qualification classes. By including the worker in 
the objective function of the first stage, it already meets the 
optimization requirement (first level resource). Stage 2 
extracts the workforce attendance and when appropriate on-
call standby times. However, the general schedule does not 
yet provide a clear, deterministic statement but the times for 
the staff schedules have to be deterministic. For this purpose, 
the method could use variable tolerance limits (see Figure 2). 
The derived workforce schedules have to leave as much 
flexibility as possible for the decentral real-time control. 
Therefore only the attendance times are defined, the exact 
allocations between work tasks (capacity demand) and the 
planned working times (capacity offer) are not defined, so 
the decentral control can still match it. 
In the third stage, a retrospective test checks the 
generated workforce schedule by feeding the attendance 
times back into the simulation model. The objective function 
value decides whether the schedules can be released for the 
reality or whether it must be returned to stage 2. In the latter 
case, a variance of the tolerance limits can readjust the 
schedules. 
In the research project, an extended factory simulator will 
replace the real production process. It incorporates further 
stochastic influencing variables and broader stochastic 
scenarios. There is not yet an adequate benchmark for the 
problem described in the introduction which can be applied 
for comparison. Using a factory simulator, the validation of 
 
 
Figure 2.  Derivation of the workforce schedule 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

the method, as well as a quality analysis of the generated 
plans is possible. Especially due to the stochastic problem 
modelling, deviations between the created personnel plans 
and the factory simulator are to be expected. Even in real 
systems application, the generated plans will not correspond 
one hundred percent with the actual implementation, as the 
forecast is still uncertain. However, it is the aim of the 
project to enable the method to keep these differences as 
small as possible by reasonable computing effort. 
If the results are promising, a test on a real system can be 
carried out at a later project stage or in a subsequent project. 
B. Research Focus 
Besides the development of the forecasting method itself, 
it is a goal of the research project to determine feasibility, 
requirements and limits of this methodology. There are three 
main categories of research questions in the project: 
 
Deterministic derivation in the stochastic field: 
Above all, the questions arise: To what extent do the 
deterministic 
specification 
of 
the 
forecasted 
attendance requirements limit the degree of self-
optimization of decentralized planning? In this 
context, is it feasible to achieve optimal results in 
terms of the overall objective? Moreover, is it 
feasible to achieve an optimized process for the 
overall system at all by determining deterministic 
workforce times from the stochastic forecast? 
 
Working time models and task bundling: What 
would a working time model have to look like in 
order to support the flexibility of decentralized 
control and at the same time implement a humane 
workforce planning? Which components of existing 
working time models lead to which influences within 
the method (e.g., flextime, overtime or division of 
the daily working time into parts)? How can the 
method match requirements from the production 
system (that means 24-hour operation) with the 
requirements regarding to the workers (e.g., 8 hours 
preferably during the day)? Is there a compromise? 
To what extent can employees contribute their 
preferred working hours (may possibly in different 
priority levels) or are core working hours necessary 
to ensure the basic supply of workforce? Is it 
possible to bundle tasks that there are no or less idle 
times? Does it have strong effects on the other 
optimization objects? Are there synergetic or 
antagonistic effects between working hours and task 
bundling? 
 
Computing 
time 
and 
method 
initiation: 
Computational efficiency is a central challenge 
within the project, because it can become the 
limiting factor of the model size. Due to the focus on 
the creation of the workforce schedule and not on the 
concrete assignment of workers to tasks, the model 
does not have to work on a real-time basis. Instead, it 
is executed cyclically (e.g. weekly). However, with 
regard to the later usability of the method in practice, 
the runtime of the models is very important. How 
can the models achieve a runtime improvement? 
May machine-learning strategies improve the 
metaheuristics of the simulation-based optimization?  
What type of triggering points will start the 
forecasting method (fixed time intervals vs. specific 
or unexpected events). How responsive are these 
trigger points with regard to already fixed personnel 
plans (e.g. drastic market changes in the occurrence 
of Covid19)? In which frequency do the method 
have to start in general? What model-internal time 
pattern for workforce scheduling is adequate (e.g., 
half-hourly)? 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The research project Sim4PeP focuses on the paradox of 
the creation of workforce schedules in smart factories. 
Therefore, the project is developing a forecasting method 
that contains a simulation-based optimization approach. A 
further goal of the research project is to determine feasibility, 
requirements and limits of this methodology in general. 
The research approach pursues long-term goals. It brings 
benefits for the employees. They should have the chance to 
have an impact on their own individual organization of 
working hours. This will increase the work-life-balance, 
which – especially for younger employees at present time – 
plays a more important role than the salary [20]. The 
increased self-determination also leads to higher motivation 
and thus to higher productivity. This in turn is a corporate 
benefit. In addition to the companies’ benefits, an efficient 
workforce deployment is encouraged. This results in a lean 
staff, which nevertheless ensures maximum flexibility and 
maximum production capacity. Therefore, it leads to cost 
advantages.  
Last, the strategy “Industry 4.0” is moving forward. The 
research project addresses the need for novel planning and 
control mechanisms inside the fourth industrial revolution. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG is funding 
the project with the title “A simulation-based and flexi-time 
applying prediction model for scheduling personnel 
deployment times in the production planning process of 
cyber-physical systems” (project-id: 439188616). 
REFERENCES 
[1] German Federal Ministry of Education and Research, 
“Industrie 4.0. Innovationen für die Produktion von morgen 
(Industry 4.0. Innovations for the production of tomorrow)“, 
Publikationsverband der Bundesregierung, Berlin, August, 
2017. 
[2] W. Bauer and S. Gerlach, “Selbstorganisierte Kapazitätsflexi-
bilität in Cyber-Physical Systems: KapaflexCy. Abschluss-
bericht. (Self-organized flexibility of capacity in Cyber-
Physical Systems: KapaflexCy. Final Report.)”, Fraunhofer 
Verlag, Stuttgart, 2015, ISBN: 978-3-8396-0932-3. 
[3] D. Spath, O. Ganschar, S. Geralch, and M. Hämmerle, 
“Produktionsarbeit der Zukunft (Production work of the 
future)“, Fraunhofer Verlag, Stuttgart, 2013, ISBN: 978-3-
8396-0570-7. 
[4] P. Ittermann, J. Niehaus, and H. Hirsch-Kreinsen “Arbeiten in 
der Industrie 4.0: Trendbestimmungen und arbeitspolitische 
Handlungsfelder (Working in industry 4.0: Determining 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

trends and labour policy fields of action)“, Study of Hans-
Böckler-Stiftung, vol. 308, Düsseldorf, June, 2015. 
[5] C. Schröder, “Industrielle Arbeitskosten im internationalen 
Vergleich 
(Industrial 
labour 
costs 
in 
international 
comparison)“, in IW-Trends, vol. 43 (3/2016), Institut der 
deutschen 
Wirtschaft 
Köln, 
Cologne, 
2016, 
doi: 
10.2373/1864-810X.16-03-03. 
[6] B. Grabot and A. Letouzey; “Short-term manpower 
management in manufacturing systems: new requirements and 
DSS prototyping”, In: Computers in Industry, vol. 43, pp. 11-
29, 2000. 
[7] R. Schieferdecker and C. Schmidt, “Produktionsplanung und -
steuerung bei flexiblen Arbeitszeiten: Arbeitszeitspezifische 
Planungsmodelle für eine integrierte Personalressourcen-
planung (Production planning and control with flexible 
working hours: Working time specific planning models for 
integrated personnel resource planning)“ AiF-founded project, 
project-id 12257N, 2002. 
[8] German Federal Ministry of Education and Research, 
“Zukunftsbild „Industrie 4.0“ (Vision of the future "Industry 
4.0)“, Publikationsverband der Bundesregierung, Bonn, July, 
2015. 
[9]  T. Stock, “Ein Verfahren zur Personalplanung und -steuerung 
und Restrukturierung der Aufbauorganisation für eine 
bedarfsorientierte und wandlungsfähige Produktion (A 
method for personnel planning and control and restructuring 
of the organizational structure for a demand-oriented and 
adaptable production)“, dissertation. In: Stuttgarter Beiträge 
zur Produktionsforschung, vol. 9, 2013, doi: 10.18419/opus-
6817.  
[10] M. Hämmerle, „Methoden zur strategischen Dimensionierung 
der Personalflexibilität in der Produktion: Wirkungsbe-
wertung von Instrumenten zur Flexibilisierung der Personal-
kapazität im volatilen Marktumfeld (Methods for strategic 
dimensioning of personnel flexibility in production: Impact 
assessment of instruments for making personnel capacity 
more flexible in a volatile market environment)“, dissertation, 
in Schriftenreihe zu Arbeitswissenschaft und Technologie-
management, vol. 26. Fraunhoferverlag, Stuttgart, 2015, 
ISBN 978-3-8396-0899-9. 
[11] E.-A. Attia, P. Duquenne, and J. Le-Lann “Considering skills 
evolutions in multi-skilled workforce allocation with flexible 
working hours”, in International Journal of Production 
Research, vol. 52(15), pp. 4548-4573, 2014, doi: 10.1080/ 
00207543.2013.877613. 
[12] G. Gong, R. Chiong, Q. Deng, and X. Gong, “A hybrid 
artificial bee colony algorithm for flexible job shop 
scheduling with worker flexibility”, in International Journal of 
Production Research, 2019, doi: 10.1080/00207543.2019. 
1653504. 
[13] X. Zheng and L. Wang “A Knowledge-Guided Fruit Fly 
Optimization Algorithm for Dual Resource Constrained 
Flexible Job-Shop Scheduling Problem”. in International 
Journal of Production Research, vol. 54(18), pp. 5554–5566, 
2016. 
[14] R. Lin, G.  Zhou, A. Liu, H. Lu, and T. Li, “Impact of 
personnel flexibility on Job Shop Scheduling”. In Scientific 
Programming, Article ID: 3403058, Hindawi Publishing 
Corporation, 2016, doi: 10.1155/2016/3403058. 
[15] Fraunhofer 
Institute 
for 
Industrial 
Engineering 
IAO, 
“MyCPS”, available from: www.mycpstoolbox.de, [retrieved: 
september, 2020]. 
[16] N. Simeunović, I. Kamenko, V. Bugarski, M. Jovanović, and 
B. Lalić “Improving workforce scheduling using artificial 
neural networks model” in Advances in Production 
Engineering & Management , vol. 12 (4), pp. 337-352, APEM 
journal, december, 2017, doi: 10.14743/apem2017.4.262. 
[17] I. Graesslera and A. Poehler “Intelligent control of an 
assembly station by integration of a digital twin for 
employees into the decentralized control system” 4th 
International Conference on System-Integrated Intelligence, 
vol. 24, pp. 185-189, Procedia Manufacturing, 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.promfg.2018.06.041. 
[18] FASTEC GmbH, “Personnel Planning” available from: 
https://www.fastec.de/mes-fastec-4-pro/personalplanung, 
[retrieved: september, 2020]. 
[19] ATOSS Software AG, “Workforce scheduling” available from: 
https://www.atoss.com/en-gb/workforce-management/ 
workforce-scheduling, [retrieved: september, 2020]. 
[20] German Federal Institute for Occupational Saftey and Health 
(baua),  “Flexible Arbeitszeitmodelle: Überblick und 
Umsetzung (Flexible working time models: overview and 
implementation)”, 2. edition, Dortmund, October 2019, doi: 
10.21934/baua: praxis20170719. 
[21] German Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection:  
“Arbeitszeitgesetz (law on working time)”, available from: 
www.gesetze-im-internet.de/arbzg/BJNR117100994.html, 
[retrieved: september, 2020]. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

