Modelling Player Combat Behaviour for Dynamic Difficulty Scaling in First Person 
Shooter Games 
Paul Williamson 
School of Computing and Mathematics 
University of South Wales 
CF37 1DL, Pontypridd 
e-mail: paul.williamson@southwales.ac.uk 
Christopher Tubb 
School of Computing and Mathematics 
University of South Wales 
CF37 1DL, Pontypridd 
e-mail: christopher.tubb@southwales.ac.uk
Abstract—Non-Player Characters (NPC) are a core aspect of 
a modern video game. They fulfil a wide range of roles and 
features in most genres. How they are perceived can have an 
impact on the overall enjoyment of the game, and when the 
NPCs are poorly modelled, the experience can be negative. This 
paper explores modelling human player behaviour to develop a 
combat model for NPCs, which will provide a dynamic solution 
for skill scaling. Game difficulty is a subjective notion and when 
games have a predefined classification, being able to satisfy all 
players is not realistic. This paper investigates if the combat 
model can therefore be used to scale the difficulty of the NPC in 
real-time, by dynamically adjusting a skill attribute, which is 
used by several key combat behaviours. 
Keywords—NPC; Player Modelling; Difficulty; Combat 
Behaviour; Gameplay; FPS. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
This paper explores a player driven approach for 
dynamically adjusting the difficulty of Non-Player Characters 
(NPCs) in real-time. This is achieved by modelling player 
combat gameplay. The model is then applied directly to NPCs. 
The combat efficiency is controlled by dynamically adjusting 
the variable parameters in real-time for the purpose of 
difficulty scaling. The reasoning behind modelling human-
player gameplay is to help define the generalised upper and 
lower skill level of average players. These bounds are then, in 
determining how skilfully an NPC should behave, based on 
data rather than developer interpretation. 
This paper conducts two experiments. The first 
experiment uses predetermined combat scenarios that records 
the data of human subjects, which is used to model generalised 
combat behaviours. The second experiment applies the 
combat model to NPCs, then evaluates the perception of the 
model when human subjects conduct a deathmatch scenario 
with the skill of the NPC increasing with each round. 
The results show that generalising human combat data 
provides a suitable base for controlling the combat 
effectiveness of NPCs. It demonstrates that by using a variable 
to denote the skill level of the NPC, the difficulty can be 
dynamically adjusted to reflect a desired outcome. 
In Section II, this paper provides a background for NPCs 
in FPS games and the role of difficulty. Section III discusses 
the motivation behind this paper and what impact this research 
could have on the gaming industry. In Section IV, a literature 
review is undertaken to discuss relative research, which is 
consistent with the NPCs in the FPS genre. Section V details 
the two experiments. The first is used to capture and model 
human subject combat behaviour, while the second 
experiment evaluates the model by having human subjects 
compete against NPCs with the combat model in a deathmatch 
scenario. In Section VI, the results of the experiments are 
analysed and displayed. Firstly, a numerical comparison 
between the human subject data and NPCs is discussed along 
with an evaluation of the feedback from human subjects, 
regarding the perception of the combat model. Lastly, an 
assessment of the combat model as a suitable solution for 
dynamic skill scaling. Section VII concludes the paper and 
discusses the impact of the combat model. Finally, Section 
VIII discusses potential future work that can be undertaken to 
build upon the work presented in this paper.  
II. BACKGROUND 
A. Non-Player Characters in FPS Games 
An NPC is a character that exists within a video game that 
is not being controlled by a human player. NPCs can occupy 
any range of characters and can exhibit a variety of levels of 
perceived intelligence. 
There are multiple roles an NPC can fulfil, and their stance 
towards a player can be friendly, neutral, or enemy [1]. This 
paper is only focused on NPCs in the role of an enemy and 
therefore a threat. 
The purpose of an NPC is dependent upon the specific role 
it was designed to fulfil. However, NPCs should strive to 
appear as authentic as possible to maintain immersion. This is 
especially important when the NPC operates as a member of 
a team with human players, because if the NPC is identified, 
it can become the focus of the opposition if the NPC performs 
at a low level. 
Poorly designed NPCs can have a significant effect on a 
game, because when the immersion is broken it can ripple 
through other parts of the game [2]. Therefore, careful 
consideration should be undertaken when designing the role 
and function of an NPC because it can negatively impact the 
game. 
B. Difficulty in Games 
Difficulty is one of the areas where poorly developed 
NPCs can damage the overall enjoyment of a game. When 
NPCs are too easy, they do not represent a challenge and when 
they are too difficult, they can be frustrating and appear as 
unfair opposition. 
This signifies a problem when discussing difficulty 
settings in video games. The term is subjective and so what is 
‘easy’ to one player may not necessarily be ‘easy’ to other 
players. The issue exists when hardcoding arbitrary 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
characteristics to perform at a defined level. The focus is not 
player-centric, but rather a generalised interpretation of what 
is considered ‘easy’ by the developers. 
In First Person Shooter games (FPS), NPCs ‘difficulty’ is 
often expressed in their combat efficiency, and so difficulty 
settings reflect adeptness regarding individual combat 
behaviours, such as accuracy and reaction time. Part of this 
paper is to explore whether the skill of the NPC can be 
changed in real-time, and if the combat behaviours correspond 
precisely to the skill level. This would enable a player-centric 
based difficulty. The players skill is calculated in real-time, 
and then the NPCs are modified accordingly depending on the 
difficulty classification selected. 
III. MOTIVATION 
The motivation of the paper is to address the purpose of 
varying difficulty and ultimately the distinction between the 
different difficulty classifications. While this is a subjective 
discussion, the difficulty of a game can impact how it is 
perceived by an individual. When a particular difficulty is 
selected, it is important that it is perceived accordingly 
otherwise there is a risk of a negative experience. 
A combat game in the form of an FPS was chosen as the 
case study because it represents a well-founded genre and 
have heavily featured in the gaming industry since the early 
1990s. As game genres can differ in gameplay and 
technicality, it was important to isolate one genre so that the 
scope of the research remains narrow so a conclusion can be 
derived from the data. Furthermore, in FPS games, the metric 
of difficulty is commonly associated with combat ‘skill’, such 
as reaction speed, precision, and decision-making. Therefore, 
it is a standard practice in the video game industry to statically 
increase reaction time, damage dealt and precision when 
increasing difficulty levels. 
The motivation for exploring real-time skill scaling 
centres around the notion that one size does not fit all. When 
a game has static pre-determined difficulty settings, they 
cannot accurately cater to all potential players. By having 
NPCs skill based on the performance of the player, it could 
usher in a new player-centric style of difficulty, and ultimately 
provide more control to the player. 
Williamson and Tubb [3] showed that player gameplay 
can be broken down into key behaviours and the patterns that 
emerged can be modelled. They also indicated that when an 
NPCs were poorly modelled, and the combat efficiency was 
too high, the resulting NPC was perceived as a player using 
cheats. 
IV. RELATED RESEARCH 
A. Non-Player Characters in Combat Roles 
When discussing NPCs in a combat role, the focus will be 
primarily on the FPS genre. While NPCs have been present 
since the inception of the FPS genre, there has been some 
progress in the scope of their capabilities. Orkin [4] showed 
that NPCs could display seemingly complex characteristics, 
such as tactics, by using Goal Orientated Action Planner 
(GOAP), which enabled individual actions to be undertaken 
based on current circumstance. This technique sparked a host 
of research based around maximising the effectiveness of 
using action planners. Influenced by GOAP, Pezzato et al. [5] 
researched a technique that uses active interference and 
Behavioural Trees (BT) to develop decision-based plans, 
which are adaptable and created in real-time for robotics.  
However, Agis et al. [6] suggest that because GOAP are 
individual by design, NPCs are not actively cooperating with 
allies and just giving the illusion of working as a team. They 
proposed using a new form of Event Driven Behavioural Tree 
(EDBT), 
where 
three 
extra 
nodes 
are 
added 
for 
communication purposes between same team NPCs. These 
nodes facilitate actions in a sub-tree, so the sender can request 
the receiver/s to perform certain actions. 
 Neufeld et al. [7] propose that behavioural trees are a good 
approach to NPC decision-making, when combined with a 
Hierarchical Task Network (HTN). The HTN was able to 
instruct multiple NPCs what to do but leave the low-level 
execution of tasks to the BTs. When comparing this hybrid 
approach against a pure HTN solution. The results showed the 
hybrid approach to be more flexible and fail less often. 
B. Human Imitation 
The idea to measure and quantify the skill of human 
players is not a new idea and in essence this research is akin 
to work undertaken to develop NPCs to appear more 
believable. While believability can have many interpretations 
depending on the context of the topic, this paper is focused on 
NPCs with a generalised skill level. Camilleri et al. [8] 
identify believability as: 
Player believability is a highly subjective notion 
commonly viewed as the ability of a game playing 
character to convince observers that it is being controlled 
by a human player 
This suggests that for an NPC to be deemed as a believable 
character, it needs to exhibit human-like behaviours. So, 
observers are convinced the character is human controlled. In 
the context of the FPS genre, these behaviours will range from 
combat efficiency to pathfinding characteristics and decisions. 
 Polceanu et al. [9] presented two solutions for imitating 
human player behaviour. The first is a human behaviour 
mirror technique, while the second uses interactive genetic 
algorithms. This is supported by Mora et al. [10], they 
combined the techniques to create a hybridisation model. 
When experimented in a Turin Test scenario, the results 
showed that a high level of “humanness” was achieved. 
The importance of imitating human players extends 
beyond difficulty scaling. Wehbe et al. [11] argue that the 
difference between playing with other human participants and 
NPC is profound because it intersects the artificial world of 
the game with real life. They also imply that quasi-feudalistic 
tendencies of human players should be encouraged in NPCs 
where possible. 
C. Difficulty Control in FPS Games 
When discussing difficulty control, it is important to 
define the terminology in the context of a video game. 
Smeddinck et al. [12] states: 
Game difficulty choices that are presented in menus with 
typical labels such as “easy, medium, hard” can be found 
even in very early and simple games. The “classic way to 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
present difficulty choices” has arguably evolved largely as 
a matter of technical circumstance 
This suggests that difficulty has been part of video games for 
a long time and has needed to evolve out of necessity.  
Hendrix et al. [13] showed a positive result when 
developing a six-point system, which gathers data and applies 
an algorithm to determine the capabilities of the player 
through engagement. 
Blom et al. [14] have taken a different approach to 
identifying the currently perceived difficulty experienced by 
the player. They developed a system that monitors facial 
expressions to determine the difficulty the subject is 
experiencing, achieving 72% accuracy. The model was able 
to adapt to the individual’s performance level via their facial 
expression and establish which tasks or challenges presented 
the most difficulty. 
The research shows that while difficulty may be an easily 
defined concept, problems occur when putting the theory into 
practice. For the remainder of this paper, difficulty will be 
defined as: 
The degree of challenge presented to an individual when 
undertaking game related tasks or mechanics 
These tasks can range from game objectives, such as solving 
puzzles or combat interactions that relies on eliminating 
opponents. 
The idea of a personalised approach to NPC development 
is not a novel idea. Research by Bakkes [15] discusses the 
notion of using player models to generate an individualistic 
experience. Their research shows that a few viable techniques 
have been examined [16]-[18]. These techniques mainly use 
NPC training methods or manipulate external constraints, 
such as environmental, to achieve the desired outcome. 
However, the purpose of this paper is to use generalised player 
data to control the combat efficiency of NPCs, which can be 
adapted in real-time. 
V. EXPERIMENTS 
A series of experiments were conducted to analyse the 
combat efficiency of human subjects so they can be directly 
modelled. This also enabled the same experiment to be 
undertaken by the NPCs, so a direct comparison could be 
performed and ensure combat efficiency was changing in 
accordance with the skill level set. Evaluating the perception 
of difficulty, an experiment was undertaken where human 
subjects played a series of deathmatch rounds against two 
NPCs. As the rounds progressed, the base skill level of the 
NPCs also increased. 
The objective of these experiments is to identify the 
generalised combat efficiency of human players, use this data 
to develop a combat model that adjusts combat efficiency 
based on current skill level, and then evaluate the model by 
having human subjects compete against NPCs. 
A. Experimantal Environment 
The experiments in this paper were developed using 
Unity3D, the files were upload to an online server. Each 
subject download and ran the experiment on their local 
machine. The first experiment took approximately fifteen 
minutes to complete. After each stage data was saved and 
uploaded to an online database. The second experiment took 
ten minutes, with the data also being saved online after each 
stage. There was also an accompanying questionnaire at the 
end of this experiment, which was completed via a web 
browser. 
All subjects in both experiments were anonymous, no 
details were requested, and no experience was required. The 
data that was uploaded from their experiment session did not 
record any information which could be tracked to an 
individual. 
B. Combat Behaviour Experimental Protocol 
The modelling experiment focused on five scenarios, 
which analysed and recorded the decisions and behaviours of 
the subjects as they undertook each scenario. Each scenario 
has three settings where targets spawns near, medium distance 
or far from the subject. During the experiment the subject 
cannot move except to rotate and targets randomly spawn in 
view. The scenarios in this experiment were used because they 
reflect commonly occurring combat situation in FPS games. 
While it is understood that in some modern games more 
complicated scenarios could appear, it was decided to model 
the fundamental scenarios only and gauge the effectiveness of 
the skill scaling. 
The experiment runs four times. Each time the weapon or 
weapon aim stance will change, in the order as follows: 
• Pistol: Off hip 
• Pistol: Aiming down sights 
• Assault Rifle: Off hip 
• Assault Rifle: Aiming down sights 
The purpose of these experiments is to identify if 
individual weapons have an impact on combat behaviours and 
the degree of change in combat efficiency when the weapon 
aim stance changes. This will help determine the specific and 
generalised weapon behaviours that will need to be modelled 
and what impact they may have on difficulty. 
All targets use the same model and texture, they each have 
the equivalence of fifty health points and are immediately 
destroyed when its health is reduced to zero. 
a) Normal Scenario 
The normal scenario is a typical encounter in a video 
game. A single target appears, and the subject has a limited 
amount of time to dispatch it. Subjects have 2 seconds to 
eliminate the target before it disappears. As the three stages 
represent near, medium, and far distances. This experiment 
analyses what effect this has on accuracy, reaction time and 
helps determine a baseline for average reaction time. 
b) Increased Spawn Rate 
The increasing spawn rate analyses the effect of targets 
appearing in view when subjects are in the process of 
eliminating another target, and if the new targets have a 
negative effect on reaction time. The purpose of this 
experiment was to determine if external influence can have a 
negative effect on combat efficiency, and if so to what degree. 
c) Grouped Targets 
It is frequent in a modern game that multiple opponents 
can be present at a given time. This scenario analyses the 
pattern exhibited when numerous opponents suddenly appear. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
Continuing with the three-stage approach, this scenario also 
increases the number of targets that simultaneously spawn as 
the stages advance. The near stage has three targets, medium 
stage has five targets, and the far stage has seven targets. All 
targets remain for five seconds before disappearing. 
d) Varying Size 
This scenario is a repeat of the normal scenario stage. 
However, the target size is decreased to determine the degree 
of correlation between target size and combat efficiency. 
e) Moving Target 
In this scenario, targets spawn every 2.5s and self-destruct 
at 5s. They move from left to right at a constant speed, 
changing direction when reaching the edge of a predefined 
boundary. This enables some overlap of targets on screen if 
they are not eliminated fast enough. This scenario explores if 
a moving target has an influence on combat efficiency of an 
individual. 
C. Dynamic Difficulty Experimental Protocol 
Evaluating the effect of dynamic difficulty, the experiment 
is a deathmatch. The objective is to achieve a set number of 
eliminations before the opposition. In this experiment, the 
requirement is set to 5 eliminations. There are three stages, as 
the stages progress the base skill level of the NPCs is 
increased. The stages are as follows: 
• Stage One: NPC Base Skill is 3 
• Stage Two: NPC Base Skill is 6 
• Stage Three: NPC Base Skill is 9 
There are two NPCs opponents, which operate in an all 
verses all scenario. One of the NPCs will use a pistol and the 
other will use the assault rifle. Each weapon has a sub model 
that influences attack distance and has its own attributes such 
as clip size and bullet damage. 
The subject will have access to three weapons. Each 
weapon has its own ammunition stash and can be equipped by 
pressing 1, 2 or 3 on the keyboard. The weapon characteristics 
are as follows: 
• Pistol: The pistol has high recoil and kickback, slow fire-
rate, but deals high damage 
• Assault Rifle: This weapon has high fire-rate, medium 
damage, and moderate recoil 
• Shotgun: The shotgun fires 12 pellets per shot, each of 
which deal low damage, high recoil, and high pellet 
spread over range 
There are three medic-packs and three ammunition-pack 
throughout the map. The medic-pack provide 50% health and 
the ammunition provides one clip for the equipped weapon. 
When a medic-pack or ammunition has been collected, it will 
respawn in the same location after five seconds. 
The purpose of this experiment is to evaluate the combat 
model and to determine if increasing the base skill level has 
an effect on combat efficiency. The skill scaling is important 
because in a real-world setting, there is a spectrum of player 
skill levels, this flexibility needs to be reflected in the model. 
If NPCs are able to increase or decrease their combat 
efficiency in real-time, it would provide a suitable solution to 
improving challenging NPCs. As NPCs could be changed 
during a game to match the skill of the current player. 
a) Combat Model 
The combat model being used in this paper was derived 
from subject data captured in the ‘Combat Behaviour 
Experiment’. The purpose of this model is to have NPCs 
imitate human-like combat behaviours, with key behaviours 
directly linked to a skill variable, so the combat efficiency 
accurately reflects the NPC skill at a given time. For this 
paper, the skill of the NPC will be between 1 and 10, with 10 
representing very high combat efficiency and 1 very poor 
efficiency. Therefore, an NPC with a skill of 5 will represent 
the generalised combat efficiency resulting from the combat 
behaviour experiment. The definition of skill will therefore be 
based around improving or worsening the generalised data. 
As the combat model was used to influence key combat 
behaviours by modifying how the NPC operates in combat 
situations. This means the purpose of the combat model was 
to represent a generalised combat behaviour exhibited by 
human subjects during combat encounters. As the data used 
for this model was directly sourced from human subjects, it 
was generalised to provide a base level for how an average 
skilled NPC should play. 
As the development techniques being deployed are 
standard in the gaming industry, it was important that a range 
of these techniques were compatible with the data acquired. 
Therefore, when developing the model, it was decided that the 
best approach would be to use object orientated programming 
to encapsulate the functionality of the model. After an object 
of the class is generated, the other components of the NPC can 
directly access the combat model. This is vital because during 
run time, several scripts and coroutines are running at the 
same time and potentially require access to the same data. 
Ensuring NPCs did not appear generic, it was decided that 
the skill attribute should be influenced by modifiers but have 
an upper and lower restriction. This would stop NPCs 
snowballing and becoming too good or regressing and 
becoming too bad. It was important that the influence applied 
by the skill attribute is a direct reflection of the previous 
passage of play, accumulating from the past few combat 
interaction outcomes. The modifiers are: 
• Death: Being eliminated has a negative effect and 
decreases skill modifier 
• Eliminations: Eliminating an opponent is positive and 
increases the skill modifier 
The modifier change is +0.5 for an elimination and -0.5 
for a death. This amount is added to an accumulative counter 
but is capped at +2.5 and -2.5. This limitation was added to 
stop NPCs diverging too far from their base skill. For instance, 
a run of eliminations without being eliminated will take an 
NPC to peak performance of base skill level + 2.5. 
Players generally have a preferred weapon of choice. 
Therefore, NPCs generate a preferred weapon order when 
initially spawned. The top three weapons have a positive 
influence on active skill, the amount is determined by the 
weapons position in the weapons order. For this experiment 
however, NPCs were not given the option to change weapon 
and were equipped with a predefined weapon. The weapon 
skill modifier was always set to +1. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
When calculating the active skill, the base skill, weapon 
modifier and a hot-streak/cold-streak modifier are all added 
together. This approach means the active skill will always be 
close to the base skill but has some arbitrary variation because 
there is potential for the NPC be having a “good” or “bad” 
round. 
Equation (1) shows how the initial reaction time was 
calculated using an active skill calculation. 
Reaction Time = 𝑇𝑠 + ((𝑆 ∗ 𝑀) ∗ 𝐷𝑥)
𝐷𝑧
 
(1) 
Where, Ts is the target size, S the active skill attribute, M 
is a generic modifier, Dx the 2D distance from the centre of 
the screen to the target and Dz the Euclidean distance from the 
NPC to the target. This represents a comprehensive approach 
to targeting because it considers not only the size of the target 
(Ts), but also the distance (Dz). This was required because the 
further away the target was in game, the smaller it would 
appear on the screen. This underscores the importance of 
precision when determining the initial reaction targeting 
speed. 
Equations (2) and (3) are for accuracy. It was decided to 
separate the two shooting stances as looking down sights 
should provide better control than shooting off the hip. 
Aiming =  Vp +  Vf ∗ (Mx + (My ∗  S)) 
(2) 
Vp is the vector position and Vf the vector forward 
direction of the NPC, Mx and My are generic modifiers and S 
the active skill of the NPC. 
Off Hip = Vp +  Vf ∗ (Mx ∗  S)
𝑆𝑥 ∗  𝑊𝑠
 
(3) 
Like the aiming equation, Vp is the vector position and Vf 
the vector forward direction of the NPC, Mx a generic 
modifier and S the active skill of the NPC. However, Sx is the 
locale scale of the crosshair and Ws is the equipped weapon 
bullet spread. When shooting off the hip, the crosshair 
momentarily increases in size, this effect is accumulative, so 
the longer the weapon is being continuously fired, the more 
inaccurate it becomes. 
The shooting stances therefore have unique characteristics 
that display different combat behaviours based on the weapon 
being used and active skill of the NPC. 
VI. RESULTS 
The results indicate that modelling human behaviour is a 
suitable method for having dynamically skilled NPCs and it is 
possible to generalise combat efficiency. While the skill 
scaling proved to be a very effective solution for modifying 
the NPC combat efficiency in real-time. 
a) Combat Model Analysis Comparison 
The results suggest that while the performance of the 
model was well received, there were some areas of combat 
that require more attention. Figure 1 details the average 
accuracy for both NPCs at each stage and subjects at stage 1. 
It shows that while the scaling worked, they were in general 
over-tuned. 
 
Figure 1. Accuracy Comparison. 
When specifying where combat believability was the 
weakest, it follows a similar trend. Figure 2 shows that when 
asked about specific behaviours of combat, 85.7% of the 
responses thought accuracy was not realistic. 
 
Figure 2. Combat Perception Analysis. 
Reaction time was also elevated. This suggests that 
subjects had a difficult time competing with the NPCs. 
However, this problem can be solved by reducing the weight 
of the modifier system in the combat model, which suggests 
more experimentation is required to tweak the model. 
Figure 3 shows the overall combat perception of the NPCs. 
While 50% thought the NPCs were somewhat human-like, the 
rest thought they did not display a good representation of a 
human player. 
 
Figure 3. Combat Feedback. 
While these results may not suggest the NPCs accurately 
imitated human players, it shows that this method does hold 
63
77
90
32
0
50
100
Accuracy
ACCURACY (%)
Accuracy Comparison
Base Skill level 3
Base Skill level 6
Base Skill level 9
Subject Stage 1
85.7
57.1
23.8
42.9
0
50
100
Combat Behaviour
SUBJECT RESPONSES (%)
Combat Perception
Accuracy
Targetting
Player Awareness
Reaction Speed
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
some promise and by fine tuning the model it could yield 
better results. 
b) Gameplay Influence 
When analysing the feedback, it became apparent that the 
other gameplay behaviours were having a direct influence on 
the perception of the combat believability. This meant that the 
perception of the pathfinding was negatively affecting the 
opinions of the subjects regarding the combat of the NPCs. As 
subjects were requested to fill out a questionnaire at the end 
of the deathmatch experiment, a question was specifically 
asked about the combat behaviours exhibited by NPCs. Figure 
4 singles out a reply from one of the subjects. It underlines 
that other gameplay behaviours, such as navigation, can have 
an impact on the perception of combat. 
 
Figure 4. Specific Combat Subject Feedback. 
When one behaviour is modelled poorly, it can affect the 
perception of other behaviours and have undesirable effects. 
When modelling certain behaviours, it is important to be 
aware of how it may affect the other behaviours in certain 
scenarios. 
c) Skill Scaling 
The skill scaling showed a high degree of effectiveness 
when asking the subject if they noticed a change in difficulty 
as they progressed through the stages (Figure 5). While 57.1% 
noticed a change in difficulty, none of the subjects thought the 
difficulty did not change. 
 
Figure 5. Difficulty Identification Feedback. 
This shows the combat model could be a suitable solution 
for enabling real-time adaptive NPC difficulty. This further 
confirms that players, to a degree, have awareness about the 
combat efficiency of opponents. This emphasises that 
generalisation of difficulties cannot satisfy all players. 
When analysing the pistol combat performance between 
the three difficulties (Figure 6). A positive trend is evident 
where the amount of damage done by the NPC increased as 
the base skill is increased. 
 
Figure 6. Pistol Damage Done Skill Comparison. 
Combat efficiency increased with base skill level. This is 
supported when analysing the average initial reaction time for 
the assault rifle across all three stages (Figure 7). The results 
show a slight correlation between reaction time and active 
skill level. While there is some deviation, this could be due to 
the fluctuation in active skill level, due to hot and cold streak 
being triggered. 
 
Figure 7. NPC Skill Reaction Time Initial Comparison. 
When analysing the 1st and 3rd stages (Figure 8) the 
average number of eliminations achieved for each character 
was considered. On average, subjects did not perform very 
well and the NPC with the assault rifle was overly efficient 
especially on stage 1. 
 
Figure 8. Eliminations Comparison. 
This data supports the suggestion that the performance of 
the NPCs was over tuned. However, when analysing the NPC 
with the pistol, the data shows that it did get better as its skill 
was increased. This had a significant effect because both the 
subject and assault rifle NPC elimination count dropped. 
While more experimentation and fine tuning of the model is 
needed, this represents a positive result. 
The novelty of this model and algorithms is that the skill 
variable directly influences the behaviour and efficiency of the 
322
441
480
0
200
400
600
Pistol
TOTAL DAMAGE DONE
Pistol Analysis
Base Skill Level 3
Base Skill Level 6
Base Skill Level 9
1
0.8
0.67
0
0.5
1
Assualt Rifle
TIME (S)
Initial Reaction Time
Base Skill Level 3
Base Skill Level 6
Base Skill Level 9
2.1
3.6
4.3
4
2.3
1.5
0
5
Stage 1
Stage 3
ELIMINATIONS 
ACHIEVED
Eliminations Comparison
Pistol
Assault Rifle
Human
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
 
NPC in combat. Further research is required to capture real-
time skill of the player, so the NPC can tweak its skill to match 
the desired difficulty outcome. This would represent a 
personalised difficulty structure, where the player skill is 
taken into consideration. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The objective of this research was to develop a dynamic 
skill scaling combat model based on data acquired from 
human subjects. This paper has shown that the combat model 
provided a good solution for modelling human combat 
behaviours, however, more data is required to improve the 
modifier weights in relation to the active skill of the NPC. 
There is evidence to suggest that modelling combat alone 
would not be enough to create dynamic NPCs, several 
subjects, when asked to comment on combat behaviours, 
mentioned pathfinding and navigation issues. Gameplay 
behaviours are intertwined and when one gameplay behaviour 
is poorly modelled, it can influence perception of other 
behaviours. 
The skill scaling showed a positive result, the data 
highlighted that there is a somewhat linear change in reaction 
time and accuracy, as the skill of the NPC was increased. This 
was noted by 57.1% of the subjects, with zero subjects stating 
that they thought the NPCs did not increase in difficulty. 
However, the combat efficiency of the NPC was deemed to be 
too high, even on the easiest difficulty stage, this was 
supported when analysing the number of eliminations 
achieved and the NPC with the assault rifle significantly 
outperformed the subjects. 
VIII.  FUTURE WORK 
As the results indicated the combat behaviour was 
negatively impacted by the other gameplay behaviours, 
research is required to determine the extent of this influence. 
Navigation and decision-making models will need to be 
included in the NPC, the experiment repeated, and results 
compared. 
Identifying real-time player skill level could further 
enhance the effectiveness of dynamic skill scaling. Research 
in this area could help determine if dynamically adjusting 
NPC skill based on the current player perform provides a more 
engaging experience. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Warpefelt, “The Non-Player Character: Exploring the 
believability of NPC presentation and behavior,” Doctoral 
dissertation, Department of Computer and Systems Sciences, 
Stockholm University, 2016. 
[2] P. Lankoski and S. Björk, “Gameplay Design Patterns for 
Believable Non-Player Characters,” DiGRA Conference, pp. 
416-423, 2007. 
[3] P. Williamson and C. Tubb, “Modelling Player Combat 
Behaviour For NPC Imitation And Combat Awareness 
Analysis,” ECMS, pp. 205-212, 2021. 
[4] J. Orkin, “Three states and a plan: the AI of FEAR,” Game 
developers conference, pp. 4, 2006. 
[5] C. Pezzato, C. Hernandez, S. Bonhof, and M. Wisse, “Active 
Inference and Behavior Trees for Reactive Action Planning and 
Execution in Robotics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09756, 
2020. 
[6] R. A. Agis, S. Gottifredi, and A. J. García, “An event-driven 
behavior trees extension to facilitate non-player multi-agent 
coordination 
in 
video 
games,” Expert 
Systems 
with 
Applications, pp. 155, 2020. 
[7] X. Neufeld, S. Mostaghim, and S. Brand, “A hybrid approach 
to planning and execution in dynamic environments through 
hierarchical task networks and behavior trees,” In Proceedings 
of the Fourteenth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
and Interactive Digital Entertainment, pp. 201-207, 2018. 
[8] E. Camilleri, G. N. Yannakakis, and A. Dingli, “Platformer 
level design for player believability,” Conference on 
Computational Intelligence and Games, pp. 1-8, 2016. 
[9] M. Polceanu, A. M. Mora, J. L. Jimenez, C. Buche, and A.J. 
Fernandez-Leiva, “The believability gene in virtual bots,” The 
Twenty-Ninth International Flairs Conference, pp. 346-349, 
2016. 
[10] A. M. Mora, A. Gutiérrez-Rodrıguez, and A. J. Fernández-
Leiva, "Optimising Humanness: Designing the Best Human-
Like Bot for Unreal Tournament 2004," In International Work-
Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, pp. 681-693, 2017. 
[11] R. R. Wehbe, E. Lank, and L. E. Nacke, “Left the 4 dead: 
Perception of humans versus non-player character teammates 
in cooperative gameplay,” In Proceedings of the 2017 
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, pp. 403-415, 
2017. 
[12] J. D. Smeddinck et al. “How to present game difficulty 
choices? Exploring the impact on player experience,” CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 
5595-5607, 2016. 
[13] M. Hendrix, T. Bellamy-Wood, S. McKay, V. Bloom. and I. 
Dunwell, “Implementing adaptive game difficulty balancing in 
serious games,” IEEE Transactions on Games, pp. 320-327, 
2018. 
[14] P. M. Blom, S. Bakkes, and P. Spronck, “Modeling and 
adjusting in-game difficulty based on facial expression 
analysis,” Entertainment Computing 31, 2019. 
[15] S. Bakkes, C. T. Tan, and Y. Pisan, “Personalised gaming: a 
motivation and overview of literature,” In Proceedings of the 
8th Australasian Conference on Interactive Entertainment: 
Playing the System, pp. 1-10, 2012. 
[16] P. H. M. Spronck, I. G. Sprinkhuizen-Kuyper, and E. O. 
Postma, “Difficulty scaling of game AI,” In Proceedings of the 
5th International Conference on Intelligent Games and 
Simulation, pp. 33-37, 2004. 
[17] P. Demasi and A. J. de. O. Cruz, “Online coevolution for action 
games,” International Journal of Intelligent Games and 
Simulation, vol. 2, pp. 80-88, 2002. 
[18] G. N. Yannakakis and J. Hallam, “Towards optimizing 
entertainment in computer games,” Applied Artificial 
Intelligence, 
vol. 
21, 
pp. 
933-971, 
2007. 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-001-8
SIMUL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

