 
Cost Evaluation System for Plant Transportation Over Land 
In-Hak Lee 
Dept. Mechanical Engineering 
Yonsei university 
Seoul, Korea, Republic of 
e-mail: inhak2001@yonsei.ac.kr 
Ho-Joon Son 
Dept. Mechanical Engineering 
Yonsei university 
Seoul, Korea, Republic of 
e-mail: hojoonson@yonsei.ac.kr 
 
Se-Hyun Hwang 
Dept. Mechanical Engineering 
Yonsei university 
Seoul, Korea, Republic of 
e-mail: hwanghyun3@gmail.com 
Soo-Hong Lee 
Dept. Mechanical Engineering 
Yonsei university 
Seoul, Korea, Republic of 
e-mail: shlee@yonsei.ac.kr 
Abstract— The purpose of this study is to develop a system for 
efficient cost calculation of transportation processes among 
many processes of plant construction. The developed system is 
called P-TAIS, and the transportation process can be analyzed 
by module and vehicle information through the system. The 
analysis includes in-path curve analysis, slope analysis, 
obstacle analysis, path width analysis, and vehicle analysis. The 
analysis then calculates the overall cost of the transportation 
process. 
Keywords-Modular plant; P-TAIS; Custom Path; Path 
assessment; SPMT; Cost optimize; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As complex processes are required to build a plant [1],[5], 
careful decisions are required for the construction, and the 
estimation of the total cost before construction is very 
important [2]. 
There are two known methods to construct a plant [3]. 
The first method is stick-build, where materials are 
transported to the site, and then fabricated to become a part 
of the plant. The second method is modular method, where 
sections of a plant are pre-made and transported to the site to 
later be assembled. There exist pros and cons of each 
construction method, depending on the requirements of each 
plant. When both methods are feasible, however, the 
modular method is usually more advantageous in terms of 
construction period and cost [4]. 
This research focuses on the transportation of plant 
module on land. Compared to the stick build method, 
modules getting larger and heavier in modular plant for 
optimized cost, their transportation on land can act a 
constraint at the scale of entire plant project. Therefore, this 
research aims to provide a web service for cost assessment 
and integrated management on land transportation required 
for plant projects. This service is named Plant-Transportation 
Analysis Information System(P-TAIS) [6]. 
Section 2 introduces the structure of the P-TAIS system 
and the role of each page. Section 3 introduces the five 
analyzes used in the P-TAIS system. The brief method of 
each analysis and the factors for cost analysis are explained. 
Section 4 describes the cost analysis method using the 
factors obtained through the analysis. Finally, a short 
summary of the overall system and future work to improve 
the shortcomings of this system are presented. 
II. 
THE P-TAIS SYSTEM 
P-TAIS aims to simplify this process and replace it with 
a web-based analysis. It allows freedom of access to 
information for all the members participating in a plant 
construction project. All of the information on past projects 
can be managed in an organized way through P-TAIS, and 
for the current ones P-TAIS can be used for real-time sharing 
of information. The client only needs a web browser to use 
P-TAIS, and no data is stored on client. 
A. P-TAIS Structure 
The schematics of P-TAIS is shown in Figure 1. To reach 
the analysis page on the land transportation of a module, the 
user is asked to create/manage project and the modules that 
the project belong. A module can be transported through 
Custom Path, which is entered by specifying waypoints in 
addition to the origin and destination. Furthermore, there is 
also a link to swept-path analysis in the analysis page. 
B. The Log-In Page 
First, the company that is going to use P-TAIS is given 
username and password after an agreement. Whether P-TAIS 
will be a paid service has not been decided yet. If a client 
Figure 1. P-TAIS page structure 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-756-6
SIMUL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
requests a computing power more than we currently own, we 
can negotiate over the cost of setting up additional 
computing resources. 
C. The Projects Page 
To create a project, it requires for user to enter the name 
of the project and the area in which the land transportation 
will be carried on. Once the project area is set, the area will 
be used to display all the maps in the context of that project. 
The projects are sorted by the time of the last use, and the 
number of registered modules is noted. 
D. The Modules Page 
Each project needs the modules to be registered. On 
module creation, user assigns a number to the new module, 
defines the origin and destination, the weight, and the size of 
a module. Each module. At the moment when the origin and 
destination are both set, route(s), multiple if possible, are 
created by Google Maps API. 
E. The Custom Path Page 
In addition to the route generated on the module 
registration, users can create more routes by adding up to 8 
waypoints. This functionality can be used, for instance, to 
satisfy the requirement of passing through a gas station. 
F. The Trasporters Page 
Users can register means of transport that are available 
for the company. The types of those can be either of flatbed 
truck or of Self-Propelled Modular Transporter (SPMT). The 
list of the registered transporters is also available for viewing. 
The analysis page will later offer a recommendation on the 
best mode of transport among various configuration possible 
with the given transporters. Required information for each 
transporter are size, payload, Center of Gravity (CoG). 
III. 
ANALYSIS 
The analysis will result in a cost assessment for each of 
the route, based on the project, module, transporter 
information registered beforehand. The analysis will cover 
the following aspect of a particular route: curvature of the 
road, slope of the road, obstacles along the route, width of 
the road, transporter. 
A. Curvature of the Road 
First of all, Google Maps directions API provides the 
nodes consisting the route. Given this raw data, the curvature 
of the road is defined as the change in the direction of travel 
along the route at each node. The maximum of this value is 
calculated along the route. The analysis page contains a 
shortcut to start a swept-path analysis at this node of 
maximum curvature. 
B. Slope of the Road 
There is a limit to which SPMT can compensate for a 
slope of the road. Depending on the model, a SPMT can 
keep its payload level, on a surface sloped up to 6-7 degrees. 
Beyond this slope is where the payload is no longer secure. 
In this case, a further structural analysis should be carried out 
on the behavior of the module. The difference in elevation 
between the nodes divided by distance between the nodes, is 
equal to the slope of the road. 
C. Obstacles along the Route 
Obstacles on the route of a transportation can prevent the 
module from passing through. Obstacles along the route are 
detected automatically by object classification algorithm 
based on deep learning called YOLO v3 [7]. YOLOv3 is 
faster than other deep learning algorithms, reducing the time 
it takes to deal with classification of simple obstacles. Users 
have to upload a driving video along the route in analysis 
page, which is then processed to yield a result of type, 
position, height of the obstacles in the video. 
D. Width of the Road 
If the width of the road at a certain point along the route 
is wider than the width of the SPMT combination, either the 
road has to be widened or different route has to be 
considered. As mentioned above, the width of the road is an 
important factor, which can be analyzed using the Pix2Pix 
algorithm, which is widely used for satellite image analysis 
[8]. Pix2Pix deep learning algorithm processes satellite 
images to automatically count the number of pixels making 
up the road and it can be changed width of the road.  
E. Transporter 
SPMTs can move in a formation to carry a payload that is 
beyond the capabilities of individual SPMT. The analysis 
page contains the recommendation of the configuration of 
SPMTs, if more than one SPMTs are required. 
IV. 
RESULT 
Cost analysis is calculated for each module in the project. 
Figure 2 shows the overall structure of this. Total cost 
analysis can be largely calculated as the sum of three costs. 
The three costs are road maintenance costs, vehicle fuel costs 
and labor costs to run the project. 
First, road maintenance costs can be calculated from data 
from the following analysis. The maximum rotation angle 
region obtained through the Curvature of the road analysis 
has a great influence on whether a vehicle carrying a real 
module can pass, which is a factor in calculating the road 
maintenance cost. This is because a module large enough to 
require many vehicles needs to widen the road for large 
turning angles. In addition, in the case of a slope data area of 
6-7 degrees or more obtained from the slope of the road 
analysis, the slope repair of the road is required to move the 
module. Therefore, it acts as a factor of road maintenance 
cost calculation. In addition, depending on the number and 
type of obstacles present in the path, the actual vehicle must 
be removed in order to pass, which is another factor of the 
road maintenance cost. Lastly, if the road width is narrow, 
widening work is required, so the regional data obtained 
from road width analysis is also a factor of road maintenance 
cost. 
Secondly, the fuel cost of the vehicle influences the 
calculation by the number of SPMT vehicles used to move 
the module obtained from the transporter analysis, the fuel 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-756-6
SIMUL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
cost and the total distance of the route the module is 
transported. 
Finally, labor costs can be calculated from the number of 
project participants and the project duration. However, since 
it does not yet provide an input for elements of project 
headcount and project period input, it is not currently used as 
a cost analysis result. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The P-TAIS system introduced in this paper is a system 
used for land transportation of modular plants, providing 
management of each project and module, and recommending 
and analyzing the route for transporting modules. This 
allows project managers to assess the possibility of 
transportation projects through P-TAIS, and analyze the 
costs required before contracting the plant project to ensure 
that the correct plant orders are achieved. 
The system is not yet perfect, so there are some things 
that need to be fixed. Especially in estimating costs, more 
analysis is needed. This needs to be closer to realistic cost 
calculation through much communication with the company. 
There is also a need to expand and update the analyzes to 
further refine these factors. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Rashed and G. Heravi. “A lean management approach for 
power plant construction projects: Wastes identification and 
assessment.” Proceedings for the 20th Annual Conference of 
the IGLC, San Diego, USA. 2012. 
[2] J. M. Marshall and P, Navarrp, “Costs of nuclear power plant 
construction: theory and new evidence.” The Rand journal of 
economics, pp. 148-154, 1991. 
[3] J. T. O’Connor, W. H. O’Brien and J.O. Choi. “Industrial 
project execution planning: Modularization versus stick-
built.” Practice 
periodical 
on 
structural 
design 
and 
construction, vol. 21-1, 2015.  
[4] J. Choi and H. J. Song. “Evaluation of the modular method 
for industrial plant construction projects.” International 
Journal of Construction Management, vol. 14-3, pp. 171-180, 
2014. 
[5] P. J. Noble. “Process plant Construction.” Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Publication. 2009. 
[6] Plant-Transportation Analysis Information System, P-TAIS: 
[online] Available : https://ptais.yonsei.ac.kr. 2019.10.8. 
[7] R. Joseph and F. Ali. “YOLOv3: An incremental 
improvement.” arXiv, 2018. 
[8] P. Isola, J. Y. Zhu, T. Zhou and A. A. Efros. “Image-to-image 
translation 
with 
conditional 
adversarial 
networks.” 
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and 
pattern recognition, pp. 1125-1134, 2017. 
 
Figure 2. P-TAIS Cost Analysis Structure 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-756-6
SIMUL 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

