Simulation of the Clinical Interactions Among
COPD Patients and Healthcare Staff in the
Emergency Department
1st Mohsen Hallaj Asghar
Dept. of computer architecture and
operating system Autonomous University
of Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
mohsenhallaj62@gmail.com
2nd Alex Vicente Villalba
Nursing School, Gimbernat University
Autonomous University of Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
alejandro.vicente@eug.es
3rd Alvaro Wong
Dept. of computer architecture and
operating system Autonomous University
of Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
alvaro.wong@uab.es
4th Dolores Rexachs
Dept. of computer architecture and
operating system Autonomous University
of Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
dolores.rexachs@uab.es
5th Emilio Luque
Dept. of computer architecture and
operating system Autonomous University
of Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
emilio.luque@uab.es
Abstract—Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
has become a major and critical cause of death among the
elderly with a history of acute pulmonary exacerbation. The
aim of this research is twofold: on the one hand to create a
conceptual and computational model of the evolution of COPD
patients in treatment at the Emergency Department (ED) and,
on the other hand, to model the process of evaluation, diagnosis
and intervention, made by the ED nurses and doctors responsible
for the treatment of COPD patients. The base of simulation we
propose to use is the Probabilistic Finite-State Machines method,
which applies the training method for the evolution of COPD
patients. This method is in front of patient as an actions/treatment
applied by healthcare personnel. In addition, the Delphi method
applies expert method reasoning for the decision making process
carried out by healthcare staff, in order to decide the treatment
to be applied to the COPD patients.
Index Terms—Simulation Model, COPD Patient, Pathologies,
Emergency Department (ED), Emergency Medical Service (EMS)
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent decades, governments / academics have been
developing applied technology for treating disease progression
to control the prevalence of chronic diseases in order to im-
prove public health and increase life expectancy in developed
countries. COPD, with its inherent characteristics and gradual
lifelong development, reduces independence, culminating in a
high level of dependency on self-care activities in its later
stage. The patient’s low skill in controlling the disease to
preserve their autonomy often leads to exacerbation’s and
subsequent readmissions, which are more common in older age
groups. The world currently has a progressively ageing popu-
lation. The number of the aged between 40-100+ is 2.87B. In
Spain, the ageing process resulting from ever longer life spans
has been particularly rapid, to the extent that the number of
people aged over 65 has doubled in the space of less than 30
years [1].As populations age and live longer, chronic diseases
become increasingly prevalent. Elderly persons with complex
pathologies and conditions will require multiple sources of
care to meet their healthcare needs. They will need to depend
on healthcare decision systems that can adequately address and
reliably serve their multiple needs. In this case, Emergency
Decision Making (EDM) is an effective way to deal with any
emergency situation, insomuch as it plays an alleviating role
for the loss of attributes and lives caused by an emergency
event. Unexpectedly, those responsible for environmental areas
have many unplanned decisions and activities to carry out,
which has recently been under the attention of governments
and academics. When an environmental emergency occurs,
EDM plays a key role in mitigating the loss of life and
property facing two critical factors: lack of information and
time pressure. EDM has become a remarkable topic in recent
years. Normally people make decisions based on the potential
value of losses and gains. Normally loss and gain proper-
ties in emergency situation distinguishing by reference point
which the outcome is respect with attributes. In reference to
Kahneman and Tversky, psychological behaviors of decision
makers show risk-taking tendencies for proﬁt and risk-taking
tendencies for losses, meaning that people are more sensitive
to losses that have equal proﬁts [2]. To measure the amount of
proﬁt and loss, the S-value function is presented in landscape
theory, as shown in Figure 1.
In addition, Kahneman and Tversky’s law demonstrated
value function where x demonstrated the gains with the shape
of x ≥ 0 and losses with the shape of x < 0 also α and β are
the key point of the gains and losses which are respectively
0 ≤ α, β ≤ 1 (Equation 1). λ is the risk parameter which
represents the a characteristic. In this equation, the values of
α, β and λ are equal to 1 [2].
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Fig. 1.
S-shape diagram as value function according to Kahneman and
versky’s law.
υ(x) =

xa,
x ≥ 0
−λ(−x)β,
x < 0

(1)
In Spain, the elderly population is increasing rapidly. Si-
multaneously, the number of COPD patients will continue
to rise. So, a large number of COPD patients refers to the
medical wards. Reciprocally in EMS and ED, which are highly
responsible for managing, caring for treating COPD patients,
two major problems are being faced: the ﬁrst is “resources”,
which are very limited in the ﬁeld of therapy and the second is
the “cost function”, which requires more ﬁnancial resources.
The outcome of those challenges impact on COPD patients’
needs as well as on the search for a higher quality of services
(QoS). From our point of view, we need to consider two
problems: the ﬁrst is the need for correct time, witch limited in
ED and Decision Making capability of the healthcare staff in
charge of COPD patients. The second is the need for speciﬁc
training to acquire these skills. Here is the exact point of
problem dominating other services.
This research proposed research objectives in II, the regard-
ing the COPD patients, Exacerbation the COPD. Section III
presents the related work. Section IV introduces the decision
making support system which is the main part of this article,
in order to training nurses and student and help the healthcare
personnel to take immediate decisions in front of the patient
with high accuracy. The section V, deals with the simulation
scenario in the emergency department and nursing activity in
an emergency box (triage). Finally, in section VI, we present
our conclusion and future work.
II. RESEARCH OBJECTIVES
The objective of our research proposal is divided into the
two important problems described below: 1) The Conceptual
Model, which is concerned with the evolution of the COPD
patient in the ED, deﬁning several variables which are most
relevant to our conceptual model, such as heart rate, blood
pressure, skin color (Cyanosis), etc. These variables make
up the condition of the COPD patient (cyanosis, accessory
muscle, heart rate, oxygen saturation, pulmonary auscultation,
x-ray, sputum, temperature, ECG and arterial blood gas).
2) The Computational Model, which is for the decision making
carried out by the healthcare staff in training. The target is
for training and/or improving the nurse/student’s knowledge
Simulator
Medical 
guidelines 
Senior 
medical staff
Doctor, nurses reasoning 
decision-making
Medical 
research
Actions - treatment
Decision Making 
explanation
COPD Patient Sim
Patient Clinical 
State Information
Staff in training
Actions - treatment
Decision Making 
explanation
COPD Patient Sim
Patient Clinical 
State Information
Patient Clinical 
State comparator
Action comparator
Fig. 2. Decision Making Support System.
in a critical situation, such as in an emergency box, real
patient analysis feedback from the simulator, improving the
medical knowledge of a junior student, nurse or doctor without
much experience in EMS in an ED [3]. For the development
of the simulator, the Iterative Spiral Development Model
(IDMS) will be followed [4]. Considering the importance for
advanced training for healthcare staff working in emergency
departments as well as the signiﬁcance of COPD disease, we
propose the design and implementation of a complex system
where it would be possible to decide and virtually apply
the selected treatment for COPD patients in the ED. This is
carried out in two different ways: The ﬁrst one interactive,
for the healthcare staff in training (Area A in Figure 2). The
second one involving an automatic decision- making process
(an expert and experienced healthcare staff simulator), based
on the cooperation of different sources of knowledge (Expert
doctors and nurses’ knowledge, scientiﬁc publications, medical
guides) (Area B in Figure 2).
III. RELATED WORK
Simulation can help us to quantify our model and what
we design; we can evaluate our system numerically and it
even enables us to reevaluate the system after we obtain
feedback from of it. As we work with a conceptual model
regarding the COPD patient, we have possibility of consid-
ering probabilities in all matters [5]. Clinical simulation is
a participant-centered learning technique or method offering
better curves than classical learning. Thus, the main limita-
tion for its generalized application is the high cost derived
from training in teaching methodology, infrastructure, and
the excess time by participants in each clinical activity. On
the other hand, computational simulation is a genre that
aids student self-evaluation, providing feedback in real-time
[3]. This method can carry out simulations at any time and
place without a teacher on site, thanks to the possibility of
sending messages throughout. The simulation will design for
speciﬁc COPD patients and our research deﬁnes the other
exacerbation pathologies which can cause and severity of the
COPD pathology as an extensible system. COPD can occur
as a result of two matters (Environmental and Genetical). The
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Consultation and possible
Reassessment
Patients
Student/Nurse
/Doctor
Simulator
Output (. Qos, 
Train, Cost, 
Stability, 
Availability 
Scalability, etc.)
Evaluation COPD
Patient
Treatment
Fig. 3. Evaluation COPD Patient.
COPD Arrivals
Pre-triage
Other
Section
ED
Treatment
Registration
Decision
by Nurse
Treatment in 
Triage
MD+RN
Assessment
MLP+RN
Assessment
Consultation
and possible
Reassessment
70%
5%
Option
ESI 1,2,3
25%
Pre-Triage Area
Triage Area
ESI 4,5
80%
20%
Fig. 4. Pre-Triage and Triage areas.
environmental factor include (defensive cell alternation, alter-
nation anti protease and alternation in the cell that repair the
lung). the environmental factor such as (smoking, air pollution
and Lung irritants) are a pre-existing diseases background. Our
intelligent system can be adopted to all these pathologies and
the condition of the healthcare artiﬁcial system requirements
and regarding the other pathologies as future research work.
Figure 3 below shows the connectivity and hierarchy of the
target research. The key point of the simulation can be the
patient’s evaluation, which captured and gathered by the nurse
at the level of entry in the ED such as Heart Rate: (59, 60-
99, 100), Breath Rate: (11, 12-19, 20) Oxygen Saturation:
(80, 81-89, 90-95, 95), Temperature: (36-37.4, 37.5-37.9,38).
This data departure to the simulator and user in front of the
simulation system can learn and used in cooperation with a
comprehensive data base, which regards the patient’s various
variables and can assist simulation to achieve better decision-
taking for the COPD patient’s treatment.
In short, a learning process which facilitates online training
for both students and professionals is a unique idea which is in-
tended to design a training simulator for students/professionals
which can further enhance the learning curve. It also takes
into account the fact that today we are living in a pandemic
where capacity limitations, mobility, etc. are moving academic
training towards a more digitized environment given that
clinical simulation is affected by the difﬁculty of carrying it
out.
IV. DECISION MAKING SUPPORT SYSTEM IN ED
The objective of the proposed” Decision-Making Support
System” is to simulate the technical behavior of the expe-
rienced (highly-trained) healthcare staff of the Emergency
Department (doctors/nurses), for the diagnosis and treatment
of COPD patients. Our “Decision-Making Support System” is
an Expert System (ES) designed with the abilities to reason
and think like experienced healthcare staff, using rules, in
the diagnosis and treatment of COPD patients. As an Expert
System, in our” Decision-Making Support System” we can
identify the following main components:
• Knowledge Base
• Inference Engine
• Explanation Facility
The Knowledge Base includes and integrates different
sources of knowledge, as well as experience of doctors and
nurses, COPD related scientiﬁc publications and COPD med-
ical guides.
V. PROPOSED METHOD AND SIMULATION
This section introduces a new simulation scenario based
on a proposed theory that can consider decision, triage area,
simulation area and treatment area. Pre-triage and Triage areas
are shown in Figure 4. Whenever the COPD patient arrives in
the Pre-triage area, the duty of Triage Nurse (TN) is to classify
the patient into one of ﬁve levels of the Emergency Severity
Index (ESI), depending on pathology exacerbation [5]. The TN
and Medical Doctor (MD) then fully reassess the treatment
for the patient. In the simulation area, the base information to
simulate will be the patient evaluation data taken on arrival at
the ED.
This simulation has two critical aspects in relation to the
training part and the expert part. Figure 5 shows the simulation
area and the treatment area in the ED.
Training Part: the Triage Nurse (TN) has to classify
the patient into one of ﬁve ESI levels, depending on the
pathology’s exacerbation [6]. In this section there can be ac-
tive/interactive COPD patient simulator. This activity is based
on the conceptual model formed by:
Input: patient condition / Actions – treatment.
Output: patient condition after Actions-treatment.
Operation: Evolution of the patient’s condition.
Expert Part: We propose using a Rule Based Approach
for modeling the patient’s condition analysis and the decision
process for the treatment to be applied, the reasoning for
the decision making process of the healthcare staff, for de-
ciding/elaborating the actions/treatment applied to the COPD
patients. The simulation is based on the “Delphi method” for
“integrating” the expert’s knowledge. Whenever the user has
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Modeling Loop
Data From 
Patient 
Evaluation
Analysis 
Simulation
Data Reference
Store 
Data
Reference Data As Training 
for Nurse/Student/ Doctor
Re-send as 
Acknowledgment
Data 1
Data 1
………………………………………….
Data 1
Decision 
by Nurse
ED 
Treatment 
Bed
Transfer
Discharge
Admission
10%
30%
60% 
Simulation loop
Treatment 
Area
Simulation 
Area
Fig. 5. Simulation and Treatment Area.
any doubt, they can use the data reference as a simulation loop.
The data can be transferred as a pull notiﬁcation. The Input
variable of the simulation is the patient’s clinical condition
information and the output can be actions/ treatment, whose
operation is based on the “Data base knowledge”, processing
the “Input” to generate the “Output”.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This research is based on the conceptual model (Qualitative)
and the computational model (Quantitative) which explores
the conditions for the implementation of simulating, based on
COPD intervention. As initial work, and to guarantee the sug-
gested model runs well, implementing a computational model
in the near future. In addition to this, we would implement the
conceptual model in order to generate a model as complex and
as realistic as possible, in a long term professional period, we
would use such a simulator to help and improve the quality
of the medical services, in order to enhance student/nurse
knowledge. This research could have an interesting potential in
gathering/connecting some pathologies relevant to COPD and
testing by healthcare professionals for stability, scalability and
reliability of the system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research has been supported by the Agencia Estatal
de Investigacion (AEI), Spain and the Fondo Europeo de
Desarrollo Regional (FEDER) UE, under contracts TIN2017-
84875-P and PID2020-112496GB-I00 and partially funded by
the Fundacion Escuelas Universitarias Gimbernat (EUG).
REFERENCES
[1] “Comunidad de madrid, canarias, illes balears, regi´on de murcia and
andaluc´ıa (statistics national institute) 28 october 2014.” [Online].
Available: https://www.ine.es/prensa/np870.pdf
[2] D. Kahneman and A. Tversky, “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of
Decision under Risk,” Econometrica, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 263–291,
March 1979. [Online]. Available: https://ideas.repec.org/a/ecm/emetrp/
v47y1979i2p263-91.html
[3] A. Vicente-Villalba, M. Antonin, D. Rexachs, and E. Luque, “A
reactive “in silico” simulation for theoretical learning clinical skills
and
decision-making,”
vol.
1,
pp.
3–7,
11/2019
2019.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
simul 2019 1 20 50013
[4] K. Becker, “Learning by doing, a comprehensive guide to simulations,
computer games, and pedagogy in e-learning and other educational
experiences, 2005. by clark aldrich.” The Canadian Journal of Learning
and Technology, vol. 31, pp. 105–108, 01 2005.
[5] M. Hallaj, A. Vicente-Villalba, A. Wong, D. Rexachs, and E. Luque,
“Modelling and simulation of the copd patient and clinical staff in the
emergency department (ed),” Short Papers of the 9th Conference on Cloud
Computing Conference, Big Data
Emerging Topics, JCCBDET21, pp.
59–62, 2021.
[6] E. MacDonald-Nethercott, S. Richter, A. Boyle, and I. Higginson, “What
should be done to reduce emergency department crowding? – a delphi
study,” Emergency Medicine Journal, vol. 33, pp. 914.1–914, 12 2016.
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

