Cost Optimization of a Nearly Net Zero Energy Building 
A case Study  
 
Narghes Doust, Marco Imperadori, Gabriele. Masera 
Dept. of Building Environment Science & 
Technology (BEST) 
Politecnico di Milano 
Milan, Italy 
narghes.doust@gmail.com, 
marco.imperadori@polimi.it, 
gabriele.masera@polimi.it 
 
Francesco Frontini 
Department for Environment Construction and 
Design (DACD) 
Institute for Applied Sustainability to the Built 
Environment (ISAAC)  
SUPSI 
Canobbio, Switzerland 
francesco.frontini@supsi.ch 
 
Abstract— The Net Zero Energy Building concept has received 
increasing attention in recent years, until becoming part of the 
EU policy on energy efficiency in buildings. Recently, a very 
important focus on cost-effectiveness has also been introduced. 
In particular, an EU regulation of 16 January 2012 establishes 
a comparative methodology framework for calculating cost-
optimal levels of minimum energy performance requirements 
for buildings and building elements. The big challenge is to 
understand how much designers should rely on energy 
efficiency measures and when instead they should start to 
apply renewable energy technologies. The study presented in 
the paper is focused on the synergy between energy–efficiency 
in terms of envelope and renewable energy utilization to 
achieve a balanced energy budget over an annual cycle, 
minimizing at the same time the investment costs. An analysis 
adopting the cost optimality methodology on a residential case 
study has been carried out. Coupling TRNSYS 16, a transient 
system simulation tool, and GenOpt®, an optimization 
program, an optimization analysis has been performed in 
order to find a  cost-optimal energy performance and to detect 
the best balance in terms of investment costs in envelope and in 
energy generation. 
Keywords- Zero energy building; Net zero energy buildings; 
Cost optimality analysis.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Nearly Zero Energy Building concept is a key issue 
for the next decade in Europe and not only. This is clearly 
pointed out in the Directive 2010/31/EU, which is the main 
EU-wide 
legislative 
instrument 
to 
improve 
energy 
performance in buildings [1]. Under this Directive, the 
Member States must apply minimum requirements as regards 
the energy performance of new and existing buildings and 
ensure the certification of their energy performance. In 
particular, the Nearly Zero Energy Building standard will 
become mandatory in 2019 for public buildings and in 2021 
for private ones. Moreover, Lombardy Region (Italy) 
anticipated this deadline to the end of 2015 with a regional  
law  issued on 18 April 2012 [2]. 
The EU directive requires nearly zero energy buildings, 
but since it does not give minimum or maximum harmonized 
requirements as well as details of energy performance 
calculation framework, it will be up to the Member States to 
define what the concept of Nearly Zero Energy Building 
stands for [3].  
As highlighted by Marszal et al. [4,5] in the literature 
review of ZEB definitions, only few out of the reviewed 
definitions emphasize the importance of employing energy 
efficiency measures before using renewable energy sources. 
Therefore, Marszal et al. conclude that, in order to ensure 
that Net ZEBs are also very energy efficient buildings, a 
good solution could be to include a fixed value of maximum 
allowed energy use in the Net ZEB definition. However, 
when considering the Net ZEB concept, a new problem 
arises, i.e., to what level should we decrease the energy use 
by means of energy efficiency measures before the 
implementation of renewable energy sources [6]? 
This paper treats the Net Zero Energy Building concept 
focusing in particular on the balance between envelope 
energy performance and energy production by Photovoltaic 
(PV) in terms of cost optimality. The aim is to investigate the 
existence of a compromise between a good envelope 
performance and investment cost while ensuring the Net 
Zero Energy Building target. This target is here treated 
according to the definition proposed by K. Voss and al. for 
which in Net ZEB total primary energy use, including 
building energy use, on a yearly basis is covered by energy 
produced on-site and building-connected renewable energy 
sources [7].  
Currently, the cost optimality concept has been poorly 
investigated from this point of view and focused to obtain 
directions for residential building design. In the literature just 
a few national examples have been proposed by Aalborg 
University and Aalto University up to now; no data are 
available on residential building in the north weather [8,9, 
10]. 
II. 
REFERENCE BUILDING 
The present paper refers to a specific case study that is an 
existing residential building sited in Colognola, a small town 
near to Bergamo in the northern part of Italy, consisting of 
two independent homes sharing a party wall [11]. 
The northern façade, fully integrated with the historical 
context, is opposed to the South side towards the garden, 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

where sunscreens, loggias and conservatories act as thermal 
collectors. The West side has no openings and is 
characterized by a ventilated skin of timber slats to avoid 
summer overheating of the envelope surface. Figure 1 shows 
picture, plans and cross section of the building. 
 
                   
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
 
 
 
(d) 
 
Figure 1. The figure shows the picture (a), plan of the first (b) and 
second floors (c) and cross section of the building (d). 
 
The envelope is based on a lightweight, stratified, dry-
assembled construction system. This delivers a very high 
thermal performance, with very good behavior both in winter 
and summer. This building has been rated as “A - Gold” 
according to KlimaHaus protocol. 
The heating system is based on a high-efficiency natural 
gas condensing boiler (efficiency at 30% partial load = 
109%) combined to a radiant floor system working at low 
temperature. This system is characterized by flow 
temperatures of 28°C and 40°C, modulated by external probe 
and local temperature regulation in each room. In order to 
minimize the energy consumption and to ensure the 
necessary hygienic conditions inside the rooms, a 
mechanical ventilation system is provided to each of the two 
independent flats. Each unit is equipped with a cross-flow 
heat exchanger with 90% efficiency. Solar collectors provide 
more than 50% of the required domestic hot water.  
The areas and U-values for both opaque and glazed parts 
of the building envelope are summarized in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
GEOMETRICAL AND PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF THE 
ENVELOPE “AS BUILT” 
 
U-value 
Area 
[W/m2K] 
[m2] 
External wall: 
 
 
South-West 
0.12 
70.8 
South-East 
0.12 
74.0 
North-West 
0.12 
77.5 
North-East 
0.12 
128.0 
Floor 
0.16 
220.0 
Roof 
0.09 
245.7 
Window: 
 
 
South-West 
0.95 
55.2 
North-East 
0.95 
20.4 
 
Sensible heat gains from equipments, including also heat 
gains due to artificial light, have been evaluated supposing 
the building occupancy. In particular, during the weekend a 
continuous building occupancy has been supposed. 100% 
occupancy corresponds to four people. 
 A typical working day occupancy is summarized in 
Figure 2. 
         
             
 
 
Figure 2. Occupancy schedule of the simulated building – week day. 
 
III. 
NUMERICAL MODELLING AND BUILDING ENERGY 
PERFORMANCE  
The TRNSYS 16 software [12] was used in order to 
perform a transient simulation of the energy behavior of the 
North-East 
South-West 
PV 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

building. Trnsys model validation has been widely discussed 
in the literature [13]. 
The weather data of Bergamo was adopted for the 
simulation. The city lies 249 m above sea level, with a 
latitude of 45.70°N and a longitude of 9.67°E. The annual 
total solar radiation in Bergamo is 1,398 kWh/m2 with 
approximately 1,900 hours of sunshine. 
 The heating system is operating between November and 
March; the cooling system is set to activate summer months 
only when indoor temperature is higher than 26°C, while the 
threshold for humidity control is 60% independently from 
the indoor temperature. In the remaining months, the 
building is in free-running condition. 
The results related to the “as built” configuration show  
that the heating and cooling demand is equal to 13  
kWh/m2y. 
In order to define the best envelope performance in terms 
of cost for the specific case study, TRNSYS was coupled 
with GenOpt, an optimization program for the minimization 
of a cost function.  
GenOpt is designed for finding the values of user-
selected design parameters that minimize a so-called 
objective function. The objective function is calculated by an 
external simulation program, in this case TRNSYS.  
The Hybrid Generalized Pattern Search Algorithm with 
Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm implemented in 
GenOpt was used [14]. Such an algorithm is a hybrid global 
optimization algorithm that starts by doing a Particle Swarm 
Optimization (PSO) on a mesh for a user specified number 
of generations nG ∈ N. Afterwards, it initializes the Hooke- 
Jeeves Generalized Pattern Search (GPS) algorithm using the 
continuous independent variables of the particle with the 
lowest cost function value. The optimization problem has 
continuous and discrete independent variables, then the 
discrete independent variables are fixed at the value with the 
lowest cost function value by the GPS algorithm [14]. 
This approach is summarized in Figure 3. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Interface between GenOpt and the simulation program (TRNSYS 
16) [13] 
 
GenOpt automatically rewrites the input files for 
TRNSYS at each iteration changing the variables taken into 
account. After this, it runs the simulation program, reads the 
output value of the function to be minimized from the 
simulation result file and then determines the new set of 
input parameters for the next run. The whole process is 
repeated iteratively until a pre-defined criterion of 
convergence is fulfilled or a maximum number of iterations 
is reached [14]. 
 
Figure 4. Combined simulation-optimisation [15] 
 
The parameter taken into account to achieve low energy 
loads is the U-value of the envelope. Other parameters, like  
window to wall ratio or building orientation, have not been 
considered not only to ensure the necessary design freedom, 
but also because they scantily affect the energy response of 
the building. This consideration is the result of sensitivity 
analysis done before to assess which are the parameters that 
mainly govern the building energy behavior [11]. 
In the sensitivity analyses done, have been considered  
the U-value of the roof and walls, the building orientation, 
the glazing fraction of the wall and the wall concrete 
thickness. Starting from the “as built” situation each of the 
mentioned parameters were changed keeping all the others at 
the initial values. 
Looking at the results represented in Figure 5, it is possible 
to observe how a change from 30% to 80% of the glazing 
fraction causes a change of less than 2 kWh/m2y in the 
annual combined consumption (H+C), a variation from 3 to 
8 cm in concrete thickness and a 360° rotation of the 
building both bring to a variation of about 1 kWh/m2y and  
finally a change from 0.1 W/m2K to 0.4 W/m2K in the U 
value of the roof and wall brings an annual combined load 
variation larger than 7 kWh/m2y. 
In this way, it is possible to conclude that the U-value of 
the envelope is at the same time the easiest parameter to 
control independently of architectural design choices and the 
most decisive one. Considering this value as a variable, an 
optimization process has been run by considering the global 
cost of the construction as the function to minimize. The 
global costs here considered take into account envelope 
investment costs and the energy costs depending on the 
primary energy demand. The energy costs were calculated 
according to the EN 15459 standard in order to consider 
market movements with respect to energy price increases for 
the analyzed period (20 years) [16]. EN 15459 regards the 
economic evaluation procedure for energy systems in 
buildings and is also used by the Commission delegated 
regulation (EU) N° 244/2012 of 16 January 2012 which 
establishes a comparative methodology framework for 
calculating 
cost-optimal 
levels 
of 
minimum 
energy 
performance requirements for buildings and building 
elements [17]. 
Keeping a fixed thermal transmittance value for 
windows, equal to 0.95 W/m2K, the thickness of the façade 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

insulation was changed in order to vary its U-value from 
0.09 W/m2K to 0.35 W/m2K. 
            
 
 
            
 
 
                        
 
 
 
            
 
Figure 5. Results of sensitivity analyses. 
 
The optimization performed considering the global cost 
as the cost function allowed us to define the curve that 
represents the relationship between global costs and primary 
energy demand (Figure 6). 
The graph shows that the minimum point of the 
Cost/Energy demand curve does not coincide with the 
minimum point in terms of primary energy demand. This 
means that to invest overly on the envelope performance is 
not the best choice if considering only the cost optimality 
point of view [18].  
It is worth noting that only the energy used for the 
building operation has been taken into account; the energy 
embedded in the building construction was not considered.  
Since the European regulation requires nearly zero 
energy building starting 2020 but does not provide any 
limitation in terms of energy performance related to cost 
analyses, further investigations have been done to find the 
best investment balance between envelope and energy 
production by renewable sources.  
 
 
Figure 6. Cost curve in function of envelope performance accounting a 
study period of 20 years. 
IV. 
TOWARDS NET ZERO ENERGY BUILDINGS 
The next step of the study was to assess the effect of PV 
technology to achieve nearly ZEB status. To predict the 
behavior of PV panels was added an additional component 
(type 194) to TRNSYS building model.  
TRNSYS PV model used is a five-parameter model 
based on an equivalent circuit of a one diode-model (Figure 
7). This approach is useful to predict the energy production 
of monocrystalline PV power plants and requires very few 
parameters [19,20,21,22]. 
 
 
Figure 7. Equivalent circuit for the 5-Parameter model [21]. 
 
A new optimization process has been run considering 
both the envelope (U value) and the PV surface on the roof 
as variables. The global costs during the 20 year period have 
been again adopted as the function to minimize. 
The PV panel here considered is a high performance 
panel characterized by cells efficiency higher then 20% and a 
nominal power of 330 W [23].  
In the global cost evaluation, also the costs of the PV 
panels have been considered as well as the PV energy 
production that is subtracted from the primary energy 
demand if production and demand happen at the same time, 
while when production is larger than demand the remaining 
energy is sold to the grid.   
Figure 8 shows that also in this case the minimum point 
in terms of cost does not coincide with the minimum point of 
the primary energy demand.  
In this case, the optimization takes into account the actual 
situation of Italian government incentives (IV Conto energia 
[24]), which imply a considerable reduction of the global 
cost. Also in Figure 8, we present a comparison with the 
cost-energy demand curve previously discussed (Figure 6) . 
A set of optimizations was run to study the different 
results obtained by considering different values of 
government incentives for each kWh of produced sold to the 
grid. This price was considered variable from 0 to 0.25 
€/kWh. 
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 8. Cost curve in function of envelope performance and energy 
production by BIPV  accounting a study period of 20 years. 
 
Figure 9 summarizes the results focusing on the 
envelope, PV and global costs of the cost optimal solutions 
while Table 2  highlights, for the same solutions, the annual 
heating (EPH) and energy (H+C) demands together with the 
PV energy production.   
 
 
 
Figure 9. Results obtained by considering different values of government 
incentives. 
TABLE II.  
ANNUAL 
HEATING (EPH) 
 
AND 
ENERGY(H+C) 
DEMANDS WITH THE ENERGY PV PRODUCTION  
Sold 
Energy 
cost 
 
EPH of optimal 
solution 
 
Heating+ 
Cooling demand 
of optimal 
solution 
PV energy 
product of 
optimal solution 
 
[€] 
[kWh/m2y] 
[kWh/m2y] 
[kWh/m2y] 
0 
16.21 
28.26 
0.64 
0.15 
16.21 
28.26 
0.64 
0.20 
15.85 
27.84 
57.35 
0.25 
15.42 
27.40 
57.35 
0.30 
15.02 
26.99 
57.35 
 
The graph shows that the envelope solution optimizing 
the global cost is not dependent from the government 
incentives: as a matter of fact, the line representing the 
envelope investments is quite horizontal. 
This envelope solution corresponds to a building that is 
able to guarantee an annual energy demand (H+C) of about 
27 kWh/m2y and an energy heating demand (EPH ) of about 
15 kWh/m2y. 
Increasing the price of sold energy, the optimized 
envelope is still the same, but the global cost optimal 
solution tends to have increased PV investment thus 
decreasing the global costs. 
Considering the case in which the customer can not sell 
his overproduction of energy providing it for free to the grid 
(sold energy cost equal to 0), it is possible to observe that 
the cost optimal solution is not a net zero energy solution. 
In this case, in order to ensure the net zero energy 
performance to the building it is necessary to provide energy 
by means of further PV panels thus moving away from the 
cost optimal solution. 
Looking at the primary energy demand for space 
heating, Figure 10 shows a comparison of the situations for 
different types of envelope solutions. The 45° line 
represents a NZEB situation since the EPH is equal to the 
energy production. Moving from the horizontal axis that 
represents the situation in which no PV panels are available, 
the figures represents which is the PV panel investment 
aimed to reach the NZEB solution for different building 
which envelope is rated in different classes according to 
Lombardy standard. For each of those solutions also the PV 
and envelope global costs are reported. 
It is worth noting that a building rated in class A 
according to the energy performance scheme of Lombardy 
is the choice which is able to guarantee the lowest global 
cost.  
             
 
Figure 10. Cost comparison for different type of envelope solutions. 
 
             
 
Figure 11. Cost comparison for different type of envelope solutions 
projecting the data in 20 years. 
 
The same results can be achieved by projecting the data 
in 20 years (Figure 11). A price reduction of 20% of the PV 
modules price has been suggested and an increase of the 
envelope investment costs was calculated according to EN 
15459 [16], that takes into account the trends. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

This case also shows that a class A envelope is a 
reasonable trade off in terms of global costs.  
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The numerical investigation here presented allows to 
draw some conclusions about the design strategies that may 
be adopted to achieve cost optimality and NZEB 
performances for the investigated case study, which 
represents a large part of the building stock of Northern 
Italy: 
1. The U value of the roof and walls is the design 
parameter that mostly affects the energy 
response of the building in terms of annual 
energy demand. 
2. In case in which any PV renewable energy is 
adopted, the cost optimal solution is the one 
with a primary energy demand of 28 kWh/m2y 
(H+C). 
3. In the case of renewable energy supply by 
means of PV panels, the envelope solution that 
guarantees, in any case, the cost optimality is 
characterized by an EPH equal to 16 kWh/m2y, 
typical of a class A according to the energy 
rating of Lombardy Region.  
4. Class A according to the energy rating of 
Lombardy Region is the most promising 
solution to reach net zero energy performance. 
As a matter of fact both more (A+) and less (B) 
performing envelopes require higher global 
costs to reach the NZEB standard. 
Further analysis are in progress in order to extend the 
results to different building aspect ratios (Surface/Volume) 
and to investigate the role of the ratio between envelope 
surface and available surface for PV panels in defining the 
cost optimal solution. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors want to acknowledge Atelier2, designers of 
the building, and Vanoncini Spa that financed and built the 
investigated case. 
REFERENCES 
[1] The Directive 2010/31/EU of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 19 May 2010 on the  energy performance of 
buildings. Official Journal of the European Union, 53, 2010. 
[2] Regional law number 7 of 18th April 2012. “Misure per la 
crescita, lo sviluppo e l’occupazione”.Official Journal of 
Lombardy Region (Italy).  
[3] J. Kurnitski, F. Allard, D. Braham, G. Goeders, P. Heiselberg, 
L. Jagemar, R. Kosonen, J. Lebrun, L. Mazzarella, J. Railio, 
O. Seppänen, M. Schmidt and M. Virta, “How to define 
nearly net zero energy buildings nZEB, REHVA proposal for 
uniformed national implementation of EPBD recast”, 
REHVA Journal, May 2011, pp. 6 – 12. 
[4] A.J. Marszal, P. Heiselberg, J.S. Bourrelle, E. Musall, K. 
Voss, I. Sartori and A. Napolitano, “Zero energy building - A 
review of definitions and calculation methodologies”, Energy 
and Buildings 43, 2011, pp. 971 – 979. 
[5] IEA SHC Task 40 / ECBCS Annex 52 ‘Towards Net Zero 
Energy 
Solar 
Buildings 
(NZEBs), 
http://www.iea-
shc.org/task40/index.html (retrieved: September, 2012)  
[6] A.J. Marszal and P. Heiselberg, “Life Cycle Cost analysis of a 
multi-storey residential Net Zero Energy Building in 
Denmark”, Energy 36, 2011,pp. 5600 – 5609. 
[7] K. Voss, E. Musall and M. Lichtmeß, “From low-energy to 
net zero-energy buildings: status and perspectives”, Journal of 
Green Building, Volume 6, Number 1, 2011, pp. 46 – 57. 
[8] A.J. Marszal, P. Heiselberg, R. Lund Jensen, J. Nørgaard,  
“On-site or off-site renewable energy supply options? Life 
cycle cost analysis of a Net Zero Energy Building in 
Denmark”, Renewable Energy, 44, 2012, pp.154– 165. 
[9] J.Kurnitski, A. Saarib, T. Kalameesc, M. Vuolled, J. 
Niemeläd, T. Tarke, “Cost optimal and nearly zero (nZEB) 
energy performance calculations for residential buildings with 
REHVA definition for nZEB national implementation”, 
Energy and Buildings 43, 2011, pp. 3279–3288. 
[10] A. Hasan, M. Vuolle and K. Sirén, “Minimisation of life cycle 
cost of a detached house using combined simulation and 
optimisation”, Building and Environment 43, 2008, pp. 2022 
– 2034. 
[11] N. Doust, G. Masera and M. Imperadori, “A study on Design 
Optimization of a Near Net-Zero Energy House”, Proceedings 
of the XVIII IAHS World Congress on Housing Science, 
2012, Turkey. 
[12] TRNSYS 16. A Transient Simulation Program. University of 
Wisconsin, Madison, WI.  
[13] C. Adam and P. Andre. "Validation exercise applied to some 
TRNSYS components in the context of IEA 34/43." Paper 
presented at EPIC 2006 AIVC. Lyon, France, novembre 2006. 
[14] M. Wetter, “GenOpt, generic optimisation program, user 
manual”, version 2.0.0. Technical report LBNL-54199, 
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 2004.Manual and 
program 
downloadable 
free 
of 
charge 
from 
http://gundog.lbl.gov/GO (retrieved: September, 2012) 
[15] A. Hasan, “Optimal design of Net Zero Energy Buildings”, 
Low-Energy Architecture (LEA), World Renewable Energy 
Congress 2011, Sweden. 
[16] EN 15459, Energy performance of buildings – economic 
evaluation procedure for energy systems in buildings, 
November 2007. 
[17] Commission Delegated Regulation No 244/2012 of 16 
January 2012 supplementing Directive 2010/31/EU) on the 
energy performance of buildings.  
[18] The Buildings Performance Institute Europe (BPIE), “Cost 
optimality: Discussing methodology and challenges within the 
recast Energy Performance of Buildings Directive”. 
http://dl.dropbox.com/u/4399528/BPIE/BPIE_costoptimality_
publication2010.pdf (retrieved: September, 2012). 
[19] A.N. Celik and N. Acikgoz, “Modelling and experimental 
verification of the operating current of mono-crystalline 
photovoltaic modules using four- and five-parameter models”, 
Appl Energy 84, 2007, pp.1–15. 
[20] J.A. Duffie and W.A. Beckman, “Solar Engineering of 
Thermal Processes”, 2nd Edition, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
New York. 1991. 
[21] J. Nelson,The Physics of Solar Cells, Imperial College Press, 
2003, London. 
[22] W. De Soto, S.A. Klein and W.A. Beckman, “Improvement 
and 
validation 
of 
a 
model 
for 
photovoltaic 
array 
performance”, Solar Energy, 80, 2006, pp.78–88. 
[23] http://www.sunpowercorp.co.uk/commercial/products-
services/solar-panels/e20/ (retrieved: September, 2012) 
[24] http://www.conto-energia-online.it/(retrieved: 
September,2012). 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-234-9
SIMUL 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

