Business Process Simulation Focusing Supply Chain Risk Management Aspects 
 
Frank Schätter 
Pforzheim University of Applied Sciences 
Tiefenbronner Str. 65, 75715 Pforzheim 
Germany 
email: frank.schaetter@hs-pforzheim.de 
 
 
Frank Morelli 
Pforzheim University of Applied Sciences 
Tiefenbronner Str. 65, 75715 Pforzheim 
Germany 
email: frank.morelli@hs-pforzheim.de 
 
 
 
Abstract - Decision support systems refer to computable models 
that assist decision-makers in the identification and/or the 
estimation of consequences of decision alternatives. In this 
regard, model-driven decision support systems have been 
proven successfully, which use simulation models to analyze 
business processes and respective decision situations based on 
parameters and a limited amount of data. The focus of this 
contribution is on the opportunities of using such a business 
processes simulation in the field of supply chain risk 
management. Therefore, we present a novel approach that 
couples a data-based supply chain model with a consequence-
driven risk simulation. Our simulation approach reverses the 
standard risk management cycle by identifying vulnerable 
parts within the supply chain – in terms of a data-based model 
– and subsequently backtracking possible triggering risk 
events instead of predicting such possible events first. The 
result of our approach is an easy-applicable procedure that 
allows companies to analyze and to improve the resilience 
status of their supply chains. 
Keywords - decision support systems; data-based supply 
chain model; consequence-driven risk simulation; resilient 
supply chains. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Simulations can be characterized as descriptions of a real 
system by a model. They are particularly useful when the 
system under examination is complex and includes numerous 
interactions. Simulations offer the opportunity to run through 
alternative solutions in different scenarios. They make it 
possible to anticipate the behavior of processes at runtime 
and thus act as a basis for decision-making without an 
underlying algorithm for determining an optimal solution. 
Instead, by incorporating human intuition, insights into 
characteristics - such as bottlenecks - can be gained. Such 
dynamic analyses, based on different iterations and multiple 
variations in inputs (what-if analysis), permit human 
decision-makers to deepen their knowledge of the real 
system under study [6] [29] [35]. However, if the 
complexity, randomness, and variability within the system 
increase, the corresponding predictability under various 
conditions becomes more problematic. 
Making good decisions depends on the available 
information describing the relevant aspects of the decision 
environment. This information can be either deterministic or 
subject to uncertainty [5]. In a decision situation under 
uncertainty, the outcome of a decision alternative is 
probabilistic or even unknown. In this case, the prediction of 
the consequences is difficult [36] and a computable model in 
terms of a Decision Support System (DSS) to assist decision-
makers are required [8] [18]. A DSS facilitates the 
structuring of information to make the decision process more 
productive and agile as uncertainty and complexity of the 
decision situation can be reduced [17] [34]. Several authors 
have highlighted the fact that a DSS never aims to replace 
decision-makers; rather, the support still depends on the 
decision-makers with the objective of obtaining a good 
solution in a reduced amount of time [12] [14] [23].  
There are typically three management systems included 
within a DSS: a data management system, a model 
management system, and a dialogue management system 
[32]. The first is targeted at structuring internal and external 
data, processes, information, and knowledge to develop a 
database as a platform for decision-making. Based on this 
database, the actual decision problem itself can be solved by 
implementing a data-based model to identify and test 
decision alternatives. Finally, interactive queries, reporting, 
and graphing functions are required to interact with the 
decision-makers. Particularly systems of data management 
are highly crucial as decision-makers never had access to 
more decision-relevant information than today [31]. 
However, this is not always beneficial as a pre-decision is 
needed by defining the relevant information to deal with the 
decision situation [11]. There are various classification 
schemes of DSSs available in literature. A common 
possibility is to describe them by their function [23] [28]. In 
this contribution, the focus is on model-driven DSSs using 
quantitative simulation models to analyze a decision 
situation based on parameters and a limited amount of data 
[28] [31].   
Simulation based on a model-driven DSS reveals several 
opportunities: it enables an integrated view by describing the 
states of individual system components or even an entire 
system. Simulation using historical process data can support 
real-time business operations. From this perspective, 
complex business processes like supply chains, are of central 
importance for decision-makers. Adjustments to synchronize 
process steps of different supply members are often 
necessary. A corresponding simulation model can support 
the analysis of various problems for strategic, tactical, and 
operational questions. The application of simulation in its 
different methodological shapes is well established in 
literature of supply chain analysis [15]. 
In this regard, the supply chain processes must be able to 
accommodate changes within the environment. A DSS needs 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

to be able to deal both with foreseen and unforeseen changes, 
even with disruptions to draw the right decisions. This means 
not only to avoid high costs and loss of profit but also to 
ensure a sufficient degree of flexibility and resilience. 
Supply chains are faced by lots of uncertainties, which 
makes risk management a key factor for success. In this 
paper, we consider possibilities of business process 
simulation to be used in supply chain risk management with 
the objective of creating a resilient supply chain. The 
rationale of our contribution is organized as follows: 
Sections 2 and 3 provide a summary of current developments 
in supply chain risk management and business processes 
simulation. In Section 4, we present a novel approach that 
facilitates the analysis of resilient supply chains based on a 
data-based risk simulation. The key aspects of our research 
are finally summarized in Section 5. 
II. 
SUPPLY CHAIN RISK MANAGEMENT 
Supply chains are dynamic networks of interconnected 
multinational firms, including relationships across a possibly 
large number of involved entities and integrated value-added 
processes [9]. Each entity refers to a specific functional stage 
in the supply chain, such as suppliers (e.g., raw material 
supplier), manufacturers, customers (e.g., wholesalers), and 
end customers. From the perspective of a specific entity, 
functional stages are either located in the upstream (supply 
side) or in the downstream (demand side) [4] [9] [27]. The 
supply chain consists of physical flows organizing the 
spatial-temporal transformation of goods, information flows, 
and financial flows, such as credits, payment schedules, and 
consignment arrangements [19].  
In recent years, supply chains have become more 
interconnected and complex and they are – in particular in 
today’s turbulent and uncertain world –predisposed to 
disruptive events [7]. Every organization somehow depends 
on further firms, industries, and markets and even the most 
carefully controlled processes are only as good as the links 
that support them [10]. Disruptions have the potential to 
cause heavy short- and long-term losses in stock price, 
shareholder value, sales, and reputation, as well as to damage 
relationships between suppliers and customers [16]. The 
recent COVID-19 pandemic or the interruption of the Suez 
Channel have highlighted how crucial supply chain 
disruptions might be. Before a disruption occurs, its potential 
is described by a supply chain risk threating the movement of 
physical flows [37]. Basically two kinds of risks can be 
distinguished in this regard: internal risks, such as late 
deliveries, excess stock, poor forecasts, financial risks, minor 
accidents, and human error and external risks in terms of 
natural and man-made disasters (e.g., extreme weather 
events, wars, terrorist attacks, outbreaks of diseases, or price 
rises) [37]. 
For 
decades, 
trends, 
such 
as 
globalization, 
decentralization, 
outsourcing 
and 
just-in-time, 
have 
optimized supply chains mostly in the direction of being 
highly efficient [13]. The other side of the coin has been an 
increased vulnerability of supply chains towards shocks as, 
for example, more nodes (entities) in a logistics network 
increase the threat of disruptions propagating through the 
highly interrelated networks. Thus, even a local failure can 
negatively affect businesses on a global scale. The number of 
events causing such disruptions is growing. According to a 
study of McKinsey & Company [24], companies should 
expect supply chain disruptions lasting a month or longer to 
occur every 3.7 years. Logistics managers have understood 
the importance of resilient supply chains and, consequently, 
Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM) has increasingly 
become a topic on their agendas. Basically, resilience is 
concerned with the supply chain’s ability to manage the 
consequences of an avoidable risk event and return to its 
original operations [3]. Strategies to increase resilience are 
related to an increased flexibility, agility, adaptability, and 
visibility of the supply chain [10] [25]. Examples might be 
postponement, strategic stock, flexible supply base, 
validations of make-or-buy decisions, economic supply 
incentives, flexible transportation, and revenue management.  
But how should a SCRM be implemented and specified 
to improve the resilience of the logistics structures? If you 
open a standard textbook, you will find that supply chain risk 
management should follow a cyclic risk management 
approach in terms of identifying, analyzing, evaluating, and 
monitoring risks threatening the smooth functioning of the 
networks [e.g., 21]. Although this is relevant information, it 
does not translate into a direct plan of action for the 
managers. How can such a procedure be set into motion? 
Where is the starting point? What data are required? 
Approaching these challenges from the practical side, 
managers could turn to one of many commercial SCRM 
tools, which typically promise network transparency, 
provision of global real-time information (e.g., weather data) 
and assistance in the development of reactive emergency 
measures. However, they focus on very specific resilience 
issues like, for example, ad-hoc actions to handle a harbor 
strike by switching the transportation mode from ship freight 
to emergency air cargo. The tools do not provide what the 
managers who are eager to implement SCRM are looking 
for. 
III. 
BUSINESS PROCESSES SIMULATION 
The simulation approach maps systems with their 
dynamic processes for analysis purposes. It allows to 
anticipate the behavior of processes at runtime and to 
consider alternative solutions in different scenarios. System 
Dynamics (SD), Discrete Event Simulation (DES) and 
Agent-Based Modeling (AB) can be distinguished as the 
main simulation paradigms for modeling complex systems. 
Simulation tools typically allow visualization of the 
simulation process.  
Business processes represent the backbone of the 
enterprise. The overarching goal of the Business Process 
Management (BPM) approach is the achievement of 
continuous improvement in organizations [30]. BPM 
analyses business activities and their interactions, identifying 
potential improvements as a support to decision makers. 
However, the use of simulation models for controlling 
business processes and related decisions (decision making) 
proves to be limited [1]. In practice, BPM rarely captures the 
dynamic characteristics of business processes, although this 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

would provide a better understanding in the event of rapid 
changes by decision-makers in execution. 
The design of business processes both within a company 
and across company boarders leads from the as-is analysis to 
the definition of a to-be model and its implementation, which 
is increasingly characterized using IT solutions in the context 
of digital transformation. Business process modeling acts as 
an essential vehicle in this regard and, thus, Business Process 
Modeling Notation (BPMN) has emerged as a de facto 
standard. In principle, an extension of the BPMN modeling 
language for simulation purposes is possible, as shown by 
the Business Process Simulation Interchange Standard 
(BPSim). However, there is still a need for research in this 
context, for example to develop a fully elaborated resource 
model [20]. By extending such a solution, simulation can be 
integrated into the business process management concept. 
Simulation has been used in the supply chain sector for a 
long time. The focus is mostly on efficiency aspects and less 
on risks and resilience. However, basically triggered by 
global trends and corresponding uncertainties, it is 
indispensable that a holistic management of supply chains is 
required which additionally respects  risk aspects [26]. Such 
a holistic management enables logistics managers to adjust 
their planning individually by steering and trading-off the 
degrees of efficiency and resilience within their supply 
chains. 
IV. 
BUSINESS PROCESS SIMULATION FOR SUPPLY CHAIN 
RISK MANAGEMENT 
The objective of our research is to develop a practical 
SCRM approach that supports decision-makers in simulating 
the current (as-is) and future (to-be) resilience status of their 
strategic supply chain processes.  
Our approach suggests combining a data-based supply 
chain model with a consequence-driven risk simulation. In 
fact, we translate the data available within a company, which 
describe the strategic supply chain processes in terms of 
physical flows of goods into a data-based representation of 
the supply chain. This data-based model provides a platform 
for decision-making in resilient supply chain design. Firstly, 
companies can directly identify and analyze vulnerable parts 
of the supply chains as well as the consequences of specific 
risk events. Secondly, the suitability of logistics strategies 
(decision alternatives) to improve the current resilience 
status can be simulated within the model. Thereby, the 
consequence-driven risk simulation reverses the standard risk 
management cycle by identifying vulnerable parts within the 
supply chain (model) and subsequently backtracking 
possible triggering risk events instead of predicting such 
possible events first.  
Our approach switches the focus from an efficient to a 
resilient supply chain management (see Section 2) and 
provides decision support for supply chain risk managers. 
The main rationales behind the two core components – data-
based supply chain model and consequence-driven risk 
simulation – are described in the forthcoming paragraphs. 
The formulation of the steps included within these 
components as well as their exemplary application is work-
in-progress and not the focus of this paper. 
Data-based supply chain model  
The data-based supply chain model includes all physical 
flows of the network under consideration for a certain 
reference time (e.g., 12 months) from the perspective of the 
company. It is the objective of the company to define the 
scope of the analysis in terms of geographic regions of 
entities, material groups, and organizational entities. From an 
analytical point of view, a supply chain is defined as a 
network of nodes and edges. Each node refers to each one 
entity of the supply chain, such as suppliers, customers, or 
company-specific facilities (e.g., factories, warehouses). An 
edge defines a single physical flow in terms of a delivery, 
which arises over time between each one sender (point of 
origin) and receiver (point of consumption) location. 
The necessary company data to develop the model refers 
to transaction and master data, which can be gathered out of 
the data warehouse of a company. In this regard, one major 
benefit of our approach becomes obvious: instead of 
investing in external tools to analyze and improve the supply 
chain, we suggest applying the data which is already 
available. Our approach, thus, ensures that SCRM can be 
conducted incidentally by the companies themselves, which, 
in turn, implies low cost, as well as high practicability and 
acceptance. 
The relevant systems defining the data warehouse are 
widespread and might refer to Enterprise Resource Planning  
(ERP) systems, excel, or Structured Query Language (SQL) 
files. Our approach does not focus on the origin of the data 
but on the necessarily required information (as possible 
parameters in the consequence-driven risk simulation) within 
the transaction and master data to represent the physical 
flows. In fact, the data-based model captures transaction data 
in terms of delivery positions and master data in terms of 
material data and entity data: 
• 
Delivery positions: each single physical flow in the 
network refers to a delivery of a certain material across each 
one sender and receiver location. Such a material-specific 
flow is called delivery position; several delivery positions 
can be part of a shipment (e.g., truck load), which, in turn, 
includes various materials. Delivery positions provide the 
basis of the data-based supply chain model as they include 
all spatial information regarding the entities and temporal 
information regarding the physical flows. Sender, receiver, 
and material must be identifiable in an unambiguous manner 
– which implies that each of them is specified by a unique 
ID. Via this ID, further in-depth information can be captured 
out of the entity and material master data (see below). 
Moreover, delivery positions should provide information 
regarding the sending date (start of delivery from the sender 
location), receiving date (end of delivery at the receiver 
location), material quantity (number of parts to be delivered), 
and transportation mode (e.g., road transport, air cargo).  
• 
Entity and material data: entities included within the 
supply chain might be suppliers, customers, or company-
specific facilities, such as factories or warehouses. Master 
data should be used to pull further entity-specific information 
per delivery position via a sender ID or a receiver ID 
referring to an entity ID. Such further information refers to 
the entity type (e.g., supplier), entity country, entity city, and 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

entity geo-information of latitude and longitude. As the 
objective of our approach is to analyze resilience from a 
strategic perspective, the aggregation level of geoformation 
referring to a city is seen as sufficient. Optionally, further 
details, such as addresses, can be used to further detail the 
supply chain. Material-specific information per delivery 
position should be captured from the material master data. 
Via the unique material ID, such information might be the 
material description, material weight [kg], material volume 
[m3], material price [e.g., EUR] and material product group. 
 
TABLE I. NECESSARY INFORMATION OF THE DATA-BASED MODEL 
 
 
 
Table 
I 
summarizes 
the 
necessary 
information 
(parameters) of a single physical delivery to be gathered out 
of the transaction and master data. The arrows in the table 
highlight connections between transaction and master data. 
In fact, entity-specific information of a delivery position can 
be captured by via a unique entity ID (referencing to the 
sender ID or receiver ID given in the delivery position); 
material-specific information can be captured by a unique 
material ID (referencing to the material ID given in the 
delivery position). 
It becomes obvious that the data-based supply chain 
model consists of a database where each single dataset refers 
to a delivery position specifying each one material-specific 
physical flow in the network. Based on this data, further 
information can be included to the database, such as 
information regarding the considered part of the supply chain 
(e.g., an inbound flow between a supplier and a company-
specific entity, an intra-company flow across company-
specific entities, or an outbound flow between a company-
specific entity and a customer), distance [km], which can be 
easily included by using open-access web tools (distance 
calculators), or further calculations, such as the total delivery 
weight (material weight * quantity), delivery volume 
(material volume * quantity) and total price (material price * 
quantity). 
In summary, each physical flow in the data-based supply 
chain model provides sender-specific, receiver-specific, 
material-specific, and transport-specific information. An 
exemplary representation of this data is given in Figure 1. 
For two nodes of the supply chain, A and B, the model 
includes two datasets with the respective information for the 
physical flows 1 to n. 
 
 
Figure 1. Included data per physical flow 
 
Consequence-driven risk simulation 
The data-based model provides the ingredients for 
simulations by changing the values of the parameters, which 
leads to a modified structure and, thus, performance of the 
supply chain. It can be used to evaluate the current and future 
resilience status of the supply chain under consideration. 
This is because the model allows to directly explore the 
effects of risk events facing the supply chain as well as 
logistics 
strategies 
to 
hedge 
against 
the 
negative 
consequences of such events. In difference to standard 
approaches of risk management, we propose a procedure that 
reverses the traditional contents of risk identification, risk 
analysis and assessment, and risk mitigation (see Figure 2). 
In fact, we believe that rather than answering to the question 
“what is happening to the supply chain if a certain risk event 
enters?”, the rationale of SCRM should be: “what are the 
most vulnerable parts in the network that lead to the highest 
consequences and how can they be mitigated?”. 
Therefore, our simulation procedure starts with the 
identification of the most business-critical and, thus, 
vulnerable parts of the supply chain, which might be the 
nodes or edges of the network. For instance, the most 
vulnerable parts might be the top sending and receiving 
nodes (e.g., nodes with high frequencies of deliveries, a high 
value of materials), most exclusive material-specific sender 
and receiver locations, or top materials (e.g., annual value of 
deliveries). The data-based model thereby provides a 
platform to rapidly identify and analyze those vulnerable 
parts. 
Based on the identified vulnerable parts, we suggest 
simulating effects in the supply chain when the business 
processes behind the vulnerable parts change (e.g., total 
weight or value per supplier, outbound flows of warehouses). 
Therefore, forecasts are implemented, which affect the 
parameter values, e.g., price increases of certain materials or 
disruptions of certain regions, sender and/or receiver 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

locations. By modifying the parameter values, worst-case 
consequences can be revealed when business-critical or 
vulnerable parts fail.  
 
 
Figure 
2. 
Procedure 
of 
consequence-driven 
risk 
simulation 
 
Rather than it is the objective of standard risk 
management, the identification of risk events triggering 
disruptions is the third step of our procedure. In fact, the 
scenarios and narrative descriptions are developed leading to 
the parameter changes, which have been simulated in the 
previous step. Such scenarios might refer to geographic 
issues (e.g., natural disasters), political events (e.g., tariffs), 
drops in demand, or further events, such as disruptions of 
key entities as warehouses due to strike events.  
Finally, the data-based model can be again used to 
simulate logistics strategies that hedge against the failures of 
the most crucial parts. These logistics strategies might be, for 
example, multiple sourcing strategies, additional entities in 
the network (e.g., further warehouses in certain areas), 
adapted frequencies in supplies, or further redundancies, 
such as larger inventories. Again, consequences of the 
logistics strategies must be translated into several parameters 
of the data-based model, such as further supplier locations 
for a previously single-sourcing material. In this way, the 
effects in the supply chain can be evaluated and the targeted 
future resilience status can be compared with the previously 
analyzed current resilience status. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have discussed the relevance of using 
business processes simulation in supply chain management 
and, in fact, for the creation of resilient supply chains. 
Therefore, we have presented the rationale of a novel 
approach, which consists of two core components: data-
based supply chain model and consequence-driven risk 
simulation. We have outlined the basic rationale behind the 
two core components and, in fact, how a data-based model 
and simulation procedure can be used for business processes 
management in SCRM. The two core components include 
various steps.  
The specific steps of our approach refer to the 
determination of framework conditions, data gathering, data 
structuring, data modelling, and the application of 
standardized key resilience indicators to identify vulnerable 
parts and to analyze the consequences of risk events. Our 
future research objective is to develop an easily 
implementable “cooking recipe” for our SCRM approach by 
providing in-depth descriptions of those steps for the 
logistics managers. In this contribution, we have exemplarily 
outlined the result of the step of data structuring in terms of a 
clear definition and links of the necessary data to stretch the 
logistics network (see Table 1). The specification of all 
further steps is work-in-progress.  
Particularly the steps of data modelling and the 
application of the key resilience indicators include various 
mathematical formulations (e.g., delivery-specific volumes 
and weights, percentages of disrupted entities in the 
network). Those formulations are highly crucial aspects of 
our “cooking recipe” and will be therefore addressed as the 
next step of our future research. Moreover, an adequate 
graphical presentation of the decision support results (e.g., 
as-is versus to-be scenarios) as well as sensitivity analyses 
will be highly crucial.  
The quality of simulation results strongly depends on the 
quality of the input data. Business process simulation models 
are intended to use real-life data sources for gathering 
relevant data. The process mining approach, which is not 
discussed further in this article, can make an important 
contribution to the creation of conceptual models by 
generating process models from event logs. Process mining 
enables automated control flow discovery (process model 
discovery), performance analysis (process bottlenecks), 
conformance checking (process guidelines vs. actual 
practices), 
enhancement 
(diagnostics), 
and 
resource 
organizational structure (collaboration) [2]. A limitation of 
contemporary process mining techniques can be seen in the 
fact that they tend to focus on distinct process instances and 
not on the multi-case setting of BPS [22]. To utilize a multi-
case context in business process Simulation, approaches, 
such as the Multi-Event-Log from Celonis, can be applied 
[33]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. M. P. van der Aalst, “Process Mining and Simulation: A 
Match made in Heaven!,”  SpringSim-SCSC, 2018 July 9-12, 
Bordeaux, 2018. 
[2] W. Abhohamad, A. Ramy, and A. Arisha, “A Hybrid Process-
Mining Approach for Simulation Modeling,” in: Proceedings 
of the 2017 Winter Simulation Conference, W. Chan, A. 
D´Ambrogio, G. Zacharewicz, N. Mustafee, G. Wainer, and 
E. Page (editors), pp. 1527-1538, 2017. 
[3] V. Anbumozhi, F. Kimura, and S. M. Thangavelu, Supply 
Chain Resilience. Singapore: Springer Singapore, 2020. 
[4] D. Arnold, H. Isermann, A. Kuhn, H. Tempelmeier, and K. 
Furmans,  Handbuch Logistik, Berlin: Springer, 2008.  
[5] V. Bertsch, Uncertainty Handling in Multi-Attribute Decision 
Support for Industrial Risk Management, Universitätsverlag 
Karlsruhe, 2008. 
[6] S. Bisogno, and A. Calabrese, “Combining modelling and 
simulation approaches,” in: Business Process Management 
Journal, 22 (1), pp. 56-74, 2015, DOI 10.1108/BPMJ-02-
2015-0021. 
[7] C. Bode, and S. M. Wagner, “Structural drivers of upstream 
supply chain complexity and the frequency of supply chain 
disruptions,” in: Journal of Operations Management 36 (1), 
pp. 215–228, 2015, DOI: 10.1016/j.jom.2014.12.004. 
[8] F. Burstein, and C. W. Holsapple, Handbook on Decision 
Support Systems 1 - Basic themes, Springer-Verlag Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2008. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

[9] M. Christopher, Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 
Financial Times/ Prentice Hall, 2011. 
[10] M. Christopher, H. Peck, “Building the Resilient Supply 
Chain,” 
in: 
The 
International 
Journal 
of 
Logistics 
Management, 15 (2), pp.1–14, 2004. 
[11] S. Djamasbi, “Does positive affect influence the effective 
usage of a Decision Support System?” Decision Support 
Systems, 43 (4), pp.1707–1717, 2007. 
[12] M. C. Er, “Decision Support Systems: A summary, problems, 
and future trends,” in: Decision Support Systems, 4 (3), pp. 
355–363, 1988.  
[13] A. Ghadge, S. Dani, M. Chester, and R. Kalawsky, “A 
systems approach for modelling supply chain risks," in: 
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, Vol. 18 
(5), pp. 523-538, 2013. 
[14] D. J. Hall, “Decision Makers and Their Need for Support,” in: 
F. Burstein, and C. W. Holsapple (editors), Handbook on 
Decision Support Systems 1, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 
83–102, 2008. 
[15] I. Heckmann, Towards Supply Chain Risk Analytics, 
SpringerGabler, Wiesbaden, 2016. 
[16] K. B. Hendricks, and V. R. Singhal, „The effect of supply 
chain glitches on shareholder wealth,” in: Journal of 
Operations Management 21 (5), pp. 501–522, 2003, DOI: 
10.1016/j.jom.2003.02.003.  
[17] C. W. Holsapple, “Decisions and Knowledge,” in: F. 
Burstein, and C. W. Holsapple (editors), Handbook on 
Decision Support Systems 1, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 
21–53, Arnott & Pervan, 2008. 
[18] C. A. Hooker, “Introduction to Philosophy of Complex 
Systems: A: Part A: Towards a framework for complex 
systems,” in: C. A. Hooker et al. (editors), Philosophy of 
Complex Systems, Volume 10 (Handbook of the Philosophy 
of Science), Elsevier B.V., pp. 3–90, 2011. 
[19] P. R. Kleindorfer, and L. van Wassenhove, “Managing risk in 
the global supply chain,” in: The INSEAD-Wharton Alliance 
on Globalizing. Cambridge University Press, UK, 2004. 
[20] R. Laue, and C. Müller, „The Business Process Simulation 
Standard (BPSim): Chances and Limits,” in: Proceedings 30th 
European Conference on Modelling and Simulation (ECMS), 
T. Claus, F. Herrmann, M. Manitz, and O. Rose (editors), pp. 
1-6, 2016, ISBN: 978-0-9932440-2-5. 
[21] T. Liebetruth, Prozessmanagement in Einkauf und Logistik: 
Instrumente und Methoden für das Supply Chain Process 
Management, Springer Gabler, 2020. 
[22] N. Martin, B. Depaire, and A. Caris, “The Use of Process 
Mining in a Business Process Simulation Context: Overview 
and Challenges,” IEEE Symposium on Computational 
Intelligence and Data Mining (CIDM), Orlando, FL (USA), 
pp. 1-8, 2014,  ISBN: 978-1-4799-4518-4. 
[23] A. Mattiussi, M. Rosano, and P. Simeoni, “A decision support 
system for sustainable energy supply combining multi-
objective and multi-attribute analysis: An Australian case 
study,” in: Decision Support Systems, 57, pp.150–159, 2014. 
[24] McKinsey & Company. Corona und andere Krisen: 
Lieferketten werden sich global dramatisch verändern, online: 
https://www.mckinsey.de/news/presse/2020-08-06-global-
value-chains [retrieved: September, 2021] 
[25] S. A. Melnyk, C. Zobel, S. E. Griffis, and J. R. Macdonald, 
Understanding Supply Chain Resilience, Supply Chain 
Management Review, 2014. 
[26] D. Neiger, M. Churilov, M. zur Muehlen, and M. Rosemann, 
Integrating Risks in Business Process Models with Value 
Focused 
Process 
Engineering, 
Proc. 
European 
Conf. 
Information Systems (ECIS ’06), 2006. 
[27] H.-C. Pfohl, „Logistiksysteme - Betriebswirtschaftliche 
Grundlagen,“ in: R. Jünemann, and H.-C. Pfohl (editors), 
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2010.  
[28] D. J. Power, “Decision Support Systems: A Historical 
Overview,” in F. Burstein, and C. W. Holsapple (editors), 
Handbook on Decision Support System 1. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, pp. 121–140, 2008. 
[29] S. Robinson, Simulation: The Practice of Model Development 
and Use, John Wiley & Sons, 2014. 
[30] M. Rosemann, and J. vom Brocke, The Six Core Elements of 
Business Process Management, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 
2015. 
[31] F. Schätter, Decision support system for a reactive 
management of disaster-caused supply chain disturbances., 
Karlsruhe, Deutschland, 2016. 
[32] J. P. Shim, et al., “Past, present, and future of decision support 
technology,” in: Decision Support Systems, 33(2), pp. 111–
126, 2002. 
[33] B. Shlakeski, Business Process Mining through the lens of 
“Multi-Event Log” approach. Master Thesis, Pforzheim 
University of Applied Sciences, 2021. 
[34] R. S. Sojda, 2007, “Empirical evaluation of decision support 
systems: needs, definitions, potential methods, and an 
example 
pertaining 
to 
waterfowl 
management,” 
in: 
Environmental Modelling & Software, 22(2), pp. 269–277, 
2007. 
[35] C. Vallejo, D. Romero, and A. Molina, “Enterprise integration 
engineering 
reference 
framework 
and 
toolbox,” 
in: 
International Journal of Production Research, Vol. 50 No. 6, 
pp. 1489-1511, 2012. 
[36] R. Vahidov, G. E. Kersten, “Decision station: situation 
decision support systems,” in: Decision Support Systems, 
38(2), pp. 283–303, 2004. 
[37] C. Waters, and J. Donald, Supply chain risk management. 
Vulnerability and resilience in logistics, 2nd ed. London, 
Philadelphia: Kogan Page, 2011. 
 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-898-3
SIMUL 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

