Utilizing Timber Harvest Simulation as a Tool for Education
Daniel Losch and J¨urgen Roßmann
Institute for Man-Machine Interaction
RWTH Aachen University
Ahornstr. 55, 52074 Aachen, Germany
Email: {losch, rossmann}@mmi.rwth-aachen.de
Abstract—Forestry is an important economic ﬁeld in Germany
as well as world wide. In Germany, specially trained forest
managers are in charge of silviculture and preservation of forests.
An important part of a forest manager’s training is the ability
to estimate the economical feasibility and ecological impact of
timber harvesting operations. In this contribution, we present
timber harvest simulation as a tool to enable teachers to better
present these estimations in the forestry classroom. We present the
simulation as a featured application of the Forest Management
System ClusterWIS, including the developments required to
implement our educative approach.
Keywords–Simulation; Geo Information Systems; Forest Infor-
mation Systems; Education; Timber Industry.
I.
INTRODUCTION
An important part of a prospective forest manager’s training
is economical and ecological planning and calculation of
timber harvesting operations. This training is usually done with
elementary teaching methods and does not utilize modern,
technology-assisted teaching methods. Common calculation
methods taught to aspiring forest managers include calcula-
tions following ofﬁcial forestry guidelines (e.g,. those of the
German state of North-Rhine Westphalia [1]). These guidelines
are primarily based on experience, and utilizing them requires
only basic knowledge about the areas affected by a harvesting
operation.
The usage of limited information is not without drawbacks:
It is rarely possible to accurately calculate concrete costs and
revenue for a single, custom harvesting operation. The amount
of ﬂexibility regarding key process parameters is very limited.
Forestry instructors, however, need tools that are more ﬂexible
to teach students the inﬂuence of different parameters on the
outcome of a harvesting operation, and that are customized to
the forestry areas used to educate their trainees on site.
Some
researchers
already
approached
this
problem:
Asikainen [2], Bruchner [3], Ziesak et al. [4] and Hemm et al.
[5] used simulation to estimate costs and revenues for harvest-
ing operations. However, their approaches were largely limited
to a small set of predeﬁned geographic locations, and were still
not very ﬂexible regarding different process parameters (e.g.,
they could only simulate a single mechanized harvester and
forwarder). Therefore, we already developed a hybrid discrete-
event and quasi-continuous timber harvest simulation system
presented in [6] as a more ﬂexible alternative. It offers a
grater ﬂexibility than the classical, table-based approaches or
the other simulative approaches. It is able to calculate the
economical results of a timber harvest operation, and also
offers methods to estimate the ecological impact of those
operations.
Hence, we propose our simulation system as the basis for
a simulation tool that is ﬁt to be used in education. However,
it still does not quite offer the required ﬂexibility. With the
integration of our simulation system into ClusterWIS, we were
able to extend and adapt the system to meet the requirements
of educative use, and were even able to improve its’ usability
for non-simulation experts. In this contribution, we present our
extensions and adaptations in detail.
Even so, a ﬂexible simulation system alone is of limited
use to forestry trainers. They also need an didactic concept
that is adapted for use with the simulation. Teachers need to
properly utilize simulation results in their classes to gain all
beneﬁts of such a system. Therefore, we also developed such
a concept and present it in this contribution.
The structure of this article is as follows: The next section
introduces ClusterWIS as as the underlying infrastructure for
our approach. Section III presents the ClusterWIS timber
harvest simulation system as well as our novel approaches to
extend that simulation system and improve its ﬂexibility and
usability. Finally, section IV describes a didactic concept for
forest manager trainees based on timber harvest simulation in
ClusterWIS.
II.
THE GEO AND FOREST INFORMATION SYSTEM
CLUSTERWIS
ClusterWIS [7] is a decentralized infrastructure for Geo
and Forest Information Systems that originated from the ”nD
Forest Management System Virtual Forest” [8], [9]. It is
implemented using the simulation system VEROSIM R
⃝ and
allows us to readily access several data sources that originated
in the Virtual Forest and to develop custom algorithms to
process their data for a wide range of applications.
In particular, the following data sources are relevant to
timber harvesting and are used by the timber harvesting
simulation that is the basis for our didactic concept.
•
A land registry that deﬁnes forestry sites.
•
A high-resolution terrain elevation database (including
hill shades).
•
A map of forest roads and streets.
•
A tree database containing information about loca-
tion, type, age, and height of trees present in the
forestry sites; Because of cost concerns, the entries
of this database were not generated by exhaustive
forest assessment, but were generated from aerial
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 1. 3D view of a simulated mechanized harvester in ClusterWIS.
measurements of tree heights in combination with
a pre-existing tree type map, utilizing the methods
described in [10].
•
A database of forest machinery available for harvest
operations.
In addition, ClusterWIS offers the possibility to ren-
der clear two-dimensional views of the aforementioned data
sources, as well as three-dimensional renderings that intuitively
illustrate the nature of the displayed forest areas. Figure 1
displays a simulated mechanized harvester in ClusterWIS. Fi-
nally, the service-oriented, distributed nature of the ClusterWIS
infrastructure allows for the easy deployment of the simulation
system to educational institutions by offering simulation as a
service.
III.
A CLUSTERWIS-BASED SIMULATION SYSTEM FOR
TIMBER HARVESTING OPERATIONS
One of the features that is available in ClusterWIS is a
Petri-net based scripting Interface called State Oriented Mod-
elling Language++ [11], [12]. This interface has already been
used to prototypically develop a combined discrete-event and
quasi-continuous simulation system for timber harvesting in
the Virtual Forest [6], [13]. It offers the possibility to simulate
and analyse work processes in the ﬁeld of fully mechanized
timber harvesting conducted by harvesters and forwarders. A
simulation pass in this system is conducted by completing the
following tasks:
1)
Select the affected area. This includes an automated
import of the forest and skidding roads – also known
as logging roads or logging trails – that are used for
navigation by mechanized harvest resources.
2)
Mark trees in the affected area for felling.
3)
Calculate the marked trees’ assortments. This in-
cludes the process of subdividing felled trees into
segments (called sorts), usually to optimize the rev-
enue of a felling operation. The relevant parameters
in timber assortment are the minimum allowed top
diameter of the resulting sorts, and optionally, their
lengths.
4)
Select harvest resources (i.e., mechanized harvesters
and forwarders)
5)
Execute the simulation.
6)
Review the simulation results.
The behaviour of harvest resources modelled as a multi-
agent system by hierarchical, synchronized and timed Petri-
net state machines. The synchronized Petri-net components
represent the discrete-event portion of the behavioural model
and react to events, such as the felling of a tree or the
successful unloading of logs at a road. The timed Petri-
net components model the quasi-continuous potion of the
behaviour and simulate real-time navigation used to determine
the position of interacting harvest resources to allow for safety
checks (e.g., when a tree is felled by a harvester, all other
harvesters have to be at a minimum safety distance). The
Petri-nets are executed by the SOML++ scripting interface and
interact with the underlying geo information system to execute
the models and lead to a simulation of harvesting operations.
More details of this simulation approach and the underlying
framework can be found in [6].
However, the simulation system included in ClusterWIS
is limited with regard to the ﬂexibility of supported process
parameters: It only supports simulations of fully mechanized
timber harvesting operations and offers a very limited way
to calculate timber assortments. It is also conﬁned to a pre-
existing database of forest and skidding roads. Those limi-
tations are severe: The deﬁnition of assortments is the most
important factor in determining the yield and ﬁnancial revenue
of a harvesting operations, and different skidding road spacings
may require manual felling of trees, which is an important cost
factor.
While discussing our initial concepts for digital timber
harvesting education with representatives of a local forestry
teaching facility, we realized that we needed to extend the
ClusterWIS timber harvest simulation system and add features
that address the mentioned shortfalls. The following subsec-
tions discuss these adaptations and extensions in detail.
A. Deﬁnition of Custom Skidding Roads
The positioning – and particularly the distance – between
adjacent skidding roads is an important factor for the total
work, and correspondingly costs, associated with a harvest
operation. If skidding roads are more than two harvester
tool ranges (usually 20 m) apart, some trees are not reach-
able by mechanized harvesters, and thus cannot be felled by
them. Since the German Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)
standardizes a skidding road distance of at least 40 m for
ecological reasons [14], this happens quite regularly. In order
to enable users to adequately simulate and compare harvest
operations with different sets of skidding roads, we added a
tool to customize the road network accordingly, and utilize
the resulting roads in simulation. In particular, we added the
possibility to generate equidistant skidding roads in an area
based on a single prototype, shown in Figure 2.
B. Simulation of Manual, Mechanized and Mixed Timber
Harvesting
Trees that are outside the range of mechanized harvesters
have to be felled manually by lumberjacks. Lumberjacks are
not bound to a road network, but can walk up to any tree
and fell it utilizing a chainsaw. However, utilizing manual
labour in harvesting operations is more expensive and time-
consuming than utilizing mechanized harvesters. To proﬁt from
the unlimited range and mobility of lumberjacks as well as the
efﬁciency of mechanized harvest, lumberjacks must fell the
trees toward the skidding roads, where mechanized harvesters
may pick the felled trees up and process them. This includes
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

(a) 20 m distance between adjacent skidding roads.
(b) 40 m distance between adjacent skidding roads.
Figure 2. 2D top down view of an exemplary forest area with customized,
equidistant skidding roads (white). The black line is the prototypical
skidding road used to generate the others.
the de-branching and splitting of the felled trees into sorts. If
no harvesters are assigned to a harvest operation, lumberjacks
have to conduct the processing as well. Figure 3 shows the
simulated behavioural work ﬂow of a lumberjack.
We added the functionality to utilize lumberjacks into our
simulation system as a type of harvesting agent by modelling
their behaviours as Petri-nets that resemble those nets that
model the harvesters’ behaviour.
We also added skidders as a new type of harvesting
resource. Skidders are manually operated tractors outﬁtted
with tongs or cable winches that can be used to manually
transport logs from the wood to the nearest street. In this
case, skidders act as the manual counterpart to mechanized
wood forwarders. Furthermore, skidders can be used to pull
felled trees to skidding roads if they cannot be felled into the
harvesters’ range.
With the inclusion of manually working harvest resources,
the simulation system now offers the following harvest scenar-
ios:
•
Fully mechanized harvest with harvesters and for-
warders.
•
Fully manual harvest with lumberjacks and skidders.
Move to next tree
Fell tree
All trees felled?
N
Y
Tree processed 
by Harvester?
Process tree
Y
N
Figure 3. Schematic work ﬂow of a manually harvesting lumberjack.
•
Mixed harvest with lumberjacks felling trees that are
far away from skidding roads, and harvesters and
forwarders conducting all further work steps. Option-
ally, skidders may be used to pull felled trees toward
skidding roads.
C. Improved Interoperability with Timber Assortment Tools
When adding the possibility to simulate lumberjacks, we
realized that manual and mechanized harvest utilizes dif-
ferent approaches for timber assortment: While mechanized
harvesters predominantly produce ﬁxed-length log segments,
the process of repeated manual bucking by lumberjacks is
quite labour-intensive and therefore expensive. Consequently,
manual harvest is usually used to fell whole logs. However,
the pre-existing interface from the simulation system to the
timber assortment tool BDAT [15] could only execute ﬁxed-
length sortimentation. We extended this interface to support
the calculation of whole-log sortimentations. We also added
the commonly used parameter of minimum top diameter to the
interface. This parameter deﬁnes a minimum diameter for each
harvested log or log segment. Smaller segments are regarded
as industrial-grade wood and are valued less.
After discussions with domain experts, we realized that
BDAT, while enabling a fast and easy-to-conﬁgure calculation
of assortments, lacks ﬂexibility that is desired in practice.
Therefore, we decided to add a new interface to the HOLZ-
ERNTE (German for ”timber harvesting”) software package
[16] that is developed at the Forest Research Institute Baden-
W¨urttemberg and allows for arbitrary, highly customized
assortments. However, this software is only used with an
extensive forestry background and lacks performance when
calculating sorts. To overcome the second limitation, our
software interface generates a limited number of representative,
virtual trees that are sorted by HOLZERNTE. The resulting
assortments are re-used for multiple trees that are most similar
to the respective virtual one.
With the extension of the BDAT interface and the addition
of the HOLZERNTE interface, users are now able to choose
between two easy to use and fast, yet simple methods to
calculate assortments and one that is highly ﬂexible, but more
difﬁcult to use.
D. Support For Wood Quality Classes in Revenue Calculation
Wood prices—and therefore the potential revenue from a
completed timber harvest operation—are dependent not only
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

Figure 4. Screen shot of economic results generated by a simulation run, as
displayed in our custom HTML template (translated to English).
on the previously mentioned assortment, but also on the quality
of the wood itself. In Germany, wood quality is measured in
quality classes, which abstract from quality factors as irregular
growth, cracks or insect damage [17]. Since we were able
to obtain wood price tables that are differentiated into these
quality classes, we added the possibility to assign quality
classes to the harvested assortments to the BDAT interface, and
to extract the corresponding data from the calculation results
of the HOLZERNTE software.
With these changes, users can choose to set the harvested
woods’ quality and calculate felling revenues dependant on
this parameter, regardless of the chosen assortment algorithm.
E. Analysis and Presentation of Simulation Results
During discussions with domain experts, we realized that
we needed to rework the results statistics previously displayed
by the simulation system: The statistics were incomplete,
unclear, and displaying them on high-resolution and high-DPI
monitors was not possible. Therefore, we completely replaced
the statistics display of the ClusterWIS wood harvest simu-
lation system. In order to reach compatibility with arbitrary
display sizes and resolutions, we designed a HTML-based
template as the foundation for our results display, thereby
shifting the responsibility for correct rendering of our results
to the web browser used to display them.
The ﬁrst part of our results page (see Figure 4) displays
the economical outcome of an exemplary simulation run of a
mixed harvest scenario that does not utilize skidders. The eco-
nomical outcome table contains a breakdown of all simulated
felling costs and the expected total revenue of the harvested
logs. It also contains a row displaying potential revenue that
was lost, because not all trees could be felled due to their
distance to the skidding roads.
Our results page also contains a set of detailed statistics
tables of all harvested sorts (grouped by tree type and sort
class and sort quality class) and their corresponding values. For
comparison, we also display a similar table for all assortments
that could not be harvested (e.g., because they were out
of range of the harvesters in a fully mechanized harvesting
operation).
Figure 5. Screenshot of work statistics calculated from a simulation run, as
displayed in our custom HTML template (translated to English).
Figure 6. Screen shot of an exemplary results comparison table (translated to
English).
The last part of our results page consists of work statis-
tics tables for each simulated harvest resource. These tables
show the allocation of work time to the different work steps
(e.g., driving, felling, debranching or log loading), and some
efﬁciency statistics such as total fuel consumption and work
efﬁciency (i.e., harvested wood volume per hour). We also
added a pie chart to offer a quick overview of the work time
allocation for each resource. Figure 5 shows an exemplary
statistics table. For forwarders, the statistics include a cal-
culation of the minimum, maximum, and average forwarding
distance. These statistics are similar to the statistics generated
in the former version of the simulation system, and are not
described in detail.
In order to be able to compare different harvesting sce-
narios, we also added a HTML template that combines the
economical results of multiple harvest operations. That tem-
plate can be used to navigate to the previously described in-
depth simulation statistics. An example is given in Figure 6.
The felling names are links to detailed result pages containing
the information described above. The table-based approach (as
described in [1]) is not able to calculate a number of harvested
trees, since this approach is solely based on wood volume.
IV.
EDUCATIONAL USE OF TIMBER HARVESTING
SIMULATION
We propose the use of timber harvesting simulation with
an interactive, discussion-based didactic approach. Depending
on the availability of simulation system instances in the
classroom, there are different ways to integrate our extended
simulation system into such a concept.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

If there is only one simulation system instance avail-
able, teachers may want to discuss the relevant simulation
parameters (as described in Sections III and III) with their
students and display simulation results on a frontal display. The
selection of parameters can be done in form of a interactive
discussion based on the information displayed by the Geo
Information System components of our simulation system.
When focussing on a speciﬁc aspect of timber harvesting,
teachers can set up different simulation runs that differ in
only one or two parameters that ﬁt the topic of the lesson.
Students can compare the different simulation runs’ results to
analyse the economical or ecological impact of the changed
parameters.
If there are multiple simulation system instances available,
students can work in groups to explore the impact of different
parameters themselves and try to optimize simulation parame-
ters (selected by the teacher in accordance to the lessons’ topic)
with regard to ﬁnancial proﬁt, work efﬁciency or ecological
impact. The students may then present their results to the class
and discuss their discoveries.
In both scenarios, teachers may want to restrict the simu-
lation to geographical areas located in the vicinity of the class
room. That enables them to take their students to a ﬁeld trip to
that area where the students can try to transfer their simulation-
based results to the real world. Teachers can discuss the
discrepancies between the (potentially inaccurate, incomplete
or out-of-date) data present in the simulation system and the
actual area and present restrictions on the simulation param-
eters that follow from these discrepancies. These restrictions
can be taken into consideration when conducting simulation in
a later lesson.
When teachers employ our simulation system in their
classes as described above, they can deepen their students’
knowledge and understanding of the different aspects of timber
harvesting. They can focus on any aspect their curriculum
requires and can discuss and compare a wide range of possible
statistical results that are relevant to real-world use.
A. Exemplary Lesson Plan
We present an exemplary lesson plan that focusses on the
difference between fully mechanized and mixed harvest (as
described in Section III-B). The lesson plan assumes the avail-
ability of our simulation system for the teacher only. It requires
a fundamental theoretic understanding of the presented topics
by the students, and assumes the teacher to be a certiﬁed
forestry management educator with corresponding background
knowledge about timber harvesting processes, and with an
introductory training in the simulation system.
1)
The students discuss guidelines for skidding road
placement in tandem with the teacher. One important
guideline to consider is the German FSC that requires
a distance of 40 m between skidding roads.
2)
The students utilize hill shades maps, aerial pho-
tographs and a 3D view of the terrain to develop
concrete skidding road placements according to the
guidelines. The teacher adds them to the simulation
system.
3)
The teacher adds a new set of parameters to the
timber harvest simulation system.
4)
The teacher presents different methods to select trees
for felling and utilizes one method to mark trees for
felling in the simulation system.
5)
The students discuss different possible timber assort-
ments. The teacher adds a corresponding assortment
to the simulation parameters.
6)
The students develop different possible resource con-
ﬁgurations in tandem with the teacher. They discuss
each conﬁgurations’ advantages and disadvantages
(e.g., regarding felling costs or tree reachability from
the skidding roads).
7)
The teacher chooses a fully mechanized harvesting
conﬁguration (i.e., one mechanized harvester and one
forwarder) and adds it to the parameter set.
8)
The teacher starts the simulation. After the simulation
is ﬁnished, they open the results page.
9)
The students analyse the results with the teacher.
They are expected to realize that soil stress concen-
trates on paths leading up to the landing site (Figure
7a) and that some trees are out of range of the
harvesters and remain unharvested (Figure 7b).
10)
The teacher adds a set of lumberjacks to the simula-
tion parameters and repeats the simulation.
11)
The students analyse the new results and compare
them with the previous ones. They are expected to
realize that more (possibly all) trees were harvested
in the second simulation, and accordingly, the gross
revenue has increased. The cost per harvested wood
volume has gone up due to the utilisation of (rela-
tively expensive) lumberjacks.
During step 2, the students may rely on physical maps of
the area, map views offered by the Geo Information System,
or a mix of both. Steps 4 and 5 are not in the focus of the
presented lesson and should be discussed only brieﬂy. They
may be discussed in detail in another lesson.
Another topic that may be presented in a different lesson
is the environmental impact of harvest operations. In such a
lesson, the teacher may compare soil stress (see Figure 7a)
and fuel consumption resulting from the use of smaller/larger
forwarders or different (or multiple) landing sites. Such a
comparison can be found in [6].
V.
CONCLUSION
In this contribution, we presented extensions and usability
improvements to the ClusterWIS-based system for timber
harvest simulation. We aimed for the improvement of the users’
ﬂexibility when conﬁguring the simulation parameters. In order
to do so, we completely reworked the assortment interface
and enabled users to utilize a professional external program
to ﬁnely tune the assortments to their requirements. We also
allowed users to create their own skidding road networks
and consequently simulate manual felling of trees. We ﬁnally
replaced the former results display by a navigable, HTML-
based results document.
In the end, all these improvements allowed us to develop
a concept for educational use of timber harvesting simulations
in training forestry managers, included in the decentralized
forest information infrastructure ClusterWIS. We presented
this didactic concept and illustrated it with a corresponding
exemplary lesson plan.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

(a) Number of passages of mechanized harvest resources over skidding
roads as an indicator of resulting soil stress [18]. Maximum soil stress
occurs near the landing site, where all felled logs are collected.
(b) Trees that could not be felled due to their distance to skidding
roads are marked red.
Figure 7. Results of a fully mechanized timber harvesting operation with a
skidding road distance of 40 m
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank the staff at Forstliches Bil-
dungszentrum Arnsberg for supplying us with revised editions
of wood price tables and with realistic machine parameters to
utilize in our simulation. The authors would also like to thank
Tobias Marquardt and Thomas Gerritzen of RIF e.V. for their
help with implementation and testing, and for participating in
valuable discussions.
The research project ClusterWIS is co-ﬁnanced by
the European Union and the German federal state of North
Rhine-Westphalia: European Union - Investing in our Future -
European Regional Development Fund (EFRE-0800088).
REFERENCES
[1]
Ministerium f¨ur Umwelt und Naturschutz, Landwirtschaft und Ver-
braucherschutz des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen, “Richtlinien zur Wald-
bewertung in Nordrhein-Westfalen [Forest Assessment Guidelines for
North-Rhine Westphalia],” 2018.
[2]
A.
Asikainen,
Discrete-event
simulation
of
mechanized
wood-
harvesting systems.
University of Joensuu, 1995.
[3]
A.-K. Bruchner, “Industrial simulation software as a decision support
tool for harvesting logistics in the wood production chain.” Ph.D.
dissertation, TU Munich, Germany, 2003.
[4]
M. Ziesak, A.-K. Bruchner, and M. Hemm, “Simulation technique
for modelling the production chain in forestry,” European Journal
of Forest Research, vol. 123, no. 3, 2004, pp. 239–244. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10342-004-0028-4
[5]
M. Hemm, M. Ziesak, and W. Warkotsch, “Simulating harvesting pro-
cedures to evaluate different working systems based on discrete single
tree events,” in Proceedings of the International Precision Forestry
Symposium.
Citeseer, 2006, pp. 205–220.
[6]
D. Losch and J. Roßmann, “Simulation-based analysis of mechanized
wood harvest operations,” in Industrial Engineering and Applications
(ICIEA), 2017 4th International Conference on.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 5–9.
[7]
J. Rossmann et al., “ClusterWIS - A Decentralized Forest Information
and Management System for the Cluster Forestry and Wood,” in The
Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information
Systems, Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing 2018) IARIA,
R¨uckemann and Doytsher, Eds.
IARIA (International Academy,
Research, and Industry Association), Mar 2018, pp. 29–35.
[8]
J. Roßmann, M. Schluse, A. B¨ucken, T. Jung, and P. Krahwinkler,
“Der virtuelle Wald in NRW [The Virtual Forest in North-Rhine
Westphalia,” AFZ Der Wald–Allgemeine Forst Zeitschrift f¨ur Wald und
Forstwirtschaft, vol. 18, 2007, pp. 966–971.
[9]
J. Roßmann, M. Schluse, and C. Schlette, “The virtual forest: Robotics
and simulation technology as the basis for new approaches to the
biological and the technical production in the forest,” in Proceedings of
the 13th World Multi-Conference Conference on Systems, Cybernetics
and Informatics, WMSCI, 2009, pp. 43–48.
[10]
J. Rossmann, M. Schluse, A. B¨ucken, and P. Krahwinkler, “Using
airborne laser-scanner-data in forestry management: A novel approach
to single tree delineation,” in Proceedings of the ISPRS Workshop on
Laser Scanning, 2007, pp. 350–354.
[11]
J. Roßmann, M. Schluse, and R. Waspe, “Integrating object oriented
petri nets into the active graph database of a real time simulation
system,” in Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference.
Winter
Simulation Conference, 2012, p. 383.
[12]
D. Losch, M. Schluse, and J. Roßmann, “Object-Oriented Petri Net-
Based Scripting for eRobotics,” in 30th European Simulation and
Modelling Conference (ESM 2016), Dubai, UAE, 2016.
[13]
RIF e.V. et al., “Der Virtuelle Wald – Abschlussbericht [The Virtual
Forest – Final Project Report],” Projektkosortium Virtueller Wald III,
Tech. Rep., 2014.
[14]
E.
Seizinger,
“German
FSC-Standard
and
Small
Forest
Stan-
dard,” Forest Stewardship Council, Arbeitsgruppe Deutschland e.V.,
Tech.
Rep.,
2012,
URL:
https://ic.fsc.org/ﬁle-download.fsc-forest-
stewardship-standard-for-germany.a-1682.pdf [accessed: 2018-07-31].
[15]
E. Kublin and G. Scharnagl, Verfahrens-und Programmbeschreibung
zum BWI-Unterprogramm BDAT [Method and Program Description
regarding the BWI-Subprogram BDAT].
Forstliche Versuchs-und
Forschungsanstalt Baden-W¨urttemberg, 1988.
[16]
W. Schoepfer, W. Avemark, and D. St¨ohr, “Sorten-, Erl¨os-und
Kostenkalkulation in der Holzernte – eine PC-gest¨utzte Entscheidung-
shilfe f¨ur den Forstbetrieb [Calculation of sorts, revenue and costs – a
computer-assisted forestry decision support system],” Forst und Holz,
vol. 51, no. 14, 1996, pp. 457–461.
[17]
S. Haas, Rahmenvereinbarung f¨ur den Rohholzhandel in Deutschland
(RVR): vereinbart zwischen dem Deutschen Forstwirtschaftsrat e.V.
und dem Deutschen Holzwirtschaftsrat e.V. [General agreement re-
garding raw timber trade in Germany; negotiated between Deutscher
Forstwirtschaftsrat e.V and Deutscher Holzwirtschaftsrat e.V.], ser.
ForstBW Praxis.
Landesbetrieb ForstBW, 2016.
[18]
R. Horn, J. Vossbrink, and S. Becker, “Modern forestry vehicles and
their impacts on soil physical properties,” Soil and Tillage Research,
vol. 79, no. 2, 2004, pp. 207–219.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-672-9
SIMUL 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

