 
The Digital Twin as a Design Tool in Industry 4.0: A Case Study 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ivan Arturo Renteria-Marquez  
Tzu-Liang (Bill) Tseng 
Department of Industrial, Manufacturing and Systems 
Engineering  
University of Texas at El Paso 
El Paso, USA 
E-mails:{iarenteria | btseng }@utep.edu 
Anabel Renteria 
Department of Mechanical Engineering 
University of Texas at El Paso 
El Paso, USA 
E-mail: arenteriamarquez@miners.utep.edu
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— This manuscript reports the findings of a study 
conducted in a manufacturing assembly plant that is in the 
journey of incorporating Industry 4.0 technologies on its 
production floor. In this manufacturing company, some manual 
operations will be replaced with painting robots, because of that, 
a digital twin was created to quantify the influence of them. 
Specifically, during this investigation, the influence of the buffer 
size over the proposed manufacturing system with painting 
robots on it was quantified. This study demonstrates the 
relevance of the digital twin as a design tool that one can employ 
to plan a gradual transition from a classical manufacturing 
production floor to a modern production floor with Industry 4.0 
technologies. 
Keywords- digital twin; discrete-event simulation; industry 
4.0; manufacturing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The new industrial revolution, most of the times referred 
to as Industry 4.0 or Smart Manufacturing has the potential to 
transform and reactivate the manufacturing industry in the 
USA [1]. 
Industry 4.0 is a term used to describe the vision of 
manufacturing systems integrated by processes with a high 
degree of automation, which are fully connected between 
them. The technologies that integrate this vision for 
manufacturing systems are: internet of things, robotics, 
automation, cloud computing, cybersecurity, data analytics, 
additive manufacturing (i.e., 3D printing), and simulation [2]. 
In recent years, the government of the USA was leading 
different initiatives to develop and implement smart 
manufacturing technologies. The goal of these initiatives is to 
generate new manufacturing opportunities within the USA 
and support the competitiveness of local manufacturers. For 
instance, the creation of the Clean Energy Smart 
Manufacturing Innovation Institute (CESMII) is one of these 
initiatives of the government focused on boosting Industry 4.0 
technologies. 
Inspired by public and private initiatives, a considerable 
number of manufacturing companies across the USA are 
trying to move from a traditional production floor to a smart 
production floor. Nevertheless, the introduction of Industry 
4.0 technologies on the production floor is a challenging task 
since it is difficult to visualize how the production system will 
perform after the introduction of them.  
Hence, the development of strategies to introduce Industry 
4.0 technologies on the production floor is required. 
Consequently, the focus of this manuscript is to report the 
methodology followed and the findings of a project deployed 
in an assembly manufacturing company located in the USA 
that focused on the implementation of a manufacturing digital 
twin to predict the effects of introducing robotic systems in 
their production process. The rest of the paper is organized as 
follows. Section II includes a literature review of important 
concepts related to the developed project. In section III the 
manufacturing system is described. One can find in section IV 
the solution approach and the results obtained. Finally, in 
section V the conclusion of this manuscript is presented. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
We will start by defining the concept of a digital twin. The 
concept was originally established by a NASA team [3][4], in 
this context, they defined the digital twin as a simulation 
model of a vehicle that integrates multi-physics, multi-scale, 
and probabilistic models. This digital twin uses physical 
models, sensor updates, and fleet history.  Reference [5] 
describes a digital twin as a coupled model of a real machine 
that is available in the cloud and is used to simulate the health 
condition of that machine. Reference [6] defines the digital 
twin as a simulation model with the ability to describe events 
in time and space. These digital twins can be used during the 
design phases of the system and during the operational phases 
of the system. 
A digital twin of a manufacturing system can be defined 
as a virtual representation of a manufacturing system that 
allows one to see how the system will perform in the real 
world; where the digital twin can be used to design, optimize 
and operate the system. In a manufacturing facility with 
Industry 4.0 technologies, the digital twin can be connected 
online through the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) and 
access in-real time the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) 
and the Manufacturing Execution System (MES) System 
updating the model according to the current status of the 
physical system. 
One can find in the literature a limited number of case 
studies of digital twin’s applications in manufacturing 
systems. Reference [7] reports the implementation of a digital 
twin to support manufacturing and maintenance planning in a 
roll shop. One can find in [8] the description of a plan to 
implement a digital twin in a drive shaft manufacturing plant.  
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Now that the concept for digital twin of manufacturing 
systems was established, we will define the concept of 
capacity analysis. One can define capacity analysis as the 
process used to measure the capacity of one operation in a 
manufacturing plant. More specifically, production capacity 
analysis refers to the maximum number of production orders 
that can be manufactured under specific conditions. 
One can study problems related to production capacity 
analysis and optimization from different angles. For instance, 
reference [9] describes a case study of a production capacity 
analysis of a shock absorber assembly line where the 
configuration of the layout was modified to improve 
production rates. In this study, the production capacity was 
increased by 32%. 
Reference [10] remarks on the lack of studies in the 
literature focused on the investigation of the influence and 
effects of limited buffer size in the production capacity of 
reentrant hybrid flow shops. The goal of this study was to 
develop scheduling strategies that will optimize production 
capacity. This type of problem demands a non-trivial solution 
since this problem is NP-hard. In this work, a hybrid harmony 
search and genetic algorithm were proposed. 
III. 
OVERVIEW OF THE MANUFACTURING SYSTEM AND 
PROBLEM DEFINITION 
As previously mentioned, the manufacturing plant 
presented in this manuscript is an assembly plant. The value 
stream of this manufacturing plant is composed of a complex 
internal structure where the workers currently perform all the 
processes with manual operations. The four main groups 
forming the processes of this facility are assembly, pre-
painting, painting, and testing, where these groups have the 
flexibility to produce five different product types. One can 
find a schematic of this facility in Fig. 1. 
The production processes of the assembly lines are 
configured as a hybrid flow shop. This is formed by a series 
of workstations, where some operations are performed in 
workstations with a parallel connection; the flow of this 
process runs in one direction. 
The production processes of the painting area are arranged 
as a job shop with reentrances. The different products run 
through the painting shop in small batches of the same product 
type. Each product type requires a specific sequence with a 
specific set up. Not all the product types require to pass 
through all the processes, and most of the time a product needs 
to pass by a specific process several times. The workstations 
that perform the same function are grouped together. After the 
product types pass through all the required painting processes, 
they pass by a functional test. 
As previously mentioned, one can classify the 
manufacturing operations of this system as manual operations. 
However, this manufacturing plant is on the journey of 
incorporating Industry 4.0 technologies into their processes. 
This manuscript reports the initial steps of this long-term 
initiative. 
In this manufacturing system, some manual operations of 
the painting shop will be replaced with automatic operations 
performed by painting robots. The presented manuscript 
focuses on a capacity analysis with a limited buffer size prior 
to the implementation of these robots. The motivation for 
predicting the proper buffer size capacity prior to the 
implementation of these robots is based on the fact that these 
robots will affect the dynamics of the entire system and a 
proper buffer size needs to be determined. The buffers are 
located before and after the painting area.  
  
 
Figure 1.  Assembly manufacturing plant. 
 
IV. 
SOLUTION APPROACH AND RESULTS OBTAINED 
The presented project was accomplished by systematically 
developing four key tasks. These four tasks are: definition of 
the logical model of the system, data collection, programming 
of the digital twin, and perform the analysis.  
Task 1: Definition of the logical model of the system. The 
starting point to develop a digital twin of a manufacturing 
system is to define a logical model of it. Hence, the entire 
process of this manufacturing plant was mapped. In order to 
document the current state of the entire process, Value Stream 
Map (VSM) techniques were used [11]. VSMs were used 
because they offer an industrial engineering language that is 
well known around the world. After that, a spaghetti diagram 
was defined for each product type. One can see in Fig. 1 an 
example of a spaghetti diagram created for a product type. 
Different meetings were organized with the engineering group 
of this company to define the logical model generated for this 
facility for each product type. This process is typically 
interactive, especially for projects where it is required to 
develop a digital twin for an entire facility. 
Task 2: Data collection. After the logical model was 
approved for each product type, the second task consists of 
working on the data collection and calculation of probabilistic 
distributions. This is a time-consuming process that requires a 
big effort [12].  
It was found that the majority of the processes involving 
this production system can be modeled using triangular 
distributions. These are continuous probability distributions 
defined by the minimum value, most likely value, and 
maximum value.  
Also, in order to accurately model the behavior of the 
painting robots, experiments with these robots were run to 
collect enough data to feed later the digital twin. 
Task 3: Programming of the digital twin. Firstly, one needs 
to choose the proper software to program the digital twin. 
Simio simulation software was chosen for this project because 
this software offers the four discrete-event modeling paradigms 
developed for simulation of queuing systems; these paradigms 
are events, processes, objects, and agent-based modeling. Also, 
the Simio software is prepared to be connected online and 
driven by data received from the MES and ERP systems [2]. 
For this project, the digital twin was connected online to the 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
MES system, allowing starting the simulation as a non-empty 
and idle system.  
The logical model previously defined in Task 1 was 
programmed using the Simio software. The paradigms that 
were used to develop the digital twin are objects, events, and 
processes. The programing task was divided into two phases. 
During the first phase, a digital twin that mimics the current 
state of the system was created to have a point of departure, 
which subsequently was used to develop a digital twin of the 
future state of the system. This digital twin was broken down 
into small parts and those were systematically programmed 
one at a time. Every time a small part of the digital twin was 
created, a verification analysis was conducted to prove that the 
model is behaving as expected.  
Subsequently, the output of the digital twin of the system’s 
current state was compared versus the output of the real 
system. The digital twin’s programming, verification, and 
validation steps were done iteratively until the group of 
modelers and the engineering team of the manufacturing plant 
agreed that the digital twin was an accurate representation of 
the current system.  
Also, a sensitivity study was conducted using linear 
regression. The input parameters that were chosen for the 
analysis are one station of the assembly and pre-painting 
areas, and the painting station. Fig. 2 shows a Tornado chart 
with the results obtained in the Simio software. The sensitivity 
coefficients of the previously mentioned workstations are 
0.044, 0.039, and 0.018 hours, respectively. 
Afterward, the programming of the digital twin of the 
current system was modified to mimic the previously defined 
logical model of the proposed system with painting robots. 
Task 4: Perform the analysis. After the digital twin of the 
proposed process with painting robots was completed during 
the third task, the analysis task started. As mentioned before, 
this analysis focuses on quantifying the influence of limited 
buffer size in the production capacity of the proposed system 
with painting robots. 
The presented study is focused on the calculation of the 
total number of products produced over the pre-defined buffer 
size of the painting area. In order to determine the influence 
of the buffer size, a what-if analysis was run.  
The simulation runs for 365 days (i.e., 8,760 hours). An 
infinite demand was considered for this analysis, which means 
that it was considered that the system is able to ship all the 
units that are produced. For this analysis, the manufacturing 
orders of the product types were pushed through the value 
stream. 
During the analysis, the average total number of parts was 
calculated for buffer sizes of 7, 8, 9, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 100, 
200 and infinity.  
Table I shows the average results obtained from fifty 
replications of the total number of parts produced. Also, one 
can see in Fig. 3 a graph that shows the total number of parts 
produced versus the different buffer sizes. It was observed that 
the system converges at a buffer size of 200, where the total 
number of parts produced with this buffer size is 5200 parts.  
In terms of theory of constrains [13], one can say that the 
painting area is the governing constraint that determines the 
throughput, because this area has the processes with longest 
processing times and the manufacturing sequences involves 
re-entrance of the WIP of the different products. The system 
converges at a buffer size of 200 units because the buffer 
placed before this area ensures a starving time of zero for this 
area. At the same time, the buffer placed after this area allows 
a starving time of zero for the Testing area.  
Furthermore, one can see in Fig. 4 the inventory of the 
cluster with painting robots. It is observed that for the case of 
an infinity buffer capacity the inventory in the robotic cluster 
grows without control, because of that, a limited buffer serves 
also as a production strategy to maintain the inventory levels. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Sensitivity analysis of the selected processes.  
 
TABLE I.  
NUMBER OF PARTS PRODUCED AS A FUNCTION OF THE 
BUFFER SIZE 
Buffer size 
Number of parts 
produced 
7 
4963 
8 
5006 
9 
5027 
10 
5065 
20 
5097 
30 
5129 
40 
5170 
50 
5185 
100 
5190 
200 
5200 
Infinity 
5205 
Figure 3.  Total number of parts produced versus different buffer sizes. 
4900
5000
5100
5200
5300
0
50
100
150
200
250
Parts
Buffer size
Total number of parts produced
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

 
Figure 4.  Inventory of the robotic cluster as a function of time. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this manuscript, the initial efforts and findings of a 
company that is in the journey of incorporating Industry 4.0 
technologies are presented. This research project reports an 
implementation of a digital twin of an entire manufacturing 
assembly plant that is used for design purposes. To be more 
specific, the digital twin was used to investigate the influence 
of the buffer size of the painting shop over the total 
production capacity for the future state of the manufacturing 
plant. The future state of the company consists on replacing 
some manual operations of the painting shop with painting 
robots. 
The implementation of a digital twin enables us to 
quantify the influence of the painting robots before the 
insertion of them into the manufacturing system. The results 
of the analysis show that the system converges at a buffer size 
of 200, obtaining approximately a total number of 5200 parts 
produced. Also, it was observed that a limited buffer size 
helps to control the inventory on the production floor.  
Furthermore, this manufacturing company will employ in 
the near future this digital twin as a foundation to quantify the 
different implications of adding additional technologies 
encompassed by Industry 4.0 on their production floor. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Industry 4.0: The Future of Competitiveness in U.S. 
Manufacturing, Innovative Manufactures Centers, retrieved: 
Aug., 2020, Available: http://imcpa.com/industry-4-0-future-
competitiveness-u-s-manufacturing/. 
[2] J. Smith, D. Sturrock, and W. Kelton, “Simio and Simulation: 
Modeling, Analysis, Applications”, 5th ed., Pittsburgh, PA: 
Simio, 2018. 
[3] M. Shafto et al., “DRAFT Modeling, Simulation, Information 
Technology & Processing Roadmap”, NASA, DC, D.C., USA, 
Nov 2010.  
[4] M. Shafto et al., “ Modeling, Simulation, Information 
Technology & Processing Roadmap”, NASA, DC, D.C., USA, 
April 2012. 
 [5]  J. Lee, E. Lapira, B. Bagheri, and Hung-an Kao, “Recent 
Advances and Trends in Predictive Manufacturing Systems in 
Big Data Environment,” Manufacturing Letters, vol. 1, pp. 38-
41, Oct. 2013, doi.org/10.1016/j.mfglet.2013.09.005. 
[6] T. Gabor, L. Belzner, M. Kiermeier, M. Beck, and A. Neitz, “A 
Simulation-Based Architecture for Smart Cyber-Physical 
Systems,”  2016 IEEE International Conference on Autonomic 
Computing (ICAC), IEEE Press, July 2016, pp. 374 379, 
doi:10.1109/ICAC.2016.29. 
[7] W. Terkaj, T. Tolio, and M. Urgo, “A virtual factory approach 
for in situ simulation to support production and maintenance 
planning,” CIRP Annals, vol. 64, pp. 451-454, 2015, 
doi.org/10.1016/j.cirp.2015.04.121. 
[8] F. Tao
et al., “Digital Twin-driven Product Design, 
Manufacturing and Service with Big Data,” The International 
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, vol. 94, pp. 
3563-3576, March 2017, doi:10.1007/s00170-017-0233-1. 
[9]  N.S. Gujarathi, R.M. Ogale, and T. Gupta, “Production 
Capacity Analysis of a Shock Absorber Assembly Line Using 
Simulation,” Proc. of the 2004 Winter Simulation Conference, 
IEEE 
Press, 
pp. 
1-5, 
Dec. 
2004, 
doi: 
10.1109/WSC.2004.1371451. 
[10] C.-C. Lin, W.-Y. Liu, and Y.-H. Chena, “Considering Stockers 
in Reentrant Hybrid Flow Shop Scheduling with Limited 
Buffer Capacity,” Computers and Industrial Engineering, vol. 
139, pp. 1-14, Jan. 2020, doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2019.106154. 
[11] Y.-H. Lian and H. Van Landeghem, “Analyzing the effects of 
Lean manufacturing using a value stream mapping-based 
simulation generator,” The International Journal of Production 
Research, 
vol. 
45, 
pp. 
3037-3058, 
July 
2007, 
doi.org/10.1080/00207540600791590. 
 [12]K. Vasudevan, E. Lammers, E. Williams, and O. Ülgen, 
“Application of Simulation to Design and Operation of Steel 
Mill Devoted to Manufacture of Line Pipes,” Proc. 2010 
Second International Conference on Advances in System 
Simulation, IEEE Press, Aug. 2010, pp. 1-6, doi: 
10.1109/SIMUL.2010.11. 
[13]E. M. Goldratt, “What is this thing called theory of constraints 
and how should it be implemented?,” 1st ed., Great Barrington, 
MA, USA, The North River Press, pp. 117-118, 1990. 
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-831-0
SIMUL 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in System Simulation

